Wendell Berry (1934-) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wendell_Berry]

###

~THE COUNTRY OF MARRIAGE~

I.

I dream of you walking at night along the streams 
of the country of my birth, warm blooms and the nightsongs 
of birds opening around you as you walk. 
You are holding in your body the dark seed of my sleep. 

	II.

This comes after silence. Was it something I said 
that bound me to you, some mere promise 
or, worse, the fear of loneliness and death? 
A man lost in the woods in the dark, I stood 
still and said nothing. And then there rose in me, 
like the earth's empowering brew rising 
in root and branch, the words of a dream of you 
I did not know I had dreamed. I was a wanderer 
who feels the solace of his native land 
under his feet again and moving in his blood. 
I went on, blind and faithful. Where I stepped 
my track was there to steady me. It was no abyss 
that lay before me, but only the level ground. 

	III.

Sometimes our life reminds me 
of a forest in which there is a graceful clearing 
and in that opening a house, 
an orchard and garden, 
comfortable shades, and flowers 
red and yellow in the sun, a pattern 
made in the light for the light to return to. 
The forest is mostly dark, its ways 
to be made anew day after day, the dark 
richer than the light and more blessed, 
provided we stay brave 
enough to keep on going in. 

	IV.

How many times have I come to you out of my head 
with joy, if ever a man was, 
for to approach you I have given up the light 
and all directions. I come to you 
lost, wholly trusting as a man who goes 
into the forest unarmed. It is as though I descend 
slowly earthward out of the air. I rest in peace 
in you, when I arrive at last. 

	V.

Our bond is no little economy based on the exchange 
of my love and work for yours, so much for so much 
of an expendable fund. We don't know what its limits are-- 
that puts us in the dark. We are more together 
than we know, how else could we keep on discovering 
we are more together than we thought? 
You are the known way leading always to the unknown, 
and you are the known place to which the unknown is always 
leading me back. More blessed in you than I know, 
I possess nothing worthy to give you, nothing 
not belittled by my saying that I possess it. 
Even an hour of love is a moral predicament, a blessing 
a man may be hard up to be worthy of. He can only 
accept it, as a plant accepts from all the bounty of the light 
enough to live, and then accepts the dark, 
passing unencumbered back to the earth, as I 
have fallen tine and again from the great strength 
of my desire, helpless, into your arms. 

	VI.

What I am learning to give you is my death 
to set you free of me, and me from myself 
into the dark and the new light. Like the water 
of a deep stream, love is always too much. We 
did not make it. Though we drink till we burst 
we cannot have it all, or want it all. 
In its abundance it survives our thirst. 
In the evening we come down to the shore 
to drink our fill, and sleep, while it 
flows through the regions of the dark. 
It does not hold us, except we keep returning 
to its rich waters thirsty. We enter, 
willing to die, into the commonwealth of its joy. 

	VII.

I give you what is unbounded, passing from dark to dark, 
containing darkness: a night of rain, an early morning. 
I give you the life I have let live for the love of you: 
a clump of orange-blooming weeds beside the road, 
the young orchard waiting in the snow, our own life 
that we have planted in the ground, as I 
have planted mine in you. I give you my love for all 
beautiful and honest women that you gather to yourself 
again and again, and satisfy--and this poem, 
no more mine than any man's who has loved a woman.


~THE SILENCE~

Though the air is full of singing 
my head is loud 
with the labor of words. 

Though the season is rich 
with fruit, my tongue 
hungers for the sweet of speech. 

Though the beech is golden 
I cannot stand beside it 
mute, but must say 

'It is golden,' while the leaves 
stir and fall with a sound 
that is not a name. 

It is in the silence 
that my hope is, and my aim. 
A song whose lines 

I cannot make or sing 
sounds men's silence 
like a root. Let me say 

and not mourn: the world 
lives in the death of speech 
and sings there.


~THE WISH TO BE GENEROUS~

ALL that I serve will die, all my delights, 
the flesh kindled from my flesh, garden and field, 
the silent lilies standing in the woods, 
the woods, the hill, the whole earth, all 
will burn in man's evil, or dwindle 
in its own age. Let the world bring on me 
the sleep of darkness without stars, so I may know 
my little light taken from me into the seed 
of the beginning and the end, so I may bow 
to mystery, and take my stand on the earth 
like a tree in a field, passing without haste 
or regret toward what will be, my life 
a patient willing descent into the grass.


~THE REAL WORK~

It may be that when we no longer know what to do 
we have come our real work, 

and that when we no longer know which way to go 
we have come to our real journey. 

The mind that is not baffled is not employed. 

The impeded stream is the one that sings.


~A TIMBERED CHOIR~

Even while I dreamed I prayed that what I saw was only fear and no foretelling, 
for I saw the last known landscape destroyed for the sake 
of the objective, the soil bludgeoned, the rock blasted. 
Those who had wanted to go home would never get there now. 

I visited the offices where for the sake of the objective the planners planned 
at blank desks set in rows. I visited the loud factories 
where the machines were made that would drive ever forward 
toward the objective. I saw the forest reduced to stumps and gullies; I saw 
the poisoned river, the mountain cast into the valley; 
I came to the city that nobody recognized because it looked like every other city. 
I saw the passages worn by the unnumbered 
footfalls of those whose eyes were fixed upon the objective. 

Their passing had obliterated the graves and the monuments 
of those who had died in pursuit of the objective 
and who had long ago forever been forgotten, according 
to the inevitable rule that those who have forgotten forget 
that they have forgotten. Men, women, and children now pursued the objective 
as if nobody ever had pursued it before. 

The races and the sexes now intermingled perfectly in pursuit of the objective. 
the once-enslaved, the once-oppressed were now free 
to sell themselves to the highest bidder 
and to enter the best paying prisons 
in pursuit of the objective, which was the destruction of all enemies, 
which was the destruction of all obstacles, which was the destruction of all objects, 
which was to clear the way to victory, which was to clear the way to promotion, to salvation, to progress, 
to the completed sale, to the signature 
on the contract, which was to clear the way 
to self-realization, to self-creation, from which nobody who ever wanted to go home 
would ever get there now, for every remembered place 
had been displaced; the signposts had been bent to the ground and covered over.

Every place had been displaced, every love 
unloved, every vow unsworn, every word unmeant 
to make way for the passage of the crowd 
of the individuated, the autonomous, the self-actuated, the homeless 
with their many eyes opened toward the objective 
which they did not yet perceive in the far distance, 
having never known where they were going, 
having never known where they came from.


~WHAT WE NEED IS HERE~

Geese appear high over us, 
pass, and the sky closes. Abandon, 
as in love or sleep, holds 
them to their way, clear 
in the ancient faith: what we need 
is here. And we pray, not 
for new earth or heaven, but to be 
quiet in heart, and in eye, 
clear. What we need is here.


~THE PEACE OF WILD THINGS~

When despair grows in me 
and I wake in the night at the least sound 
in fear of what my life and my children's lives may be, 
I go and lie down where the wood drake 
rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds. 
I come into the peace of wild things 
who do not tax their lives with forethought 
of grief. I come into the presence of still water. 
And I feel above me the day-blind stars 
waiting for their light. For a time 
I rest in the grace of the world, and am free.


~A MEETING IN A PART~

In a dream I meet 
my dead friend. He has, 
I know, gone long and far, 
and yet he is the same 
for the dead are changeless. 
They grow no older. 
It is I who have changed, 
grown strange to what I was. 
Yet I, the changed one, 
ask: "How you been?" 
He grins and looks at me. 
"I been eating peaches 
off some mighty fine trees."


