Bob Dylan (1941-) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bob_Dylan]

###

~TO RAMONA~


    Ramona, come closer
    Shut softly your watery eyes
    The pangs of your sadness
    Will pass as your senses will rise
    The flowers of the city
    Though breathlike, get deathlike sometimes
    And there's no use in tryin'
    To deal with the dyin'
    Though I cannot explain that in lines.

    Your cracked country lips
    I still wish to kiss
    As to be by the strength of you skin
    Your magnetic movements
    Still capture the minutes I'm in
    But it grieves my heart, love
    To see you tryin' to be a part of
    A world that just don't exist.
    It's all just a dream, babe
    A vacuum, a scheme, babe
    That sucks you into feelin' like this.

    I can see that your head
    Has been twisted and fed
    With worthless foam from the mouth
    I can tell you are torn
    Between stayin' and returnin'
    Back to the South
    You've been fooled into thinking
    That the finishin' end is at hand
    Yet there's no one to beat you
    No one to defeat you
    'Cept the thoughts of yourself feeling bad

    I've heard you say many times
    That you're better than no one
    And no one is better than you
    If you really believe that
    You know you have
    Nothing to win and nothing to lose
    From fixtures and forces and friends
    Your sorrow does stem
    That hype you and type you
    Making you feel
    That you gotta be just like them.

    I'd forever talk to you
    But soon my words
    They would turn into a meaningless ring
    For deep in my heart
    I know there is no help I can bring
    Everything passes
    Everything changes
    Just do what you think you should do
    And someday, maybe
    Who knows, baby
    I'll come and be cryin' to you.




~LAST THOUGHTS ON WOODY GUTHRIE~


    When yer head gets twisted and yer mind grows numb
    When you think you're too old, too young, too smart or too dumb
    When yer laggin' behind an' losin' yer pace
    In a slow-motion crawl of life's busy race
    No matter what yer doing if you start givin' up
    If the wine don't come to the top of yer cup
    If the wind's got you sideways with with one hand holdin' on
    And the other starts slipping and the feeling is gone
    And yer train engine fire needs a new spark to catch it
    And the wood's easy findin' but yer lazy to fetch it
    And yer sidewalk starts curlin' and the street gets too long
    And you start walkin' backwards though you know its wrong
    And lonesome comes up as down goes the day
    And tomorrow's mornin' seems so far away
    And you feel the reins from yer pony are slippin'
    And yer rope is a-slidin' 'cause yer hands are a-drippin'
    And yer sun-decked desert and evergreen valleys
    Turn to broken down slums and trash-can alleys
    And yer sky cries water and yer drain pipe's a-pourin'
    And the lightnin's a-flashing and the thunder's a-crashin'
    And the windows are rattlin' and breakin' and the roof tops a-shakin'
    And yer whole world's a-slammin' and bangin'
    And yer minutes of sun turn to hours of storm
    And to yourself you sometimes say
    "I never knew it was gonna be this way
    Why didn't they tell me the day I was born"

    And you start gettin' chills and yer jumping from sweat
    And you're lookin' for somethin' you ain't quite found yet
    And yer knee-deep in the dark water with yer hands in the air
    And the whole world's a-watchin' with a window peek stare
    And yer good gal leaves and she's long gone a-flying
    And yer heart feels sick like fish when they're fryin'
    And yer jackhammer falls from yer hand to yer feet
    And you need it badly but it lays on the street
    And yer bell's bangin' loudly but you can't hear its beat
    And you think yer ears might a been hurt
    Or yer eyes've turned filthy from the sight-blindin' dirt
    And you figured you failed in yesterdays rush
    When you were faked out an' fooled white facing a four flush
    And all the time you were holdin' three queens
    And it's makin you mad, it's makin' you mean
    Like in the middle of Life magazine
    Bouncin' around a pinball machine

    And there's something on yer mind you wanna be saying
    That somebody someplace oughta be hearin'
    But it's trapped on yer tongue and sealed in yer head
    And it bothers you badly when your layin' in bed
    And no matter how you try you just can't say it
    And yer scared to yer soul you just might forget it
    And yer eyes get swimmy from the tears in yer head
    And yer pillows of feathers turn to blankets of lead
    And the lion's mouth opens and yer staring at his teeth
    And his jaws start closin with you underneath
    And yer flat on your belly with yer hands tied behind
    And you wish you'd never taken that last detour sign

    And you say to yourself just what am I doin'
    On this road I'm walkin', on this trail I'm turnin'
    On this curve I'm hanging
    On this pathway I'm strolling, in the space I'm talking
    In this air I'm inhaling
    Am I mixed up too much, am I mixed up too hard
    Why am I walking, where am I running
    What am I saying, what am I knowing
    On this guitar I'm playing, on this banjo I'm frailin'
    On this mandolin I'm strummin', in the song I'm singin'
    In the tune I'm hummin', in the words I'm writin'
    In the words that I'm thinkin'
    In this ocean of hours I'm all the time drinkin'
    Who am I helping, what am I breaking
    What am I giving, what am I taking

    But you try with your whole soul best
    Never to think these thoughts and never to let
    Them kind of thoughts gain ground
    Or make yer heart pound
    But then again you know why they're around
    Just waiting for a chance to slip and drop down
    "Cause sometimes you hear'em when the night times comes creeping
    And you fear that they might catch you a-sleeping
    And you jump from yer bed, from yer last chapter of dreamin'
    And you can't remember for the best of yer thinking
    If that was you in the dream that was screaming

    And you know that it's something special you're needin'
    And you know that there's no drug that'll do for the healin'
    And no liquor in the land to stop yer brain from bleeding
    And you need something special
    Yeah, you need something special all right
    You need a fast flyin' train on a tornado track
    To shoot you someplace and shoot you back
    You need a cyclone wind on a stream engine howler
    That's been banging and booming and blowing forever
    That knows yer troubles a hundred times over

    You need a Greyhound bus that don't bar no race
    That won't laugh at yer looks
    Your voice or your face
    And by any number of bets in the book
    Will be rollin' long after the bubblegum craze
    You need something to open up a new door
    To show you something you seen before
    But overlooked a hundred times or more
    You need something to open your eyes
    You need something to make it known
    That it's you and no one else that owns
    That spot that yer standing, that space that you're sitting
    That the world ain't got you beat
    That it ain't got you licked
    It can't get you crazy no matter how many
    Times you might get kicked

    You need something special all right
    You need something special to give you hope
    But hope's just a word
    That maybe you said or maybe you heard
    On some windy corner 'round a wide-angled curve
    But that's what you need man, and you need it bad
    And yer trouble is you know it too good
    "Cause you look an' you start getting the chills
    "Cause you can't find it on a dollar bill
    And it ain't on Macy's window sill
    And it ain't on no rich kid's road map
    And it ain't in no fat kid's fraternity house
    And it ain't made in no Hollywood wheat germ
    And it ain't on that dimlit stage
    With that half-wit comedian on it
    Ranting and raving and taking yer money
    And you thinks it's funny
    No you can't find it in no night club or no yacht club
    And it ain't in the seats of a supper club
    And sure as hell you're bound to tell
    That no matter how hard you rub
    You just ain't a-gonna find it on yer ticket stub
    No, and it ain't in the rumors people're tellin' you
    And it ain't in the pimple-lotion people are sellin' you
    And it ain't in no cardboard-box house
    Or down any movie star's blouse
    And you can't find it on the golf course
    And Uncle Remus can't tell you and neither can Santa Claus
    And it ain't in the cream puff hair-do or cotton candy clothes
    And it ain't in the dime store dummies or bubblegum goons
    And it ain't in the marshmallow noises of the chocolate cake voices
    That come knockin' and tappin' in Christmas wrappin'
    Sayin' ain't I pretty and ain't I cute and look at my skin
    Look at my skin shine, look at my skin glow
    Look at my skin laugh, look at my skin cry
    When you can't even sense if they got any insides
    These people so pretty in their ribbons and bows

    No you'll not now or no other day
    Find it on the doorsteps made out-a paper mache
    And inside it the people made of molasses
    That every other day buy a new pair of sunglasses
    And it ain't in the fifty-star generals and flipped-out phonies
    Who'd turn yuh in for a tenth of a penny
    Who breathe and burp and bend and crack
    And before you can count from one to ten
    Do it all over again but this time behind yer back
    My friend
    The ones that wheel and deal and whirl and twirl
    And play games with each other in their sand-box world
    And you can't find it either in the no-talent fools
    That run around gallant
    And make all rules for the ones that got talent
    And it ain't in the ones that ain't got any talent but think they do
    And think they're foolin' you
    The ones who jump on the wagon
    Just for a while 'cause they know it's in style
    To get their kicks, get out of it quick
    And make all kinds of rnoney and chicks

    And you yell to yourself and you throw down yer hat
    Sayin', "Christ do I gotta be like that
    Ain't there no one here that knows where I'm at
    Ain't there no one here that knows how I feel
    Good God Almighty
    THAT STUFF AINT REAL"

    No but that ain't yer game, it ain't even yer race
    You can't hear yer name, you can't see yer face
    You gotta look some other place
    And where do you look for this hope that yer seekin'
    Where do you look for this lamp that's a-burnin'
    Where do you look for this oil well gushin'
    Where do you look for this candle that's glowin'
    Where do you look for this hope that you know is there
    And out there somewhere

    And your feet can only walk down two kinds of roads
    Your eyes can only look through two kinds of windows
    Your nose can only smell two kinds of hallways
    You can touch and twist
    And turn two kinds of doorknobs
    You can either go to the church of your choice
    Or you can go to Brooklyn State Hospital
    And though it's only my opinion
    I may be right or wrong
    You'll find them both
    In the Grand Canyon
    At sundown




~DESOLATION ROW~


    They're selling postcards of the hanging, they're painting the passports brown,
    The beauty parlor is filled with sailors, the circus is in town.
    Here comes the blind commissioner, they've got him in a trance,
    One hand is tied to the tight-rope walker, the other is in his pants.
    And the riot squad, they're restless, they need somewhere to go
    As Lady and I look out tonight from Desolation Row.

    Cinderella, she seems so easy. “It takes one to know one,” she smiles
    And puts her hands into her back pocket Bette Davis-style.
    And in comes Romeo, he's moaning, “You belong to me, I believe.”
    And someone turns and says to him, “My friend, you'd better leave.”
    And the only sound that's left after the ambulances go
    Is Cinderella sweeping up on Desolation Row.

    Now, the moon is almost hidden, the stars, they're just pretending to hide,
    The fortune-telling lady has even taken all her things inside.
    All except for Cain and Abel and the Hunchback of Notre Dame,
    Everyone is either making love or else expecting rain.
    And the Good Samaritan, he's dressing, he's getting ready for the show.
    He's going to the carnival tonight on Desolation Row.

    Ophelia, she's 'neath the window, for her I feel so afraid,
    On her twenty-second birthday she already is an old maid.
    Now, to her death is quite romantic, she wears an iron vest,
    Her profession is her religion, her sin is her lifelessness.
    And, though her eyes are fixed upon Noah's great rainbow,
    She spends her time peeking into Desolation Row.

    Einstein, disguised as Robin Hood, with his memories in a trunk,
    Passed this way an hour ago with his friend, some jealous monk.
    Now, he looked so immaculately frightful as he bummed a cigarette,
    Then he went off sniffing drainpipes and reciting the alphabet.
    You would not think to look at him, but he was famous long ago
    For playing the electric violin on Desolation Row.

    Dr. Filth, he keeps his world locked inside of his leather cup,
    But all his sexless patients, they're trying to blow it up.
    Now, his nurse, some local loser, she's in charge of the cyanide hole,
    She also keeps the cards that read “Have Mercy on His Soul”.
    They all play on the penny whistle, you can hear them blow
    If you lean your head out far enough from Desolation Row.

    Across the street they've nailed the curtains, they're getting ready for the feast,
    The Phantom of the Opera in the perfect image of a priest.
    They are spoon-feeding Casanova to get him to feel more assured,
    Then they'll kill him with self-confidence after poisoning him with words.
    And the Phantom shouts to skinny girls, “Get outta here if you don't know
    Casanova, he's just being punished for going to Desolation Row!”

    At midnight all the agents and the superhuman crew
    Come out and round up everyone that knows more than they do.
    Then they bring them to the factory where the heart-attack machine
    Is strapped across their shoulders and then the kerosene
    Is brought down from the castles by insurance men who go
    Check to see that no one is escaping to Desolation Row.

    Praise be to Nero's Neptune, the Titanic sails at dawn,
    Everybody's shouting, “Which side are you on?”
    And Ezra Pound and T.S. Eliot fighting in the captain's tower
    While Calypso-singers laugh at them and fishermen hold flowers
    Between the windows of the sea where lovely mermaids flow
    And nobody has to think too much about Desolation Row.

    Yes, I received your letter yesterday about the time the door-knob broke.
    When you asked me how I was doing, was that some kind of joke?
    All these people that you mention, yes, I know them, they're quite lame,
    I had to rearrange their faces and give them all another name.
    Right now I cannot read too well, don't send me no more letters, no!
    Not unless you mail them from Desolation Row.




~EVERY GRAIN OF SAND~


    In the time of my confession, in the hour of my deepest need
    When the pool of tears beneath my feet flood every newborn seed
    There's a dying voice within me reaching out somewhere
    Toiling in the danger and in the morals of despair

    Don't have the inclination to look back on any mistake
    Like Cain, I behold this chain of events that I must break
    In the fury of the moment, I can see the master's hand
    In every leaf that trembles, in every grain of sand.

    Oh, the flowers of indulgence and the weeds of yesteryear
    Like criminals, they have choked the breath of conscience and good cheer
    And the sun beat down upon the steps of time to light the way
    To ease the pain of idleness and the memory of decay

    I gaze into the doorway of temptation's angry flame
    And every time I pass that way I always hear my name
    Then onward in my journey, I come to understand
    That every hair is numbered like every grain of sand.

    I have gone from rags to riches in the sorrow of the night
    In the violence of a summer's dream, in the chill of a wintery light
    In the bitter dance of loneliness fading into space
    In the broken mirror of innocence on each forgotten face

    I hear the ancient footsteps like the motion of the sea
    Sometimes I turn, there's someone there, at times it's only me
    I'm hanging in the balance of a perfect finished plan
    Like every sparrow falling, like every grain of sand.




~TANGLED UP IN BLUE~


    Early one morning the sun was shining, she was lying in bed,
    Wondering if she'd changed at all, if her hair was still red.
    Their folks, they said their lives together sure was a-gonna be rough,
    They never did like mama's homemade dress, papa's bankbook wasn't big enough.
    And he was standing on the side of the road, rain falling on his shoes,
    Heading out for the East Coast--Lord knows, he's paid some dues getting through,
    Tangled up in blue.

    She was married when they first met, soon to be divorced,
    He helped her out of a jam, I guess, but he used a little too much force.
    Then they drove that car as far as they could, abandoned it out west,
    Splitting up on a dark, sad night, both agreeing it was best.
    She turned around to look at him as he was a-walking away,
    Saying over her shoulder, “We'll meet again someday on the avenue,
    Tangled up in blue.”

    He had a job in Santa Fe working in an old hotel,
    But he never did like it all that much and one day it just a-went to hell,
    So he drifted down to New Orleans, lucky not to be destroyed,
    Where he got him a job on a fishing boat docked outside Delacroix,
    But all the while he was alone, the past was close behind,
    He seen a lot of women but she never escaped his mind and he just grew
    Tangled up in blue.

    She was working in a topless place and I stopped in for a beer,
    I just kept looking at the side of her face in the spotlight so clear,
    And later on, when the crowd thinned out, I was just about to do the same,
    She was standing there right beside my chair, said, “Don't tell me, let me guess your name,”
    I muttered something underneath my breath, she studied the lines of my face,
    I must admit, felt a little uneasy when she bent down to tie the laces of my shoe,
    Tangled up in blue.

    I lived with them on Montague Street, in a basement down the stairs,
    There was music in the cafés at night and revolution in the air,
    Till he started into dealing with slaves and something inside of him died,
    She had to sell everything she owned and froze up inside,
    And when it all came crashing down, I became withdrawn,
    The only thing I knew how to do was keep on keeping on like a bird that flew,
    Tangled up in blue.

    So now I'm going back on again, I got to get to them somehow,
    All the faces we used to know, they're an illusion to me now.
    Some are mathematicians, some are truck drivers' wives,
    Don't know how it all got started, I don't know what they're doing with their lives,
    But me, I'm still on the road, heading for another joint,
    We always did feel the same, we just saw it from a different point of view,
    Tangled up in blue.




~IT'S ALRIGHT MA, I'M ONLY BLEEDING~


    Darkness at the break of noon
    Shadows even the silver spoon,
    The handmade blade, the child's balloon,
    Eclipses both the sun and moon-–
    To understand you know too soon that there is no sense in trying.

    Pointed threats, they bluff with scorn,
    Suicide remarks are torn
    From the fool's gold mouthpiece, the hollow horn
    Plays wasted words, it proves to warn
    He not a-busy being born is a-busy dying.

    Temptation's page flies out the door,
    You follow, find yourself at war,
    Watch a-waterfalls of pity roar,
    Feel to moan, but unlike before
    You discover that you'd just a-be one more person crying.

    So, don't fear if you hear
    A foreign sound to your ear,
    It's alright, ma, I'm only sighing.

    Some warn victory, some downfall,
    Private reasons--great or small –
    Can be seen in the eyes of those that call
    To make all that should be killed to crawl,
    Others say, “Don't hate nothing at all except a-hatred.”

    Disillusioned words a-like a-bullets bark,
    Human gods aim for their mark,
    Make everything from toy guns that spark
    To flesh-colored Christs that glow in the dark--
    It's easy to see without looking too far that not much is really sacred.

    While preachers preach of evil fates,
    Teachers teach that knowledge waits,
    Can lead you to hundred-dollar plates,
    Goodness hides behind its gates,
    Even the president of the United States sometimes a-must have to stand naked.

    But, though the rules of the road have been lodged,
    It's people's games that you got to dodge,
    It's alright, ma, I can make it.

    Advertising signs, they con,
    Con you into thinking that you're the one
    That can do what's a-never been done,
    That can win what's a-never been won--
    Meantime life outside goes on all around you.

    You lose yourself, but then you reappear,
    You suddenly find you've got nothing to fear,
    Alone you stand with nobody near
    When a trembling, distant voice, unclear,
    Startles your ears to hear somebody thinks that they really have found you.

    A question in your nerves is lit,
    Yet you know that there is no answer fit
    To satisfy, ensure you not to quit,
    Keep it in your mind and don't forget
    That it is not he or she or them or it that you belong to.

    But, though the masters make the rules
    For the wise men and the fools,
    I got nothing, ma, to live up to.

    Old-lady judges watch people in pairs,
    Limited in sex they dare
    Push fake morals, insult, and stare
    While money doesn't talk, it swears,
    Obscenity--who really cares?--propaganda all is phony.

    While them that defend what they cannot see
    With a killer's pride, security,
    It blows their minds a-most a-bitterly,
    For them that think death––death's honesty
    Won't fall upon 'em naturally, life sometimes must get lonely.

    My eyes collide head-on with stuffed
    Graveyards and false goals, I scuff
    At pettiness, which plays so rough,
    Walk upside-down inside handcuffs,
    Kick my legs to crash it off,
    Say, “Alright, I've had enough, what else can you show me?”

    And, if my thought-dreams could be seen,
    They'd probably put my head in a guillotine,
    But it's alright, ma, it's life and life only.




~WATERED DOWN LOVE~


    Love that's pure hopes all things,
    Believes all things, won't pull no strings,
    Won't sneak up into your room, tall, dark and handsome,
    Capture your soul and hold it for ransom.

    You don't want a love that's pure
    You wanna drown love
    You want a watered-down love

    Love that's pure, it don't make no false claims,
    Intercedes for you 'stead of casting the blame,
    Will not deceive you or lead you into transgression,
    Won't write it up and make you sign a false confession.

    You don't want a love that's pure
    You wanna drown love
    You want a watered-down love

    Love that's pure won't lead you astray,
    Won't hold it back, won't get in your way,
    Won't pervert you, corrupt you with foolish wishes,
    It won't make you envious, won't a-make you suspicious.

    You don't want a love that's pure
    You wanna drown love
    You want a watered-down love

    Love that's pure, no accident,
    It knows that it knows, and is always content,
    An eternal flame, quietly burning--
    Heaven needs to be proud, loud or restlessly yearning!

    You don't want a love that's pure
    You wanna drown love
    You want a watered-down love.




~LOVE IS JUST A FOUR-LETTER WORD~


    Seems like only yesterday
    I left my mind behind
    Down in the Gypsy Cafe
    With a friend of a friend of mine--
    She sat with a baby heavy on her knee
    Yet spoke of life most free from slavery
    With eyes that showed no trace of misery--
    A phrase in connection first with she I heard
    That love is just a four-letter word.

    Outside a rambling store-front window
    Cats meowed to the break of day--
    Me, I kept my mouth shut,
    To you I had no words to say--
    My experience was limited and underfed--
    You were talking, while I hid,
    To the one who was the father of your kid:
    You probably didn't think I did, but I heard
    You say that love is just a four-letter word.

    I said goodbye unnoticed,
    Pushed towards things in my own games,
    Drifting in and out of lifetimes
    Unmentionable by name,
    Searching for my double, looking for
    Complete evaporation to the core--
    Though I tried and failed at finding any door,
    I must have thought that there was nothing more absurd
    Than that love is just a four-letter word.

    Though I never knew just what you meant
    When you were speaking to your man,
    I could only think in terms of me
    And now I understand--
    After waking enough times to think I see
    The Holy Kiss that's s'posed to last eternity
    Blow up in smoke, its destiny
    Falls on strangers, travels free--
    Yes, I know now, traps are only set by me
    And I do not really need to be assured
    That love is just a four-letter word.

    Strange it is to be beside you
    Many years, the tables turned--
    You'd probably not believe me
    If I told you all I've learned--
    And it is very, very weird indeed
    To hear words like "forever" plead,
    So ships run through my mind, I cannot cheat--
    It's like looking in a teacher's face complete:
    I can say nothing to you but repeat what I heard--
    That love is just a four-letter word.




~CHANGING OF THE GUARD~


    Sixteen years,
    Sixteen banners united over the field
    Where the good shepherd grieves.
    Desperate men, desperate women divided,
    Spreading their wings 'neath the falling leaves.
    Fortune calls,
    I step from the shadows, to the marketplace,
    Merchants and thieves hungry for power, my last deal gone down.
    She's smelling sweet like the meadows where she was born,
    On midsummer's eve, near the tower.

    The cold-blooded moon,
    The captain awaiting above the celebration
    Sending his thoughts to a beloved maid
    Whose ebony face is beyond communication.
    The captain is down but still believing that his love will be repaid.

    They shaved her head.
    She was torn between Jupiter and Apollo.
    A messenger arrived with a black nightingale.
    I seen her on the stairs and I couldn't help but follow,
    Follow her down past the fountain where they lifted her veil.

    I struggled to my feet.
    I rode past destruction in the ditches
    With the stitches still mending 'neath a heart-shaped tattoo.
    Renegade priests and treacherous young witches
    Were handing out the flowers that I'd given to you.

    The palace of mirrors
    Where dog soldiers are reflected,
    The endless road and the wailing of chimes,
    The empty rooms where her memory is protected,
    Where the angels' voices whisper to the souls of previous times.

    She wakes him up
    Forty-eight hours later, the sun is breaking
    Near broken chains, mountain laurel and rolling rocks.
    She's begging to know what measures he now will be taking.
    He's pulling her down and she's clutching on to his long golden locks.

    "Gentlemen," he said,
    "I don't need your organization. I've shined your shoes,
    I've moved your mountains and marked your cards,
    But Eden is burning: either get ready for elimination
    Or else your hearts must have the courage for the changing of the guards."

    Peace will come
    With tranquility and splendour, on the wheels of fire,
    But will offer no reward when her false idols fall
    And cruel death surrenders with its pale ghost retreating
    Between the King and the Queen of Swords.




~VISIONS OF JOHANNA~


    Ain't it just like the night to play tricks when you're trying to be so quiet?
    We sit here stranded though we all do our best to deny it
    And Louise holds a handful of rain tempting you to defy it.
    Lights flicker from the opposite loft,
    In this room the heat-pipes just cough,
    The country music station plays soft,
    But there's nothing, really nothing to turn off,
    Just Louise and her lover so entwined
    And these visions of Johanna that conquer my mind.

    In the empty lot where the ladies play blindman's bluff with the key-chain
    And the all-night girls, they whisper of escapades out on the D train,
    We can hear the night watchman click his flashlight, ask himself if it's him or them who should be insane.
    But Louise, she's alright, she's just near,
    She's delicate, she seems like the mirror,
    But she just makes it all too concise and too clear
    That Johanna's not here.
    The ghost of 'lectricity howls in the bones of her face
    Where these visions of Johanna have now taken my place.

    Little boy lost, he takes himself so seriously,
    He brags of his misery, he likes to live dangerously,
    And, when bringing her name up, he speaks of her farewell kiss to me.
    He's sure got a lot of gall
    To be so useless and all,
    Muttering small talk at the wall
    While I'm in the hall.
    Oh, how can I explain? It's so hard to get on
    And these visions of Johanna, they've kept me up past the dawn.

    Inside the museums infinity's going up on trial,
    Voices echo, “This is what salvation must be like after a while”,
    But Mona Lisa musta had the highway blues, you can tell by the way she smiles.
    See the primitive wallflower freeze
    When the jelly-faced women all sneeze,
    Hear the one with the mustache say, “Jeez,
    I can't find my knees.”
    Jewels and binoculars hang from the head of the mule,
    But these visions of Johanna, they make it all seem so cruel.

    The peddler now speaks to the countess who's pretending to care for him,
    Saying, “Name me somebody that's not a parasite and I'll go out and say a prayer for him.”
    But, like Louise always says, “You can't look at much, can you, man?” as she herself prepares for him.
    And Madonna, she still has not showed,
    We see this empty cage now corrode
    Where her cape of the stage once had flowed,
    The fiddler, he now steps to the road,
    He writes, “Everything's been returned which was owed”
    On the back of the fish truck that loads
    While my conscience explodes.
    The harmonicas play the skeleton keys in the rain
    And these visions of Johanna are now all that remain.




~MOST OF THE TIME~


    Most of the time
    I'm clear focused all around,
    Most of the time
    I can keep both feet on the ground,
    I can follow the path, I can read the signs,
    Stay right with it, when the road unwinds,
    I can handle whatever I stumble upon,
    I don't even notice she's gone,
    Most of the time.
    Most of the time
    It's well understood,
    Most of the time
    I wouldn't change it if I could,
    I can make it all match up, I can hold my own,
    I can deal with the situation right down to the bone,
    I can survive, I can endure
    And I don't even think about her
    Most of the time.

    Most of the time
    My head is on straight,
    Most of the time
    I'm strong enough not to hate,
    I don't build up illusion 'till it makes me sick,
    I ain't afraid of confusion no matter how thick,
    I can smile in the face of mankind,
    Don't even remember what her lips felt like on mine
    Most of the time.

    Most of the time
    She ain't even in my mind,
    I wouldn't know her if I saw her
    She's that far behind.
    Most of the time
    I can't even be sure
    If she was ever with me
    Or if I was ever with her.

    Most of the time
    I'm halfways content,
    Most of the time
    I'd know exactly whether it all went,
    I don't cheat on myself, I don't run and hide,
    Hide from the feelings that are buried inside,
    I don't compromise and I don't pretend,
    I don't even care if I ever see her again
    Most of the time.




~NOT DARK YET~


    Shadows are falling and I've been here all day,
    It's too hot to sleep and time is running away.
    Feel like my soul has turned into steel,
    I've still got the scars that the sun did not heal.
    There's not even room enough to be anywhere,
    It's not dark yet, but it's getting there.

    Well, my sense of humanity has gone down the drain,
    Behind every beautiful thing there's been some kinda pain.
    She wrote me a letter and she wrote it so kind,
    She put down in writing what was in her mind.
    I just don't see why I should even care,
    It's not dark yet, but it's getting there.

    Well, I've been to London and I've been to gay Paris,
    I've followed the river and I got to the sea.
    I've been down on the bottom of a world full of lies,
    I ain't looking for nothing in anyone's eyes.
    Sometimes my burden is more than I can bear,
    It's not dark yet, but it's getting there.

    I was born here and I'll die here against my will,
    I know it looks like I'm moving, but I'm standing still.
    Every nerve in my body is so vacant and numb,
    I can't even remember what it was I came here to get away from.
    Don't even hear a murmur of a prayer,
    It's not dark yet, but it's getting there.





