Heinrich Heine (1797-1856) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heinrich_Heine]

###

~LOVE’S SALUTATION~

    Darling maiden, who can be
      Ever found to equal thee?
    To thy service joyfully
      Shall my life be pledged by me.

    Thy sweet eyes gleam tenderly,
      Like soft moonbeams o’er the sea;
    Lights of rosy harmony
      O’er thy red cheeks wander free.

    From thy small mouth, full of glee,
      Rows of pearls peep charmingly;
    But thy bosom’s drapery
      Veils thy fairest jewelry.

    Pure love only could it be
      That so sweetly thrill’d through me,
    When I whilome gazed on thee,
      Darling maid, so fair to see.


~LOVE’S LAMENT~

    On night’s secrecy relying,
      Silently I breathe my woes;
    From the haunts of mortals flying,
      Where the cup of pleasure flows.

    Down my cheeks run tears all burning,
      Silently, unceasingly;
    But my bosom’s fiery yearning
      Quench’ed by tears can never be.

    When a laughing urchin, gaily
      Many a merry game I play’d;
    In life’s sunshine basking daily,
      Knowing nought of grief or shade.

    For a garden of enjoyment
      Was the world I then lived in,
    Tending flowers my sole employment,
      Roses, violets, jessamine.

    By the brook’s side, on the meadow,
      Sweetly mused I in those days;
    Now I see a pale thin shadow,
      When upon the brook I gaze.

    Pale and thin my grief hath made me,
      Since mine eyes upon her fell;
    Secret sorrows now pervade me,
      Wonderful and hard to tell.

    Deep within my heart I cherish’d
      Angel forms of peace and love,
    Which have fled, their short joys perish’d,
      To their starry home above.

    Ghastly shadows rise unbidden,
      Black night round mine eyes is thrown;
    In my trembling breast is hidden
      A sad whisp’ring voice unknown.

    Unknown sorrows, unknown anguish
      Toss me wildly to and fro,
    And I pine away and languish,
      Tortured by an unknown glow.

    But the cause why I am lying
      Rack’d by fiery torments now,--
    Why from very grief I’m dying,--
      Love, behold!--The cause art thou!


~YEARNING~

    With sweetheart on arm, all my comrades with joy
      Beneath the linden trees move;
    But I, alas, poor desolate boy,
      In utter solitude rove

    Mine eye grows dim, my heart is oppress’d,
      When happy lovers I see;
    For a sweetheart by me is also possess’d,
      But, alas, far distant is she.

    I have borne it for years, with a heart fit to break,
      But no longer can bear with the pain;
    So pack up my bundle, my pilgrim’s staff take,
      And start on my travels again.

    And onward I go for hundreds of miles,
      Till I come to a city renown’d;
    A noble river beneath it smiles,
      With three stately towers ’tis crown’d.

    And now my late sorrows no longer annoy,
      Made happy at last is my love;
    For there, with my sweetheart on arm, I with joy
      Can beneath the sweet linden trees rove.


~THE WHITE FLOWER~

    In father’s garden there silently grows
      A flow’ret mournful and pale;
    The spring-time returns, the winter’s frost goes,
      Pale flow’ret remaineth as pale.
    The poor pale flower looks still
    Like a young bride that’s ill.

    Pale flow’ret gently saith to me--
      “Dear brother, pluck me, I pray!”
    I answer pale flow’ret--“That must not be,
      I never will take thee away.
    I seek with anxious care
    A purple flow’ret fair.”

    Pale flow’ret saith--“Seek here, seek there,
      Seek e’en till the day of thy death,
    But still that purple flow’ret fair
      Thou’lt seek in vain,” she saith.
    “But, prythee, pluck me now,
    I am as ill as thou.”

    Thus whispers pale flow’ret, beseeching me sore;
      I tremblingly pluck her, and lo!
    I find my heart suddenly bleeding no more,
      Mine inward eye brightly doth glow.
    Mute angel-rapture blest
    Now fills my wounded breast.


~GERMANY~

    Let me sing Germania’s glory!
      Hearken to my noblest strains!
    While my spirit tells the story,
      Thrilling bliss runs through my veins.

    Time’s book is before me lying,
      All things that have happened here,
    Good with Evil ever vying--
      All before my gaze stands clear.

    From the Frenchman’s distant nation
      Hell approach’d, with impious hand,
    Bringing shame and desecration
      On our much-loved German land.

    All our faith and virtue soiling,
      All our heavenly yearnings fled,
    All we deemed of worth, despoiling,--
      Giving sin and pain instead.

    German shame to gild refusing,
      Dark the German sun soon grew,
    And a mournful voice accusing
      Pierced the German oak trees through.

    Now the sun once more is glancing,
      And the oak trees roar with joy;
    The avengers are advancing,
      Shame and sorrow to destroy.

    And deceit’s proud altars hateful
      Totter, fall with hideous sound;
    Every German heart is grateful,
      Free is German holy ground.

    See’st the glare yon mount illuming?
      Say, what can that wild flame be?
    Yes! that fire proclaims the blooming
      Image pure of Germany.

    From the night of sin emerging
      Germany uninjured stands;
    Wildly is the spot still surging,
      Where that fair form burst her bands.

    On the old oak’s stems in splendour
      Glorious blossoms fast unfold;
    Foreign blossoms fall, and tender
      Breezes greet us as of old.

    All that’s virtuous is returning,
      All that’s good appears once more
    And the German, fondly yearning,
      Is exulting as of yore.

    Ancient manners, ancient German
      Virtues, and heroic deeds!
    Valiantly each son of Hermann
      Waves his sword and proudly bleeds.

    Heroes never doves engender,
      Lionlike is Hermann’s race;
    Yet may love’s religion tender
      Well near valour take its place.

    Germans through their sorrows lonely
      Learnt Christ’s gentle word to prize;
    Their land ’genders brethren only,
      And humanity is wise.

    Once again returns the glorious
      Noble love of minstrel’s song,
    Well becoming the victorious
      Breasts of German heroes strong,

    As they to the war are going
      With the Frank to cross the sword,
    To take signal vengeance glowing
      For their perfidy abhorr’d.

    And at home, no labour heeding,
      Woman plies her gentle hand,
    Tends the sacred wounds all bleeding
      In defence of fatherland.

    In her black dress robed, entrancing
      Looks the beauteous German dame,
    Deck’d with flow’rs and jewels glancing,
      Diamond-girded, too, her frame.

    But a nobler, prouder feeling
      Through me at her vision thrills,
    When, beside the sick-bed kneeling,
      Acts of mercy she fulfils.

    Heavenly angels she resembles
      When the last draught she supplies
    To the wounded man, who trembles,
      Smiles his grateful thanks, and dies.

    He to whom to die ’tis given
      On the battle-field, is blest;
    But a foretaste ’tis of heaven,
      Dying on a woman’s breast.

    Poor, poor sons of France! Fate ever
      Unto you unkind has been;
    On the Seine’s banks, beauty never
      Save in search of gold is seen.

    German women! German women!
      What a charm the words convey!
    German women! German women!
      Flourish on for many a day!

    All our daughters like Louisa,
      All our sons like Frederick be!
    Hear me in the grave, Louisa!
      Ever flourish Germany!


~DREAM~

    Son of folly, dream thou ever,
      When thy thoughts within thee burn;
    But in life thy visions never
      To reality will turn.

    Once in happier days chance bore me
      To a high mount on the Rhine;
    Smiling lay the land before me,
      Gloriously the sun did shine.

    Far below, the waves were singing
      Wild and magic melodies;
    In my inmost heart were ringing
      Blissful strains in wondrous wise.

    Now, when gazing from that station
      On the land--how sad its doom!
    I but see a pigmy nation
      Crawling on a giant’s tomb.

    So-call’d men wear silken raiment,
      Deem themselves the nation’s flower;
    Honours now are gain’d by payment,
      Rogues possess both wealth and power.

    Of descent they boast, not merit,
      ’Tis their dress that makes them men;
    Old coats now alone the spirit
      Of old times bring back again;

    When respect and virtue holy
      Modestly went hand in hand;
    When the youth with deference lowly
      By the aged took his stand;

    When a hand-shake was more valid
      Than an oath or written sheet;
    When men, iron-clad, forth sallied,
      And a heart inside them beat.

    Our fair garden borders nourish
      Many a thousand flow’rets fair;
    In the fostering soil they flourish,
      While the sun smiles on them there.

    But the flower most fair, most golden,
      In our gardens ne’er is known,--
    That one which, in days now olden,
      On each rocky height was grown;

    Which, in cold hill-fortress dwelling,
      Men endued with iron frame
    Deem’d the flower all flowers excelling,--
      Hospitality its name.

    Weary wanderer, never clamber
      To the mountain’s fort-crown’d brow;
    ’Stead of warm and friendly chamber,
      Cold, hard walls receive thee now.

    From the watch-tower blow no warders
      Not a drawbridge is let fall;
    For the castle’s lord and warders
      In the cold tomb slumber all.

    In dark coffins, too, are sleeping
      Those dear maids bards sang of old;
    Shrines like these within them keeping
      Greater wealth than pearls and gold.

    Strange soft whispers there are blended
      Like sweet minnesinger’s lays;
    To those dark vaults has descended
      The fair love of olden days.

    True, I also prize our ladies,
      For they blossom like the May;
    And delightful, too, their trade is,--
      ’Tis to dance, stitch, paint all day.

    And they sing, in rhymes delicious,
      Of old love and loyalty,
    Feeling all the time suspicious
      Whether such things e’er could be.

    In their simple minds, our mothers
      Used to think in days of yore,
    That the gem above all others
      Fair, man in his bosom bore.

    Very different from this is
      What their daughters wisdom call;
    In the present day our misses
      Love the jewels most of all.

    Lies, deceit, and superstition
      Rule,--life’s charms are thrown aside,
    Whilst Rome’s sordid base ambition
      Jordan’s pearls has falsified.

    To your dark domain return you,
      Visions of far happier days;
    O’er a time which thus doth spurn you,
      Vain laments no longer raise!


~THE CONSECRATION~

    Lonely in the forest chapel,
    At the image of the Virgin,
    Lay a gentle, pallid stripling,
    Bent in humble adoration.

    O Madonna! Let me ever
    On the threshold here be kneeling;
    Thou wilt never drive me from thee,
    To the world so cold and sinful.

    O Madonna! Sunny radiance
    Round thy head’s bright locks is gleaming,
    And a mild sweet smile is playing
    Round thy fair mouth’s holy roses.

    O Madonna! Thine eyes’ lustre
    Lightens me like stars in heaven;
    While life’s bark doth drift at random,
    Stars lead on for ever surely.

    O Madonna! Without wavering
    I have borne thy test of sorrow,
    On kind love relying blindly,
    In thy glow alone e’er glowing.

        O Madonna! This day hear me,
        Full of mercy, rich in wonders!
        Grant me then a sign of favour,
        Just one little sign of favour.

    Then presently happen’d a marvellous wonder.
    The forest and chapel were parted insunder;
    The boy understood not the miracle strange,
    For all around him did suddenly change.

    In a brilliant hall there sat the Madonna,
    Her rays were gone, as he gazed upon her;
    She bore the form of a lovely maid,
    Around her lips a childlike smile play’d.

    And see! from her fair and flowing tresses
    She steals a lock, as she thus addresses
    In a heavenly tone, the raptured boy:
    The sweetest reward on earth enjoy!

        What attests this consecration?
          Saw’st thou not the rainbow shedding
        Its sublime illumination,
          O’er the wide horizon spreading?

        Angels up and down are moving,
          Loudly do their pinions flutter;
        Breathing music strange and loving,
          Sweet the melodies they utter.

        Well the stripling knows the yearning
          Through his frame that now doth quiver;
        To that land his footsteps turning,
          Where the myrtle blooms for ever.


~THE MOOR’S SERENADE~

    To my sleeping dear Zuleima’s
      Bosom run, ye tears all burning!
    Then will her sweet heart for Abdul
      ’Gin to beat with tender yearning.

    Round my sleeping dear Zuleima’s
      Ear disport, ye tears of anguish!
    Then will her fair head in vision
      Sweet for Abdul’s love straight languish.

        O’er my sleeping dear Zuleima’s
          Soft hand stream, my heart’s blood gushing!
        Then will her sweet hand bear on it
          Abdul’s heart’s blood, crimson flushing.

        Sorrow is, alas, born voiceless,
          In its mouth no tongue is growing,
        It hath only tears and sighing,
          And blood from the heart’s wounds flowing.


~DREAM AND LIFE~

    The day was glowing, my heart, too, glow’d,
    In silence I bore my sorrow’s load;
    When night arrived, I hastened then
    To the blossoming rose in the silent glen.

    I softly approach’d, and mute as the grave,
    While tears my cheeks did secretly lave,
    I peep’d in the cup of the rose so fair,
    And lo! a bright light was glimmering there.

    By the rose I joyfully fell asleep,
    When a sweet mocking dream did over me creep;
    The form of a rosy maid was reveal’d;
    A rosy bodice her bosom conceal’d.

    She gave me soon a rich golden store,
    To a golden cottage the prize I bore;
    Strange goings-on in the cottage I found,--
    Small elves are dancing in graceful round.

    Twelve dancers are dancing, and taking no rest,
    And closely their hands together are press’d;
    And soon as a dance has come to a close,
    Another begins, and each merrily goes.

    And the music they dance to thus sounds in my ear:
    “The happiest of hours will ne’er reappear,
    “The whole of thy life was only a dream,
    “And this hour of pleasure a dream within dream.”

    The dream is over, the sun is up,
    I eagerly peep in the rose’s cup.
    Alas! in the place of the glimmering light,
    A nasty insect meets my sight.


~THE LESSON~

    Mother tells little bee,
    Yonder wax taper flee;
    But for his mother’s prayers
    Little bee little cares.

    Round the light hovers he,
    Humming all merrily;
    Mother’s cry hears not he,
    Little bee! Little bee!

    Youthful one! Foolish one!
    Poor little simpleton!
    In the flame rusheth he,
    Little bee! Little bee!

    Now the flame flickers high,
    In the flame he must die:
    ’Ware of the maidens, then,
    Sons of men! Sons of men!


~A PROLOGUE TO THE HARTZ-JOURNEY~

    All I saw and heard when travelling,
      All that soul and heart found pleasing,
    All that gave me food for cavilling,
      All that tedious was or teasing;

    Solemn jostlings, wild excitement,
      Both of simpletons and sages,--
    All shall swell the long indictment
      Of my travels in these pages.

    Give not travels life twice over?
      When at home one lives once only;
    Wouldst thou nobler ends discover,
      Thou must leave thy closet lonely.

    On the world’s wide stage, each player
      Is a mimic or a puppet,
    Rides his hobby his own way, or
      Bids the others clamber up it.

    If we’re laughed at by our neighbour,
      Riding in this curious fashion,
    Let us him in turn belabour,
     Jeering him without compassion.

    Read these travels in the manner
      And the sense in which I’m writing;
    Each one has his fav’rite banner
      Under which he fancies fighting.


~DEFEND NOT~

    Defend it not, defend it not,
      This wretched world below;
    Defend its gaping people not,
      Who care for nought but pomp and show.

    The tedious ones, defend them not,
      Who cause us such ennui;
    The learned ones, defend them not,
      In their o’erpow’ring pedantry.

    The women, too, defend them not,
      Though good ones may be there;
    The best amongst them scorneth not
      The man she loves not, to ensnare.

    And then my friends--defend them not:
      Count not thyself one now;
    For thou those friends resemblest not,--
      No! firm, and good, and true art thou.


~A PARODY~

    Indeed they have wearied me greatly,
      And made me exceedingly sad,
    One half with their prose so wretched,
      The other with poetry bad.

    Their terrible discord has scatter’d
      What little senses I had,
    One half with their prose so wretched,
      The other with poetry bad.

    But ’mongst the whole army of scribblers,
      They most have stirr’d up my bile,
    Who write in neither prosaic
      Nor true poetical style.


~WALKING FLOWERS AT BERLIN~

    Yes! under the lindens, my dear friend,
      Thy yearnings may satisfied be;
    The fairest of womankind here, friend,
      All walking together, thou’lt see.

    How charming they look, how delicious,
      In gay silken garments all dress’d!
    A certain poet judicious
      “Walking flowers” has named them in jest.

    How very charming each bonnet!
      Each Turkish shawl, how it gleams!
    Each cheek, what a bright glow upon it!
      Each neck, how swanlike it seems!


~EVENING SONGS~

1.

    Without any aim, forth I sallied,
      And roam’d by the pond o’er the lea;
    The charming flowers look’d pallid,
      And spectre-like gazed upon me.

    Upon me they gazed, and to chatter
      And tell my dull tale I began;
    They ask’d me, what was the matter
      With me, poor sad-looking man.

    The truth, I valiantly said it,
      No love in the world can I find;
    And as I have lost all my credit,
      With want of cash ’tis combin’d.

2.

    And over the pond are sailing
      Two swans all white as snow;
    Sweet voices mysteriously wailing
      Pierce through me as onward they go.

    They sail along, and a ringing
      Sweet melody rises on high,
    And when the swans begin singing,
      They presently must die.

3.

    When in sorrow, they dare not show it,
      However mournful their mood,
    For the swan, like the soul of the poet,
      By the dull world is ill understood.

    And in their death-hour they waken
      The air, and break into song;
    And, unless my ears are mistaken,
      They sing now, while sailing along.

4.

    The cloudlets are lazily sailing
      O’er the blue Atlantic sea;
    And mid the twilight there hovers
      A shadowy figure o’er me.

    Full deep in my soul it gazes,
      With old-time-recalling eye,
    Like a glimpse of joys long buried,
      And happiness long gone by.

    Familiar the vision appeareth,
      Methinks I know it full well;
    ’Tis the much-loved shadow of Mary,
      Who on earth no longer doth dwell.

    She beckons in friendly silence,
      And clasps me with gentle despair;
    But I seize hold of my glasses,
      To have a better stare!


~TO HER~

    The flow’rets red and white that I hold here,
      Which blossom’d erst from out the heart’s deep wound,
      Into a lovely nosegay I have bound,
    And offer unto thee, my mistress dear.
      By its acceptance be thy bard’s love crown’d!
    I cannot from this earth’s scene disappear,
    Till I have left a sign of love sincere.
      Remember me when I my death have found.
    Yet ne’er, O mistress, shalt thou pity me;
      My life of grief was enviable e’en,--
    For in my heart I bore thee lovingly.
    And greater bliss shall soon be mine, when I
      Shall, as thy guardian spirit, watch unseen,
    Thy heart with peaceful greetings satisfy.


~DRESDEN POETRY~

    At Dresden on the Elbe, that handsome city,
      Where straw hats, verses, and cigars are made,
      They’ve built (it well may make us feel afraid)
    A music-club and music warehouse pretty.
    There meet the gentlemen and ladies witty,
      Herr Kuhn, Miss Nostitz[5a]--adepts at the trade,--
      Spout verses, calling action to their aid.
    How grand! Avaunt, ye critics!--more’s the pity!
    Next day the paper tells us all the facts,
      Bright’s brightness flies, Child’s[6a] childishness is childlike,
      The critic’s supplement is mean yet wildlike.
    Arnoldi[5b] takes the cash, as salesman acts;
      Then Böttiger[5c] appears, with noise infernal--
      ’Tis a true oracle, that Evening Journal!


~BREADLESS ART~

    How soon my poverty would ended be,
      Could I the pencil use, and paint away,
      The walls of castles proud and churches gay
    Adorning with my pictures merrily!
    How soon would wealth replace my penury,
      Could I the fiddle, flute, and piano play.
      And with such elegance perform each day,
    That lords and ladies all applauded me!
    But ah! in Mammon’s smiles I ne’er had part,
      For I have follow’d thee alone, alas!
    Thee, Poetry, most thankless, breadless art!
    When others (how I’m blushing, now I’ve said it!)
      Drink their champagne from out a brimming glass,
    I needs must go without, or drink on credit!


~VISION _1_~

    Of love’s wild glow I dreamt in former days,
      Of mignonette, fair locks, and myrtle twining,
      Of lips so sweet, with bitter words combining,
    Of mournful melodies of mournful lays.

    The dreams have long been scatter’d far and banish’d,
      My dearest vision fled for evermore,
      And, save the burning glow I used to pour
    Into my tender numbers, all is vanish’d.

    Thou ling’rest still, deserted song! Now go,
      And seek that long-lost vision; shouldst thou meet it,
      On my behalf in loving fashion greet it,--
    An airy breath to that dim shade I blow.


~VISION _2_~

    A dream both strange and sad to see
    Once startled and delighted me;
    The dismal vision haunts me still,
    And in my heart doth wildly thrill.

    There was a garden wondrous fair,--
    I fain would wander gladly there;
    The beauteous flowers upon me gazed,
    And high I found my rapture raised.

    The birds were twittering above
    Their joyous melodies of love;
    The sun was red with rays of gold,
    The flowers all lovely to behold.

    Sweet fragrance all the herbs exhale,
    And sweetly, softly blows the gale;
    And all things glisten, all things smile,
    And show their loveliness the while.

    Amid that bright and flowery land
    A marble fountain was at hand,
    And there I saw a maiden fair
    Washing a garment white with care.

    Her cheeks were sweet, her eyes were mild,
    Fair hair’d and saintly look’d the child,
    And as I gazed, she seem’d to be
    So strange, yet so well known to me.

    The beauteous girl, who made all speed,
    A song was humming, strange indeed:
    “Water, water, quickly run,
    “Let the washing soon be done.”

    I went and stood then in her way,
    And whisper’d gently: “Prythee say,
    “Thou maiden sweet and wondrous fair,
    “For whom dost thou this dress prepare?”

    Then spake she quickly: “Ready be!
    “I’m washing thine own shroud for thee!”--
    Scarce had her lips these words let fall,
    Like foam the vision vanish’d all.

    And still entranced, ere long I stood
    Within a desert, gloomy wood:
    To reach the skies the branches sought;
    I stood amazed, and thought and thought.

    And hark! what hollow echoing sound
    Like axe-strokes fills the air around
    Through waste and wood I speed apace,
    Until I reach an open place.

    In the green plain before me spread
    A mighty oak tree rear’d its head;
    And lo! the maiden, strange to see,
    Was felling with an axe the tree.

    With blow on blow a song she sings
    Unceasing, as the axe she swings:
    “Iron glittering, iron bright,
    “Hew the oaken chest aright.”

    I went and stood then in her way,
    And whisper’d gently: “Prythee say,
    “Thou sweet and wondrous maiden mine,
    “For whom dost hew the oaken shrine?”

    Then spake she quickly: “Time is short,
    “To hew thy coffin is my sport!”--
    Scarce had her lips these words let fall,
    Like foam the vision vanish’d all.

    Bleak, dim was all above, beneath,
    Around was barren, barren heath:
    I felt in strange mysterious mood,
    And shuddering inwardly I stood.

    And as I roam’d on silently,
    A whitish streak soon caught mine eye;
    I hasten’d tow’rd it, and when there,
    Behold, I found the maiden fair!

    On wide heath stood the snowy maid,
    Digging the ground with sexton’s spade;
    Scarce dared I gaze on her aright,
    So fair yet fearful was the sight.

    The beauteous girl, who made all speed,
    A song was humming, strange indeed:
    “Spade, O spade, so sharp and tried,
    “Dig a pit both deep and wide.”

    I went, and stood then in her way,
    And whisper’d gently: “Prythee say,
    “Thou maiden sweet and wondrous fair,
    “What means the pit that’s lying there?”

    Then spake she quickly: “Silent be!
    “A cold, cold grave I dig for thee.”
    And when the fair maid thus replied,
    Its mouth the pit straight opened wide.

    And when the pit was full in view,
    A chilling shudder pierced me through,
    And in the grave so dark and deep
    Headlong I fell, and--woke from sleep.


~VISION _3_~

    In midnight vision I myself have spied,
      As for some festival, in ruffles dress’d,
      In a black gala-coat and silken vest;--
    My sweet and trusting love with scorn I eyed;
    And bow’d low down, and said “Art thou a bride?”
      “I wish thee joy, dear Madam, I protest!”
      And yet my lips reluctantly express’d
    The words so cold and tauntingly applied.
    And bitter tears then suddenly ’gan falling
      From her dear eyes, and in a sea of weeping
    Wellnigh dissolved her image so enthralling.
    O lovely eyes, ye stars of love so kindly,
      What though ye, when awake, and e’en when sleeping
    Deceived me oft, I trust ye still as blindly!


~VISION _4_~

    In dream I saw a tiny manikin,
      Who went on stilts, with steps a yard apart;
      White was his linen, and his dress was smart,
    But he was coarse and most unclean within.
    Yes, worthless inwardly, and full of sin;
      Worthy to seem outside was his great art,
      Of courage he discoursed, as from his heart,
    Defiant, stubborn, ’neath a veil but thin.
    “And know’st thou who he is? Come here and see!”
    So spake the dream-god, slily showing me
      Within a mirror’s frame this vision then.
    The manikin before an altar stood,
    My love beside him, both said “Yes, they would,”
      And thousand laughing devils cried “Amen!”


~VISION _5_~

    Why stirs and chafes my madden’d blood?
    Why burns my heart in furious mood?
    My blood fast boils, and foams and fumes,
    And passion fierce my heart consumes.

    My mad blood boils in foaming stream,
    Because I’ve dreamt an evil dream:
    Night’s gloomy son appear’d one day,
    And bore me in his arms away.

    To a bright house soon brought he me,
    Where sounded harp and revelry,
    And torches gleam’d and tapers shone--
    The hall I entered then alone.

    I saw a merry wedding feast,
    The glad guests round the table press’d;
    And when the bridal pair I spied,
    O woe! my mistress was the bride.

    There was my love, and strange to say,
    A stranger claim’d her hand to-day.
    Then close behind her chair of honour
    I silent stood and gazed upon her.

    The music sounded--still I stood;
    Their joy but swell’d my mournful mood;
    The bride she look’d so highly blest,
    Her hand the while the bridegroom press’d.

    The bridegroom next fill’d full his cup,
    And from it drank, then gave it up
    Unto the bride; she smiled a thank;
    O woe! my red blood ’twas she drank.

    The bride a rosy apple took,
    And gave it him with smiling look;
    He took his knife, and cut a part;
    O woe! it was indeed my heart.

    They lovingly each other eyed,
    The bridegroom boldly clasp’d the bride,
    And kissed her on her cheeks so red;
    O woe! cold death kiss’d me instead.

    Like lead my tongue within me lay,
    Vainly I strove one word to say;
    A noise was heard,--the dance began,
    The bridal pair were in the van.

    Whilst I stood rooted to the ground,
    The dancers nimbly whirl’d around;
    The bridegroom spoke a whisper’d word,--
    She blush’d, well pleased with what she heard.


~VISION _6_~

    In blissful dream, in silent night,
    There came to me, with magic might,
    With magic might, my own sweet love,
    Into my little room above.

    I gazed upon the darling child,
    I gazed, and she all-gently smiled,
    And smiled until my heart swell’d high,
    When stormlike daring words breath’d I:

    “Take, take thou everything that’s mine,
    “My All will I to thee resign,
    “If I may be thy paramour
    “From midnight till the morning hour.”

    Then on me gazed the beauteous maid,
    With looks that inward strife betray’d,
    So sweet, so sad, while thus she said:
    “Give me thy hope of heaven instead!”

    “My life so sweet, my youthful blood,
    “I’ll give with cheerful joyous mood,
    “For thee, O maiden angel-fair,--
    “But hope of heaven hereafter--ne’er!”

    My daring speech flow’d readily,
    Yet ever fairer blossom’d she,
    And still the beauteous maiden said
    “Give me thy hope of heaven instead!”

    These words fell on me heavily,
    Then rush’d, like some fierce flowing sea,
    Down to my spirit’s depth most deep,--
    I scarce had power my breath to keep.

    There came a band of angels white
    Graced with a golden halo bright,
    But wildly follow’d in their track
    A grisly train of goblins black.

    They wrestled with the angels white,
    And drove away those angels bright,
    And then the gloomy squadron too
    Melted like morning mist from view.--

    Fain had I died of rapture there,
    My arms upheld my maiden fair;
    She nestled near me like a roe,
    But also wept with bitter woe.

    Sweet maiden wept; well knew I why,
    Her rosy mouth to peace kiss’d I:
    “O still, sweet love, that tearful flood,
    “Surrender to my loving mood!

    “Surrender to my loving mood!”--
    When sudden froze to ice my blood;
    The earth beneath me groan’d and sigh’d,
    A yawning chasm open’d wide.

    And from the chasm’s gloomy veil
    Rose the black troop,--sweet love turn’d pale;
    My arms were of sweet love bereft,
    And I in solitude was left.

    The gloomy troop around me danced
    In wondrous circle, then advanced,
    And seized and bore me to the ground,
    While scornful laughter rose around.

    And still the circle narrower grew,
    And ever humm’d the fearful crew:
    “Thy hope of heaven was pledg’d by thee,
    “Thou’rt ours for all eternity!”


~VISION _7_~

    Thou now hast the money,--why longer delay?
    Thou dark scowling fellow, why lingering stay?
    I sit in my chamber, and patiently wait,
    And midnight is near, but the bride is still late.

    From the churchyard the shuddering breezes arise;--
    Ye breezes, O say, has my bride met your eyes?
    Pale demons come round me, and hard on me press,
    Make curtsies with grinning, and nod their “O yes!”

    Quick, tell me the message you’re coming about,
    Black villain, in liv’ry of fire trick’d out!
    My mistress sends word that she soon will be here;
    In a car drawn by dragons she’ll shortly appear.

    Dear grey little man, say, what would’st thou to-day?
    Dead master of mine, what’s thy business, pray?
    He gazes upon me with mute mournful mien,
    Shakes his head, turns away, and no longer is seen.

    His tail wags the shaggy old dog, and he whines;
    All brightly the eye of the black tom-cat shines;
    The women are howling with long flowing hair,--
    Why sings my old nurse my old cradle-song there?

    Old nurse stops at home, to her song to attend,
    The eiapopeia is long at an end;
    To-day I am keeping my gay wedding feast;
    Only watch the arrival of each gallant guest!

    Only watch them! Good sirs, how polite is your band!
    Ye carry your heads, ’stead of hats, in your hand;
    With your clattering bones, and like gallows-birds dress’d,
    Why arrive here so late, when the wind is at rest?

    The old witch on her broomstick comes galloping on:
    Ah, bless me, good mother, I’m really thy son.
    The mouth in her pale face beginning to twitch,
    “For ever, amen,” soon replies the old witch.

    Twelve wither’d musicians come creeping along,
    The limping blind fiddler is seen in the throng
    Jackpudding dress’d out in his motley array,
    On the gravedigger’s back is grimacing away.

    With dancing twelve nuns from the convent advance,
    The leering old procuress leading the dance;
    Twelve merry young priests follow close in their train,
    And sing their lewd songs in a church-going strain.

    Till you’re black in the face, good old clothesman, don’t yell,
    Your fur-coat will nothing avail you in hell;
    ’Tis heated for nought all the year with odd things,--
    ’Stead of wood, with the bones of dead beggars and kings.

    The girls with the flowers seem’d hunchback’d and bent,
    Tumbling head over heels in the room as they went;
    With your faces like owls, and a grasshopper’s leg,
    That rattling of bones discontinue, I beg.

    The squadrons of hell all appear in their shrouds,
    And bustle and hustle in fast-swelling crowds;
    The waltz of damnation resounds in the ear,--
    Hush, hush! my sweet love is at length drawing near.

    Now, rabble, be quiet, or get you away!
    I scarcely can hear e’en one word that I say;
    Hark! Is’t not the sound of a chariot at hand?
    Quick, open the door! Why thus loitering stand?

    Thou art welcome, my darling! how goes it, my sweet?
    You’re welcome, good parson! stand up, I entreat!
    Good parson, with hoof of a horse and with tail,
    I’m your dutiful servant, and wish you all hail!

    Dear bride, wherefore stand’st thou so pale and so dumb?
    The parson to join us together has come;
    Full dear, dear as blood, is the fee I must pay,
    And yet to possess thee is merely child’s play.

    Kneel down, my sweet bride, by my side prythee kneel
    She kneels and she sinks,--O what rapture I feel!--
    She sinks on my heart, on my fast-heaving breast;
    With shuddering pleasure I hold her close press’d.

    Like billows her golden locks circle the pair,
    ’Gainst my heart beats the heart of the maiden so fair
    They beat with a union of sorrow and love,
    And soar to the regions of heaven above.

    While our hearts are thus floating in rapture’s wide sea,
    In God’s holy realms, all untrammell’d and free,
    On our heads, as a terrible sign and a brand,
    Has hell in derision imposed her grim hand.

    _In propriâ personâ_ the dark son of night
    As parson bestows the priest’s blessing to-night;
    From a bloody book breathes he the formula terse,
    Each prayer execration, each blessing a curse.

    A crashing and hissing and howling is heard,
    Like rolling of thunder, like waves wildly stirr’d;
    When sudden a bluish-tinged light brightly flames,
    “For ever, amen!” the old mother exclaims.


~VISION _8_~

    I came from the house of my mistress dear,
    And wander’d, half frenzied, in midnight fear,
    And when o’er the churchyard I mournfully trod,
    In solemn silence the graves seem’d to nod.

    The musician’s old tombstone seem’d nodding to be;
    ’Tis the flickering light of the moon that I see.
    There’s a whisper “Dear brother, I soon shall be here!”
    Then a misty pale form from the tomb doth appear.

    The musician it was who arose in the gloom,
    And perch’d himself high on the top of the tomb;
    The chords of his lute he struck with good will,
    And sang with a voice right hollow and shrill:

        “Ah, know ye still the olden song,
        “That thrill’d the breast with passion strong,
            “Ye chords so dull and unmoving?
        “The angels they call it the joys of heaven,
        “The devils they call it hell’s torments even,
            “And mortals they call it--loving!”

    The last word’s sound had scarcely died,
    When all the graves their mouths open’d wide;
    Many airy figures step forward, and each
    The musician draws near, while in chorus they screech:

          “Love, O love, thy wondrous might
          “Brought us to this dreary plight,
          “Closed our eyes in endless night,--
          “To disturb us why delight?”

    Thus howl they confusedly, hissing and groaning,
    With roaring and sighing and crashing and moaning;
    The mad troop the musician surround as before,
    And the chords the musician strikes wildly once more

          “Bravo! bravo! How absurd!
              “Welcome to ye!
              “Plainly knew ye
          “That I spake the magic word!

          “As we pass the livelong year
          “Still as mice in prison drear,
          “Let’s to-day be full of cheer!
              “First, though, please
          “See that no one else is here;
          “Fools were we as long as living,
          “To love’s maddening passion giving
              “All our madden’d energies.
          “Let, by way of recreation,
          “Each one give a true narration
              “Of his former history,--
                “How devour’d,
                “How o’erpower’d
              “In love’s frantic chase was he.”

    Then as light as the air from the circle there broke
    A wizen’d thin being, who hummingly spoke:

          “A tailor was I by profession
            “With needle and with shears;
          “None made a better impression
            “With needle and with shears.

          “Then came my master’s daughter
            “With needle and with shears,
          “And pierced my sorrowing bosom
            “With needle and with shears.”

    In right merry chorus the spirits then laughed;
    In solemn silence a second stepp’d aft:

            “Great Rinaldo Rinaldini,
            “Schinderhanno, Orlandini,
            “And Charles Moor especially,
            “Were my patterns made by me.

            “Like those mighty heroes, I
            “Fell in love, I’ll not deny,
            “And the fairest woman most
            “Haunted me like any ghost.

            “Sighing, cooing like a dove,
            “I was driven mad with love,
            “And my fingers, by ill-luck,
            “In my neighbour’s pocket stuck.

            “But the constable abused me,
            “And most cruelly ill-used me,
            “And I sought to hide my grief
            “In my neighbour’s handkerchief.

            “Then their arms policemen placed
            “Quietly around my waist,
            “And the bridewell then and there
            “Took me ’neath its tender care.

            “There, with thoughts of love quite full,
            “Long time sat I, spinning wool,
            “Till Rinaldo’s ghost one day
            “Came and took my soul away.”

    In right merry chorus the spirits then laughed;
    A third, all-berouged and bedizen’d, stepp’d aft:

          “As monarch I ruled on the stage,
            “The part of the lover played I,
          “Oft bellowed ‘Ye Gods,’ in a rage,
            “Breath’d many a heart-rending sigh.

          “I play’d Mortimer’s part best, methinks,
            “Maria was always so fair;
          “But despite the most natural winks,
            “She never gave heed to my prayer.

          “Once when I, with desperate look,
            “‘Maria, thou holy one!’ cried,
          “The dagger I hastily took,
            “And plunged it too deep in my side.”

    In right merry chorus the spirits then laugh’d;
    A fourth in a white flowing garment stepp’d aft:

    “_Ex cathedrâ_ kept prating the learned professor,
      “He prated, and I went to sleep all the while;
    “Yet my pleasure had certainly not been the lesser,
      “Had I revell’d instead in his daughter’s sweet smile.

    “From the window she oft to me tenderly beckon’d,
      “That flower of flowers, my life’s only light;
    “Yet that flower of flowers was pluck’d in a second
      “By a stupid old blockhead, an opulent wight.

    “Then cursed I all women and rogues of high station,
      “And mingled some poisonous herbs in my wine,
    “And held with old Death a jollification,
      “While he said: ‘Your good health! from this moment you’re mine!’”

    In right merry chorus the spirits then laugh’d;
    A fifth, with a rope round his neck, next stepp’d aft:

    “There boasted and bragg’d a count, over his wine,
    “Of his daughter so fair, and his jewels so fine.
    “What care I, Sir Count, for thy jewels so fine?
    “Far rather would I that thy daughter were mine!

    “’Tis true under bar, lock, and key they both lay,
    “And the Count many servants retain’d in his pay
    “What cared I for servants, for bar, lock, or key?
    “Up the rungs of the ladder I mounted with glee.

    “To my mistress’s window I climb’d with good cheer,
    “Where curses beneath me saluted my ear.
    “‘Stop, stop, my fine fellow! I too must be there,
    “I’m likewise in love with the jewels so fair.’

    “Thus jested the Count, while he grappled me tight,
    “His servants came round me with shouts of delight.
    “‘Pooh, nonsense, you rascals! No robber am I,
    “I but came for my mistress--’tis really no lie.’

    “In vain was my talking, in vain what I said,
    “They got ready the rope, threw it over my head,
    “And the sun, when he rose, with amazement extreme
    “Found me hanging, alas, from the gallows’ high beam!”

    “In right merry chorus the spirits then laugh’d;
    “A sixth, with his head in his hand, next stepp’d aft;

        “Love’s torments made me seek the chace;
        “Rifle in hand, I roam’d apace.
        “Down from the tree, with hollow scoff,
        “The raven cried: ‘head off! head off!’

      “O, could I only see a dove,
      “I’d take it home for my sweet love!
      “Thus thought I, and midst bush and tree
      “With sportsman’s eye sought carefully.

      “What billing’s that? What gentle cooing?
      “It sounds like turtle doves’ soft wooing.
      “I stole up slily, cock’d my gun,
      “And, lo, my own sweet love was one!

      “It was indeed my dove, my bride;
      “A stranger clasp’d her waist with pride.
      “Old gun, now let thy aim be good!--
      “The stranger welter’d in his blood.

      “Soon through the wood I had to pass,
      “With hangmen by my side, alas!
      “Down from the tree, with bitter scoff,
      “The raven cried: ‘head-off! head-off!’”

    In right merry chorus the spirits then laughed;
    At length the musician in person stepp’d aft:

      “I’ve sung my own song, friends, demurely,
        “That charming song’s at an end;
      “When the heart is once broken, why surely
        “The song may homeward wend!”

    Then began the wild laughter still louder to sound,
    And the pale spectral troop in a circle swept round.
    From the neighbouring church-tow’r the stroke of “One!” fell,
    And the spirits rush’d back to their graves with a yell.


~VISION _9_~

    I was asleep, and calmly slept,
      All pain and grief allay’d;
    A wondrous vision o’er me crept,
      There came a lovely maid.

    As pale as marble was her face,
      And, O, so passing fair!
    Her eyes they swam with pearl-like grace,
      And strangely waved her hair.

    And softly, softly moved her foot
      The pale-as-marble maid;
    And on my heart herself she put,
      The pale-as-marble maid.

    How shook and throbb’d, half sad, half blest,
      My heart, which hotly burn’d!
    But neither shook nor throbb’d her breast,
      Which into ice seem’d turn’d.

    “It neither shakes nor throbs, my breast,
      “And it is icy cold;
    “And yet I know love’s yearning blest,
      “Love’s mighty pow’r of old.

    “No colour’s on my lips and cheek,
      “No blood my veins doth swell;
    “But start not, thus to hear me speak,
      “I love thee, love thee well!”

    And wilder still embraced she me,
      And I was sore afraid;
    Then crow’d the cock,--straight vanish’d she,
      The pale-as-marble maid.


~VISION _10_~

    I oft have pale spectres before now
      Conjured with magical might;
    They refuse to return any more now
      To their former dwelling of night.

    The word that commands their submission
      I forgot in my terror and fear;
    My own spirits now seek my perdition,
      Within their prison-house drear.

    Dark demons, approach not a finger!
      Away, nor to torment give birth!
    Full many a joy still may linger
      In the roseate light of this earth.

    I needs must be evermore striving
      To reach the flower so fair;
    O, what were the use of my living
      If I may cherish her ne’er?

    To my glowing heart fain would I press her,
      Would clasp her for once to my breast,
    On her lips and her cheeks once caress her,
      With sweetest of torments be blest.

    If once from her mouth I could hear it,
      Could hear one fond whisper bestow’d,
    I would follow thee, beckoning Spirit,
      Yea, e’en to thy darksome abode.

    The spirits have heard, and draw nigh me,
      And nod with terrific glee:
    Sweet love, with an answer supply me,--
      Sweet love, O lovest thou me?


~SONGS~

1.

    Every morning rise I, crying:
      Comes my love to-day?
    Then sink down at evening, sighing:
      She is still away!

    Sleepless and oppress’d with sorrow,
      All night long I lie
    Dreaming, half asleep; the morrow
      Sadly wander I.


2.

    I’m driven hither and thither along!
      But yet a few hours, I shall see her again,
      Herself, the most fair of the fair maiden-train;--
    True heart, what means thy throbbing so strong?

    The hours are only a slothful race!
      Lazily they move each day,
      And with yawning go their way;--
    Hasten on, ye slothful race!

    Wild-raging eagerness thrills me indeed;
      Never in love have the hours delighted;
      So, in a cruel bond strangely united,
    Slily deride they the lovers’ wild speed.


3.

    By nought but sorrow attended,
      I wander’d under the trees;
    That olden vision descended,
      And stole to my heart by degrees.

    Who taught you the word ye are singing,
      Ye birds in the branches on high?
    O hush! when my heart hears it ringing,
      It makes it more mournfully sigh.

    “A fair young maiden ’twas taught it,
      “Who came here, and sang like a bird;
    “And so we birds easily caught it,
      “That pretty, golden word.”

    No more shall this story deceive me,
      Ye birds, so wondrously sly:
    Of my sorrow ye fain would bereave me,
      On your friendship I cannot rely.


4.

    Sweet love, lay thy hand on my heart, and tell
    If thou hearest the knocks in that narrow cell?
    There dwells there a carpenter, cunning is he,
    And slily he’s hewing a coffin for me.

    He hammers and knocks by day and by night,
    My slumber already has banish’d outright;
    Oh, Master Carpenter, prythee make haste,
    That I some slumber at length may taste.


5.

    Beauteous cradle of my sorrow,
      Beauteous grave of all my peace,
    Beauteous town, we part to-morrow,
      Fare thee well, our ties must cease!

    Fare thee well, thou threshold holy,
      Where my loved one sets her feet!
    Fare thee well, thou spot so holy,
      Where we chanced at first to meet!

    Would that we had been for ever
      Strangers, queen of hearts so fair!
    Then it would have happen’d never
      That I’m driven to despair.

    Ne’er to stir thy bosom thought I,
      For thy love I never pray’d;
    Silently to live but sought I
      Where thy breath its balm convey’d.

    Yet thou spurn’st me in my sadness,
      Bitter words thy mouth doth speak,
    In my senses riots madness,
      And my heart is faint and weak

    And my limbs, in wanderings dreary,
      Sadly drag I, full of gloom,
    Till I lay my head all weary
      In a chilly distant tomb.


6.

    Patience, surly pilot, shortly
      To the port I’ll follow you;
    From two maidens I’m departing,
      From my love and Europe too.

    Blood-spring, from mine eyes ’gin running,
      Blood-spring, from my body flow,
    So that I then, with my hot blood,
      May write down my tale of woe.

    Ah, my body, wherefore shudder
      Thus to-day my blood to see?
    Many years before thee standing
      Pale, heart-bleeding, saw’st thou me!

    Know’st thou still the olden story
      Of the snake in Paradise,
    Who, a cursed apple giving,
      Caused our parents endless sighs?

    Apples brought all evils on us,
      Death through Eve by apples came;
    Flames on Troy were brought by Eris,--
      Both thou broughtest, death and flame!


7.

    Hill and castle fair are glancing
      O’er the clear and glassy Rhine,
    And my bark is gaily dancing
      In the sunlight all-divine.

    On the golden waters, breaking
      Sportively, my calm eyes rest;
    Gently are the feelings waking
      That I nourish’d in my breast.

    With a fond and kindly greeting,
      Lure me those deep waters bright,
    Yet I know their smoothness cheating
      Hides beneath it death and night.

    Joy above, below destruction,--
      Thou’rt my loved one’s image, stream
    Blissful is her smile’s seduction,
      Kind and gentle can she seem.


8.

    First methought in my affliction,
      I can never stand the blow.--
    Yet I did--strange contradiction!
      _How_ I did, ne’er seek to know.


9.

    With rose and cypress and tinsel gay,
    I fain would adorn in a charming way
    This book, as though a coffin it were,
    And in it my olden songs inter.

    O, could I but bury love also there!
    On love’s grave grows rest’s floweret fair;
    ’Tis there ’tis pluck’d in its sweetest bloom,--
    For me ’twill not blossom till in my tomb.

    Here now are the songs that formerly rose,
    As wild as the lava from Etna that flows,
    From out the depths of my feelings true,
    And glittering sparks around them threw!

    Like corpses now lie they, all silent and dumb,
    And cold and pallid as mist they’ve become;
    But the olden glow their revival will bring
    When the spirit of love waves o’er them its wing.

    In my heart a presentiment loudly cries:
    The spirit of love will over them rise:
    This book will hereafter come to thy hand,
    My sweetest love, in a distant land.

    Then the spell on my song at an end will be,
    The pallid letters will gaze on thee,
    Imploringly gaze on thy beauteous eyes,
    And whisper with sadness and loving sighs.


~THE MOURNFUL ONE~

    Every heart with pain is smitten
      When they see the stripling pale,
    Who upon his face bears written
      Grief and sorrow’s mournful tale.

    Breezes with compassion lightly
      Fan his burning brow the while,
    And his bosom many a sprightly
      Damsel fair would fain beguile.

    From the city’s ceaseless bustle
      To the wood for peace he flies.
    Merrily the leaves there rustle,
      Merrier still the bird’s songs rise.

    But the merry song soon ceases,
      Sadly rustle leaf and tree,
    When he, while his grief increases,
      Nears the forest mournfully.


~THE MOUNTAIN ECHO~

    At sad slow pace across the vale
      There rode a horseman brave:
    “Ah! travel I now to my mistress’s arms,
      Or but to the darksome grave?”
          The echo answer gave:
          “The darksome grave!”

    And farther rode the horseman on,
      With sighs his thoughts express’d:
    “If I thus early must go to my grave,
      Yet in the grave is rest.”
          The answering voice confess’d:
          “The grave is rest!”

    Adown the horseman’s furrow’d cheek
      A tear fell on his breast:
    “If rest I can only find in the grave,
      For me the grave is best.”
          The hollow voice confess’d:
          “The grave is best!”


~THE TWO BROTHERS~

    On the mountain summit darkling
      Lies the castle, veil’d in night;
    Lights are in the valley sparkling,
      Clashing swords are gleaming bright.

    Brothers ’tis, who in fierce duel
      Fight, with wrath to fury fann’d;
    Tell me why these brothers cruel
      Strive thus madly, sword in hand?

    By the eyes of Countess Laura
      Were they thus in strife array’d;
    Both with glowing love adore her,--
      Her, the noble, beauteous maid.

    Unto which now of the brothers
      Is her heart the most inclined?
    She her secret feelings smothers,--
      Out, then, sword, the truth to find!

    And they fight with rage despairing,
      Blows exchange with savage might;
    Take good heed, ye gallants daring,--
      Mischief walks abroad by night.

    Woe, O woe, ye brothers cruel!
      Woe, O woe, thou vale abhorr’d!
    Both fall victims in the duel,
      Falling on each other’s sword.

    Races are to dust converted,
      Many centuries have flown,
    And the castle, now deserted,
      Sadly from the mount looks down.

    But at night-time in the valley
      Wondrous forms appear again;
    At the stroke of twelve, forth sally
      To the fight the brothers twain.


~POOR PETER~

I.

    While Hans and Grettel are dancing with glee,
      And each of them loudly rejoices,
    Poor Peter looks as pale as can be,
      And perfectly mute his voice is.

    While Hans and Grettel are bridegroom and bride,
      And glitter in smart ostentation,
    Poor Peter must still in his working dress bide,
      And bites his nails with vexation.

    Then softly Peter said to himself,
      As he gazed on the couple sadly:
    “Ah, had I not been such a sensible elf,
      It had fared with my life but badly!”


II.

    “Within my breast there sits a woe
      That seems my breast to sever;
    Where’er I stand, where’er I go,
      It drives me onward ever.

    “It makes me tow’rd my loved one fly,
      As if she could restore me;
    Yet when I gaze upon her eye,
      My sorrows rise before me.

    “I clamber up the mountain now,
      In lonely sorrow creeping,
    And standing silent on its brow,
      I cannot cease from weeping.”


III.

    Poor Peter slowly totters by,
    Pale as a corpse, and stealthily;
    The very people in the street
    Stand still, when his sad form they meet.

    The maidens whisper’d as they pitied:
    “The grave he has this moment quitted.”
    Ah no, my dear young maidens fair,
    He’s just about to lie down there!

    As he is of his love bereft,
    The grave’s the best place that is left,
    Where he his aching heart may lay,
    And sleep until the Judgment Day.


~THE PRISONER’S SONG~

    When my grandmother once had bewitch’d a poor girl,
      The mob would have burnt her quite readily;
    But though fiercely the judge his mustachios might twirl,
      She refused to confess her crime steadily.

    And when in the caldron they held her fast,
      She shouted and yell’d like a craven;
    But when the black vapour arose, she at last
      Flew up in the air as a raven.

    My black and feathery grandmother dear,
      O visit me soon in this tower!
    Quick, fly through the grating, and come to me here,
      And bring me some cakes to devour!

    My black and feathery grandmother dear,
      O prythee protect me from sorrow!
    For my aunt will be picking my eyes out, I fear,
      When I merrily soar hence to-morrow.


~THE GRENADIERS~

    Two grenadiers travell’d tow’rds France one day,
      On leaving their prison in Russia,
    And sadly they hung their heads in dismay
      When they reach’d the frontiers of Prussia.

    For there they first heard the story of woe,
      That France had utterly perish’d,
    The grand army had met with an overthrow,
      They had captured their Emperor cherish’d.

    Then both of the grenadiers wept full sore
      At hearing the terrible story;
    And one of them said: “Alas! once more
      My wounds are bleeding and gory.”

    The other one said: “The game’s at an end,
      With thee I would die right gladly,
    But I’ve wife and child, whom at home I should tend,
      For without me they’ll fare but badly.

    “What matters my child, what matters my wife?
      A heavier care has arisen;
    Let them beg, if they’re hungry, all their life,--
      My Emperor sighs in a prison!

    “Dear brother, pray grant me this one last prayer:
      If my hours I now must number,
    O take my corpse to my country fair,
      That there it may peacefully slumber.

    “The legion of honour, with ribbon red,
      Upon my bosom place thou,
    And put in my hand my musket dread,
      And my sword around me brace thou.

    “And so in my grave will I silently lie,
      And watch like a guard o’er the forces,
    Until the roaring of cannon hear I,
      And the trampling of neighing horses.

    “My Emperor then will ride over my grave,
      While the swords glitter brightly and rattle;
    Then armed to the teeth will I rise from the grave,
      For my Emperor hasting to battle!”


~THE MESSAGE~

    Good servant! up, and saddle quick,
      And leap upon thy steed,
    And to King Duncan’s castle then
      Through plain and forest speed.

    Into the stable creep, and wait,
      ’Till by the helper spied;
    Then say: “Of Duncan’s daughters, which
      Has just become a bride?”

    And if he says: “The brown one ’tis,”
      The news bring quickly home;
    But if he says: “The fair one ’tis,”
      More slowly thou mayst come.

    Then go to the ropemaker’s shop,
      And buy a rope for me;
    And riding slowly, bring it here,
      And mute and silent be.


~TAKING THE BRIDE HOME~

    I’ll go not alone, my sweetheart dear!
        With me thou must go now
    To the cheery, old, and cosy room
    In the dreary cold abode of gloom,
    Where at the door my mother keeps guard,
    And for her son’s return looks hard.

    “Away from me, thou gloomy man!
        Who bid thee come hither?
    Thy hand’s like ice, thine eye glows bright,
    Thy breath is burning, thy cheek is white;--
    But I would rather my time beguile
    With smell of roses and sun’s sweet smile.”

    The roses may smell, and the sun may shine,
        My darling sweetheart!
    Throw thy spreading white veil thy figure around,
    Make the chords of the echoing lyre resound,
    And sing a wedding song to me;
    The night-wind pipes the melody.


~DON RAMIRO~

    “Donna Clara! Donna Clara!
    Through long years the hotly-loved one
    Thou hast will’d now my destruction,
    Will’d it, too, without compassion.

    “Donna Clara! Donna Clara!
    Very sweet the gift of life is!
    But beneath us all is fearful,
    In the tomb so dark and chilly.

    “Donna Clara, joy! to-morrow
    Will Fernando at the altar
    As his wedded bride salute thee,--
    Wilt thou ask me to the wedding?”

    “Don Ramiro! Don Ramiro!
    Bitterly thy words are sounding,
    Bitt’rer than you stars’ decree is,
    Scoffing at my heart’s own wishes.

    “Don Ramiro! Don Ramiro!
    Shake thy gloomy sadness from thee;
    On the earth are many maidens,
    But by God have we been parted.

    “Don Ramiro, who so bravely
    Many Moors hast overpower’d,
    Overpower now thyself too,--
    Come to-morrow to my wedding.”

    “Donna Clara! Donna Clara!
    Yes, I swear it, yes, I’ll come there!
    And the dance will lead off with thee;--
    So good night, I’ll come to-morrow.”

    “So good night!”--The window rattled;
    Sighing stood below Ramiro,
    Seeming turn’d to stone long stood he;
    Then he vanish’d in the darkness.

    Lastly, after lengthen’d conflict,
    Night to day in turn surrender’d;
    Like a blooming flowery garden
    Lies extended fair Toledo.

    Palaces and splendid buildings
    Glitter in the radiant sunlight,
    And the churches’ domes so lofty
    Glisten proudly, as though gilded.

    Humming like a busy beehive,
    Merrily the bells are sounding;
    Sweetly rise the solemn psalm-tunes
    From the God-devoted churches.

    But look yonder! but look yonder!
    Where from out the market chapel,
    Midst the heaving crowd and uproar,
    Streams the throng in chequer’d masses.

    Glittering knights and stately ladies
    In gay courtly dresses sparkle,
    And the clear-toned bells are ringing,
    And the organ peals between times.

    But with reverence saluted,
    In the people’s midst are walking,
    Nobly clad, the youthful couple,
    Donna Clara, Don Fernando.

    To the bridegroom’s palace entrance
    Slowly moves the gay procession;
    There begin the ceremonies,
    Stately, and in olden fashion.

    Knightly games and merry feasting
    Interchange with loud rejoicing;
    Swiftly fly the hours thus gladly
    Till the shades of night have fallen.

    And the wedding-guests assemble
    In the hall, to hold the dances,
    And their chequer’d gala dresses
    Midst the glittering lights are sparkling.

    On a high-exalted dais
    Bride and bridegroom are reclining,
    Donna Clara, Don Fernando,
    Holding loving conversation.

    In the hall are gaily moving
    All the festal crowd of people,
    And the kettle-drums sound loudly,
    And the trumpets, too, are crashing.

    “Wherefore, O my heart’s fair mistress.
    Are thy glances so directed
    Tow’rd the hall’s most distant corner?”
    Thus the knight exclaim’d with wonder.

    “Seest thou not, then, Don Fernando,
    Yonder man in dark cloak hidden?”
    And the knight with smiling answered:
    “Ah, ’tis nothing but a shadow.”

    But the shadow soon approach’d them,
    And a man was in the mantle,
    And Ramiro recognising,
    Clara greeted him with blushes.

    And the dancing has begun now,
    And the dancers whirl round gaily
    In the waltz’s giddy mazes,
    And the ground beneath them trembles.

    “Gladly will I, Don Ramiro,
    In the dance become thy partner,
    But thou didst not well to come here
    In a black and nightlike mantle.”

    But with eyes all fix’d and piercing
    Looks Ramiro on the fair one;
    Clasping her, with gloom thus speaks he:
    “At thy bidding have I come here!”

    And the pair of dancers vanish
    In the dance’s giddy mazes,
    And the kettle-drums sound loudly,
    And the trumpets, too, are crashing.

    “Snow-white are thy cheeks, Ramiro,”
    Clara speaks with secret trembling.
    “At thy bidding have I come here!”
    In a hollow voice replies he.

    In the hall the wax-lights glimmer
    Through the ebbing, flowing masses,
    And the kettle-drums sound loudly,
    And the trumpets, too, are crashing.

    “Ice-cold are thy hands, Ramiro,”
    Clara speaks with shudd’ring terror.
    “At thy bidding have I come here!”
    And within the whirl they vanish.

    “Leave me, leave me, Don Ramiro!
    Ah, thy breath is like a corpse’s!”
    Once again the dark words speaks he
    “At thy bidding have I come here!”

    And the very ground seems glowing.
    Fiddle, viol sound right merry;
    Like a wondrous weft of magic
    All within the hall is whirling.

    “Leave me, leave me, Don Ramiro!”
    Sadly sounds amidst the tumult;
    Don Ramiro ever answers:
    “At thy bidding have I come here!”

    “In the name of God depart, then!”
    Clara with a firm voice utters,
    And the words she scarce had spoken
    When Ramiro vanish’d from her.

    Clara, death in every feature,
    Chilly, night-surrounded, stood there,
    And a swoon her lightsome figure
    To its darksome kingdom carries.

    But at last her misty slumber
    Yields, at last her eyelids open,
    But again, with deep amazement,
    Would she fain have closed her fair eyes.

    For since they began the dancing,
    From her seat had she not moved once,
    And she still sits by the bridegroom,
    And the anxious knight thus asks her

    “Say, why are thy cheeks so pallid?
    Wherefore is thine eye so darksome?”--
    “And Ramiro?”--stammers Clara,
    And her tongue is mute with horror.

    But with deep and solemn wrinkles
    Is the bridegroom’s brow now furrow’d:
    “Lady, bloody news why seek’st thou?
    This day’s noontide died Ramiro.”


~BELSHAZZAR~

    The midnight hour was coming on,
    In deathlike calm lay Babylon.

    But in the monarch’s castle high
    Held the monarch’s attendants gay revelry.

    And in the regal hall upstairs
    A regal feast Belshazzar shares.

    The servants in glittering circles recline,
    And empty the goblets of sparkling wine.

    The servants are shouting, the goblets ring,
    Delighting the heart of the ruthless king.

    The king’s cheeks feel a ruddy glow,
    The wine doth swell his ardour so.

    And blindly led on by his ardour’s wiles,
    The Godhead with blasphemous words he reviles.

    And wildly he curses and raves aloud,
    Approvingly bellow the serving crowd.

    The king commands with a look that burns,
    The servant hastens and soon returns.

    Many golden vessels he bears on his head,
    The spoils of Jehovah’s temple dread.

    And the monarch straight seized on a sacred cup
    With impious hand, and fill’d it up.

    And down to the dregs he drains it fast,
    And with foaming mouth exclaims at last:

    “Jehovah, thy power I here defy,
    The King of Babylon am I.”

    But scarcely had sounded the fearful word,
    When the heart of the king with terror was stirr’d.

    The yelling laughter is silenced all,
    And deathlike silence fills the hall.

    And see! And see! On the wall so white
    A human hand appears in sight.

    And letters of flame on the wall so white
    It wrote, and wrote, and vanish’d from sight.

    The king the writing with wonderment sees,
    As pale as death, and with trembling knees.

    The awestruck servants sat around,
    And silent sat, and utter’d no sound.

    The magicians appear’d, but none ’mongst them all
    Could rightly interpret the words on the wall.

    But Belshazzar the king the selfsame night
    Was slain by his servants,--a ghastly sight.


~THE MINNESINGERS~

    In the minstrels’ strife engaging
      Pass the Minnesingers by;
    Strange the war that they are waging,
      Strange the tourney where they vie.

    Fancy, that for battle nerves him,
      Is the Minnesinger’s steed;
    Art as trusty buckler serves him,
      And his word’s a sword indeed.

    Beauteous dames, with glances pleasant,
      From the balcony look down;
    But the right one is not present
      With the proper laurel crown.

    Other combatants, when springing
      To the lists, at least are sound;
    Minnesingers must be bringing
      To the fray a deadly wound.

    He from whom the most there draineth
      Song’s blood from the inmost breast,--
    He is victor, and obtaineth
      From fair lips the praise most blest,


~LOOKING FROM THE WINDOW~

    Fair Hedwig lay at the window, to see
      If pale Henry would chance to detect her;
    She said half aloud: “Why goodness me!
      The man is as pale as a spectre!”

    With yearning pale Henry look’d above
      At her window, in hopes to detect her;
    Fair Hedwig now felt the torments of love,
      And she became pale as a spectre.

    Love-sick, now stood fair Hedwig all day
      At her window, lest he should reject her;
    But soon in pale Henry’s arms she lay
      All night, at the time for a spectre.


~THE WOUNDED KNIGHT~

    I know a story of anguish,
      A tale of the times of old;
    A knight with love doth languish,
      His mistress is faithless and cold.

    As faithless must he esteem now
      Her whom in his heart he adored;
    His loving pangs must he deem now
      Disgraceful and abhorr’d.

    In vain in the lists would he wander,
      And challenge to battle each knight;
    “Let him who my mistress dares slander
      Make ready at once for the fight!”

    But all are silent, save only
      His grief, that so fiercely doth burn;
    His lance he against his own lonely
      Accusing bosom must turn.


~THE SEA-VOYAGE~

    I leaning stood against the mast,
      And told each wave of ocean;
    Farewell, my beauteous fatherland!
      My bark, how swift thy motion!

    I pass’d my lovely mistress’ house,
      The windows gleam’d all over;
    But though I gazed and gazed and gazed,
      No sign could I discover.

    Ye tears, obscure not thus mine eyes
      On this too-painful morrow;
    My love-sick heart, O do not break
      With overweight of sorrow!


~THE SONG OF REPENTANCE~

    Sir Ulrich rides in the forest so green,
      The leaves with joy seem laden;
    He sees, the trees’ thick branches between,
      The form of a beauteous maiden.

    The youth then said: “Well know I thee,
      So blooming and glowing thy face is;
    Alluringly ever encircles it me,
      In deserts or crowded places.

    “Those lips, by fresh loveliness ever stirr’d,
      Appear a pair of roses;
    Yet many a hateful bitter word
      That roguish mouth discloses.

    “A pretty rosebush a mouth like this
      Resembles very closely,
    Where cunning poisonous serpents hiss
      Amid the leaves morosely.

    “Within those beauteous cheeks there lies
      A sweet and beauteous dimple;
    That is the grave where I fell by surprise,
      Lured on by a yearning simple.

    “There see I the beauteous locks of hair,
      That once so lovingly pleased me;
    That is the net so wondrous fair
      Wherewith the Evil One seized me.

    “And that blue eye, that so sweetly fell,
      As clear as the ocean even,
    It proved to be the portal of hell,
      Though I thought it the gateway of heaven.”

    In the wood still farther Sir Ulrich doth ride,
      The leaves make a rustling dreary,
    A second figure afar he spied,
      That seem’d so sad and weary.

    The youth then said: “O mother dear,
      Who lov’dst me to distraction,
    But to whom in life I caused many a tear,
      By evil word and action!

    “O would that to dry thine eyes could avail
      My sorrow so fiercely glowing!
    O could I but redden thy cheeks so pale
      With the blood from my own heart flowing!”

    And farther rides Sir Ulrich there,
      The night o’er the forest is falling;
    Many singular voices fill the air,
      The evening breezes are calling.

    The youth then hears his sorrowing words
      Full often near him ringing;
    ’Tis the notes of the mocking forest birds
      All twittering loudly and singing:

    “Sir Ulrich sings a pretty song,
      We call it the song of repentance:
    And when he has reach’d the end of his song,
      He’ll repeat it sentence by sentence.”


~TO A SINGER, ON HER SINGING AN OLD ROMANCE~

    Still think I of the magic fair one,
      How on her first my glances fell!
    How her dear tones resounded sweetly,
    How they my heart enthrall’d completely,
    How down my cheeks the tears coursed fleetly
      But how it chanced, I could not tell.

    There over me had crept a vision:
      Methought I was again a child,
    And in my mother’s chamber sitting
    In silence, by the lamp-light flitting,
    And reading fairy tales befitting,
      Whilst outside roar’d the tempest wild.

    The tales began with life to glimmer,
      The knights arise from out the grave;
    By Roncesvall the battle rages,
    Sir Roland in the fight engages,
    And with him many a valiant page is,--
      And also Ganelon, the knave.

    By him is Roland ill entreated,
      He swims in blood, fast ebbs his breath;
    Scarce can his horn, at such far distance,
    Call Charlemagne to his assistance:
    So passed away the knight’s existence,
      And, with him, sank my dream in death.

    It was a loud confusèd echo
      That from my vision wakened me.
    The legend that she sang was ended,
    The people heartily commended,
    And ofttimes shouted: “Bravo! splendid!”
      Low bow’d the singer gracefully.


~THE SONG OF THE DUCATS~

    O my golden ducats dear,
    Tell me why ye are not here?

    Are ye with the golden fishes
    Which within the stream so gaily
    Leap and splash and wriggle daily?

    Are ye with the golden flow’rets
    Which, o’er green fields scattered lightly,
    In the morning dew gleam brightly?

    Are ye with the golden bird-kins
    Which we see in happy chorus
    In the blue skies hov’ring o’er us?

    Are ye with the golden planets
    Which in radiant crowds each even
    Smile in yonder distant heaven?

    Ye, alas, my golden ducats,
    Swim not in the streamlet bright,
      Sparkle not on meadow green,
      Hover not in skies serene,
    Smile not in the heavens by night.--
    Creditors, with greedy paws,
    Hold you safely in their claws.


~DIALOGUE ON PADERBORN HEATH~

    Hear’st thou not far music ringing,
      As of double-bass and fiddle?
    Many fair ones there are springing
      Gaily up and down the middle.

    “You’re mistaken friend, in speaking
      “Thus of fiddle and its brother;
    “I but hear young porkers squeaking,
      “And the grunting of their mother.”

    Hear’st thou not the forest bugle?
      Hunters in the chase are straying;
    Gentle lambs are feeding, frugal
      Shepherds on their pipes are playing.

    “Ah, my friend, what you just now heard,
      “Was not bugles, pipes, or hunters;
    “I can only see the sow-herd
      “Slowly driving home his grunters.”

    Hear’st thou not the distant voices
      In sweet rivalry contending?
    Many an angel blest rejoices
      Strains like these to hear ascending.

    “Ah, that music sweetly ringing
      “Is, my friend, no rival chorus;
    “’Tis but youthful gooseherds, singing
      “As they drive their geese before us.”

    Hear’st thou not the church-bells holy,
      Sweet and clear, with deep emotion?
    To the village-chapel slowly
      Wend the people with devotion.

    “Ah, my friend, the bells ’tis only
      “Of the cows and oxen also,
    “Who, with sunken heads and lonely,
      “Go back to their gloomy stalls so.”

    See’st thou not the veil just moving?
      See’st thou not those soft advances?
    There I see my mistress loving,
      Humid sorrow in her glances.

    “She, my friend, who nods so much, is
      “An old woman, Betsy namely;
    “Pale and haggard, on her crutches
      “O’er the meadow limps she lamely.”

    Overwhelm me with confusion
      At my questions, friend, each minute;
    Wilt thou deem a mere illusion
      What my bosom holds within it?


19. LIFE’S SALUTATIONS. (From an Album.)

    This earth resembles a highway vast,
      We men are the trav’llers along it;
    On foot and on horseback we hurry on fast,
      And as runners or couriers throng it.

    In passing each other, we nod and we greet
      With our handkerchiefs waved from the coaches;
    We fain would embrace, but our horses are fleet,
      And speed on, despite all reproaches.

    Dear Prince Alexander, as onward we go,
      We scarcely have met at a station,
    When the signal to start the postilions blow,
      Compelling our sad separation.


~QUITE TRUE~

    When the spring returns with the sun’s sweet light,
      The flowers then bud and blossom apace;
      When the moon begins her radiant race,
    Then the stars swim after her track so bright.
    When the minstrel sees two beautiful eyes,
    Then songs from his inmost bosom arise;--
    But songs and stars and flowerets gay,
    And eyes and moonbeams and sun’s bright ray,
      However delightful they are,
      Don’t make up the world, friend, by far.


~TO A. W. VON SCHLEGEL~

    In dainty hoop, with flowers all-richly dight,
      With beauty-patches on her painted face,
      With pointed shoes all hung about with lace,
    With tow’ring curls, and, wasp-like, fasten’d tight,--
    Thus was the spurious muse equipp’d that night
      When first she offer’d thee her fond embrace;
      But thou eludedst her and leftst the place,
    Led by a mystic impulse from her sight:
    A castle in the desert thou didst find,
    Where, like a lovely marble image shrin’d,
      Lay a fair maid, in magic slumber sunk;
    But soon the spell was loosed,--when kiss’d by thee,
    With smiles the lawful muse of Germany
      Awoke, and sank within thine arms, love-drunk.


~TO MY MOTHER~

1.

    I have been wont to bear my head right high,
      My temper too is somewhat stern and rough;
      Even before a monarch’s cold rebuff
    I would not timidly avert mine eye.
    Yet, mother dear, I’ll tell it openly:
      Much as my haughty pride may swell and puff,
      I feel submissive and subdued enough,
    When thy much-cherished, darling form is nigh.
    Is it thy spirit that subdues me then,
    Thy spirit, grasping all things in its ken,
    And soaring to the light of heaven again?
      By the sad recollection I’m oppress’d
      That I have done so much that grieved thy breast,
      Which loved me, more than all things else, the best.


2.

    With foolish fancy I deserted thee;
      I fain would search the whole world through, to learn
      If in it I perchance could love discern,
    That I might love embrace right-lovingly.
    I sought for love as far as eye could see,
      My hands extending at each door in turn,
      Begging them not my prayer for love to spurn--
    Cold hate alone they laughing gave to me.
    And ever search’d I after love; yes, ever
    Search’d after love, but love discover’d never,
      And so I homeward went, with troubled thought;
    But thou wert there to welcome me again,
    And, ah, what in thy dear eye floated then
      _That_ was the sweet love I so long had sought.


~THE GODS’ TWILIGHT~

    Fair May has come with her bright golden radiance
    And silken gales and fragrant spicy odours,
    And kindly lures us with her snowy blossoms,
    And from a thousand blue-eyed violets greets us,
    And spreads abroad her flowery verdant carpet,
    With morning dew and sunshine interwoven,
    And summons all her favourite human children.
    At her first call the bashful people come;
    The men in haste put on their nankeen breeches,
    And Sunday coats with golden glassy buttons;
    The women don the white of innocence,
    The youths take care to curl their spring-mustachios,
    The maidens bid their bosoms softly heave;
    The city poets cram into their pockets
    Paper, lead-pencil, and lorgnette; and gaily
    The eddying moving crowd draw near the gateway,
    And lie at ease on the green turf beyond,
    Amazed to see how much the trees have sprouted,--
    Play with the tender colour’d flowerets fair,
    List to the song of merry birds above them,
    And shout exulting tow’rds the vault of heaven.

    To me came also May, and three times knock’d she
    Against my door and cried: “Behold sweet May!
    “Thou palefaced dreamer, come, I fain would kiss thee!”
    But I my door kept bolted, and I cried:
    “In vain thou seek’st to tempt me, evil stranger.
    “I long have seen thee through, I’ve seen through also
    “The fabric of the world, and seen too much,
    “And much too deep, and fled is all my pleasure,
    “And endless torments quiver in my heart.
    “I see through all the stony hard outsides
    “Of human houses and of human bosoms,
    “And see in both deceit and woe and falsehood.
    “I’ve learnt to read the thoughts on every face,--
    “All evil! In the maiden’s shamefaced blushes
    “I see the trembling of a secret lust;
    “On the inspired and haughty head of youth
    “I see the laughing chequer’d fool’s cap jingling;
    “And caric’tures alone and sickly shadows
    “I see upon this earth, and live in doubt
    “Whether a madhouse ’tis, or hospital.
    “The old earth’s crust I see through but too plainly
    “As though it were of crystal,--see the horrors
    “Which May is vainly striving to conceal
    “With pleasing verdure. There I see the dead;
    “They lie beneath, in their small coffins prison’d,
    “With hands together folded, eyes wide open,
    “White is their garment, white their face as well,
    “And yellow worms from out their lips are crawling.
    “I see the son with his loved mistress sitting
    “And toying with her on his father’s grave.
    “Derisive songs the nightingales are singing,
    “The gentle meadow flow’rets laugh with malice,
    “And the dead father moveth in his grave,
    “While the old mother-earth with pain doth shudder.”
    O thou poor earth, thy sorrows know I well!
    I see the glow that in thy breast is heaving,
    Thy thousand veins I see all bleeding freely,
    And see thy gaping wounds all, all torn open,
    While flames and smoke and blood stream wildly forth.
    I see thy proud defiant giant-children,
    Primeval monsters, from dark gulfs arising
    And swinging ruddy torches in their hands.
    Their iron scaling-ladders they advance,
    And wildly rush to storm the forts of heaven,
    And swarthy dwarfs climb after them; with crackling
    Each golden star on high like dust is scatter’d.
    With daring hand they tear the golden curtain
    From God’s own tent; the blessèd troops of angels
    Fall headlong down with howling at the sight.
    The pale God sits upon his awful throne,
    Tears from his head his crown, and tears his hair.--
    Still onward, onward press the savage crew,
    The giants fiercely hurl their blazing torches
    Into the realms of heaven, the dwarfs strike wildly
    With flaming scourges on the angels’ backs,
    Who twist and writhe in ecstasy of anguish,
    And by the hair are seized and whirl’d away.
    And my own angel likewise see I there,
    With his blond locks, his sweet expressive features,
    With everlasting love around his mouth,
    And with beatitude in his blue eyes.
    A fearful hideous swarthy goblin comes,
    Tears him from off the ground, my poor pale angel,
    Grins as he ogles his fair noble limbs,
    And clasps him firmly in his soft embraces,--
    A yell re-echoes through the universe,
    The pillars crash, and earth and heaven are hurl’d
    Headlong together, and old night is lord.


~RATCLIFF~

    The Dream-God brought me to a landscape fair
      Where weeping willows nodded me a welcome
    With their long verdant arms, and where the flowers
    Gazed on me mutely with wise sisters’ eyes,
    Where the birds’ twittering resounded sweetly,
    Where the dogs’ barking seem’d to me familiar,
    And voices kindly greeted me, and figures,
    Like an old friend, and yet where everything
    Appear’d so strange, beyond description strange.
    Before a pretty country-house I stood,
    My bosom in me moving, but my head
    All peaceful, and the dust with calmness shook I
    From off my travelling garments; shrilly sounded
    The bell I rang, and then the door was open’d.

    Inside were men and women, many faces
    To me well known. Still sorrow lay on all,
    And secret fearful grief. With strange emotion,
    Wellnigh with looks of pity, on me gazed they
    Till my own soul with terror was pervaded,
    As though foreboding some unknown misfortune.
    Old Margaret I straightway recognized,
    Gazed on her fixedly, but yet she spake not.
    “Where is Maria?” ask’d I, yet she spake not,
    But softly seized my hand, and led me on
    Through many a long and brightly-lighted chamber,
    Where splendour, pomp, and deathlike silence reign’d
    And to a darksome room at length she brought me,
    And, with her face averted from me, pointed
    Toward the form that sat upon the sofa.
    “Art thou Maria?” ask’d I. Inwardly
    I was myself astounded at the firmness
    With which I spoke. Like stone and hollow
    Sounded a voice: “That is the name they call me.”
    A piercing agony straight froze me through,
    For that cold hollow tone, alas, was yet
    The once enchanting voice of my Maria!
    And yonder woman in pale lilac dress,
    In negligent attire, with unveil’d bosom,
    With glassy staring eyes, like leather seeming
    The muscles of the cheeks of her white face,--
    Alas, that woman once was the most lovely,
    The blooming, pleasing, sweet and kind Maria!
    “Your travels have been long” she said aloud
    In cold, unpleasing, but familiar accents,--
    “You look no longer languishing, my friend,
    “You’re well in health, your loins and calves elastic.
    “Show your solidity.” A silly smile
    Play’d the while round her yellow, pallid mouth.
    In my confusion utter’d I these accents:
    “I’ve been inform’d that thou art married now?”
    “Ah yes!” she carelessly replied with laughing:
    “I have a stick of wood that’s cover’d over
    “With leather, call’d a husband. Still, for all that,
    “Wood is but wood!” And then she laugh’d perversely
    Till chilling anguish through my spirit ran,
    And doubt upon me seized:--are those the modest,
    The flowery-modest lips of my Maria?
    But presently she rose, took quickly up
    From off the chair her cashmere shawl, and threw it
    Around her neck, my arm took hold of then,
    Drew me away, and through the open housedoor,
    And led me on through thicket, field, and meadow.

    The sun’s red glowing disk already downward
    Was hast’ning, and its purple rays were beaming
    Over the trees and flowers, and o’er the river
    That flow’d majestically in the distance.
    “See’st thou the large and golden eye that’s floating
    “In the blue water?” cried Maria quickly.
    “Hush, thou poor creature!” said I, as I spied
    In the dim twilight a strange wondrous motion.
    Figures of mist arose from out the plain,
    And with white tender arms embraced each other;
    The violets eyed each other tenderly,
    The lily cups with yearning bent together;
    A loving glow in every rose was gleaming,
    The pinks would fain in their own breath be kindled,
    In blissful odours revell’d every flower,
    And every one wept silent tears of rapture,
    And all exulting shouted: Love! Love! Love!
    The butterflies were fluttering, and the shining
    Gold beetles humm’d their gentle fairy songs,
    The winds of evening whisper’d, and the oaks
    All rustled, and the nightingale sang sweetly;
    And amid all the whispering, rustling, singing,
    Prated away, with thin cold soundless voice,
    The faded woman hanging on my arm:
    “I know your nightly longing for the castle;
    “Every long shadow is a simpleton,
    “That nods and signs precisely as one wishes;
    “The blue coat is an angel; but the red coat
    “With his drawn sword, is very hostile to you.”
    And many other things in this strange fashion
    Continued she to say, till, tired at length,
    She sat down with me on the mossy bank
    That stands beneath the ancient noble oak-tree.
    Together there we sat, both sad and silent,
    And gazed upon each other, growing sadder.
    The oak, as with a dying sigh, was murmuring;
    Deep-grieving, sang the nightingale down on us.
    But through the leaves a ruddy light was piercing,
    And flicker’d round Maria’s pallid face,
    And lured a glow from out her rigid eyes,
    Until with her old darling voice thus spoke she:
    “How knewest thou that I am so unhappy?
    “I read it lately in thy strange wild numbers.”

    An ice-cold feeling pierced my breast, I shudder’d
    At my own mad delirium, which the future
    Saw through, my brain grew giddy with alarm,
    And through sheer terror I awoke from sleep.


~DONNA CLARA~

    In the evening-shaded garden
    Rambles the Alcalde’s daughter;
    Kettle-drums and trumpets loudly
    Echo from the lofty castle.

    “Wearisome I find the dances,
    “And the honied words of flatt’ry,
    “And the knights, who so gallantly
    “Tell me I the sun resemble.

    “Everything is hateful to me
    “Since I by the beaming moonlight
    “Saw the Knight whose lute allured me
    “To the window every evening.

    “As he stood, so slim, but daring,
    “And his eyes shot lightning glances
    “From his pale and noble features,
    “Truly he Saint George resembled.”

    In this manner Donna Clara
    Thought, and on the ground then looked she;
    When she raised her eyes, the handsome
    Unknown Knight was standing by her.

    Pressing hands with loving whispers
    Wander they beneath the moonlight,
    And the zephyr gently woos them,
    Wondrously the roses greet them.

    Wondrously the roses greet them,
    Like love’s messengers all glowing.--
    “But, my loved one, prythee tell me
    “Why so suddenly thou redden’st?”

    “’Twas the flies that stung me, dearest,
    “And the flies are, all the summer,
    “Quite as much detested by me
    “As the long-nosed Jewish fellows.”

    “Never mind the flies and Jews, dear,”
    Said the Knight, with fond caresses.
    From the almond-trees are falling
    Thousand white and fleecy blossoms.

    Thousand white and fleecy blossoms
    Their sweet fragrance shed around them.
    “But, my loved one, prythee tell me
    “Is thy heart devoted to me?”

    “Yes, I truly love thee, dearest,
    “And I swear it by the Saviour
    “Whom the God-detested Jews erst
    “Wickedly and vilely murder’d.”

    “Never mind the Jews and Saviour,”
    Said the Knight, with fond caresses.
    In the distance snow-white lilies
    Dreamily, light-bathed, are bending.

    Bathed in light the snow-white lilies
    Gaze upon the stars above them:
    “But, my loved one, prythee tell me
    “Hast thou not a false oath taken?”

    “Falsehood is not in me, dearest,
    “Since within my breast there flows not
    “E’en one single drop of Moor’s blood,
    “Or of dirty Jew’s blood either.”

    “Never mind the Moors and Jews, dear,”
    Said the Knight, with fond caresses;
    And he to a myrtle bower
    Leads the fair Alcalde’s daughter.

    With the nets of love so tender,
    He hath secretly enclosed her!
    Short their words and long their kisses,
    And their hearts are overflowing.

    Like a wedding-song all-melting
    Sings the nightingale, the dear one;
    Glowworms on the ground are moving,
    As if in the torch-dance circling.

    Silence reigns within the bower,
    Nought is heard except the stealthy
    Whispers of the cunning myrtles,
    And the breathing of the flowerets.

    But soon kettle-drums and trumpets
    Echo from the lofty castle,
    And, awakening, Clara quickly
    From the Knight’s arm frees her person.

    “Hark, they’re calling me, my dearest,
    Yet before we part, thou need’st must
    Thy dear name to me discover
    Which thou hast so long concealèd.”

    And the Knight, with radiant smiling,
    Kiss’d the fingers of his Donna,
    Kiss’d her lips and kiss’d her forehead,
    And at last these words he uttered:

    “I, Señora, I, your loved one,
    Am the son of the much honour’d
    Great and learned scribe, the Rabbi
    Israel of Saragossa.”


~ALMANSOR~

1.

    In fair Cordova’s cathedral,
    Stand the columns, thirteen hundred,--
    Thirteen hundred giant-columns
    Bear the mighty dome in safety.

    And on dome and walls and columns
    From the very top to bottom
    The Koran’s Arabian proverbs
    Twine in wise and flowery fashion.

    Moorish Kings erected whilome
    This vast house to Allah’s glory,
    Yet in many parts ’tis alter’d
    In the darksome whirl of ages.

    On the turret where the watchman
    Summon’d unto prayer the people,
    Now the Christian bell is sounding
    With its melancholy murmur.

    On the steps whereon the faithful
    Used to sing the Prophet’s sayings,
    Now baldpated priests exhibit
    All the mass’s trivial wonders.

    How they twirl before the colour’d
    Puppets, full of antic capers,
    Midst the incense smoke and ringing,
    While the senseless tapers sparkle!

    In fair Cordova’s cathedral
    Stands Almansor ben Abdullah,
    Viewing silently the columns,
    And these words in silence murmuring:

    “O ye columns, strong, gigantic,
    “Once adorn’d in Allah’s glory,
    “Now must ye pay humble homage
    “To this Christendom detested.

    “To the times have ye submitted,
    “And ye bear the burden calmly;
    “Still more reason for the weaker
    “To be patient all the sooner.”

    And Almansor ben Abdullah
    Bent his head with face unruffled
    O’er the font so decorated
    In fair Cordova’s cathedral.


2.

    The cathedral left he quickly,
    On his wild steed speeding onward,
    While his moist locks and the feathers
    In his hat the wind is moving.

    On the road to Alcolea,
    By the side of Guadalquivir,
    Where the snowy almond blossoms,
    And the fragrant golden orange,

    Thither bastes the merry rider,
    Piping, singing, laughing gaily,
    And the birds all swell the chorus,
    And the torrent’s noisy waters.

    In the fort at Alcolea
    Dwelleth Clara de Alvares;
    In Navarre her sire is fighting,
    And she revels in her freedom.

    And afar Almansor heareth
    Sounds of kettle-drums and trumpets,
    And the castle lights beholds he
    Glittering through the trees’ dark shadows.

    In the fort at Alcolea
    Dance twelve gaily trick’d-out ladies
    With twelve knights attired as gaily,
    But Almansor’s the best dancer.

    As if wing’d by merry fancies,
    Round about the hall he flutters,
    Knowing how to all the ladies
    To address sweet flattering speeches.

    Isabella’s lovely hands he
    Kisses quickly, and then leaves her,
    And before Elvira stands he,
    Looking in her face so archly.

    He in turns assures each lady
    That he heartily adores her;
    “On the true faith of a Christian”
    Swears he thirty times that evening.


3.

    In the fort at Alcolea
    Merriment and noise have ceased now
    Knights and ladies all have vanish’d,
    And the lights are all extinguish’d.

    Donna Clara and Almansor
    In the hall above still linger,
    And one single lamp is throwing
    On them both its feeble lustre.

    On the seat the lady’s sitting,
    And the knight upon the footstool,
    And his head, by sleep o’erpower’d,
    On her darling knees is resting.

    From a golden flask some rose-oil
    Pours the lady, sadly musing,
    On Almansor’s dark-brown tresses,--
    From his inmost bosom sighs he.

    With her soft lips then the lady
    Gives a sweet kiss, sadly musing,
    On Almansor’s dark-brown tresses,--
    And his brow is clouded over.

    From her light eyes tears in torrents
    Weeps the lady, sadly musing,
    On Almansor’s dark-brown tresses,--
    And his lips begin to quiver.

    And he dreams he’s once more standing
    With his head bent down and weeping
    In fair Cordova’s cathedral,
    Many gloomy voices hearing.

    All the lofty giant-columns
    Hears he murmuring full of anger,--
    That no longer will they bear it,
    And they totter and they tremble.

    And they wildly fall together,
    Pale turn all the priests and people,
    Crashing falls the dome upon them,
    And the Christian gods wail loudly.


~THE PILGRIMAGE TO KEVLAAR~

1.

    The mother stood by the window,
      The son in bed lay he.
    “Wilt thou not rise up, William,
      “The fair procession to see?”--

    “I am so ill, my mother,
      “I neither see nor hear;
    “I think of my poor dead Gretchen,
      “My heart is breaking near.”

    “Arise, let’s go to Kevlaar,
      “Take book and rosary too;
    “The mother of God will heal thee,
      “And cure thy sick heart anew.”

    In church-like tones they are singing,
      The banners flutter on high;
    At Cologne on the Rhine this happens,
      The proud procession moves by.

    The crowd the mother follows,
      Her son she leadeth now,
    And both of them sing in chorus:
      “O Mary, blessed be thou!”


2.

    The mother of God at Kevlaar
      Her best dress wears to-day;
    Full much hath she to accomplish,
      So great the sick folks’ array.

    The sick folk with them are bringing,
      As offerings fitting and meet,
    Strange limbs of wax all fashion’d,
      Yes, waxen hands and feet.

    And he who a wax hand offers,
      Finds cured in his hand the wound,
    And he who a wax foot proffers,
      Straight finds his foot grow sound.

    To Kevlaar went many on crutches
      Who now on the tight rope skip,
    And many a palsied finger
      O’er the viol doth merrily trip.

    The mother took a waxlight,
      And out of it fashion’d a heart:
    “My son, take that to God’s mother,
      “And she will cure thy smart.”

    The son took sighing the wax-heart,
      Went with sighs to the shrine so blest,
    The tears burst forth from his eyelids,
      The words burst forth from his breast:

    “Thou highly-favour’d blest one!
      “Thou pure and godlike maid!
    “Thou mighty queen of heaven,
      “To thee my woes be display’d!

    “I with my mother was dwelling
      “In yonder town of Cologne,
    “The town that many a hundred
      “Fair churches and chapels doth own.

    “And near us there dwelt my Gretchen,
      “Who, alas! is dead to-day;
    “O, Mary, I bring thee a wax-heart,
      “My heart’s wounds cure, I pray.

    “My sick heart cure, O cure thou,
      “And early and late my vow
    “I’ll pay, and sing with devotion:
      “‘O Mary, blessed be thou!’”


3.

    The poor sick son and his mother
      In their little chamber slept,
    The mother of God to their chamber
      All lightly, lightly crept.

    She bent herself over the sick one,
      Her hand with action light
    Upon his heart placed softly,
      Smiled sweetly and vanish’d from sight.

    The mother saw all in her vision,
      Saw this and saw much more;
    From out of her slumber woke she,
      The hounds were baying full sore.

    Her son was lying before her,
      And dead her son he lay,
    While over his pale cheeks gently
      The light of morning did play.

    Her hands the mother folded,
      She felt she knew not how;
    With meekness sang she and softly:
      “O Mary, blessed be thou!”


~THE DREAM~

(From _Salon_.)


    A vision I dreamt of a lovely child.
      She wore her hair in tresses;
    In the blue nights of summer so calm and mild
      We sat in the greenwood’s recesses.

    In mutual rapture and torture we vied,
      We loved and exchanged loving kisses;
    The yellow stars in the heavens all sigh’d
      And seem’d to envy our blisses.

    I now am awake, and around me gaze
      In the darkness, alone and despairing;
    The stars in the heavens are shedding their rays
      In silence and all-uncaring.


~ABROAD~

1.

    From place to place thou’rt wandering still,
      Thou scarcely knowest why;
    A gentle word the wind doth fill,--
      Thou look’st round wond’ringly.

    My loved one, who was left behind,
      Is calling softly now:
    “Return, I love thee, O be kind,
      My only joy art thou!”

    But on, still on, no peace, no rest,
      Thou never still mayst be;
    What thou of yore didst love the best,
      Thou ne’er again shalt see.


2.

    Thou art to-day of sadder seeming
      Than thou hast been for long before;
    Mute tears upon thy cheeks are gleaming,
      Thy sighs wax louder more and more.

    Of thy far home long vanish’d is it
      That thou art thinking, full of pain?
    Wouldst thou not joyfully revisit
      Thy much-loved fatherland again?

    Art thinking now of her who sweetly
      With tiny rage enchanted thee?
    Vex’d by her oft, ye soon completely
      Were reconciled, and laugh’d with glee.

    Art thinking of the friends whom yearning
      Impell’d to fall upon thy breast?
    Within the heart the thoughts were burning,
      And yet the lips remain’d at rest.

    Or of the sister and the mother
      Art thinking, who approved thy suit?
    Methinks within thy breast, good brother,
      Wild passions fast are growing mute.

    Of the fair garden art thou thinking,
      Its birds and trees, where love’s young dream
    Ofttimes sustain’d thy spirits sinking,
      And hope shone forth with trembling beam?

    ’Tis late. The snow has fallen thickly,
      Bright night illumes the humid mass;
    I now must go, and hasten quickly
      To dress for company,--Alas!


3.

    Of my fair fatherland I once was proud;
                Beside the stream
    The oak soar’d high, the violets gently bow’d;
                It was a dream.

    German the kisses were, in German too
                (Sweet then did seem
    The sound) they spake the words: “Yes, I love you!”--
                It was a dream.


~TRAGEDY~

1.

    O fly with me, and be my wife,
      And to my heart for comfort come!
    Far, far away hence be my heart,
      Thy fatherland and father’s home.

    If thou’lt not go, I here will die,
      And all alone abandon thee;
    And if thou in thy father’s home
      Dost stay, thou’lt seem abroad to be.


2.

_A genuine national song, heard by Heine on the Rhine._

    There fell a frost in a night of spring,
      It fell on the tender flowerets blue,
    They all soon wither’d and faded.

    A youth once loved a maiden full well,
    They secretly fled away from the house,
    Unknown to father and mother.

    They wander’d here and they wander’d there,
    And neither joy nor star could they find,
    And so they droop’d and they perish’d.


3.

    Upon her grave a linden is springing,
    Where birds and the evening breeze are singing,
    And on the green sward under it
    The miller’s boy and his sweetheart sit.

    The winds are blowing so softly and fleetly,
    The birds are singing so sadly and sweetly,
    The prattling lovers are mute by-and-by,
    They weep and they know not the reason why.


~THE TANNHAUSER~

1.

    O all good Christians, be on your guard,
      Lest Satan’s wiles ensnare you!
    I’ll sing you the song of the Tannhauser bold,
      That ye may duly beware you.

    The noble Tannhauser, a valiant knight,
      For love and pleasure yearning,
    To the Venus’ mount travell’d, and there he dwelt
      Seven years without returning.

    “Dear Venus, lovely mistress, farewell!
      “Though much thou mayst enchant me,
    “No longer will I tarry with thee,
      “Permission to leave now grant me.”

    “Tannhauser, dear and noble knight,
      “To-day you have kept from kissing;
    “So kiss me quickly and tell me true,
      “What is there in me you find missing?

    “Have I each day the sweetest wine
      “Not pour’d out for you gaily?
    “And have I not always crown’d your head
      “With fragrant roses daily?”--

    “Dear Venus, lovely mistress, in truth
      “My soul no longer finds pleasing
    “These endless kisses and luscious wine,--
      “I long for something that’s teasing.

    “Too much have we jested, too much have we laugh’d,
      “My heart for tears has long panted;
    “Each rose on my head I fain would see
      “By pointed thorns supplanted.”--

    “Tannhauser, dear and noble knight,
      “You fain would vex and grieve me;
    “An oath you have sworn a thousand times
      “That you would never leave me.

    “Come, let us into the chamber go,
      “To taste of love’s rapture and gladness,
    “And there my fair and lily-white form
      “Shall drive away thy sadness.”--

    “Dear Venus, lovely mistress, thy charms
      “Will bloom for ever and ever;
    “As many already have glow’d for thee,
      “So men will forget thee never!

    “But when I think of the heroes and gods
      “Who erst have taken their pleasure
    “In clasping thy fair and lily-white form
      “My anger knows no measure.

    “Thy fair and lily-white figure with dread
      “Is filling me even this minute,
    “When thinking how many in after times
      “Will still take pleasure in it!”--

    “Tannhauser, dear and noble knight,
      “You should not utter such treason;
    “’T’were better to beat me, as you have before
      “Oft done for many a season.

    “’T’were better to beat me, than such harsh words
      “Of insult thus to have spoken,
    “Whereby, O Christian ungrateful and cold,
      “The pride in my bosom is broken.

    “Because I love you so much, I forgive
      “Your evil words, thankless mortal;
    “Farewell, I grant you permission to leave,
      “I’ll open myself the portal.”


2.

    In Rome, in the holy city of Rome,
      With singing and ringing and blowing
    A grand procession is moving on,
      The Pope in the middle is going.

    The pious Pope Urban is his name,
      The triple crown he is wearing,
    He wears a red and purple robe,
      And Barons his train are bearing.

    “O holy Father, Pope Urban, stay!
      “I will not move from my station,
    “Until thou hast saved my soul from hell,
      “And heard my supplication!”--

    The ghostly songs are suddenly mute,
      The people fall backwards dumbly;
    O who is the pilgrim pale and wild
      Who bends to the Pope so humbly?

    “O holy Father, Pope Urban, to whom
      “To bind and to loose not too much is,
    “O save me from the pangs of hell,
      “And out of the Evil One’s clutches!

    “By name, I’m the noble Tannhauser call’d;
      “For love and pleasure yearning,
    “To the Venus’ mount I travell’d and dwelt
      “Seven years there without returning.

    “This Venus is a woman fair
      “With charms of dazzling splendour;
    Like light of sun and flowers’ sweet scent
      “Her voice is gentle and tender.

    “As a butterfly flutters around a flower
      “And from its calyx sips too,
    So flutters my soul for evermore
      “Around her rosy lips too.

    “Around her noble features entwine
      “Her blooming black locks wildly;
    Thy breath would be gone if once her great eyes
      “Were fix’d upon thee mildly.

    “If her great eyes upon thee were fix’d
      “They surely would harass thee greatly;
    ’Twas with the greatest trouble that I
      “Escaped from the mountain lately.

    “From out of the mountain I made my escape
      “And yet for ever pursue me
    “The looks of the beautiful woman, which seem
      “To say ‘O hasten back to me!’

    “A wretched spectre by day I’ve become,
      “At night I vainly would hide me
    “In sleep, for I dream that my mistress dear
      “Is sitting and laughing beside me.

    “How clearly, how sweetly, how madly she laughs
      “Her white teeth all the while showing!
    “Whenever I think of that laugh, in streams
      “The tears from my eyes begin flowing.

    “I love her indeed with a boundless love
      “That scorches me up to a cinder;
    “’Tis like a wild waterfall, whose fierce flood
      “No barrier ever can hinder.

    “It nimbly leaps from rock to rock
      “With noisy foaming and boiling;
    “Its neck it may break a thousand times,
      “Yet on, still on, it keeps toiling.

    “If all the expanse of the heavens were mine,
      “To Venus the whole I’d surrender;
    “I’d give her the sun, I’d give her the moon,
      “I’d give her the stars in their splendour.

    “I love her indeed with a boundless love,
      “Whose flame within me rages;
    “O say can this be the fire of hell,
      “The glow that will last through all ages?

    “O holy Father, Pope Urban, to whom
      “To bind and to loose not too much is,
    “O save me from the pangs of hell,
      “And out of the Evil One’s clutches!--”

    His hands the Pope raised sadly on high,
      And sigh’d till these words he had spoken:
    “Tannhauser, most unhappy knight,
      “The charm can never be broken.

    “The Devil whom they Venus call
      “Is mighty for hurting and harming;
    “I’m powerless quite to rescue thee
      “From out of his talons so charming.

    “And so thy soul must expiate now
      Thy fleshly lusts infernal;
    Yes, thou art rejected, yes, thou art condemn’d
      To suffer hell’s torments eternal.”


3.

    The knight Tannhauser roam’d on till his feet
      Were sore with his wanderings dreary.
    At midnight’s hour he came at length
      To the Venus’ mountain, full weary.

    Fair Venus awoke from out of her sleep,
      And out of her bed sprang lightly,
    And clasp’d her fair and lily-white arms
      Around her beloved one tightly.

    From out of her nose the blood fell fast,
      The tears from her eyes descended;
    She cover’d the face of her darling knight
      With blood and tears closely blended.

    The knight lay quietly down in the bed,
      And not one word has he spoken;
    While Venus went to the kitchen, to make
      Some soup, that his fast might be broken.

    She gave him soup, and she gave him bread,
      She wash’d his wounded feet, too;
    She comb’d his rough and matted hair,
      And laugh’d with a laugh full sweet, too.

    “Tannhauser, dear and noble knight,
      “Full long hast thou been wandering;
    “O say in what lands hast thou thy time
      “So far from hence been squandering?”

    “Dear Venus, lovely mistress, in truth
      “In Italy I have been staying;
    “I’ve had some bus’ness in Rome, and now
      “Return without further delaying.

    “Rome stands on the Tiber, just at the spot
      “Where seven hills are meeting;
    “In Rome I also beheld the Pope,--
      “The Pope he sends thee his greeting.

    “And Florence I saw, when on my return,
      “And then through Milan I hasted,
    “And next through Switzerland scrambled fast,
      “And not one moment wasted.

    “And when I travell’d over the Alps,
      “The snow already was falling;
    “The blue lakes sweetly on me smiled,
      “The eagles were circling and calling.

    “And when on the Mount St. Gothard I stood,
      “Below me snored Germany loudly;
    “Beneath the mild sway of thirty-six kings
      “It slumber’d calmly and proudly.

    “In Swabia I saw the poetical school
      “Of dear little simpleton creatures;
    “They sat together all ranged in a row,
      “With very diminutive features.

    “In Dresden I saw a certain dog,
      “A sprig of the aristocracy;
    “His teeth he had lost, and bark’d and yell’d
      “Like one of the vulgar democracy.

    “At Weimar, the Muses’ widow’d seat,
      “I heard them their sentiments giving;
    “They wept and lamented that Goethe was dead,
      “And Eckermann still ’mongst the living!

    “At Potsdam I heard a very loud cry,--
      “I said in amaze: ‘What’s the matter?’--
    “’Tis Gans at Berlin, who last century’s tale
      “Is reading and making this clatter.’

    “At Göttingen knowledge was blossoming still,
      “But bringing no fruit to perfection;
    “’Twas dark as pitch when I got there at night,
      “No light was in any direction.

    “In the bridewell at Zell Hanoverians alone
      “Were confined; at our next Reformation
    “A national bridewell and one common lash
      “We must have for the whole German nation.

    “At Hamburg, in that excellent town,
      “Many terrible rascals dwell still;
    “And when I wander’d about the Exchange,
      “I fancied myself in Zell still!

    “At Hamburg I Altona saw; ’tis a spot
      “In a charming situation;
    “And all my adventures that there I met
      “I’ll tell on another occasion.”


~A WOMAN~

    They loved each other beyond belief,
    The woman a rogue was, the man was a thief;
    At each piece of knavery, daily
    She fell on the bed, laughing gaily.

    In joy and pleasure they pass’d the day,
    Upon his bosom all night she lay;
    When they carried him off to Old Bailey,
    At the window she stood, laughing gaily.

    He sent her this message: O come to me,
    I yearn, my love, so greatly for thee;
    I want thee, I pine, and look palely,--
    Her head she but shook, laughing gaily.

    At six in the morning they hang’d the knave,
    At seven they laid him down in his grave;
    At eight on her ears this fell stalely,
    And a bumper she drank, laughing gaily.


~CELEBRATION OF SPRING~

    O list to this spring time’s terrible jest!
      In savage troops the maidens fair
      Are rushing along with fluttering hair,
    And howls of anguish and naked breast:--
            Adonis! Adonis!

    The night falls fast. By torchlight clear
      They sadly explore each forest track,
      Which mournful answers is echoing back
    Of laughter, sobs, sighs, and cries of fear:--
            Adonis! Adonis!

    That youthful figure, so wondrous fair,
      Now lies on the ground all pale and dead;
      His blood has dyed each floweret red,
    And mournful sighs resound through the air:--
            Adonis! Adonis!


~CHILDE HAROLD~

    Slow and weary, moves a dreary
      Stout black bark the stream along;
    Visors wearing, all-uncaring,
      Funeral mutes the benches throng.

    ’Mongst them dumbly, with his comely
      Face upturn’d, the dead bard lies;
    Living seeming, toward the beaming
      Light of heaven still turn his eyes.

    From the water, like a daughter
      Of the stream’s voice, comes a sigh,
    And with wailing unavailing
      ’Gainst the bark the waves dash high.


~THE EXORCISM~

    The young Franciscan friar sits
      In his cloister silent and lonely;
    He reads a magical book, which speaks
      Of exorcisms only.

    And when the hour of midnight knell’d,
      An impulse resistless came o’er him;
    The underground spirits with pallid lips
      He summon’d to rise up before him:

    “Ye spirits! Go, fetch me from out of the grave
      The corpse of my mistress cherish’d;
    For this one night restore her to life,
      Rekindling joys long perish’d.”

    The fearful exorcising word
      He breathes, and his wish is granted;
    The poor dead beauty in grave-clothes white
      Appears to his vision enchanted.

    Her look is mournful; her ice-cold breast
      Her sighs of grief cannot smother;
    The dead one sits herself down by the monk,
      In silence they gaze on each other.


~EXTRACT FROM A LETTER~

    (_The Sun speaks._)

    What matter all my looks to thee?
      It is the well-known right of the sun
      To shed down his rays on ev’ry one;
    I beam because ’tis proper for me.

    What matter all my looks to thee?
      Thy duties bear in mind, poor elf;
      Quick, marry, and get a son to thyself,
    And so a German worthy be!

    I beam because ’tis proper for me.
      I wander up and down in the sky,
      From mere _ennui_ I peep from on high--
    What matter all my looks to thee?


    (_The Poet speaks._)

    It is in truth my special merit
      That I can bear thy radiant light,
    Pledge of an endless youthful spirit,
      Thou dazzling beauty, blest and bright.

    But now mine eyes are growing weary,
      On my poor eyelids fast are falling,
    Like a black covering, the dreary
      Dark shades of night with gloom appalling.


    (_Chorus of Monkeys._)

    We monkeys, we monkeys,
    Like impudent flunkies,
    Stare at the sun,
    Who can’t prevent its being done.


    (_Chorus of Frogs._)

    The water is better,
    But also much wetter
    Than ’tis in the air,
    And merrily there
    We love to gaze
    On the sun’s bright rays.


    (_Chorus of Moles._)

    How foolish people are to chatter
      Of beams and sunny rays bewitching
      With us, they but produce an itching
    We scratch it and so end the matter.


    (_A Glow-worm speaks._)

    How boastingly the sun displays
    His very fleeting daily rays!
    But I’m not so immodest quite,
    And yet I’m an important light,--
    I mean by night, I mean by night!


~THE EVIL STAR~

    The star, after beaming so brightly,
    From the sky fell, a vision unsightly,
    What is the love by poets sung?
    A star amid a heap of dung.

    Like a poor mangy dog, when he’s dying,
    Beneath all this filth it is lying;
    Shrill crows the cock, loud grunts the sow,
    And wallows in the fearful slough.

    In the garden O had I descended,
    By fair flowerets lovingly tended,
    Where I oft yearn’d to find my doom,
    A virgin death, a fragrant tomb!


~ANNO 1829~

    Give me a wide and noble field
      Where I may perish decently!
    O let me in this narrow world
      Of shops be not condemned to die!

    They eat full well, they drink full well,
      And revel in their mole-like bliss;
    Their magnanimity’s as great
      As any poor-box opening is.

    Cigars they carry in their mouths,
      Their hands we in their breeches view,
    And their digestive powers are great,--
      O could we but digest them too!

    They trade in every spice that grows
      Upon the earth, yet we can trace,
    Despite their spices, in the air
      The odour of a grovelling race.

    Could I some great transgressions, yes,
      Colossal bloody crimes but see,--
    Aught but this virtue flat and tame,
      This solvent strict morality!

    Ye clouds on high, O bear me hence,
      To some far spot without delay!
    To Lapland or to Africa,
      To Pomerania e’en--away!

    O bear me hence!--They hearken not--
      The clouds on high so prudent are!
    They fly above this town, to seek
      With trembling haste some region far.


~ANNO 1839~

    Dear distant Germany, how often
      I weep when I remember thee!
    Gay France my sorrow cannot soften,
      Her merry race gives pain to me.

    In Paris, in this witty region,
      ’Tis cold dry reason that now reigns;
    O bells of folly and religion,
      How sweetly sound at home your strains!

    Courteous the men! Their salutation
      I yet return with feelings sad;
    The rudeness shown in every station
      In my own country made me glad!

    Smiling the women! but their clatter,
      Like millwheels, never seems to cease;
    The Germans (not to mince the matter)
      Prefer I, who lie down in peace.

    And all things here with restless passion
      Keep whirling, like some madden’d dream;
    With us, they move in jog-trot fashion,
      And well-nigh void of motion seem.

    Methinks I hear the distant ringing
      Of the soft bugle’s notes serene;
    The watchman’s songs I hear them singing,
      With Philomel’s sweet strains between.

    At home the bard, a happy vagrant
      In Schilda’s oak woods loved to rove;
    From moonbeams fair and violets fragrant
      My tender verses there I wove.


~AT DAWN~

    On the Faubourg Saint Marçeau
    Lay the mist this very morning,
    Mist of autumn, heavy, thick,
    And a white-hued night resembling.

    Wandering through this white-hued night,
    I beheld before me gliding
    An enchanting female form
    Which the moon’s sweet light resembled.

    Yes, she was, like moonlight sweet,
    Lightly floating, tender, graceful;
    Such a slender shape of limbs
    I had here in France ne’er witness’d.

    Was it Luna’s self perchance,
    Who with some young dear and handsome
    Fond Endymion had to-day
    In th’ Quartier Latin been ling’ring?

    On my way home thus I thought:
    Wherefore fled she when she saw me?
    Did the Goddess think that I
    Was perchance the Sun-God Phœbus?


~SIR OLAVE~

I.

    At the door of the cathedral
    Stand two men, both wearing red coats,
    And the first one is the monarch,
    And the headsman is the other.

    To the headsman spake the monarch:
    “By the priest’s song I can gather
    “That the wedding is now finish’d--
    “Keep thy trusty hatchet ready!”

    To the sound of bells and organ
    From the church the people issue
    In a motley throng, and ’mongst them
    Move the gay-dress’d bridal couple.

    Pale as death and sad and mournful
    Looks the monarch’s lovely daughter;
    Bold and joyous looks Sir Olave,
    And his ruddy lips are smiling.

    And with smiling ruddy lips he
    Thus the gloomy king addresses:
    “Father of my wife, good morning!
    “Forfeited to-day my head is.

    “I to-day must die,--O suffer,
    “Suffer me to live till midnight,
    “That I may with feast and torch-dance
    “Celebrate my happy wedding!

    “Let me live, O let me live, sire,
    “Till I’ve drain’d the final goblet,
    “Till the final dance is finish’d--
    “Suffer me to live till midnight!”

    To the headsman spake the monarch:
    “To our son-in-law a respite
    “Of his life we grant till midnight--
    “Keep thy trusty hatchet ready!”


II.

    Sir Olave he sits at his wedding repast,
    And every goblet is drained at last;
    Upon his shoulder reclines
    His wife and pines--
        At the door the headsman is standing.

    The dance begins, and Sir Olave takes hold
    Of his youthful wife, and with haste uncontroll’d
    They dance by the torches’ glow
    Their last dance below--
        At the door the headsman is standing.

    The fiddles strike up, so merry and glad,
    The flutes they sound so mournful and sad;
    Whoever their dancing then saw
    Was filled with awe--
        At the door the headsman is standing.

    And as they dance in the echoing hall,
    To his wife speaks Sir Olave, unheard by them all:
    “My love will be ne’er known to thee--
    “The grave yawns for me--”
        At the door the headsman is standing.


III.

    Sir Olave, ’tis the midnight hour,
      Thy days of life are number’d;
    In a king’s daughter’s arms instead
      Thou thoughtest to have slumber’d.

    The monks they mutter the prayers for the dead,
      The man the red coat wearing
    Already before the black block stands,
      His polish’d hatchet bearing.

    Sir Olave descends to the court below,
      Where the swords and the lights are gleaming;
    The ruddy lips of the Knight they smile,
      And he speaks with a countenance beaming:

    “I bless the sun, and I bless the moon,
      “And the stars in the heavens before me;
    “I bless too the little birds that sing
      “In the air so merrily o’er me.

    “I bless the sea and I bless the land,
      “And the flow’rs that the meadow’s life are;
    “I bless the violets, which are as soft
      “As the eyes of my own dear wife are.

    “Ye violet eyes of my own dear wife,
      “My life for your sakes I surrender!
    “I bless the elder-tree, under whose shade
      “We plighted our vows of love tender.”


~THE WATER NYMPHS~

    The waves were plashing against the lone strand,
      The moon had risen lately,
    The knight was lying upon the white sand,
      In vision musing greatly.

    The beauteous nymphs arose from the deep,
      Their veils around them floated;
    They softly approach’d, and fancied that sleep
      The youth’s repose denoted.

    The plume of his helmet the first one felt,
      To see if perchance it would harm her;
    The second took hold of his shoulder belt,
      And handled his heavy chain armour.

    The third one laugh’d, and her eyes gleam’d bright,
      As the sword from the scabbard drew she;
    On the bare sword leaning, she gazed on the knight,
      And heartfelt pleasure knew she.

    The fourth one danced both here and there,
      And breath’d from her inmost bosom:
    “O would that I thy mistress were,
      “Thou lovely mortal blossom!”

    The fifth her kisses with passionate strength
      On the hand of the knight kept planting;
    The sixth one tarried, and kissed at length
      His lips and his cheeks enchanting.

    The knight was wise, and far too discreet
      To open his eyes midst such blisses;
    He let the fair nymphs in the moonlight sweet
      Continue their loving kisses.


~BERTRAND DE BORN~

    A noble pride on every feature,
      His forehead stamp’d with thought mature,
    He could subdue each mortal creature,
      Bertrand de Born, the troubadour.

    How wondrously his sweet notes caught her,
      Plantagenet the Lion’s queen!
    Both sons as well as lovely daughter
      He sang into his net, I ween.

    The father too he fool’d discreetly!
      Hush’d was the monarch’s wrath and scorn
    On hearing him discourse so sweetly,
      The troubadour, Bertrand de Born.


~SPRING~

    The waters glisten and merrily glide,--
      How lovely is love midst spring’s splendour!
    The shepherdess sits by the streamlet’s side,
      And twines her garlands so tender.

    All nature is budding with fragrant perfume,
      How lovely is love midst spring’s splendour!
    The shepherdess sighs from her heart: “O to whom
      “Shall I my garlands surrender?”

    A horseman is riding beside the clear brook,
      A kindly greeting he utters;
    The shepherdess views him with sorrowful look,
      The plume in his hat gaily flutters.

    She weeps and into the gliding waves flings
      Her flowery garlands so tender;
    Of kisses and love the nightingale sings--
      How lovely is love midst spring’s splendour!


~ALI BEY~

    Ali Bey, the true Faith’s hero,
    Happy lies in maids’ embraces;
    Allah granteth him a foretaste
    Here on earth of heavenly rapture.

    Odalisques, as fair as houris,
    Like gazelles in every motion--
    While the first his beard is curling,
    See, the second smoothes his forehead.

    And the third the lute is playing,
    Singing, dancing, and with laughter
    Kissing him upon his bosom,
    Where the flames of bliss are glowing.

    But the trumpets of a sudden
    Sound outside, the swords are rattling,
    Calls to arms, and shots of muskets--
    Lord, the Franks are marching on us!

    And the hero mounts his war-steed,
    Joins the fight, but seems still dreaming;
    For he fancies he is lying
    As before in maids’ embraces.

    Whilst the heads of the invaders
    He is cutting off by dozens,
    He is smiling like a lover,
    Yes, he softly smiles and gently.


~PSYCHE~

    In her hand the little lamp, and
      Mighty passion in her breast,
    Psyche creepeth to the couch where
      Her dear sleeper takes his rest.

    How she blushes, how she trembles,
      When his beauty she descries!
    He, the God of love, unveil’d thus,
      Soon awakes and quickly flies.

    Eighteen hundred years’ repentance!
      And the poor thing nearly died!
    Psyche fasts and whips herself still,
      For she Amor naked spied.


~THE UNKNOWN ONE~

    Every day I have a meeting
    With my golden-tressèd beauty
    In the Tuileries’ fair garden
    Underneath the chesnuts’ shadow.

    Every day she goes to walk there
    With two old and ugly women--
    Are they aunts? or else two soldiers
    Muffled up in women’s garments?

    Overawed by the mustachios
    Of her masculine attendants,
    And still farther overawed too
    By the feelings in my bosom,

    I ne’er ventured e’en one sighing
    Word to whisper as I pass’d her,
    And with looks I scarcely ventured
    Ever to proclaim my passion.

    For the first time I to-day have
    Learnt her name. Her name is Laura,
    Like the Provençal fair maiden
    Whom the famous poet loved so.

    Laura is her name! I’ve gone now
    Just as far as Master Petrarch,
    Who the fair one celebrated
    In canzonas and in sonnets.

    Laura is her name! like Petrarch
    I can now platonically
    Revel in this name euphonious--
    He himself no further ventured.


~THE CHANGE~

    With brunettes I now have finish’d,
      And this year am once more fond
    Of the eyes whose colour blue is,
      Of the hair whose colour’s blond.

    Mild the blond one, whom I love now,
      And in meekness quite a gem!
    She would be some blest saint’s image,
      Held her hand a lily stem.

    Slender limbs of wondrous beauty,
      Little flesh, much sympathy;
    All her soul is glowing but for
      Faith and hope and charity.

    She maintains she understands not
      German,--but it can’t be so;
    Hast ne’er read the heavenly poem
      Klopstock wrote some time ago?


~FORTUNE~

    Madam Fortune, thou in vain
    Act’st the coy one! I can gain
    By my own exertions merely
    All thy favours prized so dearly.

    Thou art overcome by me,
    To the yoke I fasten thee;
    Thou art mine beyond escaping--
    But my bleeding wounds are gaping.

    All my red blood gushes out,
    My life’s courage to the rout
    Soon is put; I’m vanquish’d lying,
    And in victory’s hour am dying.


~LAMENTATION OF AN OLD-GERMAN YOUTH~

    The man on whom virtue smiles is blest,
      He is lost who neglects her instructions;
    Poor youth that I am, I am ruin’d
      By evil companions’ seductions.

    For cards and dice soon dispossess’d
      My pockets of all their money;
    At first the maidens consoled me
      With smiles as luscious as honey.

    But when they had fuddled with wine their guest,
      And torn my garments, straightway
    (Poor youth that I am) they seized me,
      And bundled me out at the gateway.

    On waking after a bad night’s rest,--
      Sad end to all my ambition!--
    Poor youth that I am, I was filling
      At Cassel a sentry’s position.


~AWAY! _1_~

    The day’s enamour’d of the night,
    The springtime loves the winter,
    And life’s in love with death,--
    And thou, thou lovest me!

    Thou lov’st me--thou’rt already seized
    By fear-inspiring shadows,
    And all thy blossoms fade,
    To death thy soul is bleeding.

    Away from me, and only love
    The butterflies, gay triflers,
    Who in the sunlight sport--
    Away from me and sorrow!


~MADAM METTE~

(From the Danish.)


    Says Bender to Peter over their wine:
      “I’ll wager (though doubtless you’re clever)
    “That though your fine singing may conquer the world,
      “My wife ’twill conquer never.”

    Then Peter replied: “I’ll wager my horse
      “To your dog, or the devil is in it,
    “I’ll sing Madam Mette into my house
      “This evening, at twelve to a minute.”

    And when the hour of midnight drew near,
      Friend Peter commenced his sweet singing;
    Right over the forest, right over the flood
      His charming notes were ringing.

    The fir-trees listen’d in silence deep,
      The flood stood still and listen’d,
    The pale moon trembled high up in the sky,
      The wise stars joyously glisten’d.

    Madam Mette awoke from out of her sleep:
      “What singing! How sweet the seduction!”
    She put on her dress, and left the house--
      Alas, it proved her destruction!

    Right through the forest, right through the flood,
      She speeded onward straightway;
    While Peter, with the might of his song,
      Allured her inside his own gateway.

    And when she at morning return’d back home,
      At the door her husband caught her:
    “Pray tell me, good wife, where you spent the night!
      “Your garments are dripping with water.”

    “I spent the night at the water-nymphs’ stream,
      “And heard the Future told by them;
    “The mocking fairies wetted me through
      “With their splashes, for going too nigh them.”

    “You have not been to the water-nymphs’ stream,
      “The sand there could ne’er make you muddy;
    “Your feet, good wife, are bleeding and torn,
      “Your cheeks are also bloody.”

    “I spent the night in the elfin wood,
      “To see the elfin dances;
    “I wounded my feet and face with the thorns
      “And fir-boughs cutting like lances.”

    “The elfins dance in the sweet month of May
      “On flowery plains, but the chilly
    “Bleak days of autumn now reign on the earth,
      “The wind in the forests howls shrilly.”

    “At Peter Nielsen’s I spent the night,
      “He sang so mightily to me,
    “That through the forest, and through the flood
      “He irresistibly drew me.

    “His song is mighty as death itself,
      “To-night and perdition alluring;
    “Its tuneful glow still burns in my heart,
      “ A speedy death insuring.”

    The door of the church is hung with black,
      The funeral bells are ringing,
    Poor Madam Mette’s terrible death
      To public notice bringing.

    Poor Bender sighs, as he stands at the bier,--
      ’Twas sad to hear him call so!--
    “I now have lost my beautiful wife,
      “And lost my true dog also.”


~THE MEETING~

    The music under the linden-tree sounds,
      The boys and the maidens dance lightly;
    Amongst them two dance, whom nobody knows,
      Of figures noble and sightly.

    They float about here, they float about there,
      In a way that strange habits expresses;
    They smile at each other, they shake their heads,
      The maiden the youth thus addresses:

    “My handsome youth, upon thy hat
      There nods a lily splendid,
    That only grows in the depths of the sea,--
      From Adam thou art not descended.

    “The Kelpie art thou, who the fair village maids
      Would’st allure with thy arts of seduction;
    I knew thee at once, at the very first sight,
      By thy teeth of fish-like construction.”

    They float about here, they float about there,
      In a way that strange habits expresses;
    They smile at each other, they shake their heads,
      The youth the maid thus addresses:

    “My handsome maiden, tell me why
      “Thy hand so icy cold is?
    “And tell me why thy snow-white dress
      “So moist in every fold is?

    “I knew thee at once, at the very first sight,
      “By thy bantering salutation;
    “Thou art no mortal child of man,
      “But the water-nymph, my relation.”

    The fiddles are silent, and finish’d the dance,
      They part like sister and brother,
    They know each other only too well,
      And shun now the sight of each other.


~KING HAROLD HARFAGAR~

    The great King Harold Harfagar
      In ocean’s depths is sitting,
    Beside his lovely water-fay;
      The years are over him flitting.

    By water-sprite’s magical arts chain’d down,
      He is neither living nor dead now,
    And while in this state of baneful bliss
      Two hundred years have sped now.

    The head of the king is laid on the lap
      Of the beautiful woman, and ever
    He yearningly gazes up tow’rd her eyes,
      And looks away from her never.

    His golden hair is silver grey,
      His cheekbones (of time’s march a token)
    Project like a ghost’s from his yellow face,
      His body is wither’d and broken.

    And many a time from his sweet dream of love
      He suddenly is waking,
    For over him wildly rages the flood,
      The castle of glass rudely shaking.

    He oftentimes fancies he hears in the wind
      The Northmen shouting out gladly;
    He raises his arms with joyous haste,
      Then lets them fall again sadly.

    He oftentimes fancies he hears far above
      The seamen their voices raising,
    The great King Harold Harfagar
      In songs heroical praising.

    And then the king from the depth of his heart
      Begins sobbing and wailing and sighing,
    When quickly the water-fay over him bends,
      With loving kisses replying.


~THE LOWER WORLD~

I.

    Many a time poor Pluto sigh’d thus:
      “Were I but a single man!
      “Since my married life began,
        “Hell, I’ve learnt, was not a hell
    “Till I to a wife was tied thus!

    “Would that I remain’d still single!
      “Since I Proserpine did wed,
      “Each day wish I I was dead!
        “With the bark of Cerberus
    “Her loud scoldings ever mingle.

    “Each attempt I make is fruitless
      “After peace. There’s not a ghost
      “Half so sad in all my host,
        “And I envy Sisyphus,
    “And the Danaid’s labour bootless.”


II.

    On golden chair in the regions infernal,
    Beside her spouse, the monarch eternal,
          Queen Proserpine’s sitting
          With mien ill befitting
    Her station, and sadly she’s sighing:

    “For roses I yearn, and the rapturous blisses
    “Of Philomel’s song, and the sun’s sweet kisses;
          “And here ’mongst the pallid
          “Lemures and squalid
    “Dead bodies, my youth’s days are flying.

    “I’m firmly bound in the hard yoke of marriage
    “In this hole, which I’m sure e’en a rat would disparage
          “And the spectres unsightly
          “Through my window peep nightly,
    “Their wails with the Styx’s groans vying.

    “This very day I’ve invited to dinner
    “Old Charon, the bald-pated spindle-shank’d sinner,--
        “And also the Judges,
        “Those wearisome drudges--
    “Such company’s really too trying!”


III.

    Whilst these murmurs unavailing
      In the lower world found vent,
    Ceres on the earth was wailing,
      And the crazy goddess went,
    With no cap on, with no collar,
      And with loose dishevell’d hair,
    Uttering, in a voice of dolour,
      That lament known everywhere:

    “Is’t the beauteous spring I see?
      “Hath the earth grown young again?
    “Sunlit hills glow verdantly,
      “Bursting through their icy chain.
    “From the streamlet’s mirror blue
      “Smiles the now-unclouded sky,
    “Zephyr’s wings wave milder too,
      “Youthful blossoms ope their eye.
    “In the grove sweet songs resound,
      “While the Oread thus doth speak:
    “‘Once again thy flow’rs are found,
      “Vain thy daughter ’tis to seek.’

    “Ah, how long ’tis since I went
      “First in search o’er earth’s wide face!
    “Titan, all thy rays I sent,
      “Seeking for the loved one’s trace!
    “Of that form so dear, no ray
      “Hath as yet brought news to me,
    “And the all-discerning Day
      “Cannot yet the lost one see.
    “Hast thou, Zeus, her from me torn?
      “Or to Orcus’ gloomy stream,
    “Hath she been by Pluto borne,
      “Smitten by her beauty’s beams?

    “Who will to yon dreary strand
      “Be the herald of my woe?
    “Ever leaves the bark the land,
      “Yet but shadows in it go.
    “To each blest eye evermore
      “Closed those night-like fields remain;
    “Styx no living form e’er bore,
      “Since his stream first wash’d the plain.
    “Thousand paths lead downward there,
      “None lead up again to light;
    “And her tears no witness e’er
      “Brings to her sad mother’s sight.”


IV.

    “Ceres! my good wife’s relation!
      “Prythee cease to weep and call so!
    “I now grant your application--
      “I have suffer’d greatly also!

    “Comfort take! we’ll share your daughter’s
      “Sweet society, and let her
    “Have on earth six months her quarters
      “Yearly, if you like it better.

    “She, when men in summer swelter,
      “Can assist your rural labours,
    “‘Neath a straw hat taking shelter,
      “Flow’r-bedizen’d, like her neighbours’.

    “She can rant, when colours glowing
      “Robe the evening sky in splendour,
    “When beside the stream is blowing
      “On his flute a bumpkin tender.

    “She’ll rejoice with lads and lasses
      “At the harvest-home’s gay dances,
    “And amongst the sheep and asses
      “Be a lioness, the chance is.

    “I’ll recruit my spirits sinking
      “Here in Orcus in a canter,
    “Mingled punch and Lethe drinking,
      “And forget my wife instanter!”


V.

    “Methinks at times thy brow is shaded
      “With yearnings that in secret dwell;
      “Thy hapless lot I know full well;
    “Lost love, a life untimely faded!

    “Thou nodd’st a sad assent! I never
      “Can give thee back thy youthful prime;
      “Thy heart’s woes cannot heal with time:
    “A faded life, love lost for ever!”


~MULEDOM~

    Thy father, as is known to all,
      A donkey was, beyond denial;
    Thy mother on the other hand
      A noble brood-mare proved on trial.

    Thy mulish nature, worthy friend,
      Though little liked, a thing of course is;
    Yet thou canst say, with perfect truth,
      That thou belongest to the horses.

    Thou spring’st from proud Bucephalus;
      Thy fathers were with the invaders
    Who to the Holy Sepulchre
      Of old time went, the famed Crusaders.

    Thou countest ’mongst thy relatives
      The charger ridden by the glorious
    Sir Godfrey of Bouillon the day
      He took God’s town with arm victorious.

    Thou canst aver that Bayard’s steed
      Thy cousin was, and say (andante)
    Thine aunt the knight Don Quixote bore,
      The most heroic Rosinante.

    But Sancho’s donkey thou’lt not own
      As kin, he being much too lowly;
    Thou’lt e’en disown the ass’s foal
      That whilome bore the Saviour holy.

    And thou art not obliged to stick
      A long-ear surely in thy scutcheon;
    Of thine own value be the judge,
      And thou wilt never lay too much on.


~THE SYMBOL OF MADNESS~

    We’ll now begin to sing the song
      Of a Number of much reputation,
    Known by the name of Number Three:
      To joy succeeds vexation.

    Though sprung from an old Arabian stock,
      In Christian estimation
    Nothing in Europe higher stood
      Than this Number of proud reputation.

    A very pattern of modesty,
      How great was her indignation
    At finding the man in bed with the maid!
      She gave them a sound castigation.

    In summer her coffee at seven A.M.
      She drank with much gratification,
    In winter at nine, and slept all night
      Without the least molestation.

    But now ’tis time to alter our rhyme,
      To-day is changed to to-morrow,
    And, sad to say, poor Number Three
      Must suffer pain and sorrow.

    There came a cobbler who said: “The head
      “Of Number Three at present
    “Is like a small Seven that’s placed on the top
      “Of the moon when she’s shaped like a crescent.

    “The Seven the mystical number is
      “Of the ancient Pythagoreans;
    “The crescent Diana’s worship denotes,
      “And also recals the Sabeans.

    “The Three herself the famed Shibboleth is
      “Of the senior bonze of Babel,
    “Intriguing with whom she at length gave birth
      “To the Holy Trinity’s fable.”

    A tailor came next, with a smile on his face;
      Poor Number Three, he insisted,
    Was nought but a name, and nowhere else
      Except upon paper existed.

    When poor Three heard these cruel words,
      Like a duck in a state of distraction
    She waddled here and waddled there,
      Lamenting with vehement action:

    “I’m just as old as the sea and the wold,
      “As the stars that in heaven are blinking;
    “I’ve seen kingdoms ascend, and presently end,
      “And nations rising and sinking.

    “I’ve stood on the ceaselessly whirling loom
      “Of time for many long ages;
    “I’ve peep’d into Nature’s fashioning womb,
      “Where everything rushes and rages.

    “And nevertheless I withstood all assaults
      “Of darkness and sensuality,
    “And safely preserved my virgin charms,
      “Despite their cruel brutality.

    “What use is my virtue now? By the wise
      “And the fools I am evil entreated;
    “The world is wicked, and ne’er content
      “Till every one is cheated.

    “But cheer up, my heart! thou still hast left
      “Thy faith and hope and charity,
    “With excellent coffee and glasses of rum
      “Above the reach of vulgarity.”


~PRIDE~

    O Countess Gudel of Gudelfeld town,
    Because you are wealthy, you’re held in renown
    With not less than four horses contented,
    At court you are duly presented;
    In carriage of gold you go lightly
    To the castle, where waxlights gleam brightly;
    Up the marble stairs rustle
    Your clothes with their bustle,
    And then at the top, on the landing
    The servants in gay dresses standing
    Shout: Madame la Comtesse de Gudelfeld!

    Your fan in your hand, talking loudly,
    Through the chamber you wander on proudly;
    With diamonds gaily bedizen’d,
    In pearls and Brussels lace prison’d,
    Your snowy bosom with madness
    Is heaving in uncontroll’d gladness.
    What smiles, nods, polite interjections!
    What curtsies and deep genuflexions!
    The Duchess of Pavia
    Calls you her _cara mia_;
    The nobles and courtiers advancing
    Invite you to join in the dancing;
    And the heir to the crown (who’s thought witty)
    Says loudly: How graceful and pretty
    Are all the _stern_ movements of Gudelfeld!

    But if, poor creature, you money did lack,
    The world would straightway show you its back;
    The very lackeys with loathing
    Would spit on your clothing;
    ’Stead of bows and civility,
    Nought but vulgar scurrility;
    The Duchess would cross herself rudely,
    And the Crown Prince take snuff, and say shrewdly:
    She smells of garlic--this Gudelfeld!


~AWAY! _2_~

    If by one woman thou’rt jilted, love
      Another, and so forget her;
    To pack up thy knapsack, and straight remove
      From the town will be still better.

    Thou’lt soon discover a blue lake fair,
      By weeping willows surrounded;
    Thy trifling grief thou’lt weep away there,
      Thy pangs so little founded.

    Whilst climbing up the hillside fast,
      Thou’lt pant and groan full loudly;
    But when on the rocky summit at last,
      Thou’lt hear the eagle scream proudly.

    An eagle thyself thou’lt seem to be,
      New life the change will bestow thee;
    Thou’lt feel thou hast lost, when thus set free,
      Not much in the world below thee.


~WINTER~

    The cold may burn us sadly
      Like fire, and mortals hurry
    Amidst the snowdrift madly,
      With still-increasing flurry.

    O winter stern and chilly,
      When frozen are our noses,
    And piano-strumming silly
      Our ears so discomposes!

    I like the summer only
      When in the wood I’m roving
    With my own griefs all-lonely,
      And scanning verses loving.


~THE OLD CHIMNEYPIECE~

    Outside fall the snowflakes lightly
      Through the night, loud raves the storm
    In my room the fire glows brightly,
      And ’tis cosy, silent, warm.

    Musing sit I on the settle
      By the firelight’s cheerful blaze,
    Listening to the busy kettle
      Humming long-forgotten lays.

    And beside me sits a kitten,
      Warming at the blaze her feet;
    Strangely are my senses smitten
      As the flickering flames they meet.

    Many a dim long-buried story
      O’er me soon begins to rise,
    But with dead and faded glory,
      And in strange and mask’d disguise.

    Lovely women with shrewd faces
      Greet me with a secret smile,
    Then the harlequins run races,
      Laughing merrily the while.

    Distant marble-gods nod kindly,
      Dreamily beside them grow
    Fable-flow’rs, whose leaves wave blindly
      In the moonlight to and fro.

    Magic castles, once resplendent,
      Ruin’d now, in sight appear;
    Knights in armour, squires attendant
      Quickly follow in their rear.

    All these visions I discover
      As with shadowy haste they pass,--
    Ah, the kettle’s boiling over,
      And the kitten’s burnt, alas!


~LONGING~

    Thou beholdest in thy vision
      Fable’s silent flow’rs before thee,
      And a yearning wild steals o’er thee
    At their fragrant scent elysian.

    But thou from those flow’rs art parted
      By a gulf both deep and fearful;
      Thou becomest sad and tearful,
    And at last art broken-hearted.

    How they glitter! how they lure me!
      Could I but the gulf pass over!
      How the secret to discover,
    And a bridge across procure me?


~HELENA~

    Thou hast call’d me forth from out of the grave
      By means of thy magic will now,
    And fill’d me full of love’s fierce glow--
      This glow thou never canst still now.

    O press thy mouth against my mouth,
      Man’s breath with heaven is scented;
    Thy very soul I’ll drain to the dregs,
      The dead are never contented.


~THE WISE STARS~

    The flowerets sweet are crush’d by the feet
      Full soon, and perish despairing;
    One passes by, and they must die,
      The modest as well as the daring.

    The pearls all sleep in the caves of the deep,
      Where one finds them, despite wind and weather
    A hole is soon bored and they’re strung on a cord,
      And there fast yoked together.

    The stars are more wise, and keep in the skies,
      And hold the earth at a distance;
    They shed their light in the heavens so bright,
      In safe and endless existence.


~THE ANGELS~

    Faithless as Saint Thomas, never
      Could I in the heaven believe
    Which both Jew and Priest endeavour
      To compel men to receive.

    That the angels, though, are real
      I have never held in doubt;
    Spotless, and of grace ideal,
      On this earth they move about.

    Still I doubt if such a being
      Wing’d is, it must be confess’d;
    I have recently been seeing
      Wingless angels, I protest.

    With their dear and loving glances
      With their loving hands so white
    Men they guard, and all advances
      Of misfortune put to flight.

    Every one can comfort borrow
      From their favour and regard;
    Most of all that child of sorrow
      Whom the people call a bard.


~SOUND DOCTRINE~

    Quick, beat the drum, and be not afraid,
      The suttler-maiden lovingly kiss;
    This is the whole of knowledge, in truth,
      The deepest book-learning lies in this.

    Quick, drum the people out of their sleep,
      And drum the réveille with the ardour of youth,
    And as you march, continue to drum--
      This is the whole of knowledge, in truth.

    All Hegel’s philosophy here is found,
      The deepest book-learning lies in this;
    I’ve found it out, because I’m no fool,
      And also because I drum not amiss.


~ADAM THE FIRST~

    Gendarmes of heaven with flaming swords
      Thou sent’st in cruel fashion,
    And drov’st me out of Paradise
      Without the least compassion.

    In search of another country, I
      And my wife from Eden hasted;
    Thou canst not alter the fact that there
      The tree of knowledge I tasted.

    Thou canst not alter the fact that I know
      Thy weakness and many blunders,
    However mighty thou seemest to be
      When wielding death and thunders.

    O heavens, how pitiful is this
      Consilium abeundi!
    I call it a Magnificus
      Of earth, a Lumen Mundi.

    I shall not miss the spacious realms
      Of Paradise one minute.
    It is no genuine Paradise
      When trees forbidden are in it.

    I claim my full unfetter’d rights!
      The slightest limitation
    Changes my Paradise at once
      To hell and desolation.


~WARNING~

    Worthy friend, ’twill be perdition
      Books like this to think of printing!
      Wouldst thou money earn or honour
    Thou must bend in meek submission.

    Never in this manner flighty
      Shouldest thou before the public
      Thus have spoken of the parsons
    And of monarchs high and mighty!

    Friend, thou’lt be by all forsaken!
      Princes have long arms, the parsons
      Have long tongues, and then the public
    Have long ears, or I’m mistaken!


~TO A QUONDAM FOLLOWER OF GOETHE~

(1832.)

    Hast thou, then, superior risen
      To the chilly dream of glory
      Which great Weimar’s poet hoary
    Wove around thee, like a prison?

    Are thy old friends bores now voted?--
      Clara, Gretchen,--names familiar,--
      Serlo’s chaste maid, and Ottilia
    In the “Wahlverwandschaft” noted?

    Thou’rt with Germany enchanted,
      Art become a Mignon-hater,
      And thou seek’st for freedom greater
    Than Philina ever granted.

    Like a Luneburgomaster,
      Thou dost battle for the nation,
      Holding up to execration
    Kings, as causing all disaster.

    And I hear with pleasure hearty,
      What a pitch thy praises grow to,
      And how thou’rt a Mirabeau, too,
    At each Luneburg tea-party!


~THE SECRET~

    We sigh not, and the eye’s not moisten’d,
      We laugh at times, we often smile;
    In not a look, in not a gesture
      The secret comes to light the while.

    Deep in our bleeding spirit hidden,
      It lies in silent misery;
    If in our wild heart it finds language,
      The mouth’s still closed convulsively.

    Ask of the suckling in the cradle,
      Ask of the dead man in the grave;
    They may perchance disclose the secret
      To which I never utt’rance gave.


~ON THE WATCHMAN’S ARRIVAL IN PARIS~

    “Good watchman with face so sad and despairing,
      “Why runnest thou hither with headlong speed?
    “My dear fellow-countrymen, how are they faring?
      “My fatherland, is it from tyranny freed?”

    All’s going on well, and liberty’s blessing
      Is showering silently on us its stores,
    And Germany, calmly and safely progressing,
      Unfolds and develops herself within doors.

    Unlike France, superficial are none of her blossoms,--
      _There_ freedom but touches the outside of life;
    ’Tis but in the depths of their innermost bosoms
      That freedom with Germans is found to be rife.

    They’ll finish Cologne’s great cathedral, they tell us,
      The Hohenzollerns[A] have brought this to pass;
    A Hapsburg[A] has shown himself equally zealous,
      A Wittelsbach gives it some fine painted glass.

    That true Magna Charta, a free constitution,
      They’ve promised, and surely their promise they’ll keep;
    A king’s word’s a prize, without circumlocution,--
      Like the Nibelung stone in the Rhine it lies deep.

    The Brutus of rivers, the free Rhine, they surely
      Can never remove him from out of his bed;
    The Dutchman his feet have fasten’d securely,
      The Switzers securely are holding his head.

    God will grant us a fleet, if we prove persevering;
      Our patriotic exuberant strength
    Will find a vent in sailing and steering,
      The pain of imprisonment ending at length.

    The seeds cast their shells and the spring’s blooming sweetly,
      We draw a free breath at this time of the year;
    If permission to print is denied us completely,
      The censorship will of itself disappear.


~THE DRUM-MAJOR~

    The old drum-major it is that we see;
      Poor fellow, he’s pull’d down sadly!
    In the Emperor’s time a youngster was he,
      And merrily lived and gladly.

    He used to balance his ponderous stick,
      While a smile on his face play’d lightly;
    The silver-lace on his tunic so thick
      In the rays of the sun gleam’d brightly.

    Whene’er with a mighty roll of the drum
      He enter’d a village or city,
    He caused an echo responsive to come
      In the heart of each girl, plain or pretty.

    He came and saw and conquer’d too
      Each fair one welcomed him in;
    His black moustache was wetted through
      With tears of German women.

    Resistance was vain! In every land
      That the foreign invaders came to,
    The Emperor vanquished the gentlemen, and
      The drum-major each maiden and dame too.

    Our sorrows full long we patiently bore
      Like oaks, with no one to heed ’em,
    Until the Authorities gave us once more
      The signal to battle for freedom.

    Like buffaloes rushing on to the fray,
      We toss’d our horns up proudly,
    The yoke of France we cast away,
      The songs of Körner sang loudly.

    O terrible verses! the tyrant’s ear
      At their awful sound revolted;
    The Emperor and the drum-major in fear
      Precipitately bolted.

    They both of them reap’d the wages of sin,
      And came to an end inglorious;
    The Emperor Napoleon tumbled in
      The hands of the Britons victorious.

    In Saint Helena his time he now pass’d
      In martyrdom, banish’d from France, Sir,
    And, after long suff’ring, died at last
      Of that terrible ailment cancer.

    The poor drum-major, too, fell in disgrace,
      And lost his situation;
    In our hotel he took the place
      Of boots,--what degradation!

    He warms the oven, he scours the pots,
      And wood and water fetches;
    His grey head wags as he wheezingly trots
      Up the stairs, so weak the poor wretch is.

    When Fritz comes to see me, he finds himself
      Inclined to jeer and rally
    The comical lanky poor old elf
      And his motions shilly-shally.

    O Fritz, a truce to raillery, please!
      The sons of Germany never
    Should fallen greatness love to tease,
      Or to torment endeavour.

    Such people you ought to regard with pride
      And filial piety rather;
    Perchance upon the mother’s side
      The old man is your father!


~DEGENERACY~

    Has Nature’s self been going backward,
      And human faults assuming, then?
    The very plants and beasts, I fancy,
      Now lie as much as mortal men.

    I trust not in the lily’s chasteness;
      The colour’d fop, the butterfly,
    Toys with her, kisses, round her flutters,
      Till lost is all her purity.

    The violet’s modesty moreover
      I hold full cheap. The little flower
    With the coquettish breezes trifles,
      In secret pants for fame and power.

    I doubt if Philomel appreciates
      The time she sings with pompous mien;
    She overdoes it, sobs, and warbles
      Methinks from nought but pure routine.

    Truth from the earth is fast departing,
      The days of Faith are also o’er;
    The dogs still wag their tails, smell bully
      And yet are faithful now no more.


~HENRY~

    In Canossa’s castle courtyard
      Stands the German Cæsar Henry,
    Barefoot, clad in penitential
      Shirt--the night is cold and rainy.

    From the window high above him
      Peep two figures, and the moonlight
    Gregory’s bald head illumines
      And the bosom of Mathilda.

    Henry, with his lips all pallid,
    Murmurs pious paternosters;
    Yet in his imperial heart he
    Secretly revolts and speaks thus:

    “In my distant German country
    “Upward rise the sturdy mountains;
    “In the mountain-pits in silence
    “Grows the iron for the war-axe.

    “In my distant German country
    “Upward rise the fine oak-forests;
    “In the loftiest oak-stem ’mongst them
    “Grows the handle for the war-axe.

    “Thou, my dear and faithful country,
    “Wilt beget the hero also
    “Who in time will crush the serpent
    “Of my sorrows with his war-axe.”


~LIFE’S JOURNEY~

    What laughter and singing! The sun’s rays crossing
    Each other gleam brightly; the billows are tossing
    The joyous bark, and there I reclined
    With friends beloved and lightsome mind.

    The bark was presently wreck’d and shatter’d,
    My friends were poor swimmers, and soon were scatter’d,
    And all were drown’d, in our fatherland;
    _I_ was thrown by the storm on the Seine’s far strand.

    Another ship I now ascended,
    My journey by new companions attended;
    By strange waves toss’d and rock’d, I depart--
    How far my home! how heavy my heart!

    Once more arises that singing and laughter!
    The wind pipes loud, the planks crack soon after--
    In heaven is quench’d the last last star--
    How heavy my heart! My home how far!


~THE NEW JEWISH HOSPITAL AT HAMBURG~

    A hospital for Jews who’re sick and needy,
    For those unhappy threefold sons of sorrow,
    Afflicted by the three most dire misfortunes
    Of poverty, disease, and Judaism.

    The worst by far of all the three the last is,
    That family misfortune, thousand years old,
    That plague which had its birth in Nile’s far valley,
    The old Egyptian and unsound religion.

    Incurable deep pain! ’gainst which avail not
    Nor douche nor vapour-bath, the apparatus
    Of surgery, nor all the means of healing
    Which this house offers to its sickly inmates.

    Will Time, eternal goddess, e’er extinguish
    This glowing ill, descending from the father
    Upon the son,--and will the grandson ever
    Be cured, and rational become and happy?

    I cannot tell! Yet in the meantime let us
    Extol that heart which lovingly and wisely
    Sought to alleviate pain as far as may be,
    Into the wounds a timely balsam pouring.

    Dear worthy man! He here has built a refuge
    For sorrows which by the physician’s science
    (Or else by death’s!) are curable, providing
    Cushions, refreshing drinks, and food, and nurses.

    A man of deeds, he did his very utmost,
    Devoted to good works his hard-earned savings
    In his life’s evening, kindly and humanely,
    Recruiting from his toils by acts of mercy.

    He gave with open hand--but gifts still richer,
    His tears, full often from his eyes were rolling,
    Tears fair and precious, which he wept deploring
    His brethren’s great, incurable misfortune.


~GEORGE HERWEGH~

    When Germany first drank her fill,
    You then were her obedient vassal,
    Believing in each pipe-bowl still,
    And in its black-red-golden tassel.

    But when the fond delirium ceased,
    Good friend, how great your consternation!
    The public seem’d a very beast,
    After its sweet intoxication!

    Pelted by vile abusive swarms
      With rotten apples, in disorder,
    Under an escort of gendarmes
      You reach’d at length the German border.

    There you stood still. A tear you wiped
      Away, the well-known posts on spying
    Which like the zebra’s back are striped,
      With heavy heart as follows sighing:--

    “Aranjuez, in lightsome mood
      “Once stay’d I in thy halls so splendid,
    “When I before King Philip stood,
      “By all his proud grandees attended.

    “He gave me an approving smile
      “When I the Marquis Posa acted;
    “My prose he could not relish, while
      “My verses his applause attracted.”


~THE TENDENCY~

    German bard! extol our glorious
      German freedom, that thy lay
    May possess our souls, and fire us,
    And to mighty deeds inspire us,
    Like the Marseillaise notorious.

    Be no more, like Werther, tender,
      Who for Lotte sigh’d all day;
    Thou shouldst tell the people proudly
    What the bells proclaim so loudly,--
    Speak of dirks, swords, no surrender.

    Gentle flutes no more resemble,
      Be not so idyllic, pray!
    Fire the mortars, beat to quarters,
    Crash, kill, thunder, make them tremble.

    Crash, kill, thunder like a devil
      Till the last foe flies away;
    To this cause devote thy singing,
    Thy poetic efforts bringing
    To the common public’s level.


~THE CHILD~

    The good their gifts in dream enjoy,
      How did it fare with thee?
    Scarce feeling it, you’ve got a boy,
      Poor virgin Germany!

    This boy an urchin frolicsome
      Ere long shall we behold;
    A first-rate archer he’ll become,
      As Cupid was of old.

    He’ll pierce the soaring eagle through;
      And, proudly though he fly,
    The double-headed eagle too
      Struck by his bolt, shall die.

    But that blind heathen God of love
      Will he resemble not
    In wearing neither clothes nor glove,
      Nor be a sans-culotte.

    The seasons in our land combine
      With morals and police
    To make both old and young incline
      To wear their clothes in peace.


~THE PROMISE~

    You no more shall barefoot crawl so
      Through the dirt, poor German freedom!
      Stockings (as you find you need ’em)
    You shall have, and stout boots also.

    As respects your head, upon it
      To protect your ears from freezin’
      In the chilly winter-season
    You shall have a nice warm bonnet.

    You shall have, too, savoury messes--
      Grand the future that’s before you!
      Let no Satyr, I implore you,
    Lure you onward to excesses!

    Do not haste on fast and faster!
      Render, as becomes inferiors,
      Due respect to your superiors
    And the worthy burgomaster.


~THE CHANGELING~

    A child with monstrous pumpkin head,
      Grey pigtail, and moustache light red,
      With lanky arms and yet stupendous,
      No bowels, yet with maw tremendous,--
    A changeling which a Corporal
    Into our cradle had let fall
      On stealing from it our own baby--
      This monster, falsehood’s child, (or may be
    ’Twas in reality the son
    Of his own favourite dog alone)--
      What need to say how much we spurn it?
      For heaven’s sake, drown it or else burn it!


~THE EMPEROR OF CHINA~

    My father was a dreadful bore,
      A good-for-nothing dandy;
    But I’m a mighty Emperor,
      And love a bumper of brandy.

    These glorious draughts all others surpass
      In this, their magical power:
    As soon as I have drain’d my glass,
      All China bursts into flower.

    The Middle Kingdom bursts into life,
      A blossoming meadow seeming;
    A man I wellnigh become, and my wife
      Soon gives me signs of teeming.

    On every side abundance reigns,
      The sick no longer need potions;
    Confucius, Court-philosopher, gains
      Distinct and positive notions.

    The ryebread the soldiers used to eat
      Of almond cakes is made now;
    The very vagabonds in the street
      In silk and satin parade now.

    The knightly Order of Mandarins,
      Those weak old invalids, daily
    Are gaining strength and filling their skins,
      And shaking their pigtails gaily.

    The great pagoda, faith’s symbol prized,
      Is ready for those who’re believing;
    The last of the Jews are here baptized,
      The Dragon’s order receiving.

    The noble Manchoos exclaim, when freed
      From the presence of revolution:
    “The bastinado is all that we need,
      “We want no constitution!”

    The pupils of Æsculapius perhaps
      May tell me that drink’s dissipation;
    But I continue to drink my Schnaps,
      To benefit the nation.

    And so in drinking I persevere;
      It tastes like very manna!
    My people are happy, and drink their beer
      And join in shouting Hosanna!


~CHURCH-COUNSELLOR PROMETHEUS~

    Good Sir Paulus, noble robber,
      All the gods are on thee gazing
    With their brows in anger knitted,
      Furious at the theft amazing

    Thou hast practised in Olympus&mdash;
      Sorry for it they will make thee!
    Fear the fate of poor Prometheus
      If Jove’s bailiffs overtake thee!

    Worse indeed his theft, because he
      Stole the light in heaven dwelling
    To enlighten us weak mortals&mdash;
      _Thou_ didst steal the works of Schelling,

    Just the opposite of light,&mdash;nay,
      Darkness we can feel and handle
    Like the old Egyptian darkness,&mdash;
      Not one solitary candle!


~TO THE WATCHMAN~

(On a recent occasion.)


    If heart and style remain still true,
    I’ll not object, whatever you do.
    My friend, I never will mistake you,
    E’en though a Counsellor they make you.

    They now are raising a terrible din
    Because you’ve been sworn as a Counsellor in;
    From the Seine to the Elbe, regardless of reason,
    For months they’ve declaim’d thus against your sad treason:

    His progress onward is changed of late
    To progress backward; O, answer us straight--
    On Swabian crabs are you really riding?
    Is’t only court-ladies you now take pride in?

    Perchance you are tired, and long for rest;
    All night on your horn you’ve been blowing your best
    And now on a nail you quietly stow it;
    No longer for Germany’s hobby you’ll blow it.

    You lie down in bed, and straightway close
    Your eyes, but vainly you seek for repose;
    Before the window the mockers salute us:
    Awake, Liberator! What! sleeping, Brutus?

    Ah, bawlers like these can never know why
    The best of watchmen ceases to cry;
    These young braggadocios cannot discover
    Why man his exertions at length gives over.

    You ask me how matters are going on here?
    No breeze is stirring, the atmosphere’s clear;
    The weathercocks all are perplex’d, not discerning
    The proper direction in which to be turning.


~CONSOLING THOUGHTS~

    We sleep as Brutus slept of yore,--
    And yet he awoke, and ventured to bore
    In Cæsar’s bosom his chilly dagger!
    The Romans their tyrants loved to stagger.--

    No Romans are we, tobacco we smoke,
    Each nation its favourite taste can invoke;
    Each nation its special merit possesses--
    The finest dumplings Swabia dresses.

    But Germans are we, kindhearted and brave,
    We sleep as soundly as though in the grave;
    And when we awake, our thirst is excessive,
    But not for the blood of tyrants oppressive.

    ’Tis our great pride to be as true
    As heart of oak and linden too;
    The land which oaks and lindens gives birth to
    Can never produce a Brutus of worth too.

    And e’en if amongst us a Brutus were found,
    No Cæsar exists in the country round;
    Despite all his search, he would find him never,--
    We make good gingerbread however.

    We’ve six-and-thirty masters and lords,
    (Not one too many!) who wear their swords
    And stars on their regal breasts to protect them;
    The Ides of March can never affect them.

    We call them Father, and Fatherland
    We call the country they command
    By right of descent, and love to call so--
    We love sour-crout and sausages also.

    And when our Father walks in the street
    We take off our hats with reverence meet;
    Our guileless Germany, injuring no man,
    Is not a den of murderers Roman.


~THE WORLD TURNED UPSIDE DOWN~

    The world is topsy-turvy turn’d,
      We walk feet-upwards in it;
    The woodcocks shoot the sportsmen down,
      A dozen in a minute.

    The calves are seen to roast the cook,
      On men are riding the horses;
    On freedom of teaching and laws of light
      The Catholic owl discourses.

    The herring is a sans-culotte,
      The truth is told by Bettina,
    And puss-in-boots brings Sophocles
      On the stage, with learned demeanour.

    An ape for German heroes has built
      A Pantheon, for glory zealous;
    And Massmann has lately been using a comb,
      As German papers tell us.

    The German bears, I grieve to say,
      Are atheists unbelieving,
    And in their place the parrots of France
      The Christian faith are receiving.

    The Moniteur of Uckermark
      With equal frenzy seems smitten;
    The dead have on the living there
      The vilest epitaph written.

    Then let us not swim against the stream,
      Good friends! ’twould serve us but badly;
    But let us ascend the Templehof hill,
      “Long life to the king!” shouting gladly.


~ENLIGHTENMENT~

    Have the scales that dimm’d thy vision
      Fallen, Michael? Canst thou see
    How they’re stealing in derision
      All the choicest food from thee?

    In return, divine enjoyment
      Promise they in realms above,
    Where the angels’ sole employment
      Is to cook us fleshless love.

    Michael, hath thy faith grown weaker,
      Or thy appetite more strong?
    Thou dost grasp life’s sparkling beaker,
      And thou sing’st a hero-song.

    Fear not, Michael! take thy pleasure
      While on earth, and eat what’s good;
    When thou’rt dead, thou’lt have full leisure
      To digest in peace thy food.


~WAIT AWHILE!~

    Because my lightnings are so striking,
      You think that I can’t thunder too!
    You’re wrong, for I’ve a special liking
      For thunder, as I’ll prove to you.

    This will be seen with awful clearness
      When the right moment is at hand;
    You’ll hear my voice in startling nearness,--
      The word of thunder and command.

    The raging storm will surely shiver
      Full many an oak upon that day;
    Each palace to its base shall quiver,
      And many a steeple proud give way.


~NIGHT THOUGHTS~

    When, Germany, I think of thee
    At night, all slumber flies from me;
    I cannot close mine eyes for yearning,
    And down my cheeks run tears all burning.

    How swiftly speeds each rolling year!
    Since I have seen my mother dear
    Twelve years have pass’d away; the longer
    I wait, my yearning grows the stronger.

    My yearning’s growing evermore;
    That woman has bewitch’d me sore!
    Dear, dear old woman! with what fervour
    I think of her! may God preserve her!

    The dear old thing in me delights,
    And in the letters that she writes
    I see how much her hand is shaking,--
    Her mother’s heart, how nearly breaking!

    My mother’s ever in my mind;
    Twelve long long years are left behind,
    Twelve years have follow’d on each other
    Since to my heart I clasp’d my mother.

    For ages Germany will stand;
    Sound to the core is that dear land!
    Its oaks and lindens I shall ever
    Find just the same, they alter never.

    For Germany I less should care
    If my dear mother were not there;
    My fatherland will never perish
    But _she_ may die, whom most I cherish.

    Since I my native land saw last,
    Into the tomb have many pass’d
    Whom I so loved--When of them thinking
    How sadly bleeds my spirit sinking!

    I needs must count them,--as I count
    My sorrows higher, higher mount;
    I feel as though each corpse were lying
    Upon my breast--Thank God, they’re flying!

    Thank God! for through the window-pane
    France’s clear daylight breaks again;
    My fair wife enters, sweetly smiling,
    And all my German cares beguiling!


~EVENING TWILIGHT~

    By ocean’s pallid strand
    Sat I, tormented in spirit and lonely.
    The sun sank lower and lower, and threw
    Red glowing streaks upon the water,
    And the snowy, spreading billows,
    By the flood hard-press’d,
    Foam’d and roar’d still nearer and nearer--
    A wonderful sound, a whisp’ring and piping,
    A laughing and murmuring, sighing and rushing,
    Between times a lullaby-home-sounding singing,--
    Methinks I hear some olden tradition,
    Primeval, favourite legend,
    Which I erst as a stripling
    Learnt from the neighbours’ children,
    When we, on the summer evenings,
    On the house-door’s steps all cower’d
    Cosily for quiet talking,
    With our little hearts all attentive,
    And our eyes all wisely curious;--
    Whilst the bigger maidens,
    Close by their fragrant flowerpots
    Sat at the opposite window
    Rosy their faces,
    Smiling, illumed by the moon.


~SUNSET _1_~

    The glowing ruddy sun descends
    Down to the far up-shuddering
    Silvery-grey world-ocean;
    Airy images, rosily breath’d upon,
    After him roll, and over against him,
    Out of the’ autumnal glimmering veil of clouds,
    With face all mournful and pale as death,
    Bursteth forth the moon,
    And behind her, like sparks of light,
    Misty-broad, glimmer the stars.

    Once in the heavens there glitter’d,
    Join’d in fond union,
    Luna the goddess and Sol the god,
    And around them the stars all cluster’d,
    Their little, innocent children.

    But evil tongues then whisper’d disunion,
    And they parted in anger,
    That glorious, radiant pair.

    Now, in the daytime, in splendour all lonely,
    Wanders the Sun-god in realms on high,--
    On account of his majesty
    Greatly sung-to and worshipp’d
    By haughty, bliss-harden’d mortals.
    But in the night-time,
    In heaven wanders Luna,
    Unhappy mother,
    With all her orphan’d starry children,
    And she gleams in silent sorrow,
    And loving maidens and gentle poets
    Devote to her tears and songs.

    The gentle Luna! womanly minded,
    Still doth she love her beautiful spouse.
    Towards the evening, trembling and pale,
    Peeps she forth from the light clouds around,
    And looks at the parting one mournfully,
    And fain would cry in her anguish: “Come!
    Come! the children all long for thee--”
    But the disdainful Sun-god,
    At the sight of his spouse, ’gins glowing
      With still deeper purple,
      In anger and grief,
      And inflexibly hastens he
      Down to his flood-chilly widow’d bed.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Evil and backbiting tongues
    Thus brought grief and destruction
    E’en ’mongst the godheads immortal.
    And the poor godheads, yonder in heaven,
    Wander in misery,
    Comfortless over their endless tracks,
    And death cannot reach them,
    And with them they trail
    Their bright desolation.

    But I, the mere man,
    The lowly-planted, the blest-with-death one,
    I sorrow no longer.


~THE NIGHT ON THE STRAND~

    Starless and cold is the night,
    The ocean boils;
    And over the sea, flat on its belly,
    Lies the misshapen Northwind;
    With groaning and stifled mysterious voice,
    A sullen grumbler, good-humour’d for once,
    Prates he away to the waves,
    Telling many a wild tradition,
    Giant-legends, murderous-humorous,
    Primeval Sagas from Norway,
    And the while, far echoing, laughs he and howls he
    Exorcists’ songs of the Edda,
    Grey old Runic proverbs,
    So darkly-daring, and magic-forcible,
    That the white sons of Ocean
    Spring up on high, all exulting,
    In madden’d excitement.

    Meanwhile, along the flat shore,
    Over the flood-moisten’d sand,
    Paces a stranger, whose heart within him
    Is wilder far than wind and waters;
    There where he walks
    Sparks fly out, and shells are crackling,
    And he veils himself in his dark-grey mantle,
    And quickly moves on through the blustering night;--
    Guided in safety by yon little light,
    That sweetly, invitingly glimmers,
    From the lone fisherman’s cottage.

    Father and brother are out on the sea,
    And all all alone is staying
    Within the hut the fisherman’s daughter,
    The wondrously lovely fisherman’s daughter.
    By the hearth she’s sitting,
    And lists to the water-kettle’s
    Homely, sweet foreboding humming,
    And shakes in the fire the crackling brushwood
    And on it blows,
    So that the lights, all ruddy and flickering,
    Magic-sweetly are reflected
    On her fair blooming features,
    On her tender, snowy shoulder,
    Which, moving gently, peeps
    From out her coarse grey smock,
    And on her little, anxious hand,
    Which fastens firmer her under-garment,
    Over her graceful hip.

    But sudden, the door bursts open,
    The nightly stranger entereth in;
    Love-secure, his eye reposes
    On the snowy, slender maiden,
    Who, trembling, near him stands,
    Like to a startled lily;
    And he throws his mantle to earth,
    And laughs and speaks:

    “See now, my child, I’ve kept my word,
    “And I come, and with me hath come
    “The olden time, when the gods from the heavens
    “Came down to earth, to the daughters of mortals,
    “And the daughters of mortals embraced they,
    “And from them there issued
    “Sceptre-bearing races of monarchs,
    “And heroes, wonders of earth.

    “But start not, my child, any longer
    “Because of my godhead,
    “And I pray thee give me some tea mix’d with rum
    “For ’tis cold out of doors,
    “And amid such night breezes
    “Freeze even we, we godheads immortal,
    “And easily catch the divinest of colds,
    “And a cough that proves quite eternal.”


~POSEIDON~

    The sun’s bright rays were playing
    Over the wide-rolling breadth of the sea;
    Far in the roadstead glitter’d the ship
    Destined to home to convey me.
    But a propitious wind was yet wanting,
    And I sat on the white downs all calmly
    Hard by the lonely strand,
    And I read the song of Odysseus,
    The olden, ever-youthful song,
    From out whose sea-beflutter’d leaves
    Joyfully rose to meet me
    The breath of the deities,
    And the shining spring-time of mortals,
    And the blooming heaven of Hellas.

    My generous heart accompanied truly
    The son of Laërtes in wanderings and troubles,
    Placed itself with him, spirit-tormented,
    At guestly hearths,
    Where beauteous queens were spinning their purple,
    And help’d him to lie, and succeed in escaping
    From giants’ caverns and nymphs’ embraces,
    Follow’d him down to Cimmerian night,
    And in tempest and shipwreck,
    And with him endured unspeakable torments.

    Sighing spake I: “Thou wicked Poseidon,
    “Thine anger is fearful;
    “I myself am anxious
    “As to my own return.”

    Scarce breath’d I these words,
    When the sea foam’d on high,
    And out of the snowy billows arose
    The sedge-becrowned head of the seagod,
    And scornfully cried he:

    “Fear not, little poet!
    “I’ll not for one moment endanger
    “Thy poor little vessel,
    “And thy dear life shall not be tormented
    “By any critical tossing.
    “For thou, little poet, hast never annoy’d me,
    “No single turret was injured by thee
    “In Priam’s sacred fortress,
    “No single hair didst thou e’er singe
    “In the eye of my son Polyphemus,
    “And thou hast ne’er been advised or protected
    “By the goddess of wisdom, Pallas Athene!”

    Thus cried Poseidon,
    And sank ’neath the ocean again;
    And at the vulgar seaman’s wit
    Laugh’d under the water
    Amphitrite, the clumsy fishwoman,
    And the silly daughters of Nereus.


~HOMAGE~

    Ye songs! O my trusty numbers!
    Up, up! and on with your arms
    Bid the trumpet to blow,
    And raise high on my shield
    The youthful maiden,
    Who’s now to rule my heart,
    My undivided heart, as queen.

    Hail to thee, youthful queen!

    From the sun on high
    Tear I his sparkling ruddy gold,
    And of it weave a diadem
    For thine anointed head.
    From the fluttering blue-silken heaven’s veil,
    Wherein night’s diamonds are gleaming,
    Cut I a costly piece,
    And hang, as coronation mantle,
    Upon thy regal shoulders.
    I give to thee, as courtiers,
    Some well-bedizen’d sonnets,
    Haughty terzinas and courtly stanzas;
    My wit shall serve thee as footman,
    And as court-fool my phantasy,
    As herald, the laughing tears on my scutcheon,
    My humour shall serve thee.
    But I, O my queen,
    Before thee kneel down,
    In homage, on red velvet cushion,
    And to thee hand over
    The small bit of reason,
    Which, out of compassion, was left me
    By her who last govern’d thy kingdom.


~DECLARATION~

    Onward glimmering came the evening,
    Wilder tossèd the flood,
    And I sat on the strand, regarding
    The snowy dance of the billows,
    And soon my bosom swell’d like the sea;
    A deep home-sickness yearningly seized me
    For thee, thou darling form,
    Who everywhere surround’st me,
    And everywhere call’st me,
    Everywhere, everywhere,
    In the moan of the wind, in the roar of the ocean,
    In the sigh within my own breast.

    With brittle reed I wrote on the sand:
    “Agnes, I love thee!”
    But wicked billows soon pour’d themselves
    Over the blissful confession,
    Effacing it all.

    Ah too fragile reed, all fast-scatter’d sand,
    Ah fugitive billows, I’ll trust you no more!
    The heavens grow darker, my heart grows wilder
    And with vigorous hand from the forests of Norway
    Tear I the highest fir-tree,
    And plunge it deep
    In Etna’s glowing abyss, and thereafter
    With fire-imbued giant-pen
    I write on the dark veil of heaven:
    “Agnes, I love thee!”
    Every night gleams thenceforward
    On high that eternal fiery writing,
    And all generations of farthest descendants
    Read gladly the heavenly sentence:
    “Agnes, I love thee!”


~IN THE CABIN AT NIGHT~

        The sea its pearls possesseth,
        And heaven its stars containeth,
        But, O my heart, my heart,
        My heart its love hath also.

        Vast is the sea and the heavens,
        Yet vaster is my heart,
        And fairer than pearls or the stars
        Glitt’reth and beameth my love.

        Thou little youthful maiden,
        Come to my heart so vast;
        My heart and the sea and the heavens
        For very love are dying.

           *       *       *       *       *

        ’Gainst the azure veil of heaven,
        Where the beauteous stars are twinkling,
        Fain I’d press my lips with ardour,
        Press them wildly, madly weeping.

        Yonder stars the very eyes are
        Of my loved one, thousand-changing
        Glimmer they and greet me kindly
        From the azure veil of heaven.

        Tow’rd the azure veil of heaven,
        Tow’rd the eyes of my beloved one,
        Lift I up my arms in worship,
        And I pray, and thus beseech them:

        Beauteous eyes, ye lights of mercy,
        O make happy my poor spirit,
        Let me die, and as my guerdon,
        Win both you and all your heaven!

           *       *       *       *       *

        From those heavenly eyes above me
        Light and trembling sparks are falling
        Through the night, and then my spirit
        Loving-wide and wider stretcheth.

        O ye heavenly eyes above me!
        Weep yourselves into my spirit,
        That my spirit may run over
        With those tears so sweet and starry!

           *       *       *       *       *

        Cradled by the ocean billows,
        And by thoughts that seem like visions,
        Silent lie I in the cabin,
        In the dark bed in the corner.

        Through the open hatchway see I
        There on high the stars all-radiant,
        Those sweet eyes so dearly cherish’d
        Of my sweet and dearly loved one.

        Those sweet eyes so dearly cherish’d
        Far above my head are watching,
        And they tinkle and they beckon
        From the azure veil of heaven.

        Tow’rd the azure veil of heaven
        Gaze I many an hour with rapture,
        Till a white and misty curtain
        From me hides those eyes so cherish’d.

        ’Gainst the boarded side of the ship,
        Where my dreaming head is lying,
        Rave the billows, the furious billows.
        They roar and they murmur
        Thus soft in my ear:

    “O foolish young fellow!
    “Thine arm is short, and the heavens are wide,
    “And yonder stars are firmly nailed there;
    “In vain is thy yearning, in vain is thy sighing,
    “The best thou can’st do is to sleep!”

           *       *       *       *       *

    I dreamt, and dreaming saw a spacious heath,
    Far overspread with white, with whitest snow,
    And ’neath that white snow buried I was lying,
    And slept the lonesome, chilly sleep of death.

    Yet from on high, from out the darkling heavens,
    Look’d down upon my grave those eyes all-starry,
    Those eyes so sweet! In triumph they were gleaming
    In calm and radiant but excessive love.


~STORM~

    The tempest is raging,
    It floggeth the billows,
    And the billows, fierce-foaming and rearing,
    Rise up on high, and with life are all heaving
    The snowy watery mountains,
    And the small bark climbs o’er them,
    Labouring hastily,
    And suddenly plungeth it down
    In the black, wide-gaping abyss of the flood.--

    O sea!
    Mother of beauty, the foam-arisen one!
    Grandmother of love! O spare me!
    Already flutters, corpse-scenting,
    The snowy, spirit-like sea-mew,
    And wetteth his beak ’gainst the mast,
    And longs,--eager to taste,--for the heart
    Which proclaimeth the fame of thy daughter,
    And which thy grandson, the little rogue,
    Chose for his plaything.

    In vain my entreaties and prayers!
    My cry dies away in the blustering storm,
    In the wind’s battle-shout;
    It roars and pipes and crackles and howls,
    Like a madhouse of noises!
    And, between times, I audibly hear
    Harp-strains alluring,
    Songs all wild and yearning,
    Spirit-melting and spirit-rending,
    And the voice I remember!

    Far away, on the rock-coast of Scotland,
    Where the old grey castle projecteth
    Over the wild raging sea,
    There at the lofty and archèd window,
    Standeth a woman, beauteous but ill,
    Softly-transparent and marble-pale,
    And she’s playing her harp and she’s singing,
    And the wind through her long locks forceth its way
    And beareth her gloomy song
    Over the wide and tempest-toss’d sea.


~CALM AT SEA~

    Calm at sea! His beams all radiant
    Throws the sun across the water,
    And amid the heaving jewels,
    Furrows green the ship is tracing.

    Near the steersman lies the boatswain
    On his stomach, snoring gently;
    Near the mast, the sails repairing,
    Squats the cabin-boy, all-tarry.

    But behind his cheeks so dirty
    Red blood springs, a mournful quiv’ring
    Round his wide mouth plays, and sadly
    Stare his eyes, so large and handsome.

    For the captain stands before him,
    Raving, cursing, “thief” exclaiming:
    “Thief! a herring you have stolen
    “From the barrel, O you rascal!”

    Calm at sea! From out the waters
    Lifts himself a clever fishkin;
    In the sun his head he warmeth,
    Splashing with his tail so gaily.

    But the sea-mew, soaring over,
    Shooteth down upon the fishkin,
    And his sudden prize fast holding
    In his bill, again mounts upward.


~THE OCEAN SPECTRE~

    But I upon the ship’s edge was lying,
    And gazed with my eyes all dreamy
    Down on the glassy pellucid water,
    And gazed yet deeper and deeper--
    Till, deep in the ocean’s abysses,
    At first like a glimmering mist,
    Then, bit by bit, with hues more decided,
    Domes of churches and towers appeared,
    And at last, clear as sunlight, a city,
    Antiquarian Netherlandish,
    And swarming with life.
    Reverent men, in garments of black,
    With snowy frills and chains of honour,
    And lengthy swords and lengthy faces,
    Over the crowded market are pacing
    Tow’rd the high-stair’d council-chamber,
    Where Emperors’ stony images
    Keep guard with sceptre and sword:--
    Hard by, in front of the long row of houses,
    With mirror-like glistening windows,
    Stand the lindens all trimm’d into pyramids,
    And silken rustling maidens are wandering,
    A golden band round their slender bodies,
    Their blooming faces neatly surrounded
    By head-dresses velvet and black,
    From whence their abundant locks are escaping.
    Gay young fellows, in Spanish costume,
    Proudly are passing and nodding.
    Aged women,
    In garments all brown and strange-looking,
    Psalm-book and rosary in hand,
    Hasten with tripping step
    Tow’rd the cathedral church,
    Impell’d by the sound of the bells,
    And the rushing notes of the organ.

    Mysterious awe seizeth me too,
    Caused by the distant sound;
    A ne’er-ending yearning and sadness deep
    Steal o’er my heart,
    My scarcely-heal’d heart;
    It seems as though its bitter wounds
    By dear lips were kiss’d open,
    And once again were bleeding
    With drops hot and ruddy,
    Which long and slowly downward fall
    Upon an ancient house below
    In yon deep-ocean city,
    Upon an ancient and high-gabled house,
    Where sits in lonely melancholy
    A maiden at the window,
    Her head on her arm reclined,
    Like to some poor, forgotten child,
    And I know thee, thou poor, forgotten child.

    Thus deep, thus deep, then
    Thou hidd’st thyself from me
    In some childish conceit,
    And couldst not reascend,
    And sattest strange, among strange people,
    Five hundred years,
    And I meanwhile, with soul full of grief,
    Sought thee over all the earth,
    And ever sought thee,
    Thou ever-beloved one,
    Thou long-time-lost one,
    Thou finally-found one,--
    I’ve found thee at last, and again behold
    Thy countenance sweet,
    Thine eyes so prudent and faithful,
    Thy smile so dear--
    And never again will I leave thee,
    And downward hasten I to thee,
    And with wide-spreading arms
    Throw myself down on thy heart.

    But just in time
    I was seized by the foot by the Captain,
    And torn from the side of the ship,
    While he cried, laughing bitterly:
    “Why, Doctor, are you mad?”


~PURIFICATION~

    Remain thou in thy ocean-depths,
    Delirious dream,
    That erst so many a night
    My heart with false joy hast tormented,
    And now, an ocean-spectre,
    E’en in bright daylight threaten’st me--
    Remain below, eternally,
    And I’ll throw down to thee there
    All my sins and my sorrows,
    And folly’s cap and bells
    That round my head so long have rattled,
    And the cold and glistening serpent-skin
    Of hypocrisy,
    Which so long hath twined round my spirit,
    My sickly spirit,
    My God-denying, angel-denying
    Unhappy spirit--
    Hoiho! hoiho! Here comes the wind!
    Over the plain so destructive when smooth
    Hastens the ship,
    And my rescued spirit rejoices.


~PEACE~

    High in the heavens there stood the sun
    Cradled in snowy clouds,
    The sea was still,
    And musing I lay at the helm of the ship,
    Dreamily musing,--and half in waking
    And half in slumber, I gazed upon Christ,
    The Saviour of man.
    In streaming and snowy garment
    He wander’d, giant-great,
    Over land and sea;
    His head reach’d high to the heavens,
    His hands he stretch’d out in blessing
    Over land and sea;
    And as a heart in his bosom
    Bore he the sun,
    The sun all ruddy and flaming,
    And the ruddy and flaming sunny-heart
    Shed its beams of mercy
    And its beauteous, bliss-giving light,
    Lighting and warming
    Over land and sea.

    Sounds of bells were solemnly drawing
    Here and there, like swans were drawing
    By rosy bands the gliding ship,
    And drew it sportively tow’rd the green shore,
    Where men were dwelling, in high and turreted
    O’erhanging town.
    O blessings of peace! how still the town!
    Hush’d was the hollow sound
    Of busy and sweltering trade,
    And through the clean and echoing streets
    Were passing men in white attire,
    Palm-branches bearing,
    And when two chanced to meet,
    They view’d each other with inward intelligence,
    And trembling, in love and sweet denial,
    Kiss’d on the forehead each other,
    And gazed up on high
    At the Saviour’s sunny-heart,
    Which, glad and atoningly
    Beam’d down its ruddy blood,
    And three times blest, thus spake they:
    “Praisèd be Jesus Christ!”

           *       *       *       *       *

    Couldst thou this vision have only imagined,
    What wouldst thou not give for it,
    My dearest friend!
    Thou who in head and loins art so weak,
    And so strong in thy faith,
    And the Trinity worship’st in Unity,
    And the dog and the cross and the paw
    Of thy lofty patroness daily kissest,
    And hast work’d thy way upward by canting
    As an Aulic Counsellor, Magistrate,
    And at last as a Government Counsellor
    In the pious town
    Where flourish both sand and religion,
    And the patient water of sacred Spree
    Washes souls and dilutes the tea--
    Couldst thou this vision have only imagined,
    My dearest friend!
    Thou hadst borne it up high, to the market-place,
    Thy countenance pallid and blinking
    Had been dissolved in devotion and lowliness,
    And her Serene Highness,
    Enchanted and trembling with rapture,
    Had with thee sunk in prayer on the knee,
    And her eyes, beaming brightly,
    Had promised, by way of increase of salary,
    A hundred Prussian dollars sterling,
    And thou, with folded hands, wouldst have stammer’d:
    “Praisèd be Jesus Christ!”


~SEA SALUTATION~

    Thalatta! Thalatta!
    Hail to thee, O thou Ocean eterne!
    Hail to thee ten thousand times
    From hearts all exulting,
    As formerly hail’d thee
    Ten thousand Grecian hearts,
    Misfortune-contending, homeward-aspiring,
    World-renown’d Grecian hearts.

    The billows were heaving,
    They heaved and they bluster’d,
    The sun shed hastily downwards
    His light so sportive and rosy-hued;
    The sudden-startled flocks of sea-mews
    Flutter’d along, loud screaming,
    The horses were stamping, the bucklers were ringing,
    And afar there resounded triumphantly:
    Thalatta! Thalatta!
    Hail to thee, O thou Ocean eterne!
    Like voices of home thy waters are rushing,
    Like visions of childhood saw I a glimmering
    Over thy heaving billowy-realm,
    And olden remembrance again tells me stories
    Of all the darling, beautiful playthings,
    Of all the glittering Christmas presents,
    Of all the ruddy coral branches,
    The gold fish, pearls and colour’d shells
    Which thou mysteriously dost keep
    Down yonder in bright crystal house.

    O how have I languish’d in drear foreign lands!
    Like to a wither’d flower
    In the tin case of a botanist,
    Lay in my bosom my heart;
    Methought whole winters long I sat
    An invalid, in darksome sick-room,
    And now I suddenly leave it,
    And with dazzling rays am I greeted
    By emerald springtime, the sunny-awaken’d,
    And the snowy blossoming trees are all rustling,
    And the youthful flowers upon me gaze
    With eyes all chequer’d and fragrant;
    There’s a perfume and humming and breathing and laughing,
    And the birds in the azure heavens are singing--
    Thalatta! Thalatta!

    Thou valiant retreating heart!
    How oft, how bitter-oft, wast thou
    Hard press’d by the Northern barbarian women
    From large victorious eyes
    Shot they their burning arrows;
    With words both crooked and polish’d
    They threatened to cleave my breast,
    With cuniform billets-doux harass’d they
    My poor distracted brain--
    In vain I held my shield to resist them,
    The arrows whizz’d and the blows crash’d heavily,
    And by the Northern barbarian women
    Back to the sea was I driven,
    And freely breathing I hailèd the sea,
    The darling life-saving sea,
    Thalatta! Thalatta!


~THUNDERSTORM~

    Heavily lies on the ocean the storm,
    And through the darksome wall of clouds
    Quivers the forkèd lightning flash,
    Suddenly gleaming and suddenly vanishing,
    Like a thought from the head of Cronion.
    Over the desert, far-heaving water
    Afar the thunders are rolling,
    The snowy billowy horses are springing,
    Which Boreas’ self did engender
    Out of the beautiful mares of Erichton,
    And the seafowl are mournfully fluttering,
    Like shadowy corpses by Styx,
    By Charon repulsed from his desolate bark.

    Poor, but merry little ship,
    Yonder dancing the strangest dance!
    Æolus sends it his briskest attendants,
    Who wildly strike up for the frolicsome dance;
    The one is piping, another is blowing,
    The third is beating the hollow double-bass--
    And the staggering sailor stands at the rudder,
    And on the compass is steadily looking,
    That trembling soul of the vessel,
    And raises his hands in entreaty to heaven;
    “O rescue me, Castor, thou hero gigantic,
    And thou, knight of the ring, Polydeuces!”


~THE SHIPWRECKED ONE~

    Hope and love! All crumbled to atoms,
    And I myself, like to a corpse
    Thrown up by the growling sea,
    Lie on the strand,
    The dreary, naked strand.
    Before me, the watery waste is heaving
    Behind me lie but sorrow and misery,
    And over me high are passing the clouds,
    The formless grey-hued daughters of air,
    Who out of the sea, in misty buckets,
    Draw up the water,
    And wearily drag it and drag it,
    Then spill it again in the sea,
    A mournful and tedious business,
    And useless as e’en my own life.
    The billows murmur, the sea-mews are screaming,
    Olden remembrances over me drift,
    Dreams long forgotten and images perish’d,
    Painfully sweet come to light.

    In the North a woman is living,
    A beauteous woman, royally fair.
    Her slender figure, like a tall cypress,
    By an alluring white robe is embraced;
    Her dark and flowing tresses,
    Like to a blissful night, are streaming
    Down from her lofty, braid-crownèd head,
    And dreamily-sweetly form ringlets
    Over her sweet pale face;
    And out of her sweet pale face,
    Large and o’erpowering, beams an eye
    Like a black sun in radiance.

    O thou black sun, how often,
    Enchantingly often, I drank from thee
    Wild flames of inspiration,
    And stood and reel’d, all drunk with fire,--
    Then hover’d a mild and dovelike smile
    Round the high-contracted haughty lips,
    And the high-contracted haughty lips
    Breath’d forth words as sweet as moonlight,
    And tender as the rose’s fragrance--
    And then my spirit ascended,
    And flew, like an eagle, straight up into heaven!

    Peace, ye billows and sea-mews!
    All is now over, happiness, hope,
    Hope, ay, and love! I lie on the shore,
    A lonely and shipwreckèd man,
    And press my countenance glowing
    Deep in the humid sand.


~SUNSET _2_~

    The beauteous sun
    Hath calmly descended down to the sea;
    The heaving waters already are dyed
    By dusky night;
    Nought but the evening’s red
    With golden light still spreadeth o’er them,
    And the rushing force of the flood
    ’Gainst the shore presseth the snowy billows
    Which merrily, hastily skip,
    Like wool-cover’d flocks of lambkins
    Whom the singing sheep-boy at even
    Homeward doth drive.

    “How fair is the sun!”--
    So spake, after long silence, my friend,
    Who with me wander’d along the strand,
    And half in sport and half in sad earnest
    Assured he me that the sun was only
    A lovely woman, whom the old sea-god
    Out of convenience married;
    All the day long she joyously wander’d
    In the high heavens, deck’d out with purple,
    And glitt’ring with diamonds,
    And all-beloved and all-admired
    By every mortal creature,
    And every mortal creature rejoicing
    With her sweet glances’ light and warmth;
    But in the evening, impell’d all-disconsolate.
    Once more returneth she home
    To the moist house and desert arms
    Of her grey-headed spouse.

    “Believe me”--here added my friend,
    With laughter and sighing and laughter again:
    “They’re living below in the tenderest union!
    “Either they’re sleeping or quarrelling fiercely,
    “So that up here e’en the ocean is roaring,
    “And the fisherman hears in the rush of the waves
    “How the old man’s abusing his wife:
    “‘Thou round wench of the universe!
    “Beaming coquettish one!
    “‘All the day long thou art glowing for others,
    “‘At night for me thou art frosty and tired.’
    “After this curtain lecture
    “As a matter of course the proud sun
    “Bursts into tears, lamenting her misery,
    “And cries so sadly and long, that the sea-god
    “Suddenly springs from his bed all distracted,
    “And hastily swims to the surface of ocean,
    “To recover his breath and his senses.
    “I saw him myself, in the night just past,
    “Rising out of the sea as high as his bosom;
    “A jacket of yellow flannel he wore,
    “And a lily-white nightcap,
    “And a face all wither’d and dry.”


~THE SONG OF THE OCEANIDES~

    Shadows of evening o’er ocean are falling,
    And lonely, with none but his lonely soul with him,
    Sits there a man on the dreary strand,
    And looks, with death-chilly look, up on high
    Tow’rd the spacious, death-chilly vault of heaven,
    And looks on the spacious billowy main,
    And over the spacious billowy main
    Like airy sailors, his signs are floating,
    Returning again despondingly,
    For they have found fast closèd the heart
    Wherein they fain would anchor--
    And he groans so loud, that the snowy sea-mews,
    Startled away from their sandy nests,
    Flutter around him in flocks,
    And he speaks unto them these laughing words:

    “Ye black-leggèd birds,
    “With snowy pinions o’er the sea fluttering,
    “With crooked beaks the sea-water sucking up,
    “And train-oily seal’s flesh devouring,
    “Your life is bitter as is your food!
    “But I, the happy one, taste nought but sweetness!
    “I taste the rose’s sweet exhalation,
    “The moonlight-nourished bride of the nightingale;
    “I taste, too, the sweetness of all things:
    “Loving and being loved!

    “She loves me! she loves me! the beauteous maiden!
    “Now stands she at home in her house’s high balcony,
    “And looks in the twilight abroad, o’er the highway,
    “And darkens, and for me doth yearn--I assure you!
    “In vain she looketh around and she sigheth,
    “And sighing descends she down to the garden,
    “And wanders in fragrance and moonlight,
    “And speaks to the flowers and telleth them
    “How I, the beloved one, so precious am,
    “So worthy of love--I assure you!
    “And then in bed, in slumber, in dream,
    “My darling form around her sports blissfully,
    “And then at morning at breakfast
    “Upon her glistening bread and butter
    “Sees she my countenance smiling,
    “And she eats it for love--I assure you!”

    Thus is he boasting and boasting,
    And betweentimes the sea-mews are screaming,
    Like old ironical chuckling;
    The mists of twilight rise up on high;
    Out of the violet clouds, all-gloomily,
    Peepeth the grass-yellow moon;
    High are roaring the billows of ocean,
    And from the depths of the high-roaring sea,
    Mournful as whispering gales of wind,
    Soundeth the song of the Oceanides,
    The beauteous compassionate sea-nymphs,
    And loudest of all the voice so enthralling
    Of Peleus’ spouse, the silvery-footed one,
    And they’re sighing and singing:

    “O fool, thou fool! thou hectoring fool!
    “Thou sorrow-tormented one!
    “Cruelly murder’d are all thy bright hopes,
    “Thy bosom’s frolicsome children,
    “And ah! thy heart, thy Niobe-heart
    “Through grief turn’d to stone!
    “Within thy head ’tis now night,
    “And through it are flashing the lightnings of frenzy
    “And thou boastest of sorrow!
    “O fool, thou fool! thou hectoring fool!
    “Headstrong art thou as thy forefather,
    “The lofty Titan, who heavenly fire
    “Stole from the gods and gave unto mortals,
    “And, vulture-tormented, chain’d to the rock,
    “Defied e’en Olympus, defied, groaning loudly,
    “So that in ocean’s far depths did we hear it,
    “And to him came with a comforting song.
    “O fool, thou fool! thou hectoring fool!
    “But thou art more powerless even than he,
    “And thou would’st do well to honour the deities,
    “And patiently bear the burden of sorrow,
    “And patiently bear with it, long, ay, full long,
    “Till Atlas himself his patience hath lost,
    “And the heavy world from his shoulders throws off
    “Into eternal night.”

    Thus sounded the song of the Oceanides,
    The beauteous compassionate water-nymphs,
    Till still louder billows at last overpower’d it--
    Then went the moon in the rear of the clouds,
    And night ’gan to yawn,
    And long I sat in the darkness, with weeping.


~THE GODS OF GREECE~

    Full-blossoming moon! In thy fair light
    Like liquid gold, the ocean gleams:
    Like daylight’s clearness, yet charm’d into twilight,
    Over the strand’s wide plain all is lying;
    In the starless clear azure heavens
    Hover the snowy clouds,
    Like colossal figures of deities
    Of glittering marble.

    No, ’tis not so, no clouds can they be!
    ’Tis they themselves, the Gods of old Hellas,
    Who once so joyously ruled o’er the world,
    But now, tormented and perish’d,
    Like monster spectres are moving along
    Over the midnight heaven.

    Wond’ring and strangely blinded, observed I
    The airy pantheon,
    The solemnly mute and fearfully moving
    Figures gigantic.

    He yonder’s Cronion, the monarch of heaven;
    Snow-white are the locks of his head,
    Locks so famous for shaking Olympus;
    He holds in his hand his extinguishèd bolt,
    And in his face lie misfortune and grief,
    And yet without change his olden pride.
    Those times indeed were better, O Zeus,
    When thou didst take pleasure divinely
    In youths and in nymphs and in hecatombs!
    But even the Gods can reign not for ever,
    The younger press hard on their elders,
    As thou didst once on thy grey-headed father
    And all thy Titan uncles hard press,
    Jupiter Parricida!
    Thee, too, I recognise, haughty Here!
    Spite of all thy jealous anxiety,
    Hath another thy sceptre obtain’d,
    And thou art no longer the queen of the heavens,
    And fixed is now thy beaming eye,
    And powerless lie thy lily-white arms,
    And never more thy vengeance can reach
    The God-impregnated virgin,
    And the wonder-working son of the deity.
    Thee, too, I recognise, Pallas Athene!
    With shield and wisdom couldest thou not
    Avert the destruction of deities?
    Thee, too, I recognise, thee, Aphrodite!
    Erst the golden one! now the silver one!
    True thou’rt still deck’d with the charms of thy girdle,
    Yet I secretly tremble at thought of thy beauty,
    And would I enjoy thy bountiful charms,
    Like heroes before me, of fear I should die;
    To me thou appearest the goddess of corpses,
    Venus Libitina!
    No longer with love is tow’rd thee looking,
    Yonder, the terrible Ares;
    And sadly is looking Phœbus Apollo,
    The stripling. His lyre is silent
    That sounded so joyous at feasts of the Gods.
    Still sadder appeareth Hephaestus,
    And truly, the lame one! no longer
    Fills he the office of Hebe,
    And busily pours, in the Gods’ congregation,
    The nectar delicious--And long is extinguish’d
    The inextinguishable laughter of deities.

    O ye Gods, I never could love you,
    For ever distasteful I’ve found the Grecians,
    And e’en the Romans I greatly hate.
    Yet holy compassion and shuddering pity
    Stream through my heart,
    When I now behold you on high,
    Godheads deserted,
    Dead and night-wandering shadows,
    Misty and weak, scared by the very wind--
    And when I bethink me how airy and cowardly
    The godheads are, who overcame you,
    The new, now-ruling, mournful godheads.
    The mischievous ones in the sheepskin of meekness,
    Then over me steals a glorious resentment,
    And fain would I break the new-born temples,
    And fight on your side, ye ancient deities,
    For you, and your good ambrosial rights,
    And before your lofty altars,
    The once-more-restored, the sacrifice steaming,
    Fain would I kneel down and pray,
    And, praying, raise tow’rd you my arms.--

    For evermore, ye ancient deities,
    Have ye been wont, in the combats of mortals,
    To join yourselves to the side of the victor,
    And therefore is man more high-minded than ye,
    And in combats of deities deem I it right
    To take the part of the vanquish’d deities.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Thus did I speak, and visibly redden’d
    Yon pale cloudy figures on high,
    And on me they gazed like dying ones,
    Sorrow-illumined, and suddenly vanish’d.
    The moon, too, hid herself
    Behind the clouds that darkly came over her;
    High up roarèd the sea,
    And then triumphantly stood in the heavens
    The stars all-eternal.


~QUESTIONS~

    By the sea, by the desert night-cover’d sea
    Standeth a youth,
    His breast full of sadness, his head full of doubtings,
    And with gloomy lips he asks of the billows:

    “O answer me life’s hidden riddle,
    “The riddle primeval and painful,
    “Over which many a head has been poring,
    “Heads in hieroglyphical nightcaps,
    “Heads in turbans and swarthy bonnets,
    “Heads in perukes, and a thousand other
    “Poor and perspiring heads of us mortals--
    “Tell me what signifies man?
    “From whence doth he come? And where doth he go?
    “Who dwelleth amongst the golden stars yonder?”

    The billows are murm’ring their murmur eternal,
    The wind is blowing, the clouds are flying,
    The stars are twinkling, all listless and cold,
    And a fool is awaiting an answer.


~THE PHŒNIX~

    There comes a bird who hath flown from the westward,
    He flies tow’rd the east,
    Tow’rd the eastern garden-home,
    Where the spices so fragrant are growing,
    And palms are waving and wells are cooling--
    And, flying, the wondrous bird thus singeth
    She loves him, she loves him!
    His image she bears in her little bosom,
    And bears it sweetly and secretly hidden,
    Nor knows it herself!
    But in her vision, before her he stands,
    She prays, and she weeps, and she kisses his hands,
    And calls on his name,
    And calling awakes she and lieth all-startled,
    And rubbeth her beauteous eyes in amazement--
    She loves him! she loves him!


~ECHO~

    ’Gainst the mast reclining, and high on the lofty deck
    Stood I and heard I the song of the bird.
    Like black-green steeds, with silvery manes,
    The white and curling billows were springing;
    Like flocks of swans were sailing past us,
    With glittering sails, the men of Heligoland,
    The nomads bold of the Baltic.
    Over my head, in the azure eterne,
    Snowy clouds were fluttering on,
    While sparkled the sun everlasting,
    The rose of the heavens, the fiery-blooming one,
    Who joyfully mirror’d himself in the ocean;
    And heaven and ocean and with them my heart
    In echo resounded:
    She loves him! She loves him!


~SEA-SICKNESS~

    The dark-grey clouds of the afternoon
    Deeper are sinking fast over the sea,
    Which darkly seemeth to rise to meet them,
    And between them the ship drives on.

    Sea-sick sit I unmoved by the mast,
    And make observations respecting myself,
    Primeval, ash-grey observations,
    Which Father Lot of old did make
    When he had drunk too much of the grape,
    And afterwards found himself amiss.
    At times I bethink me of olden stories:
    How cross-mark’d pilgrims of olden days
    In stormy journeys the comforting image
    Religiously kiss’d of the Holy Virgin;
    How knights, when sick in such sea-misery,
    The darling glove of their worshipp’d mistress
    Press’d to their lips and then were comforted--
    But I am sitting, and chew with vexation
    An ancient herring, the comforter salty
    After hard drinking or indigestion!

    All this time the ship is fighting
    With the furious, heaving flood;
    Now like a rearing battle-steed stands it
    On its hinder part, so that the rudder cracks;
    Now it plunges headforward down again
    In the howling abyss of the waters;
    Again, as though carelessly love-faint,
    Thinks it to lay itself down
    On the black breast of the billow gigantic,
    Who mightily onward roars,
    And sudden, a desolate ocean-waterfall,
    In snowy curlings plunges down headlong,
    And covers me over with foam.

    All this swaying and hov’ring and tossing
    Is quite unendurable!
    In vain doth my eye keep watch and seek for
    The German coast. But, alas, nought but water!
    Evermore water, fast-moving water!

    As the winter-wanderer at evening
    Longs for a comforting warm cup of tea,
    So now doth long my heart for thee,
    My German Fatherland!
    For ever may thy sweet soil be cover’d
    With whims and hussars and horrible verses,
    And lukewarm slender treatises;
    For ever may thy stately zebras
    Feed upon roses instead of on thistles;
    For ever may thy noble baboons
    In idle adornment trick themselves out,
    And think themselves better than all the other
    Lowminded heavy and lumbering cattle;
    For ever may thy assemblage of snails
    Look on themselves as immortal,
    Because they creep so slowly along,
    And may they daily collect men’s opinions
    Whether the cheesemite belongs to the cheese?
    And hold for a long time grave consultations
    How the Egyptian sheep to improve,
    So that their wool may be better in quality,
    And the shepherd may shear them like all other sheep,
    Without a distinction--
    For evermore may folly and wrong
    Cover thee, Germany, utterly!
    Still am I yearning for thee,
    For thou art _terra firma_ at least!


~IN HARBOUR~

    Happy the man who arrives safe in harbour,
    And behind him hath left the ocean and tempests,
    And now so warmly and quietly sits,
    In the townhall-cellar of Bremen!
    See how the world is truly and lovingly
    In the bumper fully depicted,
    And how the heaving microcosm
    Sunnily flows to the thirsty heart!
    All I discern in the glass,
    Olden and new traditions of nations,
    Turks and Greeks, and Hegel and Gans,
    Citron forests and watch-parades,
    Berlin and Schilda and Tunis and Hamburg,
    But most of all the form of my loved one,
    That angel-head on the Rhenish wine’s gold ground.

    O, how fair, how fair art thou, loved one!
    Thou art a very rose,
    Not like the rose of fair Schiras,
    The nightingale’s bride, of whom Hafis once sang;
    Not like the rose of Sharon,
    The sacred and red one, the prophet-honour’d one;
    But thou’rt like the rose in the cellar at Bremen!
    That is the rose of all roses,
    The older she grows, the fairer she blossoms,
    And her heavenly fragrance hath gladden’d my bosom,
    Hath served to inspire me, served to enchant me.
    And did the head of the cellar of Bremen
    Not hold me fast, yes fast by my hair,
    I surely had tumbled!

    The worthy man! we sat together,
    And drank like brethren,
    We spoke of lofty mysterious things,
    We sigh’d and sank in the arms of each other,
    And he did convert me to love’s religion,
    I drank to the health of my bitterest enemies,
    And every wretched poet I pardoned
    As I myself for pardon would hope;
    I wept with devotion, and lastly
    The doors of the place were unto me open’d
    Where the twelve apostles, the sacred tuns,
    Silently preach, though understood plainly
    By every nation.

    True men indeed!
    In wooden coats, from without all-invisible,
    Inwardly are they more radiant and fairer
    Than all the haughty priests of the temple,
    And Herod’s satellites cringing and courtiers,
    All glitt’ring in gold and clothèd in purple;
    Ever my wont is to say
    Not amongst the mere common people,
    No, in the best and politest society,
    Constantly lived the monarch of heaven.

    Hallelujah! How sweetly wave round me
    The palm-trees of Bethel!
    How fragrant the myrrh is of Hebron!
    How Jordan is roaring, and reeling with rapture,
    While my immortal soul also is reeling,
    And I reel with it, and whilst thus reeling,
    I’m brought up the stairs and into the daylight
    By the worthy head of the cellar of Bremen.

    Thou worthy head of the cellar of Bremen!
    See where sit on the roofs of the houses
    The angels, all well-drunken and singing;
    The glowing sun high up in the heavens
    Is nought but the red and drunken nose
    Which the World-Spirit sticks out,
    And round the World-Spirit’s red nose
    Whirleth the whole of the drunken world.


~EPILOGUE _1_~

    As on the plain shoot up the wheatstalks
    So do the thoughts in the spirit of man
    Grow up and waver;
    But the gentle thoughts of the poet
    Are as the red and blue-colour’d flowers
    Merrily blooming between them.

    Red and blue-colour’d flowers!
    The surly reaper rejects you as useless,
    Wooden flails all-scornfully thresh you,
    Even the needy traveller,
    Whom your sight rejoices and quickens,
    Shaketh his head,
    And calleth you pretty weeds;
    But the rustic virgin,
    The twiner of garlands,
    Doth honour and pluck you,
    And with you decketh her beauteous locks,
    And thus adorn’d, makes haste to the dance,
    Where pipes and fiddles sweetly are sounding,
    Or to the silent beech-tree,
    Where the voice of the loved one still sweeter doth sound
    Than pipes or than fiddles.


~MONOLOGUE~

    In olden legends, golden castles stood
    Where harps were sounding, beauteous maidens danced,
    And spruce attendants flash’d, and jessamine
    And rose and myrtle shed their fragrance round--
    And yet one single word of disenchantment
    Made all this splendour in a moment vanish,
    And nought remain’d behind but olden ruins
    And croaking birds of night and drear morass.
    So have I, too, with but one single word,
    All Nature’s blooming glories disenchanted.
    There lies she now, as lifeless, cold, and pale
    As some bedizen’d regal corpse might be,
    Whose cheekbones have been colour’d red by art,
    And in whose hand a sceptre hath been placed.
    His lips however wither’d look and yellow,
    For they forgot to dye them red as well;
    And mice are springing o’er his regal nose,
    And ridicule the pond’rous golden sceptre.


~RHAMPSENITUS~

    When the King Rhampsenitus
      Enter’d in the halls resplendent
    Of his daughter, she was laughing,
      As was also each attendant.

    E’en the blackamoors, the eunuchs,
      Follow’d in loud chorus after;
    E’en the mummies, e’en the sphynxes
      Seem’d about to burst with laughter.

    Then the princess said: “I fancied
      That I held the thief securely,
    But it was a dead arm only
      That my hand had seized so surely.

    “I can see now how the robber
      To thy storehouse penetrated,
    And despite all bars and fast’nings
      All thy treasure confiscated.

    “He a magic key possesses,
      “Which the door of house or stable
    “Straightway opens; to resist it
      “Are the strongest doors unable.

    “Now I’m really not a strong door,
      “Nor could I resist his pleasure;
    “So this night, while treasure-watching,
      “Have I lost my little treasure!”

    Round the chamber danced the princess,
      Laughing at this notion clever,
    And the maidens and the eunuchs
      Laugh’d again as loud as ever.

    On that day all Memphis laugh’d too,
      E’en the crocodiles so bloody
    Laughingly their heads protruded
      From the yellow Nile-stream muddy,

    When they heard the drum’s loud beating,
      And the foll’wing proclamation
    Shouted by the public crier
      On the bank, to all the nation:--

    “We, Rhampsenitus, by God’s grace
      “King of Egypt, to our loyal
    “Well-belovèd friends and subjects
      “Hereby send our greeting royal.

    “In the night between the third and
      “Fourth of June, the fourteen hundred
    “Four and twentieth year before Christ,
      “Came a certain thief, who plunder’d

    “Many jewels from the storehouse
      “Where we kept them, and more lately
    “Further thefts has perpetrated,
      “So that we have suffer’d greatly.

    “To discover the offender,
      “Made we our belovèd daughter
    “Sleep beside the treasure; but he
      “Robb’d her too, and napping caught her.

    “Now, to check this wholesale plunder,
      “And to show our deep affection
    “For the thief, our admiration,
      “And our grateful recollection,

    “We will give our only daughter
      “As his lawful wife--God bless her!--
    “And to princely rank promote him,
      “Owning him as our successor.

    “Since our son-in-law’s abode is
      “Unknown to us just at present,
    “This our rescript shall inform him
      “That we’ve now made all things pleasant.

    “Done the third of January
      “Thirteen hundred twenty-six
    “Years before Christ; here our seal we,
      “King Rhampsenitus, affix.”

    And he kept his word; the thief he
      As his son-in-law soon counted,
    And when he was dead, the robber
      On the throne of Egypt mounted.

    And he ruled like other monarchs,
      Trade and talent patronizing,
    And the fewness of the robb’ries
      In his reign was quite surprising.


~THE WHITE ELEPHANT~

    Great Mahawasant, of Siam the King,
    Has half of India under his wing;
    Twelve kings, with the Great Mogul, obey
    His rule, and acknowledge his sovereign sway.

    Each year with banner, trumpet, and drum
    To Siam the trains with the tribute come;
    Many thousand camels, with backs piled high
    With the costliest treasures of earth, draw nigh.

    When the camels he sees with their heavy piles,
    The soul of the King in secret smiles;
    But in public in truth he always deplores
    That his storehouses serve not to hold all his stores.

    Yet these storehouses all are so lofty and spacious,
    So full of magnificence, so capacious,
    The reality’s splendour surpasses in glory
    The Arabian Nights’ most wondrous story.

    The “Castle of Indra” call they the hall
    In which are display’d the deities all,
    The golden images, chisell’d with care,
    And all incrusted with jewels so fair.

    Full thirty thousand their numbers are,
    Their ugliness passes description far;
    A compound of men and animals dread,
    With many a hand and many a head.

    In the “Hall of purple” one wond’ringly sees
    Some thirteen hundred coral trees,
    As big as palms, a singular sight,
    With spiral branches, a forest bright.

    The floor of purest crystal is made,
    And all the trees are in it display’d,
    While pheasants of glittering plumage gay
    Strut up and down in a dignified way.

    The ape on which the monarch doth dote
    A ribbon of silk wears round his throat,
    Whence hangs the key that opens the hall
    Which people the “Chamber of Slumber” call.

    All kinds of jewels of value high
    All over the ground here scatter’d lie
    Like common peas, with diamonds rare
    That in size with the egg of a fowl compare.

    On sacks that stuff’d with pearls appear
    The Monarch is wont to stretch himself here;
    The ape lies down by the monarch proud,
    And both of them slumber and snore aloud.

    But the King’s most precious, costly treasure,
    His happiness, his soul’s first pleasure,
    The joy and the pride of Mahawasant
    Is truly his snow-white elephant.

    As a home for a guest so highly respected
    A splendid palace the King has erected;
    Gay lotos-headed columns uphold
    Its roof, all cover’d with plates of gold.

    Three hundred heralds stand at the gate,
    As the elephant’s guard of honour to wait;
    And kneeling down with low-bent back
    There serve him a hundred eunuchs black.

    For his proboscis the daintiest meat
    On golden dishes they bring him to eat;
    From silver buckets he drinks his wine,
    Well season’d with spices sweet and fine.

    With perfumes they rub him, and otto of roses
    On his head a chaplet of flowers reposes,
    The richest shawls that are made in the East
    As carpets serve for the dignified beast.

    The happiest life appears to be his,
    But no one on earth contented is;
    The noble creature,--one cannot tell why,--
    Gives way to a deep despondency.

    The melancholy monster white
    Is wretched, all this profusion despite;
    They fain would enliven and cheer him again,
    But all their cleverest efforts are vain.

    In vain with singing and springing there come
    The bayaderes; the kettle drum
    And cornet in vain the musicians play,
    But nothing can make the elephant gay.

    As matters continue to go on badly,
    The heart of Mahawasant beats sadly;
    He sends for the wisest astrologer known,
    And bids him stand before his throne.

    “Stargazer, I’ll cut off at once your head”--
    Thus speaks he, “unless you can tell me instead
    “What is it that my poor elephant needs,
    “And why his spirit with sorrow so bleeds.”

    The other one threw himself thrice on the ground,
    And finally spoke with obeisance profound:
    “O monarch, I’ll tell thee the actual fact,
    “And then as thou will’st, thou canst afterwards act.

    “There lives in the North a woman fair,
    “Of lofty stature and beauty rare;
    “Thy elephant’s certainly handsome, Sir,
    “But still not fit to be liken’d to her.

    “Compared with her, he only appears
    “A little white mouse; her form she rears
    “Like giantess Bimha in Ramajana,
    “And like the Ephesians’ great Diana.

    “Her limbs are combined in a beautiful frame;
    “Two lofty pilasters support the same,
    “And proudly and gracefully stand upright,
    “Of alabaster dazzling and white.

    “This is God Amor’s temple gigantic,
    “In other words, love’s cathedral romantic!
    “As lamp there burns within the fane
    “A heart quite free from spot and stain.

    “The poets are nonpluss’d how to begin
    “To describe the charms of her snow-white skin;
    “E’en Gautier unable to do it, alas! is,
    “Its whiteness all description surpasses.

    “The highest Himalaya’s snow
    “Beside her seems ash-grey to grow;
    “The lily that she by accident thumbs
    “Through envy or contrast yellow becomes.

    “The Countess Bianca is the name
    “Of this enormous snow-white dame;
    “At Paris she dwells, in the land of France,
    “And the elephant loves her by singular chance.

    “By strange and wondrous elective affinity
    “She became through a dream his bosom’s divinity
    “And into his heart this lofty Ideal
    “First crept by means of a vision unreal.

    “Since then he’s consumed by a yearning stealthy,
    “And he, who was once so joyous and healthy,
    “As a four-footed Werther sadly stands,
    “And dreams of a Lotte in Northern lands.

    “O, Sympathy’s mysterious thrill!
    “He never saw her, but thinks of her still;
    “Oft tramps he round in the moonlight fair,
    “And sighs: ‘O were I a bird of the air!’

    “His body alone is in Siam, his mind
    “In France with Bianca thou’lt certainly find;
    “And yet this parting of body and soul
    “Must greatly injure his health as a whole.

    “From the daintiest morsels revolts his belly,
    “He cares for nothing but vermicelli;
    “He’s coughing already, and fast grows thinner;
    “His yearning will kill him, or I’m a sinner.

    “If thou wouldst save him, preserve him alive,
    “His return to the animal world contrive,
    “O King, then send the renown’d invalid
    “Direct to Paris, with utmost speed.

    “When he on the spot in the actual sight
    “Of the beautiful lady can take delight--
    “Of her who the prototype was of his dream,
    “He’ll soon be cured of his sadness extreme.

    “There where his mistress’s glances fall,
    “His spirit’s torments will vanish all;
    “Her smiles will the last of the shadows efface
    “Which in his bosom had taken their place.

    “And then her voice, like a magical tune,
    “Will cure his distracted mind full soon;
    “The flaps of his ears he’ll joyfully raise,
    “And feel as he felt in youthful days.

    “All things are so very enchanting and pretty
    “On the banks of the Seine, in Paris’ fair city!
    “How thy elephant there will civilized be,
    “Amusing himself right merrily!

    “But most of all, O monarch, take care
    “That plenty of money he has with him there,
    “And a letter of credit, all charges to meet,
    “On Rothschild Frères in the Rue Lafitte,

    “For a million of ducats or thereabouts;
    “Then Baron Rothschild will harbour no doubts
    “About him, but say with an accent mellow:
    “‘The elephant’s really a capital fellow!’”

    The astrologer thus discoursed, and then
    He threw himself thrice on the ground again.
    The king with rich presents sent him away,
    And stretched himself, his course to survey.

    He thought of this, and he thought of that;
    (Kings seldom find their thoughts come pat).
    His ape beside him took his seat,
    And both of them fell asleep with the heat.

    What he resolved, I’ll hereafter relate;
    The Indian mails are behind their date.
    The last of these which has come to hand
    Was by way of Suez, and overland.


~KNAVE OF BERGEN~

    At Dusseldorf castle on the Rhine
      They’re gaily masquerading;
    The waxlights sparkle, the company dance,
      The music their nimbleness aiding.

    The beauteous Duchess dances too,
      And ceases laughing never;
    Her partner is a slender youth,
      Who seems right courtly and clever.

    He wears a mask of velvet black,
      Whence merrily is peeping
    An eye just like a shining dirk
      From out of its sheath half creeping.

    The carnival throng exultingly shout
      As they whirl in the waltz’s embraces,
    While Drickes and Marizzebill
      Salute with loud noise and grimaces.

    The trumpets crash, and the merry hum
      Of the double-bass increases,
    Until the dance to an end has come,
      And then the music ceases.

    “Most excellent Lady, thy pardon I beg,
      “’Tis time for me to go now--”
    “The Duchess said smiling: “You shall not depart,
      “Unless your face you show now.”

    “Most excellent Lady, thy pardon I beg,
      “My face is a hideous creature’s--”
    “The Duchess said smiling: “I am not afraid,
      “I insist upon seeing your features.”

    “Most excellent Lady, thy pardon I beg,
      “For night and death are my portion--”
    “The Duchess said smiling: “I’ll not let you go
      “I’ll see you, despite all your caution.”

    In vain he struggled with gloomy words
      To change her determination;
    At length she forcibly tore the mask
      From his face for her information.

    “’Tis the headsman of Bergen!” the throng in the hall
      Exclaim with a feeling of terror,
    And timidly shrink;--the Duchess rush’d out,
      Her husband to tell of her error.

    The Duke was wise, and all the disgrace
      Of the Duchess straightway effac’d he;
    He drew his bright sword and said: “Kneel down,
      Good fellow!” with accents hasty.

    “With this stroke of the sword I make you now
      “A limb of the order knightly;
    “And since you’re a knave, you’ll hereafter be call’d
      “Sir Knave of Bergen rightly.”

    So the headsman became a nobleman proud,
      Of the Bergen Knaves’ family founder;
    A haughty race! they dwelt on the Rhine,
      Though now they all underground are!


~THE VALKYRES~

    While below contending forces
    Fight, above on cloudy horses
    Three Valkyres ride; their song
    Through the air re-echoes long.

    “Princes wrangle, nations quarrel,
    “Each would bear away the laurel;
    “Conquest is the highest prize,
    “Highest worth in courage lies.

    “No proud helmet gives protection,
    “Death brings all things in subjection;
    “And the hero’s blood is shed,
    “And the wicked win instead.

    “Laurel wreaths, triumphal arches!
    On the morrow in he marches,
    “Who the better one o’erthrew,
    “Winning land and people too.

    “Senator and burgomaster
    “Go to meet the victor faster
    “With the keys that ope the gate,
    “And the train then enters straight.

    “Cannon from the walls are crashing,
    “Kettle-drums and trumpets clashing,
    “Bells’ loud ringing fills the sky,
    “And ‘hurrah!’ the people cry.

    “On the balconies are standing
    “Smiling beauteous women, handing
    “To the victor flow’ry wreaths;
    “He with haughty calmness breathes.”


~HASTINGS BATTLE-FIELD~

    The Abbot of Waltham deeply sigh’d
      When he heard the tragical story
    That Harold the king had lost his life
      On Hastings battle-field gory.

    Two monks, named Asgod and Ailrik, he
      As messengers then selected,
    To seek at Hastings amongst the dead
      For Harold’s body neglected.

    The monks went forth with sorrowing hearts,
      And return’d with faces averted:
    “O Father, the world goes wrong with us now,
      “We seem by Fortune deserted.

    “The better man has fallen in fight,
      “O’ercome by that bastard demon;
    “Arm’d thieves amongst them divide the land,
      “And make a slave of the freeman.

    “The veriest rascal in Normandy now
      “Is lord of the island of Britain;
    “A tailor from Bayeux with golden spurs
      “We saw as gay as a kitten.

    “Woe, woe to the man of Saxon birth!
      “Ye Saxon sainted ones even,
    “Ye had better take care, ye’re not safe from disgrace,
      “E’en now in the kingdom of heaven.

    “The meaning now we can understand
      “Of the blood-red comet which lately
    “On a broomstick of fire rode through the sky
      “One night, and astonish’d us greatly.

    “At Hastings there was realized
      “The evil star’s prediction;
    “Amongst the dead on the battle-field there
      “We sought with deep affliction.

    “Till every hope had disappear’d
      “We sought in each direction;
    “The corpse of King Harold, we grieve to say,
      “Escaped our close inspection.”

    ’Twas thus that Asgod and Ailrik spoke;
      His hands wrung the Abbot, while moan’d he
    Then sank in deep thought, and finally said,
      As heavily sigh’d and groan’d he:

    “At Grendelfield, by the bards’ old stone,
      “In a hut in the forest, is dwelling
    “Her whom they Edith the Swanneck call,
      “In beauty once so excelling.

    “They call’d her Edith the Swanneck erst,
      “Because her neck in its splendour
    “Resembled the neck of the swan; the king
      “Loved the maid with affection tender.

    “He loved, kiss’d, fondled her long, and then
      “Forgot, like a faithless lover;
    Time’s fleeting on, full sixteen years
      “Have since those days pass’d over.

    “Now, brethren, go to this woman straight,
      “And bid her return with you quickly
    “To Hastings; her eye will discover the king
      “‘Mid the corpses scatter’d so thickly.

    “And when you have found his body, with speed
      “To Waltham Abbey transfer him,
    “That we for his soul due masses may sing,
      “And like a Christian inter him.”

    At midnight’s hour the messengers reach’d
      The hut in the forest, saying:
    “Awake, O Edith the Swanneck, awake,
      “And follow without delaying.

    “The Duke of the Normans as victor hath come,
      “And the routed Saxons are flying,
    “And on the field of Hastings the corpse
      “Of Harold the King is lying.

    “Come with us to Hastings, we’re seeking there
      “The body beneath the dead hidden,
    “To bring it to Waltham Abbey with care,
      “As we by the Abbot are bidden.”

    Then Edith the Swanneck girded herself,
      And not one word she utter’d,
    But follow’d the monks, while her grizzly hair
      In the wind all wildly flutter’d.

    The poor woman follow’d with naked feet,
      And through marsh, wood, and briar on hied they,
    Till the chalky cliffs on the Hastings coast
      At the dawning of day descried they.

    The mist, which like a snowy veil,
      The battle-field was cloaking,
    Dispersed by degrees; the noisy daws
      Were flapping their wings and croaking.

    Many thousand corpses were lying there
      On the earth with blood bespatter’d,
    Stripp’d naked, and mangled, with many a steed
      Among the carcases scatter’d.

    Poor Edith the Swanneck in the blood
      With naked feet now waded;
    No single spot the searching glance
      Of her piercing eye evaded.

    Both here and there she sought, and she oft
      Had to scare away the devouring
    Black troop of ravens that prey’d on the dead;
      The monks behind her were cowering.

    She sought throughout the livelong day,
      Till the shades of the evening were falling;
    When out of the poor woman’s breast there burst
      A shriek both wild and appalling.

    For Edith the Swanneck had found at last
      The corpse of the king, poor creature!
    No word she utter’d, no tear she wept,
      She kiss’d each pallid feature.

    She kiss’d his forehead, she kiss’d his mouth,
      Her arms encircled him tightly;
    She kiss’d the bloody breast of the king,
      Disfigured by wounds unsightly.

    Upon his shoulder she likewise spied,--
      And cover’d them over with kisses,--
    Three little scars that her teeth had made,
      The signs of their former blisses.

    And in the meantime the pair of monks
      Some branches of trees collected;
    These form’d the bier, on which they bore
      The body, with hearts dejected.

    To Waltham Abbey the body they took,
      To bury it rightly and duly,
    And Edith the Swanneck follow’d the corpse
      Of him she had loved so truly.

    The litanies for the dead she sang
      In childlike pious fashion,
    And in the night they fearfully rang,--
      The monks pray’d, full of compassion.


~CHARLES I~

    In the charcoal-burner’s hut in the wood
      Sits the king, an object of pity;
    The charcoal-burner’s child’s cradle he rocks,
      And sings this monotonous ditty:

    “Eiapopeia, why rustles the straw?
      “The sheep in the stalls bleat loudly;
    “Thou bearest the sign on thy forehead, and smil’st
      “In thy sleep so wildly and proudly.

    “Eiapopeia, thou bear’st on thy brow
      “The sign,--and dead is the kitten;
    “When grown to manhood, thou’lt flourish the axe,
      “And the oak in the wood will be smitten.

    “The charcoal-burner’s religion is dead,
      “And now no longer receive they,--
    “Eiapopeia,--the faith in a God,
      “Still less in the king believe they.

    “The kitten is dead, and the mice rejoice
      “And we from their presence are driven,--
    “Eiapopeia,--I, monarch on earth,
      “And God, the monarch in heaven.

    “My heart grows sicker day by day,
      “My brow grows sterner and sterner;
    “Eiapopeia,--my headsman art thou,
      “Thou child of the charcoal-burner!

    “My song of death is thy cradle-song--
      “Eiapopeia--thou’lt fumble
    “My grey locks about, and cut them off,--
      “Thine axe on my neck will tumble.

    “Eiapopeia,--why rustles the straw?
      “Thou hast gained a kingdom splendid;
    “Thou strikest off from my body my head,--
      “The life of the kitten is ended.

    “Eiapopeia,--why rustles the straw?
      “The sheep in the stalls bleat loudly;
    “The kitten is dead, and the mice rejoice,--
      “My dear little headsman, sleep proudly!”


~MARIE ANTOINETTE~

    The plate-glass windows gleam in the sun
      In the Tuileries Castle gaily;
    And yet the well-known spectres of old
      Still walk about in it daily.

    Queen Marie Antoinette still doth haunt
      The famous pavilion of Flora;
    With strict etiquette she holds her court
      At each return of Aurora.

    Full dress’d are the ladies,--they most of them stand,
      On tabourets others are sitting,
    With dresses of satin and gold brocade,
      Hung with lace and jewels befitting.

    Their waists are small, their hoop-petticoats swell,
      And from underneath them are peeping
    Their high-heel’d feet, that so pretty appear,--
      If their heads were but still in their keeping!

    Not one of the number a head has on,
      The queen herself in that article
    Is wanting, and so Her Majesty boasts
      Of frizzling not one particle.

    Yes, she with toupée as high as a tower,
      In dignity so resplendent,
    Maria Theresa’s daughter fair,
      The German Cæsar’s descendant,

    She, curlless and headless, now must walk
      Amongst her maids of honour,
    Who, equally headless and void of curls,
      Are humbly waiting upon her.

    All this from the French Revolution has sprung,
      And its doctrines so pernicious,
    From Jean Jacques Rousseau and the guillotine,
      And Voltaire the malicious.

    Yet strange though it be, I shrewdly think
      That none of these hapless creatures
    Have ever observed how dead they are,
      How devoid of head and features.

    The first _dame d’atour_ a linen shift brings,
      And makes a reverence lowly;
    The second hands it to the queen,
      And both retire then slowly.

    The third and fourth ladies curtsy and kneel
      Before the queen discreetly,
    That they may be able to draw on
      Her Majesty’s stockings neatly.

    A maid of honour curtsying brings
      Her Majesty’s robe for the morning;
    Another with curtsies her petticoat holds
      And assists at the queen’s adorning.

    The mistress of the robes with her fan
      Stands by, the time beguiling;
    And as her head is unhappily gone,
      With her other end she is smiling.

    The sun his inquisitive glances throws
      Inside the draperied casement;
    But when the apparitions he sees,
      He starts in fearful amazement.


~THE SILESIAN WEAVERS~

    No tears from their gloomy eyes are flowing,
    They sit at the loom, their white teeth showing:
    “Thy shroud, O Germany, now weave we,
    “A threefold curse we’re weaving for thee,--
            “We’re weaving, we’re weaving!

    “A curse on the God to whom our petition
    “We vainly address’d when in starving condition;
    “In vain did we hope, and in vain did we wait,
    “He only derided and mock’d our sad fate,--
            “‘re weaving, we’re weaving!

    “A curse on the King of the wealthy, whom often
    “Our misery vainly attempted to soften;
    “Who takes away e’en the last penny we’ve got,
    “And lets us like dogs in the highway be shot,--
            “We’re weaving, we’re weaving!

    “A curse on our fatherland false and contriving,
    “Where shame and disgrace alone are seen thriving,
    “Where flowers are pluck’d before they unfold,
    “Where batten the worms on corruption and mould,--
            “We’re weaving, we’re weaving!

    “The shuttle is flying, the loom creaks away,
    “We’re weaving busily night and day;
    “Thy shroud, Old Germany, now weave we,
    “A threefold curse we’re weaving for thee,--
            “We’re weaving, we’re weaving!”


~POMARE~

1.

    All the gods of love are shouting
      In my heart, and blowing airy
    Flourishes, and crying: “Hail!
      “Hail, thou mighty queen Pomare!”

    Not the queen of Otaheite
      Whom ’twas missionaries’ duty
    To convert; no, she I mean
      Is a wild untutor’d beauty.

    Twice in every week appears she,
      All her subjects quite entrancing
    In that dear Jardin Mabille,
      Waltzes and the polka dancing.

    Majesty in all her footsteps,
      Grace and beauty ne’er forsake her,
    Quite a princess every inch,
      Whichsoever way you take her.

    Thus she dances--gods of love are
      In my heart all blowing airy
    Flourishes, and crying: “Hail!
      “Hail, thou mighty queen Pomare!”


2.

    She dances. How her figure sways!
    What grace her every limb displays!
    There’s as much flitting, leaping, swinging,
    As if she from her skin were springing.

    She dances. When she twirls with skill
    Upon one foot, and then stands still
    At last with both her arms extended,
    My very reason seems suspended.

    She dances. ’Tis the very same
    That once Herodias’ daughter came
    And danced to Herod. As she dances,
    Her eye casts round it deadly glances.

    She’ll dance me frantic. Woman, say,
    What shall be thy reward to-day?
    Thou smil’st? Quick, herald! to the gateway
    Decapitate the Baptist straightway!


3.

    Yesterday for very bread,
    In the mire she wallowèd;
    But to-day, with pride o’erbearing,
    In her carriage takes an airing.
    On its silken cushions she
    Rests her head, and haughtily
    Looks upon the thronging masses
    Whom on foot her carriage passes.
    When I see thee travelling so,
    Then my heart is fill’d with woe!
    Ah, this carriage,--so prepare thee,--
    To the hospital will bear thee,
    Where unfeeling cruel death
    Soon will take away thy breath,
    And the student, with coarse greasy
    Prentice hand, so free and easy,
    Will cut up thy body fair
    Anatomically there;
    And at Montfaucon thy horses
    At the knacker’s end their courses.


4.

    Thou hast been by fate befriended
      Better than at first I said;
    God be praised, all now is ended!
      God be praised, and thou art dead!

    In thy poor and agèd mother’s
      Garret thou at length didst die.
    She, with love beyond all others,
      Closed thy fair eyes tenderly.

    She a winding-sheet bought duly,
      And a coffin, and a grave;
    Somewhat close and wretched truly
      Was the funeral that they gave.

    No priests at that funeral lonely
      Sang, no bell toll’d mournfully;
    Thy _friseur_ and poodle only
      As thy mourners follow’d thee.

    “Ah!” the former sigh’d: “I often
      “Used to comb Pomare’s hair,
    “And her long black tresses soften,
      “Sitting in her easy chair!”

    But the dog,--away he scamper’d
      At the churchyard gate anon,
    And was lodged and fed and pamper’d
      Afterwards by Rose Pompon.

    She, the Provençaler, grudged thee
      Thy hard-earnèd name of queen,
    As a hated rival judged thee,
      Made thee victim of her spleen.

    Ah, poor queen of jests diurnal,
      With thy mud crown on thy head,
    Thou art saved by God’s eternal
      Goodness, thou at last art dead.

    As thy mother, so thy Father
      Mercy show’d thee from above;
    This He did, methinks, the rather
      In that thou so much didst love.


~THE APOLLO GOD~

1.


    The convent stands high on the rocky steep,
      The Rhine beneath it glistens;
    The youthful nun doth eagerly peep
      Through the lattice window, and listens.

    A bark of fable is sailing past,
      By the evening glow tinged brightly;
    While chequer’d pennons stream from the mast,
      With laurels and flowers crown’d lightly.

    Amid-ship stands a beauteous youth,
      With flowing auburn tresses;
    Of very ancient cut, in truth,
      His gold and purple dress is.

    Before his feet nine women lie,
      Of marble-lovely graces;
    A tunic fair and loop’d up high
      Each slender form embraces.

    The golden-tress’d one sweetly sings,
      And likewise plays his lyre;
    The song the poor nun’s bosom stings,
      And sets it all on fire.

    She makes a cross, and once again
      The nun repeats the measure;
    The cross scares not her blissful pain,
      Nor checks her bitter pleasure.


2.

    I am the god of music bright,
      Revered in every nation;
    In Greece, on Mount Parnassus’ height,
      My temple had its station.

    In Greece I oft have sat and play’d
      On famed Parnassus’ mountain,
    Beneath the cypress’ pleasant shade,
      Beside Castalia’s fountain.

    My daughters sat around their Pa,
      And raised a vocal chorus;
    They sweetly sang: la-la, la-la!
      While laughter floated o’er us.

    The bugle rang: tra-ra, tra-ra!
      From out the forest loudly;
    There hunted Artemisia,
      My little sister, proudly.

    And whensoe’er I took some sips,--
      I can’t describe it neatly,--
    From out Castalia’s fount, my lips
      Burst into music sweetly.

    I sang--my lyre, as it replied,
      O’er its own chords seem’d sweeping;
    I felt as if I Daphne spied
      Behind the laurels peeping.

    I sang--ambrosial incense stream’d,
      And lightly o’er me hover’d;
    And the whole world around me seem’d
      By a bright halo cover’d.

    A thousand years from Grecia’s land
      Have I been sadly banish’d;
    Yet hath my heart in Grecia’s land
      Remain’d, though I have vanish’d.


3.

    In the costume of the Beguins,
    In the cloak with cap upon it
    Of the coarsest blackest serge,
    Is the youthful nun envelop’d.

    Hastily along the Rhine banks
    Paces she adown the highway
    On the road to Holland, asking
    Eagerly of every passer:

    “Hast thou chanced to see Apollo?
    “He a scarlet cloak is wearing,
    “Sweetly sings he, plays the lyre,
    “And he is my darling idol.”

    None will answer her inquiry,
    Many turn their backs in silence,
    Many stare upon her smiling,
    Many sigh: “Alas, poor creature!”

    But along the highway trotting
    Comes a slovenly old man;
    Making figures in the air, he
    Keeps on singing through his nose.

    He a clumsy wallet carries,
    And a little hat three-corner’d,
    And with sharp and smiling eyes he
    Listens to the nun’s inquiry:

    “Hast thou chanced to see Apollo?
    “He a scarlet cloak is wearing,
    “Sweetly sings he, plays the lyre,
    “And he is my darling idol.”

    He however gave this answer,
    Whilst his little head he waggled
    Here and there, and comically
    At his sharp beard kept on twitching:

    “Have I chanced to see Apollo?
    “Yes, I certainly have seen him
    “When at Amsterdam full often,
    “In the German synagogue.

    “He was there the leading singer,
    “Known by name of Rabbi Faibisch,
    “Which in High-Dutch means Apollo,--
    “But he’s not my idol truly.

    “Scarlet cloak? His scarlet cloak too
    “I remember; genuine scarlet,
    “And the price per ell eight florins,--
    “Not all paid for to this moment.

    “His old father, Moses Jitscher,
    “Know I well; he’s circumciser
    “To the Portuguese, I fancy,
    “And to various sovereigns also.

    “And his mother is a cousin
    “Of my sister’s husband, trading
    “On the Gracht in pickled gherkins,
    “And in worn-out pairs of breeches.

    “In their son they take no pleasure;
    “On the lyre he plays not badly,
    “But, I grieve to say, far better
    “Plays he at taroc and ombre.

    “He is likewise a free-thinker,
    “Lost his place through eating swine’s flesh,
    “And then travell’d round the country
    “With some painted low comedians.

    “In the shops and on the markets
    “Has he acted as Jack-pudding,
    “Holofernes, or King David,
    “But the latter most excell’d in.

    “For the king’s own sorrows sang he
    “In the king’s own mother language,
    “Giving all the proper quavers
    “In the proper olden fashion.

    “Recently some wenches took he
    “From the Amsterdam casino,
    “And he’s travelling with these Muses
    “Round the country as Apollo.

    “One amongst them is a stout one,
    “Squeaking very much and grunting:
    “On account of her green laurel
    “Head-dress, they ‘the green sow’ call her.”


~HYMN TO KING LOUIS~

    Behold great Louis, Bavaria’s king,
      Few monarchs are half so splendid;
    In him a king the Bavarians revere,
      From an ancient line descended.

    He’s fond of art: fair women to get
      For their portraits to sit, is his passion:
    In this painted seraglio takes he his walks,
      In eunuch-artistic fashion.

    A marble place of skulls hath he
      Near Ratisbon constructed,
    And all the arrangements for every head
      In his own royal person conducted.

    Walhalla-companions! A masterpiece,
      Where the merit of every man is
    Set forth, with his character and his acts,
      From Teut to Schinderhannes.

    But Luther, the blockhead, amongst them all,
      Has no place in this proud mausoleum;
    The whale ’mongst the fishes is often left out
      In a natural hist’ry museum.

    King Louis is also a poet renown’d;
      Whenever sings or plays he,
    Apollo falls down at his feet and exclaims:
      “O stop, or you’ll drive me quite crazy!”

    King Louis is also a hero renown’d,
      Like his child, his little son, Otho,
    Who was chosen to sit on the throne of Greece
      (He disgraced it long ago, tho’).

    When Louis dies, he’ll canonised be
      At Rome by the holy Father;
    A cat with ruffles a face like his
      With its Glory will look like rather.

    As soon as the monkeys and kangaroos
      Are converted to Christianity,
    They’ll make St. Louis their guardian saint,
      In proof of their perfect sanity.


~TWO KNIGHTS~

    Crapulinski and Waschlapski,
      Poles in Poland born and bred,
    Fought for their dear country’s freedom
      ’Gainst the Russian tyrant dread.

    Boldly did they fight, and lastly
      Found at Paris a retreat;
    Living, just as much as dying
      For one’s fatherland, is sweet.

    Like Achilles and Patroclus,
      David and his Jonathan,
    Loved the pair of Poles each other,
      Kiss’d, and said: “Kochan! Kochan!”

    Neither e’er betray’d the other,
      Both were faithful friends and true,
    Notwithstanding that they Poles were,
      Born and bred in Poland too.

    They the same apartment dwelt in,
      In the selfsame bed slept they,
    And in noble emulation
      Scratch’d themselves by night and day.

    In the selfsame beershop dined they,
      And as neither was content
    That the other paid his reckoning,
      Neither ever paid a cent.

    ’Twas the selfsame washerwoman
      Did the washing for the pair;
    Humming, for their linen came she
      Every month to wash and air.

    Yes, they really had their linen,
      Each one had two shirts, well-worn,
    Notwithstanding that they Poles were,
      Poles in Poland bred and born.

    They to-day sit near the chimney,
      Where the flames a bright glow cast;
    Out of doors are night, a snowstorm,
      And the coaches driving past.

    They a mighty bowl of punch have
      Drain’d already and devour’d;
    (Understand me, ’twas unsugar’d,
      And unwater’d and unsour’d.)

    Sorrow o’er their souls is creeping,
      Tears their furrow’d faces streak:
    With a voice of deep emotion
      Thus doth Crapulinski speak;

    “Would that I had here in Paris
      “My dear bearskin, my old cotton
    “Dressing-gown, my catskin-nightcap,
      “In my fatherland forgotten!”

    Thus to him replied Waschlapski:
      “O thou art a driv’ller true;
    “Of thy home thou’rt over thinking,
      “Catskin-nightcap, bearskin too.

    “Poland has not yet quite perish’d,
      “Still our wives to sons give birth,
    “And our girls will do so likewise,
      “And produce us men of worth,

    “Heroes, like great Sobieski,
      “Like Schelmufski and Uminski,
    “Eskrokewitsch, Schubiakski,
      “And the mighty Eselinski.”


~OUR MARINE~

(A Nautical tale.)


    A dream of a fleet we lately dreamt,
      And enjoy’d a sail delicious
    Far over the wide and boundless sea,
      The wind was quite propitious.

    We gave our frigates the proudest names
      That we in our calendar reckon’d;
    One Hoffmann of Fallersleben we call’d,
      And Prutz we christen’d the second.

    There floated the cutter Freiligrath,
      Whereon was seen the figure
    Of the Moorish king, which gazed below
      Like a moon (but as black as a nigger).

    There floated Gustavus Schwab as well,
      A Pfizer, a Kölle, a Mayer;
    On each of them stood a Swabian face,
      Each holding a wooden lyre.

    There floated Birch-Pfeiffer, a brig which bore
      On its mast the escutcheon olden
    Of the famous German Admiralty,
      On tatters black-red-golden.

    We boldly clamber’d on bowsprit and yard,
      And bore ourselves like sailors;
    Our jackets were short, our hats betarr’d,
      And our trousers as big as a tailor’s.

    Full many, who formerly sipp’d but tea
      As husbands kind and forbearing,
    Now drank their rum, their pigtail chew’d,
      And, seaman-like, took to swearing.

    So bright was our vision, we well nigh won
      A naval victory splendid;
    But when return’d the morning sun,
      Both fleet and vision had ended.

    We still were lying at home in bed,
      Our limbs all over it sprawling;
    We rubbed the sleep from out of our eyes,
      The following wise speech bawling:

    “The world is round; why seek to be tost
      “On the idle billows, faint-hearted?
    “When we sail round the world, at last we return
      “To the point from which we started.”


~THE GOLDEN CALF~

    Fiddle, flute, and horn uniting,
    To the idol-dance inviting--
    Round the golden calf with springing
      All of Jacob’s daughters come--
      Brum--brum--brum--
    Kettle drums and laughter ringing!

    Girding up their tunics lightly,
    Clasping hands together tightly,
    Noble maidens, off’rings bringing,
      Twist, like whirlwinds at the least,
      Round the beast--
    Kettle drums and laughter ringing!

    Aaron’s self joins in the mazy
    Circling dance with motions crazy;
    His concerns not looking after,
      Skips he, in his high-priest’s coat,
      Like a goat--
    Kettle drums and ringing laughter!


~KING DAVID~

    Despots smiling yield their breath,
    Knowing after their own death
    That their slaves but change their master,
    And, if anything, work faster.

    Ah, poor race! like horse and bull
    They the waggons still must pull,
    And their backs will soon be broken
    If they heed not what is spoken.

    David said to Solomon
    On his deathbed: “List, my son!
    “My most dreaded foe of course is
    “Joab, general of my forces.

    “This brave general many a year
    “I have view’d with hate and fear;
    “But, however I detest him,
    “I ne’er ventured to arrest him.

    “Thou, my son, of sterner stuff,
    “Fearing God, art strong enough;
    “’Tis for thee an easy matter
    “That said Joab’s brains to scatter.”


~KING RICHARD~

    Through the silent glades of the forest there springs
      An eager horseman proudly;
    He blows his horn, he laughs, and he sings
      Exultingly and loudly.

    His armour is made of the brass most strong,
      But stronger still is his bosom;
    ’Tis Cœur de Lion that’s riding along,
      That Christian chivalry’s blossom.

    “Thou’rt welcome to England!” each verdant bough
      “Exclaims with joyous assurance;
    “We’re heartily glad, O monarch, that thou
      “Hast escap’d from thine Austrian durance.”

    The king snuffs up the free air the while,
      Like a newborn creature lives he;
    He thinks of his Austrian dungeon vile,--
      And his spurs to his proud horse gives he.


~THE ASRA~

    Daily went the wondrous lovely
    Sultan’s daughter at the cooling
    Hour of evening to the fountain,
    Where the waters white were plashing.

    Daily at the hour of evening
    Stood the young slave at the fountain
    Where the waters white were plashing,
    Daily grew he pale and paler.

    And one evening came the princess,
    And these sudden words address’d him:
    “Thou must tell me what thy name is,
    “And thy country and thy kindred!”

    And the slave replied: “My name is
    “Mahomet, I came from Yemmen,
    “And my race is of those Asras,
    “Who, whene’er they love, must perish.”


~THE NUNS~

    Who at night the convent walls
      Passes, sees the windows brightly
    Lighted up, for there the spectres
      Make their gloomy circuit nightly.

    ’Tis dead Ursulines that join
      In the sad and dark procession;
    From the linen hoods are peeping
      Faces young of sweet expression.

    Tapers bear they in their hands,
      Glimm’ring bloodred and mysterious
    Strangely echo in the crossway
      Whispers low, wails sad and serious.

    To the church the train moves on;
      Sitting on the wooden benches
    Of the quire, their mournful chorus
      Straight begin the’ unhappy wenches.

    Like a litany it sounds,
      But the words are wild and shocking
    They are poor and outcast spirits
      At the heavenly portal knocking.

    “Brides of Christ we used to be,
      “But by love of earth were chainèd,
    “And we render’d unto Cæsar
      “Things that unto God pertainèd.

    “Charming is a uniform
      “And mustachios smooth and shining
    “For the epaulettes of Cæsar
      “Were our hearts in secret pining.

    “Antlers to the brow we gave
      “By our shameless ill behaviour,
    “Which the crown of thorns once carried,--
      “We betray’d our heavenly Saviour.

    “Jesus,--mercy’s very self,--
      “Softly wept o’er our transgression,
    “And he said: ‘Your souls be cursèd
      “‘For disgracing your profession!’

    “Grave-sprung spectres of the night,
      “We must wander in these dreary
    “Walls, our folly to atone for,--
      “Miserere! Miserere!

    “Ah, within the grave ’tis well!
      “Though indeed ’tis far more cheery
    “In the glowing realms of heaven,--
      “Miserere! Miserere!

    “Jesus sweet, forgive at length
      “Our transgression sad and weary;
    “Let us feel the warmth of heaven,--
      “Miserere! Miserere!”

    Thus the troop of nuns sing on,
      And a long-dead clerk is playing
    On the organ. Hands of spirits
      O’er the keys are wildly straying.


~PALSGRAVINE JUTTA~

    The Palsgravine Jutta, in bark so light,
    Is crossing the Rhine in the moonlight bright;
    The Countess speaks, while rows the maid:
    “Hast thou yon seven corpses survey’d
        “That, seeking to find us,
        “Are floating behind us?--
    “So sadly are floating the corpses!

    “Seven knights were they, who their love confess’d,
    “And tenderly sank on my heaving breast,
    “And swore to be faithful; so, certain to make
    “That they their oaths should never break,
        “I seized and bound them,
        “And straightway drown’d them,--
    “So sadly are floating the corpses!”

    The Countess laughs, while the maiden rows,
    Through the air her laughter scornfully goes;
    From the water the corpses rise high as the thigh,
    And point with their fingers towards the sky,
        In token of swearing,
        With glassy eyes staring--
    So sadly are floating the corpses!


~THE MOORISH KING~

    To the Alpuxarres’ exile
    Went the youthful Moorish monarch;
    Silent and with heart full mournful
    Heading the procession rode he.

    And behind, on lofty palfreys
    Or in golden litters riding,
    Sat the women of his household;
    Swarthy maids on mules were sitting.

    And a hundred trusty followers
    Rode on noble Arab horses;
    Haughty steeds, and yet the riders
    Carelessly bestrode the saddles.

    Not a drum and not a cymbal,
    Not a single song resounded;
    Silver bells upon the mules, though,
    Echoed sadly in the silence.

    On the height, from whence the glances
    Sweep across the Duero valley,
    And Granada’s battlements
    For the last time rise before one,

    There the mournful king dismounted,
    And he gazed upon the city
    Glittering in the light of evening,
    As though deck’d with gold and purple.

    But, great Allah! what a sight ’twas!
    In the place of that dear crescent
    Gleam’d the Spaniard’s cross and standard
    On the tow’rs of the Alhambra.

    Ah! deep sighs at this discov’ry
    Broke from out the monarch’s bosom;
    Suddenly the tears ’gan falling
    Like a torrent down his cheeks.

    Sadly from her lofty palfrey
    Downward gazed the monarch’s mother,
    Looking on her son’s affliction;
    Proudly, bitterly, she chided:

    “Boabdil el Chico,” said she,
    “Like a woman thou bewailest
    “Yonder town, which thou neglectedst
    “To defend with manly courage.”

    When the monarch’s dearest mistress
    Heard these words, so harsh and cruel,
    Hastily she left her litter,
    Her lord’s neck embracing fondly.

    “Boabdil el Chico,” said she,
    “Comfort take, my heart-belov’d one!
    “From the deep abyss of sorrow
    “Blossoms forth a beauteous laurel.

    “Not alone the glorious victor,
    “Not alone the proud triumphant
    “Fav’rite of the blind jade Fortune,
    “But misfortune’s bloody son, too,

    “And the’ heroic-fighting warrior,
    “Who to destiny o’erpow’ring
    “Has succumb’d, will live for ever
    “In the memory of mortals.”--

    “Mountain of the Moor’s last sigh”
    To this very moment call they
    Yonder height from whence the monarch
    For the last time saw Granada.

    Time has now fulfill’d full sweetly
    His beloved one’s prophecy,
    And the Moorish monarch’s name is
    Reverenced and held in honour.

    Never will his glory vanish,
    Never, till the last chord’s broken
    Of the last guitar remaining
    In the land of Andalusia.


~GEOFFRY RUDÈL AND MELISANDA OF TRIPOLI~

    In the Château Blay still see we
      Tapestry the walls adorning,
    Worked by Tripoli’s fair countess’
      Own fair hands, no labour scorning.

    Her whole soul was woven in it,
      And with loving tears and tender
    Hallow’d is the silken picture,
      Which the following scene doth render:

    How the Countess saw Rudèl
      Dying on the strand of ocean,
    And the’ ideal in his features
      Traced of all her heart’s emotion.

    For the first and last time also
      Living saw Rudèl and breathing
    Her who in his every vision
     Intertwining was and wreathing.

    Over him the Countess bends her,
      Lovingly his form she raises,
    And his deadly-pale mouth kisses,
      That so sweetly sang her praises.

    Ah! the kiss of welcome likewise
      Was the kiss of separation,
    And they drain’d the cup of wildest
      Joy, and deepest desolation.

    In the Château Blay at night-time
      Comes a rushing, crackling, shaking
    On the tapestry the figures
      Suddenly to life are waking.

    Troubadour and lady stretch their
      Drowsy ghostlike members yonder,
    And from out the wall advancing,
      Up and down the hall they wander.

    Whispers fond and gentle toying,
      Sad-sweet secrets, heart-enthralling,
    Posthumous gallánt soft speeches,
      Minnesingers’ times recalling:

    “Geoffry! At thy voice’s music
      “Warmth is in my dead heart glowing,
    “And I feel once more a glimmer
      “In the long-quench’d embers growing!”

    “Melisanda! I awaken
      “Unto happiness and gladness,
    “When I see thine eyes; dead only
      “Is my earthly pain and sadness.”

    “Geoffry! Once we loved each other
      “In our dreams; now, cut asunder
    “By the hand of death, still love we,--
      “Amor ’tis that wrought this wonder!”

    “Melisanda! What are dreams?
      “What is death? Mere words to scare one!
    “Truth in love alone e’er find we,
      “And I love thee, ever fair one!”

    “Geoffry! O how sweet our meetings
      “In this moonlit chamber nightly,
    “Now that in the day’s bright sunbeams
      “I no more shall wander lightly.”

    “Melisanda! Foolish dear one!
      “Thou art light and sun, thou knowest!
    “Love and joys of May are budding,
      “Spring is blooming, where thou goest!”--

    Thus those tender spectres wander
      Up and down, and sweet caresses
    Interchange, whilst peeps the moonlight
      Through the window’s arch’d recesses.

    But at length the rays of morning
      Scare away the fond illusion;
    To the tapestry retreat they
      On the wall, in shy confusion.


~THE POET FERDUSI~

1.

    Men of gold, and men of silver!
    When a fool about a thoman
    Talks, of silver he is speaking,
    And he means a silver thoman.

    In a prince’s mouth, however,
    Or a shah’s, a thoman’s always
    Golden, for a shah will only
    Give and take in golden thomans.

    Worthy people have this notion,
    And Ferdusi thought so also,
    The composer of the famous
    And immortal work _Schah Nameh_.

    This divine heroic poem
    At the Shah’s command composed he,
    Who for every verse a thoman
    Promised to bestow upon him.

    Seventeen times bloom’d the roses,
    Seventeen times did they wither,
    And the nightingales sang sweetly
    And were silent seventeen times,--

    And meanwhile the bard was sitting
    At the loom of thought, composing
    Day and night, and nimbly weaving
    His sweet numbers’ giant-carpet,--

    Giant-carpet, where the poet
    Interwove with skill his country’s
    Chronicles from times of fable,
    Farsistan’s primeval monarchs,

    Fav’rite heroes of his nation,
    Knightly deeds, adventures wondrous,
    Magic beings, hateful demons,
    Intertwined with flowers of fable.

    All were blooming, all were living,
    Bright with colours, glowing, burning,
    With the heavenly rays illumin’d
    From the sacred light of Iran,

    From the godlike light primeval,
    Whose last pure and fiery temple,
    Spite of Koran and of Mufti,
    In the poet’s heart flam’d brightly.

    When at last the work was finish’d,
    Then the manuscript the poet
    Sent to his illustrious patron,
    E’en two hundred thousand verses.

    It was in the public bath room,
    In the bathing place at Gasna,
    That the Shah’s black messengers
    Found at last the bard Ferdusi.

    Each a bag of money carried,
    Which before the poet’s feet he
    Kneeling placed, to be the guerdon
    To reward his minstrel labours.

    Hastily the poet open’d
    Both the bags, his eyes to gladden
    With the gold so long kept from him,--
    When he saw with consternation

    That the bags contain’d within them
    Silver only, silver thomans,
    Some two hundred thousand of them;--
    Bitterly then laugh’d the poet.

    Laughing bitterly, the money
    He divided in three equal
    Portions, and a third part gave he
    To the two black messengers,

    Each a third, to be his guerdon
    For the message, and the third part
    Gave he to the man who waited
    On his bath, as drinking-money.

    Then his pilgrim staff he straightway
    Grasp’d, and left at once the city,
    And before the gate the dust he
    From his very shoes rejected.


2.

    “Had he been, like other men,
      “Heedless of his words once spoken,
      “And his promise merely broken,
    “I had not been angry then.

    “Suffer _this_? I never will!
      “His deceit my heart amazes,
      “Both his double-meaning phrases,
    “And his silence, falser still.

    “He was noble, fair to see,
      “Proud his gestures were, and stately;
      “Other men excell’d he greatly,
    “Every inch a king was he.

    “Firelike did his glance once meet me,
      “As the sun in yonder heaven
      “He, truth’s haughty image even--
    “And he yet hath deign’d to cheat me.”


3.

    Shah Mahomet full well has dined,
    And his soul to be merry is fully inclined.

    In the garden at twilight, on purple seat
    He sits by the fountain. Its splashing sounds sweet,

    With looks respectful his servants stand:
    His fav’rite Ansari’s amongst the band.

    From marble vases a fiery gush
    Of luxuriant flowers appears to rush.

    Like Odalisques with graceful arms
    Stand fanning themselves the slender palms.

    The cypresses stand with branches unfurl’d,
    As if dreaming of heaven, forgetting the world.

    But sudden to strains of the lute ere long
    Is heard a gentle mysterious song.

    The Shah sprang up, as if sorely perplex’d:
    “Who wrote of this song the charming text?”

    Ansari, from whom he sought to know it,
    Replied: “’Tis the work of Ferdusi the poet.”

    “Ferdusi!”--exclaim’d the prince in dismay,--
    “Where is he? How fares the poet, O say!”

    “Ansari gave answer: “In poverty great
    “He has lived full long in a mournful state

    “At Thus, the native town of the bard,
    “Where he in his garden works full hard.”

    Shah Mahomet paused, and presently said:
    “Ansari, a thought has come in my head.

    “To my stables make haste, and with hands unthrifty
    “Take a hundred mules, and camels fifty.

    “And lade them all with every treasure
    “That fills the heart of a mortal with pleasure,

    “With splendid articles, rich and rare,
    “With costly dresses and furniture fair

    “Of sandal wood and ivory white,
    “With gold and silver tissues dight;

    “With precious-handled goblets and pots,
    “And leopard-skins, all cover’d with spots,

    “With carpets and shawls and the richest brocade
    “That in my kingdom has ever been made.

    “And don’t forget to pack with the rest
    “Some glittering arms, and of housings the best,

    “As well as drinks of every kind
    “And eatables such as in pots we find,

    “And almond cakes and sweetmeats Egyptian,
    “And gingerbread of every description.

    “And also add a dozen steeds
    “As swift as arrows, of Arab breeds,

    “And likewise a dozen slaves, black as coals,
    “With bodies of steel, and sturdy souls.

    “Ansari, when all these things thou hast got,
    “Thou must start on thy journey, and linger not.

    “Thou must take them all with my kind regard
    “To Thus, to Ferdusi, the mighty bard.”--

    Ansari fulfill’d his lord’s behest,
    And loaded the camels and mules with the best

    And costliest presents, the value of which
    Was enough to make a whole province quite rich.

    In propriâ personâ he left at last
    The palace, when some three days had past,

    And with a general’s banner red
    In front of the caravan he sped.

    At the end of a week to Thus came they;
    The town at the foot of the mountain lay.

    The caravan the western gate
    With shouts and noises entered straight.

    The trumpets sounded, the loud drums beat,
    And songs of triumph rang through the street.

    “La Illa Il Allah!” with joyous shout
    The camel drivers were calling out.

    But through the East gate at the farther end
    Of Thus, at that moment chanced to wend

    The funeral train so full of gloom,
    That the dead Ferdusi bore to his tomb.


~VOYAGE BY NIGHT~

    The half-moon peer’d from the darksome clouds
      With coyness, while rock’d the sea;
    And when in the bark our places we took,
      Our number then was three.

    There plash’d in the water the strokes of the oar
      With sad monotony;
    White foaming billows came with a roar,
      And sprinkled all of us three.

    She stood in the bark, as pale, as slim,
      As void of motion too,
    As though she a marble statue were,
      Diana’s image true.

    The moon disappear’d. The nightwind piped
      With chilly blast on high;
    When over our heads there suddenly rose
      A wild and piercing cry.

    ’Twas the white and ghostlike seamew’s voice,
      And at that terrible cry,
    Which fearfully rang like a warning call,
      All three felt like to die.

    Am I in a fever? A vision is this
      Of nightly phantasy?
    Am I aped by a dream? I’m dreaming a dream
      Of wild buffoonery.

    Buffoonery wild! Methinks in my dream
      That I a Saviour am;
    And faithfully bear the weight of the Cross,
      As gentle as a lamb.

    Poor beauty beside me is sore distress’d,
      But soon I’ll set her free
    From sin and shame and sorrow and pain,
      And earthly misery.

    Poor beauty, O be not thou terrified,
      Though bitter the medicine be;
    Although my heart may break, I myself
      Will mete out death to thee.

    O folly wild and terrible dream!
      O madness fearful to see!
    The night is yawning, the ocean yells--
      O God, have mercy on me!

    Have mercy on me, O merciful God!
      O merciful God! Schaddey!
    A Something falls in the sea--Alas!
      Schaddey! Schaddey! Adonay!

    The sun arose, we came to the land,
      Sweet smiled the spring to the view;
    And when at length we left the bark,
      Our number then was two.


~THE PRELUDE~

    This, then, is America!
    This indeed the new world is!
    Not the present, which already
    Europeanized, is with’ring.--

    This indeed the new world is,
    As by Christopher Columbus
    From the ocean extricated;
    In its billowy freshness gleams it,

    With its watery pearls still dripping,
    Which are scatter’d, colour-sprinkling,
    When the sunlight fair it kisses.
    O how healthy this new world is!

    ’Tis no churchyard of romance,
    ’Tis no ancient Scherbenberg,
    All made up of mouldy symbols,
    And of petrified perukes.

    From the healthy earth are shooting
    Healthy trees, and none amongst them
    _Blasé_ is, or has consumption
    Eating up its spinal marrow.

    On the branches are disporting
    Mighty birds. Of chequer’d colours
    Is their plumage. With their solemn
    Lengthy beaks, and eyes encircled

    With black marks, like spectacles,
    They in silence gaze upon thee,
    Till they shriek with sudden clamour
    And like washerwomen chatter.

    Yet I know not what they’re saying,
    Notwithstanding that I’m learned
    In birds’ tongues as Solomon,
    Who a thousand wives rejoiced in,

    And with birds’ tongues was acquainted,--
    Not the modern ones alone,
    But all dialects whatever,
    Whether dead, or old, or worn-out.

    New the land is, new the flowers!
    New the flowers and new the fragrance!
    Fragrance wild, and never heard of,
    Piercing sweetly through my nostrils,

    Teasing, prickling, full of passion--
    And my subtle sense of smelling
    Racks itself with meditating:
    “Where have I e’er smelt this odour?

    “Was’t in Regent Street, perchance,
    “In the sunny arms so yellow
    “Of that Javanese thin woman
    “Who was always eating flowers?

    “Was it else at Rotterdam,
    “Near the Column of Erasmus,
    “In the wafer-shop notorious
    “With its most mysterious curtain?”

    Whilst I in this puzzled fashion
    The new world was contemplating,
    Seeming to instil into it
    Still more bashfulness,--a monkey,

    Who, affrighted, sought the bushes,
    Cross’d himself at my appearance,
    Crying with alarm: “A Spirit!
    “Yes, a Spirit from the old world!”--

    “Monkey, be not thus confounded!
    “I’m no spirit, I’m no spectre;
    “Life within my veins is boiling,
    “I’m life’s most true-hearted son.

    “Yet by living many years
    “With the dead, have I adopted
    “Dead men’s manners very likely,
    “And peculiar ways of thinking.

    “All the fairest years of life
    “Spent I in Kyffhauser’s cavern,
    “In the Venusberg, and other
    “Catacombs of the Romantic.

    “Have no fear of me, good monkey!
    “Thee I like, for on thy hairless
    “Tann’d and shaven hinder-quarters
    “Thou dost bear my fav’rite colours.”--

    Darling colours! Black-red-golden!
    Yes, these monkey-buttock-colours,
    Sorrowfully they remind me
    Of the flag of Barbarossa.


~VITZLIPUTZLI~

1.

    On his head he wore the laurel,
    And upon his boots there glitter’d
    Golden spurs,--but notwithstanding
    He was neither knight nor hero.

    He was but a robber captain,
    Who within the book of glory
    Wrote with his own wicked hand
    His own wicked name of--Cortez.

    Underneath Columbus’ name he
    Wrote his own,--yes, close beneath it,
    And the schoolboy at his lessons
    Learns by heart both names together.

    After Christopher Columbus
    He now names Fernando Cortez,
    As the second greatest man
    In the new world’s proud Pantheon.

    Heroes’ fate’s last stroke of malice!
    That our name should thus be coupled
    With the name of a vile scoundrel
    In the memory of mortals!

    Were’t not better e’en to perish
    All unknown, than draggle with it
    Through eternity’s long ages
    Such a name in comradeship?

    Master Christopher Columbus
    Was a hero,--and his temper,
    That was pure as e’en the sunlight,
    Was as gen’rous in addition.

    Many people much have given,
    But Columbus to the world
    Hath a world entire imparted,
    And ’tis call’d America.

    He had not the power to free us
    From our dreary earthly prison,
    But he managed to enlarge it
    And our heavy chain to lengthen.

    Mortals thankfully revere him,
    Being, not of Europe only,
    But of Africa and Asia,
    Equally quite sick and weary.

    One alone, one hero only
    Gave us more and gave us better
    Than Columbus--that one mean I
    Who a God bestow’d upon us.

    His old father’s name was Amram,
    And his mother’s Jochebed,
    And himself, his name was Moses,
    And he is my greatest hero.

    But, my Pegasus, thou’rt loitering
    Far too long with this Columbus;
    Know thou that our flight to-day is
    With the lesser man,--with Cortez.

    So extend thy colour’d pinions,
    Wingèd steed! and carry me
    To the new world’s beauteous country
    That they Mexico entitle.

    Carry me to yonder castle,
    Which the monarch Montezuma
    Kindly offer’d to his Spanish
    Guests, to be their habitation.

    Not mere food and shelter only
    In extravagant profusion
    Gave the prince these foreign strollers,--
    Presents rich and precious also,

    Valuable, wrought with cunning,
    All of massive gold, and jewels,
    Bear gay witness to the monarch’s
    Generosity and favour.

    This uncivilised, unlearned,
    Superstitious, blinded heathen
    Still believed in faith and honour,
    And the sacredness of guest-right.

    He accepted a proposal
    To be present at a banquet
    That the Spaniards in their castle
    Wish’d to give, to do him honour.

    And with all his court attendants
    Came the inoffensive monarch
    Kindly to the Spanish quarters,
    Where by trumpets he was greeted.

    What they call’d the entertainment
    Know I not. ’Twas very likely
    “Spanish Truth!” of which the author’s
    Name was Don Fernando Cortez.

    Cortez gave the signal--straightway
    They attack’d the peaceful monarch,
    And they bound him and retain’d him
    In the castle as a hostage.

    But poor Montezuma died there,
    And the dam was broken down
    Which the bold adventurers
    From the people’s wrath protected.

    Terribly began the tempest;
    Like a wild and furious ocean
    Raved and bluster’d ever nearer
    The excited human billows.

    Valiantly in truth the Spaniards
    Drove the tempest back. But daily
    Was the castle fresh blockaded,
    And the conflict was exhausting.

    When the King was dead, the convoys
    Of provisions ceased entirely;
    In proportion as the rations
    Shorter grew, each face grew longer.

    With long faces on each other
    Gazed the sons of Spain with sadness,
    And they sigh’d, when they bethought them
    Of their cosy Christian dwellings

    In their cherish’d fatherland,
    Where the pious bells were ringing,
    And upon the hearth there bubbled
    Peaceful olla podridas,

    Thickly studded with garbanzos,
    Under which, with waggish fragrance
    Chuckling famously, were hidden
    Those dear garlic sausages.

    Then the leader held a council,
    And upon retreat decided;
    On the following morn at daybreak
    Was the force to leave the city.

    Easy ’twas for clever Cortez
    Cunningly to gain an entrance,
    But retreat to terra firma
    Offer’d fatal obstacles.

    Mexico, the island city,
    In a mighty lake is founded,
    In the middle, wave-surrounded:
    E’en a haughty water fortress,

    With the continent connected
    But by ships and rafts and bridges,
    Which repose on piles gigantic,
    Little islands forming forts.

    ’Twas before the sun had risen
    That their march began the Spaniards
    Not a single drum was beaten,
    Not a trumpeter was blowing.

    ’Twas their object not to waken
    From their quiet sleep their hosts--
    (For a hundred thousand Indians
    Were encamp’d in Mexico).

    Yet without his host the Spaniard
    Reckon’d, when his plans he settled;
    For the Mexicans had risen
    Earlier still to-day than he had.

    On the rafts and on the bridges,
    On the forts they all were waiting,
    That they to their guests might offer
    Then and there the parting cup.

    On the rafts and forts and bridges
    Ha! a frantic banquet follow’d;
    In red torrents stream’d the blood,
    And the bold carousers struggled,--

    Struggled, body press’d to body,
    And we see on many naked
    Indian breasts the arabesque
    Of the Spanish arms imprinted.

    ’Twas a throttling and a choking
    And a butchery that slowly,
    Sadly slowly, roll’d still onward
    Over rafts and forts and bridges.

    Whilst the Indians sang and bellow’d
    Silently the Spaniards struggled,
    Step by step with toil and labour
    For their flight a footing gaining.

    Fighting thus in narrow passes
    Small to-day the’ advantage lying
    In old Europe’s strategy,
    Or her cannons, armour, horses.

    Many Spaniards in addition
    With the gold were heavy laden,
    Lately captured or extorted--
    Ah! that yellow load of sin

    Lamed and hemm’d them in the conflict,
    And the devilish metal proved
    Not to the poor spirit only
    Ruinous, but to the body.

    And meanwhile the lake around them
    With canoes and barks was cover’d;
    Archers in them sat, all shooting
    At the rafts and forts and bridges.

    True they hit in the confusion
    Many of their Indian brethren,
    But they also hit full many
    Excellent and brave hidalgos.

    On the third bridge fell at last
    Poor young Gaston, who was bearing
    On that day the flag whereon
    Was the Holy Virgin’s image.

    E’en this image’ self was struck
    By the missiles of the Indians;
    Six such missiles were left sticking
    In its very heart,--bright arrows,

    Like those swords of golden colour
    Which transfix the sorrowing bosom
    Of the Mater Dolorosa
    In Good Friday’s sad procession.

    Gaston, when he died, made over
    His proud banner to Gonsalvo,
    Who soon afterwards was stricken
    E’en to death, and died. Then Cortez

    Seized himself the precious banner,
    He, the leader, and he bore it
    On his steed till tow’rd the evening,
    When the fight at length was over.

    On that day a hundred Spaniards
    Fell, and sixty in addition;
    Eighty more alive were taken
    By the Indians’ cruel hands.

    Many of them sorely wounded,
    Who ere long their breath surrender’d
    And a dozen horses, too, were
    Partly kill’d and partly captured.

    Cortez and his army only
    Just at evening gain’d the shelter
    Of the shore, a seacoast planted
    Niggardly with weeping willows.


2.

    When the battle day is over,
    Comes the frantic night of triumph
    So in Mexico a hundred
    Thousand lamps of joy are flaring;

    Hundred thousand lamps of joy, with
    Woodpine torches, pitch-ring fires,
    Throw a light as clear as daylight
    Over palaces and temples,

    And guildhouses,--likewise over
    Vitzliputzli’s splendid temple,
    Idol-fortress built of red brick,
    Strangely like the old Egyptian,

    Babylonian, and Assyrian
    Monster buildings so colossal,
    As we see them in the pictures
    Of the English Henry Martin.

    Yes, it is the same broad staircase,
    So exceeding broad, that on it
    Many thousand Mexicans
    Up and down are walking freely,

    Whilst upon the steps are lying
    Mighty troops of savage warriors,
    Banqueting in joyous fashion,
    Flush’d with triumph and with palm-wine.

    This great staircase leadeth upwards
    Like a zigzag to the platform,
    By a balustrade surrounded
    At the summit of the temple.

    There, upon his altar-throne,
    Sits the mighty Vitzliputzli,
    Mexico’s bloodthirsty wargod.--
    He is but an evil monster,

    But so droll is his exterior,
    Full of carvings, and so childish,
    That despite our inward horror
    It must needs excite our laughter.

    His appearance altogether
    Brought to mind a combination
    Of the “Dance of Death” at Basle,
    And the Mannekin at Brussels.

    On the god’s left side his priests are
    Station’d, on his right the people;
    Ornaments of colour’d feathers
    Are to-day the former wearing.

    On the altar-stairs of marble
    Squats a man a hundred years old;
    On his chin and skull no hair is,
    And he wears a scarlet waistcoat.

    He’s the priest of sacrifices,
    And his bloody knife he’s whetting;
    As he whets, he grins, and ofttimes
    Leers upon the god above him.

    Vitzliputzli seems the glances
    Of his servant to appreciate,
    And he twitches every eyelash,
    And his lips at times he twitches.

    On the altar steps squat also
    The musicians of the temple,
    Kettle-drummers, cowhorn blowers--
    Loud the clatter, loud the tooting!

    Loud the clatter, loud the tooting!
    And the Mexican Te Deum
    Rises up in noisy chorus,
    As if many cats were mewing--

    As if many cats were mewing,
    But of that enlarged description
    Which are “tiger-cats” entitled,
    And, instead of mice, eat people!

    When the nightwind carries with it
    These loud noises to the seashore,
    The poor Spaniards there encamping
    Feel sensations far from pleasant.

    Sadly ’neath the weeping willows
    Are the Spaniards still remaining,
    Gazing tow’rd the distant city
    Which within the dark sea water

    Mirrors back, in sheer derision,
    All the flames of former pleasure--
    There they stand, as in the pit
    Of a vast gigantic playhouse,

    Vitzliputzli’s temple’s radiant
    Platform serving as the stage
    Where they act a tragic myst’ry
    To commemorate their triumph.

    “Human sacrifice” the play is,
    Old, full old, its plot, its fable;
    But the piece is not so fearful
    In the Christian treatment of it.

    For into the blood is red wine,
    And into the actual body
    Is a thin and harmless wafer
    Transubstantiated truly.

    ’Mongst these savages at present
    Was the joke in downright earnest
    Taken up; they fed on flesh,
    And the blood was human blood.

    This time ’twas indeed the pure blood
    Of old Christians, which had never
    Never mingled with the baser
    Blood of Jews or of Moriscos.

    O be joyful, Vitzliputzli!
    For to-day ’tis Spanish blood,
    And thou mayst refresh thy nostrils
    With its warm scent greedily.

    Eighty Spaniards will be slaughter’d
    On this day to do thee honour--
    Proud repast to grace the table
    Of thy priests, who flesh delight in.

    For the priest is but a mortal,
    And poor man, unhappy glutton,
    Cannot, like the gods, live only
    On sweet smells and savoury odours.

    Hark! the death-drum now is beating,
    And the evil cowhorn screeches!
    They proclaim the’ approaching advent
    Of the victims’ sad procession.

    Eighty Spaniards, vilely naked,
    With their hands securely fasten’d
    To their backs, are harshly driven
    Up the temple’s lofty staircase.

    And to Vitzliputzli’s image
    They must bow the knee right humbly,
    And must dance the wildest dances,
    Forcibly constrain’d by tortures,

    All so terrible and fearful,
    That their madden’d screams of anguish
    Overpow’r the whole collective
    Cannibals’ wild charivari.

    Poor spectators by the ocean!
    Cortez and his warlike comrades
    But too plainly could distinguish
    All their friends’ loud cries of torment.

    On the stage, too clearly lighted,
    They could see, alas! too plainly,
    Every figure, every gesture,--
    See the knife and see the blood.

    Then from off their heads their helmets
    Silently they took, and kneeling,
    Chaunted they the death-psalm sadly,
    And they sang the De Profundis.

    ’Mongst the number of the victims
    Was young Raimond de Mendoza,
    Offspring of the lovely abbess,
    Cortez’ first and youthful love.

    When he on the stripling’s bosom
    Saw the well-remember’d locket
    Which enclosed his mother’s portrait,
    Bitter, bitter tears wept Cortez--

    But from off his eyes he wiped them
    With his buffalo’s hard gauntlet--
    Deeply sigh’d, and sang in chorus
    With the others: Miserere!


3.

    Now the stars are glimm’ring paler,
    And the morning mists are rising
    From the ocean-flood, like spirits
    Dragging their white shrouds behind them.

    Feasts and lights are all extinguish’d
    In the temple of the idol,
    Where, upon the blood-soak’d pavement,
    Priest and laity lie snoring.

    None are waking, save Red Jacket.
    By the last lamp’s flickering glimmer,
    Sickly grinning, grimly jesting,
    Thus the priest his god addresses:

    “Vitzliputzli, Putzlivitzli!
    “Darling god, my Vitzliputzli!
    “Thou to-day hast had amusement,
    “And has smelt a fragrant odour!

    “Spanish blood to-day we offer’d,
    “O how savourily steam’d it!
    “And thy fine and dainty nostrils
    “Suck’d the scent in, full of rapture!

    “We’ll to-morrow slay the horses,
    “Neighing noble monsters are they,
    “Offspring of the tempest spirits’
    “Amorous toying with the seacow.

    “If thou’lt gracious be, I’ll slaughter
    “In thine honour my two grandsons,
    “Pretty children,--sweet their blood is,--
    “My old age’s only pleasure.

    “But indeed thou must be gracious,
    “And must grant us further triumphs,
    “Let us conquer, darling godhead,
    “Putzlivitzli, Vitzliputzli!

    “All our enemies destroy thou,
    “All these strangers who from distant
    “And still undiscover’d countries
    “Hither came across the ocean--

    “Wherefore did they leave their dwellings?
    “Was it crime or hunger drove them?
    “‘Stop at home and live in quiet’
    “Is a sensible old proverb.

    “What is their desire? Our money
    “Stick they in their greedy pockets,
    “And they wish us to be happy--
    “So they tell us,--in the heavens!

    “We at first believed them fully
    “Beings of a higher order,
    “Children of the Sun, immortal,
    “Arm’d with lightning and with thunder.

    “But they’re only men, as mortal
    “As ourselves; my knife to-night has
    “Proved beyond all doubt and question
    “Their extreme mortality.

    “They are mortal, and no fairer
    “Than ourselves, and many of them
    “Are as ugly as the monkeys,
    “And their faces, like the latter,

    “Are all hairy, and ’tis whisper’d
    “Many of them carry hidden
    “In their breeches monkeys’ tails, for
    “Those not monkeys need no breeches.

    “Morally they’re also ugly
    “And of piety know nothing,
    “And ’tis said that they’re accustom’d
    “Their own deities to swallow!

    “O destroy this vile abandon’d
    “Wicked brood, these god-devourers--
    “Vitzliputzli, Putzlivitzli,
    “Let us conquer, Vitzliputzli!”--

    Thus the priest address’d the god,
    And the god’s reply resounded
    Sighing, rattling, like the nightwind
    Toying with the ocean sedges:

    “Red-coat, red-coat, bloody slayer!
    “Thou hast slaughter’d many thousands,--
    “Plunge thy sacrificial knife now
    “In thine own old worn-out body!

    “From thy body, thus slit open,
    “Will thy spirit make its exit,
    “Over roots and over pebbles
    “Tripping to the green frog’s pond.

    “There thou’lt find my aunt, the rat-queen,
    “Squatting, and she’ll thus address thee:
    “‘So good morning, naked spirit!
    “‘Pray how fares it with my nephew?

    “‘Is he Vitzliputzlied nicely
    “‘In the gold-light, sweet as honey?
    “‘Does good fortune from his forehead
    “‘Brush away all flies and sorrows?

    “‘Or does Katzlagara scratch him,
    “‘Hated goddess of all evil,
    “‘With her black paws made of iron,
    “‘Which are steep’d in adder’s poison?’

    “Naked spirit, give this answer:
    “‘Vitzliputzli sends thee greeting,
    “‘And a pestilence he wishes
    “‘In thy belly, thou accurst one!

    “‘Thou didst urge him to the conflict,
    “‘And thy counsel was destruction;
    “‘Soon will be fulfill’d the evil
    “‘Old and mournful prophecy

    “‘Of the kingdom’s subjugation
    “‘By the men so fiercely bearded,
    “‘Who on wooden birds all flying
    “‘From the Eastern land come hither.

    “‘There’s an ancient proverb also--
    “‘Woman’s will is God’s will likewise--
    “‘And the God’s will is redoubled
    “‘When the woman is his mother.

    “‘She it is that wakes my anger,
    “‘She, the haughty queen of heaven,
    “‘She, a pure and spotless virgin,
    “‘Working charms and versed in magic.

    “‘She protects the Spanish people,
    “‘And we all at length must perish,
    “‘I, the poorest of the godheads,
    “‘And my poor, dear Mexico.’--

    “When thou hast fulfill’d thy message,
    Red-coat, let thy naked spirit
    In a sandhole creep; sleep soundly
    Out of sight of all my misery.

    “This proud temple will be shatter’d,
    “I myself shall in its ruins
    “Disappear,--mere dust and rubbish,--
    “No one e’er again will see me.

    “Yet I shall not die; we godheads
    “Grow as old as do the parrots,
    “And we cast our skins, and like them
    “Only change at times our feathers.

    “To my foemen’s native country
    “Which they give the name of Europe
    “I shall fly away, beginning
    “There a really new career.

    “I’ll turn devil, and the god
    “Then shall be a God-be-with-us;
    “As my foemen’s evil spirit
    “I can work as best may suit me.

    “There my enemies I’ll trouble,
    “And alarm them all with phantoms;
    “As a foretaste of hell’s torments,
    “Brimstone they shall smell in plenty.

    “Both their wise men and their doltards
    “I’ll allure with my seductions;
    “And their virtue will I tickle
    “Till it laughs like any strumpet.

    “Yes, I’ll turn into a devil,
    “And salute as my dear comrades
    “Satanas and Belial with him,
    “Astaroth and Beelzebub.

    “Thee I’ll also greet, O Lilis,
    “Sin’s own mother, smooth-skinn’d serpent
    “Teach me all thy dreadful secrets,
    “And the charming art of lying!

    “My belovèd Mexico,
    “I no longer can preserve thee,
    “But I’ll fearfully avenge thee,
    “My belovèd Mexico!”


~WOOD SOLITUDE~

    In former days, in my life’s young morning,
    I wore a garland my brow adorning;
    How wondrously glisten’d then every flower!
    The garland was fill’d with a magical power.

    While all in the beautiful garland took pleasure,
    Its wearer they hated beyond all measure;
    I fled from the envy of mortals rude,
    I fled to the wood’s green solitude.

    To the wood! to the wood! A life of enjoyment
    With spirits and beasts was my sole employment.
    The fairies and stags, with their antlers tall,
    Without any fear approach’d me all.

    They all approach’d me without any terror,
    In this they knew they committed no error;
    That I was no huntsman, the doe well knew,
    That I was no babbler, the fairies saw too.

    None but fools ever boast of the fays’ approbation,
    But how the remaining gentry of station
    That lived in the forest treated me well,
    I’ve not the slightest objection to tell.

    How round me hover’d the elfin rabble,
    That airy race, with their charming gabble!
    ’Tis dangerous truly their gaze to meet,
    The bliss it imparts is so deadly, though sweet.

    With May dance and May games amused they me highly
    And tales of the court narrated they slily,
    For instance, the scandalous chronicles e’en
    Of lovely Titania, the faery queen.

    If I sat by the brook, with leaping and springing
    Rose out of the flood, their tresses wringing,
    With long silver veils and fluttering hair,
    The water-bacchantes, the nixes fair!

    They play’d on the lute and the fiddle so sweetly,
    And danced the nixes’ famed dances discreetly;
    The tunes that they sang, the antics they play’d,
    Of rollicking boisterous madness seem’d made.

    And yet at times was much less alarming
    The noise that they made; these elfins charming
    Before my feet lay quietly,
    Their heads reclining on my knee.

    Some foreign romances they trill’d,--for example
    I’ll name the “three oranges” song as a sample;
    A hymn of praise they sang also with grace
    On me and my noble human face.

    They oft interrupted their songs with loud laughter,
    Many critical matters inquiring after,
    For instance: “On what particular plan
    “Did God determine on fashioning man?

    “Is each individual’s soul altogether
    “Immortal? These souls, are they made all of leather,
    “Or stiff linen only? How comes it to pass
    “That almost every man is an ass?”

    The answers I gave, I’ll conceal for the present,
    And yet my immortal soul (which is pleasant)
    Was not in the slightest degree ever hurt
    By the prattling talk of a water-sprite pert.

    While sportive and roguish are elfins and nixes,
    Not so the truehearted earth-spirits and pixies,
    Which love to help man. I prefer most of all
    The race that they dwarfs or mannikins call.

    They all wear a long and swelling red doublet,
    Their face is noble, though care seems to trouble it;
    I let them not see that I had descried
    Why they their feet so carefully hide.

    They all have ducks’ feet, but object much to show it;
    And fancy that nobody else can know it;
    Their sorrow’s so deep and hard to bear,
    That to teaze them about it I never could dare.

    Alas! we all, like those dwarfs full of feeling,
    We all have something that needs concealing;
    No Christians, we fancy, have ever descried
    Where we our ducks’ feet so carefully hide.

    Salamanders for me had never attractions,
    I learnt very little respecting their actions
    From other wood spirits. They pass’d me by night
    Like fleeting shadows, mysteriously light.

    They are thin as a spindle, and long as a baby,
    With breeches and waistcoats tight-fitting as may be,
    Of scarlet colours, embroider’d with gold;
    Their faces are sickly and yellow and old.

    A golden crown, with rubies all over,
    The head of each of their number doth cover;
    The whole of these vain conceited elves
    Quite absolute monarchs consider themselves.

    That they are not burnt in the fire is truly
    A great piece of art, I acknowledge it duly;
    And yet the uninflammable wight
    Is far from being a true fire-sprite.

    The sharpest woodspirits are mandrakes however;
    Short legs have these bearded mannikins clever;
    They have old men’s faces, the length of a span,
    But whence they proceed, is a secret to man.

    When head over heels in the moonlight they tumble,
    They remind one of roots in their nature quite humble;
    But as my welfare they always have sought,
    Their origin really to me matters nought.

    In small acts of witchcraft they gave me instructions,
    How to exorcise flames, ply the birds with seductions,
    And also to pluck on Midsummer night
    The root that makes one invisible quite.

    They taught me the stars and strange signs--how astraddle
    To ride on the winds without any saddle,
    And Runic sentences, able to call
    The dead from out of their silent graves all.

    They also taught me the whistle mysterious
    That serves to deceive the woodpecker serious,
    And makes him give us the spurge, to show
    Where secret treasures are hidden below.

    The words that ’tis needful for people to mutter
    When digging for treasure, they taught me to utter;
    But all in vain, for I ne’er got by heart
    The treasure-digger’s wonderful art.

    For money in fact I then cared not a tittle,
    My wants were soon satisfied, being but little;
    I possess’d many castles in Spain’s fair land,
    The income from which came duly to hand.

    O charming time, when the heaven’s high arches
    With fiddles were hung, when elfin marches
    And nixes’ dances and cobolds’ glad play
    My story-drunk heart enchanted all day!

    O charming time, when into auspicious
    Triumphal arches the foliage delicious
    Appear’d to be twining! I wander’d around,
    My brow, like a victor’s, with laurel-wreath crown’d.

    That charming time has utterly vanish’d,
    And all those pleasures for ever are banish’d;
    And, ah! they have stolen the garland so fair
    That I was then wont on my head to wear.

    The garland is gone that my locks shaded over,
    But how it happen’d, I ne’er could discover;
    Yet since that beauteous garland they stole,
    My spirit has seem’d deprived of its soul.

    The ghosts of the world, with looks dimly staring,
    Gaze on me, and heaven seems barren and glaring,
    A churchyard blue, its deities gone;
    I roam in the forest, depress’d and alone.

    From the forest have vanish’d the elves with their graces
    Horns hear I, and yelping of dogs in their places;
    While hid in the thicket, the trembling roe
    Is licking her wounds with tearful woe.

    And where are the mandrakes? Methinks they are biding
    In clefts of the rocks, as a safe place of hiding;
    My dear little friends, I’m returning again,
    But reft of my garland and joy I remain.

    O where is the fairy, with hair long and golden,
    First beauty to whom I was ever beholden?
    The oak-tree wherein her lifetime she pass’d
    Stands mournfully stripp’d, and bared by the blast.

    The waves of the streamlet run sad as the Styx’s;
    Beside its lone banks sits one of the nixes,
    As pale and as mute as a figure of stone,
    While marks of deep grief o’er each feature are thrown.

    I softly approach’d her with heartfelt compassion,--
    She arose and gazed on me in singular fashion,
    And then she fled with a terrified mien,
    As if she some fearful spectre had seen.


~SPANISH LYRICS~

    ’Twas on Hubert’s day--the year was
    Thirteen hundred, three and eighty--
    That the king a banquet gave us
    In the castle at Segovia.

    These state banquets just the same are
    Everywhere, and at the tables
    Of all princes sov’reign tedium
    Yawns with uncontested vigour.

    Everywhere the same silk rabble,
    Gaily dress’d, and proudly nodding,
    Like a bed of gorgeous tulips;
    Different only are the sauces.

    Whispers all the time and buzzing
    Lull the senses like the poppy,
    Till the sound of trumpets wakes us
    From our state of chewing deafness.

    Near me, by good luck, was sitting
    Don Diego Albuquerque,
    From whose lips the conversation
    Flow’d in one unbroken torrent.

    He with wondrous skill related
    Bloody stories of the palace,
    Of the times of old Don Pedro,
    Whom they call’d the cruel monarch.

    When I ask’d him why Don Pedro
    Caused his brother Don Fredrego
    To be secretly beheaded,
    With a sigh my neighbour answer’d:

    Ah, Señor! the tales believe not
    Jingled on their vile guitars by
    Balladsingers and muledrivers
    In posadas, beershops, taverns.

    And believe not what they chatter
    Of the love of Don Fredrego
    And Don Pedro’s wife so beauteous,
    Donna Blanca of Bourbon.

    ’Twas not to the husband’s jealous
    Feelings, but to his low envy
    That as victim fell Fredrego,
    Chief of Calatrava’s order.

    For the crime Don Pedro never
    Would forgive him, was his glory,--
    Glory such as Donna Fama
    Loves with trumpet-tongue to herald--

    Never could Don Pedro pardon
    His magnanimous high spirit,
    Or the beauty of his person,
    Which was but his spirit’s image.

    Still within my memory blossoms
    That slim graceful hero-flower;
    Ne’er shall I forget those lovely
    Dream-like, soft and youthful features.

    They were just of that description
    That the fairies take delight in,
    And a fable-seeming secret
    Spoke from all those features plainly.

    Blue his eyes were, their enamel
    Being dazzling as a jewel,
    But a jewel’s staring hardness
    Seem’d reflected in them likewise.

    Black his hair was in its colour,
    Bluish black, and strangely glistening,
    And in fair luxuriant tresses
    Falling down upon his shoulders.

    In the charming town of Coimbra
    Which he from the Moors had taken,
    For the last time I beheld him,
    In this world,--unhappy prince!

    He was coming from Alcanzor,
    Through the narrow streets fast riding
    Many a fair young Moorish maiden
    Eyed him from her latticed window.

    O’er his head his helm-plume floated
    Gallantly, and yet his mantle’s
    Rigid Calatrava cross
    Scared away all loving fancies.

    By his side, and gaily wagging
    With his tail, his favourite Allan
    Sprang,--a beast of proud descent,
    And whose home was the Sierra.

    He, despite his size gigantic,
    Was as nimble as a reindeer;
    Noble was his head to look at,
    Though the fox’s it resembled.

    Snow-white and like silk in softness,
    Down his back his long hair floated,
    And with rubies bright incrusted
    Was his broad and golden collar.

    It was said this collar hid the
    Talisman fidelity;
    Never did the faithful creature
    Leave the side of his dear master.

    O that fierce fidelity!
    It excites my startled feelings,
    When I think how ’twas made public
    Here, before our frighten’d presence.

    O that day so full of horror!
    Here, within this hall, it happen’d,
    And as I to-day am sitting,
    At the monarch’s table sat I.

    At the high end of the table,
    Where to-day young Don Henrico
    Gaily tipples with the flower
    Of Castilian chivalry,

    On that day there sat Don Pedro
    Darkly silent, and beside him,
    Proudly radiant as a goddess,
    Sat Maria de Padilla.

    At the table’s lower end, where
    Here to-day we see the lady
    With the linen frill capacious,
    Like a white plate in appearance.

    Whilst her yellow face is gilded
    With a smile of sour complexion,
    Like the citron that is lying
    On the plate already mention’d,--

    At the table’s lower end here
    Was a place remaining empty;
    Some great guest of lofty station
    Seem’d the golden seat to wait for.

    Don Fredrego was the guest, for
    Whom the golden seat was destined;
    Yet he came not,--ah! now know we
    But too well why thus he tarried.

    Ah! that selfsame hour the wicked
    Deed of blood was consummated,
    And the innocent young hero
    Suddenly attack’d and basely

    By Don Pedro’s myrmidons,
    Tightly bound, and quickly hurried
    To a dreary castle dungeon
    Lighted only by some torches.

    Executioners stood ready,
    And their bloody chief was with them,
    Who, upon his axe while leaning,
    Thus with sadden’d look address’d him:

    “Now, Grand Master of San Jago,
    “Now must thou for death prepare thee;
    “Just one quarter of an hour
    “Still is left for thee to pray in.”

    Don Fredrego then knelt humbly,
    And he pray’d with pious calmness,
    And then said: “I now have finish’d,”
    And received the stroke of death.

    In the very selfsame moment
    That the head roll’d on the pavement,
    Faithful Allan, who had follow’d
    All unseen, sprang quickly to it.

    With his teeth the head straight seized he
    By the long luxuriant tresses,
    And with this much valued booty
    Shot away with speed of magic.

    Agonizing shouts resounded
    Everywhere as on he hasten’d,
    Through the passages and chambers,
    Sometimes upstairs, sometimes downstairs.

    Since the banquet of Belshazzar
    Never company at table
    Was so utterly confounded
    As was ours that fill’d this hall then,

    When the monstrous creature leapt in,
    With the head of Don Fredrego,
    Which he with his teeth was dragging
    By the dripping bloody tresses.

    On the seat which, being destined
    For his master, still was empty,
    Sprang the dog and like a plaintiff
    Held the head before our faces.

    Ah! it was the well-remember’d
    Hero’s features, but still paler
    And more solemn now when dead,
    And all-fearfully encircled

    By the locks in black luxuriance,
    Which stood up as did the savage
    Serpent-headdress of Medusa,
    Turning into stone through terror.

    Yes, turn’d into stone felt all then,
    Wildly stared we on each other,
    And each tongue was mute and palsied
    Both by etiquette and horror.

    But Maria de Padilla
    Broke the universal silence;
    Wringing hands, and sobbing loudly,
    She forebodingly lamented:

    “Now it will be said ’twas I that
    “Brought about this cruel murder;
    “Rancour will assail my children,
    “My poor innocent young children!--”

    Don Diego interrupted
    At this place his tale, observing
    That the company had risen,
    And the court the hall was leaving.

    Kind and courteous in his manners,
    Then the knight became my escort,
    And we rambled on together
    Through the ancient Gothic castle.

    In the crossway which conducted
    To the kennels of the monarch,
    Which proclaimed themselves already
    By far growling sounds and yelpings,

    There I noticed, built up strongly
    In the wall, and on the outside
    Firmly fasten’d by strong iron,
    Like a cage, a narrow cell.

    And inside it sat two human
    Figures, two young boys appearing;
    By the legs securely fetter’d,
    On the dirty straw they squatted.

    Scarcely twelve years old the one seem’d,
    Scarcely older seem’d the other;
    Fair and noble were their faces,
    But through sickness thin and sallow.

    They were clothed in rags, half naked,
    And their wither’d bodies offer’d
    Plainest signs of gross ill-treatment;
    Both with fever shook and trembled.

    From the depth of their deep mis’ry
    They upon me turn’d their glances;
    White and spirit-like their eyes were,
    And I felt all terror-stricken.

    “Who, then, are these wretched objects?”
    I exclaim’d, with hasty action
    Don Diego’s hand tight grasping,
    Which was trembling as I touch’d it.

    Don Diego seem’d embarrass’d,
    Look’d if any one was listening,
    Deeply sigh’d, and said, assuming
    A mere worldling’s jaunty accents:

    These are children of a monarch,
    Early orphan’d, and their father
    Was Don Pedro, and their mother
    Was Maria de Padilla.

    After the great fight at Narvas,
    Where Henrico Transtamara
    Freed his brother, this Don Pedro,
    From his crown’s oppressive burden,

    And from that still greater burden
    Which by men is Life entitled,
    Don Henrico’s victor-kindness
    Also reach’d his brother’s children.

    Under his own care he took them,
    As becomes a kindly uncle,
    And in his own castle gave them
    Free of charge, both board and lodging.

    Narrow is indeed the chamber
    That he there allotted to them;
    Yet in summer it is coolish,
    And not over cold in winter.

    For their food, they live on ryebread,
    As delicious in its flavour
    As if Ceres’ self had baked it
    For her dear child Proserpina.

    Oftentimes he also sends them
    Quite a bowl-full of garbanzos,
    And the youngsters in this manner
    Learn that ’tis in Spain a Sunday.

    Yet not always is it Sunday,
    And garbanzos come not always,
    And the upper huntsman treats them
    To a banquet with his whip.

    For this worthy upper huntsman,
    Who is with the care entrusted
    Of the pack of hounds, together
    With the cage that holds the nephews,

    Is the most unhappy husband
    Of that acid Citronella
    With the frill so white and plate-like,
    Whom we saw to-day at table;

    And she scolds so loud, that often
    On the whip her husband seizes,
    Hither hastens, and chastises
    First the dogs, and then the children.

    But the king is very angry
    With his conduct, and commanded
    That his nephews should in future
    Never like the dogs be treated.

    He will not entrust to any
    Mercenary fist the duty
    Of correcting them, but do it
    With his own right hand henceforward.--

    Suddenly stopp’d Don Diego,
    For the castle Seneschal
    Now approach’d us, and politely
    Ask’d: Had we enjoy’d our dinner?--


~THE EX-LIVING ONE~

    Say, Brutus, where can thy Cassius be,
      The watchman, the crier nightly,
    Who once on the banks of the Seine with thee
      Used to ramble in converse sprightly?

    Ye often were wont to gaze up on high,
      Where the darksome clouds were scudding;
    A far darker cloud were the thoughts, by-the-by,
      That in your bosoms were budding.

    Say, Brutus, where can thy Cassius be?
      No longer he thinks of destroying;
    By the Neckar he dwells, where his talents is he
      As a reader to tyrants employing.

    But Brutus replied: “A fool, friend, art thou,
      “Shortsighted as every poet;
    “To a tyrant my Cassius now reads, I allow,
      “But his object’s to kill him,--I know it.

    “So Matzerath’s poems he reads him each day
      “A dagger is each line in it;
    “And so the poor tyrant, I’m sorry to say,
      “May die of ennui any minute.”


~THE EX-WATCHMAN~

    From the Neckar he departed,
      With the town of Stuttgardt vex’d,
    And as play-director started
      In fair Munich’s city next.

    All that country’s very pretty,
      And they in perfection here,
    In this fancy-stirring city,
      Brew the very best of beer.

    But ’tis said the poor Director
      Rambles, like a Dante, glum,
    Melancholy as a spectre,
      Like Lord Byron, gloomy, dumb.

    Comedies no longer heeds he,
      Nor the very worst of rhyme;
    Wretched tragedies oft reads he,
      Not once smiling all the time.

    Oft herself some fair one flatters
      She will cheer his sorrowing heart;
    But his coat of mail soon shatters
      Every love-directed dart.

    All in vain his friends endeavour
      To enliven him and sing:
    “In thy life rejoice thee ever,
      “While thy lamp’s still glimmering!”

    Is there nought can raise thy spirits
      In this fair and charming town,
    Which, among its many merits,
      Boasts such men of great renown?

    It is true, that it has lately
      Lost full many a man of worth
    Whom we miss and valued greatly,
      Chorus-leaders and so forth.

    Would that Massmann left us never!
      He would surely have some day
    By his antics strange but clever
      Driven all thy cares away.

    Schelling’s loss is very serious,
      And can never be replaced,
    A philosopher mysterious,
      And a mimic highly graced.

    That the founder of Walhalla
      Went away, and left behind
    All his manuscripts,--by Allah!
      That was really too unkind!

    With Cornelius also perish’d
      All his pupils whatsoe’er;
    They shaved off their tresses cherish’d,
      And their strength was in their hair

    For their prudent Master planted
      In their hair some magic springs,
    And it seem’d, as if enchanted,
      To be full of living things.

    Apropos! The arch-notorious
      Priest, as Dollingerius known,--
    That’s, I think, his name inglorious,--
      Has he from the Isar flown?

    In Good Friday’s sad procession
      I beheld him in his place;
    ’Mongst the men of his profession
      He had far the gloomiest face.

    On Monácho Monachorum
      Now-a-days the cap doth fit
    Of virorum obscurorum,
      Glorified by Hutten’s wit.

    At his name thy dull eye flashes;
      Ex-nightwatchman, watchful be!
    There the cowls are, here the lash is,--
      Strike away as formerly!

    Scourge them, worthy friend, devoutly,
      As at sight of every cowl
    Ulrich did; he smote them stoutly,
      And they fearfully did howl.

    Old Erasmus could not master
      His loud laughter at the joke;
    And this fortunate disaster
      His tormenting ulcer broke.

    Old and young laugh,--all the city
      In the general shout concur,
    And they sing the well-known ditty:
      “Gaudeamur igitur!”

    When those dirty monks we’re catching,
      We are overwhelm’d with fleas;
    Hutten thus was always scratching,
      And was never at his ease.

    “Alea jacta est!” however
      Was the brave knight’s battle shout,
    Smiting down, with deathstroke clever,
      Both the priests and rabble rout.

    Ex-nightwatchman, now be wiser!
      Feel’st thou not thy bosom glow?
    Wake to action on the Isar,
      And thy sickly spleen o’erthrow.

    Call thy long legs transcendental
      Into full and active play;
    Vulgar be the monks or gentle,
      If they’re monks, then strike away!

    He however sigh’d, and wringing
      Both his hands he thus replied:
    My long legs, so apt at springing,
      Are with Europe stupified.

    And my corns are twitching sadly,
      Tight the German shoes I’ve on;
    Where the shoe is pinching badly
      Know I now,--so pray begone!


~MYTHOLOGY~

    Yes! Europa must knock under,--
      Who could stand against a bull?
    Danäe we’ll forgive; no wonder
      Golden rain made her a fool!

    Sem’le was a victim real,
      For she innocently thought
    That a heavenly cloud ideal
      Could not injure her in aught.

    But poor Leda’s tale notorious
      Really stirs up all our spleen;
    Vanquish’d by a swan inglorious,

    What a goose must she have been!


~IN MATILDA’S ALBUM~

    On these mill’d rags--a change mysterious!--
      I with a goose-quill must rehearse
    Partly in jest, and partly serious,
      Some foolish nonsense turn’d to verse.

    I, who am wont my thoughts to utter
      Upon thy rosy lips so fair
    With kisses that like bright flames splutter
      Up from my bosom’s inmost lair!

    O fashion’s rage! If I’m a poet,
      E’en by my wife I’m plagued at times
    Until (and other minstrels know it)
      I in her album scrawl some rhymes.


~TO THE YOUNG~

    Heed not the confusion, resist the illusion
      Of golden apples that lie in thy way!
    The swords are clashing, the arrows are flashing,
      But they cannot long the hero delay.

    A daring beginning is halfway to winning,
      An Alexander once conquer’d the earth!
    Restrain each soft feeling! the queens are all kneeling
      In the tent, to reward thy victorious worth.

    Surmounting each burden, we win as our guerdon
      The bed of Darius of old, and his crown;
    O deadly seduction! O blissful destruction!
      To die thus in triumph in Babylon town!


~THE UNBELIEVER~

    Thou wilt repose within mine arms!
      With rapturous emotion
    My bosom heaves and throbs and thrills
      At this delicious notion.

    Thou wilt repose within mine arms,
      Whilst with thy fair gold tresses
    I sport, and thy dear darling head
      My shoulder gently presses!

    Thou wilt repose within mine arms!
      To truth will turn my vision,
    And here on earth shall I enjoy
      The highest bliss elysian.

    St. Thomas! Scarce can I believe
      The fact, my doubts will linger
    Until upon my rapture’s wounds
      I lay my eager finger.


~WHITHER NOW?~

    Whither now? my stupid foot
      Fain to Germany would guide me;
    But my reason shakes its head
      Wisely, seeming thus to chide me:

    “Ended is the war indeed,
      “But they still keep up courts-martial,
    “And to writing things esteem’d
      “Shootable, thou’rt far too partial.”

    That’s quite true, and being shot
      Has for me no great attractions;
    I’m no hero, and unskill’d
      In pathetic words and actions.

    Fain to England would I go,
      View’d I not with such displeasure
    Englishmen and coals--their smell
      Makes me sick beyond all measure.

    To America methinks
      I would sail the broad seas over;
    To that place of freedom where
      All alike may live in clover,

    Did I not detest a land
      Where tobacco’s ’mongst their victuals,
    Where they never use spittoons,
      And so strangely play at skittles.

    Russia, that vast empire fair,
      Might be tolerably pleasant,
    But I should not like the knout
      That’s their usual winter present.

    Sadly gaze I up on high,
      Where the countless stars are gleaming,
    But I nowhere can discern
      Where my own bright star is beaming.

    Perhaps in heaven’s gold labyrinth
      It has got benighted lately,
    As I on this bustling earth
      Have myself been wandering greatly.


~AN OLD SONG~

    Thou now art dead, and thou knowest it not,
    The light of thine eyes is quench’d and forgot;
    Thy rosy mouth is pallid for ever,
    And thou art dead, and wilt live again never.

    ’Twas in a dreary midsummer night,
    I bore thee myself to the grave outright;
    The nightingales sang their soft lamentations,
    And after us follow’d the bright constellations.

    As through the forest the train moved along,
    They made it resound with the litany’s song;
    The firs, in their mantles of mourning veil’d closely,
    The prayers for the dead repeated morosely.

    And as o’er the willowy lake we flew
    The elfins were dancing full in our view;
    They suddenly stopp’d in wondering fashion,
    And seem’d to regard us with looks of compassion.

    And when we had reach’d the grave, full soon
    From out of the heavens descended the moon,
    And preach’d a sermon, ’midst tears and condoling
    While in the distance the bells were tolling.


~READY MONEY~

    Love, before she granted favours,
      One day told the god Apollo
    She on guarantees insisted,
      For the times were false and hollow.

    Laughingly the god made answer:
      “Yes, the times are alter’d truly,
    “And thou speakest like a usurer
      “Who on pawn lends money duly.

    “Well, then, I’ve a lyre, one only,--
      “’Tis of gold, a good and rare one;
    “Prythee say how many kisses
      “Thou wilt lend upon it, fair one?”


~THE OLD ROSE~

    She for whom my heart once beat
      Was a rosebud fair and tender;
    Yet it ever grew more sweet,
      Bursting into full-blown splendour.

    ’Twas the loveliest that could be,
      And to pluck it I bethought me;
    But it stung me piquantly
      With its thorns, and prudence taught me.

    Now, when wither’d, torn, and maim’d,
      By the wind and tempests shatter’d,
    “Dearest Henry” I’m proclaim’d,
      And I’m follow’d, sought, and flatter’d.

    Henry here and Henry there
      Calleth she with ceaseless din now;
    If a thorn is anywhere,
      ’Tis upon the fair one’s chin now.

    O how hard the bristles grow
      On the chin’s warts of my beauty!
    Either to a convent go,
      Or to shave will be thy duty.


~AUTO-DA-FÉ~

    See these violets, dusty tresses,
      And this faded ribbon blue,
    Long forgotten cherish’d trifles,
      And these half-torn billets-doux,--

    All, with angry look and gesture
      In the blazing fire I throw;
    Sadly crackle up these relics
      Of my happiness and woe.

    Vows of love, and fond deceiving
      Broken oaths all upwards fly
    In the chimney, while in secret
      Cupid laughs maliciously.

    Dreamily beside the fireplace
      Sit I, while the sparkles bright
    Glow in silence midst the ashes,--
      So farewell! good night! good night!


~THE WAY OF THE WORLD~

    He who has already much,
      Finds his wealth increasing faster;
    Who but little, is of all
      Soon bereft by some disaster.

    But if thou hast nothing, friend,
      Go and hang thyself this minute;
    Only they who’ve aught on earth
      Have a claim for living in it.


~RETROSPECT _1_~

    I’ve snuff’d at every smell that has birth
    In this delightful kitchen of earth;
    Each thing that the world contains that’s delicious
    Have I enjoy’d like a hero ambitious;
    I’ve drunk my coffee, and eaten with zest,
    And many a charming doll caress’d,
    Worn silken waistcoats and handsome coats,
    And had my pockets well lined with notes;
    The high horse, like Gellert the poet, I rode,
    Had house and castle all à-la-mode.
    On fortune’s verdant meadow I lay,
    While on me the sun gleam’d brightly all day,
    A wreath of laurel my brow embraced,
    And through my brain sweet visions raced,
    Sweet visions of endless May and flowers--
    How happily fleeted then the hours,
    So dim and hazy, so full of repose,--
    My mouth was fill’d with whatever I chose,
    And angels came, and out of their pockets
    The champagne bottles flew like rockets,--
    Bright visions were these,--soap-bubbles, alas!
    They burst,--and I lie on the humid grass;
    My limbs are now rheumatic and lame,
    My inmost spirit is fill’d with shame.
    Alas! each pleasure and gratification
    I bought at the price of bitter vexation;
    I’m steep’d in bitterness up to the chin,
    The bugs have terribly bitten my skin;
    Oppress’d by care and gloomy sorrow
    I needs must lie, and I needs must borrow
    From wealthy rascals, and slatterns vile,
    I even believe that I begg’d for a while.
    And now I would finish this wearisome race,
    And find in the grave a resting-place.
    Farewell! In yon heavens, good Christian brother,
    Once more we may hope to meet with each other.


~RESURRECTION~

    The trumpet’s wild echo fills the skies
      As though it summon’d to battle;
    From out of their graves the dead arise,
      Their limbs they wriggle and rattle.

    Each thing that has legs prepares for the race,
      The spectres white are all driven
    To Jehoshaphat, the gathering-place,
      Where judgment is now to be given.

    There sits, as Head of the Court, the Lord,
      By all his apostles surrounded;
    Assessors are they,--each judgment, each word
      On love and wisdom is founded.

    No face is disguised in all that array
      For every mask is seen falling
    In the radiant light of the judgment day,
      At the sound of the trumpet enthralling.

    At Jehoshaphat, in the valley at last
      The whole of the troop is united,
    And since the defendants’ number’s so vast,
      I’ve the summary only recited:

    The goats to the left, and the sheep to the right,--
      The parting is quickly effected;
    For the pious good sheep heaven’s mansions of light,
      And hell for the goats is selected.


~THE DYING ONE~

    Flying after bliss and light,
    Thou return’st in piteous plight;
    German truth and German shirt
    Strangers draggle through the dirt.

    Pale as death hast thou become,
    But take comfort, thou’rt at home;
    Warm as by the household hearth
    Lie we under German earth.

    Many others, who fell lame,
    Home again, alas! ne’er came,
    Though they yearningly implored,--
    O have pity, gracious Lord!


~RASCALITY~

    Rich people only can be won
      By open, barefaced flattery;
    Money is flat, my worthy son,
      And needs must flatly flatter’d be.

    The box of incense swing with zeal
      Before all worshipp’d golden calves:
    In dust and mire with meekness kneel,
      And, above all, ne’er praise by halves.

    The price of bread this year is high,
      Fine words we lavish all in vain;
    Mecænas’ dog to praise, then, try,
      And earn a bellyful again.


~RETROSPECT _2_~

    The pearl for the first, and the case for the second,--
    O William Wisetzki, thy days were soon reckon’d,
      But the Kitten, the Kitten was saved.

    The beam that he clung to, that stretch’d o’er the current
    Beneath him broke down, and he sank in the torrent,
      But the Kitten, the Kitten was saved.

    We follow’d the corpse of this darling of ours,
    They buried him under a grave of May flowers,
      But the Kitten, the Kitten was saved.

    O prudent wert thou, thus early in striving
    To ’scape from life’s storms, and in harbour arriving,--
      But the Kitten, the Kitten was saved.

    Happy thou, that thus early thy danger was over;
    Before thou wert ill, thou thy health didst recover,--
      But the Kitten, the Kitten was saved.

    For many a year have I thought, child so cherish’d,
    With envy and grief how thou early hast perish’d,--
      But the Kitten, the Kitten was saved.


~IMPERFECTION~

    Nothing is perfect in this world of ours,
    The thorn grows with the rose, that queen of flowers;
    Methinks the angels, who for our protection
    Dwell in the skies, are stain’d with imperfection.

    The tulip has no scent. The saying is:
    Honour once stole a sucking-pig, old quiz;
    Had not Lucretia stabb’d herself, she may be
    Would have in time brought forth a thumping baby.

    The haughty peacock has but ugly feet;
    A woman may be witty and discreet,
    And yet, like Voltaire’s Henriade, may weary,
    Or be, like Klopstock’s famed Messias, dreary.

    The best of cows no Spanish knows, I ween,
    Massmann no Latin. Much too smooth are e’en
    The marble buttocks of Canova’s Venus;
    Too flat is Massmann’s nose (but this between us).

    In pretty songs are hidden wretched rhymes,
    As bees’ stings in the honey lurk at times;
    Of vulnerable heel the son of Thetis,
    And Alexandre Dumas is quite a Metis.

    The fairest star that in the heavens has birth,
    When it has caught a cold, straight falls to earth;
    Prime cider of the barrel bears the traces,
    And many a spot the sun’s bright face defaces.

    And thou, much honour’d Madam, even thou
    Faultless art not, nor free from failings now.
    “What, then, is wanting?” askest thou and starest,--
    A bosom, and a soul within it, fairest!


~PIOUS WARNING~

    When thou dost quit this mortal abode,
      Immortal spirit, beware thee
      Lest dangers seek to ensnare thee;
    Through death and night conducteth the road.

    The soldiers of God at the golden door
      Of the city of light are collected;
      Here actions and deeds are respected,
    Mere name and station avail no more.

    The pilgrim leaves at the portal behind
      His shoes so heavy and dusty;
      O enter with confidence trusty,
    Soft slippers, sweet music, and rest thou’lt find.


~THE COOLED-DOWN ONE~

    When we are dead, we long must lie
    Within the tomb; distress’d am I,
    Yes, sad am I that resurrection
    Delays so long to give perfection.

    Once more, before the light of life
    Is quench’d, before this weary strife
    Is o’er, fain would I, ere I perish,
    Have woman’s love, to bless and cherish.

    Some fair one I would now invite
    With eyes as soft as moonbeams’ light;
    No more I relish the advances
    Of wild brunettes with burning glances.

    Young men, exulting in their youth,
    Prefer tumultuous love in truth.
    With them excitement’s all the fashion,
    And soul-enthralling mutual passion.

    No longer young, bereft of power,
    As I, alas! am at this hour,
    I fain once more would love in quiet,
    And happy be,--without a riot.


~SOLOMON~

    The drums, trumps, cornets at length sink to slumber;
      By Solomon’s couch, as he lieth sleeping,
      Full-girded angels the watch are keeping,
    On either side six thousand in number.

    The monarch protect they from cares while dreaming,
      And as he frowns in his slumbers nightly,
      From out of their sheaths straight draw they lightly
    Twelve thousand swords, all fiercely gleaming.

    But presently back in their sheaths are falling
      The angels’ swords. The brow of the sleeper
      Grows smooth, his slumber is softer and deeper,
    And soon his lips are gently calling:

    “O Sulamith, thou whom so dearly I cherish!
      “O’er countries and kingdoms I rule, great and glorious,
      “Of Israel and Judah the monarch victorious,
    “But if thou’lt not love me, I wither and perish.”


~LOST WISHES~

    Similar in disposition,
      Like a brother link’d to brother,
    We unconsciously were ever
      Growing fonder of each other.

    Each one knew the other’s meaning,
      Just as if we were omniscient;
    Words, in fact, we found superfluous,
      And a look was quite sufficient.

    How I long’d to have thee near me,
      Revelling in peace and plenty,
    As my staunch and valiant comrade
      In a dolce far niente!

    Always to remain beside thee
      Was the aim of each endeavour;
    Everything that gave thee pleasure,
      To accomplish sought I ever.

    I enjoy’d what thou didst relish,
      Neither would I touch the dishes
    Thou didst hate, and even smoking
      I commenced, to meet thy wishes.

    Many a funny Polish story
      That thy merriment excited,
    In a strange and Jewish accent
      To repeat I then delighted.

    Yes, then long’d I to approach thee,
      Leave my foreign habitation,
    And beside thy fortune’s fireplace
      Take for evermore my station.

    Golden wishes! mere soap bubbles!
      Like my life they all have vanish’d;
    On the ground I now am lying,
      Crush’d for ever, hopeless, banish’d.

    Fare ye well, ye golden wishes
      Where my darling hopes once centred!
    Ah! the blow was far too deadly
      That my inmost heart has enter’d.


~THE ANNIVERSARY~

    Not one mass will e’er be chanted,
      Not one Hebrew prayer be mutter’d,
    When the day I died returneth,--
      Nothing will be sung or utter’d.

    Yet upon that day, it may be,
      If the weather has not chill’d her,
    On a visit to Montmartre
      With Pauline will go Matilda.

    With a wreath of immortelles she’ll
      Deck my grave in foreign fashion,
    Sighing say “_pauvre homme!_” and sadly
      Drop a tear of fond compassion.

    I shall then too high be dwelling,
      And, alas! no chair have ready
    For my darling’s use to offer,
      As she walks with foot unsteady.

    Sweet, stout little one, return not
      Home on foot, I must implore thee;
    At the barrier gate is standing
      A fiacre all ready for thee.


~MEETING AGAIN~

    One summer eve, in the woodbine bower
      We sat once more at the window lonely;
    The moon arose with life-giving power,
      But we appear’d two spectres only.

    Twelve years had pass’d since the last occasion
      When we on this spot had sat together;
    Each tender glow, each loving persuasion
      Had meanwhile been quench’d in life’s rough weather.

    I silently sat. The woman, however,
      Just like her sex, amongst love’s ashes
    Must needs be raking, but vain her endeavour
      To kindle again its long-quench’d flashes.

    And she recounted how she had contended
      With evil thoughts, the story disclosing
    How hardly she once her virtue defended,--
      I stupidly listened to all her prosing.

    When homeward I rode, the trees beside me
      Like spirits beneath the moon’s rays flitted;
    Sad voices call’d, but onward I hied me,
      Yes, I and the dead, who my side ne’er quitted.


~MRS. CARE~

    When fortune on me shed her ray,
    The gnats around me danced all day,
    Plenty of friends then cherish’d me,
    And all, in fashion brotherly,
      My viands with me tasted,
      And my last penny wasted.

    Fortune has fled, and void is my purse,
    My friends have left for better for worse,
    Extinguish’d is each sunny ray,
    Around me the gnats no longer play;
      My friends and the gnats together
      Have gone with the sunny weather.

    Beside my bed in the winter night
    Old Care as my nurse sits bolt upright;
    She wears a habit that’s white enough,
    A bonnet black, and takes her snuff.
      The box is harshly creaking,
      As the woman a pinch is seeking.

    I often dream that the happy time
    Of bliss has return’d, and May’s young prime,
    And friendship, and all the gnats as well,--
    When creaks the snuffbox,--and, sad to tell,
      The bubble is straightway breaking,
      While the nurse her snuff is taking.


~TO THE ANGELS~

      This is dread Thanatos indeed!
      He comes upon his pale-white steed.
      I hear its tread, I hear its trot,
      The dusky horseman spares me not;
    He tears me from Matilda’s fond embraces,--
    This thought of woe all other thoughts effaces.

      She was at once my child, my wife,
      And when I quit this mortal life
      An orphan’d widow will she be!
      I leave alone on earth’s wide sea
    The wife, the child, who, trusting to my guiding
    Slept on my bosom, careless and confiding.

      Ye angels in yon heavens so fair
      Receive my sobs, receive my prayer!
      When I am buried, from above
      Protect the woman that I love!
    Be shield and guardian to your own reflection,
    Grant my poor child Matilda your protection!

      By all the tears e’er shed by you
      Over men’s woes in pity true,--
      By that dread word that priests alone
      Know, and ne’er breathe without a groan,
    By all your beauty, gentleness, perfection,
    Ye angels, grant Matilda your protection!


~IN OCTOBER 1849~

    The weather now is calm and mild,
      And hush’d once more the tempest’s voice is,
    And Germany, that o’ergrown child,
      Once more in its old Christmas trees rejoices.

    Domestic joys we now pursue,
      All things beyond are false and hollow,
    And to the house’s gable too,
      Where once he built his nest, comes concord’s swallow.

    Forest and stream rest peacefully,
      With the soft moonlight o’er them playing;
    But, hark, a crack! A shot may’t be?
      It is perchance some friend whom they are slaying.

    Perchance with weapons in his hand,
      Some madcap they have overtaken;
    (All do not flight well understand
      Like Horace, who so nimbly saved his bacon).

    Crack, Crack! A fête, may I presume,
      Or fireworks in our Goethe’s honour?
    Or Sontag rising from the tomb
      Greeted, by rockets showering down upon her?

    And Francis Liszt appears again!
      He lives, he lies not dead and gory
    On some Hungarian battle-plain,
      Russian and Croat have not quench’d his glory.

    Freedom’s last bulwark was o’erthrown,
      And Hungary to death is bleeding--
    Francis, our Knight, escaped alone,
      His sword a quiet life at home is leading.

    Francis still lives; when old and gray
      Of the Hungarian war devoutly
    He’ll tell his grandsons: “Thus I lay,
      “And thus my trusty blade I wielded stoutly!”

    Hearing the name of Hungary,
      My German waistcoat grows too narrow;
    Beneath it foams a raging sea,
      The trumpet’s clang seems thrilling through my marrow.

    Once more across my memory throng
      The hero-legend’s strains enthralling,
    The wild and iron martial song,
      The Nibelunge’s overthrow appalling.

    ’Tis still the same heroic lot,
      ’Tis still the same old noble stories;
    The names are changed, the natures not,--
      ’Tis still the same praiseworthy hero-glories.

    And the same issue ’tis once more;
      However proudly flaunts the banner,
    The hero, as in days of yore,
      Yields to brute strength, but in a glorious manner.

    This time the oxen and the bear
      In firm alliance are united;
    Thou fall’st; but, Magyar, ne’er despair,
      Still more have all _our_ German hopes been blighted.

    While very decent beasts are they
      Who have in fight become thy masters,
    We have, alas! become the prey
      Of wolves, swine, dogs,--so great are our disasters.

    They howl, grunt, bark,--the victor’s smell
      Is such, I fain would do without it;--
    But, Poet, hush!--it were as well,
      Seeing thou’rt ill, to say no more about it.


~EVIL DREAMS~

    In vision once more young and happy, paced I
      Near the old country house that used to stand
    Hard by the mountain; down the pathway raced I,
      Yes, raced with dear Ottilia, hand in hand.

    How graceful was her figure! She enchanted
      With the sweet magic of her sea-green eyes;
    On her small feet how firmly was she planted,
      A form where elegance with vigour vies!

    Her voice’s tone, how true and how confiding!
      Her spirit’s inmost depth one seems to see;
    Wisdom her every word is ever guiding,
      Her mouth’s as like a rosebud as can be.

    It is not pangs of love that now steal o’er me,
      I wander not, my reason’s in command;
    Yet strangely am I soften’d, as before me
      She stands, with trembling warmth I kiss her hand.

    When I a lily from the stem had broken,
      I gave it her, and then these words address’d:
    “Ottilia, be my wife by this dear token,
      “That I may be as good as thee, and blest.”

    The answer that she gave, it reach’d me never,
      For presently I woke,--and now lie here
    In my sick chamber, weak and ill as ever--
      As I have hopeless lain for many a year.


~IT GOES OUT~

    The curtain falls, as ends the play,
      And all the audience go away;
    And did the piece give satisfaction?
    Methinks they found it of attraction.
    A much-respected public then
      Its poet thankfully commended;
    But now the house is hush’d again,
      And lights and merriment are ended.

    But hark to that dull heavy clang
      Hard by the empty stage’s middle!
    It was perchance the bursting twang
      Of the worn string of some old fiddle.
    With rustling noise across the pit
    Some nasty rats like shadows flit,
      And rancid oil all places smell of,
    And the last lamp, with groans and sighs
    Despairing, then goes out and dies.--
      My soul was this poor light I tell of.


~THE WILL~

    Now that life is nearly spent,
      Here’s my will and testament,
    Giving every foe a present,
      As a Christian finds it pleasant:

    Let these gentry full of merit
      Have my sickness as their guerdon,
      All that makes my life a burden,--
    All my wretched pangs inherit.

    I bequeath you all the colic
    Which my belly tweaks in frolic,--
    Strangury and these perfidious
    Prussian piles so sharp and hideous.

    Unto you my cramps be given,
      Pains in joints, and salivation,
      Pains in back, and inflammation,--
    Every one the gift of heaven.

    Let this codicil then follow:--
      Lord! that wretched herd demolish,
      And their very name abolish,
    As they in their vileness wallow.


~ENFANT PERDU~

    Forlorn posts leading, thirty long years fought I
      Stoutly and well on freedom’s battle plain;
    Hopeless of triumph, never hoped or thought I
      Safe and uninjured home to see again.

    I watch’d both day and night, slept not a tittle,
      As when I camp’d amongst my friends of yore;
    (And if I felt inclined to doze a little,
      I soon was waken’d by my neighbour’s snore.)

    In those long nights ennui would oft assail me,
      And fear as well,--(’tis fools who never fear;)
    To scare them, I delighted to regale me
      With whistling songs all full of gibe and jeer.

    Yes, watchfully I stood, my weapon grasping,--
      If a suspicious looking fool drew nigh,
    I took a careful aim, and laid him gasping
      With a hot bullet in his paunch or thigh.

    But by-and-by, if I may so express it,
      This clumsy fool, whom I so much deride,
    Proves the best shot; and now, I must confess it,
      My blood pours forth, my wounds are gaping wide.

    A post is vacant! All my wounds are gaping--
      One falls, the others follow in his wake;
    Unvanquish’d fall I,--from my hands escaping
      My arms break not, my heart alone doth break.


~PRINCESS SABBATH~

    In Arabia’s books of stories
    Read we of enchanted princes,
    Who from time to time recover’d
    Their once handsome pristine features;

    Or the whilome hairy monster
    To a king’s son is converted,
    Dress’d in gay and glittering garments,
    And the flute divinely playing.

    Yet the magic time expires,
    And once more and of a sudden
    We behold his royal highness
    Changed into a shaggy monster.

    Of a prince of such-like fortune
    Sings my song. His name is Israel,
    And a witch’s art has changed him
    To the figure of a dog.

    As a dog, with doggish notions,
    All the week his time he muddles
    Through life’s filthiness and sweepings,
    To the scavengers’ derision.

    But upon each Friday evening,
    Just at twilight, the enchantment
    Ceases suddenly,--the dog
    Once more is a human being.

    As a man, with human feelings,
    With his head and breast raised proudly
    Dress’d in festival attire,
    His paternal halls he enters.

    “Hail, all hail, ye halls belovèd
    “Of my gracious regal father!
    “Tents of Jacob, your all-holy
    “Entrance posts my mouth thus kisses!”

    Through the house mysteriously
    Goes a whispering and buzzing,
    And the unseen master of it
    Shudd’ring breathes amid the silence,--

    Silence, save the seneschal
    (Vulgo Synagogue-Attendant)
    Here and there with vigour springing,
    As the lamps he seeks to kindle.

    Golden lights so comfort-giving,
    How they glitter, how they glimmer!
    Proudly also flare the tapers
    On the rails of the Almemor.

    At the shrine wherein the Thora
    Is preserved, and which is cover’d
    With the costly silken cov’ring
    That with precious jewels sparkles,--

    There beside his post, already
    Stands prepared the parish minstrel,
    Dandy little man, who shoulders
    His black cloak coquettishly.

    His white hand to show the better,
    At his neck he works, his finger
    Pressing strangely to his temple,
    And his thumb against his throat.

    To himself then softly trills he,
    Till at length his voice he raises
    Joyfully, and loudly sings he
    “Lecho Daudi Likras Kalle!

    “Lecho Daudi Likras Kalle--
    “Loved one, come! the bride already
    “Waiteth for thee, to uncover
    “To thy face her blushing features!”

    This most charming marriage ditty
    Was composed by the illustrious
    Far and wide known Minnesinger
    Don Jehuda ben Halevy.

    In the song was celebrated
    The espousals of Prince Israel
    With the lovely Princess Sabbath,
    Whom they call the silent princess.

    Pearl and flower of perfect beauty
    Is the Princess. Fairer never
    Was the famous queen of Sheba,
    Solomon’s old bosom-friend,

    Ethiopian vain blue-stocking,
    Who with her _esprit_ would dazzle,
    And with all her clever riddles
    Was, I fear, extremely tedious.

    But our Princess Sabbath, who was
    Peace itself personified,
    Held in utter detestation
    All debates and wit-encounters.

    Equally abhorr’d she noisy
    And declamatory passion,--
    All that pathos which with flowing
    And dishevell’d hair storms wildly.

    Modestly the silent princess
    In her hood conceals her tresses;
    Soft as the gazelle’s her looks are,
    Slender as an Addas blooms she.

    She allows her lover all things
    Save this one,--tobacco-smoking:
    “Loved one! smoking is forbidden,
    “For to-day the Sabbath is.

    “But at noon, in compensation,
    “Thou a steaming dish shalt taste of,
    “Which is perfectly delicious--
    “Thou shall eat to-day some Schalet!”

    “Schalet, beauteous spark immortal,
    “Daughter of Elysium!”
    Thus would Schiller’s song have sung it,
    Had he ever tasted Schalet.

    Schalet is the food of heaven,
    Which the Lord Himself taught Moses
    How to cook, when on that visit
    To the summit of Mount Sinai,

    Where the Lord Almighty also
    Every good religious doctrine
    And the holy ten commandments
    Publish’d in a storm of lightning.

    Schalet is the pure ambrosia
    That the food of heaven composes--
    Is the bread of Paradise;
    And compared with food so glorious,

    The ambrosia of the spurious
    Heathen gods whom Greece once worshipp’d
    And were naught but muffled devils,
    Was but wretched devil’s dung.

    When the prince this food hath tasted,
    Gleams his eye as if transfigured,
    And his waistcoat he unbuttons,
    And he speaks with smiles of rapture:

    “Hear I not the Jordan murmuring?
    “Is it not the gushing fountains
    “In the palmy vale of Beth-El,
    “Where the camels have their station?

    “Hear I not the sheep-bells ringing?
    “Is it not the well-fed wethers
    “Whom the herdsman drives at evening
    “Down from Gilead’s lofty mountain?”

    Yet the beauteous day fades quickly;
    As with long and shadowy legs
    Hastens on the fell enchantment’s
    Evil hour, the prince sighs sadly,

    Feeling as though with his bosom
    Icy witches’ fingers grappled;
    He’s pervaded by the fear of
    Canine metamorphosis.

    To the prince then hands the princess
    Her own golden box of spikenard;
    Long he smells, once more desiring
    To find comfort in sweet odours.

    Next the parting drink the princess
    Gives the prince--He hastily
    Drinks, and in the goblet only
    Some few drops are left untasted.

    With them sprinkles he the table,
    Then he takes a little waxlight,
    And he dips it in the moisture
    Till it crackles and goes out.


~A FRAGMENT~

1.

    “If, Jerusalem, I ever
    “Should forget thee, let my tongue
    “To my mouth’s roof cleave, let also
    “My right hand forget her cunning--”

    Words and melody are whirling
    In my head to-day unceasing,
    And methinks I hear sweet voices
    Singing psalms, sweet human voices.

    Often to the light come also
    Beards of shadowy-long proportions;
    Say, ye phantoms, which amongst you
    Is Jehuda ben Halevy?

    But they quickly hustle by me;
    Spirits ever shun with terror
    Exhortations of the living--
    But I recognized him well.

    Well I knew him by his pallid,
    Haughty, high, and thoughtful forehead,
    By his eyes so sweetly staring,
    Viewing me with piercing sorrow.

    But I recognized him mostly
    By the enigmatic smile which
    O’er his fair rhymed lips was playing,
    Such as none but poets boast of.

    Years come on and years pass swiftly
    Since Jehuda ben Halevy
    Had his birth, have seven hundred
    Years and fifty fleeted o’er us.

    At Toledo in Castile he
    For the first time saw the light,
    And the golden Tagus lull’d him
    In his cradle with its music.

    His strict father the unfolding
    Of his intellect full early
    Cared for, and began his lessons
    With the book of God, the Thora.

    With his son he read this volume
    In the’ original, whose beauteous
    Picturesque and hieroglyphic
    Old Chaldean quarto pages

    Spring from out the childish ages
    Of our world, and for that reason
    Smile so trustingly and sweetly
    On each childlike disposition.

    And this genuine ancient text
    By the boy was likewise chanted
    In the ancient and establish’d
    Sing-song fashion, known as Tropp.

    And melodiously he gurgled
    Those fat oily gutturals;
    Like a very bird he warbled
    That fine quaver, the Schalscheleth.

    And the Targum Onkelos,
    Which is written in the idiom,
    The low-Hebrew sounding idiom
    That we call the Aramæan,

    And that to the prophet’s language
    Has about the same relation
    As the Swabian to the German,--
    In this bastard Hebrew likewise

    Was the youth betimes instructed
    And the knowledge thus acquired
    Proved extremely useful to him
    In the study of the Talmud.

    Yes, full early did his father
    Lead him onward to the Talmud
    And he then unfolded to him
    The Halacha, that illustrious

    Fighting school, where the expertest
    Dialectic athletes both of
    Babylon and Pumpeditha
    Carry on their mental combats.

    Here the boy could gain instruction
    In the arts, too, of polemics;
    Later, in the book Cosari
    Was his mastership establish’d.

    Yet the heavens pour down upon us
    Lights of two distinct descriptions:
    Glaring daylight of the sun,
    And the moonlight’s softer lustre.

    Thus two different lights the Talmud
    Also sheds, and is divided
    In Halacha and Hagada.--
    Now the first’s a fighting school,

    But the latter, the Hagada,
    I should rather call a garden,
    Yes, a garden, most fantastic,
    Comparable to that other,

    Which in days of yore was planted
    In the town of Babylon,--
    Great Semiramis’s garden,
    That eighth wonder of the world.

    ’Tis said queen Semiramis,
    Who had, when a child, been brought up
    By the birds, and had contracted
    Many a bird’s peculiar custom,

    On the mere flat ground would never
    Promenade, as human creatures
    Mostly do, and so she planted
    In the air a hanging garden.

    High upon colossal pillars
    Palms and cypresses were standing,
    Golden oranges, fair flow’r-beds,
    Marble statues, gushing fountains,--

    Firmly, skilfully united
    By unnumber’d hanging bridges
    Which appear’d like climbing plants,
    And whereon the birds were rocking,--

    Solemn birds, large, many-colour’d,
    All deep thinkers, never singing,
    While around them finches flutter’d,
    Keeping up a merry twitter,--

    All things here were blest, and teeming
    With a pure balsamic fragrance,
    Which was free from all offensive
    Earthly smells and hateful odours.

    The Hagada is a garden
    That this airy whim resembles,
    And the youthful Talmud scholar,
    When his heart was overpower’d

    And was deafen’d by the squabbles
    Of the’ Halacha, by disputes
    All about the fatal egg
    Laid one feast day by a pullet,--

    Or about some other question
    Of the same importance, straightway
    Fled the boy to find refreshment
    In the blossoming Hagada

    Where the charming olden stories,
    Tales of angels, famous legends,
    Silent histories of martyrs,
    Festal songs, and words of wisdom,

    Hyperboles, far-fetch’d it may be,
    But impress’d with deep conviction,
    Full of glowing faith,--all glitter’d,
    Bloom’d and sprung in such abundance.

    And the stripling’s noble bosom
    Was pervaded by the savage
    But adventure-breathing sweetness,
    By the wondrous blissful anguish

    And the fabulous wild terrors
    Of that blissful secret world,
    Of that mighty revelation,
    Known to us as Poesy.

    And the art of Poesy,
    Radiant knowledge, understanding,
    Which we call the art poetic,
    Open’d on the boy’s mind also.

    And Jehuda ben Halevy
    Was not merely skill’d in reading,
    But in poetry a master,
    And himself a first-rate poet.

    Yes, he was a first-rate poet,
    Star and torch of his own age,
    Light and beacon of his people,
    Yes, a very wondrous mighty

    Fiery pillar of all song,
    That preceded Israel’s mournful
    Caravan as it was marching
    Through the desert of sad exile.

    Pure and true alike, and spotless
    Was his song, as was his spirit;
    When this spirit was created
    By its Maker, self-contented,

    He embraced the lovely spirit,
    And that kiss’s beauteous echo
    Thrills through all the poet’s numbers,
    Which are hallow’d by this grace.

    As in life, in numbers also
    Grace is greatest good of all;
    He who has it, ne’er transgresses
    In his prose or in his verses.

    Genius call we such a poet
    Of the mighty grace of God;
    He is undisputed monarch
    Of the boundless realms of fancy.

    He to God alone accounteth,
    Not to man, and, as in lifetime,
    So in art the mob have power
    To destroy, but not to judge us.


2.

    “By the streams of Babylon
    “Sat we down and wept, we hangèd
    “Our sad harps upon the willows--”
    Know’st thou not the olden song?

    Know’st thou not the olden tune,
    Which begins with elegiac
    Crying, humming like a kettle
    That upon the hearth is boiling?

    Long has it been boiling in me,
    Thousand years. A gloomy anguish
    And my wounds are lick’d by time,
    As Job’s boils by dogs were lickèd.

    Thank thee, dog, for thy saliva,--
    Though it can but cool and soften--
    Death alone can ever heal me,
    But, alas, I am immortal!

    Years come round and years then vanish--
    Busily the spool is humming
    As it in the loom is moving,--
    What it weaves, no weaver knoweth.

    Years come round and years then vanish,
    Human tears are dripping, running
    On the earth, and then the earth
    Sucks them in with eager silence.

    Seething mad! The cover leaps up--
    “Happy he whose daring hand
    “Taketh up thy little ones,
    “Dashing them against the stones.”

    God be praised! the seething slowly
    In the pot evaporates,
    Then is mute. My spleen is soften’d,
    My west-eastern darksome spleen.

    And my Pegasus is neighing
    Once more gaily, and the nightmare
    Seems to shake with vigour off him,
    And his wise eyes thus are asking:

    Are we riding back to Spain,
    To the little Talmudist there,
    Who was such a first-rate poet,--
    To Jehuda ben Halevy?

    Yes, he was a first-rate poet,
    In the realm of dreams sole ruler
    With the spirit-monarch’s crown,
    By the grace of God a poet,

    Who in all his sacred metres,
    In his madrigals, terzinas,
    Canzonets, and strange ghaselas
    Pour’d out all the’ abundant fire

    Of his noble god-kiss’d spirit!
    Of a truth this troubadour
    Was upon a par with all the
    Best lute-players of Provence,

    Of Poitou and of Guienne,
    Roussillon and every other
    Charming orange-growing region
    Of gallant old Christendom.

    Charming orange-growing regions
    Of gallant old Christendom!
    How they glitter, smell, and tingle
    In the twilight of remembrance!

    Beauteous world of nightingales!
    Where we only in the place of
    The true God, the false God worshipp’d
    Of the Muses and of love.

    Clergy, bearing wreaths of roses
    On their bald pates, sang the psalms
    In the charming langue d’oc;
    Laity, all gallant knights,

    On their high steeds proudly trotting,
    Verse and rhyme were ever making
    To the honour of the ladies
    Whom their hearts to serve delighted.

    There’s no love without a lady.
    Therefore to a Minnesinger
    Was a lady just as needful
    As to bread-and-butter, butter.

    And the hero, whom we sing of,
    Our Jehuda ben Halevy,
    Also had his heart’s fair lady;
    But she was of special kind.

    She no Laura was, whose eyes,
    Mortal constellations, kindled
    On Good Friday the notorious
    Fire within the famed Cathedral;

    She was not a chatelaine
    Who, attired in youthful graces,
    Took the chair at tournaments,
    And the laurel wreath presented.

    Casuist in the laws of kisses
    She was not, no doctrinaire,
    Who within the learned college
    Of a court of love gave lectures.

    She the Rabbi was in love with
    Was a poor and mournful loved one,
    Woeful image of destruction,
    And her name--Jerusalem!

    In his early days of childhood
    She his one sole love was always;
    E’en the word Jerusalem
    Made his youthful spirit quiver.

    Purple flames were ever standing
    On the boy’s cheek, and he hearken’d
    When a pilgrim to Toledo
    Came from out the far east country,

    And recounted how deserted
    And uncleanly was the city
    Where upon the ground the traces
    Of the prophets’ feet still glisten’d;

    Where the air is still perfumed
    By the’ undying breath of God--
    “O the mournful sight!” a pilgrim
    Once exclaim’d, whose beard was floating

    White as silver, notwithstanding
    That the hair which form’d its end
    Once again grew black, appearing
    As if getting young again.

    And a very wondrous pilgrim
    Might he be, his eyes were peering
    As through centuries of sorrow,
    And he sigh’d: “Jerusalem!

    “She, the crowded holy city,
    “Is converted to a desert,
    “Where wood-devils, werewolves, jackals
    “Their accursèd home have made.

    “Serpents, birds of night, are dwelling
    “In its weather-beaten ruins;
    “From the window’s airy bow
    “Peeps the fox with much contentment.

    “Here and there a ragged fellow
    “Comes sometimes from out the desert,
    “And his hunch-back’d camel feedeth
    “In the long grass growing round it.

    “On the noble heights of Zion,
    “Where stood up the golden fortress
    “Whose great majesty bore witness
    “To the mighty monarch’s glory,--

    “There, with noisome weeds encumber’d,
    “Nought now lies but gray old ruins,
    “Gazing with such looks of sorrow
    “One must fancy they are weeping.

    “And ’tis said they wept in earnest,
    “Once in each year, on the ninth day
    “Of the month’s that known as Ab--
    “With my own eyes, full of weeping,

    “I the clammy drops have witness’d
    “Down the large stones slowly trickling,
    “And have heard the broken columns
    “Of the temple sadly moaning.”

    Such-like pious pilgrim-sayings
    Waken’d in the youthful bosom
    Of Jehuda ben Halevy
    Yearnings for Jerusalem.

    Poet’s yearnings! As foreboding,
    Visionary, sad, as those
    In the Château Blay experienced
    Whilome by the noble Vidam,

    Messer Geoffroy Rudello,
    When the knights, returning homeward
    From the Eastern land, asserted
    Loudly, as they clash’d their goblets,

    That the paragon of graces,
    And the flower and pearl of women,
    Was the beauteous Melisanda,
    Margravine of Tripoli.

    Each one knows that for this lady
    Raved the troubadour thenceforward;
    Her alone he sang, and shortly
    Château Blay no more could hold him;

    And he hasten’d thence. At Cette
    Took he ship, but on the ocean
    He fell ill, and sick and dying
    He arriv’d at Tripoli.

    Here at length, on Melisanda
    He, too, gazed with eyes all-loving,
    Which that self-same hour were cover’d
    By the darksome shades of death.

    Singing his last song of love,
    He expired before the feet
    Of his lady Melisanda,
    Margravine of Tripoli.

    Wonderful was the resemblance
    In the fate of these two poets!
    Save that in old age the former
    His great pilgrimage commenced.

    And Jehuda ben Halevy
    At his mistress’ feet expired,
    And his dying head, it rested
    On Jerusalem’s dear knees.


3.

    When the fight at Arabella
    Had been won, great Alexander
    Placed Darius’ land and people,
    Court and harem, horses, women,

    Elephants, and daric coins,
    Crown and sceptre, golden lumber--
    Placed them all inside his spacious
    Macedonian pantaloons.

    In the tent of great Darius,
    Who himself had fled, because he
    Fear’d he also might be placed there,
    The young hero found a casket.

    ’Twas a little golden box,
    Richly ornamented over
    With incrusted stones and cameos,
    And with miniature devices.

    Now this casket, in itself
    Of inestimable value,
    Served to hold the priceless treasures
    Of the monarch’s body-jewels.

    All the latter Alexander
    On his brave commanders lavish’d,
    Smiling at the thought of men
    Childlike loving colour’d pebbles.

    One fair valuable gem he
    To his mother dear presented;
    ’Twas the signet ring of Cyrus,
    Turn’d into a brooch henceforward.

    To his famous old preceptor
    Aristotle he presented
    A fine onyx for his splendid
    Cabinet of natural history.

    In the casket were some pearls too,
    Forming quite a wondrous string,
    Which were once to Queen Atossa
    Given by the false knave Smerdis;

    But the pearls were all quite real,
    And the merry victor gave them
    To a pretty dancer whom he
    Brought from Corinth, named Miss Thais.

    In her hair the latter wore them,
    In bacchantic fashion streaming,
    On that night when she was dancing
    At Persepolis, and wildly

    In the regal castle hurl’d her
    Impious torch, till, loudly crackling,
    Soon the flames obtain’d the mastery,
    And the fortress laid in ruins.

    On the death of beauteous Thais
    Who of some bad Babylonian
    Illness died at Babylon,
    All her pearls were sold by auction

    At the public auction-rooms there;
    Purchased by a priest from Memphis,
    He to Egypt took them with him,
    Where they on the toilet table

    Of fair Cleopatra glisten’d;
    She the finest pearl amongst them
    Crush’d and mix’d with wine and swallow’d,
    Her friend Antony to banter.

    With the final Ommiad monarch
    Came the string of pearls to Spain,
    And they twined around the turban
    Worn at Cord’va, by the Caliph.

    Abderam the Third he wore them
    As his breast-knot at the tourney
    Where he pierced through thirty golden
    Rings, and fair Zuleima’s bosom.

    When the Moorish race was vanquish’d,
    Then the Christians gain’d possession
    Of the pearls, which rank’d thenceforward
    As crown-jewels of Castile.

    Their most Cath’lic Majesties,
    Queens of Spain, were wont to wear them
    On all court and state occasions,
    At all bullfights, grand processions,

    And at each auto da fé,
    When they took their pleasure, sitting
    At the balcony, in sniffing
    Up the smell of burnt old Jews.

    Later still, old Mendizabel,
    Satan’s grandson, pawn’d these jewels,
    Vainly hoping thus to meet the
    Deficit in the finances.

    At the Tuileries the jewels
    Finally appear’d again,
    Glittering on the neck of Madame
    Salomon, the Baroness.

    With the fair pearls thus it happened.--
    Less adventurous the fortune
    Of the casket, Alexander
    Keeping it for his own use.

    He the songs enclosed within it
    Of ambrosia-scented Homer,
    His great fav’rite, and the casket
    All night long was wont to stand

    At his bed’s head; when the monarch
    Slept, the heroes’ airy figures
    Came from out it, o’er his visions
    Creeping in fantastic fashion.

    Other times and other birds too--
    I myself have erst delighted
    In the stories of the actions
    Of Pelides, of Odysseus.

    All then seem’d so sunny-golden
    And so purple to my spirit,
    Vine-leaves twined around my forehead,
    And the trumpets flourish’d loudly.

    Hush, no more! All broken lieth
    Now my haughty victor-chariot,
    And the panthers, who once drew it,
    Now are dead, as are the women

    Who, to sound of drum and cymbal,
    Danced around, and I myself
    Writhe upon the ground in anguish.
    Weak and crippled--hush, no more!

    Hush, no more! we now are speaking
    Of the casket of Darius,
    And within myself thus thought I:
    Should I e’er possess the casket,

    And not be obliged to change it
    Into cash, for want of money,
    I would then enclose within it
    All the poems of our Rabbi,--

    All Jehuda ben Halevy’s
    Festal songs and lamentations,
    And Ghaselas, the description
    Of his pilgrimage--the whole I

    Would have written on the cleanest
    Parchment by the best of scribes,
    And the manuscript deposit
    In the little golden casket.

    This should stand upon the table
    Near my bed, and then, whenever
    Friends appear’d and were astonish’d
    At the beauty of the trinket,--

    At the wondrous bas-reliefs,
    Small in size, and yet so perfect
    Notwithstanding,--at the jewels
    Of such size incrusted on it,--

    I should smilingly address them:
    That is but the vulgar covering
    That contains a nobler treasure--
    In this casket there are lying

    Diamonds, whose light doth mirror
    And reflect the light of heaven,
    Rubies glowing as the heart’s blood,
    Turquoises of spotless beauty,

    And fair emeralds of promise,
    Likewise pearls of greater value
    Than the pearls to Queen Atossa
    Given by the false knave Smerdis,

    And that afterwards were worn by
    All the notabilities
    Who this mundane earth have dwelt in,
    Thais first, then Cleopatra,

    Priests of Isis, Moorish princes,
    And the queens of old Hispania,
    And at last the worthy Madame
    Salomon, the Baroness.--

    For those pearls of world-wide glory
    After all are but the mucus
    Of a poor unhappy oyster
    Lying sickly in the ocean;

    But the pearls within this casket
    Are the offspring of a beauteous
    Human spirit, far far deeper
    Than the ocean’s deepest depths,--

    For they are the pearly tears
    Of Jehuda ben Halevy,
    That he over the destruction
    Of Jerusalem let fall.

    Pearly tears, which, join’d together
    By the golden threads of rhythm,
    As a song from poesy’s
    Golden smithy have proceeded.

    And this song of pearly tears
    Is the famous lamentation
    That is sung in all the scatter’d
    And far-distant tents of Jacob

    On the ninth day of the month Ab,
    That sad anniversary
    Of Jerusalem’s destruction
    By the Emperor Vespasian.

    Yes, it is the song of Zion
    That Jehuda ben Halevy
    Sang when dying on the holy
    Ruins of Jerusalem.

    Barefoot and in lowly garments
    Sat he there upon the fragment
    Of a pillar that had fallen,
    Till upon his breast there fell

    Like a gray old wood his hair,
    Shading over in strange fashion
    His afflicted pallid features,
    With his eyes so like a spectre’s.

    In this manner sat he, singing,
    In appearance like a minstrel
    From the times of old, like ancient
    Jeremiah, grave-arisen.

    Soon the birds around the ruins
    By his numbers’ mournful cadence
    All were tamed, and e’en the vulture
    Drew near list’ning, almost pitying,--

    But an impious Saracen
    Came one day in that direction,
    On his charger in his stirrups
    Balancing, his bright lance wielding.

    And the breast of our poor singer
    With this deadly spear transfix’d he,
    And then gallop’d off instanter
    Wing’d as though a shadowy figure.

    Calmly flow’d the Rabbi’s life-blood,
    Calmly to its termination
    Sang he his sweet song,--his dying
    Sigh was still--Jerusalem!

    It is said in olden legend
    That the Saracen was really
    Not a wicked cruel mortal,
    But an angel in disguise,

    Sent from the bright realms of heaven
    To remove God’s favourite
    From the earth, and to advance him
    Painlessly to those blest regions.

    There, ’tis said, there waited for him
    A reception highly flatt’ring
    In its nature to the poet,
    Quite a heavenly surprise.

    Solemnly with strains of music
    Came the’ angelic choir to meet him,
    And instead of hymns, he heard them
    Singing his own lovely verses,

    Synagoguish Wedding-Carmen,
    Hymeneal Sabbath numbers,
    With their well-known and exulting
    Melodies--what notes enthralling!

    While some angels play’d the hautboy,
    Others play’d upon the fiddle;
    Others handled the bass-viol,
    Others beat the drum and cymbal.

    Sweetly all the music sounded.
    Sweetly through the far-extending
    Vaults of heaven these strains re-echoed
    Lecho Daudi Likras Kalle!


4.

    My good wife is not contented
    With the chapter just concluded,
    And especially the portion
    Speaking of Darius’ casket.

    Almost bitterly observes she,
    That a husband with pretensions
    To religion, into money
    Straightway would convert the casket,

    That he with it might be able
    For his poor and lawful spouse
    That nice Cashmere shawl to purchase
    That she stands so much in need of.

    That Jehuda ben Halevy
    Would, she fancies, with sufficient
    Honour be preserved, if guarded
    In a pretty box of pasteboard,

    Deck’d with Chinese elegant
    Arabesques, like those enchanting
    Sweetmeat-boxes of Marquis
    In the Passage Panorama.

    “Very strange it is,”--she added,--
    “That I never heard the name of
    “This remarkable old poet,
    “This Jehuda ben Halevy.”

    Darling little wife, I answer’d,
    Your delightful ignorance
    But too well the gaps discloses
    In the education given

    In the boarding schools of Paris,
    Where the girls, the future mothers
    Of a proud and freeborn nation,
    Learn the elements of knowledge.

    All about the dry old mummies,
    And embalm’d Egyptian Pharaohs
    Merovingian shadowy monarchs,
    With perukes devoid of powder,

    And the pig-tail’d kings of China,
    Lords of porcelain and pagodas,--
    This they know by heart and fully,
    Clever girls,--but, O, good heavens

    If you ask for any great names
    From the glorious golden ages
    Of Arabian-ancient-Spanish
    Jewish schools of poetry,--

    If you ask for those three worthies,
    For Jehuda ben Halevy,
    For great Solomon Gabirol,
    Or for Moses Iben Esra,

    If you ask for these or suchlike,
    Then the children stare upon us
    With a look of stupid wonder,
    And in fact seem quite dumb-founded.

    Let me then advise you, dearest,
    These neglected points to study,
    And to take to learning Hebrew
    Leaving theatres and concerts.

    When a few years to these studies
    Have been given, you’ll be able
    In the’ original to read them,
    Iben Esra and Gabirol,

    And Halevy in addition,
    That triumvirate poetic,
    Who evoked the sweetest music
    From the instrument of David.

    Alcharisi, who, I’ll wager,
    Is to you unknown, although he
    A Voltairian was, six hundred
    Years before Voltaire’s time, spoke thus:

    “In his thoughts excels Gabirol,
    “And the thinker most he pleases;
    “Iben Esra shines in art, and
    “Is the fav’rite of the artist.

    “But Jehuda ben Halevy
    “Is in both a perfect master,
    “And at once a famous poet
    “And a universal fav’rite.”

    Iben Esra was a friend,
    And I rather think, a cousin
    Of Jehuda ben Halevy,
    Who in his famed book of travels

    Bitterly complains how vainly
    He had sought through all Granada
    For his friend, and only found there
    His friend’s brother, the physician,

    Rabbi Meyer, poet likewise,
    And the father of the beauty
    Who in Iben Esra’s bosom
    Kindled such a hopeless passion.

    That he might forget his niece, he
    Took in hand his pilgrim’s staff,
    Like so many of his colleagues,
    Living restlessly and homeless.

    Tow’rd Jerusalem he wander’d,
    When some Tartars fell upon him,
    Fasten’d him upon a steed’s back,
    And to their wild deserts took him.

    Duties there devolved upon him
    Quite unworthy of a Rabbi,
    Still less fitted for a poet--
    He was made to milk the cows.

    Once, as he beneath the belly
    Of a cow was sitting squatting,
    Fing’ring hastily her udder,
    While the milk the tub was filling,--

    A position quite unworthy
    Of a Rabbi, of a poet,--
    Melancholy came across him,
    And to sing a song began he.

    And he sang so well and sweetly,
    That the Khan, the horde’s old chieftain,
    Who was passing by, was melted,
    And he gave the slave his freedom.

    And he likewise gave him presents,
    Gave a fox-skin, and a lengthy
    Saracenic mandoline,
    And some money for his journey.

    Poets’ fate! an evil star ’tis,
    Which the offspring of Apollo
    Worried unto death, and even
    Did not spare their noble father,

    When he, after Daphne lurking,
    In the fair nymph’s snowy body’s
    Stead, embraced the laurel only,--
    He, the great divine Schlemihl!

    Yes, the glorious Delphic god is
    A Schlemihl, and e’en the laurel
    That so proudly crowns his forehead
    Is a sign of his Schlemihldom.

    What the word Schlemihl betokens
    Well we know. Long since Chamisso
    Rights of German citizenship
    Gain’d it (of the word I’m speaking).

    But its origin has ever,
    Like the holy Nile’s far sources,
    Been unknown. Upon this subject
    Many a night have I been poring.

    Many a year ago I travell’d
    To Berlin, to see Chamisso
    On this point, and from the dean sought
    Information of Schlemihl.

    But he could not satisfy me,
    And referr’d me on to Hitzig,
    Who had made the first suggestion
    Of the family name of Peter

    Shadowless. I straightway hired
    The first cab, and quickly hasten’d
    To the magistrate Herr Hitzig,
    Who was formerly call’d Itzig.

    When he still was known as Itzig,
    In a vision saw he written
    His own name high in the heavens,
    And in front the letter H.

    “What’s the meaning of this H?”
    Ask’d he of himself. “Herr Itzig
    “Or the Holy Itzig? Holy
    “Is a pretty title. Not, though,

    “Suited for Berlin.” At length he,
    Tired of thinking, took the name of
    Hitzig, and his best friends only
    Knew that Hitzig stood for Holy.

    “Holy Hitzig!” said I therefore
    When I saw him, “have the goodness
    “To explain the derivation
    “Of the word Schlemihl, I pray you.”

    Many circumbendibuses
    Took the holy one--he could not
    Recollect,--and made excuses
    In succession like a Christian,

    Till at length I burst the buttons
    In the breeches of my patience,
    And began to swear so fiercely,
    In such very impious fashion,

    That the worthy pietist,
    Pale as death, with trembling knees,
    Forthwith gratified my wishes,
    And the following story told me:

    “In the Bible it is written
    “How, while wandering in the desert,
    “Israel oft committed whoredom
    “With the daughters fair of Canaan.

    “Then it came to pass that Phinehas
    “Chanced to see the noble Zimri
    “Thus engaged in an intrigue
    “With a Canaanitish woman.

    “Straightway in his fury seized he
    “On his spear, and put to death
    “Zimri on the very spot.--Thus
    “In the Bible ’tis recounted.

    “But, according to an oral
    “Old tradition ’mongst the people,
    “’Twas not Zimri that was really
    “Stricken by the spear of Phinehas;

    “But the latter, blind with fury,
    “In the sinner’s place, by ill-luck
    “Chanced to kill a guiltless person,
    “Named Schlemihl ben Zuri Schadday.”--

    He, then, this Schlemihl the First,
    Was the ancestor of all the
    Race Schlemihlian. We’re descended
    From Schlemihl ben Zuri Schadday.

    Certainly no wondrous actions
    Are preserved of his; we only
    Know his name, and in addition
    Know that he was a Schlemihl.

    But a pedigree is valued
    Not according to its fruits, but
    Its antiquity alone--
    Ours three thousand years can reckon.

    Years come round, and years then vanish--
    Full three thousand years have fleeted
    Since the death of our forefather
    This Schlemihl ben Zuri Schadday.

    Phinehas, too, has long been dead,
    But his spear is in existence,
    And incessantly we hear it
    Whizzing through the air above us.

    And the noblest hearts it pierces--
    Both Jehuda ben Halevy,
    Also Moses Iben Esra,
    And it likewise struck Gabirol,

    Yes, Gabirol, that truehearted
    God-devoted Minnesinger,
    That sweet nightingale, who sang to
    God instead of to a rose,--

    That sweet nightingale who caroll’d
    Tenderly his loving numbers
    In the darkness of the Gothic
    Mediæval night of earth!

    Undismay’d and caring nothing
    For grimaces or for spirits,
    Or the chaos of delirium
    And of death those ages haunting,

    Our sweet nightingale thought only
    Of the Godlike One he loved so,
    Unto Whom he sobb’d his love,
    Whom his hymns were glorifying.

    Thirty springs Gabirol witness’d
    On this earth, but loud-tongued Fama
    Trumpeted abroad the glory
    Of his name through every country.

    Now at Cordova, his home, he
    Had a Moor as nextdoor neighbour,
    Who wrote verses, like the other,
    And the poet’s glory envied.

    When he heard the poet singing,
    Then the Moor’s bile straight flow’d over,
    And the sweetness of the songs was
    Bitter wormwood to this base one.

    He enticed his hated rival
    To his house one night, and slew him
    There, and then the body buried
    In the garden in its rear.

    But behold! from out the spot
    Where the body had been hidden,
    Presently there grew a fig-tree
    Of the most enchanting beauty.

    All its fruit was long in figure,
    And of strange and spicy sweetness;
    He who tasted it, sank into
    Quite a dreamy state of rapture.

    ’Mongst the people on the subject
    Much was said aloud or whisper’d,
    Till at length the rumour came to
    The illustrious Caliph’s ears.

    He with his own tongue first tasted
    This strange fig-phenomenon,
    And then form’d a strict commission
    Of inquiry on the matter.

    Summarily they proceeded;
    On the owner of the tree’s soles
    Sixty strokes of the bamboo they
    Gave, and then his crime confess’d he.

    Thereupon they tore the tree up
    By its roots from out the ground,
    And the body of the murder’d
    Man Gabirol was discover’d.

    He was buried with due honour,
    And lamented by his brethren;
    And the selfsame day they also
    Hang’d the Moor at Cordova.


~DISPUTATION~

    In the Aula at Toledo
      Loudly are the trumpets blowing
    To the spiritual tourney,
      Gaily dress’d, the crowd are going.

    This is no mere worldly combat,
      Not one arm of steel here glances;
    Sharply pointed and scholastic
      Words are here the only lances.

    Gallant Paladins here fight not,
      Ladies’ honest fame defending;
    Capuchins and Jewish Rabbis
      Are the knights who’re here contending.

    In the place of helmets are they
      Scull caps and capouches wearing;
    Scapular and _Arbecanfess_
      Are the armour they are bearing.

    Which God is the one true God?
      He, the Hebrew stern and glorious
    Unity, whom Rabbi Juda
      Of Navarre would see victorious?

    Or the triune God, whom Christians
      Hold in love and veneration,
    As whose champion Friar Jose,
      The Franciscan, takes his station?

    By the might of weighty reasons,
      And the logic taught at college,
    And quotations from the authors
      Whose repute one must acknowledge,

    Either champion _ad absurdum_
      His opponent would bring duly,
    And the pure divinity
      Of his own God point out truly.

    ’Tis laid down that he whose foeman
      Manages his cause to smother,
    Should be bound to take upon him
      The religion of the other,

    And the Jew be duly christen’d,--
      This was the express provision,--
    On the other hand the Christian
      Bear the rite of circumcision.

    Each one of the doughty champions
      Has eleven comrades by him,
    All to share his fate determined,
      And for weal or woe keep nigh him.

    While the monks who back the friar
      With assurance full and steady
    Hold the holy-water vessels
      For the rite of christening ready,

    Swinging sprinkling-brooms and censers,
      Whence the incense smoke is rising,--
    All their adversaries briskly
      Whet their knives for circumcising.

    By the lists within the hall stand,
      Ready for the fray, both forces,
    And the crowd await the signal,
      Eager for the knights’ discourses.

    ’Neath a golden canopy,
      While their courtiers duly flatter,
    Both the king and queen are sitting;
      Quite a child appears the latter.

    With a small French nose, her features
      Are in roguishness not wanting,
    And the ever laughing rubies
      Of her mouth are quite enchanting.

    Fragile fair inconstant flower,--
      May the grace of God be with her!--
    From the merry town of Paris
      She has been transplanted hither,

    To the country where the Spanish
      Old grandees’ stiff manners gall her;
    Whilome known as Blanche de Bourbon,
      Donna Blanca now they call her.

    And the monarch’s name is Pedro,
      With the nickname of The Cruel;
    But to-day, in gentle mood, he
      Looks as if he ne’er could do ill.

    With the nobles of his court he
      Enters into conversation,
    And both Jew and Moor addresses
      With a courteous salutation.

    For these sons of circumcision
      Are the monarch’s favourite creatures;
    They command his troops, and also
      In finances are his teachers.

    Suddenly the drums ’gin beating,
      And the trumpets’ bray announces
    That the conflict is beginning,
      Where each knight the other trounces.

    The Franciscan monk commences,
      Bursting into furious passion,
    And his voice, now harsh, now growling,
      Blusters in a curious fashion.

    Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
      In one sentence he comprises,
    And the seed accurst of Jacob
      In the Rabbi exorcises.

    For in suchlike controversies
      Little devils oft are hidden
    In the Jews, and give them sharpness,
      Wit, and arguments when bidden.

    Having thus expell’d the devil
      By his mighty exorcism,
    Comes the monk, dogmatically,
      Quoting from the catechism.

    He recounts how in the Godhead
      Persons three are comprehended,
    Who, whenever they so will it,
      Into one are straightway blended.

    ’Tis a mystery unfolded
      But to those who, in due season,
    Have escaped from out the prison
      And the chains of human reason.

    He recounts how God was born at
      Bethlehem, of a tenderhearted
    Virgin, whose divine unsullied
      Innocency ne’er departed.

    How they laid the Lord Almighty
      In a lowly stable manger,
    Where the calf and heifer meekly
      Stood around the newborn stranger.

    He recounts, too, how the Lord
      From King Herod’s minions flying,
    Went to Egypt, how still later
      Death’s sharp pangs he suffer’d, dying.

    In the time of Pontius Pilate,
      Who subscribed his condemnation,
    Urged on by the Jews and cruel
      Pharisees’ confederation.

    He recounts, too, how the Lord,
      Bursting from the tomb’s dark prison
    On the third day, into heaven
      Had in glorious triumph risen;

    How, when ’tis the proper time, he
      Would return to earth in splendour,
    At Jehoshaphat, to judge there
      Every quick and dead offender.

    “Tremble, Jews!” exclaim’d the friar,
      “At the God whom ye tormented
    “Cruelly with thorns and scourges,
      “To whose death ye all consented.

    “Jews, ye were his murderers! nation
      “Of vindictive fierce behaviour!
    “Him who comes to free you, still ye
      “Slay,--ye murder him, the Saviour.

    “Jews, the carrion where the demons
      “Coming from the lower regions
    “Dwell, your bodies are the barracks
      “Of the devil’s wicked legions.

    “Thomas of Aquinas says so,
      “He is famed in Christian story,
    “Call’d the mighty ox of learning,
      “Orthodoxy’s light and glory.

    “Villain race of Jews! you’re nought but
      “Wolves, hyenas, jackals hateful,
    “Church-yard prowlers, who deem only
      “Flesh of corpses to be grateful.

    “Jews, O Jews! you’re hogs and monkeys,
      “Monsters cruel and perfidious,
    “Whom they call rhinoceroses,
      “Crocodiles and vampires hideous.

    “Ye are ravens, owls, and screechowls,
      “Rats and miserable lapwings,
    “Gallows’-birds and cockatrices,
      “Very scum of all that flap wings!

    “Ye are vipers, ye are blindworms,
      “Rattlesnakes, disgusting adders,
    “Poisonous toads--Christ soon will surely
     “Tread you out like empty bladders!

    “Or, accursèd people, would ye
      “Save your souls so wretched rather?
    “Flee the synagogues of evil,
      “Seek the bosom of your Father.

    “Flee to love’s bright radiant churches,
      “Where the well of mercy bubbles
    “For your sakes in hallow’d basins,--
      “Hide your heads there from your troubles.

    “Wash away the ancient Adam,
      “And the vices that deface it;
    “From your hearts the stains of rancour
      “Wash, and grace shall then replace it.

    “Hear ye not the Saviour speaking?
      “O how well your new names suit you!
    “Cleanse yourselves upon Christ’s bosom
      “From the vermin that pollute you.

    “Yes, our God is very love, is
      “Like a lamb that’s dearly cherish’d,
    “And our vices to atone for,
      “On the cross with meekness perish’d.

    “Yes, our God is very love, his
      “Name is Jesus Christ the blessèd;
    “Of his patience and submission
      “We aspire to be possessèd.

    “Therefore are we meek and gentle,
      “Courteous, never in a passion,
    “Fond of peace and charitable,
      “In the Lamb the Saviour’s fashion.

    “We in heaven shall be hereafter
      “Into angels blest converted,
    “Wandering there in bliss with lily
      “Blossoms in our hands inserted.

    “In the place of cowls, the purest
      “Robes shall we when there be wearing,
    “Made of silk, brocades, and muslin,
      “Golden lace and ribbons flaring.

    “No more bald pates! Round our heads there
      “Will be floating golden tresses;
    “While our hair some charming virgin
      “Into pretty topknots dresses.

    “Winecups will be there presented
      “Of circumference so spacious,
    “That, compared with them, the goblets
      “Made on earth are not capacious.

    “On the other hand, much smaller
      “Than the mouths of earthly ladies
    “Will the mouth be of each woman
      “Who in heaven our solace made is.

    “Drinking, kissing, laughing will we
      “Pass through endless ages proudly,
    “Singing joyous Hallelujahs,
      “Kyrie Eleyson loudly.”

    Thus the Christian ended, and the
      Monks believed illumination
    Pierced each heart, and so prepared for
      The baptismal operation.

    But the water-hating Hebrews
      Shook themselves with scornful grinning,
    Rabbi Juda of Navarre thus
      His reply meanwhile beginning:

    “That thou for thy seed mightst dung
      “My poor soul’s bare field devoutly,
    “With whole dung-carts of abuse thou
      “Hast in truth befoul’d me stoutly.

    “Every one the method follows
      “To his taste best calculated,
    “And instead of being angry,
      “Thank you, I’m propitiated.

    “Your fine trinitarian doctrine
      “We poor Jews can never swallow,
    “Though from earliest days of childhood
      “Wont the rule of three to follow.

    “That three persons in your Godhead,
      “And no more, are comprehended,
    “Moderate appears; the ancients
      “On six thousand gods depended.

    “Quite unknown to me the God is
      “Whom you call the Christ, good brother;
    “Nor have I e’er had the honour
      “To have met his virgin mother.

    “I regret that some twelve hundred
      “Years back, as your speech confesses,
    “At Jerusalem he suffer’d
      “Certain disagreablenesses.

    “That the Jews in truth destroy’d him
      “Rests upon your showing solely,
    “Seeing the delicti corpus
      “On the third day vanish’d wholly.

    “It is equally uncertain
      “Whether he was a connection
    “Of our God, who had no children--
      “In, at least, our recollection.

    “Our great God, like some poor lambkin,
      “For humanity would never
    “Perish; for such philanthropic
      “Actions he is far too clever.

    “Our great God of love knows nothing,
      “Never to affection yields he,
    “For he is a God of vengeance,
      “And as God his thunders wields he.

    “Nothing can his wrathful lightnings
      “From the sinner turn or soften,
    “And the latest generations
      “For the fathers’ sins pay often.

    “Our great God, he lives for ever
      “In his heavenly halls in glory,
    “And, compared with him, eternal
      “Ages are but transitory.

    “Our great God, he is a hearty
      “God, not like the myths that fright us,
    “Pale and lean as any wafer,
      “Or the shadows by Cocytus.

    “Our great God is strong. He graspeth
      “Sun and moon and constellation:
    “Thrones are crush’d, and people vanish
      “When he frowns in indignation.

    “And he is a mighty God.
      “David sings: We cannot measure
    “All his greatness, earth’s his footstool,
      “And is subject to his pleasure.

    “Our great God loves music dearly,
      “Lute and song to him are grateful;
    “But, like grunts of sucking pigs, he
      “Finds the sounds of churchbells hateful.

    “Great Leviathan the fish is
      “Who beneath the ocean strayeth,
    “And with him the Lord Almighty
      “For an hour each morning playeth.

    “With the’ exception of the ninth day
      “Of the month Ab, that sad morrow,
    “When they burnt his holy temple;
      “On that day too great’s his sorrow.

    “Just one hundred miles in length is
      “The Leviathan; each fin is
    “Big as Og the King of Basan,
      “And his tail no cedar thin is.

    “Yet his flesh resembles turtle,
      “And its flavour is perfection,
    “And the Lord will ask to dinner
      “On the day of resurrection

    “All his own elect, the righteous,
      “Those whose faith was firm and stable,
    “And this fish, the Lord’s own favourite,
      “Will be set upon the table,

    “Partly dress’d with garlic white sauce,
      “Partly stew’d in wine and toasted,
    “Dress’d with raisins and with spices,
      “Much resembling matelotes roasted.

    “Little slices of horseradish
      “Will the white sauce much embellish,
    “So make ready, Friar Jose,
      “To devour the fish with relish.

    “And the raisin sauce I spoke of
      “Makes a most delicious jelly,
    “And will be full well adapted,
      “Friar Jose, to thy belly.

    “What God cooks, is quite perfection--
      “Monk, my honest counsel follow,
    “And be circumcised, your portion
      “Of Leviathan to swallow.”--

    Thus the Rabbi to allure him
      Spoke with inward mirth insulting,
    And the Jews, with pleasure grunting,
      Brandish’d all their knives exulting.

    To cut off the forfeit foreskins,
      Victors after all the fighting,
    Genuine spolia opima
      In this conflict so exciting.

    But the monks to their religion
      Stuck, despite the Jews’ derision,
    And were equally reluctant
      To submit to circumcision.

    Next the Catholic converter
      Answer’d, when the Jew had finish’d,
    His abuse again repeating,
      Full of fury undiminish’d.

    Then the Rabbi with a cautious
      Ardour, with his answer follow’d;
    Though his heart was boiling over,
      All his rising gall he swallow’d.

    He appeals unto the Mischna,
      Treatises and commentaries,
    And with extracts from the Tausves-
      Jontof his quotations varies.

    But what blasphemy now speaks the
      Friar, arguments in want of!
    He exclaim’d: “I wish the devil
      “Had your stupid Tausves-Jontof!”

    “This surpasses all, good heavens!”
      Fearfully the Rabbi screeches,
    And his patience lasts no longer,
      Like a maniac’s soon his speech is.

    “If the Tausves-Jontof’s nothing,
      “What is left? O vile detractor!
    Lord, avenge this foul transgression!
      “Punish, Lord, this malefactor!

    “For the Tausves-Jontof, God,
      “Is thyself! And on the daring
    “Tausves-Jontof’s base denier
      “Thou must vent thy wrath unsparing.

    “Let the earth consume him, like the
      “Wicked band of Cora, quickly,
    “Who their plots and machinations
      “Sow’d against thee, Lord, so thickly.

    “Punish, O my God, his baseness!
      “Thunder forth thy loudest thunder;
    “Thou with pitch and brimstone Sodom
      “And Gomorrha didst bring under.

    “Strike these Capuchins with vigour,
      “As of yore thou struckest Pharaoh
    “Who pursued us, as well-laden
      “Flying from his land we were, Oh!

    “Knights a hundred thousand follow’d
      “This proud monarch of Mizrayim,
    “In steel armour, with bright weapons
      “In their terrible Jadayim.

    “Lord, thy right hand then extending,
      “Pharaoh and his host were smitten
    “In the Red Sea, and were drown’d there
      “As we drown a common kitten.

    “Strike these Capuchins with vigour,
      “Show the wicked wretches clearly
    “That the lightnings of thine anger
      “Are not smoke and bluster merely.

    “Then thy triumph’s praise and glory
      “I will sing and tell of proudly,
    “And moreover will, like Miriam,
      “Dance and play the timbrel loudly.”

    Then the monk with equal passion
      Answer’d thus the furious Rabbi:
    “Villain, may the Lord destroy thee,
      “Damnable, accurst, and shabby!

    “I can well defy your devils
      “Whom the Evil One created,
    “Lucifer and Beelzebub,
      “Astaroth and Belial hated.

    “I can well defy your spirits,
      “And your hellish tricks unhallow’d,
    “For in me is Jesus Christ, since
      “I his body blest have swallow’d.

    “Christ my only favourite food is,
      “Than Leviathan more savoury,
    “With its boasted garlic white sauce
      “Cook’d by Satan, full of knavery.

    “Ah! instead of thus disputing,
      “I would sooner roast and bake you
    “With your comrades on the warmest
      “Funeral pile, the devil take you!”

    Thus for God and faith the tourney
      Goes on in confusion utter;
    But in vain the doughty champions
      Screech and rail and storm and splutter.

    For twelve hours the fight has lasted,
      Neither side gives signs of tiring,
    But the public fast grow weary,
      And the ladies are perspiring.

    And the Court, too, grows impatient,
      Ladies make with yawns suggestions;
    To the lovely queen the monarch
      Turns and asks the following questions:

    “Tell me, what is your opinion?
      “Which is right, and which the liar?
    “Will you give your verdict rather
      “For the Rabbi or the friar?”

    Donna Blanca gazes on him,
      Thoughtfully her hands she presses
    With closed fingers on her forehead,
      And the monarch thus addresses:

    “Which is right, I cannot tell you,
      “But I have a shrewd suspicion
    “That the Rabbi and the monk are
      “Both in stinking bad condition.”


~PEACE-YEARNING~

    O let thy wounds bleed on, and let
      Thy tears for ever flow unbidden--
    In sorrow revels secret joy,
      And a sweet balm in tears is hidden.

    If strangers’ hand did wound thee not,
      Thou by thyself must needs be wounded;
    Thank God with all thy heart, if tears
      To wet thy cheek have e’er abounded.

    The noise of day is hush’d, and night
      In long dark mantle comes from heaven;
    While in her arms, nor fool nor dolt
      Can break the rest to soothe thee given.

    Here thou art safe from music’s noise,
      And from the piano’s hammer-hammer,
    From the grand opera’s pompous notes,
      And the bravura’s fearful clamour.

    Here thou art not pursued, nor plagued
      By endless crowds of idle smatt’rers;
    Nor by the genius Giacomo,
      And all the clique of world-known chatt’rers.

    O grave, thou art the Paradise
      Of ears that shun the rabble’s chorus;
    Death’s good indeed, yet better ’twere
      Our loving mothers never bore us.


~IN MAY~

    The friends whom I kiss’d and caress’d of yore
    Have treated me now with cruelty sore;
    My heart is fast breaking. The sun, though, above
    With smiles is hailing the sweet month of love.

    Spring blooms around. In the greenwood is heard
    The echoing song of each happy bird,
    And flowers and girls wear a maidenly smile--
    O beauteous world, I hate thee the while;

    Yes, Orcus’ self I wellnigh praise;
    No contrasts vain torment there our days;
    For suffering hearts ’tis better below,
    There where the Stygian night-waters flow.

    That sad and melancholy stream,
    And the Stymphalides’ dull scream,
    The Furies singsong, so harsh and shrill,
    With Cerberus’ bark the pauses to fill,--

    These match full well with sorrow and pain.
    In Proserpine’s accursèd domain,
    In the region of shadows, the valley of sighs,
    All with our tears doth harmonize.

    But here above, like hateful things,
    The sun and the rose inflict their stings;
    I’m mock’d by the heavens so May-like and blue--
    O beauteous world, I hate thee anew!


~BODY AND SOUL~

    Poor soul doth to the body say:
    I’ll never leave thee, but I’ll stay
    With thee; yea, I with thee will sink
    In death and night, destruction drink.
    Thou ever wert my second I,
    And round me clungest lovingly,
    As though a dress of satin bright,
    All lined throughout with ermine white--
    Alas! I’ve come to nakedness,
    A mere abstraction, bodiless,
    Reduced a blessèd nullity
    In yon bright realms of light to be,
    In the cold halls of heaven up yonder,
    Where the Immortals silent wander,
    And gape upon me, clatt’ring by
    In leaden slippers wearily.
    ’Tis quite intolerable; stay,
    Stay with me, my dear body, pray.

    The body to poor soul replied:
    Cheer up, be not dissatisfied!
    We peacefully must learn to bear
    What Fate apportions as our share.
    I was the lamp’s wick; I must now
    Consume away; the spirit, thou,
    Wilt be selected by-and-by
    To sparkle as a star on high
    Of purest radiance. I’m but rags.
    Mere stuff, like rotten tinder bags,
    Collapsing fast, and nothing worth,
    Becoming, what I was, mere earth.

    Farewell! take comfort, cease complaining;
    Perchance ’tis far more entertaining
    In heaven than now supposed by thee.
    If thou shouldst e’er the great bear see
    (Not Meyer-beer) in those bright climes,
    Greet him from me a thousand times.


~RED SLIPPERS~

    A wicked cat, grown old and gray,
    That she was a shoemaker chose to say,
    And put before her window a board
    Where slippers for young maidens were stored;
    While some were of morocco made,
    Others of satin were there display’d;
    Of velvet some, with edges of gold,
    And figured strings, all gay to behold.
    But fairest of all exposed to view
    Was a pair of slippers of scarlet hue;
    They gave full many a lass delight
    With their gorgeous colours and splendour bright.
    A young and snow-white noble mouse
    Who chanced to pass the shoemaker’s house
    First turn’d to look, and then stood still,
    And then peep’d over the window sill.
    At length she said: “Good day, mother cat:
    “You’ve pretty red slippers, I grant you that.
    “If they’re not dear, I’m ready to buy,
    “So tell me the price, if it’s not too high.”

    “My good young lady,” the cat replied,
    “Pray do me the favour to step inside,
    “And honour my house, I venture to pray,
    “With your gracious presence. Allow me to say
    “That the fairest maidens come shopping to me,
    “And duchesses too, of high degree.
    “The slippers I’m willing full cheap to sell,
    “Yet let us see if they’ll fit you well.
    “Pray step inside, and take a seat”--

    Thus the wily cat did falsely entreat,
    And the poor white thing in her ignorance then
    Fell plump in the snare in that murderous den.
    The little mouse sat down on a chair,
    And lifted her small leg up in the air,
    In order to try how the red shoes fitted,
    A picture of innocent calm to be pitied.
    When sudden the wicked cat seized her fast,
    Her murderous talons around her cast,
    And bit right off her poor little head.
    “My dear white creature,” the cat then said,
    “My sweet little mouse, you’re as dead as a rat.
    “The scarlet red slippers that served me so pat
    “I’ll kindly place on the top of your tomb,
    “And when is heard, on the last day of doom,
    “The sound of the trump, O mouse so white,
    “From out of your grave you’ll come to light,
    “Like all the rest, and then you’ll be able
    “To wear your red slippers.” Here ends my fable.


~MORAL _1_~

    Ye little white mice, take care where you go,
    And don’t be seduced by worldly show;
    I counsel you sooner barefooted to walk,
    Than buy slippers of cats, however they talk.


~BABYLONIAN SORROWS~

    I’m summon’d by death. I’d fain, my love,
    Have left thee behind in a wood to rove,
    In one of those forests of firs so drear,
    Where vultures build, and wolves’ howlings we hear,
    Where the wild sow fearfully grunts evermore,
    The lawful spouse of the light grey boar.

    I’m summon’d by death. ’Twere better far
    If I, where the stormy billows are,
    Had had to leave thee, my wife, my child,
    And straightway the northpole’s tempest wild
    The waters had flogg’d, and out of the deep
    The hideous monsters that in it sleep,
    The crocodile fierce and the shark, had come
    With open jaws, and around thee swum.
    Believe me, my child, Matilda, my wife,
    That the angry sea, in its wildest strife,
    And the cruel forest less dangers give
    Than the city where we’re now fated to live.
    Though fearful the wolf and the vulture may be,
    The shark, and the monsters dread of the sea,
    Far fiercer, more furious beasts have their birth
    In Paris, the capital proud of the earth.
    Fair Paris, the singing, so gay in her revels,
    That hell to the angels, that heaven to devils.--
    That thee I must leave in this dungeon sad,
    This drives me crazy, this drives me mad.

    With scornful buzzing around my bed
    The black flies come; on my nose and head
    They perch themselves--detestable race!
    Amongst them are some with a human face,
    And elephants’ trunks (though small in span)
    Like the god Ganesa in Hindostan.
    In my brain I hear noises and heavy knocks,
    It sounds as if they were packing a box,
    And my reason departs, alas! alas!
    Ere I myself from this earth can pass.


~THE SLAVE SHIP~

I.

    The supercargo Mynher Van Koek
      In his cabin sits adding his figures;
    He calculates his cargo’s amount,
      And the probable gain from his niggers.

    “My gum and pepper are good: the stock
      “Is three hundred chests of all sizes;
    “I’ve gold dust and ivory too in store,
      “But the black ware by far the best prize is.

    “Six hundred niggers I bought dirt-cheap
      “Where the Senegal river is flowing;
    “Their flesh is firm, and their sinews tough
      “As the finest iron going.

    “I got them by barter, and gave in exchange
      “Glass beads, steel goods, and some brandy;
    “I shall make at least eight hundred per cent.
      “With but half of them living and handy.

    “If only three hundred niggers are left,
      “When I get to Rio Janeiro,
    “I shall have a hundred ducats a head
      “From the house of Gonzales Perreiro.”--

    Here all of a sudden Mynher Van Koek
      Was disturb’d in his meditation,
    For Doctor Van Smissen enter’d in,
      The vessel’s surgeon by station.

    His figure was just as thin as a lath,
      And his nose had warts all over;
    “Well, worthy Doctor,” exclaim’d Van Koek,
      “Are my niggers still living in clover?”

    The Doctor thank’d him, and said in reply:
      “I’ve come with a tale of disaster;
    “Throughout the night, I’m sorry to say,
      “The deaths have grown faster and faster.

    “The average daily number is two,
      “But to-day just seven have died, Sir,--
    “Four men and three women; I wrote the loss
      “At once in the log as my guide, Sir.

    “I closely inspected every corpse,
      “For these rascals have often a notion
    “To feign themselves dead, in hopes that they
      “May be thrown away into the ocean.

    “I took the irons from off the dead,
      “And according to usual custom
    “Next morning early into the sea
      “I bid the sailors thrust ’em.

    “At once the sharks from out of the waves
      “Shot up in countless legions;
    “They love full dearly the niggers’ flesh,
      “My boarders are they in these regions.

    “They have follow’d after the track of the ship,
      “Since we’ve left the land in the distance;
    “The creatures smell the scent of a corpse
      “With ravenous snuffling persistence.

    “In truth ’tis a capital joke to see
      “How after the bodies they follow;
    “One takes the head, another a leg,
      “While the rest the fragments swallow.

    “Then round the ship contented they roll,
      “When they’ve finished their eating and crunching
    “And stare in my face, as if they sought
      “To thank me for their luncheon.”--

    Then spake Van Koek, as he sadly sigh’d,
      When the Doctor his story had finish’d:
    “How to lessen the evil? In what way best
      “Can the rate of the deaths be diminish’d?”

    The Doctor replied: “Many niggers have died
      “By their own misconduct stealthy;
    “Their breath’s so bad, that it poisons the air
      “In the ship, and makes it unhealthy.

    “Through lowness of spirits, too, many have died,
      “And ennui, in this dreary stillness;
    “I think that air and music and dance
      “Would soon remove their illness.”--

    Then cried Van Koek: “An excellent plan!
      “Dear Doctor, I utter no slander,
    “When I say that like Aristotle you’re wise,
      “The tutor of Alexander.

    “The Tulip-improvement Society’s head
      “In the town of Delft may be clever,
    “But he hasn’t one half of your brains, I’m sure,--
      “Your equal I’ve met with never.

    “Then, music, music! The niggers all
      “On the deck I’ll see dancing and kicking,
    “And whosoever won’t join in the fun
      “Shall receive in reward a good licking.”


II.

    On high, from the heaven’s blue canopy,
      Many thousand stars are gleaming,
    Like the eyes of fair women, so large and clear,
      And with locks of yearning beaming.

    They’re looking down on the ocean below,
      Whose waves in the distance are curling,
    In phosphorescent blue vapour all veil’d,
      While the billows are joyously whirling.

    Not a sail on the slave-ship is fluttering now,
      As though without tackle she’s lying;
    But lanthorns are glimmering high on the decks
      Where the dance with the music is vying.

    The cook of the vessel is playing the flute,
      The steersman’s playing the fiddle,
    The trumpet is blown by the Doctor himself,
      And a lad beats the drum in the middle.

    A hundred niggers, both women and men,
      Are yelling and whirling and leaping,
    As though they were mad; and at every spring
      Their irons the tune are keeping.

    They stamp on the ground in uproarious mirth,
      And many a swarthy maiden
    Clasps her naked partner with warmth, while at times
      The air with their groanings is laden.

    The jailer acts as _maître des plaisirs_,
      And dealing his lashes so fearful,
    The weary dancers he stimulates,
      And bids them be merry and cheerful.

    So dideldumdei and schnedderedeng!
      The strange unwonted commotion
    Aroused from their lazy slumbers below
      The monsters fierce of the ocean.

    All-heavy with sleep, the sharks swam up,
      In numbers many a hundred;
    They stupidly stared at the ship on high
      With amazement, and blindly wondered.

    They see that their usual breakfast time
      Has not come as soon as ’tis wanted,
    So they gape and ope wide their throats, their jaws
      With teeth like saws being planted.

    And dideldumdei and schnedderedeng!
      There seems no end to the dances;
    The sharks grow impatient, and bite themselves
      In the tail with their teeth like lances.

    I presume that for music they’ve got no taste,
      Like many an ignoramus;
    Trust not the beast that music loves not,
      Says Albion’s poet famous.

    And schnedderedeng and dideldumdei!
      Not one of the dancers seems lazy;
    At the foremast stands Mynher Van Koek,
      And with folded hands thus prays he:

    “For Christ’s dear sake, O spare, good Lord,
      “The lives of these swarthy sinners;
    “If they’ve anger’d thee e’er, thou know’st they’re as dull
      “As the beasts that we eat for our dinners.

    “O spare their lives, for Christ’s dear sake,
      “Who died for our salvation;
    “For unless I have left me three hundred head,
      “There’s an end to my occupation.”


~AFFRONTENBURG~

    Time fleeteth, yet that castle old,
      With all its battlements, its tower,
    And simple folk that in it dwelt,
      Appears before me every hour.

    I ever see the weathercock
      That on the roof turn’d round so drily;
    Each person, ere he spoke a word,
      Was wont to look up tow’rds it slily.

    He that would talk, first learnt the wind,
      For fear the ancient grumbler Boreas
    Might turn against him suddenly,
      Tormenting him with blast uproarious.

    In truth, the wisest held their tongues,
      For in that place an echo sported,
    Which, when it answer’d back the voice,
      Each word maliciously distorted.

    Amidst the castle garden stood
      A marble fount, with sphinxes round it,
    For ever dry, though tears enough
      Had flow’d inside it, to have drown’d it.

    O most accursèd garden! Ah,
      No single spot was in thy keeping
    Wherein my heart had not been sad,
      Wherein my eye had not known weeping.

    No single tree did it contain
      Beneath whose shade affronts injurious
    Had not against me utter’d been
      By tongues ironical or furious.

    The toad that listen’d in the grass
      Unto the rat hath all confided,
    Who told his aunt the viper straight
      The news in which himself he prided.

    She in her turn told cousin frog,--
      And in this manner each relation
    In the whole filthy race soon learnt
      My dire affronts and sad vexation.

    The garden roses were full fair,
      And sweet the fragrance that they scatter’d;
    Yet early wither’d they and died,
      By a mysterious poison shatter’d.

    And next the nightingale was sick
      To death,--that songster loved and cherish’d.
    That sang to every rose her song;
      Through her own poison’s taste she perish’d.

    O most accursèd garden! Yea,
      It was as though a curse oppress’d it;
    Oft was I seized by ghostly fear,
      While broad clear daylight still possess’d it.

    The green-eyed spectre on me grinn’d,
      Terror with fearful mockery vying,
    While from the yew-trees straightway rose
      A sound of groaning, choking, sighing.

    At the long alley’s end arose
      The terrace where the Baltic Ocean
    At time of flood its billows dash’d
      Against the rocks in wild commotion.

    There sees one far across the main,
      There stood I oft, in wild dreams roaming;
    The breakers fill’d my heart as well
      With ceaseless roaring, raging, foaming.

    A foaming, raging, roaring ’twas,
      As powerless as the billows curling
    That the hard rock broke mournfully,
      Proudly as they their shocks were hurling.

    With envy saw I ships pass by,
      Some happier country seeking gladly,
    While I am in this castle chain’d
      With bonds accurst, and pining sadly.


~THE DRAGONFLY _1_~

    The beauteous dragonfly’s dancing
    By the waves of the rivulet glancing;
    She dances here and she dances there,
    The glimmering, glittering flutterer fair.

    Full many a beetle with loud applause
    Admires her dress of azure gauze,
    Admires her body’s bright splendour,
    And also her figure so slender.

    Full many a beetle, to his cost,
    His modicum small of reason lost;
    Her wooers are humming of love and truth,
    Brabant and Holland pledging forsooth.

    The dragonfly smiled and thus spake she:
    “Brabant and Holland are nought to me;
    “But haste, if my charms you admire,
    “And fetch me a sparklet of fire.

    “The cook has just been brought to bed,
    “And I my supper must cook instead;
    “The coals on the hearth are burnt away,--
    “So fetch me a sparklet of fire, I pray.”

    Scarce had the false one spoken the word,
    When off the beetles flew, like a bird.
    They seek for fire, and soon they find
    Their home in the wood’s left far behind.

    At length they see a candle’s light
    In garden-bower burning bright;
    And then with amorous senseless aim,
    They headlong rush in the candle’s flame.

    The candle’s flame with crackling consumed
    The beetles and their fond hearts so doom’d:
    While some with their lives did expiation,
    Some only lost wings in the conflagration.

    O woe to the beetle, whose wings have been
    Burnt off! In a foreign land, I ween,
    He must crawl on the ground like vermin fell,
    With humid insects that nastily smell.

    One’s bad companions--he’s heard to say,--
    Are the worst of plagues, in exile’s day.
    We’re forced to converse with every sort
    Of noxious creatures, of bugs in short,

    Who treat us as though their comrades were we,
    Because in the selfsame mud we be.
    Of this complain’d old Virgil’s scholar,
    The poet of exile and hell, with choler.

    I think with grief of the happier time,
    When I in my glory’s well-winged prime
    In my native ether was playing,
    On sunny flowers was straying.

    From rosy calixes food I drew,
    Was thought of importance, and wheeling flew
    With butterflies all of elegance rare,
    And with the cricket, the artist fair.

    But since my poor wings I happen’d to burn,
    To my fatherland now I ne’er can return;
    I’m turn’d to a worm, that will soon expire,
    I’m rotting away in foreign mire.

    O would that I had never met
    The dragonfly, that azure coquette,
    With figure so fine and slender,
    The fair but cruel pretender!


~ASCENSION~

    The body lay on the bier of death,
    While the poor soul, when gone its breath,
    Escaping from earth’s constant riot,
    Was on its way to heavenly quiet.

    Then knock’d it at the portal high,
    And spake these words with a heavy sigh:
    “Saint Peter, give me inside a place,
    “I am so tired of life’s hard race.

    “On silken pillows I fain would rest
    “In heaven’s bright realms, and play my best
    “With darling angels at blindman’s-buff,
    “Enjoying repose and bliss enough!”

    A clatter of slippers ere long was heard,
    A bunch of keys appear’d to be stirr’d,
    And out of a lattice, the entrance near,
    Saint Peter’s visage was seen to peer.

    He spake: “The vagabonds come again,
    “The gipsies, Poles, and their beggarly train,
    “The idlers and the Hottentots--
    “They come alone and they come in knots,
    “And fain would enter on heaven’s bright rest,
    “And there be angels, and there be blest.
    “Halloa, halloa! For gallows’ faces
    “Like yours, for such contemptible races
    “Were never created the halls of bliss,--
    “Your portion’s with Satan, far off from this.
    “Away, away, and take your flight
    “To the black pool of endless night.”--

    The old man thus growl’d, but hadn’t the heart
    To continue to play a blustering part,
    So added these words, its spirits to cheer:
    “Poor soul, in truth thou dost not appear
    “To that base troop of rogues to belong--
    “Well, well, I’ll grant thy desire so strong,
    “Because it is my birthday to-day,
    “And I feel just now in a merciful way.
    “But meanwhile tell me the country and place
    “From whence thou comest; and was it the case
    “That thou wast married? It happens sometimes
    “A husband’s patience atones for all crimes;
    “A husband need not in hell to be stew’d,
    “Nor need we him from heaven exclude.”

    The soul replied: “From Prussia I came,
    “My native town is Berlin by name,
    “There ripples the Spree, and in its bed
    “The young cadets jump heels over head;
    “It overflows kindly, when rains begin--
    “A beautiful spot is indeed Berlin!
    “I was a private teacher when there,
    “And much philosophy read with care.
    “I married a chanoinesse--strange to say,
    “She quarrell’d frightfully every day,
    “Especially when in the house was no bread--
    “’Twas this that kill’d me, and now I am dead.”

    Saint Peter cried: “Alack, alack!
    “Philosophy’s but the trade of a quack.
    “In truth it is a puzzle to me
    “Why people study philosophy.
    “It is such tedious and profitless stuff,
    “And is moreover godless enough;
    “In hunger and doubt their votaries dwell,
    “Till Satan carries them off to hell.
    “Well thy Xantippe might make exclamations
    “Against the thin and washy potations
    “From whence upon her, with comforting gleam
    “No eye of fat could ever beam.
    “But now, poor soul, pray comforted be!
    “The strictest commands are given to me,
    “’Tis true, that each who whilst he did live
    “To philosophy used his attention to give,
    “Especially to the godless German,
    “Should be driven away from hence like vermin.
    “Yet ’tis my birthday to-day, as I
    “Have said, so there is a reason why
    “I’ll not reject thee, but ope for a minute
    “The gate of heaven--quick, enter within it
    “With utmost speed--
                        “Now all is right!
    “The whole of the day, from morn’s first light
    “Till late in the evening, thou canst walk
    “Round heaven at will, and dreamily stalk
    “Along its jewel-paved streets so fair;
    “But mind, thou must not meddle when there
    “With any philosophy, or I shall be
    “Soon compromised most terribly.
    “When angels thou hearest singing, assume
    “A face of rapture, and never of gloom;
    “But if an archangel sang the song,
    “Be full of inspiration strong,
    “And say that Malibran ne’er pretended
    “To have a soprano so rich and splendid;
    “And ever applaud each tuneful hymn
    “Of cherubim and of seraphim.
    “Compare them all with Signor Rubini,
    “With Mario and Tamburini,
    “Give them the title of Excellencies,
    “And be not sparing of reverencies.
    “The singers in heaven, as well as on earth,
    “Have all loved flattery since their birth.
    “The world’s great Chapel-master on high,
    “E’en He is pleased when they glorify
    “His works, and delighteth to hear ador’d
    “The wonders of God, the mighty Lord,
    “And when a psalm to His glory and praise
    “In thickest incense clouds they raise.

    “Forget me not. Whenever to thee
    “The glory of heaven causes ennui,
    “Then hither come, and at cards we’ll play.
    “All games alike are in my way,
    “From doubledummy to faro I’ll go,--
    “We’ll also drink. But, _apropos_,
    “If thou should’st meet, when going from hence,
    “The Lord, and He should ask thee from whence
    “Thou com’st, let no word of Berlin be said,
    “But say, from Vienna or Munich instead.”


~THE AFFIANCED ONES~

    Thou weep’st, and on me look’st, believing
    That thou art for my anguish grieving--
    Thou know’st not, wife, that ’tis for thee
    The tear escapes thee, not for me.

    O tell me if it be not true
    That o’er thy spirit sometimes grew
    The blest foreboding, showing thee
    That we were join’d by fate’s decree?
    United, bliss was ours below,
    But sever’d, nought is ours but woe.

    In the great book ’tis written clearly
    That we should love each other dearly.
    Thy place should be upon my breast,
    Here first awoke self-knowledge blest;
    From out the realm of plants, with power
    ’Twas mine to free, to kiss thee, flower!--
    Raise thee to me, to highest life,
    ’Twas mine to give thee soul, my wife.

    Now, when reveal’d the riddles stand,
    When in the hour-glass is the sand
    Run out, weep not, ’tis order’d so--
    Alone thou’lt wither, when I go;
    Thou’lt wither, ere thou yet hast bloom’d,
    Ere thou hast glow’d, be quench’d and doom’d;
    Thou’lt die and be the prey of death
    Ere thou hast learnt to draw thy breath.

    I know it now. By heaven, ’tis thou
    Whom I have loved. How bitter now,
    The moment we are join’d for ever,
    To find the hour when we must sever.
    The welcome meanwhile must give way
    To sad farewell. We part to-day
    For evermore, for ’tis not given
    To us to meet again in heaven.
    Beauty to dust will fall at last,
    Thou’lt pass away, and crumble fast.
    The poets’ fate will happier be,
    Death cannot kill them utterly.
    Annihilation strikes us ne’er,
    We live in poesy’s land so fair,
    In Avalon, where fairies dwell--
    Dear corpse, for ever fare thee well!


~THE PHILANTHROPIST~

    There once was a brother and sister,
    The sister was poor, the brother was rich.
    The poor one said to the rich one:
    “Give me a piece of bread.”

    The rich one said to the poor one:
    “Leave me to-day in peace,
    “While I give my yearly banquet
    “To the lords of the Council all.

    “The first doth turtlesoup relish,
    “The second doth pineapples eat,
    “The third is fond of pheasant
    “And Perigord truffles too.

    “The fourth eats nought but seafish,
    “The fifth in salmon delights,
    “The sixth of each dish eateth,
    “And drinketh even more.”

    The poor rejected sister
    Went hungry back to her house;
    She threw herself on her straw-bed,
    And deeply sighed and died.

    We all alike must perish!
    The scythe of death at last
    Mowed down the wealthy brother,
    As it the sister had mown.

    And when the wealthy brother
    His end approaching saw,
    He sent for his notary quickly,
    And straightway made his will.

    With legacies large and lib’ral
    The clergy he endow’d,
    The schools, and the great museum
    Of zoological things.

    And noble sums moreover
    The great testator bequeath’d
    To the deaf and dumb asylum
    And Jewish Conversion fund.

    A handsome bell bestow’d he
    On the new Saint Stephen’s tower;
    It weighs five hundred centners,
    Of first-rate metal too.

    It is a bell enormous,
    And sounds both early and late;
    It sounds to the praise and glory
    Of that most excellent man.

    It tells, with its tongue of iron,
    Of all the good he has done
    To the town and his fellow-townsmen,
    Whatever might be their faith.

    Thou great benefactor of mortals
    In death as well as in life
    The great bell’s ever proclaiming
    Each benefaction of thine!

    The funeral next with all honour
    And pomp was solemnized,
    The people crowded to see it
    And reverently gazed.

    Upon a coal-black carriage,
    Like a vast canopy
    Adorn’d with black ostrich feathers,
    The splendid coffin lay.

    Trick’d out with plates of silver,
    And silver embroidery fine,
    Upon the black ground the silver
    The grandest effect produced.

    The carriage was drawn by six horses,
    In coal-black trappings disguised,
    That fell, like funeral mantles,
    Down even to their hoofs.

    Behind the coffin were crowded
    The servants in liveries black,
    Their snow-white handkerchiefs holding
    Before their sorrowing face.

    The people of rank in the city,
    In long procession form’d
    Of black and showy coaches,
    Totter’d along behind.

    In this grand fun’ral procession,
    Remember, were also found
    The noble lords of the Council,
    And yet they were not complete.

    The one was missing, whose fancy
    Was pheasant and truffles to eat;
    An attack of indigestion
    Had lately carried him off.


~THE WHIMS OF THE AMOROUS~

(A true story, repeated after old documents and reproduced in excellent
rhyme.)


    Upon the hedge the beetle sits sadly,
    He has fallen in love with a lady-fly madly.

    O fly of my soul, ’tis thou alone
    Art the wife I have chosen to be my own.

    O marry me, and be not cold,
    For I have a belly of glistening gold.

    My back is a mass of glory and show,
    There rubies glitter, there emeralds glow--

    O would that I were a fool just now!
    I’d never marry a beetle, I vow.

    I care not for emeralds, rubies, or gold,
    I know that no happiness riches enfold.

    ’Tis tow’rd the ideal my thought soars high,
    For I am in truth a haughty fly.--

    The beetle flew off, with a heart like to break,
    The fly went away, a bath to take.

    O what has become of my maid, the bee,
    That she when I’m washing may wait on me,

    That she may stroke my soft hair outside,
    For I am now a beetle’s bride.

    In truth, a splendid party I’ll give,
    For handsomer beetle never did live.

    His back is a mass of glory and show,
    There rubies glitter, there emeralds glow.

    His belly is golden, and noble each feature;
    With envy will burst full many a creature.

    Make haste, Miss Bee, and dress my hair,
    And lace my waist, use perfumes rare.

    With otto of roses rub me o’er,
    And lavender oil on my feet then pour,

    That I mayn’t stink or nastily smell,
    When I in my bridegroom’s arms shall dwell.

    Already are flitting the dragonflies blue,
    As maids of honour to wait on me too.

    Into my bridal garland they’ll twine
    The blossoms white of the orange so fine.

    Full many musicians are asked to the place,
    And singers as well, of the grasshopper race.

    The bittern, drone, hornet, and gadfly all come,
    To blow on the trumpet, and beat the drum.

    They’re all to strike up for the glad wedding feast--
    The gay-wingèd guests, from greatest to least,

    Are coming in families dapper and brisk,
    The commoner insects amongst them frisk.

    The grasshoppers, wasps, and the aunts, and the cousins
    Are coming, whilst trumpets are blowing by dozens.

    The pastor, the mole, in black dignified state,
    Has also arrived, and the hour grows late.

    The bells are all sounding ding-dong, ding-a-dong--
    But where’s my dear bridegroom ling’ring so long?

    Ding dong, ding-a-dong, sound the bells all the day,
    The bridegroom however has flown far away.

    The bells are all sounding ding-dong, ding-a-dong--
    But where’s my dear bridegroom ling’ring so long?

    The bridegroom has meanwhile taken his seat
    On a distant dunghill, enjoying the heat.

    Seven years there sits he, until his forgotten
    Poor bride has long been dead and rotten.


~MIMI~

    “I’m no modest city creature
      “By the hearth demurely spinning,
    “But a free cat on the roof,
      “In the air, with manners winning.

    “When in summer nights I’m musing
      “On the roof, in grateful coolness,
    “Music in me purrs, I sing
      “From my heart’s o’erpowering fulness.”

    Thus she speaks, and from her bosom
      Wild and wedding-songs stream thickly,
    And the melody allures
      All the cats unmarried quickly.

    Purring, mewing, thither hasten
      All the young cats, plain or brindled,
    And with Mimi join in chorus,
      Full of love, with passion kindled.

    They are no mere virtuosos
      Who profane, for sordid wages,
    Music, but of harmony
      Are apostles true, and sages.

    They no instruments use ever,
      Each is his own flute and viol;
    All their noses trumpets are,
      Bellies, drums, and no denial.

    They in chorus raise their voices,
      In one general intermezzo,
    Playing fugues, as if by Bach,
      Or by Guido of Arezzo.

    Wild the symphonies they’re singing
      Like capriccios of Beethoven,
    Or of Berlioz, who’s excell’d
      By their strains so interwoven.

    Wonderful their music’s might is!
      Magic notes without an equal!
    E’en the heavens they shake, the stars
      All turn pallid in the sequel.

    When the magic notes she heareth,
      And the wondrous tones delightful,
    Then Selene hides her face
      With a veil of clouds so frightful.

    But the nightingale with envy--
      Scandalous old prima donna--
    Turns her nose up, snuffs, and scorns
      Mimi’s voice, to her dishonour.

    Never mind! She’ll go on singing
      Spite the envy of Signora,
    Till on the horizon’s seen,
      Smiling rosily, Aurora.


~GOOD ADVICE~

    Cease thy blushes and thy sorrow,
      Boldly woo, and, not aside,
    Civil they will be to-morrow,
      And thou thus wilt win thy bride.

    ’Tis the fiddle makes the revel,--
      Give, then, the musicians gold;
    Though thou wish them at the devil,
      Kiss thy aunts-in-law, though old.

    Give a prince his meed of laurel,
      Of a woman speak not ill;
    With thy sausages don’t quarrel
      When thou hast a sow to kill.

    If the church to thee is hateful,
      All the more attend its shrine;
    To the parson be thou grateful,
      Send him, too, a flask of wine.

    If an itching chance to teaze thee,
      Like a man of honour, scratch;
    If thy shoe be tight and squeeze thee,
      Slippers get with all despatch.

    If thy soup has too much seasoning,
      Be not in an angry mood;
    Smiling say, instead of reasoning:
      “Sweet wife, all thou cook’st is good.”

    If thy wife a wish expresses
      For a shawl, straight buy her two;
    Buy her golden brooches, dresses,
      Lace and jewels not a few.

    If thou’lt give this plan a trial,
      Then, my friend, thou’lt surely gain
    Heaven to bless thy self-denial,
      And on earth to peace attain.


~REMINISCENCES OF HAMMONIA~

    Orphan children two and two,
    Wandering gladly on we view,
    All of them blue coats are wearing,
    All of them red cheeks are bearing--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    All are moved when thus they prattle,
    And the money boxes rattle;
    Liberal alms upon them flow,
    That their secret sires bestow,--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    Women of a feeling heart
    Many a poor child kiss apart,
    Kiss his driv’lling nose (not pleasant),
    Give him sweetmeats as a present--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    One, with timid face but willing,
    Throws into the box a shilling,--
    For he has a heart,--then gaily
    Follows he his business daily--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    One a golden louis-d’or
    Next bestows, but not before
    Heavenward looking, hoping blindly
    That the Lord will view him kindly--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    Porters, coopers, working men,
    Servants, make to-day again
    Holiday, and drain their glasses,
    Drinking to these lads and lasses--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    Tutelar Hammonia
    Follows them incognita;
    As she moves, her form gigantic
    Sways about, in manner frantic--
    O the pretty orphan children!

    In the green field where they went
    Music fills the lofty tent,
    Cover’d o’er with flag and banner;
    There are fed in sumptuous manner
    All these pretty orphan children.

    There in lengthy rows they sit,
    Eating many a nice tit-bit,
    Tarts and cakes and sweet things crunching,
    While like little mice they’re munching,--
    All these pretty orphan children.

    Now my thoughts to dwell begin
    On an orphan-house wherein
    There no feasting is or gladness,
    Where lament in ceaseless sadness,
    Millions of poor orphan children.

    There no uniforms are seen,
    Many want their dinner e’en;
    No two walk together yonder,
    Lonely, sorrowfully wander
    Many million orphan children.


~THE ROBBERS~

    While Laura’s arm, with tender feeling,
      Embraced me on the couch, the fox
      Her worthy husband from my box
    My banknotes quietly was stealing.

    My pockets now have got no cash in!
      Was Laura’s kiss a simple lie?
      Ah! what is truth? In days gone by
    Thus Pilate ask’d, his hands while washing.

    This evil world, decay’d and rotten,
      I soon shall ne’er again behold;
      I see that he who has no gold
    Will very soon be quite forgotten.

    For you, pure souls, whose habitation
      In yonder realms of light I see,
      My bosom yearns. No wants have ye,
    So stealing is not your vocation.


~THE YOUNG CATS’ CLUB FOR POETRY-MUSIC~

    The philharmonic young cats’ club
      Upon the roof was collected
    To-night, but not for sensual joys,
      No wrong could there be detected.

    No summer night’s wedding dream there was dreamt,
      No song of love did they utter
    In the winter season, in frost and snow,
      For frozen was every gutter.

    A newborn spirit hath recently
      Come over the whole cat-nation,
    But chiefly the young, and the young cat feels
      More earnest with inspiration.

    The frivolous generation of old
      Is extinct, and a newborn yearning,
    A pussy-springtime of poetry
      In art and in life they’re learning.

    The philharmonic young cats’ club
      Is now returning to artless
    And primitive music, and naïveté,
      From modern fashions all heartless.

    It seeks in music for poetry,
      Roulades with the quavers omitted
    It seeks for poetry, music-void,
      For voice and instrument fitted.

    It seeks for genius’s sovereign sway,
      Which often bungles truly,
    Yet oft in art unconsciously
      Attains the highest stage duly.

    It honours the genius which prefers
      Dame Nature to keep at a distance,
    And will not show off its learning,--in fact
      Its learning not having existence.

    This is the programme of our cat club,
      And with these intentions elated,
    It holds its first winter concert to-night
      On the roof, as before I have stated.

    Yet sad was the execution, alas!
      Of this great idea so splendid;
    I’m sorry, my dear friend Berlioz,
      That by thee it wasn’t attended.

    It was a charivari, as though
      With brandy elated greatly,
    Three dozen pipers struck up the tune
      That the poor cow died of lately.

    It was an utter medley, as though
      In Noah’s ark were beginning
    The whole of the beasts in unison
      The Deluge to tell of in singing,

    O what a croaking, snarling, and noise!
      O what a mewing and yelling!
    And even the chimneys all join’d in,
      The wonderful chorus swelling.

    And loudest of all was heard a voice
      Which sounded languid and shrieking
    As Sontag’s voice became at the last,
      When utterly broken and squeaking.

    The whimsical concert! Methinks that they
      A grand Te Deum were chanting,
    To honour the triumph o’er reason obtain’d
      By commonest frenzy and canting.

    Perchance moreover the young cats’ club
      The opera grand were essaying
    That the greatest pianist of Hungary
      Composed for Charenton’s playing.

    It was not till the break of day
      That an end was put to the party;
    A cook was in consequence brought to bed
      Who before had seem’d well and hearty.

    The lying-in woman lost her wits,
      Her memory, too, was affected,
    And who was the father of her child
      No longer she recollected.

    Say, was it Peter? Say, was it Paul?
      Say who is the father, Eliza!
    “O Liszt, thou heavenly cat!” she said,
      And simper’d and look’d the wiser.


~HANS LACK-LAND~

    Farewell, my wife, said Lack-Land Hans,
      A lofty object elates me;
    Far different goats I now must shoot,
      Far different game awaits me.

    I’ll leave thee behind my hunting horn,
      Thou canst in my absence daily,.
    Play merrily on it, for thou hast learnt
      To blow on the post-horn gaily.

    I’ll also leave thee behind my hound,
      To be the castle’s defender;
    My German folk, like faithful dogs,
      Will guard me and never surrender.

    They offer me the imperial throne,
      Their affection is almost provoking
    My image is graven on every heart,
      And every pipe they are smoking.

    Ye Germans are a wonderful race,
      So simple and yet so clever;
    One forgets that gunpowder, but for you,
      Had been discover’d never.

    Your emperor,--no, your father I’ll be,
      Your welfare shall be my sole glory--
    O blissful thought! it makes me as proud
      As the Gracchi’s mother in story.

    I’ll govern my people by feeling alone,
      And not by the light of mere reason;
    I never could bear diplomacy,
      And politics hate like treason.

    A huntsman am I, and Nature’s own child,
      Who had in the forest my training,
    With chamois and snipe and roebuck and boar,--
      A foe to all nonsense and feigning.

    By proclamations I never enticed,
      No printed pamphlet invented;
    I say: “My people, the salmon’s all gone,
      “With cod for to-day be contented.

    “If I don’t please you as Emperor, take
      “The first donkey that comes about you;
    “I had, when I lived in the Tyrol, no lack,
      “I’ve plenty to eat without you.”

    Thus speak I, but now, my wife, farewell,
      I must end my long discourses;
    My father-in-law’s postilion’s outside,
      Awaiting me with the horses.

    Quick, hand me over my travelling cap,
      With the ribbon all black-red-golden;
    Thou’lt see me soon with the diadem,
      In the dress imperial and olden.

    Thou’lt see me in the Pluvial too,
      The purple robe so glorious,
    The gift of the Saracen Sultan erst
      To Otto, the Cæsar victorious.

    Beneath, I shall wear the Dalmatian dress,
      Whereon, in each species of jewel,
    A train of lions and camels is work’d,
      And fabulous monsters and cruel.

    Upon my breast the stole I shall wear,
      Significantly blended
    With eagles black on a yellow ground,--
      The garment is really splendid.

    Farewell! Posterity shall say
      I reign’d with honest intention.--
    Who knows? Posterity perchance
      My name will never mention.


~RECOLLECTIONS FROM KRÄHWINKEL’S DAYS OF TERROR~

    We, mayor and senate of the town,
    The following orders now lay down
    To all who love their city truly,
    Enjoining them to keep them duly.

    ’Tis foreigners and strangers most
    Who their rebellious spirit boast;
    Thank God, such rogues (to put it fairly)
    The children of the soil are rarely.

    The Atheists likewise are concern’d;
    For he by whom his God is spurn’d
    Is sure at last to hold detested
    All those on earth with power invested.

    Christian and Jew, at close of day,
    Must shut their shops without delay;
    “Obey your rulers” should be ever
    Both Jew and Christian’s first endeavour.

    No person shall be seen at night
    In any street without a light;
    Where three or more in groups are standing,
    Let them at once begin disbanding.

    Each one must bring his weapons all,
    And lay them down in the guildhall;
    And every kind of ammunition
    Is subject to the same condition.

    He who in any public spot
    Ventures to reason, shall be shot;
    He who by gestures dares to reason
    Shall pay the penalty of treason.

    Confide in the authorities,
    So gracious, but withal so wise,
    Who rule the fortunes of the city,
    And hold your tongues, or more’s the pity.


~THE AUDIENCE~

(An old Fable.)


    “I’ll let not my children, like Pharaoh, be drown’d
      “In the Nile’s deep turbulent water;
    “Nor am I a tyrant, like Herod of old,
      “No patron of children’s slaughter.

    “I will, as my gracious Saviour did,
      “Find the sight of the children pleasant;
    “So suffer the children to come, and first
      “The big one, the Swabian peasant.”

    Thus spake the monarch; the chamberlain ran,
      And return’d, introducing slowly
    The stalwart child from Swabia’s land,
      Who made a reverence lowly.

    Thus spake the king: “A Swabian art thou?
      “There’s no disgrace in that surely.”--
    “Quite right! I was born in Swabia’s land,”
      Replied the Swabian demurely.

    “Art thou from the seven Swabians sprung?”
      Ask’d the other.--“In truth I’m descended
    “From one of them only,” the Swabian replied,
      “And not from the whole of them blended.”

    The king then ask’d: “Are dumplings this year
      “In Swabia as usual eaten?”--
    “I’m obliged for the question,” the Swabian rejoin’d,
      “They are not easily beaten.”

    “And do ye still boast big men?” next said
      The monarch.--“Why, just at present
    “The big ones are scarce, but in their place
      “We’ve fat ones,” answer’d the peasant.

    “Has Menzel,” added the king, “received
      “On his ear many boxes lately?”
    “I’m obliged for the question,” the Swabian said,
      “The former ones punish’d him greatly.”

    The king then said, “Thou’rt not such a fool,
      “My friend, as thou fain wouldst persuade me.”
    “That’s because I was changed in my cradle,” said he,
      “By the cobolds, who different made me.”

    The king then spake: “The Swabians are wont
      “To love their fatherland dearly;
    “So why hast thou left thy native home?
      “Explain the reason clearly.”

    The Swabian replied: “Each day I had nought
      “But turnips and sour-crout ever;
    “And had my mother but cook’d me meat,
      “I had left my fatherland never.”

    “One wish I will grant thee,” the monarch then said--
      Then the Swabian in deep supplication
    Knelt down and exclaim’d: “O, Sire, pray grant
      “Their freedom once more to the nation.

    “Freeborn is man, and Nature ne’er meant
      “That he as a slave should perish;
    “O, Sire, restore to the German folk
      “The rights that they manfully cherish!”

    The monarch in deep amazement stood,
      The scene was really enthralling;
    With his sleeve the Swabian wiped from his eye
      The tear that was wellnigh falling.

    At last said the king: “In truth a fine dream!
      “Farewell, and pray learn more discretion;
    “And as a somnambulist plainly thou art,
      “Of thy person I’ll give the possession

    “To two trusty gendarmes, whose duty ’twill be
      “To see thee safe over the border--
    “Farewell! I must hasten to join the parade,
      “The drums are beating to order.”

    And so this affecting audience came
      To a most affecting conclusion.
    But from that moment the monarch allow’d
      No more of his children’s intrusion.


~KOBES I~

    In eighteen hundred and forty-eight,
    When passions men’s minds were heating,
    The German nation’s parliament
    At Frankfort held its meeting.

    Just at this time, in the Senate-house
      Appear’d the white lady ghostly,
    The spectre that heralds the coming of woe,--
      They call her the Housekeeper mostly.

    By night they say in the Senate-house
      She is wont to make her appearance,
    Whenever the Germans their foolish tricks play
      With extra perseverance.

    I saw her myself at the selfsame time
      As she roam’d in the hours of slumber
    Through the silent chambers, wherein were piled
      The middle ages’ old lumber.

    She held the lamp and a bunch of keys
      In her hands so pale and sickly;
    She open’d the presses against the walls,
      And the chests strew’d around her thickly.

    There lie the imperial insignia all,
      There lies the bull all-golden,
    The sceptre, the regal apple, the crown,
      And more of such fancies olden.

    There lie the ancient imperial robes,
      The purple frippery faded,
    The German kingdom’s wardrobe in fact,
      Now rusted and rot-pervaded.

    The Housekeeper mournfully shakes her head
      At the sight, then with deep displeasure
    She suddenly cries at the top of her voice:
      “The whole of them stink beyond measure!

    “The whole of them stink with mice’s dung
      “And rotten and mouldy’s the ermine;
    “And all the gaudy trumpery work
      “Is swarming with noxious vermin.

    “In truth, on this splendid ermine dress,
      “Once used at the coronation,
    “The cats of the Senate-house district are wont
      “To lie, as their lying-in station.

    “’Tis useless to clean them; I pity the fate
      “Of the Emperor next elected;
    “By the fleas in his coronation robe
      “His health will be surely affected.

    “And know ye, that all the people must scratch,
      “Whenever the Emperor itches--
    “O Germans, I dread the princely fleas
      “Who swallow up much of your riches.

    “Yet what is the use of monarch and fleas?
      “For rusty are now and all rotten
    “The olden costumes--By modern days
      “Are the ancient dresses forgotten.

    “The German poet at Kyffhauser said
      “To Barbarossa quite truly:
    “‘I find that we want no Emperor now,
      “When I weigh the matter duly.’

    “But if, spite of all, ye an empire must have,
      “With an Emperor reigning o’er ye,
    “My worthy Germans, don’t suffer yourselves
      “To be snared by genius or glory.

    “Choose one of the people your monarch to be,
      “All sons of the nobles reject ye;
    “Select not the lion, select not the fox,
      “The dullest of sheep elect ye.

    “Elect as your Monarch Colonia’s son,
      “The crown to dull Kobes awarding;
    “The genius of Dulness well-nigh is he,
      “His people he’ll ne’er be defrauding.

    “A log is ever the best of kings,
      “As Esop has shown in the fable;
    “He cannot devour us poor frogs up,
      “As the stork with his long bill is able.

    “Be sure that Kobes no tyrant will be,
      “No Holofernes or Nero;
    “He boasts no terrible antique heart,
      “A soft modern heart has our hero.

    “Though vulgar pride might scorn such a heart
      “Yet in the arms of the helot
    “Of work the unfortunate threw himself,
      “Becoming a regular zealot.

    “The men of the journeymen’s _Burschenschaft_
      “As president Kobes elected;
    “He shared with them their last piece of bread,
      “They held him vastly respected.

    “They boasted that he in all his life
      “Had never been at college,
    “And out of his head composed his books
      “By the light of intuitive knowledge.

    “Yes, his consummate ignorance
      “Was the fruit of his own endeavour;
    “With foreign wisdom and training he
      “Had injured his intellect never.

    “From abstract philosophy’s influence he
      “Kept likewise his thoughts and his spirit
    “Entirely free.--Himself he remain’d!
      “Yes, Kobes has really his merit!

    “The tear of the usual stereotype form
      “In his beautiful eye is gleaming,
    “And from his lips incessantly
      “The grossest stupidity’s streaming.

    “He prates and he grins, and he grins and prates,
      “His words with long ears are provided;
    “A pregnant woman who heard him speak
      “Gave birth to a donkey decided.

    “With scribbling books and knitting he’s wont
      “His idle hours to flavour;
    “The stockings that he with his own hands knit
      “Have met with particular favour.

    “To devote himself wholly to knitting he’s begg’d
      “By Apollo and all the Muses;
    “They’re frighten’d whenever they see that his hand
      “A goose-quill laboriously uses.

    “His knitting recals the olden time
      “Of the Funken,--who all stood knitting
    “While mounting guard,--these men of Cologne
      “No means of amusement omitting.

    “If Kobes is Emp’ror, he’ll surely recal
      “To life these Funken deserving;
    “The valiant band will surround his throne,
      “As the guard imperial serving.

    “He well might be glad to go at their head,
      “And march over France’s borders,
    “And Alsace, Lorraine, and Burgundy fair
      “Bring under Germany’s orders.

    “Yet be not afraid, at home he’ll remain,
      “Intent on a scheme long suspended,
    “A lofty idea, the completion, in fact,
      “Of Cologne Cathedral so splendid.

    “But when the Cathedral’s quite complete,
      “Then Kobes will get in a passion,
    “And sword in hand, will bring the French
      “To account in a regular fashion.

    “He’ll take Alsace and Lorraine away
      “(By France from the empire estreated);
    “To Burgundy, too, he’ll triumphantly go,
      “When once the Cathedral’s completed.

    “Ye Germans, pray lose not your senses quite,
      “If an Emperor’s needed, I’ll name him;
    “The Carnival King of Cologne let it be,
      “As Kobes the First now proclaim him!

    “The fools of the Carnival rout at Cologne,
      “With caps and bells ringing and mocking,
    “Shall be his ministers of state,
      “His scutcheon a knitted stocking.

    “Let Drickes be Chancellor, calling himself
      “Count Drickes of Drickeshausen,
    “And Marizebill the Mistress of State,
      “With the Emperor fondly carousing.

    “Within his good sacred town of Cologne
      “Will be Kobes’s habitation;
    “And when the Cologners hear the glad news,
      “They’ll have an illumination.

    “The bells, the iron dogs of the air,
      “Into joyous barks will be breaking,
    “And the three holy kings from the land of the East
      “In their chapel will soon be awaking.

    “They’ll step outside with their clattering bones,
      “All dancing with rapture and springing;
    “I hear them the Hallelujah’s strains
      “And Kyrie Eleison singing.”--

    Thus spoke the dread white nightly ghost
      With loud uproarious laughter;
    Through all the resounding halls of the place
      The echo rang wildly long after.


~EPILOGUE _2_~

    Graves they say are warm’d by glory;
    Foolish words and empty story!
    Better far the warmth we prove
    From a cow-girl deep in love,
    With her arms around us flung,
    Reeking with the smell of dung.
    And that warmth is better too
    That man’s entrails pierces through
    When he drinks hot punch and wine,
    Or his fill of grog divine,
    In the vilest, meanest den
    ’Mongst the thieves and scum of men,
    Who escape the gallows daily,
    But who breathe and live all-gaily,
    With as enviable fate
    As e’en Thetis’ son so great.--
    Rightly did Pelides say:
    Living in the meanest way
    In the upper world’s worth more,
    Than beside the Stygian shore
    King of shades to be; a hero
    Such as Homer sang is zero.




_ADDENDA TO THE POEMS._


~THE SONG OF SONGS~

    Fair woman’s body is a song
      Inscribed by our great Maker
    In Nature’s mighty album erst,
      When moved to life to wake her.

    Ah yes! propitious was the hour
      When thus he show’d compassion!
    The coy rebellious stuff he work’d
      In true artistic fashion.

    Yes, woman’s body is, ’mongst songs,
      The song most sweet and tender,
    And wondrous strophes are her limbs,
      So snowy-white and slender.

    And then her neck, her glistening neck,--
      O what a godlike notion!--
    Where the main thought, her little head,
      Rocks with a graceful motion.

    Like polish’d epigrams one loves
      Her bosom’s rosebuds dearly;
    Enchanting the cæsura is
      That parts her breasts severely.

    The song has flesh, ribs, hands, and feet,
      No abstract poem this is!
    With lips that rhyme deliciously
      It smiles and sweetly kisses.

    True poetry is breathing here,
      Grace shines in each direction;
    The song upon its forehead bears
      The stamp of all perfection.

    I’ll praise thee, Lord, and in the dust
      Will humbly kneel to show it;
    Bunglers are we, compared with thee,
      Thou glorious heavenly Poet.

    Before the splendour of thy song
      I’ll bow in adoration,
    And to its study day and night
      Pay closest application.

    Yes, day and night I’ll study it,
      No loss of time admitting;
    So shall I soon with overwork
      Be thinner than befitting.


~THE SUTTLER’S SONG~

(From the Thirty Years’ War.)


    The brave hussars I dearly love,
      I love each gallant fellow;
    Without distinction I love them all,
      The blue as well as the yellow.

    The musketeers I dearly love,
      I love the musketeers, too;
    The officers, privates, and recruits,
      And those of older years too.

    The infantry and cavalry--
      I love the brave fellows sincerely;
    And then the artillery,--one and all,
      I love them truly and dearly.

    I love the Germans, I love the French,
      I love the Italians and Dutchmen;
    I love the Bohemians, Spaniards, and Swedes,
      I love both many and much men.

    Whatever may be his native land,
      Whatever his faith or persuasion,
    Provided a man is sound in health,
      I love him on ev’ry occasion.

    Religion and country are nothing more
      Than his outside clothing,--God bless him.
    Away with his cov’ring, that I to my heart
      May fondly and warmly press him!

    A mortal am I, and only too glad
      With any mortal to dally;
    And as for the man who can’t pay on the spot,
      For him I keep a tally.

    The garland green in front of my tent
      In the light of the sun smiles gaily,
    And I am now drinking malmsey wine
      From a fresh-open’d barrel daily.


~HORSE AND ASS~

    A train was rushing along one day,
      With carriages, engine, and tender;
    The chimney vomited forth its smoke,
      Like a dashing old offender.

    The train pass’d a farmyard, and over the hedge
      A grey horse, at the sound of the whistle,
    Stretch’d out his head; an ass stood by,
      Demurely chewing a thistle.

    With wondering gaze the horse long stared
      At the train; then strangely quivering
    In every limb, he sigh’d, and said:
      “The sight has set me a-shivering!

    “I’m sure that if I by nature had been
      “A chesnut, or black, or bay horse,
    “My skin with the fright its colour would change,
      “And make me (as now) a grey horse.

    “The equestrian race is doom’d, beyond doubt,
      “To be swept away in fate’s eddy;
    “Although I’m a grey horse, I cannot but see
      “A black future before me already.

    “The competition of these machines
      “Will certainly kill us poor horses;
    “For riding and driving will man prefer
      “Iron steeds, if so great their force is.

    “And if man can get on without our help,
      “Alike for riding and driving,
    “Good-bye to our oats, good-bye to our hay
      “What chance have we of surviving?

    “The heart of man is hard as a stone,
      “He gives away nothing gratis;
    “They’ll drive us out of our stables, and we
      “Shall starve--what a cruel fate ’tis!

    “We cannot borrow and cannot steal
      “Like mortals whose natures are blacker;
    “We cannot fawn like men and dogs,
      “But shall fall a prey to the knacker.”

    Thus grumbled the horse, and deeply sigh’d,--
      Meanwhile the ass hard by him
    Had quietly chew’d two thistle-tops,
      As if nothing could terrify him.

    He presently answer’d in dainty tones,
      With his tongue first licking his muzzle:
    “With what the future may have in store,
      “My brains I shall not puzzle.

    “You horses proud are threaten’d, no doubt,
      “By a future that’s far from pleasant;
    “But we modest asses are not afraid
      “Of dangers future or present.

    “That grey horses, and chesnut, and piebald, and black,
      “May be done without, true, alas! is;
    “But Mister Steam, with his chimney long,
      “Can never replace us asses.

    “However clever may be the machines
      “Made by man with his senses besotted,
    “The ass as his portion will always have
      “Sure means of existence allotted.

    “Its asses will Heaven, I’m sure, ne’er desert,
      “Who, moved by a calm sense of duty,
    “Turn the mill every day, as their fathers have done,--
      “A sight not deficient in beauty.

    “The mill-wheel clatters, the miller works hard,
      “The meal in the sack well shaking,
    “And people eat their bread and their rolls,
      “As soon as they’ve finished the baking.

    “In Nature’s old-fashion’d and jogtrot way
      “The world will keep spinning for ever;
    “And as changeless even as Nature herself,
      “The ass will alter never.”

           *       *       *       *       *


~MORAL _2_~

    Gone are the days of chivalry,
    And the proud steed must hungry be;
    But L----, the ass, I boldly say,
    Will never want his oats and hay.


~THE ASS-ELECTION~

    Being tired of freedom for some time past
      The beasts’ republic decided
    To be with a single ruler at last
      As its absolute head provided.

    Each kind of beast prepared for the strife,
      Electoral billets were written;
    Intrigues on every side were rife,
      With party zeal all were bitten.

    By long-ear’d gentry at its head
      The asses’ committee was aided;
    Cockades, whose colours were black, gold, and red,
      They boastfully paraded.

    A small party there was of friends of the horse,
      Who yet were afraid of voting,
    So greatly they dreaded the outcry coarse
      The long-ear’d party denoting.

    But when one of them ventured the horse to name
      As a candidate, greater and greater
    Wax’d the noise, and an old long-ear, to his shame,
      Shouted out “Thou art only a traitor.

    “A traitor art thou, in thy veins doth not flow
      “One drop of asses’ blood proper;
    “No ass art thou, and I almost know
      “That a foreign mare was thy dropper!

    “From the zebra perchance thou art sprung; thy striped hide
      “Quite answers the zebra’s description;
    “The nasal twang of thy voice is allied
      “To the Hebrew as well as Egyptian.

    “And if not a stranger, thou art, thou must own,
      “A dull ass, of an intellect paltry;
    “The depths of ass-nature to thee are unknown
      “Thou hear’st not its mystical psalt’ry.

    “But with sweet stupefaction my soul drinks in
      “That sound which all others surpasses;
    “An ass am I, and each hair in the skin
      “Of my tail the hair of an ass is.

    “I am not a Papist, I am not a slave,
      “A German ass am I solely;
    “The same as my fathers, who all were so brave,
      “So thoughtful, demure, and so holy.

    “They were not addicted to doing ill,
      “Or practising gallantry gaily;
    “But trotted off with the sack to the mill
      “In frolicsome fashion daily.

    “Our fathers still live. In the tomb only lie
      “Their skins, their mortal covering;
    “Their happy spirits, high up in the sky,
      “Complacently o’er us are hovering.

    “Ye glorified asses, ye need not doubt
      “That we fain would resemble you ever,
    “And from the path that duty points out
      “We’ll swerve a finger’s breadth never.

    “O what a delight an ass to be,
      “From such long-ear’d worthies descended!
    “From every house-top I’d fain shout with glee:
      “‘An ass I was born--how splendid!’

    “The noble jackass who gave me birth
      “Was of genuine German extraction;
    “From my mother, a German ass of worth,
      “My milk suck’d I with great satisfaction.

    “An ass am I, and fully intend,
      “Like my fathers who now are departed,
    “To stand by the asses, yes, stand to the end
      “By the asses so dear and true-hearted.

    “And since I’m an ass, I advise you all round
      “To choose your king from the asses;
    “A mighty ass-kingdom we thus will found,
      “They being the governing classes.

    “We all are asses. Hee-ha! Hee-ha!
      “As ostlers we will not demean us;
    “Away with the horses! Long live, hurrah,
      “The king of the asinine genus!”

    Thus spake the patriot. Through the hall
      The asses cheer’d him proudly;
    They all, in fact, were national,
      And with their hoofs stamp’d loudly.

    An oaken wreath on the orator’s head
      They put as a decoration;
    He wagg’d his tail (though nothing he said)
      With evident gratification.


~BERTHA~

    She seem’d so gentle, she seem’d so good,
      An angel I thought my lover;
    She wrote the dearest letters to me,
      With kindness teeming all over.

    The wedding was very soon to take place,
      Her relations heard this by dozens;
    My Bertha was a silly thing,
      For she listen’d to aunts and cousins.

    She kept not her word, she broke her oath,
      And yet I have been forgiving;
    Had I married her first, I ne’er should have known
      Either pleasure or love while living.

    When I of a faithless woman think,
      I think of Bertha the faithless;
    The only wish I have left, is that she
      May pass through her confinement scatheless.


~IN THE CATHEDRAL~

    Before me the sexton’s daughter fair
      Through the sacred edifice skippèd;
    Her size was small, and light her hair,
      From her neck her kerchief had slippèd.

    In the old cathedral for sixpence I got
      A sight of its marvellous creatures,
    Its tombs, lights, crosses; I turn’d quite hot
      When I gazed on Elspeth’s features.

    And once again I stared about
      At the sacred relics entrancing;
    In their under-petticoats all trick’d out,
      On the window the women were dancing.

    The sexton’s little daughter fair
      Stood by me, while thus I inspected.
    She had a very pretty pair
      Of eyes, wherein all was reflected.

    Before me the sexton’s daughter fair
      From the sacred edifice skippèd;
    Her mouth was small, her neck was bare,
      From her bosom her kerchief had slippèd.


~THE DRAGONFLY _2_~

    The dragonfly blue’s all the fashion
      In beetle-land, in the present day;
      The butterflies their addresses pay
    To the beauty with amorous passion.

    Her hips are excessively slender,
      She wears a gauze dress of delicate hue,
      With very symmetrical movements too
    She flutters about in splendour.

    Her colour’d admirers hover
      In her train, and many a young gallant
      Thus swears: “I’ll Holland give, and Brabant
    “If thou wilt be my lover.”

    She answers (but how insincerely!):
      “Brabant and Holland are nothing to me,
      “I want but a spark of light, to see
    “In my little chamber clearly.”

    When she imposes this duty,
      Her lovers hasten to join in the race,
      And eagerly seek, from place to place,
    A spark of light for the beauty.

    As soon as one sees a taper,
      He blindly rushes on to his doom,
      And the cruel flames the victim consume,
    And his loving heart, like paper.

           *       *       *       *       *

    It comes from Japan, this fable,
      Yet even in Germany, my dear child,
      Are plenty of dragonflies, devilish wild,
    Perfidious, and unstable.


~OLD SCENTS~

    The nosegay Matilda twined for me,
    And smilingly offer’d entreatingly,
    I push’d away, o’erpower’d completely
    By the sight of the flowers that blossom’d so sweetly.

    At the scent of the flowers, my tears fast flow,--
    I feel that in all this fair world below,
    Its beauty, sunlight, joy, love are bereft me,
    And nought but its bitter tears are left me.

    They tell me that I no longer share
    A part in life and its circle fair,
    That I belong to death’s kingdom dreary,
    Yes, I, a corpse unburied and weary.

    How happy was I when erst I saw
    The dance of rats at the Opera!
    But now I hear the odious scuffling
    Of churchyard rats and grave-moles shuffling.

    The scent of the flowers recalls again
    A perfect ballet, a joyous train
    Of recollections perfumed and glowing,
    From the hidden depths of the past o’erflowing,

    To sound of cornet and castanet,
    In spangled dresses (full short, I regret),--
    Yet all their toying, each laugh, each titter,
    Can only render my thoughts more bitter.

    Away with the flowers! O, how I abhor
    The scent that maliciously tells once more
    Of days long vanish’d and hours of gladness--
    I weep at the thought with speechless sadness.


~MISERERE~

    The sons of Fortune I envy not
      For their lives, in pleasure vying,
    I envy them only their happy death,
      Their easy and painless dying.

    In gala dresses, with garlanded heads,
      Their lips in laughter extended,
    They joyously sit at the banquet of life,--
      The sickle falls,--all is ended!

    In festal attire, with roses adorn’d,
      Still blooming with life, these glad mortals,
    These fav’rites of fortune reach at last
      The shadowy realm’s dark portals.

    They ne’er were disfigured by fever’s attack,
      They die with a joyous demeanour,
    And gladly are welcomed at her sad court
      By Proserpine, hell’s Czarina.

    O how I envy a fate like theirs!
      Seven years I daily languish
    For death, as on the ground I writhe
      In bitter and speechless anguish.

    O God! my agony shorten, that I
      May be buried,--my sole ambition.
    Thou knowest that I no talent possess
      For filling a martyr’s position.

    I feel astonished, gracious Lord,
      At a course so unconsequential;
    Thou madest a joyous poet, without
      That joy that is so essential.

    My torments blunt each feeling of mirth,
      And melancholy make me;
    Unless I get better ere long, to the faith
      Of a Catholic I must betake me.

    Like other good Christians, I then shall howl
      In thine ears my wailings dreary--
    The best of humorists then will be lost
      For ever--O Miserere.


~TO MATILDA~

    I was, dear lamb, ordain’d to be
    A shepherd here, to watch o’er thee;
    I nourish’d thee with mine own bread,
    With water from the fountain head.

    And when the winter storm roar’d loudly,
    Against my breast I warm’d thee proudly;
    There held I thee encircled well
    Whilst rain in torrents round us fell;
    When, through its rocky dark bed pouring
    The torrent, with the wolf, was roaring,
    Thou feared’st not, no muscle quiver’d,
    E’en when the highest pine was shiver’d
    By the fork’d flash--within mine arm
    Thou slept’st in peace without alarm.

    My arm grows weak, and fast draws near
    Pale death! My shepherd’s task so dear,
    And pastoral care approach their end.
    Into Thy hands, God, I commend
    My staff once more. O do Thou guard
    My lamb, when I beneath the sward
    Am laid in peace, and suffer ne’er
    A thorn to prick her anywhere.

    From thorny hedges guard her fleece,
    May quagmires ne’er disturb her peace,
    May there spring up beneath her feet
    An ample crop of pasture sweet,
    And let her sleep without alarm,
    As erst she slept within mine arm!


~FOR THE “MOUCHE”~

    I had a dream. It was a summer’s night,
      And in the moonlight, pale and weatherbeaten,
    Lay buildings, relics of past ages bright,--
      The style, renaissant, of these wrecks time-eaten.

    And here and there, with stately Doric head,
      Rose single columns from the mass there lying,
    And on the firmament high o’er them spread
      Gazed they, as if its thunderbolts defying.

    In broken fragments lay there on the ground,
      Mingled with many a portal, many a gable,
    Sculptures where man, beast, centaur, sphinx were found,
      Chimera, satyr,--creatures of old fable.

    The contrasts there presented were grotesque,
      The emblems of Judæa’s God combining
    With Grecian grace, in fashion arabesque
      The ivy round them both, its tendrils twining.

    A fair sarcophagus of marble white
      Amid the ruins stood, unmutilated;
    And in the coffin lay a corpse in sight,
      Of features mild, with sadness penetrated.

    The power supporting it appear’d supplied
      By Caryatides, with necks extended;
    And many a bas-relief on either side
      Was seen, of chisell’d figures strangely blended.

    The glories of Olympus there saw I,
      With all its heathen deities misguided;
    Adam and Eve were there, decorously
      With figleaf aprons round their loins provided.

    Troy’s taking and Troy’s burning here were seen,
      Hector and Helen, Paris (that wild gay man);
    Moses and Aaron also stood between,
      With Esther, Judith, Holofernes, Haman.

    God Amor also had his place hard by,
      Phœbus, Apollo, Vulcan, Madam Venus,
    Pluto, Proserpina, and Mercury,
      God Bacchus, and Priapus, and Silenus.

    Likewise was Balaam’s ass omitted not,--
      (The ass for speaking seem’d, in fact, created),
    And Abraham’s temptation too, and Lot,
      Who by his daughters was intoxicated.

    Herodias’ daughter’s dance was shown as well,
      The Baptist’s head was in the charger given;
    The monster Satan too was there, and hell,
      And Peter, with the heavy keys of heaven.

    And next in order saw I sculptured there
      The loves of Jove, with his vile actions blending;
    How as a swan he ravish’d Leda fair,
      And Danaë, in golden shower descending.

    The wild hunt of Diana was display’d,
      With her fleet dogs, and nymphs attired so trimly;
    And Hercules, in woman’s clothes array’d,
      Distaff on arm, the spindle whirling nimbly.

    And next was Sinai’s mountain to be view’d,
      And Israel near it, with his oxen lowing;
    The Lord a child within the temple stood,
      Disputing with the doctors proud and knowing.

    But, strange to tell, when I had dreamily
      These forms a while observed, in thought suspended,
    I suddenly conceived myself to be
      The corpse, in that fair marble tomb extended.

    And at the head of this my grave there stood
      A flower full fair, of strange configuration;
    Its leaves were yellow-tinged and violet-hued,
      The flower possess’d a wondrous fascination.

    ’Tis by the name of passion-flower well known,
      On Golgotha, they say, ’twas first created
    The day they crucified God’s only Son,
      And the Redeemer’s body lacerated.

    Bloodwitness doth this flower now bear, they say;
      Each instrument of torture then invented
    And used at His sad martyrdom that day,
      Is in its calyx duly represented.

    Yes! every passion-attribute adorns
      The flower, each emblem of their cruel malice,--
    For instance, scourge and rope and crown of thorns,
      The hammer and the nails, the cross, the chalice.

    Such was the flower which at my grave did stand,
      And o’er my body bending with compassion,
    As with a woman’s sorrow, kiss’d my hand,
      My eyes, and forehead, in sad silent fashion.

    But O, my dream’s strange magic! Wondrously
      The passion-flower, the yellow-hued and rare one,
    Changed to a woman’s likeness,--ah! and she,
      She was my loved one, she was mine own fair one!

    Thou wert the flower, yes, thou, my darling child!
      At once I knew thee by thy kisses yearning;
    No lips of flowers so tender are and mild,
      No tears of flowers so fiery are and burning.

    Although mine eyes were closed, my spirit gazed
      With steadiness upon thy face entrancing;
    Thou look’dst at me with raptured look amazed,
      Strangely illumined in the moonlight glancing.

    No words we spake, and yet my heart could see
      The thoughts that in thy mind in silence hover’d;
    A word when spoken has no modesty,
      By silence is love’s modest blossoms cover’d.

    Voiceless our converse! Wondrous doth it seem
      How in our silent, tender conversation
    The time pass’d in that summer night’s fair dream,
      When joy commingled was with consternation.

    That which we spoke of then, ne’er seek to learn,
      The glow-worm ask, why in the grass it gloweth,
    The torrent, why it roareth in the burn,
      The west wind, why it waileth as it bloweth.

    Ask the carbuncle why it gleams so bright,
      The rose and violet, why so sweetly scented;
    But ask not what, beneath the moon’s soft light,
      The martyr-flower talk’d with her love lamented!

    I cannot tell how long it was that I
      Enjoy’d, as in the marble tomb I slumber’d,
    That beauteous, happy dream. It fleeted by,
      Too soon the moments of my rest were number’d.

    Death with thy gravelike silence! Thou alone
      Canst give us pleasure in a lasting fashion;
    Vain barbarous life, for joy is ever known
      To give us restless bliss, convulsive passion.

    Alas, alas! my happiness soon fled,
      For suddenly arose a noise exciting,
    It was a savage conflict, fierce and dread--
      Ah, my poor flower was scared by all this fighting!

    Yes! there arose outside, with hideous yell,
      A quarrelling, a yelping, and a scolding;
    Methought that many a voice I knew full well,--
      It was the bas-reliefs my tomb enfolding!

    Is the stone haunted by those visions wan?
      And are those marble phantoms all disputing?
    The fearful clamour of the wood-god Pan,
      Moses’s fierce anathemas confuting.

    Alas! this contest ne’er will ended be,
      The True and Beautiful will wrangle ever!
    Greeks and Barbarians in wild rivalry
      The ranks of man are always doom’d to sever.

    They cursed and raved. No end would there have been
      To this long squabble, and their passion towering,
    Had Balaam’s ass not come upon the scene,
      The voices of the gods and saints o’erpowering.

    The stupid beast, with his disgusting brag,
      That sobbing sound of sheer abomination,
    Made me cry out in terrible dismay,
      And I awoke at last in desperation.


