Aldous Huxley (1894-1963) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aldous_Huxley]

###

~SONG OF POPLARS~

Shepherd to yon tall poplars tune your flute:
Let them pierce keenly subtly shrill
The slow blue rumour of the hill;
Let the grass cry with an anguish of evening gold
And the great sky be mute.

Then hearken how the poplar trees unfold
Their buds yet close and gummed and blind
In airy leafage of the mind
Rustling in silvery whispers the twin-hued scales
That fade not nor grow old.

“Poplars and fountains and you cypress spires
Springing in dark and rusty flame
Seek you aught that hath a name?
Or say say: Are you all an upward agony
Of undefined desires?

“Say are you happy in the golden march
Of sunlight all across the day?
Or do you watch the uncertain way
That leads the withering moon on cloudy stairs
Over the heaven’s wide arch?

“Is it towards sorrow or towards joy you lift
The sharpness of your trembling spears?
Or do you seek through the grey tears
That blur the sky in the heart of the triumphing blue
A deeper calmer rift?”

So; I have tuned my music to the trees
And there were voices dim below
Their shrillness voices swelling slow
In the blue murmur of hills and a golden cry
And then vast silences.


~THE REEF~

My green aquarium of phantom fish
Goggling in on me through the misty panes;
My rotting leaves and fields spongy with rains;
My few clear quiet autumn days--I wish

I could leave all clearness and mistiness;
Sodden or goldenly crystal all too still.
Yes and I too rot with the leaves that fill
The hollows in the woods; I am grown less

Than human listless aimless as the green
Idiot fishes of my aquarium
Who loiter down their dim tunnels and come
And look at me and drift away nought seen

Or understood but only glazedly
Reflected. Upwards upwards through the shadows
Through the lush sponginess of deep-sea meadows
Where hare-lipped monsters batten let me ply

Winged fins bursting this matrix dark to find
Jewels and movement mintage of sunlight
Scattered largely by the profuse wind
And gulfs of blue brightness too deep for sight.

Free newly born on roads of music and air
Speeding and singing I shall seek the place
Where all the shining threads of water race
Drawn in green ropes and foamy meshes. There

On the red fretted ramparts of a tower
Of coral rooted in the depths shall break
An endless sequence of joy and speed and power:
Green shall shatter to foam; flake with white flake

Shall create an instant’s shining constellation
Upon the blue; and all the air shall be
Full of a million wings that swift and free
Laugh in the sun all power and strong elation.

Yes I shall seek that reef which is beyond
All isles however magically sleeping
In tideless seas uncharted and unconned
Save by blind eyes: beyond the laughter and weeping

That brood like a cloud over the lands of men.
Movement passion of colour and pure wings
Curving to cut like knives--these are the things
I search for:--passion beyond the ken
Of our foiled violences and more swift
Than any blow which man aims against time
The invulnerable motion that shall rift
All dimness with the lightning of a rhyme

Or note or colour. And the body shall be
Quick as the mind; and will shall find release
From bondage to brute things; and joyously
Soul will and body in the strength of triune peace

Shall live the perfect grace of power unwasted.
And love consummate marvellously blending
Passion and reverence in a single spring
Of quickening force till now never yet tasted

But ever ceaselessly thirsted for shall crown
The new life with its ageless starry fire.
I go to seek that reef far down far down
Below the edge of everyday’s desire

Beyond the magical islands where of old
I was content dreaming to give the lie
To misery. They were all strong and bold
That thither came; and shall I dare to try?


~THE FLOWERS~

Day after day
At spring’s return
I watch my flowers how they burn
Their lives away.

The candle crocus
And daffodil gold
Drink fire of the sunshine--
Quickly cold.

And the proud tulip--
How red he glows!--
Is quenched ere summer
Can kindle the rose.

Purple as the innermost
Core of a sinking flame
Deep in the leaves the violets smoulder
To the dust whence they came.

Day after day
At spring’s return
I watch my flowers how they burn
Their lives away
Day after day....


~THE ELMS~

Fine as the dust of plumy fountains blowing
Across the lanterns of a revelling night
The tiny leaves of April’s earliest growing
Powder the trees--so vaporously light
They seem to float billows of emerald foam
Blown by the South on its bright airy tide
Seeming less trees than things beatified
Come from the world of thought which was their home.

For a while only. Rooted strong and fast
Soon will they lift towards the summer sky
Their mountain-mass of clotted greenery.
Their immaterial season quickly past
They grow opaque and therefore needs must die
Since every earth to earth returns at last.


~OUT OF THE WINDOW~

In the middle of countries far from hills and sea
Are the little places one passes by in trains
And never stops at; where the skies extend
Uninterrupted and the level plains
Stretch green and yellow and green without an end.
And behind the glass of their Grand Express
Folk yawn away a province through
With nothing to think of nothing to do
Nothing even to look at--never a “view”
In this damned wilderness.
But I look out of the window and find
Much to satisfy the mind.
Mark how the furrows formed and wheeled
In a motion orderly and staid
Sweep as we pass across the field
Like a drilled army on parade.
And here’s a market-garden barred
With stripe on stripe of varied greens....
Bright potatoes flower starred
And the opacous colour of beans.
Each line deliberately swings
Towards me till I see a straight
Green avenue to the heart of things
The glimpse of a sudden opened gate
Piercing the adverse walls of fate....
A moment only and then fast fast
The gate swings to the avenue closes;
Fate laughs and once more interposes
Its barriers.
              The train has passed.


~SUMMER STILLNESS~

The stars are golden instants in the deep
Flawless expanse of night: the moon is set:
The river sleeps entranced a smooth cool sleep
Seeming so motionless that I forget
The hollow booming bridges where it slides
Dark with the sad looks that it bears along
Towards a sea whose unreturning tides
Ravish the sighted ships and the sailors’ song.


~INSPIRATION~

Noonday upon the Alpine meadows
Pours its avalanche of Light
And blazing flowers: the very shadows
Translucent are and bright.
It seems a glory that nought surpasses--
Passion of angels in form and hue--
When lo! from the jewelled heaven of the grasses
Leaps a lightning of sudden blue.
Dimming the sun-drunk petals
Bright even unto pain
The grasshopper flashes settles
And then is quenched again.


~ANNIVERSARIES~

Once more the windless days are here
Quiet of autumn when the year
Halts and looks backward and draws breath
Before it plunges into death.
Silver of mist and gossamers
Through-shine of noonday’s glassy gold
Pale blue of skies where nothing stirs
Save one blanched leaf weary and old
That over and over slowly falls
From the mute elm-trees hanging on air
Like tattered flags along the walls
Of chapels deep in sunlit prayer.
Once more.... Within its flawless glass
To-day reflects that other day
When under the bracken on the grass
We who were lovers happily lay
And hardly spoke or framed a thought
That was not one with the calm hills
And crystal sky. Ourselves were nought
Our gusty passions our burning wills
Dissolved in boundlessness and we
Were almost bodiless almost free.
The wind has shattered silver and gold;
Night after night of sparkling cold
Orion lifts his tangled feet
From where the tossing branches beat
In a fine surf against the sky.
So the trance ended and we grew
Restless we knew not how or why;
And there were sudden gusts that blew
Our dreaming banners into storm;
We wore the uncertain crumbling form
Of a brown swirl of windy leaves
A phantom shape that stirs and heaves
Shuddering from earth to fall again
With a dry whisper of withered rain.

Last from the dead and shrunken days
We conjured spring lighting the blaze
Of burnished tulips in the dark;
And from black frost we struck a spark
Of blue delight and fragrance new
A little world of flowers and dew.
Winter for us was over and done:
The drought of fluttering leaves had grown
Emerald shining in the sun
As light as glass as firm as stone.
Real once more: for we had passed
Through passion into thought again;
Shaped our desires and made that fast
Which was before a cloudy pain;
Moulded the dimness fixed defined
In a fair statue strong and free
Twin bodies flaming into mind
Poised on the brink of ecstasy.


~ITALY~

There is a country in my mind
Lovelier than a poet blind
Could dream of who had never known
This world of drought and dust and stone
In all its ugliness: a place
Full of an all but human grace;
Whose dells retain the printed form
Of heavenly sleep and seem yet warm
From some pure body newly risen;
Where matter is no more a prison
But freedom for the soul to know
Its native beauty. For things glow
There with an inward truth and are
All fire and colour like a star.
And in that land are domes and towers
That hang as light and bright as flowers
Upon the sky and seem a birth
Rather of air than solid earth.

Sometimes I dream that walking there
In the green shade all unaware
At a new turn of the golden glade
I shall see her and as though afraid
Shall halt a moment and almost fall
For passing faintness like a man
Who feels the sudden spirit of Pan
Brimming his narrow soul with all
The illimitable world. And she
Turning her head will let me see
The first sharp dawn of her surprise
Turning to welcome in her eyes.
And I shall come and take my lover
And looking on her re-discover
All her beauty:--her dark hair
And the little ears beneath it where
Roses of lucid shadow sleep;
Her brooding mouth and in the deep
Wells of her eyes reflected stars.

Oh the imperishable things
That hands and lips as well as words
Shall speak! Oh movement of white wings
Oh wheeling galaxies of birds!


~THE ALIEN~

A petal drifted loose
From a great magnolia bloom
Your face hung in the gloom
Floating white and close.

We seemed alone: but another
Bent o’er you with lips of flame
Unknown without a name
Hated and yet my brother.

Your one short moan of pain
Was an exorcising spell:
The devil flew back to hell;
We were alone again.


~A LITTLE MEMORY~

White in the moonlight
Wet with dew
We have known the languor
Of being two.

We have been weary
As children are
When over them radiant
A stooping star

Bends their Good-Night
Kissed and smiled:--
Each was mother
Each was child.

Child from your forehead
I kissed the hair
Gently ah gently:
And you were

Mistress and mother
When on your breast
I lay so safely
And could rest.


~WAKING~

Darkness had stretched its colour
Deep blue across the pane:
No cloud to make night duller
No moon with its tarnish stain;
But only here and there a star
One sharp point of frosty fire
Hanging infinitely far
In mockery of our life and death
And all our small desire.

Now in this hour of waking
From under brows of stone
A new pale day is breaking
And the deep night is gone.
Sordid now and mean and small
The daylight world is seen again
With only the veils of mist that fall
Deaf and muffling over all
To hide its ugliness and pain.

But to-day this dawn of meanness
Shines in my eyes as when
The new world’s brightness and cleanness
Broke on the first of men.
For the light that shows the huddled things
Of this close-pressing earth
Shines also on your face and brings
All its dear beauty back to me
In a new miracle of birth.

I see you asleep and unpassioned
White-faced in the dusk of your hair--
Your beauty so fleetingly fashioned
That it filled me once with despair
To look on its exquisite transience
And think that our love and thought and laughter
Puff out with the death of our flickering sense
While we pass ever on and away
Towards some blank hereafter.

But now I am happy knowing
That swift time is our friend
And that our love’s passionate glowing
Though it turn ash in the end
Is a rose of fire that must blossom its way
Through temporal stuff nor else could be
More than a nothing. Into day
The boundless spaces of night contract
And in your opening eyes I see
Night born in day in time eternity.


~BY THE FIRE~

We who are lovers sit by the fire
Cradled warm ’twixt thought and will
Sit and drowse like sleeping dogs
In the equipoise of all desire
Sit and listen to the still
Small hiss and whisper of green logs
That burn away that burn away
With the sound of a far-off falling stream
Of threaded water blown to steam
Grey ghost in the mountain world of grey.
Vapours blue as distance rise
Between the hissing logs that show
A glimpse of rosy heat below;
And candles watch with tireless eyes
While we sit drowsing here. I know
Dimly that there exists a world
That there is time perhaps and space
Other and wider than this place
Where at the fireside drowsily curled
We hear the whisper and watch the flame
Burn blinkless and inscrutable.
And then I know those other names
That through my brain from cell to cell
Echo--reverberated shout
Of waiters mournful along corridors:
But nobody carries the orders out
And the names (dear friends your name and yours)
Evoke no sign. But here I sit
On the wide hearth and there are you:
That is enough and only true.
The world and the friends that lived in it
Are shadows: you alone remain
Real in this drowsing room
Full of the whispers of distant rain
And candles staring into the gloom.


~VALEDICTORY~

I had remarked--how sharply one observes
When life is disappearing round the curves
Of yet another corner out of sight!--
I had remarked when it was “good luck” and “good night”
And “a good journey to you” on her face
Certain enigmas penned in the hieroglyphs
Of that half frown and queer fixed smile and trace
Of clouded thought in those brown eyes
Always so happily clear of hows and ifs--
My poor bleared mind!--and haunting whys.

There I stood holding her farewell hand
(Pressing my life and soul and all
The world to one good-bye till small
And smaller pressed why there I’d stand
Dead when they vanished with the sight of her).
And I saw that she had grown aware
Queer puzzled face! of other things
Beyond the present and her own young speed
Of yesterday and what new days might breed
Monstrously when the future brings
A charger with your late-lamented head:
Aware of other people’s lives and will
Aware perhaps aware even of me....
The joyous hope of it! But still
I pitied her; for it was sad to see
A goddess shorn of her divinity.
In the midst of her speed she had made pause
And doubts with all their threat of claws
Outstripped till now by her unconsciousness
Had seized on her; she was proved mortal now.
“Live only live? For you were meant
Never to know a thought’s distress
But a long glad astonishment
At the world’s beauty and your own.
The pity of you goddess grown
Perplexed and mortal!”
                        Yet ... yet ... can it be
That she is aware perhaps even of me?

And life recedes recedes; the curve is bare
My handkerchief flutters blankly in the air;
And the question rumbles in the void:
Was she aware was she after all aware?


~PRIVATE PROPERTY~

All fly--yet who is misanthrope?--
The actual men and things that pass
Jostling to wither as the grass
So soon: and (be it heaven’s hope
Or poetry’s kaleidoscope
Or love or wine at feast at mass)
Each owns a paradise of glass
Where never a yearning heliotrope
Pursues the sun’s ascent or slope;
For the sun dreams there and no time is or was.

Like fauns embossed in our domain
We look abroad and our calm eyes
Mark how the goatish gods of pain
Revel; and if by grim surprise
They break into our paradise
Patient we build its beauty up again.


~REVELATION~

At your mouth white and milk-warm sphinx
I taste a strange apocalypse:
Your subtle taper finger-tips
Weave me new heavens yet methinks
I know the wiles and each iynx
That brought me passionate to your lips:
I know you bare as laughter strips
Your charnel beauty; yet my spirit drinks

Pure knowledge from this tainted well
And now hears voices yet unheard
Within it and without it sees
That world of which the poets tell
Their vision in the stammered word
Of those that wake from piercing ecstasies.


~MINOAN PORCELAIN~

Her eyes of bright unwinking glaze
All imperturbable do not
Even make pretences to regard
The jutting absence of her stays
Where many a Tyrian gallipot
Excites desire with spilth of nard.
The bistred rims above the fard
Of cheeks as red as bergamot
Attest that no shamefaced delays
Will clog fulfilment nor retard
Full payment of the Cyprian’s praise
Down to the last remorseful jot.
Hail priestess of we know not what
Strange cult of Mycenean days!


~IN UNCERTAINTY TO A LADY~

I am not one of those who sip
Like a quotidian bock
Cheap idylls from a languid lip
Prepared to yawn or mock.

I wait the indubitable word
The great Unconscious Cue.
Has it been spoken and unheard?
Spoken perhaps by you?


~CRAPULOUS IMPRESSION~

Still life still life ... the high-lights shine
Hard and sharp on the bottles: the wine
Stands firmly solid in the glasses
Smooth yellow ice through which there passes
The lamp’s bright pencil of down-struck light.
The fruits metallically gleam
Globey in their heaped-up bowl
And there are faces against the night
Of the outer room--faces that seem
Part of this still still life ... they’ve lost their soul.

And amongst these frozen faces you smiled
Surprised surprisingly like a child:
And out of the frozen welter of sound
Your voice came quietly quietly.
“What about God?” you said. “I have found
Much to be said for Totality.
All I take it is God: God’s all--
This bottle for instance....” I recall
Dimly that you took God by the neck--
God-in-the-bottle--and pushed Him across:
But I without a moment’s loss
Moved God-in-the-salt in front and shouted: “Check!”


~COMPLAINT OF A POET MANQUÉ~

We judge by appearance merely:
If I can’t think strangely I can at least look queerly.
So I grew the hair so long on my head
That my mother wouldn’t know me
Till a woman in a night-club said
As I was passing by
“Hullo here comes Salome.”

I looked in the dirty gilt-edged glass
And oh Salome! there I was--
Positively jewelled half a vampire
With the soul in my eyes hanging dizzily
Like the gatherer of proverbial samphire
Over the brink of the crag of sense
Looking down from perilous eminence
Into a gulf of windy night.
And there’s straw in my tempestuous hair
And I’m not a poet: but never despair!
I’ll madly live the poems I shall never write.


~SOCIAL AMENITIES~

I am getting on well with this anecdote
When suddenly I recall
The many times I have told it of old
And all the worked-up phrases and the dying fall
Of voice well timed in the crisis the note
Of mock-heroic ingeniously struck--
The whole thing sticks in my throat
And my face all tingles and pricks with shame
For myself and my hearers.
These are the social pleasures my God!
But I finish the story triumphantly all the same.


~TOPIARY~

Failing sometimes to understand
Why there are folk whose flesh should seem
Like carrion puffed with noisome steam
Fly-blown to the eye that looks on it
Fly-blown to the touch of a hand;
Why there are men without any legs
Whizzing along on little trollies
With long long arms like apes’:
Failing to see why God the Topiarist
Should train and carve and twist
Men’s bodies into such fantastic shapes:
Yes failing to see the point of it all I sometimes wish
That I were a fabulous thing in a fool’s mind
Or at the ocean bottom in a world that is deaf and blind
Very remote and happy a great goggling fish.




ON THE ’BUS.


Sitting on the top of the ’bus
I bite my pipe and look at the sky.
Over my shoulder the smoke streams out
And my life with it.
“Conservation of energy” you say.
But I burn I tell you I burn;
And the smoke of me streams out
In a vanishing skein of grey.
Crash and bump ... my poor bruised body!
I am a harp of twittering strings
An elegant instrument but infinitely second-hand
And if I have not got phthisis it is only an accident.
Droll phenomena!


~POINTS AND LINES~

Instants in the quiet small sharp stars
Pierce my spirit with a thrust whose speed
Baffles even the grasp of time.
Oh that I might reflect them
As swiftly as keenly as they shine.
But I am a pool of waters summer-still
And the stars are mirrored across me;
Those stabbing points of the sky
Turned to a thread of shaken silver
A long fine thread.


~PANIC~

The eyes of the portraits on the wall
Look at me follow me
Stare incessantly:
I take it their glance means nothing at all?
--Clearly oh clearly! Nothing at all....

Out in the gardens by the lake
The sleeping peacocks suddenly wake;
Out in the gardens moonlit and forlorn
Each of them sounds his mournful horn:
Shrill peals that waver and crack and break.
What can have made the peacocks wake?


~STANZAS~

Thought is an unseen net wherein our mind
Is taken and vainly struggles to be free:
Words that should loose our spirit do but bind
New fetters on our hoped-for liberty:
And action bears us onward like a stream
Past fabulous shores scarce seen in our swift course;
Glorious--and yet its headlong currents seem
But backwaters of some diviner force.

There are slow curves more subtle far than thought
That stoop to carry the grace of a girl’s breast;
And hanging flowers so exquisitely wrought
In airy metal that they seem possessed
Of souls; and there are distant hills that lift
The shoulder of a god towards the light;
And arrowy trees sudden and sharp and swift
Piercing the spirit deeply with delight.

Would I might make these miracles my own!
Like a pure angel thinking colour and form;
Hardening to rage in a flame of chiselled stone;
Spilling my love like sunlight golden and warm
On noonday flowers; speaking the song of birds
Among the branches; whispering the fall of rain;
Beyond all thought past action and past words
I would live in beauty free from self and pain.


~POEM~

Books and a coloured skein of thoughts were mine;
And magic words lay ripening in my soul
Till their much-whispered music turned a wine
Whose subtlest power was all in my control.

These things were mine and they were real for me
As lips and darling eyes and a warm breast:
For I could love a phrase a melody
Like a fair woman worshipped and possessed.

I scorned all fire that outward of the eyes
Could kindle passion; scorned yet was afraid;
Feared and yet envied those more deeply wise
Who saw the bright earth beckon and obeyed.

But a time came when turning full of hate
And weariness from my remembered themes
I wished my poet’s pipe could modulate
Beauty more palpable than words and dreams.

All loveliness with which an act informs
The dim uncertain chaos of desire
Is mine to day; it touches me it warms
Body and spirit with its outward fire.

I am mine no more: I have become a part
Of that great earth that draws a breath and stirs
To meet the spring. But I could wish my heart
Were still a winter of frosty gossamers.


~SCENES OF THE MIND~

I have run where festival was loud
With drum and brass among the crowd
Of panic revellers whose cries
Affront the quiet of the skies;
Whose dancing lights contract the deep
Infinity of night and sleep
To a narrow turmoil of troubled fire.
And I have found my heart’s desire
In beechen caverns that autumn fills
With the blue shadowiness of distant hills;
Whose luminous grey pillars bear
The stooping sky: calm is the air
Nor any sound is heard to mar
That crystal silence--as from far
Far off a man may see
The busy world all utterly
Hushed as an old memorial scene.
Long evenings I have sat and been
Strangely content while in my hands
I held a wealth of coloured strands
Shimmering plaits of silk and skeins
Of soft bright wool. Each colour drains
New life at the lamp’s round pool of gold;
Each sinks again when I withhold
The quickening radiance to a wan
And shadowy oblivion
Of what it was. And in my mind
Beauty or sudden love has shined
And wakened colour in what was dead
And turned to gold the sullen lead
Of mean desires and everyday’s
Poor thoughts and customary ways.
Sometimes in lands where mountains throw
Their silent spell on all below
Drawing a magic circle wide
About their feet on every side
Robbed of all speech and thought and act
I have seen God in the cataract.
In falling water and in flame
Never at rest yet still the same
God shows himself. And I have known
The swift fire frozen into stone
And water frozen changelessly
Into the death of gems. And I
Long sitting by the thunderous mill
Have seen the headlong wheel made still
And in the silence that ensued
Have known the endless solitude
Of being dead and utterly nought.
Inhabitant of mine own thought
I look abroad and all I see
Is my creation made for me:
Along my thread of life are pearled
The moments that make up the world.




L’APRÈS-MIDI D’UN FAUNE.

(From the French of Stéphane Mallarmé.)


I would immortalize these nymphs; so bright
Their sunlit colouring so airy light
It floats like drowsy down. Loved I a dream?
My doubts born of oblivious darkness seem
A subtle tracery of branches grown
The tree’s true self--proving that I have known
Thinking it love the blushing of a rose.
But think. These nymphs their loveliness ... suppose
They bodied forth your senses’ fabulous thirst?
Illusion! which the blue eyes of the first
As cold and chaste as is the weeping spring
Beget: the other sighing passioning
Is she the wind warm in your fleece at noon?
No; through this quiet when a weary swoon
Crushes and chokes the latest faint essay
Of morning cool against the encroaching day
There is no murmuring water save the gush
Of my clear fluted notes; and in the hush
Blows never a wind save that which through my reed
Puffs out before the rain of notes can speed
Upon the air with that calm breath of art
That mounts the unwrinkled zenith visibly
Where inspiration seeks its native sky.
You fringes of a calm Sicilian lake
The sun’s own mirror which I love to take
Silent beneath your starry flowers tell
_How here I cut the hollow rushes well_
_Tamed by my skill when on the glaucous gold_
_Of distant lawns about their fountain cold_
_A living whiteness stirs like a lazy wave;_
_And at the first slow notes my panpipes gave_
_These flocking swans these naiads rather fly_
_Or dive_. Noon burns inert and tawny dry
Nor marks how clean that Hymen slipped away
From me who seek in song the real A.
Wake then to the first ardour and the sight
O lonely faun of the old fierce white light
With lilies one of you for innocence.
Other than their lips’ delicate pretence
The light caress that quiets treacherous lovers
My breast I know not how to tell discovers
The bitten print of some immortal’s kiss.
But hush! a mystery so great as this
I dare not tell save to my double reed
Which sharer of my every joy and need
Dreams down its cadenced monologues that we
Falsely confuse the beauties that we see
With the bright palpable shapes our song creates:
My flute as loud as passion modulates
Purges the common dream of flank and breast
Seen through closed eyes and inwardly caressed
Of every empty and monotonous line.

Bloom then O Syrinx in thy flight malign
A reed once more beside our trysting-lake.
Proud of my music let me often make
A song of goddesses and see their rape
Profanely done on many a painted shape.
So when the grape’s transparent juice I drain
I quell regret for pleasures past and feign
A new real grape. For holding towards the sky
The empty skin I blow it tight and lie
Dream-drunk till evening eyeing it.
                                      Tell o’er
Remembered joys and plump the grape once more.
_Between the reeds I saw their bodies gleam_
_Who cool no mortal fever in the stream_
_Crying to the woods the rage of their desire:_
_And their bright hair went down in jewelled fire_
_Where crystal broke and dazzled shudderingly._
_I check my swift pursuit: for see where lie_
_Bruised being twins in love by languor sweet_
_Two sleeping girls clasped at my very feet._
_I seize and run with them nor part the pair_
_Breaking this covert of frail petals where_
_Roses drink scent of the sun and our light play_
_’Mid tumbled flowers shall match the death of day._
I love that virginal fury--ah the wild
Thrill when a maiden body shrinks defiled
Shuddering like arctic light from lips that sear
Its nakedness ... the flesh in secret fear!
Contagiously through my linked pair it flies
Where innocence in either struggling dies
Wet with fond tears or some less piteous dew.
_Gay in the conquest of these fears I grew_
_So rash that I must needs the sheaf divide_
_Of ruffled kisses heaven itself had tied._
_For as I leaned to stifle in the hair_
_Of one my passionate laughter (taking care_
_With a stretched finger that her innocence_
_Might stain with her companion’s kindling sense_
_To touch the younger little one who lay_
_Child-like unblushing) my ungrateful prey_
_Slips from me freed by passion’s sudden death_
_Nor heeds the frenzy of my sobbing breath._

Let it pass! others of their hair shall twist
A rope to drag me to those joys I missed.
See how the ripe pomegranates bursting red
To quench the thirst of the mumbling bees have bled;
So too our blood kindled by some chance fire
Flows for the swarming legions of desire.
At evening when the woodland green turns gold
And ashen grey ’mid the quenched leaves behold!
Red Etna glows by Venus visited
Walking the lava with her snowy tread
Whene’er the flames in thunderous slumber die.
I hold the goddess!
                    Ah sure penalty!

But the unthinking soul and body swoon
At last beneath the heavy hush of noon.
Forgetful let me lie where summer’s drouth
Sifts fine the sand and then with gaping mouth
Dream planet-struck by the grape’s round wine-red star.

Nymphs I shall see the shade that now you are.


~MOLE~

Tunnelled in solid blackness creeps
The old mole-soul and wakes or sleeps
He knows not which but tunnels on
Through ages of oblivion;
Until at last the long constraint
Of each hand-wall is lost and faint
Comes daylight creeping from afar
And mole-work grows crepuscular.
Tunnel meets air and bursts; mole sees
Men as strange as walking trees?
And far horizons smoking blue
And chasing clouds for ever new;
Green hills like lighted lamps aglow
Or quenched beneath the cloud-shadow;
Quenching and blazing turn by turn
Spring’s great green signals fitfully burn.
Mole travels on but finds the steering
A harder task of pioneering
Than when he thridded through the strait
Blind catacombs that ancient fate
Had carved for him. Stupid and dumb
And blind and touchless he had come
A way without a turn; but here
Under the sky the passenger
Chooses his own best way; and mole
Distracted wanders yet his hole
Regrets not much wherein he crept
But runs a joyous nympholept
This way and that by all made mad--
River nymph and oread
Ocean’s daughters and Lorelei
Combing the silken mystery
The glaucous gold of her rivery tresses--
Each haunts the traveller each possesses
The drunken wavering soul awhile;
Then with a phantom’s cock-crow smile
Mocks craving with sheer vanishment.
  Mole-eyes grow hawk’s: knowledge is lent
In grudging driblets that pay high
Unconscionable usury.
To unrelenting life. Mole learns
To travel more secure; the turns
Of his long way less puzzling seem
And all those magic forms that gleam
In airy invitation cheat
Less often than they did of old.
  The earth slopes upward fold by fold
Of quiet hills that meet the gold
Serenity of western skies.
Over the world’s edge with clear eyes
Our mole transcendent sees his way
Tunnelled in light: he must obey
Necessity again and thrid
Close catacombs as erst he did
Fate’s tunnellings himself must bore
Through the sunset’s inmost core.
The guiding walls to each-hand shine
Luminous and crystalline;
And mole shall tunnel on and on
Till night let fall oblivion.


~TWO REALITIES~

A waggon passed with scarlet wheels
  And a yellow body shining new.
“Splendid!” said I. “How fine it feels
To be alive when beauty peels
  The grimy husk from life.” And you

Said “Splendid!” and I thought you’d seen
  That waggon blazing down the street;
But I looked and saw that your gaze had been
On a child that was kicking an obscene
  Brown ordure with his feet.

Our souls are elephants thought I
  Remote behind a prisoning grill
With trunks thrust out to peer and pry
And pounce upon reality;
  And each at his own sweet will

Seizes the bun that he likes best
And passes over all the rest.


~QUOTIDIAN VISION~

There is a sadness in the street
And sullenly the folk I meet
Droop their heads as they walk along
Without a smile without a song.
A mist of cold and muffling grey
Falls fold by fold on another day
That dies unwept. But suddenly
Under a tunnelled arch I see
On flank and haunch the chestnut gleam
Of horses in a lamplit steam;
And the dead world moves for me once more
With beauty for its living core.


~THE MIRROR~

Slow-moving moonlight once did pass
Across the dreaming looking-glass
Where sunk inviolably deep
Old secrets unforgotten sleep
Of beauties unforgettable.
But dusty cobwebs are woven now
Across that mirror which of old
Saw fingers drawing back the gold
From an untroubled brow;
And the depths are blinded to the moon
And their secrets forgotten for ever untold.


~VARIATIONS ON A THEME OF LAFORGUE~

Youth as it opens out discloses
The sinister metempsychosis
Of lilies dead and turned to roses
Red as an angry dawn.
But lilies remember are grave-side flowers
  While slow bright rose-leaves sail
Adrift on the music of happiest hours;
  And those lilies cold and pale
Hide fiery roses beneath the lawn
  Of the young bride’s parting veil.


~PHILOSOPHY~

“God needs no christening”
  Pantheist mutters
  “Love opens shutters
On heaven’s glistening
Flesh key-hole listening
  Hear what God utters”....
  Yes but God stutters.


~PHILOCLEA IN THE FOREST~

I.

’Twas I that leaned to Amoret
With: “What if the briars have tangled Time
Till lost in the wood-ways he quite forget
How plaintive in cities at midnight sounds the chime
Of bells slow-dying from discord to the hush whence they rose and met?

“And in the forest we shall live free
Free from the bondage that Time has made
To hedge our soul from its liberty;
We shall not fear what is mighty and unafraid
Shall look wide-eyed at beauty nor shrink from its majesty.”

But Amoret answered me again:
“We are lost in the forest you and I;
Lost lost not free though no bonds restrain;
For no spire rises for comfort no landmark in the sky
And the long glades as they curve from sight are dark with a nameless pain.

And Time creates what he devours--
Music that sweetly dreams itself away
Frail-swung leaves of autumn and the scent of flowers
And the beauty of that poised moment when the day
Hangs ’twixt the quiet of darkness and the mirth of the sunlit hours.”


II.

Mottled and grey and brown they pass
The wood-moths wheeling fluttering;
And we chase and they vanish; and in the grass
Are starry flowers and the birds sing
Faint broken songs of the dying spring.
  And on the beech-hole smooth and grey
  Some lover of an older day
Has carved in time-blurred lettering
    One world only:--“Alas.”


III.

Lutes I forbid you! You must never play
  When shimmeringly glimpse by glimpse
Seen through the leaves the silken figures sway
In measured dance. Never at shut of day
  When Time perversely loitering limps
  Through endless twilights should your strings
  Whisper of light remembered things
That happened long ago and far away:
Lutes I forbid you! You must never play....

And you pale marble statues far descried
  Where vistas open suddenly
I bid you shew yourselves no more but hide
Your loveliness lest too much glorified
  By western radiance slantingly
  Shot down the glade you turn from stone
  To living gods immortal grown
And ageless mock my beauty’s fleeting pride
You pale relentless statues far descried....


~BOOKS AND THOUGHTS~

Old ghosts that death forgot to ferry
Across the Lethe of the years--
These are my friends and at their tears
I weep and with their mirth am merry.
On a high tower whose battlements
Give me all heaven at a glance
I lie long summer nights in trance
Drowsed by the murmurs and the scents
That rise from earth while the sky above me
Merges its peace with my soul’s peace
Deep meeting deep. No stir can move me
Nought break the quiet of my release:
  In vain the windy sunlight raves
  At the hush and gloom of polar caves.


~THE HIGHER SENSUALISM~

There’s a church by a lake in Italy
Stands white on a hill against the sky;
And a path of immemorial cobbles
Leads up and up where the pilgrim hobbles
Past a score or so of neat reposories
Where you stop and breathe and tell your rosaries
To the shrined terra-cotta mannikins
That expound with the liveliest quirks and grins
Known texts of Scripture. But no long stay
Should the pilgrim make upon his way;
But as means to the end these shrines stand here
To guide to something holier
The church on the hill top.

                             Your heaven’s so
With a path leading up to it past a row
Of votary Priapulids;
At each you pause and tell your beads
Along the quintuple strings of sense:
Then on to face Heaven’s eminence
New stimulated new inspired.


~FORMAL VERSES~

I.

Mother of all my future memories
  Mistress of my new life which but to-day
Began when I beheld deep in your eyes
My own love mirrored and the warm surprise
  Of the first kiss swept both our souls away

Your love has freed me; for I was oppressed
  By my own devil whose unwholesome breath
Tarnished my youth leaving to me at best
Age lacking comfort of a soul at rest
  And weariness beyond the hope of death.

II.

Ah those were days of silent happiness!
  I never spoke and had no need to speak
  While on the windy down-land cheek by cheek
The slow-driven sun beheld us. Each caress
Had oratory for its own defence;
And when I kissed or felt her fingers press
  I envied not Demosthenes his Greek
Nor Tully for his Latin eloquence.


~PERILS OF THE SMALL HOURS~

When life burns low as the fire in the grate
And all the evening’s books are read
I sit alone save for the dead
And the lovers I have grown to hate.

But all at once the narrow gloom
Of hatred and despair expands
In tenderness: thought stretches hands
To welcome to the midnight room

Another presence:--a memory
Of how last year in the sunlit field
Laughing you suddenly revealed
Beauty in immortality.

For so it is; a gesture strips
Life bare of all its make-believe.
All unprepared we may receive
Our casual apocalypse.

Sheer beauty then you seemed to stir
Unbodied soul; soul sleeps to night
And love comes dimming spirit’s sight
When body plays interpreter.


~RETURN TO AN OLD HOME~

In this wood--how the hazels have grown!--
I left a treasure all my own
Of childish kisses and laughter and pain;
Left till I might come back again
To take from the familiar earth
My hoarded secret and count its worth.
And all the spider-work of the years
All the time-spun gossamers
Dewed with each succeeding spring;
And the piled up leaves the Autumns fling
To the sweet corruption of death on death....
At the sudden stir of my spirit’s breath
All scattered. New and fair and bright
As ever it was before my sight
The treasure lay and nothing missed.
So having handled all and kissed
I put them back adding one new
And precious memory of you.


