John Updike (1932-2009) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Updike]

###

~RETURNING NATIVE~

What can you say about Pennsylvania 
in regard to New England except that 
it is slightly less cold, and less rocky, 
or rather that the rocks are different? 
Redder, and gritty, and piled up here and there, 
whether as glacial moraine or collapsed springhouse 
is not easy to tell, so quickly 
are human efforts bundled back into nature. 

In fall, the trees turn yellower--
hard maple, hickory, and oak 
give way to tulip poplar, black walnut, 
and locust. The woods are overgrown 
with wild-grape vines, and with greenbrier 
spreading its low net of anxious small claws. 
In warm November, the mulching forest floor 
smells like a rotting animal. 

A genial pulpiness, in short: the sky 
is soft with haze and paper-gray 
even as the sun shines, and the rain 
falls soft on the shoulders of farmers 
while the children keep on playing, 
their heads of hair beaded like spider webs. 
A deep-dyed blur softens the bleak cities 
whose people palaver in prolonged vowels. 

There is a secret here, some death-defying joke 
the eyes, the knuckles, the bellies imply--
a suet of consolation fetched straight 
from the slaughterhouse and hung out 
for chickadees to peck in the lee of the spruce, 
where the husks of sunflower seeds 
and the peace-signs of bird feet crowd 
the snow that barely masks the still-green grass. 

I knew that secret once, and have forgotten. 
The death-defying secret—it rises 
toward me like a dog's gaze, loving 
but bewildered. When winter sits cold and black 
on Boston's granite hills, in Philly, 
slumped between its two polluted rivers, 
warmth's shadow leans close to the wall 
and gets the cement to deliver a kiss.


~PERFECTION WASTED~

And another regrettable thing about death 
is the ceasing of your own brand of magic, 
which took a whole life to develop and market-- 
the quips, the witticisms, the slant 
adjusted to a few, those loved ones nearest 
the lip of the stage, their soft faces blanched 
in the footlight glow, their laughter close to tears, 
their tears confused with their diamond earrings, 
their warm pooled breath in and out with your heartbeat, 
their response and your performance twinned. 
The jokes over the phone. The memories packed 
in the rapid-access file. The whole act. 
Who will do it again? That's it: no one; 
imitators and descendants aren't the same.


~SEVEN STANZAS AT EASTER~

Make no mistake: if He rose at all 
it was as His body; 
if the cells' dissolution did not reverse, the molecules 
reknit, the amino acids rekindle, 
the Church will fall. 

It was not as the flowers, 
each soft Spring recurrent; 
it was not as His Spirit in the mouths and fuddled 
eyes of the eleven apostles; 
it was as His flesh: ours. 

The same hinged thumbs and toes, 
the same valved heart 
that-pierced-died, withered, paused, and then 
regathered out of enduring Might 
new strength to enclose. 

Let us not mock God with metaphor, 
analogy, sidestepping, transcendence; 
making of the event a parable, a sign painted in the 
faded credulity of earlier ages: 
let us walk through the door. 

The stone is rolled back, not papier-mâché, 
not a stone in a story, 
but the vast rock of materiality that in the slow 
grinding of time will eclipse for each of us 
the wide light of day. 

And if we will have an angel at the tomb, 
make it a real angel, 
weighty with Max Planck's quanta, vivid with hair, 
opaque in the dawn light, robed in real linen 
spun on a definite loom. 

Let us not seek to make it less monstrous, 
for our own convenience, our own sense of beauty, 
lest, awakened in one unthinkable hour, we are 
embarrassed by the miracle, 
and crushed by remonstrance.


~EVENING CONCERT, SAINTE-CHAPELLE~

The celebrated windows flamed 
with light directly pouring north 
across the Seine; we rustled into place. 
Then violins vaunting Vivaldi's strident strength, 
then Brahms, seemed to suck 
with their passionate sweetness, 
bit by bit, the vigor from the red, 
the blazing blue, so that the listening eye 
saw suddenly the thick black lines, 
in shapes of shield and cross and strut and brace, 
that held the holy glowing fantasy together. 
The music surged; the glow became a milk, 
a whisper to the eye, a glimmer ebbed 
until our beating hearts, 
our violins were cased in thin but solid sheets of lead.


~HOEING~

I sometimes fear the younger generation will be deprived 
of the pleasures of hoeing; 
there is no knowing 
how many souls have been formed by this simple exercise. 

The dry earth like a great scab breaks, revealing 
moist-dark loam--
the pea-root's home, 
a fertile wound perpetually healing. 

How neatly the green weeds go under! 
The blade chops the earth new. 
Ignorant the wise boy who 
has never rendered thus the world fecunder.


~IN EXTREMIS~

I saw my toes the other day. 
I hadn't looked at them for months. 
Indeed, they might have passed away. 
And yet they were my best friends once. 
When I was small, I knew them well. 
I counted on them up to ten 
And put them in my mouth to tell 
The larger from the lesser. Then 
I loved them better than my ears, 
My elbows, adenoids, and heart. 
But with the swelling of the years 
We drifted, toes and I, apart. 
Now, gnarled and pale, each said, j'accuse!--
I hid them quickly in my shoes.


~PURA VIDA~

Such heat! It brings the brain back to its basic blank. 
Small, recurrent events become the daily news— 
the white-nosed coati treading the cecropia's 
bending thin branches like sidewalks in the sky, 
the scarlet-rumped tanager flitting like a spark 
in the tinder of dank green, the nodding palm leaves 
perforated like Jacquard cards in a code of wormholes, 
the black hawk skimming nothingness over and over. 

What does the world's wide brimming mean, with hunger 
the unstated secret, dying the proximate reality? 
Con mucho gusto—the muchness extends to the stars, 
as wet and numerous as larvae underground 
where the ants in their preset patterns scurry and nurture, 
and the queen, immobilized, pours forth her eggs 
in the dark. We are far from oaks and stoplights, 
from England's chill classrooms and Tuscany's paved hills. 

For thought is a stridulation, an insect sizzling, 
knit of the moment's headlines and temperate-zone quips, 
viable in the debris of our rotting educations, 
that thatch where peer-groups call each to each in semes 
ecosystematically. Great God Himself 
wilts with a rise in temperature, a drop in soil acidity, 
a new language in its grimacing opacity. 
The brain's dry buzz revives, a bit, as evening falls.


~FLIGHT TO LIMBO~

The line didn't move, though there were not 
many people in it. In a half-hearted light 
the lone agent dealt patiently, noiselessly, endlessly 
with a large dazed family ranging 
from twin toddlers in strollers to an old lady 
in a bent wheelchair. Their baggage 
was all in cardboard boxes. The plane was delayed, 
the rumor went through the line. We shrugged, 
in our hopeless overcoats. Aviation 
had never seemed a very natural idea. 

Bored children floated with faces drained of blood. 
The girls in the tax-free shops stood frozen 
amid promises of a beautiful life abroad. 
Louis Armstrong sang in some upper corner, 
a trickle of ignored joy. 
Outside, in an unintelligible darkness 
that stretched to include the rubies of strip malls, 
winged behemoths prowled looking for the gates 
where they could bury their koala-bear noses 
and suck our dimming dynamos dry. 

Boys in floppy sweatshirts and backward hats 
slapped their feet ostentatiously 
while security attendants giggled 
and the voice of a misplaced angel melodiously 
parroted FAA regulations. Women in saris 
and kimonos dragged, as their penance, behind them 
toddlers clutching Occidental teddy bears, 
and chair legs screeched in the food court 
while ill-paid wraiths mopped circles of night 
into the motionless floor.


~RELATIVES~

Just the thought of them makes your jawbone ache: 
those turkey dinners, those holidays with 
the air around the woodstove baked to a stupor, 
and Aunt Lil's tablecloth stained by her girlhood's gravy. 
A doggy wordless wisdom whimpers from 
your uncles' collected eyes; their very jokes 
creak with genetic sorrow, a strain 
of common heritage that hurts the gut. 

Sheer boredom and fascination! A spidering 
of chromosomes webs even the infants in 
and holds us fast around the spread 
of rotting food, of too-sweet pie. 
The cousins buzz, the nephews crawl; 
to love one's self is to love them all.


~PENUMBRAE~

The shadows have their seasons, too. 
The feathery web the budding maples 
cast down upon the sullen lawn 

bears but a faint relation to 
high summer's umbrageous weight 
and tunnellike continuum— 

black leached from green, deep pools 
wherein a globe of gnats revolves 
as airy as an astrolabe. 

The thinning shade of autumn is 
an inherited Oriental, 
red worn to pink, nap worn to thread. 

Shadows on snow look blue. The skier, 
exultant at the summit, sees his poles 
elongate toward the valley: thus 

each blade of grass projects another 
opposite the sun, and in marshes 
the mesh is infinite, 

as the winged eclipse an eagle in flight 
drags across the desert floor 
is infinitesimal. 

And shadows on water!— 
the beech bough bent to the speckled lake 
where silt motes flicker gold, 

or the steel dock underslung 
with a submarine that trembles, 
its ladder stiffened by air. 

And loveliest, because least looked-for, 
gray on gray, the stripes 
the pearl-white winter sun 

hung low beneath the leafless wood 
draws out from trunk to trunk across the road 
like a stairway that does not rise.


~BACK FROM VACATION~

'Back from vacation', the barber announces, 
or the postman, or the girl at the drugstore, now tan. 
They are amazed to find the workaday world 
still in place, their absence having slipped no cogs, 
their customers having hardly missed them, and 
there being so sparse an audience to tell of the wonders, 
the pyramids they have seen, the silken warm seas, 
the nighttimes of marimbas, the purchases achieved 
in foreign languages, the beggars, the flies, 
the hotel luxury, the grandeur of marble cities. 
But at Customs the humdrum pressed its claims. 
Gray days clicked shut around them; the yoke still fit, 
warm as if never shucked. The world is still so small, 
the evidence says, though their hearts cry, 'Not so!'


~DOG'S DEATH~

She must have been kicked unseen or brushed by a car. 
Too young to know much, she was beginning to learn 
To use the newspapers spread on the kitchen floor 
And to win, wetting there, the words, 'Good dog! Good dog!' 

We thought her shy malaise was a shot reaction. 
The autopsy disclosed a rupture in her liver. 
As we teased her with play, blood was filling her skin 
And her heart was learning to lie down forever. 

Monday morning, as the children were noisily fed 
And sent to school, she crawled beneath the youngest's bed. 
We found her twisted and limp but still alive. 
In the car to the vet's, on my lap, she tried 

To bite my hand and died. I stroked her warm fur 
And my wife called in a voice imperious with tears. 
Though surrounded by love that would have upheld her, 
Nevertheless she sank and, stiffening, disappeared. 

Back home, we found that in the night her frame, 
Drawing near to dissolution, had endured the shame 
Of diarrhoea and had dragged across the floor 
To a newspaper carelessly left there. Good dog.


~SAYING GOODBYE TO VERY YOUNG CHILDREN~

They will not be the same next time. The sayings 
so cute, just slightly off, will be corrected. 
Their eyes will be more skeptical, plugged in 
the more securely to the worldly buzz 
of television, alphabet, and street talk, 
culture polluting their gazes' dawn blue. 
It makes you see at last the value of 
those boring aunts and neighbors (their smells 
of summer sweat and cigarettes, their faces 
like shapes of sky between shade-giving leaves) 
who knew you from the start, when you were zero, 
cooing their nothings before you could be bored 
or knew a name, not even you own, or how 
this world brave with hellos turns all goodbye.


~PLANTING TREES~

Our last connection with the mythic. 
My mother remembers the day as a girl 
she jumped across a little spruce 
that now overtops the sandstone house 
where still she lives; her face delights 
at the thought of her years translated 
into wood so tall, into so mighty 
a peer of the birds and the wind. 

Too, the old farmer still stout of step 
treads through the orchard he has outlasted 
but for some hollow-trunked much-lopped 
apples and Bartlett pears. The dogwood 
planted to mark my birth flowers each April, 
a soundless explosion. We tell its story 
time after time: the drizzling day, 
the fragile sapling that had to be staked. 

At the back of our acre here, my wife and I, 
freshly moved in, freshly together, 
transplanted two hemlocks that guarded our door 
gloomily, green gnomes a meter high. 
One died, gray as sagebrush next spring. 
The other lives on and some day will dominate 
this view no longer mine, its great 
lazy feathery hemlock limbs down-drooping, 
its tent-shaped caverns resinous and deep. 
Then may I return, an old man, a trespasser, 
and remember and marvel to see 
our small deed, that hurried day, 
so amplified, like a story through layers of air 
told over and over, spreading.


~ON THE ROAD~

Those dutiful dogtrots down airport corridors 
while gnawing at a Dunkin' Donuts cruller, 
those hotel rooms where the TV remote 
waits by the bed like a suicide pistol, 
those hours in the air amid white shirts 
whose wearers sleep-read through thick staid thrillers, 
those breakfast buffets in prairie Marriotts— 
such venues of transit grow dearer than home. 

The tricycle in the hall, the wife's hasty kiss, 
the dripping faucet and uncut lawn—this is life? 
No, vita thrives via the road, in the laptop 
whose silky screen shimmers like a dark queen's mirror, 
in the polished shoe that signifies killer intent, 
and in the solitary mission, a bumpy glide 
down through the cloud cover to a single runway 
at whose end a man just like you guards the Grail.


~JANUARY~

The days are short, 
The sun a spark, 
Hung thin between 
The dark and dark. 

Fat snowy footsteps 
Track the floor. 
Milk bottles burst 
Outside the door. 

The river is 
A frozen place 
Held still beneath 
The trees of lace. 

The sky is low. 
The wind is gray. 
The radiator 
Purrs all day.


~EX-BASKETBALL PLAYER~

Pearl Avenue runs past the high-school lot, 
Bends with the trolley tracks, and stops, cut off 
Before it has a chance to go two blocks, 
At Colonel McComsky Plaza. Berth's Garage 
Is on the corner facing west, and there, 
Most days, you'll find Flick Webb, who helps Berth out. 

Flick stands tall among the idiot pumps--
Five on a side, the old bubble-head style, 
Their rubber elbows hanging loose and low. 
One's nostrils are two S's, and his eyes 
An E and O. And one is squat, without 
A head at all—more of a football type. 

Once Flick played for the high-school team, the Wizards. 
He was good: in fact, the best. In '46 
He bucketed three hundred ninety points, 
A county record still. The ball loved Flick. 
I saw him rack up thirty-eight or forty 
In one home game. His hands were like wild birds. 

He never learned a trade, he just sells gas, 
Checks oil, and changes flats. Once in a while, 
As a gag, he dribbles an inner tube, 
But most of us remember anyway. 
His hands are fine and nervous on the lug wrench. 
It makes no difference to the lug wrench, though. 

Off work, he hangs around Mae's Luncheonette. 
Grease-gray and kind of coiled, he plays pinball, 
Smokes those thin cigars, nurses lemon phosphates. 
Flick seldom says a word to Mae, just nods 
Beyond her face toward bright applauding tiers 
Of Necco Wafers, Nibs, and Juju Beads.


