Paul Verlaine (1844-1896) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Verlaine]

###

~LAST HOPE~

Beside a humble stone, a tree
Floats in the cemetery’s air,
Not planted _in memoriam_ there,
But growing wild, uncultured, free.
 
A bird comes perching there to sing,
Winter and summer, proffering
Its faithful song--sad, bittersweet.
That tree, that bird are you and I:
 
You, memory; absence, me, that tide
And time record. Ah, by your side
To live again, undying! Aye,
 
To live again! But _ma petite_,
Now nothingness, cold, owns my flesh. . .
Will your love keep my memory fresh?


~MOONLIGHT~

Your soul is like a landscape fantasy,
Where masks and Bergamasks, in charming wise,
Strum lutes and dance, just a bit sad to be
Hidden beneath their fanciful disguise.
 
Singing in minor mode of life’s largesse
And all-victorious love, they yet seem quite
Reluctant to believe their happiness,
And their song mingles with the pale moonlight,
 
The calm, pale moonlight, whose sad beauty, beaming,
Sets the birds softly dreaming in the trees,
And makes the marbled fountains, gushing, streaming—
Slender jet-fountains—sob their ecstasies.


~IN MUTED TONE~

Gently, let us steep our love
In the silence deep, as thus,
Branches arching high above
Twine their shadows over us.
 
Let us blend our souls as one,
Hearts’ and senses’ ecstasies,
Evergreen, in unison
With the pines’ vague lethargies.
 
Dim your eyes and, heart at rest,
Freed from all futile endeavor,s
Arms crossed on your slumbering breast,
Banish vain desire forever.
 
Let us yield then, you and I,
To the waftings, calm and sweet,
As their breeze-blown lullaby
Sways the gold grass at your feet.
 
And, when night begins to fall
From the black oaks, darkening,
In the nightingale’s soft call
Our despair will, solemn, sing.


~INNOCENTS WE~

Their long skirts and high heels battled away:
Depending on the ground’s and breezes’ whim,
At times some stocking shone, low on the limb—
Too soon concealed!—tickling our naïveté.
 
At times, as well, an envious bug would bite
Our lovelies’ necks beneath the boughs, and we
Would glimpse a flash—white flash, ah! ecstasy!—
And glut our mad young eyes on sheer delight.
 
Evening would fall, the autumn day would draw
To its uncertain close: our belles would cling
Dreamingly to us, cooing, whispering
Lies that still set our souls trembling with awe.


~GREEN~

     See, blossoms, branches, fruit, leaves I have brought,
        And then my heart that for you only sighs;
     With those white hands of yours, oh, tear it not,
        But let the poor gift prosper in your eyes.

     The dew upon my hair is still undried,--
        The morning wind strikes chilly where it fell.
     Suffer my weariness here at your side
        To dream the hour that shall it quite dispel.

     Allow my head, that rings and echoes still
        With your last kiss, to lie upon your breast,
     Till it recover from the stormy thrill,--
        And let me sleep a little, since you rest.


~STREETS~

            Let's dance the jig!

     Above all else I loved her eyes,
     More clear than stars of cloudless skies,
     And arch and mischievous and wise.

            Let's dance the jig!

     So skilfully would she proceed
     To make a lover's bare heart bleed,
     That it was beautiful indeed!

            Let's dance the jig!

     But keenlier have I relished
     The kisses of her mouth so red
     Since to my heart she has been dead.

            Let's dance the jig!

     The circumstances great and small,--
     Words, moments... I recall, recall
     It is my treasure among all.

            Let's dance the jig!


~GIVE EAR UNTO THE GENTLE LAY~

     Give ear unto the gentle lay
     That's only sad that it may please;
     It is discreet, and light it is:
     A whiff of wind o'er buds in May.

     The voice was known to you (and dear?),
     But it is muffled latterly
     As is a widow,--still, as she
     It doth its sorrow proudly bear,

     And through the sweeping mourning veil
     That in the gusts of Autumn blows,
     Unto the heart that wonders, shows
     Truth like a star now flash, now fail.

     It says,--the voice you knew again!--
     That kindness, goodness is our life,
     And that of envy, hatred, strife,
     When death is come, shall naught remain.

     It says how glorious to be
     Like children, without more delay,
     The tender gladness it doth say
     Of peace not bought with victory.

     Accept the voice,--ah, hear the whole
     Of its persistent, artless strain:
     Naught so can soothe a soul's own pain,
     As making glad another soul!

     It pines in bonds but for a day,
     The soul that without murmur bears....
     How unperplexed, how free it fares!
     Oh, listen to the gentle lay!


~THE SKY-BLUE SMILES ABOVE THE ROOF~

     The sky-blue smiles above the roof
            Its tenderest;
     A green tree rears above the roof
            Its waving crest.

     The church-bell in the windless sky
            Peaceably rings,
     A skylark soaring in the sky
            Endlessly sings.

     My God, my God, all life is there,
            Simple and sweet;
     The soothing bee-hive murmur there
            Comes from the street!

     What have you done, O you that weep
            In the glad sun,--
     Say, with your youth, you man that weep,
            What have you done?


~MON RÊVE FAMILIER~

     Oft do I dream this strange and penetrating dream:
     An unknown woman, whom I love, who loves me well,
     Who does not every time quite change, nor yet quite dwell
     The same,--and loves me well, and knows me as I am.

     For she knows me! My heart, clear as a crystal beam
     To her alone, ceases to be inscrutable
     To her alone, and she alone knows to dispel
     My grief, cooling my brow with her tears' gentle stream.

     Is she of favor dark or fair?--I do not know.
     Her name? All I remember is that it doth flow
     Softly, as do the names of them we loved and lost.

     Her eyes are like the statues',--mild and grave and wide;
     And for her voice she has as if it were the ghost
     Of other voices,--well-loved voices that have died.


~'TIS THE FEAST OF CORN~

     'Tis the feast of corn, 'tis the feast of bread,
        On the dear scene returned to, witnessed again!
     So white is the light o'er the reapers shed
        Their shadows fall pink on the level grain.

     The stalked gold drops to the whistling flight
        Of the scythes, whose lightning dives deep, leaps clear;
     The plain, labor-strewn to the confines of sight,
        Changes face at each instant, gay and severe.

     All pants, all is effort and toil 'neath the sun,
        The stolid old sun, tranquil ripener of wheat,
     Who works o'er our haste imperturbably on
        To swell the green grape yon, turning it sweet.

     Work on, faithful sun, for the bread and the wine,
        Feed man with the milk of the earth, and bestow
     The frank glass wherein unconcern laughs divine,--
        Ye harvesters, vintagers, work on, aglow!

     For from the flour's fairest, and from the vine's best,
        Fruit of man's strength spread to earth's uttermost,
     God gathers and reaps, to His purposes blest,
        The Flesh and the Blood for the chalice and host!


