Oscar Wilde (1854-1900) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscar_Wilde]

###

~SAN MINIATO~

   SEE I have climbed the mountain side
      Up to this holy house of God
      Where once that Angel-Painter trod
   Who saw the heavens opened wide

   And throned upon the crescent moon
      The Virginal white Queen of Grace—
      Mary! could I but see thy face
   Death could not come at all too soon.

   O crowned by God with thorns and pain!
      Mother of Christ!  O mystic wife!
      My heart is weary of this life
   And over-sad to sing again.

   O crowned by God with love and flame!
      O crowned by Christ the Holy One!
      O listen ere the searching sun
   Show to the world my sin and shame.


~ROME UNVISITED~

                                    I.

   THE corn has turned from grey to red
      Since first my spirit wandered forth
      From the drear cities of the north
   And to Italia’s mountains fled.

   And here I set my face towards home
      For all my pilgrimage is done
      Although methinks yon blood-red sun
   Marshals the way to Holy Rome.

   O Blessed Lady who dost hold
      Upon the seven hills thy reign!
      O Mother without blot or stain
   Crowned with bright crowns of triple gold!

   O Roma Roma at thy feet
      I lay this barren gift of song!
      For ah! the way is steep and long
   That leads unto thy sacred street.

                                   II.

   AND yet what joy it were for me
      To turn my feet unto the south
      And journeying towards the Tiber mouth
   To kneel again at Fiesole!

   And wandering through the tangled pines
      That break the gold of Arno’s stream
      To see the purple mist and gleam
   Of morning on the Apennines

   By many a vineyard-hidden home
      Orchard and olive-garden grey
      Till from the drear Campagna’s way
   The seven hills bear up the dome!

                                   III.

   A PILGRIM from the northern seas—
      What joy for me to seek alone
      The wondrous temple and the throne
   Of him who holds the awful keys!

   When bright with purple and with gold
      Come priest and holy cardinal
      And borne above the heads of all
   The gentle Shepherd of the Fold.

   O joy to see before I die
      The only God-anointed king
      And hear the silver trumpets ring
   A triumph as he passes by!

   Or at the brazen-pillared shrine
      Holds high the mystic sacrifice
      And shows his God to human eyes
   Beneath the veil of bread and wine.

                                   IV.

   FOR lo what changes time can bring!
      The cycles of revolving years
      May free my heart from all its fears
   And teach my lips a song to sing.

   Before yon field of trembling gold
      Is garnered into dusty sheaves
      Or ere the autumn’s scarlet leaves
   Flutter as birds adown the wold

   I may have run the glorious race
      And caught the torch while yet aflame
      And called upon the holy name
   Of Him who now doth hide His face.

   ARONA


~HUMANITAD~

   IT is full winter now: the trees are bare
      Save where the cattle huddle from the cold
   Beneath the pine for it doth never wear
      The autumn’s gaudy livery whose gold
   Her jealous brother pilfers but is true
   To the green doublet; bitter is the wind as though it blew

   From Saturn’s cave; a few thin wisps of hay
      Lie on the sharp black hedges where the wain
   Dragged the sweet pillage of a summer’s day
      From the low meadows up the narrow lane;
   Upon the half-thawed snow the bleating sheep
   Press close against the hurdles and the shivering house-dogs creep

   From the shut stable to the frozen stream
      And back again disconsolate and miss
   The bawling shepherds and the noisy team;
      And overhead in circling listlessness
   The cawing rooks whirl round the frosted stack
   Or crowd the dripping boughs; and in the fen the ice-pools crack

   Where the gaunt bittern stalks among the reeds
      And flaps his wings and stretches back his neck
   And hoots to see the moon; across the meads
      Limps the poor frightened hare a little speck;
   And a stray seamew with its fretful cry
   Flits like a sudden drift of snow against the dull grey sky.

   Full winter: and the lusty goodman brings
      His load of faggots from the chilly byre
   And stamps his feet upon the hearth and flings
      The sappy billets on the waning fire
   And laughs to see the sudden lightening scare
   His children at their play and yet—the spring is in the air;

   Already the slim crocus stirs the snow
      And soon yon blanchèd fields will bloom again
   With nodding cowslips for some lad to mow
      For with the first warm kisses of the rain
   The winter’s icy sorrow breaks to tears
   And the brown thrushes mate and with bright eyes the rabbit peers

   From the dark warren where the fir-cones lie
      And treads one snowdrop under foot and runs
   Over the mossy knoll and blackbirds fly
      Across our path at evening and the suns
   Stay longer with us; ah! how good to see
   Grass-girdled spring in all her joy of laughing greenery

   Dance through the hedges till the early rose
      (That sweet repentance of the thorny briar!)
   Burst from its sheathèd emerald and disclose
      The little quivering disk of golden fire
   Which the bees know so well for with it come
   Pale boy’s-love sops-in-wine and daffadillies all in bloom.

   Then up and down the field the sower goes
      While close behind the laughing younker scares
   With shrilly whoop the black and thievish crows
      And then the chestnut-tree its glory wears
   And on the grass the creamy blossom falls
   In odorous excess and faint half-whispered madrigals

   Steal from the bluebells’ nodding carillons
      Each breezy morn and then white jessamine
   That star of its own heaven snap-dragons
      With lolling crimson tongues and eglantine
   In dusty velvets clad usurp the bed
   And woodland empery and when the lingering rose hath shed

   Red leaf by leaf its folded panoply
      And pansies closed their purple-lidded eyes
   Chrysanthemums from gilded argosy
      Unload their gaudy scentless merchandise
   And violets getting overbold withdraw
   From their shy nooks and scarlet berries dot the leafless haw.

   O happy field! and O thrice happy tree!
      Soon will your queen in daisy-flowered smock
   And crown of flower-de-luce trip down the lea
      Soon will the lazy shepherds drive their flock
   Back to the pasture by the pool and soon
   Through the green leaves will float the hum of murmuring bees at noon.

   Soon will the glade be bright with bellamour
      The flower which wantons love and those sweet nuns
   Vale-lilies in their snowy vestiture
      Will tell their beaded pearls and carnations
   With mitred dusky leaves will scent the wind
   And straggling traveller’s-joy each hedge with yellow stars will bind.

   Dear bride of Nature and most bounteous spring
      That canst give increase to the sweet-breath’d kine
   And to the kid its little horns and bring
      The soft and silky blossoms to the vine
   Where is that old nepenthe which of yore
   Man got from poppy root and glossy-berried mandragore!

   There was a time when any common bird
      Could make me sing in unison a time
   When all the strings of boyish life were stirred
      To quick response or more melodious rhyme
   By every forest idyll;—do I change?
   Or rather doth some evil thing through thy fair pleasaunce range?

   Nay nay thou art the same: ’tis I who seek
      To vex with sighs thy simple solitude
   And because fruitless tears bedew my cheek
      Would have thee weep with me in brotherhood;
   Fool! shall each wronged and restless spirit dare
   To taint such wine with the salt poison of own despair!

   Thou art the same: ’tis I whose wretched soul
      Takes discontent to be its paramour
   And gives its kingdom to the rude control
      Of what should be its servitor—for sure
   Wisdom is somewhere though the stormy sea
   Contain it not and the huge deep answer ‘’Tis not in me.’

   To burn with one clear flame to stand erect
      In natural honour not to bend the knee
   In profitless prostrations whose effect
      Is by itself condemned what alchemy
   Can teach me this? what herb Medea brewed
   Will bring the unexultant peace of essence not subdued?

   The minor chord which ends the harmony
      And for its answering brother waits in vain
   Sobbing for incompleted melody
      Dies a swan’s death; but I the heir of pain
   A silent Memnon with blank lidless eyes
   Wait for the light and music of those suns which never rise.

   The quenched-out torch the lonely cypress-gloom
      The little dust stored in the narrow urn
   The gentle ΧΑΙΡΕ of the Attic tomb—
      Were not these better far than to return
   To my old fitful restless malady
   Or spend my days within the voiceless cave of misery?

   Nay! for perchance that poppy-crownèd god
      Is like the watcher by a sick man’s bed
   Who talks of sleep but gives it not; his rod
      Hath lost its virtue and when all is said
   Death is too rude too obvious a key
   To solve one single secret in a life’s philosophy.

   And Love! that noble madness whose august
      And inextinguishable might can slay
   The soul with honeyed drugs—alas! I must
      From such sweet ruin play the runaway
   Although too constant memory never can
   Forget the archèd splendour of those brows Olympian

   Which for a little season made my youth
      So soft a swoon of exquisite indolence
   That all the chiding of more prudent Truth
      Seemed the thin voice of jealousy—O hence
   Thou huntress deadlier than Artemis!
   Go seek some other quarry! for of thy too perilous bliss.

   My lips have drunk enough—no more no more—
      Though Love himself should turn his gilded prow
   Back to the troubled waters of this shore
      Where I am wrecked and stranded even now
   The chariot wheels of passion sweep too near
   Hence!  Hence!  I pass unto a life more barren more austere.

   More barren—ay those arms will never lean
      Down through the trellised vines and draw my soul
   In sweet reluctance through the tangled green;
      Some other head must wear that aureole
   For I am hers who loves not any man
   Whose white and stainless bosom bears the sign Gorgonian.

   Let Venus go and chuck her dainty page
      And kiss his mouth and toss his curly hair
   With net and spear and hunting equipage
      Let young Adonis to his tryst repair
   But me her fond and subtle-fashioned spell
   Delights no more though I could win her dearest citadel.

   Ay though I were that laughing shepherd boy
      Who from Mount Ida saw the little cloud
   Pass over Tenedos and lofty Troy
      And knew the coming of the Queen and bowed
   In wonder at her feet not for the sake
   Of a new Helen would I bid her hand the apple take.

   Then rise supreme Athena argent-limbed!
      And if my lips be musicless inspire
   At least my life: was not thy glory hymned
      By One who gave to thee his sword and lyre
   Like Æschylos at well-fought Marathon
   And died to show that Milton’s England still could bear a son!

   And yet I cannot tread the Portico
      And live without desire fear and pain
   Or nurture that wise calm which long ago
      The grave Athenian master taught to men
   Self-poised self-centred and self-comforted
   To watch the world’s vain phantasies go by with unbowed head.

   Alas! that serene brow those eloquent lips
      Those eyes that mirrored all eternity
   Rest in their own Colonos an eclipse
      Hath come on Wisdom and Mnemosyne
   Is childless; in the night which she had made
   For lofty secure flight Athena’s owl itself hath strayed.

   Nor much with Science do I care to climb
      Although by strange and subtle witchery
   She drew the moon from heaven: the Muse Time
      Unrolls her gorgeous-coloured tapestry
   To no less eager eyes; often indeed
   In the great epic of Polymnia’s scroll I love to read

   How Asia sent her myriad hosts to war
      Against a little town and panoplied
   In gilded mail with jewelled scimitar
      White-shielded purple-crested rode the Mede
   Between the waving poplars and the sea
   Which men call Artemisium till he saw Thermopylæ

   Its steep ravine spanned by a narrow wall
      And on the nearer side a little brood
   Of careless lions holding festival!
      And stood amazèd at such hardihood
   And pitched his tent upon the reedy shore
   And stayed two days to wonder and then crept at midnight o’er

   Some unfrequented height and coming down
      The autumn forests treacherously slew
   What Sparta held most dear and was the crown
      Of far Eurotas and passed on nor knew
   How God had staked an evil net for him
   In the small bay at Salamis—and yet the page grows dim

   Its cadenced Greek delights me not I feel
      With such a goodly time too out of tune
   To love it much: for like the Dial’s wheel
      That from its blinded darkness strikes the noon
   Yet never sees the sun so do my eyes
   Restlessly follow that which from my cheated vision flies.

   O for one grand unselfish simple life
      To teach us what is Wisdom! speak ye hills
   Of lone Helvellyn for this note of strife
      Shunned your untroubled crags and crystal rills
   Where is that Spirit which living blamelessly
   Yet dared to kiss the smitten mouth of his own century!

   Speak ye Rydalian laurels! where is he
      Whose gentle head ye sheltered that pure soul
   Whose gracious days of uncrowned majesty
      Through lowliest conduct touched the lofty goal
   Where love and duty mingle!  Him at least
   The most high Laws were glad of he had sat at Wisdom’s feast;

   But we are Learning’s changelings know by rote
      The clarion watchword of each Grecian school
   And follow none the flawless sword which smote
      The pagan Hydra is an effete tool
   Which we ourselves have blunted what man now
   Shall scale the august ancient heights and to old Reverence bow?

   One such indeed I saw but Ichabod!
      Gone is that last dear son of Italy
   Who being man died for the sake of God
      And whose unrisen bones sleep peacefully
   O guard him guard him well my Giotto’s tower
   Thou marble lily of the lily town! let not the lour

   Of the rude tempest vex his slumber or
      The Arno with its tawny troubled gold
   O’er-leap its marge no mightier conqueror
      Clomb the high Capitol in the days of old
   When Rome was indeed Rome for Liberty
   Walked like a bride beside him at which sight pale Mystery

   Fled shrieking to her farthest sombrest cell
      With an old man who grabbled rusty keys
   Fled shuddering for that immemorial knell
      With which oblivion buries dynasties
   Swept like a wounded eagle on the blast
   As to the holy heart of Rome the great triumvir passed.

   He knew the holiest heart and heights of Rome
      He drave the base wolf from the lion’s lair
   And now lies dead by that empyreal dome
      Which overtops Valdarno hung in air
   By Brunelleschi—O Melpomene
   Breathe through thy melancholy pipe thy sweetest threnody!

   Breathe through the tragic stops such melodies
      That Joy’s self may grow jealous and the Nine
   Forget awhile their discreet emperies
      Mourning for him who on Rome’s lordliest shrine
   Lit for men’s lives the light of Marathon
   And bare to sun-forgotten fields the fire of the sun!

   O guard him guard him well my Giotto’s tower!
      Let some young Florentine each eventide
   Bring coronals of that enchanted flower
      Which the dim woods of Vallombrosa hide
   And deck the marble tomb wherein he lies
   Whose soul is as some mighty orb unseen of mortal eyes;

   Some mighty orb whose cycled wanderings
      Being tempest-driven to the farthest rim
   Where Chaos meets Creation and the wings
      Of the eternal chanting Cherubim
   Are pavilioned on Nothing passed away
   Into a moonless void—and yet though he is dust and clay

   He is not dead the immemorial Fates
      Forbid it and the closing shears refrain.
   Lift up your heads ye everlasting gates!
      Ye argent clarions sound a loftier strain
   For the vile thing he hated lurks within
   Its sombre house alone with God and memories of sin.

   Still what avails it that she sought her cave
      That murderous mother of red harlotries?
   At Munich on the marble architrave
      The Grecian boys die smiling but the seas
   Which wash Ægina fret in loneliness
   Not mirroring their beauty; so our lives grow colourless

   For lack of our ideals if one star
      Flame torch-like in the heavens the unjust
   Swift daylight kills it and no trump of war
      Can wake to passionate voice the silent dust
   Which was Mazzini once! rich Niobe
   For all her stony sorrows hath her sons; but Italy

   What Easter Day shall make her children rise
      Who were not Gods yet suffered? what sure feet
   Shall find their grave-clothes folded? what clear eyes
      Shall see them bodily?  O it were meet
   To roll the stone from off the sepulchre
   And kiss the bleeding roses of their wounds in love of her

   Our Italy! our mother visible!
      Most blessed among nations and most sad
   For whose dear sake the young Calabrian fell
      That day at Aspromonte and was glad
   That in an age when God was bought and sold
   One man could die for Liberty! but we burnt out and cold

   See Honour smitten on the cheek and gyves
      Bind the sweet feet of Mercy: Poverty
   Creeps through our sunless lanes and with sharp knives
      Cuts the warm throats of children stealthily
   And no word said:—O we are wretched men
   Unworthy of our great inheritance! where is the pen

   Of austere Milton? where the mighty sword
      Which slew its master righteously? the years
   Have lost their ancient leader and no word
      Breaks from the voiceless tripod on our ears:
   While as a ruined mother in some spasm
   Bears a base child and loathes it so our best enthusiasm

   Genders unlawful children Anarchy
      Freedom’s own Judas the vile prodigal
   Licence who steals the gold of Liberty
      And yet has nothing Ignorance the real
   One Fraticide since Cain Envy the asp
   That stings itself to anguish Avarice whose palsied grasp

   Is in its extent stiffened moneyed Greed
      For whose dull appetite men waste away
   Amid the whirr of wheels and are the seed
      Of things which slay their sower these each day
   Sees rife in England and the gentle feet
   Of Beauty tread no more the stones of each unlovely street.

   What even Cromwell spared is desecrated
      By weed and worm left to the stormy play
   Of wind and beating snow or renovated
      By more destructful hands: Time’s worst decay
   Will wreathe its ruins with some loveliness
   But these new Vandals can but make a rain-proof barrenness.

   Where is that Art which bade the Angels sing
      Through Lincoln’s lofty choir till the air
   Seems from such marble harmonies to ring
      With sweeter song than common lips can dare
   To draw from actual reed? ah! where is now
   The cunning hand which made the flowering hawthorn branches bow

   For Southwell’s arch and carved the House of One
      Who loved the lilies of the field with all
   Our dearest English flowers? the same sun
      Rises for us: the seasons natural
   Weave the same tapestry of green and grey:
   The unchanged hills are with us: but that Spirit hath passed away.

   And yet perchance it may be better so
      For Tyranny is an incestuous Queen
   Murder her brother is her bedfellow
      And the Plague chambers with her: in obscene
   And bloody paths her treacherous feet are set;
   Better the empty desert and a soul inviolate!

   For gentle brotherhood the harmony
      Of living in the healthful air the swift
   Clean beauty of strong limbs when men are free
      And women chaste these are the things which lift
   Our souls up more than even Agnolo’s
   Gaunt blinded Sibyl poring o’er the scroll of human woes

   Or Titian’s little maiden on the stair
      White as her own sweet lily and as tall
   Or Mona Lisa smiling through her hair—
      Ah! somehow life is bigger after all
   Than any painted angel could we see
   The God that is within us!  The old Greek serenity

   Which curbs the passion of that level line
      Of marble youths who with untroubled eyes
   And chastened limbs ride round Athena’s shrine
      And mirror her divine economies
   And balanced symmetry of what in man
   Would else wage ceaseless warfare—this at least within the span

   Between our mother’s kisses and the grave
      Might so inform our lives that we could win
   Such mighty empires that from her cave
      Temptation would grow hoarse and pallid Sin
   Would walk ashamed of his adulteries
   And Passion creep from out the House of Lust with startled eyes.

   To make the body and the spirit one
      With all right things till no thing live in vain
   From morn to noon but in sweet unison
      With every pulse of flesh and throb of brain
   The soul in flawless essence high enthroned
   Against all outer vain attack invincibly bastioned

   Mark with serene impartiality
      The strife of things and yet be comforted
   Knowing that by the chain causality
      All separate existences are wed
   Into one supreme whole whose utterance
   Is joy or holier praise! ah! surely this were governance

   Of Life in most august omnipresence
      Through which the rational intellect would find
   In passion its expression and mere sense
      Ignoble else lend fire to the mind
   And being joined with it in harmony
   More mystical than that which binds the stars planetary

   Strike from their several tones one octave chord
      Whose cadence being measureless would fly
   Through all the circling spheres then to its Lord
      Return refreshed with its new empery
   And more exultant power—this indeed
   Could we but reach it were to find the last the perfect creed.

   Ah! it was easy when the world was young
      To keep one’s life free and inviolate
   From our sad lips another song is rung
      By our own hands our heads are desecrate
   Wanderers in drear exile and dispossessed
   Of what should be our own we can but feed on wild unrest.

   Somehow the grace the bloom of things has flown
      And of all men we are most wretched who
   Must live each other’s lives and not our own
      For very pity’s sake and then undo
   All that we lived for—it was otherwise
   When soul and body seemed to blend in mystic symphonies.

   But we have left those gentle haunts to pass
      With weary feet to the new Calvary
   Where we behold as one who in a glass
      Sees his own face self-slain Humanity
   And in the dumb reproach of that sad gaze
   Learn what an awful phantom the red hand of man can raise.

   O smitten mouth!  O forehead crowned with thorn!
      O chalice of all common miseries!
   Thou for our sakes that loved thee not hast borne
      An agony of endless centuries
   And we were vain and ignorant nor knew
   That when we stabbed thy heart it was our own real hearts we slew.

   Being ourselves the sowers and the seeds
      The night that covers and the lights that fade
   The spear that pierces and the side that bleeds
      The lips betraying and the life betrayed;
   The deep hath calm: the moon hath rest: but we
   Lords of the natural world are yet our own dread enemy.

   Is this the end of all that primal force
      Which in its changes being still the same
   From eyeless Chaos cleft its upward course
      Through ravenous seas and whirling rocks and flame
   Till the suns met in heaven and began
   Their cycles and the morning stars sang and the Word was Man!

   Nay nay we are but crucified and though
      The bloody sweat falls from our brows like rain
   Loosen the nails—we shall come down I know
      Staunch the red wounds—we shall be whole again
   No need have we of hyssop-laden rod
   That which is purely human that is godlike that is God.


~LOUIS NAPOLEON~

   EAGLE of Austerlitz! where were thy wings
      When far away upon a barbarous strand
      In fight unequal by an obscure hand
   Fell the last scion of thy brood of Kings!

   Poor boy! thou shalt not flaunt thy cloak of red
      Or ride in state through Paris in the van
      Of thy returning legions but instead
   Thy mother France free and republican

   Shall on thy dead and crownless forehead place
      The better laurels of a soldier’s crown
      That not dishonoured should thy soul go down
   To tell the mighty Sire of thy race

   That France hath kissed the mouth of Liberty
      And found it sweeter than his honied bees
      And that the giant wave Democracy
   Breaks on the shores where Kings lay couched at ease.


~ENDYMION~

(FOR MUSIC)


   THE apple trees are hung with gold
      And birds are loud in Arcady
   The sheep lie bleating in the fold
   The wild goat runs across the wold
   But yesterday his love he told
      I know he will come back to me.
   O rising moon!  O Lady moon!
      Be you my lover’s sentinel
      You cannot choose but know him well
   For he is shod with purple shoon
   You cannot choose but know my love
      For he a shepherd’s crook doth bear
   And he is soft as any dove
      And brown and curly is his hair.

   The turtle now has ceased to call
      Upon her crimson-footed groom
   The grey wolf prowls about the stall
   The lily’s singing seneschal
   Sleeps in the lily-bell and all
      The violet hills are lost in gloom.
   O risen moon!  O holy moon!
      Stand on the top of Helice
      And if my own true love you see
   Ah! if you see the purple shoon
   The hazel crook the lad’s brown hair
      The goat-skin wrapped about his arm
   Tell him that I am waiting where
      The rushlight glimmers in the Farm.

   The falling dew is cold and chill
      And no bird sings in Arcady
   The little fauns have left the hill
   Even the tired daffodil
   Has closed its gilded doors and still
      My lover comes not back to me.
   False moon!  False moon!  O waning moon!
      Where is my own true lover gone
      Where are the lips vermilion
   The shepherd’s crook the purple shoon?
   Why spread that silver pavilion
      Why wear that veil of drifting mist?
   Ah! thou hast young Endymion
      Thou hast the lips that should be kissed!


~LE JARDIN~

   THE lily’s withered chalice falls
      Around its rod of dusty gold
      And from the beech-trees on the wold
   The last wood-pigeon coos and calls.

   The gaudy leonine sunflower
      Hangs black and barren on its stalk
      And down the windy garden walk
   The dead leaves scatter—hour by hour.

   Pale privet-petals white as milk
      Are blown into a snowy mass:
      The roses lie upon the grass
   Like little shreds of crimson silk.


~LA MER~

   A WHITE mist drifts across the shrouds
      A wild moon in this wintry sky
      Gleams like an angry lion’s eye
   Out of a mane of tawny clouds.

   The muffled steersman at the wheel
      Is but a shadow in the gloom;—
      And in the throbbing engine-room
   Leap the long rods of polished steel.

   The shattered storm has left its trace
      Upon this huge and heaving dome
      For the thin threads of yellow foam
   Float on the waves like ravelled lace.


~LE PANNEAU~

   UNDER the rose-tree’s dancing shade
      There stands a little ivory girl
      Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl
   With pale green nails of polished jade.

   The red leaves fall upon the mould
      The white leaves flutter one by one
      Down to a blue bowl where the sun
   Like a great dragon writhes in gold.

   The white leaves float upon the air
      The red leaves flutter idly down
      Some fall upon her yellow gown
   And some upon her raven hair.

   She takes an amber lute and sings
      And as she sings a silver crane
      Begins his scarlet neck to strain
   And flap his burnished metal wings.

   She takes a lute of amber bright
      And from the thicket where he lies
      Her lover with his almond eyes
   Watches her movements in delight.

   And now she gives a cry of fear
      And tiny tears begin to start:
      A thorn has wounded with its dart
   The pink-veined sea-shell of her ear.

   And now she laughs a merry note:
      There has fallen a petal of the rose
      Just where the yellow satin shows
   The blue-veined flower of her throat.

   With pale green nails of polished jade
      Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl
      There stands a little ivory girl
   Under the rose-tree’s dancing shade.


~LES BALLONS~

   AGAINST these turbid turquoise skies
      The light and luminous balloons
      Dip and drift like satin moons
   Drift like silken butterflies;

   Reel with every windy gust
      Rise and reel like dancing girls
      Float like strange transparent pearls
   Fall and float like silver dust.

   Now to the low leaves they cling
      Each with coy fantastic pose
      Each a petal of a rose
   Straining at a gossamer string.

   Then to the tall trees they climb
      Like thin globes of amethyst
      Wandering opals keeping tryst
   With the rubies of the lime.


~CANZONET~

      I HAVE no store
   Of gryphon-guarded gold;
      Now as before
   Bare is the shepherd’s fold.
      Rubies nor pearls
   Have I to gem thy throat;
      Yet woodland girls
   Have loved the shepherd’s note.

      Then pluck a reed
   And bid me sing to thee
      For I would feed
   Thine ears with melody
      Who art more fair
   Than fairest fleur-de-lys
      More sweet and rare
   Than sweetest ambergris.

      What dost thou fear?
   Young Hyacinth is slain
      Pan is not here
   And will not come again.
      No horned Faun
   Treads down the yellow leas
      No God at dawn
   Steals through the olive trees.

      Hylas is dead
   Nor will he e’er divine
      Those little red
   Rose-petalled lips of thine.
      On the high hill
   No ivory dryads play
      Silver and still
   Sinks the sad autumn day.


~LE JARDIN DES TUILERIES~

   THIS winter air is keen and cold
      And keen and cold this winter sun
      But round my chair the children run
   Like little things of dancing gold.

   Sometimes about the painted kiosk
      The mimic soldiers strut and stride
      Sometimes the blue-eyed brigands hide
   In the bleak tangles of the bosk.

   And sometimes while the old nurse cons
      Her book they steal across the square
      And launch their paper navies where
   Huge Triton writhes in greenish bronze.

   And now in mimic flight they flee
      And now they rush a boisterous band—
      And tiny hand on tiny hand
   Climb up the black and leafless tree.

   Ah! cruel tree! if I were you
      And children climbed me for their sake
      Though it be winter I would break
   Into spring blossoms white and blue!


~PAN~

DOUBLE VILLANELLE


                                    I.

   O GOAT-FOOT God of Arcady!
   This modern world is grey and old
   And what remains to us of thee?

   No more the shepherd lads in glee
   Throw apples at thy wattled fold
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!

   Nor through the laurels can one see
   Thy soft brown limbs thy beard of gold
   And what remains to us of thee?

   And dull and dead our Thames would be
   For here the winds are chill and cold
   O goat-loot God of Arcady!

   Then keep the tomb of Helice
   Thine olive-woods thy vine-clad wold
   And what remains to us of thee?

   Though many an unsung elegy
   Sleeps in the reeds our rivers hold
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!
   Ah what remains to us of thee?

                                   II.

   AH leave the hills of Arcady
   Thy satyrs and their wanton play
   This modern world hath need of thee.

   No nymph or Faun indeed have we
   For Faun and nymph are old and grey
   Ah leave the hills of Arcady!

   This is the land where liberty
   Lit grave-browed Milton on his way
   This modern world hath need of thee!

   A land of ancient chivalry
   Where gentle Sidney saw the day
   Ah leave the hills of Arcady!

   This fierce sea-lion of the sea
   This England lacks some stronger lay
   This modern world hath need of thee!

   Then blow some trumpet loud and free
   And give thine oaten pipe away
   Ah leave the hills of Arcady!
   This modern world hath need of thee!


~IN THE FOREST~

   OUT of the mid-wood’s twilight
      Into the meadow’s dawn
   Ivory limbed and brown-eyed
      Flashes my Faun!

   He skips through the copses singing
      And his shadow dances along
   And I know not which I should follow
      Shadow or song!

   O Hunter snare me his shadow!
      O Nightingale catch me his strain!
   Else moonstruck with music and madness
      I track him in vain!


~SYMPHONY IN YELLOW~

   AN omnibus across the bridge
      Crawls like a yellow butterfly
      And here and there a passer-by
   Shows like a little restless midge.

   Big barges full of yellow hay
      Are moored against the shadowy wharf
      And like a yellow silken scarf
   The thick fog hangs along the quay.

   The yellow leaves begin to fade
      And flutter from the Temple elms
      And at my feet the pale green Thames
   Lies like a rod of rippled jade.


~HÉLAS!~

   TO drift with every passion till my soul
   Is a stringed lute on which can winds can play
   Is it for this that I have given away
   Mine ancient wisdom and austere control?
   Methinks my life is a twice-written scroll
   Scrawled over on some boyish holiday
   With idle songs for pipe and virelay
   Which do but mar the secret of the whole.
   Surely there was a time I might have trod
   The sunlit heights and from life’s dissonance
   Struck one clear chord to reach the ears of God:
   Is that time dead? lo! with a little rod
   I did but touch the honey of romance—
   And must I lose a soul’s inheritance?


~TO MILTON~

   MILTON! I think thy spirit hath passed away
   From these white cliffs and high-embattled towers;
   This gorgeous fiery-coloured world of ours
   Seems fallen into ashes dull and grey
   And the age changed unto a mimic play
   Wherein we waste our else too-crowded hours:
   For all our pomp and pageantry and powers
   We are but fit to delve the common clay
   Seeing this little isle on which we stand
   This England this sea-lion of the sea
   By ignorant demagogues is held in fee
   Who love her not: Dear God! is this the land
   Which bare a triple empire in her hand
   When Cromwell spake the word Democracy!


~ON THE MASSACRE OF THE CHRISTIANS IN BULGARIA~

   CHRIST dost Thou live indeed? or are Thy bones
   Still straitened in their rock-hewn sepulchre?
   And was Thy Rising only dreamed by her
   Whose love of Thee for all her sin atones?
   For here the air is horrid with men’s groans
   The priests who call upon Thy name are slain
   Dost Thou not hear the bitter wail of pain
   From those whose children lie upon the stones?
   Come down O Son of God! incestuous gloom
   Curtains the land and through the starless night
   Over Thy Cross a Crescent moon I see!
   If Thou in very truth didst burst the tomb
   Come down O Son of Man! and show Thy might
   Lest Mahomet be crowned instead of Thee!


~HOLY WEEK AT GENOA~

   I WANDERED through Scoglietto’s far retreat
      The oranges on each o’erhanging spray
      Burned as bright lamps of gold to shame the day;
   Some startled bird with fluttering wings and fleet
   Made snow of all the blossoms; at my feet
      Like silver moons the pale narcissi lay:
      And the curved waves that streaked the great green bay
   Laughed i’ the sun and life seemed very sweet.
   Outside the young boy-priest passed singing clear
      ‘Jesus the son of Mary has been slain
      O come and fill His sepulchre with flowers.’
   Ah God!  Ah God! those dear Hellenic hours
      Had drowned all memory of Thy bitter pain
      The Cross the Crown the Soldiers and the Spear.


~URBS SACRA ÆTERNA~

   ROME! what a scroll of History thine has been;
      In the first days thy sword republican
      Ruled the whole world for many an age’s span:
   Then of the peoples wert thou royal Queen
   Till in thy streets the bearded Goth was seen;
      And now upon thy walls the breezes fan
      (Ah city crowned by God discrowned by man!)
   The hated flag of red and white and green.
   When was thy glory! when in search for power
      Thine eagles flew to greet the double sun
      And the wild nations shuddered at thy rod?
   Nay but thy glory tarried for this hour
      When pilgrims kneel before the Holy One
      The prisoned shepherd of the Church of God.
      MONTRE MARIO


~E TENEBRIS~

   COME down O Christ and help me! reach Thy hand
      For I am drowning in a stormier sea
      Than Simon on Thy lake of Galilee:
   The wine of life is spilt upon the sand
   My heart is as some famine-murdered land
      Whence all good things have perished utterly
      And well I know my soul in Hell must lie
   If I this night before God’s throne should stand.
   ‘He sleeps perchance or rideth to the chase
      Like Baal when his prophets howled that name
      From morn to noon on Carmel’s smitten height.’
   Nay peace I shall behold before the night
      The feet of brass the robe more white than flame
      The wounded hands the weary human face.


~AT VERONA~

   HOW steep the stairs within King’s houses are
      For exile-wearied feet as mine to tread
      And O how salt and bitter is the bread
   Which falls from this Hound’s table—better far
   That I had died in the red ways of war
      Or that the gate of Florence bare my head
      Than to live thus by all things comraded
   Which seek the essence of my soul to mar.

   ‘Curse God and die: what better hope than this?
      He hath forgotten thee in all the bliss
      Of his gold city and eternal day’—
   Nay peace: behind my prison’s blinded bars
      I do possess what none can take away
      My love and all the glory of the stars.


~ON THE SALE BY AUCTION OF KEATS’ LOVE LETTERS~

   THESE are the letters which Endymion wrote
      To one he loved in secret and apart.
      And now the brawlers of the auction mart
   Bargain and bid for each poor blotted note
   Ay! for each separate pulse of passion quote
      The merchant’s price.  I think they love not art
      Who break the crystal of a poet’s heart
   That small and sickly eyes may glare and gloat.

   Is it not said that many years ago
      In a far Eastern town some soldiers ran
      With torches through the midnight and began
   To wrangle for mean raiment and to throw
      Dice for the garments of a wretched man
   Not knowing the God’s wonder or His woe?


~THE NEW REMORSE~

   THE sin was mine; I did not understand.
      So now is music prisoned in her cave
      Save where some ebbing desultory wave
   Frets with its restless whirls this meagre strand.
   And in the withered hollow of this land
      Hath Summer dug herself so deep a grave
      That hardly can the leaden willow crave
   One silver blossom from keen Winter’s hand.

   But who is this who cometh by the shore?
   (Nay love look up and wonder!)  Who is this
      Who cometh in dyed garments from the South?
   It is thy new-found Lord and he shall kiss
      The yet unravished roses of thy mouth
   And I shall weep and worship as before.


