*** James Agee (1909 - 1955)

	1. A PARABLE OF DOORS

		All things of life I term as many doors:
		Entrance to each or all, that man may win
		Who neither questions, nor no more implores
		But that with mindless ease he be let in.
		
		Such men are myriad and the door swings wide
		And smoothly they swarm through, who care not why,
		Initiate to those mysteries most denied
		Those who most seek them: such a man am I.
		
		I would expound those truths unalterably
		Flayed to strict harmonies no mind has sung.
		Mindful that truths are founded axially,
		By too much mind all hinges I have sprung:
		
		For it was thus: I lunged the brutal mind
		Shoulder to hinge post, since the truth stood there;
		Which neither yielded nor have I repined,
		But lunge and batter and am in despair.
		
		I cramped all gates of love forever shut,
		All beauty is for ever wrecked for me,
		And God all spiked with brain, and here is but
		One door, whose certitude the others flee.
		
		That door is death: and though my chief assault
		And shrewdest labor I’ve assemble there,
		Dark hinges no conjecture may default
		Soon shall devolve me on a doorless air.


	2. A SONG

		I had a little child was born in the month of May.
		He croaked and he crowed from early in the day.
		He sang like a bird and he delighted to play
		And before the night time he was gone away.
		
		Little child, take no fright,
		In that shadow where you are
		The toothless glowworm grants you light.
		Sure your mother’s not afar.
		
		Brave, brave, little boy,
		Angels wave you round with joy.
		Soon through the dark she runs to you,
		Soon, soon your mother comforts you.


	3. DESCRIPTION OF ELYSIUM

		_There: far, friends our dear dominion:_
		
		Whole health resides with peace,
		Gladness and never harm,
		There not time turning,
		Nor fear of flower of snow
		
		Where marbling water slides
		No charm may halt of chill,
		Air aisling the open acres,
		And all the gracious trees
		
		Spout up their standing fountains
		Of wind-beloved green
		And the blue conclaved mountains
		Are grave guards
		
		Stone and springing field
		Wide one tenderness,
		The unalterable hour
		Smiles deathlessness:
		
		No thing is there thinks:
		Mind the witherer
		Withers on the outward air:
		We can not come there.
		
		Sure on this shining night
		Of starmade shadows round,
		Kindness must watch for me
		This side the ground.
		
		The late year lies down the north.
		All is healed, all is health.
		High summer holds the earth.
		Hearts all whole.
		
		Sure on this shining night I weep for wonder wandering far alone
		Of shadows on the stars.
		
		Now thorn bone bare
		Silenced with iron the branch’s gullet:
		Rattling merely on the air
		Of hornleaved holly:
		
		The stony mark where sand was by 
		The water of a naild foot:
		The berry harder than the beak:
		The hole beneath the dead oak root:
		
		All now brought quiet
		Through the latest throe
		Quieted and ready and quiet:
		Still not snow:
		
		Still thorn bone hare
		Iron in the silenced gully
		Rattling only of the air
		Through hornleaved holly.


	4. KNOXVILLE, SUMMER OF 1915

		It has become that time of evening
		When people sit on their porches
		Rocking gently and talking gently
		And watching the street
		And the standing up into their sphere
		Of possession of the trees,
		Of birds’ hung havens, hangars.
		People go by; things go by.
		A horse, drawing a buggy,
		Breaking his hollow iron music on the asphalt:
		A loud auto: a quiet auto:
		People in pairs, not in a hurry,
		Scuffling, switching their weight of aestival body,
		Talking casually,
		The taste hovering over them of vanilla,
		Strawberry, pasteboard, and starched milk,
		The image upon them of lovers and horsement,
		Squared with clowns in hueless amber.
		
		A streetcar raising into iron moan;
		Stopping;
		Belling and starting; stertorous;
		Rousing and raising again
		Its iron increasing moan
		And swimming its gold windows and straw seats
		On past and past and past
		The bleak spark crackling and cursing above it
		Like a small malignant spirit
		Set to dog its tracks;
		The iron whine rises on rising speed;
		Still risen, faints; halts;
		The faint stinging bell;
		Rises again, still fainter;
		Fainting, lifting lifts,
		Faints foregone;
		Forgotten.
		Now is the night one blue dew;
		My father has drained,
		He has coiled the hose.
		Low on the length of lawns,
		A frailing of fire who breathes.
		Parents on porches:
		Rock and rock.
		From damp strings morning glories hang their ancient faces.
		The dry and exalted noise of the locusts from all the air
		At once enchants my eardrums.
		On the rough wet grass
		Of the backyard
		My father and mother have spread quilts
		We all lie there, my mother, my father, my uncle, my aunt,
		And I too am lying there.
		They are not talking much, and the talk is quiet,
		Of nothing in particular,
		Of nothing at all.
		The stars are wide and alive,
		They all seem like a smile
		Of great sweetness,
		And they seem very near.
		All my people are larger bodies than mine,
		With voices gentle and meaningless
		Like the voices of sleeping birds.
		One is an artist, he is living at home.
		One is a musician, she is living at home.
		One is my mother who is good to me.
		One is my father who is good to me.
		By some chance, here they are,
		All on this earth;
		And who shall ever tell the sorrow
		Of being on this earth, lying, on quilts,
		On the grass,
		In a summer evening,
		Among the sounds of the night.
		May God bless my people,
		My uncle, my aunt, my mother, my good father,
		Oh, remember them kindly in their time of trouble;
		And in the hour of their taking away.
		After a little
		I am taken in
		And put to bed.
		Sleep, soft smiling,
		Draws me unto her;
		And those receive me,
		Who quietly treat me,
		As one familiar and well-beloved in that home:
		But will not, oh, will not,
		Not now, not ever;
		But will not ever tell me who I am.


	5. ON THE WORD ASLEEP

		Asleep, perfected, you would never believe
		Harm of a one of them. That stirring hand,
		That leg, might clasp, endear, be brought across
		An enemy, as gently as a wife.
		How God must grieve,
		Watching in all this shadow land
		The flinching vigil candles of this countless loss
		In night’s nave each a life:
		Who groans, smiles, murmurs, quiets; then on the horn
		Transpierced, assembles upward, and reborn,
		By all that skill and bravery crowns him with
		Works, while he wakes, to put himself to death.


	6. ON THE WORD KINGDOM

		In that kingdom no one cries.
		No one doubts, for no one lies.
		No son ever dreads his mother,
		Nor no brother envies brother.
		
		Families, there like nearby trees
		Spring and shelter, and the bees
		Groan among the cloudy flowers;
		Angels, each a soul devours.
		
		There continually the smile
		Of the heart that knows no guile.
		There, untroubled, people greet,
		Death like an old friend in the street.


	7. OUR DOOM IS IN OUR BEING

		Our doom is in our being. We began
		In hunger eager more than ache of hell:
		And in that hunger became each a man
		Ravened with hunger death alone may spell:
		And in that hunger live, as lived the dead,
		Who sought, as now we seek, in the same ways,
		Nobly, and hatefully, what angel’s-bread
		Might ever stand us out those short few days.
		So is the race in this wild hour confounded:
		And though you rectify the big distress,
		And kill all outward wrong where wrong abounded,
		Your hunger cannot make this hunger less
		Which breeds all wrath and right, and shall not die
		In earth, and finds some hope upon the sky. 


	8. OUTSKIRTS OF KNOXVILLE, TENNESSEE

		There, in the earliest and chary spring, the dogwood
		flowers.
		
		Unharnessed in the friendly Sunday air
		By the red brambles, on the river bluffs,
		Clerks and their choices pair.
		
		Thrive by, not near, masked all away by shrub and 
		juniper,
		The Ford V8, racing the Chevrolet.
		
		They can not trouble her:
		
		Her breasts, helped open from the afforded lace,
		lie like a peaceful lake;
		And on his mouth she breaks her gentleness:
		
		Oh, wave them awake!
		
		They are not of the birds. Such innocence
		Brings us whole to break us only:
		Theirs are not happy words.
		
		We that are human cannot hope.
		Our tenderest joys oblige us most.
		No chain so cuts the bone; and sweetest silk most 
		shrewdly strangles.
		
		How this must end, that now please love were ended,
		In kitchens, bedfights, silences, women’s-pages,
		Sickness of heart before goldlettered doors,
		Stale flesh, hard collars, agony in antiseptic corridors,
		Spankings, remonstrances, fishing trips, orange juice,
		Policies, incapacities, a chevrolet,
		Scorn of their children, kind contempt exchanged,
		Recalls, tears, second honeymoons, pity,
		Shouted corrections of missed syllables,
		Hot water bags, gallstones, falls down stairs,
		Stammerings, soft foods, confusion of personalities,
		Oldfashioned christmases, suspicions of theft,
		Arrangements with morticians taken care of by sons in
		law,
		Small rooms beneath the gables of brick bungalows,
		The tumbler smashed, the glance between daughter and
		husband,
		The empty body in the lonely bed
		And, in the empty concrete porch, blown ash
		Grandchildren wandering the betraying sun
		
		Now, on the winsome crumbling shelves of the horror
		God show, God blind these children!


	9. PERMIT ME VOYAGE

		Take these who will as may be: I
		Am careless now of what they fail:
		My heart and mind discharted lie
		And surely as the nerved nail
		
		Appoints all quarters on the north
		So now it designates him forth
		My sovereign God my princely soul
		Whereon my flesh is priestly stole:
		
		Whence forth shall my heart and mind
		To God through soul entirely bow,
		Therein such strong increase to find
		In truth as is my fate to know:
		
		Small though that be great God I know
		I know in this gigantic day
		What God is ruined and I know
		How labors with Godhead this day:
		
		How from the porches of our sky
		The crested glory is declined:
		And hear with what translated cry
		The stridden soul is overshined:
		
		And how this world of wildness through
		True poets shall walk who herald you:
		Of whom God grant me of your grace
		To be, that shall preserve this race.
		
		Permit me voyage, Love, into your hands.


	10. SEASON OF CHANGE

		Season of change the sun for distaff bearing
		In your right hand and in the left large rains
		And writhen winds and noiselessly forth faring
		The earth abroad, and streaming wide your skeins,
		When in unfathomed fairness you have clothed
		The sea with quiet, the land with painless wealth,
		Turn you to those who changelessly have loathed
		All and their kind, and grant them peace and health:
		The proud stone-parting ardor of the tree,
		The glee of ice relaxed against new earth,
		Joy of the lamb and lust of bloom-struck bee
		Grant to the sick, stiff, spiteful, like fresh birth.
		Let this new time no natural wheel derange:
		Be ever changeless, thus: season of change.


	11. SO IT BEGINS

		So it begins. Adam is in his earth.
		Tempted, and fallen, and his doom made sure
		Oh, in the very instant of his birth:
		Whose deathly nature must all things endure.
		The hungers of his flesh, and mind, and heart,
		That governed him when he was in the womb,
		Those ravenings multiply in every part:
		And shall release him only to the tomb.
		Meantime he works the earth, and builds up nations,
		And trades, and wars, and learns, and worships chance,
		And looks to God, and weaves the generations
		Which shall his many hungerings advance
		When he is sunken dead among the sins.
		Adam is in the earth. So it begins.


	12. SONNET

		I have been fashioned on a chain of flesh
		Whose ancient lengths are immolate to dust:
		Frail though that dust be as the dew’s mesh
		The morning mars, it holds me to a trust:
		My flesh that was, long as this flesh knew life,
		Strove, and was valiant, still strove, and was naught:
		Now it is mine to wage their valiant strife
		And failing seek still what they ever sought.
		I have been given wings they never wore.
		I have been given hope they never knew.
		And they were brave, who can be brave no more.
		And they that live are kind as they are few.
		˜Tis mine to touch with deathlessness their clay:
		And I shall fail, and join those I betray.


	13. STRENGTHLESS THEY STAND

		Strengthless they stand assembled in the shadow,
		Blind to all strife and all to sorrow blind
		Who reared the tower, who scored the April meadow:
		Sheltered, they overshade my strengthless mind.
		Those hands that gave their kind ungentle power
		To summer’s travail, autumn did not spare:
		That mind which knew the clear, the intact hour,
		Now is disparted on a changeful air.
		
		The hands that ached to help are pithless bone
		(Mind, mind, the harsh pain and the unalloyed:
		What fruit you bear, that must you bear alone!)
		The broken helmet nods around its void:
		So I disclothe me of this shadow’s blight;
		And stand the axis of swift noon, sure night.


	14. SUMMER EVENING

		Bandstands every Tuesday evening
		Bring us to the drawling square:
		Braid, glad horn, blunt drum, commend us
		Each another, shed of care.
		
		Locusts with enthusiasm
		Celebrate the spended day:
		In the dappling shadowed porchswing
		Love finds out the usual way.
		
		Children are composed this season.
		There is hope among us yet.
		Hope can cut the roots of reason:
		And the sorrowful man forget.


	15. SUN OUR FATHER

		Sun our father while I slept
		You lifted like a field of corn
		The smiling and the peaceful strength
		Of those that are the race new born:
		
		The infant future waked in you
		Once more, and the world’s rich breast
		Drank the day’s courage and lay down
		In fearless and refreshing rest:
		
		And while the russian field you raised
		Dreams in the starflung shadow’s keep
		You wake these backward lands to work:
		Good work to do before we sleep.


	16. SURE ON THIS SHINING NIGHT

		Sure on this shining night
		Of star made shadows round,
		Kindness must watch for me
		This side the ground.
		The late year lies down the north.
		All is healed, all is health.
		High summer holds the earth.
		Hearts all whole.
		Sure on this shining night I weep for wonder wand’ring far
		alone
		Of shadows on the stars.


	17. THE HAPPY HEN

		_(To Dr. Marie Stopes et al., and to all scientific lovers)_
		
		His hottest love and most delight
		The rooster knows for speed of fear
		And winds her down and treads her right
		And leaves her stuffed with dazzled cheer,
		
		Rumpled allwhichways in her lint,
		Who swears, shrugs, redeems her face,
		And serves to mind us how a sprint
		Heads swiftliest for the state of grace.
		
		I loitered weeping with my bride for gladness
		Her walking side against and both embracing
		Through the brash brightening rain that now the season
		      changes
		White on the fallen air that now my fallen
		                                  the fallen girl her grave effaces.


	18. THE RENDEZVOUS

		The horn of resurrection
		    Globes world and skull with jubilance of sound:
		Perfect, my soul and flesh
		    Resolve from living sky and deathly ground.
		
		Ah, true to our appointment
		    You join me, that together we may rise
		To love’s eternity . . .
		     But tell me: what has saddened, so, your eyes?
		
		“Only that you, who loved me
		     Have waited long in vain new love to share:
		Before the blazing God
		     That cloudy love has burned to clearest air.”
		
		“Be sad no more; forget me
		     As now I can you: lost in God your soul:
		Me, love’s thin fever
		     Could not beguile from death’s white ruinous coal!”


	19. THE WIDE EARTH’S ORCHARD

		The wide earth’s orchard of your time of knowing,
		Shine of the springtime pleasures into bloom
		And branched throes of health: but soon the snowing
		And tender foretaste of your afterdoom,
		Of fallen blossoming air persuades the air
		In hardier practices: and soon dilate
		Fruits and the air together that shall bear
		Earthward the heavied boughs and to their fate:
		Wrung of the wealth and wonder they unfurled
		By that same air: which air the sun deranges 
		To slope the living season from the world
		And charge the world with snow that all estranges.
		Watch well this sun, and air, and orchard green:
		None stay these changes every man has seen.


*** Conrad Aiken (1889 - 1973)

	1. ALL LOVELY THINGS

		All lovely things will have an ending, 
		All lovely things will fade and die, 
		And youth, that’s now so bravely spending, 
		Will beg a penny by and by.
		
		Fine ladies soon are all forgotten, 
		And goldenrod is dust when dead, 
		The sweetest flesh and flowers are rotten 
		And cobwebs tent the brightest head.
		
		Come back, true love! Sweet youth, return!-- 
		But time goes on, and will, unheeding, 
		Though hands will reach, and eyes will yearn, 
		And the wild days set true hearts bleeding.
		
		Come back, true love! Sweet youth, remain!-- 
		But goldenrod and daisies wither, 
		And over them blows autumn rain, 
		They pass, they pass, and know not whither.


	2. ANNIHILATION

		While the blue noon above us arches, 
		And the poplar sheds disconsolate leaves, 
		Tell me again why love bewitches, 
		And what love gives. 
		
		It is the trembling finger that traces 
		The eyebrow’s curve, the curve of the cheek? 
		The mouth that quivers, when the hand caresses, 
		But cannot speak? 
		
		No, not these, not in these is hidden 
		The secret, more than in other things: 
		Not only the touch of a hand can gladden 
		Till the blood sings. 
		
		It is the leaf that falls between us, 
		The bells that murmur, the shadows that move, 
		The autumnal sunlight that fades upon us: 
		These things are love. 
		
		It is the ‘No, let us sit here longer,’ 
		The ‘Wait till tomorrow,’ the ‘Once I knew--’ 
		These trifles, said as I touch your finger, 
		And the clock strikes two. 
		
		The world is intricate, and we are nothing. 
		It is the complex world of grass, 
		A twig on the path, a look of loathing, 
		Feelings that pass--
		
		These are the secret! And I could hate you, 
		When, as I lean for another kiss, 
		I see in your eyes that I do not meet you, 
		And that love is this. 
		
		Rock meeting rock can know love better 
		Than eyes that stare or lips that touch. 
		All that we know in love is bitter, 
		And it is not much.


	3. BELOVED, LET US ONCE MORE PRAISE THE RAIN

		Beloved, let us once more praise the rain. 
		Let us discover some new alphabet, 
		For this, the often praised; and be ourselves, 
		The rain, the chickweed, and the burdock leaf, 
		The green-white privet flower, the spotted stone, 
		And all that welcomes the rain; the sparrow too,-- 
		Who watches with a hard eye from seclusion, 
		Beneath the elm-tree bough, till rain is done. 
		There is an oriole who, upside down, 
		Hangs at his nest, and flicks an orange wing,-- 
		Under a tree as dead and still as lead; 
		There is a single leaf, in all this heaven 
		Of leaves, which rain has loosened from its twig: 
		The stem breaks, and it falls, but it is caught 
		Upon a sister leaf, and thus she hangs; 
		There is an acorn cup, beside a mushroom 
		Which catches three drops from the stooping cloud. 
		The timid bee goes back to the hive; the fly 
		Under the broad leaf of the hollyhock 
		Perpends stupid with cold; the raindark snail 
		Surveys the wet world from a watery stone . . .
		And still the syllables of water whisper: 
		The wheel of cloud whirs slowly: while we wait 
		In the dark room; and in your heart I find 
		One silver raindrop,--on a hawthorn leaf,-- 
		Orion in a cobweb, and the World.


	4. CHANCE MEETING

		In the mazes of loitering people, the watchful and furtive, 
		The shadows of tree-trunks and shadows of leaves, 
		In the drowse of the sunlight, among the low voices, 
		I suddenly face you, 
		
		Your dark eyes return for a space from her who is with you, 
		They shine into mine with a sunlit desire, 
		They say an ‘I love you, what star do you live on?’ 
		They smile and then darken, 
		
		And silent, I answer ‘You too--I have known you,--I love you!--’ 
		And the shadows of tree-trunks and shadows of leaves 
		Interlace with low voices and footsteps and sunlight 
		To divide us forever.


	5. DISCORDANTS

		I. 
		
		Music I heard with you was more than music, 
		And bread I broke with you was more than bread; 
		Now that I am without you, all is desolate; 
		All that was once so beautiful is dead. 
		
		Your hands once touched this table and this silver, 
		And I have seen your fingers hold this glass. 
		These things do not remember you, belovèd, 
		And yet your touch upon them will not pass. 
		
		For it was in my heart you moved among them, 
		And blessed them with your hands and with your eyes; 
		And in my heart they will remember always,-- 
		They knew you once, O beautiful and wise. 
		
		
		II
		
		My heart has become as hard as a city street, 
		The horses trample upon it, it sings like iron, 
		All day long and all night long they beat, 
		They ring like the hooves of time. 
		
		My heart has become as drab as a city park, 
		The grass is worn with the feet of shameless lovers, 
		A match is struck, there is kissing in the dark, 
		The moon comes, pale with sleep. 
		
		My heart is torn with the sound of raucous voices, 
		They shout from the slums, from the streets, from the crowded places, 
		And tunes from the hurdy-gurdy that coldly rejoices 
		Shoot arrows into my heart. 
		
		
		III
		
		Dead Cleopatra lies in a crystal casket, 
		Wrapped and spiced by the cunningest of hands. 
		Around her neck they have put a golden necklace, 
		Her tatbebs, it is said, are worn with sands. 
		
		Dead Cleopatra was once revered in Egypt, 
		Warm-eyed she was, this princess of the South. 
		Now she is old and dry and faded, 
		With black bitumen they have sealed up her mouth. 
		
		O sweet clean earth, from whom the green blade cometh! 
		When we are dead, my best belovèd and I, 
		Close well above us, that we may rest forever, 
		Sending up grass and blossoms to the sky. 
		
		
		IV
		
		In the noisy street, 
		Where the sifted sunlight yellows the pallid faces, 
		Sudden I close my eyes, and on my eyelids 
		Feel from the far-off sea a cool faint spray,-- 
		
		A breath on my cheek, 
		From the tumbling breakers and foam, the hard sand shattered, 
		Gulls in the high wind whistling, flashing waters, 
		Smoke from the flashing waters blown on rocks; 
		
		--And I know once more, 
		O dearly belovèd! that all these seas are between us, 
		Tumult and madness, desolate save for the sea-gulls, 
		You on the farther shore, and I in this street.


*** Anna Akhmatova (1889 - 1966)

	1. I DON’T KNOW IF YOU’RE ALIVE OR DEAD

		I don’t know if you’re alive or dead. 
		Can you on earth be sought, 
		Or only when the sunsets fade 
		Be mourned serenely in my thought? 
		
		All is for you: the daily prayer, 
		The sleepless heat at night, 
		And of my verses, the white 
		Flock, and of my eyes, the blue fire. 
		
		No-one was more cherished, no-one tortured 
		Me more, not 
		Even the one who betrayed me to torture, 
		Not even the one who caressed me and forgot.


	2. I HEAR THE ORIOLE’S ALWAYS-GRIEVING VOICE

		I hear the oriole’s always-grieving voice, 
		And the rich summer’s welcome loss I hear 
		In the sickle’s serpentine hiss 
		Cutting the corn’s ear tightly pressed to ear. 
		And the short skirts of the slim reapers 
		Fly in the wind like holiday pennants, 
		The clash of joyful cymbals, and creeping 
		From under dusty lashes, the long glance. 
		
		I don’t expect love’s tender flatteries, 
		In premonition of some dark event, 
		But come, come and see this paradise 
		Where together we were blessed and innocent.


	3. IN MEMORIAM

		We aged a hundred years and this descended
		In just one hour, as at a stroke.
		The summer had been brief and now was ended;
		The body of the ploughed plains lay in smoke.
		
		The hushed road burst in colors then, a soaring
		Lament rose, ringing silver like a bell.
		And so I covered up my face, imploring
		God to destroy me before battle fell.
		
		And from my memory the shadows vanished
		Of songs and passions--burdens I’d not need.
		The Almighty bade it be--with all else banished--
		A book of portents terrible to read.


	4. LOT’S WIFE

		And the just man trailed God’s shining agent,
		over a black mountain, in his giant track,
		while a restless voice kept harrying his woman:
		“It’s not too late, you can still look back
		
		at the red towers of your native Sodom,
		the square where once you sang, the spinning-shed,
		at the empty windows set in the tall house
		where sons and daughters blessed your marriage-bed.”
		
		A single glance: a sudden dart of pain
		stitching her eyes before she made a sound . . .
		Her body flaked into transparent salt,
		and her swift legs rooted to the ground.
		
		Who will grieve for this woman? Does she not seem
		too insignificant for our concern?
		Yet in my heart I never will deny her,
		who suffered death because she chose to turn.


	5. MARCH ELEGY

		I have enough treasures from the past
		to last me longer than I need, or want.
		You know as well as I . . . malevolent memory
		won’t let go of half of them:
		a modest church, with its gold cupola
		slightly askew; a harsh chorus
		of crows; the whistle of a train;
		a birch tree haggard in a field
		as if it had just been sprung from jail;
		a secret midnight conclave
		of monumental Bible-oaks;
		and a tiny rowboat that comes drifting out
		of somebody’s dreams, slowly foundering.
		Winter has already loitered here,
		lightly powdering these fields,
		casting an impenetrable haze
		that fills the world as far as the horizon.
		I used to think that after we are gone
		there’s nothing, simply nothing at all.
		Then who’s that wandering by the porch
		again and calling us by name?
		Whose face is pressed against the frosted pane?
		What hand out there is waving like a branch?
		By way of reply, in that cobwebbed corner
		a sunstruck tatter dances in the mirror.


	6. REQUIEM

		Not under foreign skies
		Nor under foreign wings protected--
		I shared all this with my own people
		There, where misfortune had abandoned us. 
		
		
		_Instead of a Preface_
		
		During the frightening years of the Yezhov terror, I
		spent seventeen months waiting in prison queues in
		Leningrad. One day, somehow, someone ‘picked me out’.
		On that occasion there was a woman standing behind me,
		her lips blue with cold, who, of course, had never in
		her life heard my name. Jolted out of the torpor
		characteristic of all of us, she said into my ear
		(everyone whispered there)--‘Could one ever describe
		this?’ And I answered--‘I can.’ It was then that
		something like a smile slid across what had previously
		been just a face.
		
		
		_Dedication_
		
		Mountains fall before this grief,
		A mighty river stops its flow,
		But prison doors stay firmly bolted
		Shutting off the convict burrows
		And an anguish close to death.
		Fresh winds softly blow for someone,
		Gentle sunsets warm them through; we don’t know this,
		We are everywhere the same, listening
		To the scrape and turn of hateful keys
		And the heavy tread of marching soldiers.
		Waking early, as if for early mass,
		Walking through the capital run wild, gone to seed,
		We’d meet--the dead, lifeless; the sun, 
		Lower every day; the Neva, mistier:
		But hope still sings forever in the distance.
		The verdict. Immediately a flood of tears,
		Followed by a total isolation,
		As if a beating heart is painfully ripped out, or,
		Thumped, she lies there brutally laid out,
		But she still manages to walk, hesitantly, alone.
		Where are you, my unwilling friends,
		Captives of my two satanic years?
		What miracle do you see in a Siberian blizzard?
		What shimmering mirage around the circle of the moon?
		I send each one of you my salutation, and farewell.
		
		
		_Introduction_
		
		It happened like this when only the dead
		Were smiling, glad of their release,
		That Leningrad hung around its prisons
		Like a worthless emblem, flapping its piece.
		Shrill and sharp, the steam-whistles sang
		Short songs of farewell
		To the ranks of convicted, demented by suffering,
		As they, in regiments, walked along--
		Stars of death stood over us
		As innocent Russia squirmed
		Under the blood-spattered boots and tyres
		Of the black marias.
		
		
		i. 
		
		You were taken away at dawn. I followed you 
		As one does when a corpse is being removed. 
		Children were crying in the darkened house. 
		A candle flared, illuminating the Mother of God. . .
		The cold of an icon was on your lips, a death-cold
		sweat
		On your brow--I will never forget this; I will gather
		
		To wail with the wives of the murdered streltsy
		Inconsolably, beneath the Kremlin towers.
		
		
		ii
		
		Silent flows the river Don
		A yellow moon looks quietly on
		Swanking about, with cap askew
		It sees through the window a shadow of you
		Gravely ill, all alone
		The moon sees a woman lying at home
		Her son is in jail, her husband is dead 
		Say a prayer for her instead.
		
		
		iii
		
		It isn’t me, someone else is suffering. I couldn’t.
		Not like this. Everything that has happened,
		Cover it with a black cloth, 
		Then let the torches be removed. . .
		Night.
		
		
		iv
		
		Giggling, poking fun, everyone’s darling,
		The carefree sinner of Tsarskoye Selo
		If only you could have foreseen
		What life would do with you--
		That you would stand, parcel in hand,
		Beneath the Crosses, three hundredth in
		line,
		Burning the new year’s ice
		With your hot tears.
		Back and forth the prison poplar sways
		With not a sound--how many innocent 
		Blameless lives are being taken away . . .
		
		
		v
		
		For seventeen months I have been screaming,
		Calling you home.
		I’ve thrown myself at the feet of butchers
		For you, my son and my horror.
		Everything has become muddled forever--
		I can no longer distinguish
		Who is an animal, who a person, and how long
		The wait can be for an execution.
		There are now only dusty flowers,
		The chinking of the thurible,
		Tracks from somewhere into nowhere
		And, staring me in the face
		And threatening me with swift annihilation,
		An enormous star.
		
		
		vi
		
		Weeks fly lightly by. Even so,
		I cannot understand what has arisen,
		How, my son, into your prison
		White nights stare so brilliantly.
		Now once more they burn,
		Eyes that focus like a hawk,
		And, upon your cross, the talk
		Is again of death.
		
		
		vii. _The Verdict_
		
		The word landed with a stony thud
		Onto my still-beating breast.
		Nevermind, I was prepared,
		I will manage with the rest.
		
		I have a lot of work to do today;
		I need to slaughter memory,
		Turn my living soul to stone
		Then teach myself to live again . . .
		
		But how. The hot summer rustles
		Like a carnival outside my window;
		I have long had this premonition
		Of a bright day and a deserted house.
		
		
		viii. _To Death_
		
		You will come anyway--so why not now?
		I wait for you; things have become too hard.
		I have turned out the lights and opened the door
		For you, so simple and so wonderful. 
		Assume whatever shape you wish. Burst in 
		Like a shell of noxious gas. Creep up on me 
		Like a practised bandit with a heavy weapon.
		Poison me, if you want, with a typhoid exhalation,
		Or, with a simple tale prepared by you
		(And known by all to the point of nausea), take me 
		Before the commander of the blue caps and let me
		glimpse 
		The house administrator’s terrified white face.
		I don’t care anymore. The river Yenisey 
		Swirls on. The Pole star blazes.
		The blue sparks of those much-loved eyes
		Close over and cover the final horror.
		
		
		ix
		
		Madness with its wings
		Has covered half my soul
		It feeds me fiery wine
		And lures me into the abyss.
		
		That’s when I understood 
		While listening to my alien delirium
		That I must hand the victory
		To it.
		
		However much I nag
		However much I beg
		It will not let me take
		One single thing away:
		
		Not my son’s frightening eyes--
		A suffering set in stone,
		Or prison visiting hours
		Or days that end in storms
		
		Nor the sweet coolness of a hand
		The anxious shade of lime trees
		Nor the light distant sound
		Of final comforting words.
		
		
		x. _Crucifixion_
		
		Weep not for me, mother.
		I am alive in my grave.
		
		A choir of angels glorified the greatest hour,
		The heavens melted into flames.
		To his father he said, ‘Why hast thou forsaken me!’
		But to his mother, ‘Weep not for me . . .’
		
		Magdalena smote herself and wept,
		The favourite disciple turned to stone,
		But there, where the mother stood silent,
		Not one person dared to look.
		
		
		_Epilogue_
		
		i
		
		I have learned how faces fall,
		How terror can escape from lowered eyes,
		How suffering can etch cruel pages 
		Of cuneiform-like marks upon the cheeks.
		I know how dark or ash-blond strands of hair
		Can suddenly turn white. I’ve learned to recognise
		The fading smiles upon submissive lips,
		The trembling fear inside a hollow laugh.
		That’s why I pray not for myself
		But all of you who stood there with me
		Through fiercest cold and scorching July heat
		Under a towering, completely blind red wall.
		
		
		ii
		
		The hour has come to remember the dead.
		I see you, I hear you, I feel you:
		The one who resisted the long drag to the open window;
		The one who could no longer feel the kick of familiar
		soil beneath her feet;
		The one who, with a sudden flick of her head, replied,
		
		‘I arrive here as if I’ve come home!’
		I’d like to name you all by name, but the list
		Has been removed and there is nowhere else to look.
		So,
		I have woven you this wide shroud out of the humble
		words
		I overheard you use. Everywhere, forever and always,
		I will never forget one single thing. Even in new
		grief.
		Even if they clamp shut my tormented mouth
		Through which one hundred million people scream;
		That’s how I wish them to remember me when I am dead
		On the eve of my remembrance day.
		If someone someday in this country 
		Decides to raise a memorial to me,
		I give my consent to this festivity
		But only on this condition--do not build it
		By the sea where I was born,
		I have severed my last ties with the sea;
		Nor in the Tsar’s Park by the hallowed stump
		Where an inconsolable shadow looks for me;
		Build it here where I stood for three hundred hours
		And no-one slid open the bolt.
		Listen, even in blissful death I fear
		That I will forget the Black Marias,
		Forget how hatefully the door slammed and an old woman
		Howled like a wounded beast.
		Let the thawing ice flow like tears
		From my immovable bronze eyelids
		And let the prison dove coo in the distance
		While ships sail quietly along the river.


	7. SNOW

		Upon the hard crest of a snow-drift
		We tread, and grown quiet, we walk
		On towards my house, white, enchanted;
		Our mood is too tender for talk.


	8. THE MUSE

		All that I am hangs by a thread tonight
		as I wait for her whom no one can command.
		Whatever I cherish most--youth, freedom, glory--
		fades before her who bears the flute in her hand.
		
		And look! she comes . . . she tosses back her veil,
		staring me down, serene and pitiless.
		“Are you the one,” I ask, “whom Dante heard dictate
		the lines of his _Inferno_?” She answers: “Yes.”


*** Louisa May Alcott (1832 - 1888)

	1. DON’T DRIVE ME AWAY

		Don’t drive me away, 
		But hear what I say: 
		Bad men want the gold; 
		They will steal it to-night, 
		And you must take flight; 
		So be quiet and busy and bold.
		
		Slip away with me, 
		And you will see 
		What a wise little thing am I; 
		For the road I show 
		No man can know, 
		Since it’s up in the pathless sky.


	2. MY KINGDOM

		A little kingdom I possess 
		where thoughts and feelings dwell, 
		And very hard I find the task 
		of governing it well; 
		For passion tempts and troubles me, 
		A wayward will misleads, 
		And selfishness its shadow casts 
		On all my words and deeds. 
		
		How can I learn to rule myself, 
		to be the child I should, 
		Honest and brave, nor ever tire 
		Of trying to be good? 
		How can I keep a sunny soul 
		To shine along life’s way? 
		How can I tune my little heart 
		To sweetly sing all day? 
		
		Dear Father, help me with the love 
		that casteth out my fear; 
		Teach me to lean on thee, and feel 
		That thou art very near, 
		That no temptation is unseen 
		No childish grief too small, 
		Since thou, with patience infinite, 
		Doth soothe and comfort all. 
		
		I do not ask for any crown 
		But that which all may win 
		Nor seek to conquer any world 
		Except the one within. 
		Be thou my guide until I find, 
		Led by a tender hand, 
		Thy happy kingdom in myself 
		And dare to take command.


*** Vicente Aleixandre (1898 - 1984)

	1. WITH ALL DUE RESPECT

		Trees, women and children
		are all the same thing: Background.
		Voices, affections, brightness, joy,
		this knowledge that finally here we all are.
		Indeed. Me and my ten fingers.
		
		Now the sun isn’t horrendous like a cheek that’s ready:
		it isn’t a piece of clothing or a speechless flashlight.
		Nor is it the answer heard by our knees,
		nor the task of touching the frontiers with the whitest part of our eyes.
		The Sun has already become truth, lucidity, stability.
		You converse with the mountain,
		you trade the mountain for a heart:
		then you can go on, weightless, going away.
		The fish’s eye, if we come to the river, 
		is precisely the image of happiness God sets up for us,
		the passionate kiss that breaks our bones.
		
		Indeed. Finally, it’s life. Oh, what egg-like beauty
		in this ample gift the Valley spreads before us,
		this limitation we can lean our heads against
		so as to hear the greatest music, that of the distant planets.
		Hurry, let’s all
		get close around the bonfire.
		Your hands made of petals and mine of bark,
		these delicious improvisations we show each other,
		are good--for burning, for keeping faith in tomorrow,
		so that our talk can go on ignoring our clothes.
		I don’t notice our clothes. Do you?
		Dressed up in three-hundred burlap suits,
		wrapped in my roughest heaviest get-up,
		I maintain a dawn-like dignity and brag of how much I know about nakedness.


*** Dante Alighieri (1265 - 1321)

	1. SESTINA OF THE LADY PIETRA DEGLI SCROVIGNI

		To the dim light and the large circle of shade 
		I have clomb, and to the whitening of the hills, 
		There where we see no color in the grass. 
		Natheless my longing loses not its green, 
		It has so taken root in the hard stone 
		Which talks and hears as though it were a lady. 
		
		Utterly frozen is this youthful lady, 
		Even as the snow that lies within the shade; 
		For she is no more moved than is the stone 
		By the sweet season which makes warm the hills 
		And alters them afresh from white to green 
		Covering their sides again with flowers and grass. 
		
		When on her hair she sets a crown of grass 
		The thought has no more room for other lady, 
		Because she weaves the yellow with the green 
		So well that Love sits down there in the shade,-- 
		Love who has shut me in among low hills 
		Faster than between walls of granite-stone. 
		
		She is more bright than is a precious stone; 
		The wound she gives may not be healed with grass: 
		I therefore have fled far o’er plains and hills 
		For refuge from so dangerous a lady; 
		But from her sunshine nothing can give shade,-- 
		Not any hill, nor wall, nor summer-green. 
		
		A while ago, I saw her dressed in green,-- 
		So fair, she might have wakened in a stone 
		This love which I do feel even for her shade; 
		And therefore, as one woos a graceful lady, 
		I wooed her in a field that was all grass 
		Girdled about with very lofty hills. 
		
		Yet shall the streams turn back and climb the hills 
		Before Love’s flame in this damp wood and green 
		Burn, as it burns within a youthful lady, 
		For my sake, who would sleep away in stone 
		My life, or feed like beasts upon the grass, 
		Only to see her garments cast a shade. 
		
		How dark soe’er the hills throw out their shade, 
		Under her summer green the beautiful lady 
		Covers it, like a stone cover’d in grass. 


	2. SONNET

		Upon a day, came Sorrow in to me,
		        Saying, ‘I’ve come to stay with thee a while’;
		        And I perceived that she had ushered Bile
		And Pain into my house for company.
		Wherefore I said, ‘Go forth--away with thee!’
		        But like a Greek she answered, full of guile,
		        And went on arguing in an easy style.
		Then, looking, I saw Love come silently,
		Habited in black raiment, smooth and new,
		        Having a black hat set upon his hair;
		And certainly the tears he shed were true.
		        So that I asked, ‘What ails thee, trifler?’
		Answering, he said: ‘A grief to be gone through;
		        For our own lady’s dying, brother dear.’


*** Yehuda Amichai (1924 - 2000)

	1. A MAN DOESN’T HAVE TIME IN HIS LIFE

		A man doesn’t have time in his life
		to have time for everything.
		He doesn’t have seasons enough to have
		a season for every purpose. Ecclesiastes
		Was wrong about that.
		
		A man needs to love and to hate at the same moment,
		to laugh and cry with the same eyes,
		with the same hands to throw stones and to gather them,
		to make love in war and war in love.
		And to hate and forgive and remember and forget,
		to arrange and confuse, to eat and to digest
		what history 
		takes years and years to do.
		
		A man doesn’t have time.
		When he loses he seeks, when he finds
		he forgets, when he forgets he loves, when he loves
		he begins to forget.
		
		And his soul is seasoned, his soul
		is very professional.
		Only his body remains forever
		an amateur. It tries and it misses,
		gets muddled, doesn’t learn a thing,
		drunk and blind in its pleasures 
		and its pains.
		
		He will die as figs die in autumn,
		Shriveled and full of himself and sweet,
		the leaves growing dry on the ground,
		the bare branches pointing to the place
		where there’s time for everything.


	2. A PITY

		They amputated
		Your thighs off my hips.
		As far as I’m concerned
		They are all surgeons. All of them.
		
		They dismantled us
		Each from the other.
		As far as I’m concerned
		They are all engineers. All of them.
		
		A pity. We were such a good
		And loving invention.
		An aeroplane made from a man and wife.
		Wings and everything.
		We hovered above the earth.
		
		We even flew a little.


	3. BEFORE

		Before the gate has been closed, 
		before the last question is posed, 
		before I am transposed. 
		Before the weeds fill the gardens, 
		before there are no pardons, 
		before the concrete hardens. 
		Before all the flute-holes are covered, 
		before things are locked in the cupboard, 
		before the rules are discovered. 
		Before the conclusion is planned, 
		before God closes his hand, 
		before we have nowhere to stand. 


*** Kingsley Amis (1922 - 1995)

	1. SOMETHING NASTY IN THE BOOKSHOP

		Between the Gardening and the Cookery
		Comes the brief Poetry shelf;
		By the Nonesuch Donne, a thin anthology
		Offers itself.
		
		Critical, and with nothing else to do,
		I scan the Contents page,
		Relieved to find the names are mostly new;
		No one my age.
		
		Like all strangers, they divide by sex:
		Landscape Near Parma
		Interests a man, so does The Double Vortex,
		So does Rilke and Buddha.
		
		“I travel, you see”, “I think” and “I can read”
		These titles seem to say;
		But I Remember You, Love is my Creed,
		Poem for J.,
		
		The ladies’ choice, discountenance my patter
		For several seconds;
		From somewhere in this (as in any) matter
		A moral beckons.
		
		Should poets bicycle-pump the human heart
		Or squash it flat?
		Man’s love is of man’s life a thing apart;
		Girls aren’t like that.
		
		We men have got love well weighed up; our stuff
		Can get by without it.
		Women don’t seem to think that’s good enough;
		They write about it.
		
		And the awful way their poems lay them open
		Just doesn’t strike them.
		Women are really much nicer than men:
		No wonder we like them.
		
		Deciding this, we can forget those times
		We stayed up half the night
		Chock-full of love, crammed with bright thoughts, names, rhymes,
		And couldn’t write.


	2. THINGS TELL LESS AND LESS

		Things tell less and less: 
		The news impersonal 
		And from afar; no book 
		Worth wrenching off the shelf. 
		Liquor brings dizziness 
		And food discomfort; all 
		Music sounds thin and tired, 
		And what picture could earn a look? 
		The self drowses in the self 
		Beyond hope of a visitor. 
		Desire and those desired 
		Fade, and no matter: 
		Memories in decay 
		Annihilate the day. 
		There once was an answer: 
		Up at the stroke of seven, 
		A turn round the garden 
		(Breathing deep and slow), 
		Then work, never mind what, 
		How small, provided that 
		It serves another’s good 
		But once is long ago 
		And, tell me, how could 
		Such an answer be less than wrong, 
		Be right all along? 
		Vain echoes, desist.


	3. WASTED

		That cold winter evening
		The fire would not draw,
		And the whole family hung
		Over the dismal grate
		Where rain-soaked logs
		Bubbled, hissed and steamed.
		Then, when the others had gone
		Up to their chilly beds,
		And I was ready to go,
		The wood began to flame
		In clear rose and violet,
		Heating the small hearth.
		
		Why should that memory cling
		Now the children are all grown up,
		And the house--a different house--
		Is warm at any season?


*** Thomas Aquinas (1225 - 1274)

	1. PANGE LINGUA

		Sing, my tongue, the Saviour’s glory,
		Of His cross the mystery sing;
		Lift on high the wondrous trophy,
		Tell the triumph of the King:
		He, the world’s Redeemer, conquers
		Death, through death now vanquishing.
		
		Born for us, and for us given;
		Son of man, like us below,
		He, as Man with men, abiding
		Dwells, the seed of life to sow:
		He, our heavy griefs partaking,
		Thus fulfils His life of woe.
		
		Word made flesh! His word life-giving,
		Gives His flesh our meat to be,
		Bids us drink His blood, believing,
		Through His death, we life shall see:
		Blessed they who thus receiving
		Are from death and sin set free.
		
		Low in adoration bending,
		Now our hearts our God revere;
		Faith, her aid to sight is lending,
		Though unseen the Lord is near;
		Ancient types and shadows ending,
		Christ our paschal Lamb is here.
		
		Praise for ever, thanks and blessing,
		Thine, O gracious Father, be:
		Praise be Thine, O Christ, who bringeth
		Life and immortality.
		Praise be Thine, Thou quickening Spirit,
		Praise through all eternity. 


	2. THEE WE ADORE

		Thee we adore, O hidden Savior, Thee,
		Who in Thy sacrament dost deign to be;
		Both flesh and spirit at Thy presence fail,
		Yet here Thy presence we devoutly hail.
		
		O blest memorial of our dying Lord,
		Who living Bread to men doth here afford!
		O may our souls forever feed on Thee,
		And Thou, O Christ, forever precious be.
		
		Fountain of gladness, Jesu, Lord and God,
		Cleanse us, unclean, with Thy most cleansing blood;
		Increase our faith and love, that we may know
		The hope and peace which from Thy presence flow.
		
		O Christ, Whom now beneath a veil we see,
		May what we thirst for soon our portion be,
		To gaze on Thee unveiled, and see Thy face,
		The vision of Thy glory and Thy grace. 


*** Matthew Arnold (1822 - 1888)

	1. BACCHANALIA

		I
		
		The evening comes, the fields are still.
		The tinkle of the thirsty rill,
		Unheard all day, ascends again;
		Deserted is the half-mown plain,
		Silent the swaths; the ringing wain,
		The mower’s cry, the dog’s alarms,
		All housed within the sleeping farms.
		The business of the day is done,
		The last-left haymaker is gone.
		And from the thyme upon the height,
		And from the elder-blossom white
		And pale dog-roses in the hedge,
		And from the mint-plant in the sedge,
		In puffs of balm the night-air blows
		The perfume which the day foregoes.
		And on the pure horizon far,
		See, pulsing with the first-born star,
		The liquid sky above the hill!
		The evening comes, the fields are still.
		
		Loitering and leaping,
		With saunter, with bounds,
		Flickering and circling
		In files and in rounds,
		Gayly their pine-staff green
		Tossing in air,
		Loose o’er their shoulders white
		Showering their hair,
		See! the wild Mænads
		Break from the wood,
		Youth and Iacchus
		Maddening their blood.
		See! through the quiet land
		Rioting they pass,
		Fling the fresh heaps about,
		Trample the grass,
		Tear from the rifled hedge
		Garlands, their prize;
		Fill with their sports the field,
		Fill with their cries.
		
		Shepherd, what ails thee, then?
		Shepherd, why mute?
		Forth with thy joyous song!
		Forth with thy flute!
		Tempts not the revel blithe?
		Lure not their cries?
		Glow not their shoulders smooth?
		Melt not their eyes?
		Is not, on cheeks like those,
		Lovely the flush?
		--_Ah! so the quiet was!
		So was the hush!_
		
		
		II
		
		The epoch ends, the world is still.
		The age has talked and worked its fill.
		The famous orators have shone,
		The famous poets sung and gone,
		The famous men of war have fought,
		The famous speculators thought,
		The famous players, sculptors, wrought,
		The famous painters filled their wall,
		The famous critics judged it all.
		The combatants are parted now;
		Uphung the spear, unbent the bow,
		The puissant crowned, the weak laid low.
		And in the after-silence sweet,
		Now strifes are hushed, our ears doth meet,
		Ascending pure, the bell-like fame
		Of this or that down-trodden name,
		Delicate spirits, pushed away
		In the hot press of the noonday.
		And o’er the plain, where the dead age
		Did its now-silent warfare wage,--
		O’er that wide plain, now wrapped in gloom,
		Where many a splendor finds its tomb,
		Many spent fames and fallen nights nights--
		The one or two immortal lights
		Rise slowly up into the sky,
		To shine there everlastingly,
		Like stars over the bounding hill.
		The epoch ends, the world is still.
		
		Thundering and bursting
		In torrents, in waves,
		Carolling and shouting
		Over tombs, amid graves,
		See! on the cumbered plain
		Clearing a stage,
		Scattering the past about,
		Comes the new age.
		Bards make new poems,
		Thinkers new schools,
		Statesmen new systems,
		Critics new rules.
		All things begin again;
		Life is their prize;
		Earth with their deeds they fill,
		Fill with their cries.
		
		Poet, what ails thee, then?
		Say, why so mute?
		Forth with thy praising voice!
		Forth with thy flute!
		Loiterer! why sittest thou
		Sunk in thy dream?
		Tempts not the bright new age?
		Shines not its stream?
		Look, ah! what genius,
		Art, science, wit!
		Soldiers like Cæsar,
		Statesmen like Pitt!
		Sculptors like Phidias,
		Raphaels in shoals,
		Poets like Shakspeare,--
		Beautiful souls!
		See, on their glowing cheeks
		Heavenly the flush!
		--_Ah! so the silence was!
		So was the hush!_
		
		 The world but feels the present’s spell:
		The poet feels the past as well;
		Whatever men have done, might do,
		Whatever thought, might think it too.


	2. CONSOLATION

		Mist clogs the sunshine.
		Smoky dwarf houses
		Hem me round everywhere;
		A vague dejection
		Weighs down my soul.
		
		Yet, while I languish,
		Everywhere countless
		Prospects unroll themselves,
		And countless beings
		Pass countless moods.
		
		Far hence, in Asia,
		On the smooth convent-roofs,
		On the gold terraces,
		Of holy Lassa,
		Bright shines the sun.
		
		Gray time-worn marbles
		Hold the pure Muses;
		In their cool gallery,
		By yellow Tiber,
		They still look fair.
		
		Strange unloved uproar[A]
		Shrills round their portal;
		Yet not on Helicon
		Kept they more cloudless
		Their noble calm.
		
		Through sun-proof alleys
		In a lone, sand-hemmed
		City of Africa,
		A blind, led beggar,
		Age-bowed, asks alms.
		
		No bolder robber
		Erst abode ambushed
		Deep in the sandy waste;
		No clearer eyesight
		Spied prey afar.
		
		Saharan sand-winds
		Seared his keen eyeballs;
		Spent is the spoil he won.
		For him the present
		Holds only pain.
		
		Two young, fair lovers,
		Where the warm June-wind,
		Fresh from the summer fields
		Plays fondly round them,
		Stand, tranced in joy.
		
		With sweet, joined voices,
		And with eyes brimming,
		“Ah!” they cry, “Destiny,
		Prolong the present!
		Time, stand still here!”
		
		The prompt stern goddess
		Shakes her head, frowning:
		Time gives his hour-glass
		Its due reversal;
		Their hour is gone.
		
		With weak indulgence
		Did the just goddess
		Lengthen their happiness,
		She lengthened also
		Distress elsewhere.
		
		The hour whose happy
		Unalloyed moments
		I would eternalize,
		Ten thousand mourners
		Well pleased see end.
		
		The bleak, stern hour,
		Whose severe moments
		I would annihilate,
		Is passed by others
		In warmth, light, joy.
		
		Time, so complained of,
		Who to no one man
		Shows partiality,
		Brings round to all men
		Some undimmed hours.


	3. DOVER BEACH

		The sea is calm to-night.
		The tide is full, the moon lies fair
		Upon the straits; on the French coast, the light
		Gleams and is gone; the cliffs of England stand,
		Glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay.
		
		Come to the window, sweet is the night-air!
		Only, from the long line of spray
		Where the sea meets the moon-blanched sand,
		Listen! you hear the grating roar
		Of pebbles which the waves draw back, and fling,
		At their return, up the high strand,
		Begin and cease, and then again begin,
		With tremulous cadence slow, and bring
		The eternal note of sadness in.
		
		Sophocles long ago
		Heard it on the Ægean, and it brought
		Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow
		Of human misery: we
		Find also in the sound a thought,
		Hearing it by this distant northern sea.
		
		The sea of faith
		Was once, too, at the full, and round earth’s shore
		Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled.
		But now I only hear
		Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,
		Retreating, to the breath
		Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear
		And naked shingles of the world.
		
		Ah, love, let us be true
		To one another! for the world, which seems
		To lie before us like a land of dreams,
		So various, so beautiful, so new,
		Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light,
		Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain;
		And we are here as on a darkling plain
		Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,
		Where ignorant armies clash by night.


	4. FROM THE HYMN OF EMPEDOCLES

		IS it so small a thing
		To have enjoy’d the sun,
		To have lived light in the spring,
		To have loved, to have thought, to have done;
		To have advanced true friends, and beat down baffling foes;
		
		That we must feign a bliss
		Of doubtful future date,
		And while we dream on this
		Lose all our present state,
		And relegate to worlds yet distant our repose?
		
		Not much, I know, you prize
		What pleasures may be had,
		Who look on life with eyes
		Estranged, like mine, and sad:
		And yet the village churl feels the truth more than you;
		
		Who ‘s loth to leave this life
		Which to him little yields:
		His hard-task’d sunburnt wife,
		His often-labour’d fields;
		The boors with whom he talk’d, the country spots he knew.
		
		But thou, because thou hear’st
		Men scoff at Heaven and Fate;
		Because the gods thou fear’st
		Fail to make blest thy state,
		Tremblest, and wilt not dare to trust the joys there are.
		
		I say, Fear not! life still
		Leaves human effort scope.
		But, since life teems with ill,
		Nurse no extravagant hope.
		Because thou must not dream, thou need’st not then despair.


	5. GROWING OLD

		What is it to grow old?
		Is it to lose the glory of the form,
		The lustre of the eye?
		Is it for beauty to forego her wreath?
		--Yes, but not this alone.
		
		Is it to feel our strength--
		Not our bloom only, but our strength--decay?
		Is it to feel each limb
		Grow stiffer, every function less exact,
		Each nerve more loosely strung?
		
		Yes, this, and more; but not,
		Ah! ’tis not what in youth we dreamed ’twould be.
		’Tis not to have our life
		Mellowed and softened as with sunset-glow,--
		A golden day’s decline.
		
		’Tis not to see the world
		As from a height, with rapt prophetic eyes,
		And heart profoundly stirred;
		And weep, and feel the fulness of the past,
		The years that are no more.
		
		It is to spend long days,
		And not once feel that we were ever young;
		It is to add, immured
		In the hot prison of the present, month
		To month with weary pain.
		
		It is to suffer this,
		And feel but half, and feebly, what we feel.
		Deep in our hidden heart
		Festers the dull remembrance of a change,
		But no emotion,--none.
		
		It is--last stage of all--
		When we are frozen up within, and quite
		The phantom of ourselves,
		To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost,
		Which blamed the living man.


	6. ISOLATION

		We were apart: yet, day by day,
		I bade my heart more constant be.
		I bade it keep the world away,
		And grow a home for only thee;
		Nor feared but thy love likewise grew,
		Like mine, each day, more tried, more true.
		
		The fault was grave! I might have known,
		What far too soon, alas! I learned,--
		The heart can bind itself alone,
		And faith may oft be unreturned.
		Self-swayed our feelings ebb and swell.
		Thou lov’st no more. Farewell! Farewell!
		
		Farewell!--And thou, thou lonely heart,
		Which never yet without remorse
		Even for a moment didst depart
		From thy remote and spherèd course
		To haunt the place where passions reign,--
		Back to thy solitude again!
		
		Back! with the conscious thrill of shame
		Which Luna felt, that summer-night,
		Flash through her pure immortal frame,
		When she forsook the starry height
		To hang o’er Endymion’s sleep
		Upon the pine-grown Latmian steep.
		
		Yet she, chaste queen, had never proved
		How vain a thing is mortal love,
		Wandering in heaven, far removed;
		But thou hast long had place to prove
		This truth,--to prove, and make thine own:
		“Thou hast been, shalt be, art, alone.”
		
		Or, if not quite alone, yet they
		Which touch thee are unmating things,--
		Ocean and clouds and night and day;
		Lorn autumns and triumphant springs;
		And life, and others’ joy and pain,
		And love, if love, of happier men.
		
		Of happier men; for they, at least,
		Have _dreamed_ two human hearts might blend
		In one, and were through faith released
		From isolation without end
		Prolonged; nor knew, although not less
		Alone than thou, their loneliness.


	7. MORALITY

		We cannot kindle when we will
		The fire which in the heart resides;
		The spirit bloweth and is still,
		In mystery our soul abides.
		 But tasks in hours of insight willed
		 Can be through hours of gloom fulfilled.
		
		With aching hands and bleeding feet
		We dig and heap, lay stone on stone;
		We bear the burden and the heat
		Of the long day, and wish ’twere done.
		 Not till the hours of light return,
		 All we have built do we discern.
		
		Then, when the clouds are off the soul,
		When thou dost bask in Nature’s eye,
		Ask how _she_ viewed thy self-control,
		Thy struggling, tasked morality,--
		 Nature, whose free, light, cheerful air,
		 Oft made thee, in thy gloom, despair.
		
		And she, whose censure thou dost dread,
		Whose eye thou wast afraid to seek,
		See, on her face a glow is spread,
		A strong emotion on her cheek!
		 “Ah, child!” she cries, “that strife divine,
		 Whence was it, for it is not mine?
		
		“There is no effort on _my_ brow;
		I do not strive, I do not weep:
		I rush with the swift spheres, and glow
		In joy, and when I will, I sleep.
		 Yet that severe, that earnest air,
		 I saw, I felt it once--but where?
		
		“I knew not yet the gauge of time,
		Nor wore the manacles of space;
		I felt it in some other clime,
		I saw it in some other place.
		 ’Twas when the heavenly house I trod,
		 And lay upon the breast of God.”


	8. MYCERINUS

		“Not by the justice that my father spurned,
		Not for the thousands whom my father slew,
		Altars unfed and temples overturned,
		Cold hearts and thankless tongues, where thanks are due;
		Fell this dread voice from lips that cannot lie,
		Stern sentence of the Powers of Destiny.
		
		“I will unfold my sentence and my crime.
		My crime,--that, rapt in reverential awe,
		I sate obedient, in the fiery prime
		Of youth, self-governed, at the feet of Law;
		Ennobling this dull pomp, the life of kings,
		By contemplation of diviner things.
		
		“My father loved injustice, and lived long;
		Crowned with gray hairs he died, and full of sway.
		I loved the good he scorned, and hated wrong--
		The gods declare my recompense to-day.
		I looked for life more lasting, rule more high;
		And when six years are measured, lo, I die!
		
		“Yet surely, O my people, did I deem
		Man’s justice from the all-just gods was given;
		A light that from some upper fount did beam,
		Some better archetype, whose seat was heaven;
		A light that, shining from the blest abodes,
		Did shadow somewhat of the life of gods.
		
		“Mere phantoms of man’s self-tormenting heart,
		Which on the sweets that woo it dares not feed!
		Vain dreams, which quench our pleasures, then depart,
		When the duped soul, self-mastered, claims its meed;
		When, on the strenuous just man, Heaven bestows,
		Crown of his struggling life, an unjust close!
		
		“Seems it so light a thing, then, austere powers,
		To spurn man’s common lure, life’s pleasant things?
		Seems there no joy in dances crowned with flowers,
		Love free to range, and regal banquetings?
		Bend ye on these indeed an unmoved eye,
		Not gods, but ghosts, in frozen apathy?
		
		“Or is it that some force, too stern, too strong,
		Even for yourselves to conquer or beguile,
		Bears earth and heaven and men and gods along,
		Like the broad volume of the insurgent Nile?
		And the great powers we serve, themselves may be
		Slaves of a tyrannous necessity?
		
		“Or in mid-heaven, perhaps, your golden cars,
		Where earthly voice climbs never, wing their flight,
		And in wild hunt, through mazy tracts of stars,
		Sweep in the sounding stillness of the night?
		Or in deaf ease, on thrones of dazzling sheen,
		Drinking deep draughts of joy, ye dwell serene?
		
		“Oh, wherefore cheat our youth, if thus it be,
		Of one short joy, one lust, one pleasant dream?
		Stringing vain words of powers we cannot see,
		Blind divinations of a will supreme;
		Lost labor! when the circumambient gloom
		But hides, if gods, gods careless of our doom?
		
		“The rest I give to joy. Even while I speak,
		My sand runs short; and as yon star-shot ray,
		Hemmed by two banks of cloud, peers pale and weak,
		Now, as the barrier closes, dies away,--
		Even so do past and future intertwine,
		Blotting this six years’ space, which yet is mine.
		
		“Six years,--six little years,--six drops of time!
		Yet suns shall rise, and many moons shall wane,
		And old men die, and young men pass their prime,
		And languid pleasure fade and flower again,
		And the dull gods behold, ere these are flown,
		Revels more deep, joy keener than their own.
		
		“Into the silence of the groves and woods
		I will go forth; though something would I say,--
		Something,--yet what, I know not: for the gods
		The doom they pass revoke not nor delay;
		And prayers and gifts and tears are fruitless all,
		And the night waxes, and the shadows fall.
		
		“Ye men of Egypt, ye have heard your king!
		I go, and I return not. But the will
		Of the great gods is plain; and ye must bring
		Ill deeds, ill passions, zealous to fulfil
		Their pleasure, to their feet; and reap their praise,--
		The praise of gods, rich boon! and length of days.”
		
		--So spake he, half in anger, half in scorn;
		And one loud cry of grief and of amaze
		Broke from his sorrowing people; so he spake,
		And turning, left them there: and with brief pause,
		Girt with a throng of revellers, bent his way
		To the cool region of the groves he loved.
		There by the river-banks he wandered on,
		From palm-grove on to palm-grove, happy trees,
		Their smooth tops shining sunward, and beneath
		Burying their unsunned stems in grass and flowers;
		Where in one dream the feverish time of youth
		Might fade in slumber, and the feet of joy
		Might wander all day long and never tire.
		Here came the king, holding high feast, at morn,
		Rose-crowned; and ever, when the sun went down,
		A hundred lamps beamed in the tranquil gloom,
		From tree to tree all through the twinkling grove,
		Revealing all the tumult of the feast,--
		Flushed guests, and golden goblets foamed with wine;
		While the deep-burnished foliage overhead
		Splintered the silver arrows of the moon.
		  It may be that sometimes his wondering soul
		From the loud joyful laughter of his lips
		Might shrink half startled, like a guilty man
		Who wrestles with his dream; as some pale shape,
		Gliding half hidden through the dusky stems,
		Would thrust a hand before the lifted bowl,
		Whispering, _A little space, and thou art mine!_
		It may be, on that joyless feast his eye
		Dwelt with mere outward seeming; he, within,
		Took measure of his soul, and knew its strength,
		And by that silent knowledge, day by day,
		Was calmed, ennobled, comforted, sustained.
		It may be; but not less his brow was smooth,
		And his clear laugh fled ringing through the gloom,
		And his mirth quailed not at the mild reproof
		Sighed out by winter’s sad tranquillity;
		Nor, palled with its own fulness, ebbed and died
		In the rich languor of long summer-days;
		Nor withered when the palm-tree plumes, that roofed
		With their mild dark his grassy banquet-hall,
		Bent to the cold winds of the showerless spring;
		No, nor grew dark when autumn brought the clouds.
		  So six long years he revelled, night and day.
		And when the mirth waxed loudest, with dull sound
		Sometimes from the grove’s centre echoes came,
		To tell his wondering people of their king;
		In the still night, across the steaming flats,
		Mixed with the murmur of the moving Nile.


	9. PHILOMELA

		Hark! ah, the nightingale--
		The tawny-throated!
		Hark! from that moonlit cedar what a burst!
		What triumph! hark! what pain!
		
		O wanderer from a Grecian shore,
		Still, after many years, in distant lands,
		Still nourishing in thy bewildered brain
		That wild, unquenched, deep-sunken, old-world pain,
		Say, will it never heal?
		And can this fragrant lawn
		With its cool trees, and night,
		And the sweet, tranquil Thames,
		And moonshine, and the dew,
		To thy racked heart and brain
		Afford no balm?
		
		Dost thou to-night behold,
		Here, through the moonlight on this English grass,
		The unfriendly palace in the Thracian wild?
		Dost thou again peruse
		With hot cheeks and seared eyes
		The too clear web, and thy dumb sister’s shame?
		Dost thou once more assay
		Thy flight, and feel come over thee,
		Poor fugitive, the feathery change.
		Once more, and once more seem to make resound
		With love and hate, triumph and agony,
		Lone Daulis, and the high Cephissian vale?
		Listen, Eugenia,--
		How thick the bursts come crowding through the leaves!
		Again--thou hearest?
		Eternal passion!
		Eternal pain!


	10. PROGRESS

		The Master stood upon the mount, and taught.
		He saw a fire in his disciples’ eyes;
		“The old law,” they said, “is wholly come to naught:
		   Behold the new world rise!”
		
		“Was it,” the Lord then said, “with scorn ye saw
		The old law observed by scribes and Pharisees?
		I say unto you, see ye keep that law
		   More faithfully than these!
		
		“Too hasty heads for ordering worlds, alas!
		Think not that I to annul the law have willed:
		No jot, no tittle, from the law shall pass
		   Till all have been fulfilled.”
		
		So Christ said eighteen hundred years ago.
		And what, then, shall be said to those to-day,
		Who cry aloud to lay the old world low
		   To clear the new world’s way?
		
		“Religious fervors! ardor misapplied!
		Hence, hence!” they cry, “ye do but keep man blind!
		But keep him self-immersed, pre-occupied,
		   And lame the active mind.”
		
		Ah! from the old world let some one answer give:
		“Scorn ye this world, their tears, their inward cares?
		I say unto you, see that _your_ souls live
		   A deeper life than theirs!
		
		“Say ye, ‘The spirit of man has found new roads,
		And we must leave the old faiths, and walk therein’?
		Leave, then, the cross as ye have left carved gods,
		   But guard the fire within!
		
		“Bright, else, and fast the stream of life may roll,
		And no man may the other’s hurt behold;
		Yet each will have one anguish,--his own soul
		   Which perishes of cold.”
		
		Here let that voice make end; then let a strain
		From a far lonelier distance, like the wind
		Be heard, floating through heaven, and fill again
		   These men’s profoundest mind:--
		
		“Children of men! the unseen Power, whose eye
		Forever doth accompany mankind,
		Hath looked on no religion scornfully
		   That men did ever find.
		
		“Which has not taught weak wills how much they can?
		Which has not fallen on the dry heart like rain?
		Which has not cried to sunk, self-weary man,--
		   _Thou must be born again!_
		
		“Children of men! not that your age excel
		In pride of life the ages of your sires,
		But that _ye_ think clear, feel deep, bear fruit well,
		   The Friend of man desires.”


	11. RUGBY CHAPEL

		Coldly, sadly descends
		The autumn evening. The field
		Strewn with its dank yellow drifts
		Of withered leaves, and the elms,
		Fade into dimness apace,
		Silent; hardly a shout
		From a few boys late at their play!
		The lights come out in the street,
		In the schoolroom windows; but cold,
		Solemn, unlighted, austere,
		Through the gathering darkness, arise
		The chapel-walls, in whose bound
		Thou, my father! art laid.
		
		There thou dost lie, in the gloom
		Of the autumn evening. But ah!
		That word _gloom_ to my mind
		Brings thee back in the light
		Of thy radiant vigor again.
		In the gloom of November we passed
		Days not dark at thy side;
		Seasons impaired not the ray
		Of thy buoyant cheerfulness clear.
		Such thou wast! and I stand
		In the autumn evening, and think
		Of bygone autumns with thee.
		
		Fifteen years have gone round
		Since thou arosest to tread,
		In the summer-morning, the road
		Of death, at a call unforeseen,
		Sudden. For fifteen years,
		We who till then in thy shade
		Rested as under the boughs
		Of a mighty oak, have endured
		Sunshine and rain as we might,
		Bare, unshaded, alone,
		Lacking the shelter of thee.
		
		O strong soul, by what shore
		Tarriest thou now? For that force,
		Surely, has not been left vain!
		Somewhere, surely, afar,
		In the sounding labor-house vast
		Of being, is practised that strength,
		Zealous, beneficent, firm!
		
		Yes, in some far-shining sphere,
		Conscious or not of the past,
		Still thou performest the word
		Of the Spirit in whom thou dost live,
		Prompt, unwearied, as here.
		Still thou upraisest with zeal
		The humble good from the ground,
		Sternly repressest the bad;
		Still, like a trumpet, dost rouse
		Those who with half-open eyes
		Tread the border-land dim
		’Twixt vice and virtue; reviv’st,
		Succorest. This was thy work,
		This was thy life upon earth.
		
		What is the course of the life
		Of mortal men on the earth?
		Most men eddy about
		Here and there, eat and drink,
		Chatter and love and hate,
		Gather and squander, are raised
		Aloft, are hurled in the dust,
		Striving blindly, achieving
		Nothing; and then they die,--
		Perish; and no one asks
		Who or what they have been,
		More than he asks what waves,
		In the moonlit solitudes mild
		Of the midmost ocean, have swelled,
		Foamed for a moment, and gone.
		
		And there are some whom a thirst
		Ardent, unquenchable, fires,
		Not with the crowd to be spent,
		Not without aim to go round
		In an eddy of purposeless dust,
		Effort unmeaning and vain.
		Ah yes! some of us strive
		Not without action to die
		Fruitless, but something to snatch
		From dull oblivion, nor all
		Glut the devouring grave.
		We, we have chosen our path,--
		Path to a clear-purposed goal,
		Path of advance; but it leads
		A long, steep journey, through sunk
		Gorges, o’er mountains in snow.
		Cheerful, with friends, we set forth:
		Then, on the height, comes the storm.
		Thunder crashes from rock
		To rock; the cataracts reply;
		Lightnings dazzle our eyes;
		Roaring torrents have breached
		The track; the stream-bed descends
		In the place where the wayfarer once
		Planted his footstep; the spray
		Boils o’er its borders; aloft,
		The unseen snow-beds dislodge
		Their hanging ruin. Alas!
		Havoc is made in our train!
		Friends who set forth at our side
		Falter, are lost in the storm.
		
		We, we only are left!
		With frowning foreheads, with lips
		Sternly compressed, we strain on,
		On; and at nightfall at last
		Come to the end of our way,
		To the lonely inn ’mid the rocks;
		Where the gaunt and taciturn host
		Stands on the threshold, the wind
		Shaking his thin white hairs,
		Holds his lantern to scan
		Our storm-beat figures, and asks,--
		Whom in our party we bring?
		Whom we have left in the snow?
		
		Sadly we answer, We bring
		Only ourselves! we lost
		Sight of the rest in the storm.
		Hardly ourselves we fought through,
		Stripped, without friends, as we are.
		Friends, companions, and train,
		The avalanche swept from our side.
		
		But thou wouldst not _alone_
		Be saved, my father! _alone_
		Conquer and come to thy goal,
		Leaving the rest in the wild.
		We were weary, and we
		Fearful, and we in our march
		Fain to drop down and to die.
		Still thou turnedst, and still
		Beckonedst the trembler, and still
		Gavest the weary thy hand.
		If, in the paths of the world,
		Stones might have wounded thy feet,
		Toil or dejection have tried
		Thy spirit, of that we saw
		Nothing: to us thou wast still
		Cheerful, and helpful, and firm!
		Therefore to thee it was given
		Many to save with thyself;
		And, at the end of thy day,
		O faithful shepherd! to come,
		Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.
		
		And through thee I believe
		In the noble and great who are gone;
		Pure souls honored and blest
		By former ages, who else else--
		Such, so soulless, so poor,
		Is the race of men whom I see--
		Seemed but a dream of the heart,
		Seemed but a cry of desire.
		Yes! I believe that there lived
		Others like thee in the past,
		Not like the men of the crowd
		Who all round me to-day
		Bluster or cringe, and make life
		Hideous and arid and vile;
		But souls tempered with fire,
		Fervent, heroic, and good,
		Helpers and friends of mankind.
		
		Servants of God!--or sons
		Shall I not call you? because
		Not as servants ye knew
		Your Father’s innermost mind,
		His who unwillingly sees
		One of his little ones lost,--
		Yours is the praise, if mankind
		Hath not as yet in its march
		Fainted and fallen and died.
		
		See! In the rocks of the world
		Marches the host of mankind,
		A feeble, wavering line.
		Where are they tending? A God
		Marshalled them, gave them their goal.
		Ah, but the way is so long!
		
		Years they have been in the wild:
		Sore thirst plagues them; the rocks,
		Rising all round, overawe;
		Factions divide them; their host
		Threatens to break, to dissolve.
		Ah! keep, keep them combined!
		Else, of the myriads who fill
		That army, not one shall arrive;
		Sole they shall stray; on the rocks
		Batter forever in vain,
		Die one by one in the waste.
		
		Then, in such hour of need
		Of your fainting, dispirited race,
		Ye like angels appear,
		Radiant with ardor divine.
		Beacons of hope, ye appear!
		Languor is not in your heart,
		Weakness is not in your word,
		Weariness not on your brow.
		Ye alight in our van! at your voice,
		Panic, despair, flee away.
		Ye move through the ranks, recall
		The stragglers, refresh the outworn,
		Praise, re-inspire the brave.
		Order, courage, return;
		Eyes rekindling, and prayers,
		Follow your steps as ye go.
		Ye fill up the gaps in our files,
		Strengthen the wavering line,
		Stablish, continue our march,
		On, to the bound of the waste,
		On, to the City of God.


	12. SAINT BRANDAN

		Saint Brandan sails the northern main;
		The brotherhoods of saints are glad.
		He greets them once, he sails again;
		So late! such storms! The saint is mad!
		
		He heard, across the howling seas,
		Chime convent-bells on wintry nights;
		He saw, on spray-swept Hebrides,
		Twinkle the monastery-lights;
		
		But north, still north, Saint Brandan steered;
		And now no bells, no convents more!
		The hurtling Polar lights are neared,
		The sea without a human shore.
		
		At last (it was the Christmas-night;
		Stars shone after a day of storm)
		He sees float past an iceberg white,
		And on it--Christ!--a living form.
		
		That furtive mien, that scowling eye,
		Of hair that red and tufted fell,
		It is--oh, where shall Brandan fly?--
		The traitor Judas, out of hell!
		
		Palsied with terror, Brandan sate;
		The moon was bright, the iceberg near.
		He hears a voice sigh humbly, “Wait!
		By high permission I am here.
		
		“One moment wait, thou holy man!
		On earth my crime, my death, they knew;
		My name is under all men’s ban:
		Ah! tell them of my respite too.
		
		“Tell them, one blessed Christmas-night
		(It was the first after I came,
		Breathing self-murder, frenzy, spite,
		To rue my guilt in endless flame),--
		
		“I felt, as I in torment lay
		’Mid the souls plagued by heavenly power,
		An angel touch mine arm, and say,--
		_Go hence, and cool thyself an hour!_
		
		“‘Ah! whence this mercy, Lord?’ I said.
		_The leper recollect_, said he,
		_Who asked the passers-by for aid,_
		_In Joppa, and thy charity_.
		
		“Then I remembered how I went,
		In Joppa, through the public street,
		One morn when the sirocco spent
		Its storms of dust with burning heat;
		“And in the street a leper sate,
		Shivering with fever, naked, old;
		Sand raked his sores from heel to pate,
		The hot wind fevered him fivefold.
		
		“He gazed upon me as I passed,
		And murmured, _Help me, or I die!_
		To the poor wretch my cloak I cast,
		Saw him look eased, and hurried by.
		
		“O Brandan! think what grace divine,
		What blessing must full goodness shower,
		When fragment of it small, like mine,
		Hath such inestimable power!
		
		“Well-fed, well-clothed, well-friended, I
		Did that chance act of good, that one!
		Then went my way to kill and lie,
		Forgot my good as soon as done.
		
		“That germ of kindness, in the womb
		Of mercy caught, did not expire;
		Outlives my guilt, outlives my doom,
		And friends me in the pit of fire.
		
		“Once every year, when carols wake,
		On earth, the Christmas-night’s repose,
		Arising from the sinner’s lake,
		I journey to these healing snows.
		
		“I stanch with ice my burning breast,
		With silence balm my whirling brain.
		O Brandan! to this hour of rest,
		That Joppan leper’s ease was pain.”
		
		Tears started to Saint Brandan’s eyes;
		He bowed his head, he breathed a prayer,
		Then looked--and lo, the frosty skies!
		The iceberg, and no Judas there!


	13. SELF-DEPENDENCE

		Weary of myself, and sick of asking
		What I am, and what I ought to be,
		At this vessel’s prow I stand, which bears me
		Forwards, forwards, o’er the starlit sea.
		
		And a look of passionate desire
		O’er the sea and to the stars I send:
		“Ye who from my childhood up have calmed me,
		Calm me, ah, compose me to the end!
		
		Ah, once more,” I cried, “ye stars, ye waters,
		On my heart your mighty charm renew;
		Still, still let me, as I gaze upon you,
		Feel my soul becoming vast like you!”
		
		From the intense, clear, star-sown vault of heaven,
		Over the lit sea’s unquiet way,
		In the rustling night-air came the answer,--
		“Wouldst thou _be_ as these are? _Live_ as they.
		
		“Unaffrighted by the silence round them,
		Undistracted by the sights they see,
		These demand not that the things without them
		Yield them love, amusement, sympathy.
		
		“And with joy the stars perform their shining,
		And the sea its long moon-silvered roll;
		For self-poised they live, nor pine with noting
		All the fever of some differing soul.
		
		“Bounded by themselves, and unregardful
		In what state God’s other works may be,
		In their own tasks all their powers pouring,
		These attain the mighty life you see.”
		
		O air-born voice! long since, severely clear,
		A cry like thine in mine own heart I hear,--
		“Resolve to be thyself; and know, that he
		Who finds himself loses his misery!”


	14. SUMMER NIGHT

		In the deserted, moon-blanched street,
		How lonely rings the echo of my feet!
		Those windows, which I gaze at, frown,
		Silent and white, unopening down,
		Repellent as the world; but see,
		A break between the housetops shows
		The moon! and lost behind her, fading dim
		Into the dewy dark obscurity
		Down at the far horizon’s rim,
		Doth a whole tract of heaven disclose!
		
		And to my mind the thought
		Is on a sudden brought
		Of a past night, and a far different scene.
		Headlands stood out into the moonlit deep
		As clearly as at noon;
		The spring-tide’s brimming flow
		Heaved dazzlingly between;
		Houses, with long white sweep,
		Girdled the glistening bay;
		Behind, through the soft air,
		The blue haze-cradled mountains spread away.
		That night was far more fair--
		But the same restless pacings to and fro,
		And the same vainly throbbing heart was there,
		And the same bright, calm moon.
		
		And the calm moonlight seems to say,--
		_Hast thou, then, still the old unquiet breast,_
		_Which neither deadens into rest,_
		_Nor ever feels the fiery glow_
		_That whirls the spirit from itself away,_
		_But fluctuates to and fro,_
		_Never by passion quite possessed,_
		_And never quite benumbed by the world’s sway?_
		And I, I know not if to pray
		Still to be what I am, or yield, and be
		Like all the other men I see.
		
		For most men in a brazen prison live,
		Where, in the sun’s hot eye,
		With heads bent o’er their toil, they languidly
		Their lives to some unmeaning task-work give,
		Dreaming of naught beyond their prison-wall.
		And as, year after year,
		Fresh products of their barren labor fall
		From their tired hands, and rest
		Never yet comes more near,
		Gloom settles slowly down over their breast.
		And while they try to stem
		The waves of mournful thought by which they are prest,
		Death in their prison reaches them,
		Unfreed, having seen nothing, still unblest.
		
		And the rest, a few,
		Escape their prison, and depart
		On the wide ocean of life anew.
		There the freed prisoner, where’er his heart
		Listeth, will sail;
		Nor doth he know how there prevail,
		Despotic on that sea,
		Trade-winds which cross it from eternity.
		Awhile he holds some false way, undebarred
		By thwarting signs, and braves
		The freshening wind and blackening waves.
		And then the tempest strikes him; and between
		The lightning-bursts is seen
		Only a driving wreck,
		And the pale master on his spar-strewn deck
		With anguished face and flying hair,
		Grasping the rudder hard,
		Still bent to make some port, he knows not where,
		Still standing for some false, impossible shore.
		And sterner comes the roar
		Of sea and wind; and through the deepening gloom
		Fainter and fainter wreck and helmsman loom,
		And he too disappears, and comes no more.
		
		Is there no life, but these alone?
		Madman or slave, must man be one?
		
		Plainness and clearness without shadow of stain!
		Clearness divine!
		Ye heavens, whose pure dark regions have no sign
		Of languor, though so calm, and though so great
		Are yet untroubled and unpassionate;
		Who, though so noble, share in the world’s toil,
		And, though so tasked, keep free from dust and soil!
		I will not say that your mild deeps retain
		A tinge, it may be, of their silent pain
		Who have longed deeply once, and longed in vain;
		But I will rather say that you remain
		A world above man’s head, to let him see
		How boundless might his soul’s horizons be,
		How vast, yet of what clear transparency!
		How it were good to live there, and breathe free;
		How fair a lot to fill
		Is left to each man still!


	15. THE BETTER PART

		Long fed on boundless hopes, O race of man,
		How angrily thou spurn’st all simpler fare!
		“Christ,” some one says, “was human as we are;
		No judge eyes us from heaven, our sin to scan;
		
		We live no more, when we have done our span.”
		“Well, then, for Christ,” thou answerest, “who can care?
		From sin which Heaven records not, why forbear?
		Live we like brutes our life without a plan!”
		
		So answerest thou; but why not rather say,--
		“Hath man no second life? _Pitch this one high!_
		Sits there no judge in heaven, our sin to see?
		
		_More strictly, then, the inward judge obey!_
		Was Christ a man like us? _Ah! let us try_
		_If we then, too, can be such men as he!_”


	16. THE BURIED LIFE

		Light flows our war of mocking words; and yet,
		Behold, with tears mine eyes are wet!
		I feel a nameless sadness o’er me roll.
		Yes, yes, we know that we can jest,
		We know, we know that we can smile!
		But there’s a something in this breast,
		To which thy light words bring no rest,
		And thy gay smiles no anodyne;
		Give me thy hand, and hush awhile,
		And turn those limpid eyes on mine,
		And let me read there, love! thy inmost soul.
		
		Alas! is even love too weak
		To unlock the heart, and let it speak?
		Are even lovers powerless to reveal
		To one another what indeed they feel?
		
		I knew the mass of men concealed
		Their thoughts, for fear that if revealed
		They would by other men be met
		With blank indifference, or with blame reproved;
		I knew they lived and moved
		Tricked in disguises, alien to the rest
		Of men, and alien to themselves--and yet
		The same heart beats in every human breast!
		
		But we, my love! doth a like spell benumb
		Our hearts, our voices? must we too be dumb?
		
		Ah! well for us, if even we,
		Even for a moment, can get free
		Our heart, and have our lips unchained;
		For that which seals them hath been deep-ordained!
		
		Fate, which foresaw
		How frivolous a baby man would be,--
		By what distractions he would be possessed,
		How he would pour himself in every strife,
		And well-nigh change his own identity,--
		That it might keep from his capricious play
		His genuine self, and force him to obey
		Even in his own despite his being’s law,
		Bade through the deep recesses of our breast
		The unregarded river of our life
		Pursue with indiscernible flow its way;
		And that we should not see
		The buried stream, and seem to be
		Eddying at large in blind uncertainty,
		Though driving on with it eternally.
		
		But often, in the world’s most crowded streets,
		But often, in the din of strife,
		There rises an unspeakable desire
		After the knowledge of our buried life;
		A thirst to spend our fire and restless force
		In tracking out our true, original course;
		A longing to inquire
		Into the mystery of this heart which beats
		So wild, so deep in us,--to know
		Whence our lives come, and where they go.
		And many a man in his own breast then delves,
		But deep enough, alas! none ever mines.
		And we have been on many thousand lines,
		And we have shown, on each, spirit and power;
		But hardly have we, for one little hour,
		Been on our own line, have we been ourselves,--
		Hardly had skill to utter one of all
		The nameless feelings that course through our breast,
		But they course on forever unexpressed.
		And long we try in vain to speak and act
		Our hidden self, and what we say and do
		Is eloquent, is well--but ’tis not true!
		And then we will no more be racked
		With inward striving, and demand
		Of all the thousand nothings of the hour
		Their stupefying power;
		Ah, yes, and they benumb us at our call!
		Yet still, from time to time, vague and forlorn,
		From the soul’s subterranean depth upborne
		As from an infinitely distant land,
		Come airs, and floating echoes, and convey
		A melancholy into all our day.
		
		Only--but this is rare--
		When a beloved hand is laid in ours,
		When, jaded with the rush and glare
		Of the interminable hours,
		Our eyes can in another’s eyes read clear,
		When our world-deafened ear
		Is by the tones of a loved voice caressed,--
		A bolt is shot back somewhere in our breast,
		And a lost pulse of feeling stirs again.
		The eye sinks inward, and the heart lies plain,
		And what we mean, we say, and what we would, we know.
		
		A man becomes aware of his life’s flow,
		And hears its winding murmur, and he sees
		The meadows where it glides, the sun, the breeze.
		
		And there arrives a lull in the hot race
		Wherein he doth forever chase
		The flying and elusive shadow, rest.
		An air of coolness plays upon his face,
		And an unwonted calm pervades his breast;
		And then he thinks he knows
		The hills where his life rose,
		And the sea where it goes.


	17. THE CHURCH OF BROU

		I
		
		_The Castle_
		
		
		Down the Savoy valleys sounding,
		 Echoing round this castle old,
		’Mid the distant mountain-chalets
		 Hark! what bell for church is tolled?
		
		In the bright October morning
		 Savoy’s Duke had left his bride.
		From the castle, past the drawbridge,
		 Flowed the hunters’ merry tide.
		
		Steeds are neighing, gallants glittering.
		 Gay, her smiling lord to greet,
		From her mullioned chamber-casement
		 Smiles the Duchess Marguerite.
		
		From Vienna, by the Danube,
		 Here she came, a bride, in spring.
		Now the autumn crisps the forest;
		 Hunters gather, bugles ring.
		
		Hounds are pulling, prickers swearing,
		 Horses fret, and boar-spears glance.
		Off!--They sweep the marshy forests,
		 Westward on the side of France.
		
		Hark! the game’s on foot; they scatter!
		 Down the forest-ridings lone,
		Furious, single horsemen gallop.
		 Hark! a shout--a crash--a groan!
		
		Pale and breathless, came the hunters--
		 On the turf dead lies the boar.
		God! the duke lies stretched beside him,
		 Senseless, weltering in his gore.
		
		In the dull October evening,
		 Down the leaf-strewn forest-road,
		To the castle, past the drawbridge,
		 Came the hunters with their load.
		
		In the hall, with sconces blazing,
		 Ladies waiting round her seat,
		Clothed in smiles, beneath the dais
		 Sate the Duchess Marguerite.
		
		Hark! below the gates unbarring!
		 Tramp of men, and quick commands!
		“’Tis my lord come back from hunting;”
		 And the duchess claps her hands.
		
		Slow and tired, came the hunters;
		 Stopped in darkness in the court.
		“Ho, this way, ye laggard hunters!
		 To the hall! What sport, what sport?”
		
		Slow they entered with their master;
		 In the hall they laid him down.
		On his coat were leaves and blood-stains,
		 On his brow an angry frown.
		
		Dead her princely youthful husband
		 Lay before his youthful wife,
		Bloody ’neath the flaring sconces--
		 And the sight froze all her life.
		
		In Vienna, by the Danube,
		 Kings hold revel, gallants meet.
		Gay of old amid the gayest
		 Was the Duchess Marguerite.
		
		In Vienna, by the Danube,
		 Feast and dance her youth beguiled.
		Till that hour she never sorrowed;
		 But from then she never smiled.
		
		’Mid the Savoy mountain-valleys,
		 Far from town or haunt of man,
		Stands a lonely church, unfinished,
		 Which the Duchess Maud began.
		
		Old, that duchess stern began it,
		 In gray age, with palsied hands;
		But she died while it was building,
		 And the church unfinished stands,--
		
		Stands as erst the builders left it,
		 When she sank into her grave;
		Mountain greensward paves the chancel,
		 Harebells flower in the nave.
		
		“In my castle all is sorrow,”
		 Said the Duchess Marguerite then:
		“Guide me, some one, to the mountain;
		 We will build the church again.”
		
		Sandalled palmers, faring homeward,
		 Austrian knights from Syria came.
		“Austrian wanderers bring, O warders!
		 Homage to your Austrian dame.”
		
		From the gate the warders answered,--
		 “Gone, O knights, is she you knew!
		Dead our duke, and gone his duchess;
		 Seek her at the church of Brou.”
		
		Austrian knights and march-worn palmers
		 Climb the winding mountain-way;
		Reach the valley, where the fabric
		 Rises higher day by day.
		
		Stones are sawing, hammers ringing;
		 On the work the bright sun shines;
		In the Savoy mountain-meadows,
		 By the stream, below the pines.
		
		On her palfrey white the duchess
		 Sate, and watched her working train,--
		Flemish carvers, Lombard gilders,
		 German masons, smiths from Spain.
		
		Clad in black, on her white palfrey,
		 Her old architect beside,--
		There they found her in the mountains,
		 Morn and noon and eventide.
		
		There she sate, and watched the builders,
		 Till the church was roofed and done;
		Last of all, the builders reared her
		 In the nave a tomb of stone.
		
		On the tomb two forms they sculptured,
		 Lifelike in the marble pale,--
		One, the duke in helm and armor;
		 One, the duchess in her veil.
		
		Round the tomb the carved stone fret-work
		 Was at Easter-tide put on.
		Then the duchess closed her labors;
		 And she died at the St. John.
		
		
		II
		
		_The Church_
		
		Upon the glistening leaden roof
		Of the new pile, the sunlight shines;
		 The stream goes leaping by.
		The hills are clothed with pines sun-proof;
		’Mid bright green fields, below the pines,
		 Stands the church on high.
		What church is this, from men aloof?
		’Tis the Church of Brou.
		
		At sunrise, from their dewy lair
		Crossing the stream, the kine are seen
		 Round the wall to stray,--
		The churchyard wall that clips the square
		Of open hill-sward fresh and green
		 Where last year they lay.
		But all things now are ordered fair
		Round the Church of Brou.
		
		On Sundays, at the matin-chime,
		The Alpine peasants, two and three,
		 Climb up here to pray;
		Burghers and dames, at summer’s prime,
		Ride out to church from Chambery,
		 Dight with mantles gay.
		But else it is a lonely time
		Round the Church of Brou.
		
		On Sundays, too, a priest doth come
		From the walled town beyond the pass,
		 Down the mountain-way;
		And then you hear the organ’s hum,
		You hear the white-robed priest say mass,
		 And the people pray.
		But else the woods and fields are dumb
		Round the Church of Brou.
		
		And after church, when mass is done,
		The people to the nave repair
		 Round the tomb to stray;
		And marvel at the forms of stone,
		And praise the chiselled broideries rare--
		 Then they drop away.
		The princely pair are left alone
		In the Church of Brou.
		
		
		III
		
		_The Tomb_
		
		So rest, forever rest, O princely pair!
		In your high church, ’mid the still mountain-air,
		Where horn, and hound, and vassals, never come.
		Only the blessed saints are smiling dumb
		From the rich painted windows of the nave
		On aisle, and transept, and your marble grave;
		Where thou, young prince, shalt never more arise
		From the fringed mattress where thy duchess lies,
		On autumn-mornings, when the bugle sounds,
		And ride across the drawbridge with thy hounds
		To hunt the boar in the crisp woods till eve;
		And thou, O princess, shalt no more receive,
		Thou and thy ladies, in the hall of state,
		The jaded hunters with their bloody freight,
		Coming benighted to the castle-gate.
		 So sleep, forever sleep, O marble pair!
		Or, if ye wake, let it be then, when fair
		On the carved western front a flood of light
		Streams from the setting sun, and colors bright
		Prophets, transfigured saints, and martyrs brave,
		In the vast western window of the nave;
		And on the pavement round the tomb there glints
		A checker-work of glowing sapphire-tints,
		And amethyst, and ruby,--then unclose
		Your eyelids on the stone where ye repose,
		And from your broidered pillows lift your heads,
		And rise upon your cold white marble beds;
		And looking down on the warm rosy tints
		Which checker, at your feet, the illumined flints,
		Say, _What is this? we are in bliss--forgiven--
		Behold the pavement of the courts of heaven!_
		Or let it be on autumn-nights, when rain
		Doth rustlingly above your heads complain
		On the smooth leaden roof, and on the walls
		Shedding her pensive light at intervals
		The moon through the clere-story windows shines,
		And the wind washes through the mountain-pines,--
		Then, gazing up ’mid the dim pillars high,
		The foliaged marble forest where ye lie,
		_Hush_, ye will say, _it is eternity!
		This is the glimmering verge of heaven, and these
		The columns of the heavenly palaces._
		And in the sweeping of the wind your ear
		The passage of the angels’ wings will hear,
		And on the lichen-crusted leads above
		The rustle of the eternal rain of love.


	18. THE FUTURE

		A wanderer is man from his birth.
		He was born in a ship
		On the breast of the river of Time;
		Brimming with wonder and joy,
		He spreads out his arms to the light,
		Rivets his gaze on the banks of the stream.
		
		As what he sees is, so have his thoughts been.
		Whether he wakes
		Where the snowy mountainous pass,
		Echoing the screams of the eagles,
		Hems in its gorges the bed
		Of the new-born, clear-flowing stream;
		Whether he first sees light
		Where the river in gleaming rings
		Sluggishly winds through the plain;
		Whether in sound of the swallowing sea,--
		As is the world on the banks,
		So is the mind of the man.
		
		Vainly does each, as he glides,
		Fable and dream
		Of the lands which the river of Time
		Had left ere he woke on its breast,
		Or shall reach when his eyes have been closed.
		Only the tract where he sails
		He wots of; only the thoughts,
		Raised by the objects he passes, are his.
		
		Who can see the green earth any more
		As she was by the sources of Time?
		Who imagines her fields as they lay
		In the sunshine, unworn by the plough?
		Who thinks as they thought,
		The tribes who then roamed on her breast,
		Her vigorous, primitive sons?
		
		What girl
		Now reads in her bosom as clear
		As Rebekah read, when she sate
		At eve by the palm-shaded well?
		Who guards in her breast
		As deep, as pellucid a spring
		Of feeling, as tranquil, as sure?
		
		What bard,
		At the height of his vision, can deem
		Of God, of the world, of the soul,
		With a plainness as near,
		As flashing, as Moses felt,
		When he lay in the night by his flock
		On the starlit Arabian waste?
		Can rise and obey
		The beck of the Spirit like him?
		
		This tract which the river of Time
		Now flows through with us, is the plain.
		Gone is the calm of its earlier shore.
		Bordered by cities, and hoarse
		With a thousand cries is its stream.
		And we on its breast, our minds
		Are confused as the cries which we hear,
		Changing and short as the sights which we see.
		
		And we say that repose has fled
		Forever the course of the river of Time.
		That cities will crowd to its edge
		In a blacker, incessanter line;
		That the din will be more on its banks,
		Denser the trade on its stream,
		Flatter the plain where it flows,
		Fiercer the sun overhead;
		That never will those on its breast
		See an ennobling sight,
		Drink of the feeling of quiet again.
		
		But what was before us we know not,
		And we know not what shall succeed.
		
		Haply, the river of Time--
		As it grows, as the towns on its marge
		Fling their wavering lights
		On a wider, statelier stream--
		May acquire, if not the calm
		Of its early mountainous shore,
		Yet a solemn peace of its own.
		
		And the width of the waters, the hush
		Of the gray expanse where he floats,
		Freshening its current, and spotted with foam
		As it draws to the ocean, may strike
		Peace to the soul of the man on its breast,--
		As the pale waste widens around him,
		As the banks fade dimmer away,
		As the stars come out, and the night-wind
		Brings up the stream
		Murmurs and scents of the infinite sea.


	19. THE GOOD SHEPHERD WITH THE KID

		_He saves the sheep, the goats he doth not save._
		So rang Tertullian’s sentence, on the side
		Of that unpitying Phrygian sect which cried,
		“Him can no fount of fresh forgiveness lave,
		Who sins, once washed by the baptismal wave.”
		So spake the fierce Tertullian. But she sighed,
		The infant Church! of love she felt the tide
		Stream on her from her Lord’s yet recent grave.
		
		And then she smiled; and in the Catacombs,
		With eye suffused but heart inspired true,
		On those walls subterranean, where she hid
		
		Her head ’mid ignominy, death, and tombs,
		She her Good Shepherd’s hasty image drew--
		And on his shoulders, not a lamb, a kid.


	20. THE NECKAN

		In summer, on the headlands,
		 The Baltic Sea along,
		Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,
		 And sings his plaintive song.
		
		Green rolls, beneath the headlands,
		 Green rolls the Baltic Sea;
		And there, below the Neckan’s feet,
		 His wife and children be.
		
		He sings not of the ocean,
		 Its shells and roses pale:
		Of earth, of earth, the Neckan sings,
		 He hath no other tale.
		
		He sits upon the headlands,
		 And sings a mournful stave
		Of all he saw and felt on earth,
		 Far from the kind sea-wave.
		
		Sings how, a knight, he wandered
		 By castle, field, and town;
		But earthly knights have harder hearts
		 Than the sea-children own.
		
		Sings of his earthly bridal,
		 Priest, knights, and ladies gay.
		“And who art thou,” the priest began,
		 “Sir Knight, who wedd’st to-day?”
		
		“I am no knight,” he answered;
		 “From the sea-waves I come.”
		The knights drew sword, the ladies screamed,
		 The surpliced priest stood dumb.
		
		He sings how from the chapel
		 He vanished with his bride,
		And bore her down to the sea-halls,
		 Beneath the salt sea-tide.
		
		He sings how she sits weeping
		 ’Mid shells that round her lie.
		“False Neckan shares my bed,” she weeps;
		 “No Christian mate have I.”
		
		He sings how through the billows
		 He rose to earth again,
		And sought a priest to sign the cross,
		 That Neckan heaven might gain.
		
		He sings how, on an evening,
		 Beneath the birch-trees cool,
		He sate and played his harp of gold,
		 Beside the river-pool.
		
		Beside the pool sate Neckan,
		 Tears filled his mild blue eye.
		On his white mule, across the bridge,
		 A cassocked priest rode by.
		
		“Why sitt’st thou there, O Neckan,
		 And play’st thy harp of gold?
		Sooner shall this my staff bear leaves,
		 Than thou shalt heaven behold.”
		
		But, lo! the staff, it budded;
		 It greened, it branched, it waved.
		“O ruth of God!” the priest cried out,
		 “This lost sea-creature saved!”
		
		The cassocked priest rode onwards,
		 And vanished with his mule;
		And Neckan in the twilight gray
		 Wept by the river-pool.
		
		He wept, “The earth hath kindness,
		 The sea, the starry poles;
		Earth, sea, and sky, and God above,--
		 But, ah! not human souls!”
		
		In summer, on the headlands,
		 The Baltic Sea along,
		Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,
		 And sings this plaintive song.


	21. THE SCHOLAR-GYPSY

		Go, for they call you, shepherd, from the hill;
		 Go, shepherd, and untie the wattled cotes!
		   No longer leave thy wistful flock unfed,
		 Nor let thy bawling fellows rack their throats,
		   Nor the cropped grasses shoot another head;
		     But when the fields are still,
		 And the tired men and dogs all gone to rest,
		   And only the white sheep are sometimes seen
		   Cross and recross the strips of moon-blanched green,
		 Come, shepherd, and again renew the quest!
		
		Here, where the reaper was at work of late,--
		 In this high field’s dark corner, where he leaves
		   His coat, his basket, and his earthen cruse,
		 And in the sun all morning binds the sheaves,
		   Then here at noon comes back his stores to use,--
		     Here will I sit and wait,
		 While to my ear from uplands far away
		   The bleating of the folded flocks is borne,
		   With distant cries of reapers in the corn,--
		 All the live murmur of a summer’s day.
		
		Screened is this nook o’er the high, half-reaped field,
		 And here till sundown, shepherd! will I be.
		   Through the thick corn the scarlet poppies peep,
		 And round green roots and yellowing stalks I see
		   Pale blue convolvulus in tendrils creep;
		     And air-swept lindens yield
		   Their scent, and rustle down their perfumed showers
		   Of bloom on the bent grass where I am laid,
		   And bower me from the August-sun with shade;
		 And the eye travels down to Oxford’s towers.
		
		And near me on the grass lies Glanvil’s book.
		 Come, let me read the oft-read tale again!
		   The story of that Oxford scholar poor,
		 Of shining parts and quick inventive brain,
		   Who, tired of knocking at preferment’s door,
		     One summer-morn forsook
		 His friends, and went to learn the gypsy-lore,
		   And roamed the world with that wild brotherhood,
		   And came, as most men deemed, to little good,
		 But came to Oxford and his friends no more.
		
		But once, years after, in the country-lanes,
		 Two scholars, whom at college erst he knew,
		   Met him, and of his way of life inquired;
		 Whereat he answered, that the gypsy-crew,
		   His mates, had arts to rule as they desired
		     The workings of men’s brains,
		 And they can bind them to what thoughts they will.
		   “And I,” he said, “the secret of their art,
		   When fully learned, will to the world impart;
		 But it needs Heaven-sent moments for this skill.”
		
		This said, he left them, and returned no more.
		 But rumors hung about the country-side,
		   That the lost Scholar long was seen to stray,
		 Seen by rare glimpses, pensive and tongue-tied,
		   In hat of antique shape, and cloak of gray,
		     The same the gypsies wore.
		 Shepherds had met him on the Hurst in spring;
		   At some lone alehouse in the Berkshire moors,
		   On the warm ingle-bench, the smock-frocked boors
		 Had found him seated at their entering;
		
		But, ’mid their drink and clatter, he would fly.
		 And I myself seem half to know thy looks,
		   And put the shepherds, wanderer! on thy trace;
		 And boys who in lone wheat-fields scare the rooks
		   I ask if thou hast passed their quiet place;
		     Or in my boat I lie
		 Moored to the cool bank in the summer-heats,
		   Mid wide grass meadows which the sunshine fills,
		   And watch the warm, green-muffled Cumner hills,
		 And wonder if thou haunt’st their shy retreats.
		
		For most, I know, thou lov’st retired ground!
		 Thee at the ferry Oxford riders blithe,
		   Returning home on summer-nights, have met
		 Crossing the stripling Thames at Bab-lock-hithe,
		   Trailing in the cool stream thy fingers wet,
		     As the punt’s rope chops round;
		 And leaning backward in a pensive dream,
		   And fostering in thy lap a heap of flowers
		     Plucked in shy fields and distant Wychwood bowers,
		 And thine eyes resting on the moonlit stream.
		
		And then they land, and thou art seen no more!
		 Maidens, who from the distant hamlets come
		   To dance around the Fyfield elm in May,
		 Oft through the darkening fields have seen thee roam,
		   Or cross a stile into the public way;
		     Oft thou hast given them store
		 Of flowers,--the frail-leafed, white anemone,
		   Dark bluebells drenched with dews of summer eves,
		   And purple orchises with spotted leaves,--
		 But none hath words she can report of thee!
		
		And, above Godstow Bridge, when hay-time’s here
		 In June, and many a scythe in sunshine flames,
		   Men who through those wide fields of breezy grass,
		 Where black-winged swallows haunt the glittering Thames,
		   To bathe in the abandoned lasher pass,
		     Have often passed thee near
		 Sitting upon the river-bank o’ergrown;
		   Marked thine outlandish garb, thy figure spare,
		   Thy dark vague eyes, and soft abstracted air:
		 But, when they came from bathing, thou wast gone!
		
		At some lone homestead in the Cumner hills,
		 Where at her open door the housewife darns,
		   Thou hast been seen, or hanging on a gate
		 To watch the threshers in the mossy barns.
		   Children, who early range these slopes and late
		     For cresses from the rills,
		 Have known thee eying, all an April-day,
		   The springing pastures and the feeding kine;
		     And marked thee, when the stars come out and shine,
		 Through the long dewy grass move slow away.
		
		In autumn, on the skirts of Bagley Wood,--
		 Where most the gypsies by the turf-edged way
		   Pitch their smoked tents, and every bush you see
		 With scarlet patches tagged and shreds of gray,
		   Above the forest ground called Thessaly,--
		     The blackbird picking food
		 Sees thee, nor stops his meal, nor fears at all;
		   So often has he known thee past him stray,
		   Rapt, twirling in thy hand a withered spray,
		 And waiting for the spark from heaven to fall.
		
		And once, in winter, on the causeway chill
		 Where home through flooded fields foot-travellers go,
		   Have I not passed thee on the wooden bridge
		 Wrapped in thy cloak and battling with the snow,
		   Thy face toward Hinksey and its wintry ridge?
		     And thou hast climbed the hill,
		 And gained the white brow of the Cumner range;
		   Turned once to watch, while thick the snowflakes fall,
		   The line of festal light in Christ-church hall:
		 Then sought thy straw in some sequestered grange.
		
		But what--I dream! Two hundred years are flown
		 Since first thy story ran through Oxford halls,
		   And the grave Glanvil did the tale inscribe
		 That thou wert wandered from the studious walls
		   To learn strange arts, and join a gypsy-tribe.
		     And thou from earth art gone
		 Long since, and in some quiet churchyard laid,--
		   Some country-nook, where o’er thy unknown grave
		   Tall grasses and white flowering nettles wave,
		 Under a dark, red-fruited yew-tree’s shade.
		
		--No, no, thou hast not felt the lapse of hours!
		 For what wears out the life of mortal men?
		   ’Tis that from change to change their being rolls;
		 ’Tis that repeated shocks, again, again,
		   Exhaust the energy of strongest souls,
		     And numb the elastic powers,
		 Till having used our nerves with bliss and teen,
		   And tired upon a thousand schemes our wit,
		   To the just-pausing Genius we remit
		 Our well-worn life, and are--what we have been.
		
		Thou hast not lived, why shouldst thou perish, so?
		 Thou hadst _one_ aim, _one_ business, _one_ desire;
		   Else wert thou long since numbered with thedead!
		 Else hadst thou spent, like other men, thy fire!
		   The generations of thy peers are fled,
		     And we ourselves shall go;
		 But thou possessest an immortal lot,
		   And we imagine thee exempt from age,
		   And living as thou liv’st on Glanvil’s page,
		 Because thou hadst--what we, alas! have not.
		
		For early didst thou leave the world, with powers
		 Fresh, undiverted to the world without,
		   Firm to their mark, not spent on other things;
		 Free from the sick fatigue, the languid doubt,
		   Which much to have tried, in much been baffled, brings.
		     O life unlike to ours!
		 Who fluctuate idly without term or scope,
		   Of whom each strives, nor knows for what he strives,
		   And each half lives a hundred different lives;
		 Who wait like thee, but not, like thee, in hope.
		
		Thou waitest for the spark from heaven! and we,
		 Light half-believers of our casual creeds,
		   Who never deeply felt, nor clearly willed,
		 Whose insight never has borne fruit in deeds,
		   Whose vague resolves never have been fulfilled;
		     For whom each year we see
		 Breeds new beginnings, disappointments new;
		   Who hesitate and falter life away,
		   And lose to-morrow the ground won to-day--
		 Ah! do not we, wanderer! await it too?
		
		Yes, we await it! but it still delays,
		 And then we suffer! and amongst us one,
		   Who most has suffered, takes dejectedly
		 His seat upon the intellectual throne;
		   And all his store of sad experience he
		     Lays bare of wretched days;
		 Tells us his misery’s birth and growth and signs,
		   And how the dying spark of hope was fed,
		   And how the breast was soothed, and how the head,
		 And all his hourly varied anodynes.
		
		This for our wisest! and we others pine,
		 And wish the long unhappy dream would end,
		   And waive all claim to bliss, and try to bear;
		 With close-lipped patience for our only friend,--
		   Sad patience, too near neighbor to despair,--
		     But none has hope like thine!
		 Thou through the fields and through the woods dost stray,
		   Roaming the country-side, a truant boy,
		   Nursing thy project in unclouded joy,
		 And every doubt long blown by time away.
		
		Oh, born in days when wits were fresh and clear,
		 And life ran gayly as the sparkling Thames;
		   Before this strange disease of modern life,
		 With its sick hurry, its divided aims,
		   Its heads o’ertaxed, its palsied hearts, was rife,--
		     Fly hence, our contact fear!
		 Still fly, plunge deeper in the bowering wood!
		   Averse, as Dido did with gesture stern
		   From her false friend’s approach in Hades turn,
		 Wave us away, and keep thy solitude!
		
		Still nursing the unconquerable hope,
		 Still clutching the inviolable shade,
		   With a free, onward impulse brushing through,
		 By night, the silvered branches of the glade,--
		   Far on the forest-skirts, where none pursue,
		     On some mild pastoral slope
		 Emerge, and resting on the moonlit pales
		   Freshen thy flowers as in former years
		   With dew, or listen with enchanted ears,
		 From the dark dingles, to the nightingales!
		
		But fly our paths, our feverish contact fly!
		 For strong the infection of our mental strife,
		   Which, though it gives no bliss, yet spoils for rest;
		 And we should win thee from thy own fair life,
		   Like us distracted, and like us unblest.
		     Soon, soon thy cheer would die,
		 Thy hopes grow timorous, and unfixed thy powers,
		   And thy clear aims be cross and shifting made;
		   And then thy glad perennial youth would fade,
		 Fade, and grow old at last, and die like ours.
		
		Then fly our greetings, fly our speech and smiles!
		--As some grave Tyrian trader, from the sea,
		   Descried at sunrise an emerging prow
		 Lifting the cool-haired creepers stealthily,
		   The fringes of a southward-facing brow
		     Among the Aegeaen isles;
		 And saw the merry Grecian coaster come,
		   Freighted with amber grapes, and Chian wine,
		   Green bursting figs, and tunnies steeped in brine,
		 And knew the intruders on his ancient home,--
		
		The young light-hearted masters of the waves,--
		 And snatched his rudder, and shook out more sail,
		   And day and night held on indignantly
		 O’er the blue Midland waters with the gale,
		   Betwixt the Syrtes and soft Sicily,
		     To where the Atlantic raves
		 Outside the western straits, and unbent sails
		   There where down cloudy cliffs, through sheets of foam,
		   Shy traffickers, the dark Iberians come;
		 And on the beach undid his corded bales.


	22. WORLDLY PLACE

		_Even in a palace, life may be led well!_
		So spake the imperial sage, purest of men,
		Marcus Aurelius. But the stifling den
		Of common life, where, crowded up pell-mell,
		
		Our freedom for a little bread we sell,
		And drudge under some foolish master’s ken
		Who rates us if we peer outside our pen,--
		Matched with a palace, is not this a hell?
		
		_Even in a palace!_ On his truth sincere,
		Who spoke these words, no shadow ever came;
		And when my ill-schooled spirit is aflame
		
		Some nobler, ampler stage of life to win,
		I’ll stop, and say, “There were no succor here!
		The aids to noble life are all within.”


	23. YOUTH AND CALM

		’Tis death! and peace indeed is here,
		And ease from shame, and rest from fear.
		There’s nothing can dismarble now
		The smoothness of that limpid brow.
		But is a calm like this, in truth,
		The crowning end of life and youth?
		And when this boon rewards the dead,
		Are all debts paid, has all been said?
		And is the heart of youth so light,
		Its step so firm, its eye so bright,
		Because on its hot brow there blows
		A wind of promise and repose
		From the far grave, to which it goes;
		Because it has the hope to come,
		One day, to harbor in the tomb?
		Ah, no! the bliss youth dreams is one
		For daylight, for the cheerful sun,
		For feeling nerves and living breath;
		Youth dreams a bliss on this side death.
		It dreams a rest, if not more deep,
		More grateful than this marble sleep;
		It hears a voice within it tell,--
		_Calm’s not life’s crown, though calm is well_.
		’Tis all, perhaps, which man acquires,
		But ’tis not what our youth desires.


*** John Ashbery (1927 - 2017)

	1. A MAN OF WORDS

		His case inspires interest
		But little sympathy; it is smaller
		Than at first appeared. Does the furst nettle
		Make any difference as what grows
		Becomes a skit? Three sides enclosed,
		The fourth open to a wash of the weather,
		Exits and entrances, gestures theatrically meant
		To punctuate like doubled-over weeds as
		The garden fills up with snow?
		Ah, but this would have been another, quite other
		Entertainment, not the metallic taste
		In my mouth as I look away, density black as gunpowder
		In the angles where the grass writing goes on,
		Rose-red in unexpected places like the pressure
		Of fingers on a book suddenly snapped shut.
		
		Those tangled versions of the truth are
		Combed out, the snarls ripped out
		And spread around. Behind the mask
		Is still a continental appreciation
		Of what is fine, rarely appears and when it does is already
		Dying on the breeze that brought it to the threshold
		Of speech. The story worn out from telling.
		All diaries are alike, clear and cold, with
		The outlook for continued cold. They are placed
		Horizontal, parallel to the earth,
		Like the unencumbering dead. Just time to reread this
		And the past slips through your fingers, wishing you were
		 there.


	2. A WORLDLY COUNTRY

		Not the smoothness, not the insane clocks on the square,
		the scent of manure in the municipal parterre,
		not the fabrics, the sullen mockery of Tweety Bird,
		not the fresh troops that needed freshening up. If it occurred
		in real time, it was OK, and if it was time in a novel
		that was OK too. From palace and hovel
		the great parade flooded avenue and byway
		and turnip fields became just another highway.
		Leftover bonbons were thrown to the chickens
		and geese, who squawked like the very dickens.
		There was no peace in the bathroom, none in the china closet
		or the banks, where no one came to make a deposit.
		In short all hell broke loose that wide afternoon.
		By evening all was calm again. A crescent moon
		hung in the sky like a parrot on its perch.
		Departing guests smiled and called, “See you in church!”
		For night, as usual, knew what it was doing,
		providing sleep to offset the great ungluing
		that tomorrow again would surely bring.
		As I gazed at the quiet rubble, one thing
		puzzled me: What had happened, and why?
		One minute we were up to our necks in rebelliousness,
		and the next, peace had subdued the ranks of hellishness.
		
		So often it happens that the time we turn around in
		soon becomes the shoal our pathetic skiff will run aground in.
		And just as waves are anchored to the bottom of the sea
		we must reach the shallows before God cuts us free.


	3. ALCOVE

		Is it possible that spring could be
		once more approaching? We forget each time
		what a mindless business it is, porous like sleep,
		adrift on the horizon, refusing to take sides, “mugwump
		of the final hour,“ lest an agenda--horrors!--be imputed to it,
		and the whole point of its being spring collapse
		like a hole dug in sand. It’s breathy, though,
		you have to say that for it.
		And should further seasons coagulate
		into years, like spilled, dried paint, why,
		who’s to say we weren’t provident? We indeed
		looked out for others as though they mattered, and they,
		catching the spirit, came home with us, spent the night
		in an alcove from which their breathing could be heard clearly.
		But it’s not over yet. Terrible incidents happen
		daily. That’s how we get around obstacles.


	4. AND ’UT PICTURA POESIS’ IS HER NAME

		You can’t say it that way any more.   
		Bothered about beauty you have to   
		Come out into the open, into a clearing,
		And rest. Certainly whatever funny happens to you
		Is OK. To demand more than this would be strange
		Of you, you who have so many lovers,   
		People who look up to you and are willing   
		To do things for you, but you think
		It’s not right, that if they really knew you . . .
		So much for self-analysis. Now,
		About what to put in your poem-painting:   
		Flowers are always nice, particularly delphinium.   
		Names of boys you once knew and their sleds,   
		Skyrockets are good--do they still exist?
		There are a lot of other things of the same quality   
		As those I’ve mentioned. Now one must
		Find a few important words, and a lot of low-keyed,
		Dull-sounding ones. She approached me
		About buying her desk. Suddenly the street was   
		Bananas and the clangor of Japanese instruments.   
		Humdrum testaments were scattered around. His head
		Locked into mine. We were a seesaw. Something   
		Ought to be written about how this affects   
		You when you write poetry:
		The extreme austerity of an almost empty mind
		Colliding with the lush, Rousseau-like foliage of its desire to communicate   
		Something between breaths, if only for the sake   
		Of others and their desire to understand you and desert you
		For other centers of communication, so that understanding
		May begin, and in doing so be undone.


	5. AS YOU CAME FROM THE HOLY LAND

		of western New York state
		were the graves all right in their bushings
		was there a note of panic in the late August air
		because the old man had peed in his pants again
		was there turning away from the late afternoon glare
		as though it too could be wished away
		was any of this present
		and how could this be
		the magic solution to what you are in now
		whatever has held you motionless
		like this so long through the dark season
		until now the women come out in navy blue
		and the worms come out of the compost to die
		it is the end of any season
		
		you reading there so accurately
		sitting not wanting to be disturbed
		as you came from that holy land
		what other signs of earth’s dependency were upon you
		what fixed sign at the crossroads
		what lethargy in the avenues
		where all is said in a whisper
		what tone of voice among the hedges
		what tone under the apple trees
		the numbered land stretches away
		and your house is built in tomorrow
		but surely not before the examination
		of what is right and will befall
		not before the census
		and the writing down of names
		
		remember you are free to wander away
		as from other times other scenes that were taking place
		the history of someone who came too late
		the time is ripe now and the adage
		is hatching as the seasons change and tremble
		it is finally as though that thing of monstrous interest
		were happening in the sky
		but the sun is setting and prevents you from seeing it
		
		out of night the token emerges
		its leaves like birds alighting all at once under a tree
		taken up and shaken again
		put down in weak rage
		knowing as the brain does it can never come about
		not here not yesterday in the past
		only in the gap of today filling itself
		as emptiness is distributed
		in the idea of what time it is
		when that time is already past


	6. BLUEPRINTS AND OTHERS

		The man across the street seems happy,
		or pleased. Sometimes a porter evades the grounds.
		After you play a lot with the military
		you are my own best customer.
		
		I’ve done five of that.
		Make my halloween. Ask me not to say it.
		The old man wants to see you--_now_.
		That’s all right, but find your own.
		Do you want to stop using these?
		
		Last winning people told me to sit on the urinal.
		Do not put on others what you can put on yourself.
		_How to be in the city my loved one._
		Men in underwear . . . A biography field
		like where we live in the mountains,
		
		a falling. Yes I know you have.
		Troves of merchandise, you know, “boomer buzz.”
		Hillbilly sculptures of the outside.
		(They won’t see anybody.)


	7. BOUNDARY ISSUES

		Here in life, they would understand.   
		How could it be otherwise? We had groped too,   
		unwise, till the margin began to give way,   
		at which point all was sullen, or lost, or both.   
		
		Now it was time, and there was nothing for it.   
		
		We had a good meal, I and my friend,   
		slurping from the milk pail, grabbing at newer vegetables.   
		Yet life was a desert. Come home, in good faith.   
		You can still decide to. But it wanted warmth.   
		Otherwise ruse and subtlety would become impossible   
		in the few years or hours left to us. “Yes, but . . .”   
		The iconic beggars shuffled off   too. I told you,   
		once a breach emerges it will become a chasm   
		before anyone’s had a chance to waver. A dispute   
		on the far side of town erupts into a war   
		in no time at all, and ends as abruptly. The tendency to heal   
		sweeps all before it, into the arroyo, the mine shaft,   
		into whatever pocket you were contemplating. And the truly lost   
		make up for it. It’s always us that has to pay.   
		
		I have a suggestion to make: draw the sting out   
		as probingly as you please. Plaster the windows over   
		with wood pulp against the noon gloom proposing its enigmas,   
		its elixirs. Banish truth-telling. 
		That’s the whole point, as I understand it.   
		Each new investigation rebuilds the urgency,   
		like a sand rampart. And further reflection undermines it,   
		causing its eventual collapse. We could see all that   
		from a distance, as on a curving abacus, in urgency mode   
		from day one, but by then dispatches hardly mattered.   
		It was camaraderie, or something like it, that did,   
		poring over us like we were papyri, hoping to find one   
		correct attitude sketched on the gaslit air, night’s friendly takeover.


	8. BUNCH OF STUFF

		To all events I squirted you
		knowing this not to be this came to pass
		when we were out and it looked good.
		Why wouldn’t you want a fresh piece
		of outlook to stand in down the years?
		See, your house, a former human energy construction,
		crashed with us for a few days in May
		and sure enough, the polar inscape
		brought about some easier poems,
		which I guessed was a good thing. At least
		some of us were relaxed, Steamboat Bill included.
		
		He didn’t drink nothing.
		It was one thing
		to be ready for their challenge, quite another to accept it.
		And if I had a piece of advice for you, this is it:
		Poke fun at balm, then suffer lethargy
		to irradiate its shallow flood in the new packaging
		our enemies processed. They should know.
		
		The Gold Dust Twins never stopped supplicating Hoosiers
		to limn the trail. There’s no Shakespeare.
		Through the window, Casanova.
		Couldn’t get to sleep in the dumb incident
		of those days, crimping the frozen feet of Lincoln.


	9. BY AN EARTHQUAKE

		A hears by chance a familiar name, and the name involves a riddle of the past.
		B, in love with A, receives an unsigned letter in which the writer states that she is the mistress of A and begs B not to take him away from her.
		B, compelled by circumstances to be a companion of A in an isolated place, alters her rosy views of love and marriage when she discovers, through A, the selfishness of men.
		A, an intruder in a strange house, is discovered; he flees through the nearest door into a windowless closet and is trapped by a spring lock.
		A is so content with what he has that any impulse toward enterprise is throttled.
		A solves an important mystery when falling plaster reveals the place where some old love letters are concealed.
		A-4, missing food from his larder, half believes it was taken by a “ghost.”
		A, a crook, seeks unlawful gain by selling A-8 an object, X, which A-8 already owns.
		A sees a stranger, A-5, stealthily remove papers, X, from the pocket
		of another stranger, A-8, who is asleep. A follows A-5.
		A sends an infernal machine, X, to his enemy, A-3, and it falls into
		the hands of A’s friend, A-2.
		Angela tells Philip of her husband’s enlarged prostate, and asks for money.
		Philip, ignorant of her request, has the money placed in an escrow account.
		A discovers that his pal, W, is a girl masquerading as a boy.
		A, discovering that W is a girl masquerading as a boy, keeps the knowledge to himself and does his utmost to save the masquerader from annoying experiences.
		A, giving ten years of his life to a miserly uncle, U, in exchange for a college education, loses his ambition and enterprise.
		
		A, undergoing a strange experience among a people weirdly deluded, discovers the secret of the delusion from Herschel, one of the victims who has died. By means of information obtained from the notebook, A succeeds in rescuing the other victims of the delusion.
		A dies of psychic shock.
		Albert has a dream, or an unusual experience, psychic or otherwise, which enables him to conquer a serious character weakness and become successful in his new narrative, “Boris Karloff.”
		
		Silver coins from the Mojave Desert turn up in the possession of a sinister jeweler.
		Three musicians wager that one will win the affections of the local kapellmeister’s wife; the losers must drown themselves in a nearby stream.
		Ardis, caught in a trap and held powerless under a huge burning glass, is saved by an eclipse of the sun.
		Kent has a dream so vivid that it seems a part of his waking experience.   
		A and A-2 meet with a tragic adventure, and A-2 is killed.
		Elvira, seeking to unravel the mystery of a strange house in the hills, is caught in an electrical storm. During the storm the house vanishes and the site on which it stood becomes a lake.
		Alphonse has a wound, a terrible psychic wound, an invisible psychic wound, which causes pain in flesh and tissue which, otherwise, are perfectly healthy and normal.
		A has a dream which he conceives to be an actual experience.   
		Jenny, homeward bound, drives and drives, and is still driving, no nearer to her home than she was when she first started.
		Petronius B. Furlong’s friend, Morgan Windhover, receives a wound from which he dies.
		Thirteen guests, unknown to one another, gather in a spooky house to hear Toe reading Buster’s will.
		Buster has left everything to Lydia, a beautiful Siamese girl poet of whom no one has heard.
		Lassie and Rex tussle together politely; Lassie, wounded, is forced to limp home.
		In the Mexican gold rush a city planner is found imprisoned by outlaws in a crude cage of sticks.
		More people flow over the dam and more is learned about the missing electric cactus.
		Too many passengers have piled onto a cable car in San Francisco; the conductor is obliged to push some of them off.
		Maddalena, because of certain revelations she has received, firmly resolves that she will not carry out an enterprise that had formerly been dear to her heart.
		
		Fog enters into the shaft of a coal mine in Wales.
		A violent wind blows the fog around.
		Two miners, Shawn and Hillary, are pursued by fumes.
		Perhaps Emily’s datebook holds the clue to the mystery of the seven swans under the upas tree.
		Jarvis seeks to manage Emily’s dress shop and place it on a paying basis. Jarvis’s bibulous friend, Emily, influences Jarvis to take to drink, scoffing at the doctor who has forbidden Jarvis to indulge in spirituous liquors.
		Jarvis, because of a disturbing experience, is compelled to turn against his friend, Emily.
		A ham has his double, “Donnie,” take his place in an important enterprise.
		Jarvis loses his small fortune in trying to help a friend.
		Lodovico’s friend, Ambrosius, goes insane from eating the berries of a strange plant, and makes a murderous attack on Lodovico.
		“New narrative” is judged seditious. Hogs from all over go squealing down the street.
		Ambrosius, suffering misfortune, seeks happiness in the companionship of Joe, and in playing golf.
		Arthur, in a city street, has a glimpse of Cathy, a strange woman who has caused him to become involved in a puzzling mystery.   
		Cathy, walking in the street, sees Arthur, a stranger, weeping.
		Cathy abandons Arthur after he loses his money and is injured and sent to a hospital.
		Arthur, married to Beatrice, is haunted by memories of a former sweetheart, Cornelia, a heartless coquette whom Alvin loves.
		
		Sauntering in a park on a fine day in spring, Tricia and Plotinus encounter a little girl grabbing a rabbit by its ears. As they remonstrate with her, the girl is transformed into a mature woman who regrets her feverish act.
		Running up to the girl, Alvin stumbles and loses his coins.
		In a nearby dell, two murderers are plotting to execute a third.   
		Beatrice loved Alvin before he married.
		B, second wife of A, discovers that B-3, A’s first wife, was unfaithful.   
		B, wife of A, dons the mask and costume of B-3, A’s paramour, and meets A as B-3; his memory returns and he forgets B-3, and goes back to B.
		A discovers the “Hortensius,” a lost dialogue of Cicero, and returns it to the crevice where it lay.
		Ambrose marries Phyllis, a nice girl from another town.
		Donnie and Charlene are among the guests invited to the window.   
		No one remembers old Everett, who is left to shrivel in a tower.   
		Pellegrino, a rough frontiersman in a rough frontier camp, undertakes to care for an orphan.
		Ildebrando constructs a concealed trap, and a person near to him, Gwen, falls into the trap and cannot escape.


	10. BY GUESS AND BY GOSH

		O awaken with me
		the inquiring goodbyes.
		Ooh what a messy business
		a tangle and a muddle
		(and made it seem quite interesting).
		
		He ticks them off:
		leisure top,
		a different ride home,
		whispering, in a way,
		whispered whiskers,
		so many of the things you have to share.
		
		But I was getting on,
		and that’s what you don’t need.
		I’m certainly sorry about scaring your king,
		if indeed that’s what happened to him.
		You get Peanuts and War and Peace,
		some in rags, some in jags, some in
		velvet gown. They want
		the other side of the printing plant.
		
		There were concerns.
		Say hi to jock itch, leadership principles,
		urinary incompetence.
		Take that, perfect pitch.
		And say a word for the president,
		for the scholar magazines, papers, a streaming.
		Then you are interested in poetry.


	11. CROSSROADS IN THE PAST

		That night the wind stirred in the forsythia bushes,
		but it was a wrong one, blowing in the wrong direction.
		“That’s silly. How can there be a wrong direction?
		‘It bloweth where it listeth,’ as you know, just as we do
		when we make love or do something else there are no rules for.”
		
		I tell you, something went wrong there a while back.
		Just don’t ask me what it was. Pretend I’ve dropped the subject.
		No, now you’ve got me interested, I want to know
		exactly what seems wrong to you, how something could
		
		seem wrong to you. In what way do things get to be wrong?
		I’m sitting here dialing my cellphone
		with one hand, digging at some obscure pebbles with my shovel
		with the other. And then something like braids will stand out,
		
		on horsehair cushions. That armchair is really too lugubrious.
		We’ve got to change all the furniture, fumigate the house,
		talk our relationship back to its beginnings. Say, you know
		that’s probably what’s wrong--the beginnings concept, I mean.
		I aver there are no beginnings, though there were perhaps some
		sometime. We’d stopped, to look at the poster the movie theater
		
		had placed freestanding on the sidewalk. The lobby cards
		drew us in. It was afternoon, we found ourselves
		sitting at the end of a row in the balcony; the theater was unexpectedly
		crowded. That was the day we first realized we didn’t fully
		know our names, yours or mine, and we left quietly
		amid the gray snow falling. Twilight had already set in.


	12. DAY BUMP

		Whether the harborline or the east shoreline
		consummated it was nobody’s biz until you got there,
		eyelids ashimmer, content with one more dispensation
		from blue above. And just like we were saying,
		the people began to show some interest
		in the mud-choked harbor. It could be summer again
		for all anyone in our class knew.
		Yeah, that’s right. Bumped from our dog-perch,
		we’d had to roil with the last of them.
		
		It’s taken a while since I’ve been here,
		but I’m resolved. What, didn’t I print,
		little piles of notes, slopes almost Sicilian?
		Here is my friend:
		Socks for comfort (now boys) will see later. Did they come?
		The inner grocery had to take three sets of clips away.
		Speaking to him of intricate family affairs.
		I’m not what you think. Stay preconscious.
		It’s just the “flooding of the council.” No need to feel afraid.


	13. ELECTIVE INFINITIES

		Thirsty? They race across ampersands,
		scrolling. He isn’t sure it’s his head.
		There’s a delay right now. Smoke backed up.
		Ladies please remove hats.
		
		It was all over by morning. The village idiot
		was surprised to see us. “. . . thought you were in Normandy.”
		Like all pendulums we were surprised,
		then slightly miffed at what seemed to be happening
		back in the bushes. Keep your ornaments,
		if that’s what they are. Return to sender, arse.
		
		At the intersection a statue of a policeman
		was directing traffic. It seemed likale a vacation,
		halloween or something. Process 
		was the only real thing that happened.
		We wove closer to the abyss, a maze of sunflowers.
		The dauphin said to take our time.


	14. FARM IMPLEMENTS AND RUTABAGAS IN A LANDSCAPE

		The first of the undecoded messages read: “Popeye sits in thunder,   
		Unthought of. From that shoebox of an apartment,
		From livid curtain’s hue, a tangram emerges: a country.”
		Meanwhile the Sea Hag was relaxing on a green couch: “How pleasant   
		To spend one’s vacation _en la casa de Popeye_,” she scratched
		Her cleft chin’s solitary hair. She remembered spinach
		
		And was going to ask Wimpy if he had bought any spinach.   
		“M’love,” he intercepted, “the plains are decked out in thunder   
		Today, and it shall be as you wish.” He scratched
		The part of his head under his hat. The apartment
		Seemed to grow smaller. “But what if no pleasant
		Inspiration plunge us now to the stars? _For this is my country_.”
		
		Suddenly they remembered how it was cheaper in the country.   
		Wimpy was thoughtfully cutting open a number 2 can of spinach   
		When the door opened and Swee’pea crept in. “How pleasant!”
		But Swee’pea looked morose. A note was pinned to his bib. “Thunder   
		And tears are unavailing,” it read. “Henceforth shall Popeye’s apartment   
		Be but remembered space, toxic or salubrious, whole or scratched.”
		
		Olive came hurtling through the window; its geraniums scratched
		Her long thigh. “I have news!” she gasped. “Popeye, forced as you know to flee the country
		One musty gusty evening, by the schemes of his wizened, duplicate father, jealous of the apartment
		And all that it contains, myself and spinach
		In particular, heaves bolts of loving thunder
		At his own astonished becoming, rupturing the pleasant
		
		Arpeggio of our years. No more shall pleasant
		Rays of the sun refresh your sense of growing old, nor the scratched   
		Tree-trunks and mossy foliage, only immaculate darkness and thunder.”   
		She grabbed Swee’pea. “I’m taking the brat to the country.”
		“But you can’t do that--he hasn’t even finished his spinach,”   
		Urged the Sea Hag, looking fearfully around at the apartment.
		
		But Olive was already out of earshot. Now the apartment
		Succumbed to a strange new hush. “Actually it’s quite pleasant
		Here,” thought the Sea Hag. “If this is all we need fear from spinach
		Then I don’t mind so much. Perhaps we could invite Alice the Goon over”--she scratched
		One dug pensively--“but Wimpy is such a country
		Bumpkin, always burping like that.” Minute at first, the thunder
		
		Soon filled the apartment. It was domestic thunder,   
		The color of spinach. Popeye chuckled and scratched
		His balls: it sure was pleasant to spend a day in the country.


	15. HONESTLY,

		we could send you out there
		to join the cackle squad,
		but hey, that highly accomplished,
		thinly regarded equestrian--well there was no way
		he was going to join the others’ field trip.
		Wouldn’t put his head on the table.
		But here’s the thing:
		
		They had owned great dread,
		knew of a way to get away from here
		through ice and smoke
		always clutching her fingers, like it says
		to do.
		
		Once we were passionate about the police,
		yawned in the teeth of pixels,
		but a far rumor blanked us out.
		We bathed in moonshine.
		Now, experts disagree.
		Were we unhappy or sublime?
		We’ll have to wait until the next time
		an angel comes rapping at the door
		to rejoice docently.
		
		(I know there’s a way to do this.)


	16. HOW TO CONTINUE

		Oh there once was a woman
		and she kept a shop
		selling trinkets to tourists
		not far from a dock
		who came to see what life could be
		far back on the island.
		
		And it was always a party there
		always different but very nice
		New friends to give you advice
		or fall in love with you which is nice
		and each grew so perfectly from the other
		it was a marvel of poetry
		and irony
		
		And in this unsafe quarter
		much was scary and dirty
		but no one seemed to mind
		very much
		the parties went on from house to house
		There were friends and lovers galore
		all around the store
		There was moonshine in winter
		and starshine in summer
		and everybody was happy to have discovered
		what they discovered
		
		And then one day the ship sailed away
		There were no more dreamers just sleepers
		in heavy attitudes on the dock
		moving as if they knew how
		among the trinkets and the souvenirs
		the random shops of modern furniture
		and a gale came and said
		it is time to take all of you away
		from the tops of the trees to the little houses
		on little paths so startled
		
		And when it became time to go
		they none of them would leave without the other
		for they said we are all one here
		and if one of us goes the other will not go
		and the wind whispered it to the stars
		the people all got up to go
		and looked back on love


	17. IF YOU SAID YOU WOULD COME WITH ME

		n it was very urban but in the country cows were covering the hills. The clouds were near and very moist. I was walking along the pavement with Anna, enjoying the scattered scenery. Suddenly a sound like a deep bell came from behind us. We both turned to look. “It’s the words you spoke in the past, coming back to haunt you,” Anna explained. “They always do, you know.”
		Indeed I did. Many times this deep bell-like tone had intruded itself on my thoughts, scrambling them at first, then rearranging them in apple-pie order. “Two crows,” the voice seemed to say, “were sitting on a sundial in the God-given sunlight. Then one flew away.”
		“Yes . . . and then?” I wanted to ask, but I kept silent. We turned into a courtyard and walked up several flights of stairs to the roof, where a party was in progress. “This is my friend Hans,” Anna said by way of introduction. No one paid much attention and several guests moved away to the balustrade to admire the view of orchards and vineyards, approaching their autumn glory. One of the women however came to greet us in a friendly manner. I was wondering if this was a “harvest home,” a phrase I had often heard but never understood.
		“Welcome to my home . . . well, to our home,” the woman said gaily. “As you can see, the grapes are being harvested.” It seemed she could read my mind. “They say this year’s vintage will be a mediocre one, but the sight is lovely, nonetheless. Don’t you agree, Mr. . . .”
		“Hans,” I replied curtly. The prospect was indeed a lovely one, but I wanted to leave. Making some excuse I guided Anna by the elbow toward the stairs and we left.
		“That wasn’t polite of you,” she said dryly.
		“Honey, I’ve had enough of people who can read your mind. When I want it done I’ll go to a mind reader.”
		“I happen to be one and I can tell you what you’re thinking is false. Listen to what the big bell says: ‘We are all strangers on our own turf, in our own time.’ You should have paid attention. Now adjustments will have to be made.”


	18. INSTEAD OF LOSING

		Anyone, growing up in a space you hadn’t used yet
		would’ve done the same: bother the family’s bickering
		to head straight into the channel. My, those times
		crackled near about us, from sickly melodrama
		instead of losing, and the odd confusion . . . confusion.
		
		I thought of it then, and in the mountains.
		During the day we perforated the eponymous city limits
		and then some. No one knew all about us
		but some knew plenty. It was time to leave that town
		for an empty drawer
		into which they sailed. Some of the eleven thousand
		virgins were getting queasy. I say, stop the ship!
		No can do. Here come the bald arbiters
		with their eyes on chains, just so, like glasses.
		Heck, it’s only a muskrat
		that’s seen better years, when things were medieval
		and gold . . .
		
		So you people in the front,
		leave. You see them. And you understand it all.
		It doesn’t end, night’s sorcery notwithstanding.
		Would you have preferred to be a grownup in earlier times
		than the child can contain or imagine?
		Or is right now the answer--you know, the radio
		we heard news on late at night,
		our checkered fortunes so pretty.
		Here’s your ton of plumes, and your Red Seal Records.
		The whole embrace.


	19. LEAVE THE HAND IN

		Furthermore, Mr. Tuttle used to have to run in the streets.   
		Now, each time friendship happens, they’re fully booked.   
		Sporting with amaryllis in the shade is all fine and good,   
		but when your sparring partner gets there first   
		you wonder if it was all worth it. “Yes, why do it?”   
		I’m on hold. It will take quite a lot for this music   
		to grow on me. I meant no harm. I’ve helped him   
		from getting stuck before. Dumb thing. All my appetites are friendly.   
		Children too are free to go and come as they please.   
		I ask you only to choose between us, then shut down this election.   
		But don’t reveal too much of your hand at any given time.   
		Then up and pipes the major, leave the hand in,   
		or change the vows. The bold, enduring menace of courtship is upon us   
		like the plague, and none of us can say what trouble   
		will be precipitated once it has had its way with us.   
		Our home is marshland. After dinner was wraparound.   
		You got a tender little look at it.   
		
		Outside, it never did turn golden.


	20. LIKE A SENTENCE

		How little we know,   
		and when we know it!
		
		It was prettily said that “No man
		hath an abundance of cows on the plain, nor shards
		in his cupboard.” Wait! I think I know who said that! It was . . .
		
		Never mind, dears, the afternoon
		will fold you up, along with preoccupations   
		that now seem so important, until only a child   
		running around on a unicycle occupies center stage.   
		Then what will you make of walls? And I fear you   
		will have to come up with something,
		
		be it a terraced gambit above the sea
		or gossip overheard in the marketplace.
		For you see, it becomes you to be chastened:
		for the old to envy the young,
		and for youth to fear not getting older,
		where the paths through the elms, the carnivals, begin.
		
		And it was said of Gyges that his ring
		attracted those who saw him not,
		just as those who wandered through him were aware
		only of a certain stillness, such as precedes an earache,
		while lumberjacks in headbands came down to see what all the fuss was about,
		whether it was something they could be part of
		_sans_ affront to self-esteem.
		And those temple hyenas who had seen enough,
		nostrils aflare, fur backing up in the breeze,
		were no place you could count on,
		having taken a proverbial powder
		as rifle butts received another notch.
		I, meanwhile . . . I was going to say I had squandered spring   
		when summer came along and took it from me   
		like a terrier a lady has asked one to hold for a moment
		while she adjusts her stocking in the mirror of a weighing machine.   
		But here it is winter, and wrong
		to speak of other seasons as though they exist.   
		Time has only an agenda
		in the wallet at his back, while we
		who think we know where we are going unfazed
		end up in brilliant woods, nourished more than we can know
		by the unexpectedness of ice and stars
		and crackling tears. We’ll just have to make a go of it,
		a run for it. And should the smell of baking cookies appease
		one or the other of the olfactory senses, climb down   
		into this wagonload of prisoners.
		
		The meter will be screamingly clear then,
		the rhythms unbounced, for though we came
		to life as to a school, we must leave it without graduating   
		even as an ominous wind puffs out the sails
		of proud feluccas who don’t know where they’re headed,   
		only that a motion is etched there, shaking to be free.


	21. MEAN PARTICLES

		Sometimes something like a second
		washes the base of this street.
		The father and his two assistants
		are given permission to go.
		One of them, a woman, asks, “Why
		did we come here in the first place,
		to this citadel of dampness?”
		
		Some days are worse than others,
		even if we can’t believe in them.
		But that was never a concern of mine,
		reasoned the patient.
		
		Sing, scroll, or never be blasted by us
		into marmoreal meaning, or the fist for it.
		Kudos to the prince who journeyed here
		to negotiate our release, if you can believe it.
		
		You’re right. The ballads are retreating
		back into the atmosphere.
		They won’t be coming round again.
		Make your peace.


	22. MEANINGFUL LOVE

		What the bad news was
		became apparent too late
		for us to do anything good about it.
		
		I was offered no urgent dreaming,
		didn’t need a name or anything.
		Everything was taken care of.
		
		In the medium-size city of my awareness
		voles are building colossi.
		The blue room is over there.
		
		He put out no feelers.
		The day was all as one to him.
		Some days he never leaves his room
		and those are the best days,
		by far.
		
		There were morose gardens farther down the slope,
		anthills that looked like they belonged there.
		The sausages were undercooked, 
		the wine too cold, the bread molten.
		Who said to bring sweaters?
		The climate’s not that dependable.
		
		The Atlantic crawled slowly to the left
		pinning a message on the unbound golden hair of sleeping maidens,
		a ruse for next time,
		
		where fire and water are rampant in the streets,
		the gate closed--no visitors today
		or any evident heartbeat.
		
		I got rid of the book of fairy tales,
		pawned my old car, bought a ticket to the funhouse,
		found myself back here at six o’clock,
		pondering “possible side effects.”
		
		There was no harm in loving then,
		no certain good either. But love was loving servants
		or bosses. No straight road issuing from it.
		Leaves around the door are penciled losses.
		Twenty years to fix it.
		Asters bloom one way or another.


	23. MOTTLED TUESDAY

		Something was about to go laughably wrong,
		whether directly at home or here,
		on this random shoal pleading with its eyes
		till it too breaks loose, caught in a hail of references.
		I’ll add one more scoop
		to the pile of retail.
		
		Hey, you’re doing it, like I didn’t tell you
		to, my sinking laundry boat, point of departure,
		my white pomegranate, my swizzle stick.
		We’re leaving again of our own volition
		for bogus patterned plains streaked by canals,
		maybe. Amorous ghosts will pursue us
		for a time, but sometimes they get, you know, confused and
		forget to stop when we do, as they continue to populate this
		fertile land with their own bizarre self-imaginings.
		Here’s hoping the referral goes tidily, O brother.
		Chime authoritatively with the pop-ups and extras.
		Keep your units pliable and folded,
		the recourse a mere specter, like you have it coming to you,
		awash with the new day and its abominable antithesis,
		OK? Don’t be able to make that distinction.


	24. PEOPLE BEHAVING BADLY A CONCERN

		Aggressive panhandling, public urination, verbal threats,
		public nudity and violation of the open container law
		followed us down the days, for why
		are we here much longer,
		or even this long? I ask you
		to be civil and not interrupt night’s business.
		
		It was fun getting used to you,
		who couldn’t have been more nicer.
		This was as modern as it had ever been.
		They were influenced by him: some dirty magazine
		on the air tonight. (Amid the chaos, reports of survivors.)
		
		Didn’t the flowers’ restoration cat fugue keep spilling,
		and like that? It wouldn’t be the first time, either.
		The pro-taffeta get up and laugh,
		investigate or communicate. The night you were
		going to stay up late, others will kiss,
		and he talks about you, and I don’t know what.
		Come in, anyway,
		and don’t lack for tales of the Assertion.
		
		We’re talking civilian unrest.
		Yes, well, maybe you should take one.
		
		(Do not bite or chew.)


	25. PROXIMITY

		It was great to see you the other day
		at the carnival. My enchiladas were delicious,
		
		and I hope that yours were too.
		I wanted to fulfill your dream of me
		
		in some suitable way. Giving away my new gloves,
		for instance, or putting a box around all that’s wrong with us.
		
		But these gutta percha lamps do not whisper on our behalf.
		Now sometimes in the evenings, I am lonely
		
		with dread. A rambunctious wind fills the pine
		at my doorstep, the woodbine is enchanted,
		
		and I must be off before the clock strikes
		whatever hour it is intent on.
		
		Do not leave me in this wilderness!
		Or, if you do, pay me to stay behind.


	26. PYROGRAPHY

		Out here on Cottage Grove it matters. The galloping
		Wind balks at its shadow. The carriages
		Are drawn forward under a sky of fumed oak.
		This is America calling:
		The mirroring of state to state,   
		Of voice to voice on the wires,
		The force of colloquial greetings like golden
		Pollen sinking on the afternoon breeze.
		In service stairs the sweet corruption thrives;
		The page of dusk turns like a creaking revolving stage in Warren, Ohio.
		
		If this is the way it is let’s leave,
		They agree, and soon the slow boxcar journey begins,   
		Gradually accelerating until the gyrating fans of suburbs   
		Enfolding the darkness of cities are remembered   
		Only as a recurring tic. And midway
		We meet the disappointed, returning ones, without its   
		Being able to stop us in the headlong night
		Toward the nothing of the coast. At Bolinas
		The houses doze and seem to wonder why through the   
		Pacific haze, and the dreams alternately glow and grow dull.   
		Why be hanging on here? Like kites, circling,   
		Slipping on a ramp of air, but always circling?
		
		But the variable cloudiness is pouring it on,
		Flooding back to you like the meaning of a joke.
		The land wasn’t immediately appealing; we built it
		Partly over with fake ruins, in the image of ourselves:
		An arch that terminates in mid-keystone, a crumbling stone pier   
		For laundresses, an open-air theater, never completed
		And only partially designed. How are we to inhabit
		This space from which the fourth wall is invariably missing,   
		As in a stage-set or dollhouse, except by staying as we are,   
		In lost profile, facing the stars, with dozens of as yet
		Unrealized projects, and a strict sense
		Of time running out, of evening presenting   
		The tactfully folded-over bill? And we fit   
		Rather too easily into it, become transparent,   
		Almost ghosts. One day
		The birds and animals in the pasture have absorbed   
		The color, the density of the surroundings,   
		The leaves are alive, and too heavy with life.
		
		A long period of adjustment followed.
		In the cities at the turn of the century they knew about it   
		But were careful not to let on as the iceman and the milkman   
		Disappeared down the block and the postman shouted   
		His daily rounds. The children under the trees knew it   
		But all the fathers returning home
		On streetcars after a satisfying day at the office undid it:   
		The climate was still floral and all the wallpaper   
		In a million homes all over the land conspired to hide it.   
		One day we thought of painted furniture, of how   
		It just slightly changes everything in the room
		And in the yard outside, and how, if we were going
		To be able to write the history of our time, starting with today,   
		It would be necessary to model all these unimportant details   
		So as to be able to include them; otherwise the narrative   
		Would have that flat, sandpapered look the sky gets   
		Out in the middle west toward the end of summer,   
		The look of wanting to back out before the argument   
		Has been resolved, and at the same time to save appearances
		So that tomorrow will be pure. Therefore, since we have to do our business   
		In spite of things, why not make it in spite of everything?   
		That way, maybe the feeble lakes and swamps
		Of the back country will get plugged into the circuit   
		And not just the major events but the whole incredible
		Mass of everything happening simultaneously and pairing off,
		Channeling itself into history, will unroll
		As carefully and as casually as a conversation in the next room,   
		And the purity of today will invest us like a breeze,
		Only be hard, spare, ironical: something one can
		Tip one’s hat to and still get some use out of.
		
		The parade is turning into our street.
		My stars, the burnished uniforms and prismatic   
		Features of this instant belong here. The land
		Is pulling away from the magic, glittering coastal towns
		To an aforementioned rendezvous with August and December.   
		The hunch is it will always be this way,   
		The look, the way things first scared you   
		In the night light, and later turned out to be,   
		Yet still capable, all the same, of a narrow fidelity   
		To what you and they wanted to become:   
		No sighs like Russian music, only a vast unravelling   
		Out toward the junctions and to the darkness beyond   
		To these bare fields, built at today’s expense.


	27. RIVERS AND MOUNTAINS

		On the secret map the assassins   
		Cloistered, the Moon River was marked   
		Near the eighteen peaks and the city
		Of humiliation and defeat--wan ending   
		Of the trail among dry, papery leaves   
		Gray-brown quills like thoughts
		In the melodious but vast mass of today’s   
		Writing through fields and swamps
		Marked, on the map, with little bunches of weeds.   
		Certainly squirrels lived in the woods   
		But devastation and dull sleep still   
		Hung over the land, quelled
		The rioters turned out of sleep in the peace of prisons   
		Singing on marble factory walls   
		Deaf consolation of minor tunes that pack   
		The air with heavy invisible rods   
		Pent in some sand valley from
		Which only quiet walking ever instructs.   
		The bird flew over and
		Sat--there was nothing else to do.
		Do not mistake its silence for pride or strength
		Or the waterfall for a harbor
		Full of light boats that is there
		Performing for thousands of people   
		In clothes some with places to go   
		Or games. Sometimes over the pillar   
		Of square stones its impact
		Makes a light print.
		So going around cities
		To get to other places you found   
		It all on paper but the land
		Was made of paper processed   
		To look like ferns, mud or other   
		Whose sea unrolled its magic   
		Distances and then rolled them up   
		Its secret was only a pocket
		After all but some corners are darker
		Than these moonless nights spent as on a raft
		In the seclusion of a melody heard   
		As though through trees
		And you can never ignite their touch   
		Long but there were homes
		Flung far out near the asperities   
		Of a sharp, rocky pinnacle
		And other collective places
		Shadows of vineyards whose wine   
		Tasted of the forest floor
		Fisheries and oyster beds
		Tides under the pole
		Seminaries of instruction, public   
		Places for electric light
		And the major tax assessment area   
		Wrinkled on the plan
		Of election to public office
		Sixty-two years old bath and breakfast   
		The formal traffic, shadows
		To make it not worth joining
		After the ox had pulled away the cart.
		
		Your plan was to separate the enemy into two groups   
		With the razor-edged mountains between.
		It worked well on paper
		But their camp had grown
		To be the mountains and the map   
		Carefully peeled away and not torn   
		Was the light, a tender but tough bark
		On everything. Fortunately the war was solved   
		In another way by isolating the two sections   
		Of the enemy’s navy so that the mainland   
		Warded away the big floating ships.   
		Light bounced off the ends   
		Of the small gray waves to tell   
		Them in the observatory   
		About the great drama that was being won
		To turn off the machinery
		And quietly move among the rustic landscape   
		Scooping snow off the mountains rinsing
		The coarser ones that love had   
		Slowly risen in the night to overflow   
		Wetting pillow and petal   
		Determined to place the letter
		On the unassassinated president’s desk
		So that a stamp could reproduce all this
		In detail, down to the last autumn leaf
		And the affliction of June ride
		Slowly out into the sun-blackened landscape.


	28. SLEEPERS AWAKE

		Cervantes was asleep when he wrote _Don Quixote_.
		Joyce slept during the Wandering Rocks section of _Ulysses_.
		Homer nodded and occasionally slept during the greater part of the _Iliad_; he was awake however when he wrote the _Odyssey_.
		Proust snored his way through _The Captive_, as have legions of his readers after him.
		Melville was asleep at the wheel for much of _Moby-Dick_.
		Fitzgerald slept through _Tender Is the Night_, which is perhaps not so surprising,
		but the fact that Mann slumbered on the very slopes of _The Magic Mountain_ is quite extraordinary--that he wrote it, even more so.   
		Kafka, of course, never slept, even while not writing or on bank holidays.
		No one knows too much about George Eliot’s writing habits--my guess is she would sleep a few minutes, wake up and write something, then pop back to sleep again.
		Lew Wallace’s forty winks came, incredibly, during the chariot race in _Ben-Hur_.
		Emily Dickinson slept on her cold, narrow bed in Amherst.
		When she awoke there would be a new poem inscribed by Jack Frost on the windowpane; outside, glass foliage chimed.
		Good old Walt snored as he wrote and, like so many of us, insisted he didn’t.
		Maugham snored on the Riviera.
		Agatha Christie slept daintily, as a woman sleeps, which is why her novels are like tea sandwiches--artistic, for the most part.
		I sleep when I cannot avoid it; my writing and sleeping are constantly improving.
		
		I have other things to say, but shall not detain you much.
		Never go out in a boat with an author--they cannot tell when they are over water.
		Birds make poor role models.
		A philosopher should be shown the door, but don’t, under any circumstances, try it.
		Slaves make good servants.
		Brushing the teeth may not always improve the appearance.
		Store clean rags in old pillow cases.
		Feed a dog only when he barks.
		Flush tea leaves down the toilet, coffee grounds down the sink.
		Beware of anonymous letters--you may have written them, in a wordless implosion of sleep.


	29. SNOW FENCE

		Dieting aids posture,
		as reading helps thought.
		They may be forced
		into another shape, and the world
		around us becomes black
		with notions of the ground.
		
		A snow fence imposes that sleep
		All along it snow has chosen different shapes
		of busyness. It has been prevented
		from staying where it wanted to.
		Blue sky will pay for this
		music from an old Victrola
		singing about a lover and his henchman
		and the woman hiding in a barrel
		under the bridge.
		
		In the west it all turns to meat.
		A few are grateful, more are bored.
		We could have lunch by that lake,
		drink beer from a nearby farm.
		And the actors walked with me
		to those calms.


	30. SOONEST MENDED

		Barely tolerated, living on the margin
		In our technological society, we were always having to be rescued   
		On the brink of destruction, like heroines in _Orlando Furioso_
		Before it was time to start all over again.
		There would be thunder in the bushes, a rustling of coils,   
		And Angelica, in the Ingres painting, was considering
		The colorful but small monster near her toe, as though wondering whether forgetting
		The whole thing might not, in the end, be the only solution.   
		And then there always came a time when
		Happy Hooligan in his rusted green automobile
		Came plowing down the course, just to make sure everything was O.K.,   
		Only by that time we were in another chapter and confused   
		About how to receive this latest piece of information.   
		_Was_ it information? Weren’t we rather acting this out   
		For someone else’s benefit, thoughts in a mind
		With room enough and to spare for our little problems (so they began to seem),
		Our daily quandary about food and the rent and bills to be paid?   
		To reduce all this to a small variant,
		To step free at last, minuscule on the gigantic plateau--
		This was our ambition: to be small and clear and free.   
		Alas, the summer’s energy wanes quickly,
		A moment and it is gone. And no longer
		May we make the necessary arrangements, simple as they are.   
		Our star was brighter perhaps when it had water in it.   
		Now there is no question even of that, but only
		Of holding on to the hard earth so as not to get thrown off,   
		With an occasional dream, a vision: a robin flies across   
		The upper corner of the window, you brush your hair away
		And cannot quite see, or a wound will flash
		Against the sweet faces of the others, something like:   
		This is what you wanted to hear, so why
		Did you think of listening to something else? We are all talkers   
		It is true, but underneath the talk lies
		The moving and not wanting to be moved, the loose
		Meaning, untidy and simple like a threshing floor.
		
		These then were some hazards of the course,
		Yet though we knew the course was hazards and nothing else   
		It was still a shock when, almost a quarter of a century later,   
		The clarity of the rules dawned on you for the first time.   
		_They_ were the players, and we who had struggled at the game   
		Were merely spectators, though subject to its vicissitudes
		And moving with it out of the tearful stadium, borne on shoulders, at last.
		Night after night this message returns, repeated
		In the flickering bulbs of the sky, raised past us, taken away from us,   
		Yet ours over and over until the end that is past truth,   
		The being of our sentences, in the climate that fostered them,   
		Not ours to own, like a book, but to be with, and sometimes   
		To be without, alone and desperate.
		But the fantasy makes it ours, a kind of fence-sitting
		Raised to the level of an esthetic ideal. These were moments, years,   
		Solid with reality, faces, namable events, kisses, heroic acts,   
		But like the friendly beginning of a geometrical progression
		Not too reassuring, as though meaning could be cast aside some day   
		When it had been outgrown. Better, you said, to stay cowering   
		Like this in the early lessons, since the promise of learning   
		Is a delusion, and I agreed, adding that
		Tomorrow would alter the sense of what had already been learned,   
		That the learning process is extended in this way, so that from this standpoint
		None of us ever graduates from college,
		For time is an emulsion, and probably thinking not to grow up   
		Is the brightest kind of maturity for us, right now at any rate.
		And you see, both of us were right, though nothing
		Has somehow come to nothing; the avatars
		Of our conforming to the rules and living
		Around the home have made--well, in a sense, “good citizens” of us,   
		Brushing the teeth and all that, and learning to accept
		The charity of the hard moments as they are doled out,
		For this is action, this not being sure, this careless
		Preparing, sowing the seeds crooked in the furrow,
		Making ready to forget, and always coming back
		To the mooring of starting out, that day so long ago.


	31. STRANGE THINGS HAPPEN AT NIGHT

		Without thinking too much about it,
		prepare to go out into the city of your dreams.
		Now, look up. At first they cannot see you.
		Later, the adjustment will be made.
		Your boyfriend sips bark tea.
		
		The number should’ve turned up by now.
		Perhaps the driving rain impedes it,
		the recession. In any case there are two too many of
		 us here.
		We must double up, or die.
		
		And that might be a practical if remote solution.
		It’s not every day you get to bicycle past the ribbons
		of people, watch the grand hotels
		for some event thought imminent--not lost.
		
		If ever I was going to turn up your volume--
		but this isn’t about living, is it?
		Or is it? I mean, many suppers in the seven modes
		or grades, as many as can be made to last
		once the bosses and their beagles have passed through.


	32. STREET MUSICIANS

		One died, and the soul was wrenched out   
		Of the other in life, who, walking the streets   
		Wrapped in an identity like a coat, sees on and on   
		The same corners, volumetrics, shadows   
		Under trees. Farther than anyone was ever   
		Called, through increasingly suburban airs   
		And ways, with autumn falling over everything:   
		The plush leaves the chattels in barrels   
		Of an obscure family being evicted
		Into the way it was, and is. The other beached   
		Glimpses of what the other was up to:
		Revelations at last. So they grew to hate and forget each other.
		
		So I cradle this average violin that knows   
		Only forgotten showtunes, but argues
		The possibility of free declamation anchored
		To a dull refrain, the year turning over on itself   
		In November, with the spaces among the days   
		More literal, the meat more visible on the bone.   
		Our question of a place of origin hangs
		Like smoke: how we picnicked in pine forests,
		In coves with the water always seeping up, and left   
		Our trash, sperm and excrement everywhere, smeared   
		On the landscape, to make of us what we could.


	33. SYRINGA

		Orpheus liked the glad personal quality
		Of the things beneath the sky. Of course, Eurydice was a part   
		Of this. Then one day, everything changed. He rends   
		Rocks into fissures with lament. Gullies, hummocks   
		Can’t withstand it. The sky shudders from one horizon   
		To the other, almost ready to give up wholeness.   
		Then Apollo quietly told him: “Leave it all on earth.   
		Your lute, what point? Why pick at a dull pavan few care to   
		Follow, except a few birds of dusty feather,
		Not vivid performances of the past.” But why not?   
		All other things must change too.
		The seasons are no longer what they once were,   
		But it is the nature of things to be seen only once,
		As they happen along, bumping into other things, getting along   
		Somehow. That’s where Orpheus made his mistake.   
		Of course Eurydice vanished into the shade;
		She would have even if he hadn’t turned around.
		No use standing there like a gray stone toga as the whole wheel   
		Of recorded history flashes past, struck dumb, unable to utter an intelligent
		Comment on the most thought-provoking element in its train.   
		Only love stays on the brain, and something these people,   
		These other ones, call life. Singing accurately
		So that the notes mount straight up out of the well of   
		Dim noon and rival the tiny, sparkling yellow flowers   
		Growing around the brink of the quarry, encapsulates   
		The different weights of the things.
		                                                      But it isn’t enough   
		To just go on singing. Orpheus realized this
		And didn’t mind so much about his reward being in heaven   
		After the Bacchantes had torn him apart, driven   
		Half out of their minds by his music, what it was doing to them.
		Some say it was for his treatment of Eurydice.
		But probably the music had more to do with it, and   
		The way music passes, emblematic
		Of life and how you cannot isolate a note of it
		And say it is good or bad. You must
		Wait till it’s over. “The end crowns all,”
		Meaning also that the “tableau”
		Is wrong. For although memories, of a season, for example,   
		Melt into a single snapshot, one cannot guard, treasure   
		That stalled moment. It too is flowing, fleeting;   
		It is a picture of flowing, scenery, though living, mortal,   
		Over which an abstract action is laid out in blunt,   
		Harsh strokes. And to ask more than this
		Is to become the tossing reeds of that slow,
		Powerful stream, the trailing grasses
		Playfully tugged at, but to participate in the action   
		No more than this. Then in the lowering gentian sky   
		Electric twitches are faintly apparent first, then burst forth   
		Into a shower of fixed, cream-colored flares. The horses   
		Have each seen a share of the truth, though each thinks,   
		“I’m a maverick. Nothing of this is happening to me,   
		Though I can understand the language of birds, and   
		The itinerary of the lights caught in the storm is fully apparent to me.
		Their jousting ends in music much
		As trees move more easily in the wind after a summer storm   
		And is happening in lacy shadows of shore-trees, now, day after day.”
		
		But how late to be regretting all this, even
		Bearing in mind that regrets are always late, too late!   
		To which Orpheus, a bluish cloud with white contours,   
		Replies that these are of course not regrets at all,   
		Merely a careful, scholarly setting down of
		Unquestioned facts, a record of pebbles along the way.
		And no matter how all this disappeared,   
		Or got where it was going, it is no longer   
		Material for a poem. Its subject
		Matters too much, and not enough, standing there helplessly   
		While the poem streaked by, its tail afire, a bad   
		Comet screaming hate and disaster, but so turned inward   
		That the meaning, good or other, can never   
		Become known. The singer thinks
		Constructively, builds up his chant in progressive stages   
		Like a skyscraper, but at the last minute turns away.   
		The song is engulfed in an instant in blackness   
		Which must in turn flood the whole continent   
		With blackness, for it cannot see. The singer   
		Must then pass out of sight, not even relieved   
		Of the evil burthen of the words. Stellification   
		Is for the few, and comes about much later   
		When all record of these people and their lives   
		Has disappeared into libraries, onto microfilm.   
		A few are still interested in them. “But what about   
		So-and-so?” is still asked on occasion. But they lie   
		Frozen and out of touch until an arbitrary chorus
		Speaks of a totally different incident with a similar name   
		In whose tale are hidden syllables
		
		
		Of what happened so long before that
		In some small town, one indifferent summer.


	34. TAHITI TROT

		We close in on ourselves,
		then yelp that the world is awry.
		If one person could see his (or her)
		reflection outlined in the mirror
		
		the last knot would come untied,
		the great ship slip into the depths
		of the Atlantic Ocean. Who told you
		to say that? Why have you come here?
		
		We need more people like you
		to tell us what we’re not like. True,
		aging would get lost in the process.
		We’d be sitting on the grass like young
		
		idiots, involved in some personal spell
		when the boiler exploded. You’d say,
		“I can’t get over that hat,” and I.
		pretending not to understand, would say,
		 “Can I get you anything?”


	35. THE BUNGALOWS

		Impatient as we were for all of them to join us,
		The land had not yet risen into view: gulls had swept the gray steel towers away
		So that it profited less to go searching, away over the humming earth
		Than to stay in immediate relation to these other things--boxes, store parts, whatever you wanted to call them--
		Whose installedness was the price of further revolutions, so you knew this combat was the last.
		And still the relationship waxed, billowed like scenery on the breeze.
		
		They are the same aren’t they,
		The presumed landscape and the dream of home
		Because the people are all homesick today or desperately sleeping,   
		Trying to remember how those rectangular shapes
		Became so extraneous and so near
		To create a foreground of quiet knowledge
		In which youth had grown old, chanting and singing wise hymns that   
		Will sign for old age
		And so lift up the past to be persuaded, and be put down again.
		
		The warning is nothing more than an aspirate “h”;
		The problem is sketched completely, like fireworks mounted on poles:   
		Complexion of evening, the accurate voices of the others.
		During Coca-Cola lessons it becomes patent
		Of noise on the left, and we had so skipped a stage that   
		The great wave of the past, compounded in derision,   
		Submerged idea and non-dreamer alike   
		In falsetto starlight like “purity”
		Of design that had been the first danger sign
		To wash the sticky, icky stuff down the drain--pfui!
		
		How does it feel to be outside and inside at the same time,
		The delicious feeling of the air contradicting and secretly abetting
		The interior warmth? But the land curdles the dismay in which it’s written   
		Bearing to a final point of folly and doom
		The wisdom of these generations.
		Look at what you’ve done to the landscape--
		The ice cube, the olive--
		There is a perfect tri-city mesh of things
		Extending all the way along the river on both sides
		With the end left for thoughts on construction
		That are always turning to alps and thresholds
		Above the tide of others, feeding a European moss rose without glory.
		
		We shall very soon have the pleasure of recording
		A period of unanimous tergiversation in this respect
		And to make that pleasure the greater, it is worth while
		At the risk of tedious iteration, to put first upon record a final protest:   
		Rather decaying art, genius, inspiration to hold to
		An impossible “calque” of reality, than
		“The new school of the trivial, rising up on the field of battle,   
		Something of sludge and leaf-mold,” and life
		Goes trickling out through the holes, like water through a sieve,   
		All in one direction.
		
		You who were directionless, and thought it would solve everything if you found one,
		What do you make of this? Just because a thing is immortal
		Is that any reason to worship it? Death, after all, is immortal.   
		But you have gone into your houses and shut the doors, meaning   
		There can be no further discussion.
		And the river pursues its lonely course
		With the sky and the trees cast up from the landscape
		For green brings unhappiness--_le vert Porte malheur_.
		“The chartreuse mountain on the absinthe plain
		Makes the strong man’s tears tumble down like rain.”
		
		All this came to pass eons ago.
		Your program worked out perfectly. You even avoided
		The monotony of perfection by leaving in certain flaws:
		A backward way of becoming, a forced handshake,
		An absent-minded smile, though in fact nothing was left to chance.
		Each detail was startlingly clear, as though seen through a magnifying glass,   
		Or would have been to an ideal observer, namely yourself--
		For only you could watch yourself so patiently from afar
		The way God watches a sinner on the path to redemption,
		Sometimes disappearing into valleys, _but always on the way_,
		For it all builds up into something, meaningless or meaningful
		As architecture, because planned and then abandoned when completed,   
		To live afterwards, in sunlight and shadow, a certain amount of years.   
		Who cares about what was there before? There is no going back,   
		For standing still means death, and life is moving on,
		Moving on towards death. But sometimes standing still is also life.


	36. THE INSTRUCTION MANUAL

		As I sit looking out of a window of the building
		I wish I did not have to write the instruction manual on the uses of a new metal.
		I look down into the street and see people, each walking with an inner peace,   
		And envy them--they are so far away from me!
		Not one of them has to worry about getting out this manual on schedule.   
		And, as my way is, I begin to dream, resting my elbows on the desk and leaning out of the window a little,
		Of dim Guadalajara! City of rose-colored flowers!
		City I wanted most to see, and most did not see, in Mexico!
		But I fancy I see, under the press of having to write the instruction manual,   
		Your public square, city, with its elaborate little bandstand!
		The band is playing _Scheherazade_ by Rimsky-Korsakov.
		Around stand the flower girls, handing out rose- and lemon-colored flowers,   
		Each attractive in her rose-and-blue striped dress (Oh! such shades of rose and blue),
		And nearby is the little white booth where women in green serve you green and yellow fruit.
		The couples are parading; everyone is in a holiday mood.
		First, leading the parade, is a dapper fellow
		Clothed in deep blue. On his head sits a white hat
		And he wears a mustache, which has been trimmed for the occasion.
		His dear one, his wife, is young and pretty; her shawl is rose, pink, and white.   
		Her slippers are patent leather, in the American fashion,
		And she carries a fan, for she is modest, and does not want the crowd to see her face too often.
		But everybody is so busy with his wife or loved one
		I doubt they would notice the mustachioed man’s wife.
		Here come the boys! They are skipping and throwing little things on the sidewalk
		Which is made of gray tile. One of them, a little older, has a toothpick in his teeth.
		He is silenter than the rest, and affects not to notice the pretty young girls in white.
		But his friends notice them, and shout their jeers at the laughing girls.   
		Yet soon all this will cease, with the deepening of their years,
		And love bring each to the parade grounds for another reason.
		But I have lost sight of the young fellow with the toothpick.
		Wait--there he is--on the other side of the bandstand,
		Secluded from his friends, in earnest talk with a young girl
		Of fourteen or fifteen. I try to hear what they are saying
		But it seems they are just mumbling something--shy words of love, probably.
		She is slightly taller than he, and looks quietly down into his sincere eyes.   
		She is wearing white. The breeze ruffles her long fine black hair against her olive cheek.
		Obviously she is in love. The boy, the young boy with the toothpick, he is in love too;
		His eyes show it. Turning from this couple,
		I see there is an intermission in the concert.
		The paraders are resting and sipping drinks through straws
		(The drinks are dispensed from a large glass crock by a lady in dark blue),   
		And the musicians mingle among them, in their creamy white uniforms, and talk
		About the weather, perhaps, or how their kids are doing at school.
		
		Let us take this opportunity to tiptoe into one of the side streets.   
		Here you may see one of those white houses with green trim   
		That are so popular here. Look--I told you!
		It is cool and dim inside, but the patio is sunny.
		An old woman in gray sits there, fanning herself with a palm leaf fan.   
		She welcomes us to her patio, and offers us a cooling drink.   
		“My son is in Mexico City,” she says. “He would welcome you too   
		If he were here. But his job is with a bank there.
		Look, here is a photograph of him.”
		And a dark-skinned lad with pearly teeth grins out at us from the worn leather frame.
		We thank her for her hospitality, for it is getting late
		And we must catch a view of the city, before we leave, from a good high place.
		That church tower will do--the faded pink one, there against the fierce blue of the sky. Slowly we enter.
		The caretaker, an old man dressed in brown and gray, asks us how long we have been in the city, and how we like it here.
		His daughter is scrubbing the steps--she nods to us as we pass into the tower.
		Soon we have reached the top, and the whole network of the city extends before us.
		There is the rich quarter, with its houses of pink and white, and its crumbling, leafy terraces.
		There is the poorer quarter, its homes a deep blue.
		There is the market, where men are selling hats and swatting flies
		And there is the public library, painted several shades of pale green and beige.
		Look! There is the square we just came from, with the promenaders.   
		There are fewer of them, now that the heat of the day has increased,   
		But the young boy and girl still lurk in the shadows of the bandstand.   
		And there is the home of the little old lady--
		She is still sitting in the patio, fanning herself.
		How limited, but how complete withal, has been our experience of Guadalajara!
		We have seen young love, married love, and the love of an aged mother for her son.
		We have heard the music, tasted the drinks, and looked at colored houses.   
		What more is there to do, except stay? And that we cannot do.
		And as a last breeze freshens the top of the weathered old tower, I turn my
		gaze
		Back to the instruction manual which has made me dream of Guadalajara.


	37. THE MAUVE NOTEBOOK

		 “Say it enough times and it’s August.”
		 _--Geoffrey G. O’Brien, “Three Years”_
		
		On a set you need bush rebels,
		that numbing little chair while passing.
		If we knock ‘em out
		seven precincts are going to show up.
		It looks like you don’t need oil.
		I think it’ll be fine.
		Did she think that might be good,
		or for the man who listens to it,
		nothing to be done or thought,
		(section pending)?
		
		Or for the man who listens to it,
		an abrupt yawn, history or the other.
		Home economics.  Dr. Singalong
		can’t find his way back.
		I don’t know about that, but
		at her lamps do you still see
		the awkward ceremony, too serious?
		Leave it that way, imperfect start beyond
		where I was going.
		Prison outside the perpetual sonata,
		the only anxiety,
		since you wonder what they don’t do,
		from your red zero heart page
		waiting to touch your face.
		
		Although they know about it and
		it literally doesn’t exist,
		no, stay up and go to sleep,
		unless it falls on the right side of the brain
		positioned for so many forgeries,
		moon nugget...
		
		I don’t cut ‘em any slack.
		Assault on a clean front,
		that’s a lot to be turning into.
		
		These residents, they start throwing ‘em early.
		Continue to open your door to mud!                                                          
		
		Take the noon balloon to Rangoon,
		gutta percha academy,
		to the place of ice cream,
		
		because, really, what difference does it make?
		When it was time you went home.
		Tears and flowers,
		
		see how dirty your hands are.
		We had a lovely dime.
		Soon it will be seven I ask you.


	38. THE NEW HIGHER

		You meant more than life to me. I lived through
		you not knowing, not knowing I was living.
		I learned that you called for me. I came to where
		you were living, up a stair. There was no one there.
		No one to appreciate me. The legality of it
		upset a chair. Many times to celebrate
		we were called together and where
		we had been there was nothing there,
		nothing that is anywhere. We passed obliquely,
		leaving no stare. When the sun was done muttering,
		in an optimistic way, it was time to leave that there.
		
		Blithely passing in and out of where, blushing shyly
		at the tag on the overcoat near the window where
		the outside crept away, I put aside the there and now.
		Now it was time to stumble anew,
		blacking out when time came in the window.
		There was not much of it left.
		I laughed and put my hands shyly
		across your eyes. Can you see now?
		Yes I can see I am only in the where
		where the blossoming stream takes off, under your window.
		Go presently you said. Go from my window.
		I am in love with your window I cannot undermine
		it, I said.


	39. THE ONE THING THAT CAN SAVE AMERICA

		Is anything central?
		Orchards flung out on the land,
		Urban forests, rustic plantations, knee-high hills?
		Are place names central?
		Elm Grove, Adcock Corner, Story Book Farm?
		As they concur with a rush at eye level
		Beating themselves into eyes which have had enough
		Thank you, no more thank you.
		And they come on like scenery mingled with darkness
		The damp plains, overgrown suburbs,
		Places of known civic pride, of civil obscurity.
		
		These are connected to my version of America
		But the juice is elsewhere.
		This morning as I walked out of your room
		After breakfast crosshatched with
		Backward and forward glances, backward into light,
		Forward into unfamiliar light,
		Was it our doing, and was it
		The material, the lumber of life, or of lives
		We were measuring, counting?
		A mood soon to be forgotten
		In crossed girders of light, cool downtown shadow
		In this morning that has seized us again?
		
		I know that I braid too much on my own
		Snapped-off perceptions of things as they come to me.
		They are private and always will be.
		Where then are the private turns of event
		Destined to bloom later like golden chimes
		Released over a city from a highest tower?
		The quirky things that happen to me, and I tell you,
		And you know instantly what I mean?
		What remote orchard reached by winding roads
		Hides them? Where are these roots?
		
		It is the lumps and trials
		That tell us whether we shall be known
		And whether our fate can be exemplary, like a star.
		All the rest is waiting
		For a letter that never arrives,
		Day after day, the exasperation
		Until finally you have ripped it open not knowing what it is,
		The two envelope halves lying on a plate.
		The message was wise, and seemingly
		Dictated a long time ago.
		Its truth is timeless, but its time has still
		Not arrived, telling of danger, and the mostly limited
		Steps that can be taken against danger
		Now and in the future, in cool yards,
		In quiet small houses in the country,
		Our country, in fenced areas, in cool shady streets.


	40. THE PAINTER

		Sitting between the sea and the buildings
		He enjoyed painting the sea’s portrait.
		But just as children imagine a prayer
		Is merely silence, he expected his subject
		To rush up the sand, and, seizing a brush,
		Plaster its own portrait on the canvas.
		
		So there was never any paint on his canvas
		Until the people who lived in the buildings
		Put him to work: “Try using the brush
		As a means to an end. Select, for a portrait,
		Something less angry and large, and more subject
		To a painter’s moods, or, perhaps, to a prayer.”
		
		How could he explain to them his prayer
		That nature, not art, might usurp the canvas?
		He chose his wife for a new subject,
		Making her vast, like ruined buildings,
		As if, forgetting itself, the portrait
		Had expressed itself without a brush.
		
		Slightly encouraged, he dipped his brush
		In the sea, murmuring a heartfelt prayer:
		“My soul, when I paint this next portrait
		Let it be you who wrecks the canvas.”
		The news spread like wildfire through the buildings:
		He had gone back to the sea for his subject.
		
		Imagine a painter crucified by his subject!
		Too exhausted even to lift his brush,
		He provoked some artists leaning from the buildings
		To malicious mirth: “We haven’t a prayer
		Now, of putting ourselves on canvas,
		Or getting the sea to sit for a portrait!”
		
		Others declared it a self-portrait.
		Finally all indications of a subject
		Began to fade, leaving the canvas
		Perfectly white. He put down the brush.
		At once a howl, that was also a prayer,
		Arose from the overcrowded buildings.
		
		They tossed him, the portrait, from the tallest of the buildings;
		And the sea devoured the canvas and the brush
		As though his subject had decided to remain a prayer.


	41. THE SHORT ANSWER

		I am forced to sleepwalk much of the time.
		We hold on to these old ways, are troubled
		sometimes and then the geyser goes away,
		time gutted. In and of itself there is
		no great roar, force pitted against force that
		makes up in time what it loses in speed.
		The waterfalls, the canyon, a royal I-told-you-so
		comes back to greet us at the beginning.
		How was your trip? Oh I didn’t last
		you see, folded over like the margin
		of a dream of the thing-in-itself. Well, and
		what have we come to? A paper-thin past,
		just so, and ‘tis pity. We regurgitate
		old anthems and what has come to pass, and why
		dwell on these. Why make things more difficult
		than they already are? Because if it’s boring
		in a different way, that’ll be interesting too.
		That’s what I say.
		
		That rascal, he jumped over the fence.
		I’m wiping my pince-nez now. Did you ever hear from
		the one who said he’d be back once it was over,
		who eluded me even in my sleep? That was a particularly
		promising time, we thought. Now the sun’s out
		and it’s raining again. Just like a day from
		the compendium. I’ll vouch for you,
		and we can go on scrolling as though nothing had risen,
		the horizon forest looks back at us. The preacher
		shook his head, the evangelist balanced two spools
		at the end of his little makeshift rope. We’d gone too far.
		We’d have to come back in a day or so.


	42. THE SUN

		The watermark said it was alone with us,
		“To do your keeping and comparing.
		But there were
		 bushes
		On the horizon shaped like hearts, spades, clubs and
		 diamonds.
		They were considered
		To belong to a second class, to which lower standards
		Were applied, as called for in the original rule,
		And these standards were now bent inward to become
		The invariable law, to which exceptions
		Were sometimes apposite, and they liked the new clime,
		
		So bracing here on the indigo slopes
		To which families of fathers and daughters have come
		Summer after summer, decade after decade, and it never
		 stops
		Being refreshing. It is a sign of maturity,
		This stationary innocence, and a proof
		Of our slow, millennial growth, ring after ring
		Just inside the bark. Yet we get along well without it.
		Water boils more slowly, and then faster
		At these altitudes, and slowness need never be something
		To criticize, for it has an investment in its own weight,
		Rare bird. We know we can never be anything but
		 parallel
		And proximate in our relations, but we are linked up
		Anyway in the sun’s equation, the house from which
		It steals forth on occasion, pretending, isn’t
		It funny, to pass unnoticed, until the deeply shelving
		Darker pastures project their own reflection
		And are caught in history,
		
		Transfixed, like caves against the sky
		Or rotting spars sketched in phosphorus, for what we
		did.


	43. THE TENNIS COURT OATH

		What had you been thinking about
		the face studiously bloodied
		heaven blotted region
		I go on loving you like water but
		there is a terrible breath in the way all of this
		You were not elected president, yet won the race
		All the way through fog and drizzle
		When you read it was sincere the coasts
		stammered with unintentional villages the
		horse strains fatigued I guess . . . the calls . . .
		I worry
		
		the water beetle head
		why of course reflecting all
		then you redid you were breathing
		I thought going down to mail this
		of the kettle you jabbered as easily in the yard
		you come through but
		are incomparable the lovely tent
		mystery you don’t want surrounded the real
		you dance
		in the spring there was clouds
		
		The mulatress approached in the hall--the
		lettering easily visible along the edge of the _Times_
		in a moment the bell would ring but there was time
		for the carnation laughed here are a couple of “other”
		
		to one in yon house
		The doctor and Philip had come over the road
		Turning in toward the corner of the wall his hat on
		reading it carelessly as if to tell you your fears were justified
		the blood shifted you know those walls
		wind off the earth had made him shrink
		undeniably an oboe now the young
		were there there was candy
		to decide the sharp edge of the garment
		like a particular cry not intervening called the dog “he’s coming! he’s coming” with an emotion felt it sink into peace
		there was no turning back but the end was in sight
		he chose this moment to ask her in detail about her family and the others
		The person.   pleaded--“have more of these
		not stripes on the tunic--or the porch chairs
		will teach you about men--what it means”
		to be one in a million pink stripe
		and now could go away the three approached the doghouse
		the reef.   Your daughter’s
		dream of my son understand prejudice
		darkness in the hole
		the patient finished
		They could all go home now the hole was dark
		lilacs blowing across his face glad he brought you


	44. THESE LACUSTRINE CITIES

		These lacustrine cities grew out of loathing
		Into something forgetful, although angry with history.
		They are the product of an idea: that man is horrible, for instance,   
		Though this is only one example.
		
		They emerged until a tower
		Controlled the sky, and with artifice dipped back
		Into the past for swans and tapering branches,
		Burning, until all that hate was transformed into useless love.
		
		Then you are left with an idea of yourself
		And the feeling of ascending emptiness of the afternoon   
		Which must be charged to the embarrassment of others   
		Who fly by you like beacons.
		
		The night is a sentinel.
		Much of your time has been occupied by creative games
		Until now, but we have all-inclusive plans for you.
		We had thought, for instance, of sending you to the middle of the desert,
		
		To a violent sea, or of having the closeness of the others be air   
		To you, pressing you back into a startled dream
		As sea-breezes greet a child’s face.
		But the past is already here, and you are nursing some private project.
		
		The worst is not over, yet I know
		You will be happy here. Because of the logic
		Of your situation, which is something no climate can outsmart.   
		Tender and insouciant by turns, you see
		
		You have built a mountain of something,
		Thoughtfully pouring all your energy into this single monument,   
		Whose wind is desire starching a petal,
		Whose disappointment broke into a rainbow of tears.


	45. THIS ROOM

		The room I entered was a dream of this room.
		Surely all those feet on the sofa were mine.
		The oval portrait
		of a dog was me at an early age.
		Something shimmers, something is hushed up.
		
		We had macaroni for lunch every day
		except Sunday, when a small quail was induced
		to be served to us. Why do I tell you these things?
		You are not even here.


	46. TOWER OF DARKNESS

		I cannot remain outside any longer
		in the cold and pervasive rain.
		I grab my crotch wishing for a ball of light
		in the shaggy interior other people have.
		I shall go away without fetching a grain
		from the earth, compact,
		with the climbing design
		we knew and hated so well, and when it was our turn
		to die we just gave up, mumbling some excuse.
		
		Do you often go to see them?
		They can’t have much cause
		to journey here, yet their footprints,
		foreclosed by snow . . .
		
		It was the barker whose patter started it
		well before we were awake, into the dawn
		that grizzles, now, a fright
		to be wished, to be read.
		unlike the old healing that will come again in time.


	47. TRAIN RISING OUT OF THE SEA

		It is written in the Book of Usable Minutes
		That all things have their center in their dying,
		That each is discrete and diaphanous and
		Has pointed its prow away from the sand for the next
		 trillion years.
		
		After that, we may be friends,
		Recognizing in each other the precedents that make us
		 truly social.
		Do you hear the wind? It’s not dying,
		It’s singing, weaving a song about the president saluting
		 the trust.
		
		The past in each of us, until so much memory becomes
		 an institution,
		Through sheer weight, the persistence of it, no,
		Not the persistence, that makes it seem a deliberate act
		Of duration, much too deliberate for this ingenuous being
		
		Like an era that refuses to come to an end or be born
		 again.
		We need more night for the sky, more blue for the
		 daylight
		That inundates our remarks before we can make them
		Taking away a little bit of us each time
		
		To be deposited elsewhere
		In the place of our involvement
		With the core that brought excessive flowering this year
		Of enormous sunsets and big breezes
		
		That left you feeling too simple
		Like an island just off the shore, one of many, that no one
		Notices, though it has a certain function, though an
		 abstract one
		Built to prevent you from being towed to shore.


	48. VETIVER

		Ages passed slowly, like a load of hay,
		As the flowers recited their lines
		And pike stirred at the bottom of the pond.
		The pen was cool to the touch.
		The staircase swept upward
		Through fragmented garlands, keeping the melancholy
		Already distilled in letters of the alphabet.
		
		It would be time for winter now, its spun-sugar
		Palaces and also lines of care
		At the mouth, pink smudges on the forehead and cheeks,
		The color once known as “ashes of roses.”
		How many snakes and lizards shed their skins
		For time to be passing on like this,
		Sinking deeper in the sand as it wound toward
		The conclusion. It had all been working so well and now,
		Well, it just kind of came apart in the hand
		As a change is voiced, sharp
		As a fishhook in the throat, and decorative tears flowed
		Past us into a basin called infinity.
		
		There was no charge for anything, the gates
		Had been left open intentionally.
		Don’t follow, you can have whatever it is.
		And in some room someone examines his youth,
		Finds it dry and hollow, porous to the touch.
		O keep me with you, unless the outdoors
		Embraces both of us, unites us, unless
		The birdcatchers put away their twigs,
		The fishermen haul in their sleek empty nets
		And others become part of the immense crowd
		Around this bonfire, a situation
		That has come to mean us to us, and the crying
		In the leaves is saved, the last silver drops.


*** Miguel Ángel Asturias (1899 - 1974)

	1. CAUDAL

		To give is to love,
		To give prodigiously:
		For every drop of water
		To return a torrent.
		
		We were made that way,
		Made to scatter
		Seeds in the furrow
		And stars in the ocean.
		
		Woe to him, Lord,
		who doesn’t exhaust his supply,
		And, on returning, tells you:
		“Like an empty satchel
		Is my heart.”


*** W. H. Auden (1907 - 1973)

	1. A NEW YEAR GREETING

		On this day tradition allots
		   to taking stock of our lives,
		my greetings to all of you, Yeasts,
		   Bacteria, Viruses,
		Aerobics and Anaerobics:
		   A Very Happy New Year
		to all for whom my ectoderm
		   is as Middle-Earth to me.
		
		For creatures your size I offer
		   a free choice of habitat,
		so settle yourselves in the zone
		   that suits you best, in the pools
		of my pores or the tropical
		   forests of arm-pit and crotch,
		in the deserts of my fore-arms,
		   or the cool woods of my scalp.
		
		Build colonies: I will supply
		   adequate warmth and moisture,
		the sebum and lipids you need,
		   on condition you never
		do me annoy with your presence,
		   but behave as good guests should,
		not rioting into acne
		   or athlete’s-foot or a boil.
		
		Does my inner weather affect
		   the surfaces where you live?
		Do unpredictable changes
		   record my rocketing plunge
		from fairs when the mind is in tift
		   and relevant thoughts occur
		to fouls when nothing will happen
		   and no one calls and it rains.
		
		I should like to think that I make
		   a not impossible world,
		but an Eden it cannot be:
		   my games, my purposive acts,
		may turn to catastrophes there.
		   If you were religious folk,
		how would your dramas justify
		   unmerited suffering?
		
		By what myths would your priests account
		   for the hurricanes that come
		twice every twenty-four hours,
		   each time I dress or undress,
		when, clinging to keratin rafts,
		   whole cities are swept away
		to perish in space, or the Flood
		   that scalds to death when I bathe?
		
		Then, sooner or later, will dawn
		   a Day of Apocalypse,
		when my mantle suddenly turns
		   too cold, too rancid, for you,
		appetising to predators
		   of a fiercer sort, and I
		am stripped of excuse and nimbus,
		   a Past, subject to Judgement.


	2. A WALK AFTER DARK

		A cloudless night like this 
		Can set the spirit soaring: 
		After a tiring day 
		The clockwork spectacle is 
		Impressive in a slightly boring 
		Eighteenth-century way. 
		
		It soothed adolescence a lot 
		To meet so shameless a stare; 
		The things I did could not 
		Be so shocking as they said 
		If that would still be there 
		After the shocked were dead 
		
		Now, unready to die 
		Bur already at the stage 
		When one starts to resent the young, 
		I am glad those points in the sky 
		May also be counted among 
		The creatures of middle-age. 
		
		It’s cosier thinking of night 
		As more an Old People’s Home 
		Than a shed for a faultless machine, 
		That the red pre-Cambrian light 
		Is gone like Imperial Rome 
		Or myself at seventeen. 
		
		Yet however much we may like 
		The stoic manner in which 
		The classical authors wrote, 
		Only the young and rich 
		Have the nerve or the figure to strike 
		The lacrimae rerum note. 
		
		For the present stalks abroad 
		Like the past and its wronged again 
		Whimper and are ignored, 
		And the truth cannot be hid; 
		Somebody chose their pain, 
		What needn’t have happened did. 
		
		Occurring this very night 
		By no established rule, 
		Some event may already have hurled 
		Its first little No at the right 
		Of the laws we accept to school 
		Our post-diluvian world: 
		
		But the stars burn on overhead, 
		Unconscious of final ends, 
		As I walk home to bed, 
		Asking what judgment waits 
		My person, all my friends, 
		And these United States.


	3. AFTER READING A CHILD’S GUIDE TO MODERN PHYSICS

		If all a top physicist knows
		About the Truth be true,
		Then, for all the so-and-so’s,
		Futility and grime,
		Our common world contains,
		We have a better time
		Than the Greater Nebulae do,
		Or the atoms in our brains. 
		
		Marriage is rarely bliss
		But, surely it would be worse
		As particles to pelt
		At thousands of miles per sec
		About a universe
		Wherein a lover’s kiss
		Would either not be felt
		Or break the loved one’s neck. 
		
		Though the face at which I stare
		While shaving it be cruel
		For, year after year, it repels
		An ageing suitor, it has,
		Thank God, sufficient mass
		To be altogether there,
		Not an indeterminate gruel
		Which is partly somewhere else. 
		
		Our eyes prefer to suppose
		That a habitable place
		Has a geocentric view,
		That architects enclose
		A quiet Euclidian space:
		Exploded myths - but who
		Could feel at home astraddle
		An ever expanding saddle? 
		
		This passion of our kind
		For the process of finding out
		Is a fact one can hardly doubt,
		But I would rejoice in it more
		If I knew more clearly what
		We wanted the knowledge for,
		Felt certain still that the mind
		Is free to know or not. 
		
		It has chosen once, it seems,
		And whether our concern
		For magnitude’s extremes
		Really become a creature
		Who comes in a median size,
		Or politicizing Nature
		Be altogether wise,
		Is something we shall learn.


	4. ANOTHER TIME

		For us like any other fugitive,
		Like the numberless flowers that cannot number
		And all the beasts that need not remember,
		It is today in which we live.
		
		So many try to say Not Now,
		So many have forgotten how
		To say I Am, and would be
		Lost, if they could, in history.
		
		Bowing, for instance, with such old-world grace
		To a proper flag in a proper place,
		Muttering like ancients as they stump upstairs
		Of Mine and His or Ours and Theirs.
		
		Just as if time were what they used to will
		When it was gifted with possession still,
		Just as if they were wrong
		In no more wishing to belong.
		
		No wonder then so many die of grief,
		So many are so lonely as they die;
		No one has yet believed or liked a lie,
		Another time has other lives to live.


	5. ARE YOU THERE?

		Each lover has some theory of his own
		About the difference between the ache
		Of being with his love, and being alone:
		
		Why what, when dreaming, is dear flesh and bone
		That really stirs the senses, when awake,
		Appears a simulacrum of his own.
		
		Narcissus disbelieves in the unknown;
		He cannot join his image in the lake
		So long as he assumes he is alone.
		
		The child, the waterfall, the fire, the stone,
		Are always up to mischief, though, and take
		The universe for granted as their own.
		
		The elderly, like Proust, are always prone
		To think of love as a subjective fake;
		The more they love, the more they feel alone.
		
		Whatever view we hold, it must be shown
		Why every lover has a wish to make
		Some kind of otherness his own:
		Perhaps, in fact, we never are alone.


	6. AT LAST THE SECRET IS OUT

		At last the secret is out,
		as it always must come in the end,
		the delicious story is ripe to tell
		to tell to the intimate friend;
		over the tea-cups and into the square
		the tongues has its desire;
		still waters run deep, my dear,
		there’s never smoke without fire.
		
		Behind the corpse in the reservoir,
		behind the ghost on the links,
		behind the lady who dances
		and the man who madly drinks,
		under the look of fatigue
		the attack of migraine and the sigh
		there is always another story,
		there is more than meets the eye.
		
		For the clear voice suddenly singing,
		high up in the convent wall,
		the scent of the elder bushes,
		the sporting prints in the hall,
		the croquet matches in summer,
		the handshake, the cough, the kiss,
		there is always a wicked secret,
		a private reason for this.


	7. COCAINE LIL AND MORPHINE SUE

		Did you ever hear about Cocaine Lil?
		She lived in Cocaine town on Cocaine hill,
		She had a cocaine dog and a cocaine cat,
		They fought all night with a cocaine rat.
		
		She had cocaine hair on her cocaine head.
		She had a cocaine dress that was poppy red:
		She wore a snowbird hat and sleigh-riding clothes,
		On her coat she wore a crimson, cocaine rose.
		
		Big gold chariots on the Milky Way,
		Snakes and elephants silver and gray.
		Oh the cocaine blues they make me sad,
		Oh the cocaine blues make me feel bad.
		
		Lil went to a snow party one cold night,
		And the way she sniffed was sure a fright.
		There was Hophead Mag with Dopey Slim,
		Kankakee Liz and Yen Shee Jim.
		
		There was Morphine Sue and the Poppy Face Kid,
		Climbed up snow ladders and down they skid;
		There was the Stepladder Kit, a good six feet,
		And the Sleigh-riding Sister who were hard to beat.
		
		Along in the morning about half past three
		They were all lit up like a Christmas tree;
		Lil got home and started for bed,
		Took another sniff and it knocked her dead.
		
		They laid her out in her cocaine clothes:
		She wore a snowbird hat with a crimson rose;
		On her headstone you’ll find this refrain:
		She died as she lived, sniffing cocaine


	8. FOR WHAT AS EASY

		For what as easy 
		For what thought small, 
		For what is well 
		Because between, 
		To you simply 
		From me I mean. 
		
		Who goes with who 
		The bedclothes say, 
		As I and you 
		Go kissed away, 
		The data given, 
		The senses even. 
		
		Fate is not late, 
		Nor the speech rewritten, 
		Nor one word forgotten, 
		Said at the start 
		About heart, 
		By heart, for heart.


	9. GIVE ME A DOCTOR

		Give me a doctor partridge-plump, 
		Short in the leg and broad in the rump, 
		An endomorph with gentle hands 
		Who’ll never make absurd demands 
		That I abandon all my vices 
		Nor pull a long face in a crisis, 
		But with a twinkle in his eye 
		Will tell me that I have to die.


	10. IF I COULD TELL YOU

		Time will say nothing but I told you so,
		Time only knows the price we have to pay;
		If I could tell you I would let you know.
		
		If we should weep when clowns put on their show,
		If we should stumble when musicians play,
		Time will say nothing but I told you so.
		
		There are no fortunes to be told, although,
		Because I love you more than I can say,
		If I could tell you I would let you know.
		
		The winds must come from somewhere when they blow,
		There must be reasons why the leaves decay;
		Time will say nothing but I told you so.
		
		Perhaps the roses really want to grow,
		The vision seriously intends to stay;
		If I could tell you I would let you know.
		
		Suppose all the lions get up and go,
		And all the brooks and soldiers run away;
		Will Time say nothing but I told you so?
		If I could tell you I would let you know.


	11. LADY WEEPING AT THE CROSSROADS

		Lady, weeping at the crossroads,
		Would you meet your love
		In the twilight with his greyhounds,
		And the hawk on his glove?
		
		Bribe the birds then on the branches,
		Bribe them to be dumb,
		Stare the hot sun out of heaven
		That the night may come.
		
		Starless are the nights of travel,
		Bleak the winter wind;
		Run with terror all before you
		And regret behind.
		
		Run until you hear the ocean’s
		Everlasting cry;
		Deep though it may be and bitter
		You must drink it dry,
		
		Wear out patience in the lowest
		Dungeons of the sea,
		Searching through the stranded shipwrecks
		For the golden key,
		
		Push on to the world’s end, pay the
		Dread guard with a kiss,
		Cross the rotten bridge that totters
		Over the abyss.
		
		There stands the deserted castle
		Ready to explore;
		Enter, climb the marble staircase,
		Open the locked door.
		
		Cross the silent ballroom,
		Doubt and danger past;
		Blow the cobwebs from the mirror
		See yourself at last.
		
		Put your hand behind the wainscot,
		You have done your part;
		Find the penknife there and plunge it
		Into your false heart.


	12. MIRANDA

		My dear one is mine as mirrors are lonely, 
		As the poor and sad are real to the good king, 
		And the high green hill sits always by the sea. 
		
		Up jumped the Black Man behind the elder tree, 
		Turned a somersault and ran away waving; 
		My Dear One is mine as mirrors are lonely. 
		
		The Witch gave a squawk; her venomous body 
		Melted into light as water leaves a spring, 
		And the high green hill sits always by the sea. 
		
		At his crossroads, too, the Ancient prayed for me, 
		Down his wasted cheeks tears of joy were running: 
		My dear one is mine as mirrors are lonely. 
		
		He kissed me awake, and no one was sorry; 
		The sun shone on sails, eyes, pebbles, anything, 
		And the high green hill sits always by the sea. 
		
		So to remember our changing garden, we 
		Are linked as children in a circle dancing: 
		My dear one is mine as mirrors are lonely, 
		And the high, green hill sits always by the sea.


	13. MUSÉE DES BEAUX ARTS

		About suffering they were never wrong,
		The old Masters: how well they understood
		Its human position: how it takes place
		While someone else is eating or opening a window or just walking dully along;
		How, when the aged are reverently, passionately waiting
		For the miraculous birth, there always must be
		Children who did not specially want it to happen, skating
		On a pond at the edge of the wood:
		They never forgot
		That even the dreadful martyrdom must run its course
		Anyhow in a corner, some untidy spot
		Where the dogs go on with their doggy life and the torturer’s horse
		Scratches its innocent behind on a tree.
		
		In Breughel’s Icarus, for instance: how everything turns away
		Quite leisurely from the disaster; the ploughman may
		Have heard the splash, the forsaken cry,
		But for him it was not an important failure; the sun shone
		As it had to on the white legs disappearing into the green
		Water, and the expensive delicate ship that must have seen
		Something amazing, a boy falling out of the sky,
		Had somewhere to get to and sailed calmly on.


	14. O WHAT IS THAT SOUND

		O what is that sound which so thrills the ear
		Down in the valley drumming, drumming?
		Only the scarlet soldiers, dear,
		The soldiers coming.
		
		O what is that light I see flashing so clear
		Over the distance brightly, brightly?
		Only the sun on their weapons, dear,
		As they step lightly.
		
		O what are they doing with all that gear,
		What are they doing this morning, morning?
		Only their usual manoeuvres, dear,
		Or perhaps a warning.
		
		O why have they left the road down there,
		Why are they suddenly wheeling, wheeling?
		Perhaps a change in their orders, dear,
		Why are you kneeling?
		
		O haven’t they stopped for the doctor’s care,
		Haven’t they reined their horses, horses?
		Why, they are none of them wounded, dear,
		None of these forces.
		
		O is it the parson they want, with white hair,
		Is it the parson, is it, is it?
		No, they are passing his gateway, dear,
		Without a visit.
		
		O it must be the farmer that lives so near.
		It must be the farmer so cunning, so cunning?
		They have passed the farmyard already, dear,
		And now they are running.
		
		O where are you going? Stay with me here!
		Were the vows you swore deceiving, deceiving?
		No, I promised to love you, dear,
		But I must be leaving.
		
		O it’s broken the lock and splintered the door,
		O it’s the gate where they’re turning, turning;
		Their boots are heavy on the floor
		And their eyes are burning.


	15. O WHERE ARE YOU GOING?

		“O where are you going?” said reader to rider,
		“That valley is fatal where furnaces burn,
		Yonder’s the midden whose odours will madden,
		That gap is the grave where the tall return.”
		
		“O do you imagine,” said fearer to farer,
		“That dusk will delay on your path to the pass,
		Your diligent looking discover the lacking,
		Your footsteps feel from granite to grass?”
		
		“O what was that bird,” said horror to hearer,
		“Did you see that shape in the twisted trees?
		Behind you swiftly the figure comes softly,
		The spot on your skin is a shocking disease.”
		
		“Out of this house”--said rider to reader,
		“Yours never will”--said farer to fearer
		“They’re looking for you”--said hearer to horror,
		As he left them there, as he left them there.


	16. OLD PEOPLE’S HOME

		All are limitory, but each has her own 
		nuance of damage.  The elite can dress and decent themselves, 
		   are ambulant with a single stick, adroit 
		to read a book all through, or play the slow movements of 
		   easy sonatas. (Yet, perhaps their very 
		carnal freedom is their spirit’s bane: intelligent 
		   of what has happened and why, they are obnoxious 
		to a glum beyond tears.)  Then come those on wheels, the average 
		   majority, who endure T.V. and, led by 
		lenient therapists, do community-singing, then 
		   the loners, muttering in Limbo, and last 
		the terminally incompetent, as improvident, 
		   unspeakable, impeccable as the plants 
		they parody. (Plants may sweat profusely but never 
		   sully themselves.)  One tie, though, unites them: all 
		appeared when the world, though much was awry there, was more 
		   spacious, more comely to look at, it’s Old Ones 
		with an audience and secular station.  Then a child, 
		   in dismay with Mamma, could refuge with Gran 
		to be revalued and told a story.  As of now, 
		   we all know what to expect, but their generation 
		is the first to fade like this, not at home but assigned 
		   to a numbered frequent ward, stowed out of conscience 
		as unpopular luggage. 
		                                      As I ride the subway 
		   to spend half-an-hour with one, I revisage 
		who she was in the pomp and sumpture of her hey-day, 
		   when week-end visits were a presumptive joy, 
		not a good work.  Am I cold to wish for a speedy 
		   painless dormition, pray, as I know she prays, 
		that God or Nature will abrupt her earthly function?


	17. REFUGEE BLUES

		Say this city has ten million souls,
		Some are living in mansions, some are living in holes:
		Yet there’s no place for us, my dear, yet there’s no place for us.
		
		Once we had a country and we thought it fair,
		Look in the atlas and you’ll find it there:
		We cannot go there now, my dear, we cannot go there now.
		
		In the village churchyard there grows an old yew,
		Every spring it blossoms anew:
		Old passports can’t do that, my dear, old passports can’t do that.
		
		The consul banged the table and said,
		“If you’ve got no passport you’re officially dead”:
		But we are still alive, my dear, but we are still alive.
		
		Went to a committee; they offered me a chair;
		Asked me politely to return next year:
		But where shall we go to-day, my dear, but where shall we go to-day?
		
		Came to a public meeting; the speaker got up and said;
		“If we let them in, they will steal our daily bread”:
		He was talking of you and me, my dear, he was talking of you and me.
		
		Thought I heard the thunder rumbling in the sky;
		It was Hitler over Europe, saying, “They must die”:
		O we were in his mind, my dear, O we were in his mind.
		
		Saw a poodle in a jacket fastened with a pin,
		Saw a door opened and a cat let in:
		But they weren’t German Jews, my dear, but they weren’t German Jews.
		
		Went down the harbour and stood upon the quay,
		Saw the fish swimming as if they were free:
		Only ten feet away, my dear, only ten feet away.
		
		Walked through a wood, saw the birds in the trees;
		They had no politicians and sang at their ease:
		They weren’t the human race, my dear, they weren’t the human race.
		
		Dreamed I saw a building with a thousand floors,
		A thousand windows and a thousand doors:
		Not one of them was ours, my dear, not one of them was ours.
		
		Stood on a great plain in the falling snow;
		Ten thousand soldiers marched to and fro:
		Looking for you and me, my dear, looking for you and me.


	18. STOP ALL THE CLOCKS

		Stop all the clocks, cut off the telephone, 
		Prevent the dog from barking with a juicy bone, 
		Silence the pianos and with muffled drum 
		Bring out the coffin, let the mourners come. 
		
		Let aeroplanes circle moaning overhead 
		Scribbling on the sky the message He Is Dead, 
		Put crepe bows round the white necks of the public doves, 
		Let the traffic policemen wear black cotton gloves. 
		
		He was my North, my South, my East and West, 
		My working week and my Sunday rest, 
		My noon, my midnight, my talk, my song; 
		I thought that love would last for ever: I was wrong. 
		
		The stars are not wanted now: put out every one; 
		Pack up the moon and dismantle the sun; 
		Pour away the ocean and sweep up the wood; 
		For nothing now can ever come to any good.


	19. THE FALL OF ROME

		The piers are pummelled by the waves;
		In a lonely field the rain
		Lashes an abandoned train;
		Outlaws fill the mountain caves.
		
		Fantastic grow the evening gowns;
		Agents of the Fisc pursue
		Absconding tax-defaulters through
		The sewers of provincial towns.
		
		Private rites of magic send
		The temple prostitutes to sleep;
		All the literati keep
		An imaginary friend.
		
		Cerebrotonic Cato may
		Extol the Ancient Disciplines,
		But the muscle-bound Marines
		Mutiny for food and pay.
		
		Caesar’s double-bed is warm
		As an unimportant clerk
		Writes I DO NOT LIKE MY WORK
		On a pink official form.
		
		Unendowed with wealth or pity,
		Little birds with scarlet legs,
		Sitting on their speckled eggs,
		Eye each flu-infected city.
		
		Altogether elsewhere, vast
		Herds of reindeer move across
		Miles and miles of golden moss,
		Silently and very fast.


	20. THE MORE LOVING ONE

		Looking up at the stars, I know quite well
		That, for all they care, I can go to hell,
		But on earth indifference is the least
		We have to dread from man or beast.
		
		How should we like it were stars to burn
		With a passion for us we could not return?
		If equal affection cannot be,
		Let the more loving one be me.
		
		Admirer as I think I am
		Of stars that do not give a damn,
		I cannot, now I see them, say
		I missed one terribly all day.
		
		Were all stars to disappear or die,
		I should learn to look at an empty sky
		And feel its total dark sublime,
		Though this might take me a little time.


	21. THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES

		   She looked over his shoulder
		      For vines and olive trees,
		   Marble well-governed cities
		      And ships upon untamed seas,
		   But there on the shining metal
		      His hands had put instead
		   An artificial wilderness
		      And a sky like lead.
		
		A plain without a feature, bare and brown,
		  No blade of grass, no sign of neighborhood,
		Nothing to eat and nowhere to sit down,
		  Yet, congregated on its blankness, stood
		  An unintelligible multitude,
		A million eyes, a million boots in line,
		Without expression, waiting for a sign.
		
		Out of the air a voice without a face
		  Proved by statistics that some cause was just
		In tones as dry and level as the place:
		  No one was cheered and nothing was discussed;
		  Column by column in a cloud of dust
		They marched away enduring a belief
		Whose logic brought them, somewhere else, to grief.
		
		   She looked over his shoulder
		      For ritual pieties,
		   White flower-garlanded heifers,
		      Libation and sacrifice,
		   But there on the shining metal
		      Where the altar should have been,
		   She saw by his flickering forge-light
		      Quite another scene.
		
		Barbed wire enclosed an arbitrary spot
		  Where bored officials lounged (one cracked a joke)
		And sentries sweated for the day was hot:
		  A crowd of ordinary decent folk
		  Watched from without and neither moved nor spoke
		As three pale figures were led forth and bound
		To three posts driven upright in the ground.
		
		The mass and majesty of this world, all
		  That carries weight and always weighs the same
		Lay in the hands of others; they were small
		  And could not hope for help and no help came:
		  What their foes like to do was done, their shame
		Was all the worst could wish; they lost their pride
		And died as men before their bodies died.
		
		   She looked over his shoulder
		      For athletes at their games,
		   Men and women in a dance
		      Moving their sweet limbs
		   Quick, quick, to music,
		      But there on the shining shield
		   His hands had set no dancing-floor
		      But a weed-choked field.
		
		A ragged urchin, aimless and alone,
		  Loitered about that vacancy; a bird
		Flew up to safety from his well-aimed stone:
		  That girls are raped, that two boys knife a third,
		  Were axioms to him, who’d never heard
		Of any world where promises were kept,
		Or one could weep because another wept.
		
		   The thin-lipped armorer,
		      Hephaestos, hobbled away,
		   Thetis of the shining breasts
		      Cried out in dismay
		   At what the god had wrought
		      To please her son, the strong
		   Iron-hearted man-slaying Achilles
		      Who would not live long.


	22. THE UNKNOWN CITIZEN

		He was found by the Bureau of Statistics to be
		One against whom there was no official complaint,
		And all the reports on his conduct agree
		That, in the modern sense of an old-fashioned word, he was a saint,
		For in everything he did he served the Greater Community.
		Except for the War till the day he retired
		He worked in a factory and never got fired,
		But satisfied his employers, Fudge Motors Inc.
		Yet he wasn’t a scab or odd in his views,
		For his Union reports that he paid his dues,
		(Our report on his Union shows it was sound)
		And our Social Psychology workers found
		That he was popular with his mates and liked a drink.
		The Press are convinced that he bought a paper every day
		And that his reactions to advertisements were normal in every way.
		Policies taken out in his name prove that he was fully insured,
		And his Health-card shows he was once in hospital but left it cured.
		Both Producers Research and High-Grade Living declare
		He was fully sensible to the advantages of the Instalment Plan
		And had everything necessary to the Modern Man,
		A phonograph, a radio, a car and a frigidaire.
		Our researchers into Public Opinion are content
		That he held the proper opinions for the time of year;
		When there was peace, he was for peace: when there was war, he went.
		He was married and added five children to the population,
		Which our Eugenist says was the right number for a parent of his generation.
		And our teachers report that he never interfered with their education.
		Was he free? Was he happy? The question is absurd:
		Had anything been wrong, we should certainly have heard.


	23. WE TOO HAD KNOWN GOLDEN HOURS

		We, too, had known golden hours 
		When body and soul were in tune, 
		Had danced with our true loves 
		By the light of a full moon, 
		And sat with the wise and good 
		As tongues grew witty and gay 
		Over some noble dish 
		Out of Escoffier; 
		Had felt the intrusive glory 
		Which tears reserve apart, 
		And would in the old grand manner 
		Have sung from a resonant heart. 
		But, pawed-at and gossiped-over 
		By the promiscuous crowd, 
		Concocted by editors 
		Into spells to befuddle the crowd, 
		All words like Peace and Love, 
		All sane affirmative speech, 
		Had been soiled, profaned, debased 
		To a horrid mechanical screech. 
		No civil style survived 
		That pandaemonioum 
		But the wry, the sotto-voce, 
		Ironic and monochrome: 
		And where should we find shelter 
		For joy or mere content 
		When little was left standing 
		
		But the suburb of dissent?


*** Teresa of Ávila (1515 - 1582)

	1. LAUGHTER CAME FROM EVERY BRICK

		Just these two words He spoke
		changed my life,
		“Enjoy Me.”
		What a burden I thought I was to carry--
		a crucifix, as did He.
		Love once said to me, “I know a song,
		would you like to hear it?”
		And laughter came from every brick in the street
		and from every pore
		in the sky.
		After a night of prayer, He
		changed my life when
		He sang,
		“Enjoy Me.”


	2. LET NOTHING DISTURB YOU

		Let nothing disturb you,
		Let nothing frighten you,
		All things pass away:
		God never changes.
		Patience obtains all things.
		He who has God
		Finds he lacks nothing;
		God alone suffices.


*** Maurice Baring (1874 - 1945)

	1. A JUNE NIGHT IN RUSSIA

		A concert. Hark to the prelude’s opening bar!
		Played by the sheep bells tinkling on the hill;
		Dogs bark and frogs are croaking near the mill,
		The watchman’s rattle beats the time afar.
		Like water bubbling in a magic jar,
		The nightingale begins a liquid trill,
		Another answers; and the world’s so still,
		You’d think that you could hear that falling star.
		
		I scarcely see for light the stars that swim
		Aloof in skies not dark but only dim.
		The women’s voices echo far away.
		And on the road two lovers sing a song:
		They sing the joy of love that lasts a day:
		The sorrow of love that lasts a whole life long.


	2. DIFFUGERE NIVES

		The snows have fled, the hail, the lashing rain,
		       Before the Spring.
		The grass is starred with buttercups again,
		       The blackbirds sing.
		
		Now spreads the month that feast of lovely things
		       We loved of old.
		Once more the swallow glides with darkling wings
		       Against the gold.
		
		Now the brown bees about the peach trees boom
		       Upon the walls;
		And far away beyond the orchard’s bloom
		       The cuckoo calls.
		
		The season holds a festival of light,
		       For you, for me,
		The shadows are abroad, there falls a blight
		       On each green tree.
		
		And every leaf unfolding, every flower
		       Brings bitter meed;
		Beauty of the morning and the evening hour
		       Quickens our need.
		
		All is reborn, but never any Spring
		       Can bring back this;
		Nor any fullness of midsummer bring
		       The voice we miss.
		
		The smiling eyes shall smile on us no more;
		       The laughter clear,
		Too far away on the forbidden shore,
		       We shall not hear.
		
		Bereft of these until the day we die,
		       We both must dwell;
		Alone, alone, and haunted by the cry:
		       “Hail and farewell!”
		
		Yet when the scythe of Death shall near us hiss
		       Through the cold air,
		Then on the shuddering marge of the abyss
		       They will be there.
		
		They will be there to lift us from sheer space
		       And empty night;
		And we shall turn and see them face to face
		       In the new light.
		
		So shall we pay the unabated price
		       Of their release,
		And found on our consenting sacrifice
		       Their lasting peace.
		
		The hopes that fall like leaves before the wind,
		       The baffling waste,
		And every earthly joy that leaves behind
		       A mortal taste.
		
		The uncompleted end of all things dear,
		       The clanging door
		Of Death, forever loud with the last fear,
		       Haunt them no more.
		
		Without them the awakening world is dark
		       With dust and mire;
		Yet as they went they flung to us a spark,
		       A thread of fire.
		
		To guide us while beneath the sombre skies
		       Faltering we tread,
		Until for us like morning stars shall rise
		       The deathless dead.


	3. DOSTOYEVSKY

		You healed the sore, you made the fearful brave,
		They bless you for your lasting legacy;
		The balm, the tears, the fragrant charity
		You sought and treasured in your living grave.
		The gifts you humbly took you greatly gave,
		For solace of the soul in agony,
		When through the bars the brutal passions pry,
		And mock the bonds of the celestial slave.
		
		You wandered in the uttermost abyss;
		And there, amidst the ashes and the dust,
		You spoke no word of anger or of pride;
		You found the prints of steps divine to kiss;
		You looked right upwards to the stars, you cried:
		“_Hosanna to the Lord, for He is just._”


	4. GREECE

		The Spring had scattered poppies on the land,
		The Spring was saying her secret to the breeze;
		In the translucent shallows of green seas,
		A fisherman, a trident in his hand,
		Was casting shining fishes to the sand,
		And wading in the water to his knees;
		And still I hear the crickets and the bees,
		The hidden hoofs, the ringing saraband.
		
		I see the temples above the breaking foam,
		The pillars pink as dawn in the silver dust;
		The Parthenon at sunset large and dim,
		Smouldering against the purple mountain’s crust;
		And far away on the ocean’s blazing rim,
		The phantom ship that brought Ulysses home.


	5. SEVILLE

		The orange blossoms in the Alcazar,
		Where roses and syringas are in flower;
		The blinding glory of the morning hour;
		The eyes that gleam behind a twisted bar;
		The women on the balconies,--a smile;
		The barrel-organs, and the blazing heat;
		The awning hanging high across the street;
		A dark mantilla in a sombre aisle.
		
		A fountain tinkling in a shady court;
		The gold arena of the bull-ring’s feast;
		The coloured crowd acclaiming perilous sport;
		The sudden silence when they hold their breath,
		While the _torero_ gently plays with death,
		And flicks the horns of the tremendous beast.


	6. VITA NUOVA

		I watched you in the distance tall and pale,
		Like a swift swallow in a pearly sky;
		Your eyelids drooped like petals wearily,
		Your face was like a lily of the vale.
		You had the softness of all Summer days,
		The silver radiance of the twilight hour,
		The mystery of bluebell-haunted ways,
		The passion of the white syringa’s flower.
		
		I watched you, and I knew that I had found
		The long-delaying, long-expected Spring;
		I knew my heart had found a tune to sing;
		That strength to soar was in my spirit’s wing;
		That life was full of a triumphant sound,
		That death could only be a little thing.


	7. YOU WERE BLESSED

		I saw you by the Summer candlelight:--
		You put to shame the sparkle of the gems,
		The lights, the flashing of the diadems,
		The moon and all the stars of Summer night.
		I saw you in the radiant morning hour:--
		You put to shame the white rose and the red;
		Your chiselled lips, your little lovely head,
		Were fairer than the petals of a flower.
		
		And on the shaven surface of the lawn,
		You moved like music, and you smiled like dawn,--
		The leaves, the flowers, the dragon-flies, the dew,
		Beside you seemed the stuff of coarser clay;
		And all the glory of the Summer day
		A background for the wonder that was you.


*** Charles Baudelaire (1821 - 1867)

	1. ALBATROSS

		Often, to amuse themselves, sailors
		snare that great seabird, the albatross,
		that flies with these indolent companions as their ship
		glides over the depths of boredom and despair.
		
		Once they have set their captive on the deck,
		the king of the sky, awkward and in shame,
		piteously drags along his great white wings,
		like idle oars bouncing useless on the foam.
		
		The winged voyager looks foolish now and weak--
		yesterday he was beautiful; today, ugly and ridiculous.
		One tries to force a burning pipe into his beak.
		Another mimes the limp of one that used to fly.
		
		The Poet resembles this prince from the clouds:
		Each hangs in the tempest and laughs at the archer,
		and finds his exile in a circle of hooting humans
		where his wide wings are impediments.


	2. AUTUMN

		Soon we will plunge ourselves into cold shadows, 
		And all of summer’s stunning afternoons will be gone. 
		I already hear the dead thuds of logs below 
		Falling on the cobblestones and the lawn. 
		
		All of winter will return to me 
		derision, Hate, shuddering, horror, drudgery and vice, 
		And exiled, like the sun, to a polar prison, 
		My soul will harden into a block of red ice. 
		
		I shiver as I listen to each log crash and slam 
		The echoes are as dull as executioners’ drums. 
		My mind is like a tower that slowly succumbs 
		To the blows of a relentless battering ram. 
		
		It seems to me, swaying to these shocks, that someone 
		Is nailing down a coffin in a hurry somewhere. 
		For whom? It was summer yesterday; now it’s autumn. 
		Echoes of departure keep resounding in the air.


	3. I LOVE THE NAKED AGES LONG AGO

		I love the naked ages long ago 
		When statues were gilded by Apollo, 
		When men and women of agility 
		Could play without lies and anxiety, 
		And the sky lovingly caressed their spines, 
		As it exercised its noble machine. 
		Fertile Cybele, mother of nature, then, 
		Would not place on her daughters a burden, 
		But, she-wolf sharing her heart with the people, 
		Would feed creation from her brown nipples. 
		Men, elegant and strong, would have the right 
		To be proud to have beauty named their king; 
		Virgin fruit free of blemish and cracking, 
		Whose flesh smooth and firm would summon a bite! 
		The Poet today, when he would convey 
		This native grandeur, would not be swept away 
		By man free and woman natural, 
		But would feel darkness envelop his soul 
		Before this black tableau full of loathing. 
		O malformed monsters crying for clothing! 
		O ludicrous heads! Torsos needing disguise! 
		O poor writhing bodies of every wrong size, 
		Children that the god of the Useful swaths 
		In the language of bronze and brass! 
		And women, alas! You shadow your heredity, 
		You gnaw nourishment from debauchery, 
		A virgin holds maternal lechery 
		And all the horrors of fecundity! 
		
		We have, it is true, corrupt nations, 
		Beauty unknown to the radiant ancients: 
		Faces that gnaw through the heart’s cankers, 
		And talk with the cool beauty of languor; 
		But these inventions of our backward muses 
		Are never hindered in their morbid uses 
		Of the old for profound homage to youth, 
		--To the young saint, the sweet air, the simple truth, 
		To the eye as limpid as the water current, 
		To spread out over all, insouciant 
		Like the blue sky, the birds and the flowers, 
		Its perfumes, its songs and its sweet fervors.


	4. MEDITATION

		Wise up, Sorrow. Calm down.
		You always lay claim to twilight. Well, here it is, brother,
		It descends. Obscurity settles over the town,
		bringing peace to one, worry to another.
		
		The restless crowd, whipped on by pleasure--
		our dogged torturer--carry their hearts’ raw
		remorse with them as they serve their vapid leisure,
		while you, my Sorrow, drop by here, take my hand, and draw
		
		me apart from them. We watch the dying years
		in faded gowns lean out from heaven’s balconies, as Regret rears,
		smiling, out of the deep dark where the dead ones march.
		
		Dragging its long train--now a shroud--from its early light
		in the East, the sun goes to sleep under an arch.
		Listen, Sorrow, beloved, to the soft approach of Night.


	5. WHEN A HEAVY LID OF LOW SKY

		When a heavy lid of low sky
		covers a soul moaning with ennui and fright,
		and the whole horizon is rounded by
		a black day pouring down, sadder than any night;
		
		When the earth is turned to a muggy dungeon
		where Hope is the shadow of a bat, feeling
		with feeble, flapping wings along the grunge on
		walls and bumping its head against a putrid ceiling;
		
		When the crawling spiders of scattershot rains
		drop cold bars that imprison us,
		water trickles along the channels in our brains,
		and the people around us feel poisonous--
		
		the bells speak out suddenly with fury
		and lance the sky with dreadful howls,
		and frightened strays and exiles, sorry
		and homeless, rage from deep within their bowels.
		
		Long hearses roll, slow, silent, hypnotic,
		through my soul. Hope, defeated, cries
		out its atrocious anguish--despotic.
		A black hood slides over my ferocious eyes.


*** Hilaire Belloc (1870 - 1953)

	1. BECAUSE MY FALTERING FEET

		Because my faltering feet may fail to dare
		The first descendant of the steps of Hell
		Give me the Word in time that triumphs there.
		I too must pass into the misty hollow
		Where all our living laughter stops: and hark!
		The tiny stuffless voices of the dark
		Have called me, called me, till I needs must follow:
		Give me the Word and I’ll attempt it well.
		
		Say it’s the little winking of an eye
		Which in that issue is uncurtained quite;
		A little sleep that helps a moment by
		Between the thin dawn and the large daylight.
		Ah! tell me more than yet was hoped of men;
		Swear that’s true now, and I’ll believe it then.


	2. DECEMBER

		Hoar Time about the house betakes him slow,
		Seeking an entry for his weariness.
		And in that dreadful company distress
		And the sad night with silent footsteps go.
		On my poor fire the brands are scarce aglow,
		And in the woods without what memories press
		Where, waning in the trees from less to less,
		Mysterious hangs the hornéd moon and low.
		
		For now December, full of agéd care,
		Comes in upon the year and weakly grieves;
		Mumbling his lost desires and his despair; 
		And with mad trembling hand still interweaves,
		The dank sear flower-stalks tangled in his hair,
		While round about him whirl the rotten leaves.


	3. OCTOBER

		Look, how those steep woods on the mountain’s face
		Burn, burn against the sunset; now the cold
		Invades our very noon: the year’s grown old,
		Mornings are dark, and evenings come apace.
		The vines below have lost their purple grace,
		And in Forreze the white wrack backward rolled,
		Hangs to the hills tempestuous, fold on fold,
		And moaning gusts make desolate all the place.
		
		Mine host the month, at thy good hostelry,
		Tired limbs I’ll stretch and steaming beast I’ll tether;
		Pile on great logs with Gascon hand and free,
		And pour the Gascon stuff that laughs at weather;
		Swell your tough lungs, north wind, no whit care we,
		Singing old songs and drinking wine together.


	4. ON THE GIFT OF A BOOK TO A CHILD

		Child! do not throw this book about!   
		  Refrain from the unholy pleasure   
		Of cutting all the pictures out!
		  Preserve it as your chiefest treasure.
		
		Child, have you never heard it said   
		  That you are heir to all the ages?
		Why, then, your hands were never made
		  To tear these beautiful thick pages!
		
		Your little hands were made to take
		  The better things and leave the worse ones:   
		They also may be used to shake
		  The Massive Paws of Elder Persons.
		
		And when your prayers complete the day,   
		  Darling, your little tiny hands
		Were also made, I think, to pray   
		  For men that lose their fairylands.


	5. TARANTELLA

		Do you remember an Inn, 
		Miranda? 
		Do you remember an Inn? 
		And the tedding and the spreading 
		Of the straw for a bedding, 
		And the fleas that tease in the High Pyrenees, 
		And the wine that tasted of tar? 
		And the cheers and the jeers of the young muleteers 
		(Under the vine of the dark veranda)? 
		Do you remember an Inn, Miranda, 
		Do you remember an Inn? 
		And the cheers and the jeers of the young muleteers 
		Who hadn't got a penny, 
		And who weren't paying any, 
		And the hammer at the doors and the din? 
		And the hip! hop! hap! 
		Of the clap 
		Of the hands to the swirl and the twirl 
		Of the girl gone chancing, 
		Glancing, 
		Dancing, 
		Backing and advancing, 
		Snapping of the clapper to the spin 
		Out and in-- 
		And the ting, tong, tang of the guitar! 
		Do you remember an Inn, 
		Miranda? 
		Do you remember an Inn? 
		
		Never more; 
		Miranda, 
		Never more. 
		Only the high peaks hoar; 
		And Aragon a torrent at the door. 
		No sound 
		In the walls of the halls where falls 
		The tread 
		Of the feet of the dead to the ground, 
		No sound: 
		But the boom 
		Of the far waterfall like doom.


	6. THE BIRDS

		When Jesus Christ was four years old
		The angels brought Him toys of gold,
		Which no man ever had bought or sold.
		
		And yet with these He would not play.
		He made Him small fowl out of clay,
		And blessed them till they flew away:
		Tu creasti Domine
		
		Jesus Christ, Thou child so wise,
		Bless mine hands and fill mine eyes,
		And bring my soul to Paradise.


	7. THE DEATH AND LAST CONFESSION OF WANDERING PETER

		When Peter Wanderwide was young
		He wandered everywhere he would:
		All that he approved was sung,
		And most of what he saw was good.
		
		When Peter Wanderwide was thrown
		By Death himself beyond Auxerre,
		He chanted in heroic tone
		To priests and people gathered there:
		
		“If all that I have loved and seen
		Be with me on the Judgment Day,
		I shall be saved the crowd between
		From Satan and his foul array.
		
		“Almighty God will surely cry,
		‘St. Michael! Who is this that stands
		With Ireland in his dubious eye,
		And Perigord between his hands,
		
		“‘And on his arm the stirrup-thongs,
		And in his gait the narrow seas,
		And in his mouth Burgundian songs,
		But in his heart the Pyrenees?’
		
		“St. Michael then will answer right
		(And not without angelic shame),
		‘I seem to know his face by sight:
		I cannot recollect his name . . . ?’
		
		“St. Peter will befriend me then,
		Because my name is Peter too:
		‘I know him for the best of men
		That ever walloped barley brew.
		
		“‘And though I did not know him well
		And though his soul were clogged with sin,
		I hold the keys of Heaven and Hell.
		Be welcome, noble Peterkin.’
		
		“Then shall I spread my native wings
		And tread secure the heavenly floor,
		And tell the blessed doubtful things
		Of Val d’Aran and Perigord.”
		
		--
		
		This was the last and solemn jest
		Of weary Peter Wanderwide.
		He spoke it with a failing zest,
		And having spoken it, he died.


	8. THE HIPPOPOTAMUS

		I shoot the Hippopotamus
		With bullets made of platinum,
		Because if I use leaden ones
		His hide is sure to flatten ’em.


	9. THE REBEL

		There is a wall of which the stones 
		Are lies and bribes and dead men's bones.   
		And wrongfully this evil wall 
		Denies what all men made for all, 
		And shamelessly this wall surrounds   
		Our homesteads and our native grounds. 
		
		But I will gather and I will ride, 
		And I will summon a countryside, 
		And many a man shall hear my halloa 
		Who never had thought the horn to follow;   
		And many a man shall ride with me 
		Who never had thought on earth to see   
		High Justice in her armoury. 
		
		When we find them where they stand,   
		A mile of men on either hand, 
		I mean to charge from right away 
		And force the flanks of their array, 
		And press them inward from the plains,   
		And drive them clamouring down the lanes,   
		And gallop and harry and have them down,   
		And carry the gates and hold the town.   
		Then shall I rest me from my ride 
		With my great anger satisfied. 
		
		Only, before I eat and drink, 
		When I have killed them all, I think   
		That I will batter their carven names,   
		And slit the pictures in their frames,   
		And burn for scent their cedar door,   
		And melt the gold their women wore,   
		And hack their horses at the knees,   
		And hew to death their timber trees, 
		And plough their gardens deep and through--
		And all these things I mean to do   
		For fear perhaps my little son 
		Should break his hands, as I have done. 


	10. THE STATUE

		When we are dead, some Hunting-boy will pass
		And find a stone half-hidden in tall grass
		And grey with age: but having seen that stone
		(Which was your image), ride more slowly on.


	11. THE WHALE

		The Whale that wanders round the Pole   
		   Is not a table fish.
		You cannot bake or boil him whole,   
		   Nor serve him in a dish;
		
		But you may cut his blubber up
		   And melt it down for oil,
		And so replace the colza bean
		   (A product of the soil).
		
		These facts should all be noted down   
		   And ruminated on,
		By every boy in Oxford town
		   Who wants to be a Don.


	12. THE YAK

		As a friend to the children commend me the Yak.
		You will find it exactly the thing:
		It will carry and fetch, you can ride on its back,
		Or lead it about with a string.
		
		The Tartar who dwells on the plains of Thibet
		(A desolate region of snow)
		Has for centuries made it a nursery pet.
		And surely the Tartar should know!
		
		Then tell your papa where the Yak can be got,
		And if he is awfully rich
		He will buy you the creature--or else he will not.
		(I cannot be positive which.)


*** Stephen Vincent Benét (1898 - 1943)

	1. LONELY BURIAL

		There were not many at that lonely place,
		Where two scourged hills met in a little plain.
		The wind cried loud in gusts, then low again.
		Three pines strained darkly, runners in a race
		Unseen by any. Toward the further woods
		A dim harsh noise of voices rose and ceased.
		--We were most silent in those solitudes--
		Then, sudden as a flame, the black-robed priest,
		
		The clotted earth piled roughly up about
		The hacked red oblong of the new-made thing,
		Short words in swordlike Latin--and a rout
		Of dreams most impotent, unwearying.
		Then, like a blind door shut on a carouse,
		The terrible bareness of the soul’s last house.


	2. LOVE IN TWILIGHT

		There is darkness behind the light--and the pale light drips
		Cold on vague shapes and figures, that, half-seen loom
		Like the carven prows of proud, far-triumphing ships--
		And the firelight wavers and changes about the room,
		
		As the three logs crackle and burn with a small still sound;
		Half-blotting with dark the deeper dark of her hair,
		Where she lies, head pillowed on arm, and one hand curved round
		To shield the white face and neck from the faint thin glare.
		
		Gently she breathes--and the long limbs lie at ease,
		And the rise and fall of the young, slim, virginal breast
		Is as certain-sweet as the march of slow wind through trees,
		Or the great soft passage of clouds in a sky at rest.
		
		I kneel, and our arms enlace, and we kiss long, long.
		I am drowned in her as in sleep. There is no more pain.
		Only the rustle of flames like a broken song
		That rings half-heard through the dusty halls of the brain.
		
		One shaking and fragile moment of ecstasy,
		While the grey gloom flutters and beats like an owl above.
		And I would not move or speak for the sea or the sky
		Or the flame-bright wings of the miraculous Dove!


	3. MAY MORNING

		I lie stretched out upon the window-seat
		And doze, and read a page or two, and doze,
		And feel the air like water on me close,
		Great waves of sunny air that lip and beat
		With a small noise, monotonous and sweet,
		Against the window--and the scent of cool,
		Frail flowers by some brown and dew-drenched pool
		Possesses me from drowsy head to feet.
		
		This is the time of all-sufficing laughter
		At idiotic things some one has done,
		And there is neither past nor vague hereafter.
		And all your body stretches in the sun
		And drinks the light in like a liquid thing;
		Filled with the divine languor of late spring.


	4. POOR DEVIL!

		Well, I was tired of life; the silly folk,
		The tiresome noises, all the common things
		I loved once, crushed me with an iron yoke.
		I longed for the cool quiet and the dark,
		Under the common sod where louts and kings
		Lie down, serene, unheeding, careless, stark,
		Never to rise or move or feel again,
		Filled with the ecstasy of being dead . . .
		
		I put the shining pistol to my head
		And pulled the trigger hard--I felt no pain,
		No pain at all; the pistol had missed fire
		I thought; then, looking at the floor, I saw
		My huddled body lying there--and awe
		Swept over me. I trembled--and looked up.
		About me was--not that, my heart’s desire,
		That small and dark abode of death and peace--
		But all from which I sought a vain release!
		The sky, the people and the staring sun
		Glared at me as before. I was undone.
		My last state ten times worse than was my first.
		Helpless I stood, befooled, betrayed, accursed,
		Fettered to Life forever, horribly;
		Caught in the meshes of Eternity,
		No further doors to break or bars to burst!


	5. THE CITY REVISITED

		The grey gulls drift across the bay
		Softly and still as flakes of snow
		Against the thinning fog. All day
		I sat and watched them come and go;
		And now at last the sun was set,
		Filling the waves with colored fire
		Till each seemed like a jewelled spire
		Thrust up from some drowned city. Soon
		From peak and cliff and minaret
		The city’s lights began to wink,
		Each like a friendly word. The moon
		Began to broaden out her shield,
		Spurting with silver. Straight before
		The brown hills lay like quiet beasts
		Stretched out beside a well-loved door,
		And filling earth and sky and field
		With the calm heaving of their breasts.
		
		Nothing was gone, nothing was changed,
		The smallest wave was unestranged
		By all the long ache of the years
		Since last I saw them, blind with tears.
		Their welcome like the hills stood fast:
		And I, I had come home at last.
		
		So I laughed out with them aloud
		To think that now the sun was broad,
		And climbing up the iron sky,
		Where the raw streets stretched sullenly
		About another room I knew,
		In a mean house--and soon there, too,
		The smith would burst the flimsy door
		And find me lying on the floor.
		Just where I fell the other night,
		After that breaking wave of pain.--
		How they will storm and rage and fight,
		Servants and mistress, one and all,
		“No money for the funeral!”
		
		I broke my life there. Let it stand
		At that.
		The waters are a plain,
		Heaving and bright on either hand,
		A tremulous and lustral peace
		Which shall endure though all things cease,
		Filling my heart as water fills
		A cup. There stand the quiet hills.
		So, waiting for my wings to grow,
		I watch the gulls sail to and fro,
		Rising and falling, soft and swift,
		Drifting along as bubbles drift.
		And, though I see the face of God
		Hereafter--this day have I trod
		Nearer to Him than I shall tread
		Ever again. The night is dead.
		And there’s the dawn, poured out like wine
		Along the dim horizon-line.
		And from the city comes the chimes--
		
		We have our heaven on earth--sometimes!


	6. THE QUALITY OF COURAGE

		Black trees against an orange sky,
		Trees that the wind shook terribly,
		Like a harsh spume along the road,
		Quavering up like withered arms,
		Writhing like streams, like twisted charms
		Of hot lead flung in snow. Below
		The iron ice stung like a goad,
		Slashing the torn shoes from my feet,
		And all the air was bitter sleet.
		
		And all the land was cramped with snow,
		Steel-strong and fierce and glimmering wan,
		Like pale plains of obsidian.
		--And yet I strove--and I was fire
		And ice--and fire and ice were one
		In one vast hunger of desire.
		A dim desire, of pleasant places,
		And lush fields in the summer sun,
		And logs aflame, and walls, and faces,
		--And wine, and old ambrosial talk,
		A golden ball in fountains dancing,
		And unforgotten hands. (Ah, God,
		I trod them down where I have trod,
		And they remain, and they remain,
		Etched in unutterable pain,
		Loved lips and faces now apart,
		That once were closer than my heart--
		In agony, in agony,
		And horribly a part of me . . .
		For Lethe is for no man set,
		And in Hell may no man forget.)
		
		And there were flowers, and jugs, bright-glancing,
		And old Italian swords--and looks,
		A moment’s glance of fire, of fire,
		Spiring, leaping, flaming higher,
		Into the intense, the cloudless blue,
		Until two souls were one, and flame,
		And very flesh, and yet the same!
		As if all springs were crushed anew
		Into one globed drop of dew!
		But for the most I thought of heat,
		Desiring greatly . . . Hot white sand
		The lazy body lies at rest in,
		Or sun-dried, scented grass to nest in,
		And fires, innumerable fires,
		Great fagots hurling golden gyres
		Of sparks far up, and the red heart
		In sea-coals, crashing as they part
		To tiny flares, and kindling snapping,
		Bunched sticks that burst their string and wrapping
		And fall like jackstraws; green and blue
		The evil flames of driftwood too,
		And heavy, sullen lumps of coke
		With still, fierce heat and ugly smoke. . . .
		. . . And then the vision of his face,
		And theirs, all theirs, came like a sword,
		Thrice, to the heart--and as I fell
		I thought I saw a light before.
		
		I woke. My hands were blue and sore,
		Torn on the ice. I scarcely felt
		The frozen sleet begin to melt
		Upon my face as I breathed deeper,
		But lay there warmly, like a sleeper
		Who shifts his arm once, and moans low,
		And then sinks back to night. Slow, slow,
		And still as Death, came Sleep and Death
		And looked at me with quiet breath.
		Unbending figures, black and stark
		Against the intense deeps of the dark.
		Tall and like trees. Like sweet and fire
		Rest crept and crept along my veins,
		Gently. And there were no more pains . . .
		
		Was it not better so to lie?
		The fight was done. Even gods tire
		Of fighting . . . My way was the wrong.
		Now I should drift and drift along
		To endless quiet, golden peace . . .
		And let the tortured body cease.
		
		And then a light winked like an eye.
		. . . And very many miles away
		A girl stood at a warm, lit door,
		Holding a lamp. Ray upon ray
		It cloaked the snow with perfect light.
		And where she was there was no night
		Nor could be, ever. God is sure,
		And in his hands are things secure.
		It is not given me to trace
		The lovely laughter of that face,
		Like a clear brook most full of light,
		Or olives swaying on a height,
		So silver they have wings, almost;
		Like a great word once known and lost
		And meaning all things. Nor her voice
		A happy sound where larks rejoice,
		Her body, that great loveliness,
		The tender fashion of her dress,
		I may not paint them.
		These I see,
		Blazing through all eternity,
		A fire-winged sign, a glorious tree!
		
		She stood there, and at once I knew
		The bitter thing that I must do.
		There could be no surrender now;
		Though Sleep and Death were whispering low.
		My way was wrong. So. Would it mend
		If I shrank back before the end?
		And sank to death and cowardice?
		No, the last lees must be drained up,
		Base wine from an ignoble cup;
		(Yet not so base as sleek content
		When I had shrunk from punishment)
		The wretched body strain anew!
		Life was a storm to wander through.
		I took the wrong way. Good and well,
		At least my feet sought out not Hell!
		Though night were one consuming flame
		I must go on for my base aim,
		And so, perhaps, make evil grow
		To something clean by agony . . .
		And reach that light upon the snow . . .
		And touch her dress at last . . .
		So, so,
		I crawled. I could not speak or see
		Save dimly. The ice glared like fire,
		A long bright Hell of choking cold,
		And each vein was a tautened wire,
		Throbbing with torture--and I crawled.
		My hands were wounds.
		So I attained
		The second Hell. The snow was stained
		I thought, and shook my head at it
		How red it was! Black tree-roots clutched
		And tore--and soon the snow was smutched
		Anew; and I lurched babbling on,
		And then fell down to rest a bit,
		And came upon another Hell . . .
		Loose stones that ice made terrible,
		That rolled and gashed men as they fell.
		I stumbled, slipped . . . and all was gone
		That I had gained. Once more I lay
		Before the long bright Hell of ice.
		And still the light was far away.
		There was red mist before my eyes
		Or I could tell you how I went
		Across the swaying firmament,
		A glittering torture of cold stars,
		And how I fought in Titan wars . . .
		And died . . . and lived again upon
		The rack . . . and how the horses strain
		When their red task is nearly done . . .
		
		I only know that there was Pain,
		Infinite and eternal Pain.
		And that I fell--and rose again.
		
		So she was walking in the road.
		And I stood upright like a man,
		Once, and fell blind, and heard her cry . . .
		And then there came long agony.
		There was no pain when I awoke,
		No pain at all. Rest, like a goad,
		Spurred my eyes open--and light broke
		Upon them like a million swords:
		And she was there. There are no words.
		
		Heaven is for a moment’s span.
		And ever.
		So I spoke and said,
		“My honor stands up unbetrayed,
		And I have seen you. Dear . . .”
		Sharp pain
		Closed like a cloak . . .
		I moaned and died.
		
		Here, even here, these things remain.
		I shall draw nearer to her side.
		
		Oh dear and laughing, lost to me,
		Hidden in grey Eternity,
		I shall attain, with burning feet,
		To you and to the mercy-seat!
		The ages crumble down like dust,
		Dark roses, deviously thrust
		And scattered in sweet wine--but I,
		I shall lift up to you my cry,
		And kiss your wet lips presently
		Beneath the ever-living Tree.
		
		This in my heart I keep for goad!
		Somewhere, in Heaven she walks that road.
		Somewhere . . . in Heaven . . . she walks . . . that . . . road . . .


*** Robert Hugh Benson (1871 - 1914)

	1. A HALT

		Lie still, my soul, the Sun of Grace
		Is warm within this garden space
		Beneath tall kindly trees.
		The quiet light is green and fair;
		A fragrance fills the swooning air;
		Lie still, and take thine ease.
		
		This silent noon of Jesu’s love
		Is warm about thee and above--
		A tender Lord is He.
		Lie still an hour--this place is His.
		He has a thousand pleasaunces,
		And each all fair and fragrant is,
		And each is all for thee.
		
		Then, Jesu, for a little space
		I rest me in this garden place,
		All sweet to scent and sight.
		Here, from this high-road scarce withdrawn,
		I thrust my hot hands in the lawn
		Cool yet with dew of far-off dawn
		And saturate with light.
		
		But ah, dear Saviour, human-wise,
		I yearn to pierce all mysteries,
		To catch Thine Hands, and see Thine Eyes
		When evening sounds begin.
		There, in Thy white Robe, Thou wilt wait
		At dusk beside some orchard gate,
		And smile to see me come so late,
		And, smiling, call me in.


	2. AN INVITATION

		Lord take Thine ease within my heart,
		Rest here and count Thyself at home
		Do as Thou wilt; rise, set, depart;
		My Master, not my guest, Thou art
		Come as Thou wilt, but come, Lord, come.
		
		Do Thine own pleasure. Surely, Lord,
		Thou art full free to come and go,
		To lift my sorrow by a word,
		Or pierce me with a sudden sword,
		And leave me sobbing in my woe.
		
		Come in broad day, for good or ill,
		In time of business or of prayer;
		Come in disguise, if so Thy Will
		Be better served, that I may still
		Wait on my Lord, though unaware.
		
		Come with the dawn, shine in on me
		And wake my soul with welcome light;
		Or let the twilight herald Thee,
		And falling dusk Thy shelter be
		To shroud Thy coming from my sight.
		
		Come by the way beneath the trees
		Where whispering heath and bracken stir
		There, where my spirit takes her ease,
		Let that pure scented evening breeze
		Waft me the aloes and the myrrh.
		
		Come, tender Lover, still and bright;
		Rose crowned and framed in gracious form
		Or come with terror, and by night,
		Thundrous and girt with vivid light,
		A giant striding with the storm.
		
		Come through the Cloister, past the lawn
		And laurels where the thin jet plays
		Where, from the wrangling world withdrawn,
		Waking to silence dawn by dawn,
		My soul comes forth to studious days.
		
		Come through the carven door, and bring
		A burst of Music through to me;
		One chord of organ-thundering
		And measured song of those that sing,
		Dear Saviour, to the praise of Thee.
		
		Or come by some forgotten way
		Untrodden long and overgrown;
		And on a sudden on a day
		Burst in; snap web and ivy spray
		That claim the entrance for their own.
		
		So many doors, and all divine,
		And every latch is loose to Thee;
		So many paths, and all are Thine
		That bring Thee to this heart of mine,
		And all are therefore dear to me!


	3. CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES

		Now God forbid that Faith be blind assent,
		 Grasping what others know; else Faith were nought
		But learning, as of some far continent
		       Which others sought,
		And carried thence, better the tale to teach,
		Pebbles and shells, poor fragments of the beach.
		
		Now God forbid that Faith be built on dates,
		 Cursive or uncial letters, scribe or gloss,
		What one conjectures, proves, or demonstrates:
		       This were the loss
		Of all to which God bids that man aspire,
		This were the death of life, quenching of fire.
		
		Nay, but with Faith I see. Not even Hope,
		 Her glorious sister, stands so high as she.
		For this but stands expectant on the slope
		       That leads where He
		Her source and consummation sets His seat,
		Where Faith dwells always to caress His Feet.
		
		Nay, but with Faith I saw my Lord and God
		 Walk in the fragrant garden yesterday.
		Ah! how the thrushes sang; and, where He trod
		       Like spikenard lay
		Jewels of dew, fresh-fallen from the sky,
		While all the lawn rang round with melody.
		
		Nay, but with Faith I marked my Saviour go,
		 One August noonday, down the stifling street
		That reeked with filth and man; marked from Him flow
		       Radiance so sweet,
		The man ceased cursing, laughter lit the child,
		The woman hoped again, as Jesus smiled.
		
		Nay, but with Faith I sought my Lord last night,
		 And found Him shining where the lamp was dim;
		The shadowy altar glimmered, height on height,
		       A throne for Him:
		Seen as through lattice work His gracious Face
		Looked forth on me and filled the dark with grace.
		
		Nay then, if proof and tortured argument
		 Content thee -- teach thee that the Lord is there,
		Or risen again; I pray thee be content,
		       But leave me here
		With eye unsealed by any proof of thine,
		With eye unsealed to know the Lord is mine.
		
		Prove if thou wilt, my friend, that Paul is Paul
		 And Peter Peter: talk till crack of doom;
		Marshal thy facts ; yes, yes, l know them all;
		       And, spite of gloom,
		Of all the dust and science raised by thee,
		I saw my Lord was there Who smiled on me.
		
		Thou dost believe that, ah, so long ago
		 He lived, wrought marvels, and was crucified,
		Because that Holy Matthew tells thee so?
		       I, on my side,
		Know Him as Love; and Love could not pass by
		And leave men sinning -- therefore Love must die.
		
		Thou dost believe, because He rose again,
		 That Christ is very God? Yet I believe
		He rose because I see Him walk with men,
		       Sinners receive,
		Loose stammering tongues, open the blindest eyes.
		And none but God doth so; and God must rise.
		
		“Nay, but I serve Him,” is thy claim, “for yet
		 The faith of some rests all on evidence.
		Men will remember me, while they forget
		       Thine eloquence,
		And set it by for solid argument;
		Let me serve such, and I am well content.”
		
		Each to his own: yet surely I have read
		 How of two sisters (each to Him was dear),
		One listened but to what the Saviour said, --
		       Thought to be near
		The Lord Himself were best: -- the other ran
		Laid plates, clashed dishes, filled and set the can;
		
		And all to serve Him. Yet the Lord preferred
		 A quiet face, and that turned up to read
		The reason of His silence or His word;
		       And said indeed
		Somewhat, I fancy, of a better part
		Near to His Feet, but nearer to His Heart.
		
		Choose thou, then, Martha, if thou wilt; perchance
		 The joy of serving is enough for thee.
		Let me choose Mary; yea, love’s arrogance
		       Is all for me:
		Nay, more than Mary -- let me seek His side
		And sit by Him in penitential pride.


	4. LAUDA SION SALVATOREM

		Laud, O Sion, thy Salvation,
		Laud in songs of exultation
		This thy Shepherd and thy King:
		All thy might in triumph raising
		Praise Him who surpasses praising,
		Far beyond thine honouring.
		
		Be our theme of high thanksgiving
		Living Bread and source of living
		Set to-day before us here
		Broken at that Supper blessed,
		As by every mouth confessed,
		For the brethren gathered there.
		
		Laud be lifted, sweet and sounding,
		Ringing from an heart abounding,
		Rising into jubilee
		Laud in duteous celebration
		Of this Table’s consecration
		For such high solemnity.
		
		Lo, the King His Law revises;
		Newer truth from elder rises,
		Newer Law and Paschal rite.
		Ancient truths their room surrender,
		Glows the twilight into splendour,
		Darkness vanishes in light.
		
		That He wrought at supper lying
		In remembrance of His dying
		Christ hath bid His Church renew;
		We the ordinance obeying,
		Earthly bread and wine displaying,
		Consecrate the Victim due.
		
		Now the sacred truth receiving
		We, the Bread His Flesh believing
		And the Wine His Blood to be,
		What tho’ eye and mind be failing,
		Nature’s order countervailing
		Grasp by faith the mystery.
		
		Under diverse kinds concealed
		While to sense yet unrevealed
		Lies a wonder all-divine
		Flesh and Blood hath each its token
		Yet abides their Christ unbroken
		Hidden under either sign.
		
		Perfect to the priest who breaks it,
		Perfect in the hand that takes it,
		Christ is undivided there,
		One or thousands may receive Him
		Yet true hearts in truth believe Him
		Unconsumed everywhere.
		
		Good and bad alike partaking
		Each, by diverse lot, is making
		One to woe and one to weal,
		Each from each is set asunder:
		Mark the word of grace and wonder--
		One to hurt and one to heal.
		
		Thus the Lord His Presence hiding
		Dwells in many parts abiding,--
		Every soul in Him confiding
		Doubts not that the Whole is there.
		He the One remaineth ever
		Under every part: for never
		Aught can Christ from Christ dissever,
		Still abiding everywhere.


	5. PATIENCE

		I
		
		waited for the Lord a little space.
		So little! in whose sight as yesterday
		Passes a thousand years:--I cried for grace,
		Impatient of delay.
		
		
		II
		
		He waited for me--ah so long! For He
		Sees in one single day a loss or gain
		That bears a fruit through all eternity:--
		My soul, did He complain?


	6. VISIONS OF THE NIGHT

		_Libera me a terrore nocturno a negotio
		Perambulante in tenebris . . . custodi
		animam meam O Domine visitans me 
		visitatione sanctorum revela mihi animum 
		in visionibus noctis_
		
		Ere yet I slept, the summer night
		 Lay vague and mellow in the gloom
		Beyond the steady candlelight.
		 The moth came tapping on the pane,
		   Intent on doom.
		Then sank into the night again.
		
		Then, as I lie, the darkened walls
		 Grow dim; the sheets are turned to air,
		As fold on fold the slumber falls.
		 The ticking clock grows dumb with sleep
		   And everywhere
		About the soul slow pauses creep.
		
		The sense contracts from form and space --
		 Shrinks to a speck within the brain --
		Then opens on a wider place
		 That knows no law, no harmony; 
		   Till once again
		A newer world is born for me.
		
		My spirit moves in dark dismay
		 About a house of misty halls:
		I hear the shuddering branches sway
		 At gable-corners; on the floor
		   And on the walls
		The firelight glimmers through the door.
		
		I sit and talk beside the bed,
		 Grasp hands, and meet the living eyes,
		Of one whom I had fancied dead
		 Some ten years back “How strange,” I say
		   In glad surprise,
		“That we should meet again to-day!”
		
		He smiles for answer sudden then
		 I understand the mystery
		Of dying, for the sons of men
		 And wonder where the sadness lay
		   To see him die
		Last year -- or was it yesterday?
		
		All passes; -- down long corridors,
		 That lead about this wilderness,
		Fall footsteps tramping on the floors,
		 That come from nowhere and are gone
		   Yet none the less
		I run in panting terror on.
		
		Here is a lawn with beds and grass;
		 The birds sing shrilly in the air,
		While multitudes pass and re-pass,
		 Who fill me with unknown distress,
		   That holds me there
		To mark their swift unweariedness.
		
		And so with eyes that ache to close,
		 And feet that fly and flag in turn,
		About, about, my spirit goes.
		 In wondrous wise from deep to deep,
		   Before me burn
		The crumbling pageantries of sleep.
		
		O Lord of Light, who gav’st me breath,
		 And set’st my spirit ill at ease
		Within the body of this death,
		 What means this dreaming rush and rout --
		   These phantasies
		Born from within and seen without?
		
		Since ghost and devil, foe and friend
		 Throng -- shadows on this shadow-stage --
		Move from no source and seek no end --
		 Since all the passions born of fear
		   Terror and rage,
		As in a looking-glass appear;
		
		Why com’st Thou not Thyself, O Lord,
		 To still the tossing of the brain,
		And calm with one imperious word
		 This storm of fancy under Thee,
		   And yet again
		Bid peace, as once in Galilee?
		
		Come, Lord; and if through toilsome days
		 I pray in dumb perplexity,
		And strive to lift my wearied praise, --
		 Yet let me rest when night is deep,
		   And look on Thee
		The Lord of waking and of sleep.


*** Wendell Berry (1934 - )

	1. A MEETING IN A PART

		In a dream I meet 
		my dead friend. He has, 
		I know, gone long and far, 
		and yet he is the same 
		for the dead are changeless. 
		They grow no older. 
		It is I who have changed, 
		grown strange to what I was. 
		Yet I, the changed one, 
		ask: “How you been?“ 
		He grins and looks at me. 
		“I been eating peaches 
		off some mighty fine trees.”


	2. A TIMBERED CHOIR

		Even while I dreamed I prayed that what I saw was only fear and no foretelling, 
		for I saw the last known landscape destroyed for the sake 
		of the objective, the soil bludgeoned, the rock blasted. 
		Those who had wanted to go home would never get there now. 
		
		I visited the offices where for the sake of the objective the planners planned 
		at blank desks set in rows. I visited the loud factories 
		where the machines were made that would drive ever forward 
		toward the objective. I saw the forest reduced to stumps and gullies; I saw 
		the poisoned river, the mountain cast into the valley; 
		I came to the city that nobody recognized because it looked like every other city. 
		I saw the passages worn by the unnumbered 
		footfalls of those whose eyes were fixed upon the objective. 
		
		Their passing had obliterated the graves and the monuments 
		of those who had died in pursuit of the objective 
		and who had long ago forever been forgotten, according 
		to the inevitable rule that those who have forgotten forget 
		that they have forgotten. Men, women, and children now pursued the objective 
		as if nobody ever had pursued it before. 
		
		The races and the sexes now intermingled perfectly in pursuit of the objective. 
		the once-enslaved, the once-oppressed were now free 
		to sell themselves to the highest bidder 
		and to enter the best paying prisons 
		in pursuit of the objective, which was the destruction of all enemies, 
		which was the destruction of all obstacles, which was the destruction of all objects, 
		which was to clear the way to victory, which was to clear the way to promotion, to salvation, to progress, 
		to the completed sale, to the signature 
		on the contract, which was to clear the way 
		to self-realization, to self-creation, from which nobody who ever wanted to go home 
		would ever get there now, for every remembered place 
		had been displaced; the signposts had been bent to the ground and covered over.
		
		Every place had been displaced, every love 
		unloved, every vow unsworn, every word unmeant 
		to make way for the passage of the crowd 
		of the individuated, the autonomous, the self-actuated, the homeless 
		with their many eyes opened toward the objective 
		which they did not yet perceive in the far distance, 
		having never known where they were going, 
		having never known where they came from.


	3. BEFORE DARK

		From the porch at dusk I watched
		a kingfisher wild in flight
		he could only have made for joy.
		
		He came down the river, splashing
		against the water’s dimming face
		like a skipped rock, passing
		
		on down out of sight. And still
		I could hear the splashes
		farther and farther away
		
		as it grew darker. He came back
		the same way, dusky as his shadow,
		sudden beyond the willows.
		
		The splashes went on out of hearing.
		It was dark then. Somewhere
		the night had accommodated him
		
		--at the place he was headed for
		or where, led by his delight,
		he came.


	4. ELEGY

		I
		
		All day our eyes could find no resting place.
		Over a flood of snow sight came back
		Empty to the mind. The sun
		In a shutter of clouds, light
		Staggered down the fall of snow.
		All circling surfaces of earth were white.
		No shape or shadow moved the flight
		Of winter birds. Snow held earth its silence.
		We could pick no birdsong from the wind.
		At nightfall our father turned his eyes away.
		It was this storm of silence shook out his ghost.
		
		
		II
		
		We sleep; he only wakes
		Who is unshapen in a night of snow.
		His shadow in the shadow of the earth,
		Moves the dark to wholeness.
		We watch beside his body here, his image
		Shape of silence in the room.
		
		
		III
		
					Sifting
		Down the wind the winter rain
		Spirals about the town
		And the church hill’s jut of stones.


	5. ENEMIES

		If you are not to become a monster, 
		you must care what they think. 
		If you care what they think, 
		
		how will you not hate them, 
		and so become a monster 
		of the opposite kind? From where then 
		
		is love to come—love for your enemy 
		that is the way of liberty? 
		From forgiveness. Forgiven, they go 
		
		free of you, and you of them; 
		they are to you as sunlight 
		on a green branch. You must not 
		
		think of them again, except 
		as monsters like yourself, 
		pitiable because unforgiving.


	6. GRACE

		The woods is shining this morning.
		Red, gold and green, the leaves
		lie on the ground, or fall,
		or hang full of light in the air still.
		Perfect in its rise and in its fall, it takes
		the place it has been coming to forever.
		It has not hastened here, or lagged.
		See how surely it has sought itself,
		its roots passing lordly through the earth
		See how without confusion it is
		all that it is, and how flawless
		its grace is. Running or walking, the way
		is the same. Be still. Be still.
		“He moves your bones, and the way is clear.”


	7. MANIFESTO

		“Love the quick profit, the annual raise,
		vacation with pay. Want more
		of everything ready-made. Be afraid
		to know your neighbors and to die.
		
		And you will have a window in your head.
		Not even your future will be a mystery
		any more. Your mind will be punched in a card
		and shut away in a little drawer.
		
		When they want you to buy something
		they will call you. When they want you
		to die for profit they will let you know.
		So, friends, every day do something
		that won’t compute. Love the Lord.
		Love the world. Work for nothing.
		Take all that you have and be poor.
		Love someone who does not deserve it.
		
		Denounce the government and embrace
		the flag. Hope to live in that free
		republic for which it stands.
		Give your approval to all you cannot
		understand. Praise ignorance, for what man
		has not encountered he has not destroyed.
		
		Ask the questions that have no answers.
		Invest in the millenium. Plant sequoias.
		Say that your main crop is the forest
		that you did not plant,
		that you will not live to harvest.
		
		Say that the leaves are harvested
		when they have rotted into the mold.
		Call that profit. Prophesy such returns.
		Put your faith in the two inches of humus
		that will build under the trees
		every thousand years.
		
		Listen to carrion--put your ear
		close, and hear the faint chattering
		of the songs that are to come.
		Expect the end of the world. Laugh.
		Laughter is immeasurable. Be joyful
		though you have considered all the facts.
		So long as women do not go cheap
		for power, please women more than men.
		
		Ask yourself: Will this satisfy
		a woman satisfied to bear a child?
		Will this disturb the sleep
		of a woman near to giving birth?
		
		Go with your love to the fields.
		Lie down in the shade. Rest your head
		in her lap. Swear allegiance
		to what is nighest your thoughts.
		
		As soon as the generals and the politicos
		can predict the motions of your mind,
		lose it. Leave it as a sign
		to mark the false trail, the way
		you didn’t go.
		
		Be like the fox
		who makes more tracks than necessary,
		some in the wrong direction.
		Practice resurrection.” 


	8. NINE VERSES OF THE SAME SONG

		I
		
		the ear finely attuned
		to the extravagant music
		of yellow pears ripening
		in the scrolled light
		of orchards as if the world
		were perfect
		hears the cicada burst its shell
		
		
		II
		
		the quiet man sits
		touching his cheek
		in a room delicately walled
		with the sound of rain
		trumpets on the phonograph
		hold the globed gold light
		belling in the mirror’s corridor
		time out of time
		without duration
		measure moving to no distance
		a dance of instant light
		in the mirror’s silent hallway
		
		counter-measure
		to clock tick
		the morning-red cockerel’s
		burnished crowing
		heard mute in the sun-tattered
		darkness of gravestones
		and loud
		in the quick of his wrist
		
		
		III _State Fair_
		
		the perfect green
		and red and yellow gold
		of this prized and pampered fruit
		sheaves of millet
		sheaves of wheat
		arranged in perfect ripeness
		beyond our touch
		to music out the light
		as if all possibilities of seed
		became visible and orderly here
		and ripeness final
		but as the sign cautions
		do not touch
		
		perfection is the myth of effort
		
		from here we endlessly return
		
		
		IV
		
		hear also the resounding actual
		music of wood if played alone
		
		sounds the beloved flesh might make
		isolate and without a soul
		
		like the austere and strained-for
		music of pure soul
		
		music the unplayed strings contain
		
		   hear these imagining
		   imaged in the mind’s ear
		
		it is more mingled and various music
		heard in the human actual ear
		
		a speech breaking categories
		to confront its objects
		
		here the most distant burble
		of water becomes vocal
		
		the blinding noon lick of the sun
		a voice
		
		rapt cicadas thrumming
		the ear’s meat
		
		beyond this light
		and darkness are the same
		
		
		V
		
		in starlight
		slow as a ship
		the whitened carcass founders
		and goes down
		earth like water
		caving the ribs
		
		bees in the hollow skull
		make honey
		as gold in the dark
		as light
		
		
		VI
		
		the picnic done with
		we became aware
		of the black bull at his mating
		
		imaged in us the music
		more gay than madrigals
		that strummed his veins
		parading
		to his perfect lust
		
		deep-bodied
		slow
		
		he stood a moment attentive
		to the drumming of his blood
		
		then mounted
		brought the period
		to its close
		
		and descended
		to the immediacy of darkness
		and grass
		unwintered and green
		to his quieted flesh
		as if only the hour
		awaited him
		
		to our ears the evening cicadas
		whirred like violins
		their dry atmospheric sound
		
		
		VII _Two Definitive Movements_
		
		my child stood in the doorway
		watching night approach the house
		asking to be allowed outside
		
		and admission granted to the dark
		she chose the light instead
		
		that
		
		and the word _gone_
		she learned to say
		at the summer’s end
		committed
		
		she has touched knowing’s edge
		and will own it
		closely as her flesh
		
		the morning-glory’s opening
		the white tenuous muscle
		flexing to light
		as though no darkness had ever been
		is not profounder music
		
		
		VIII
		
		and my love has come to me
		to ask my comfort
		for the hurt I give her
		--having no other
		
		time and again
		
		tor that trammel me
		my heart
		
		my hearing suffers
		no more sorrowing music
		
		
		IX
		
		the child born dead
		goes free of light
		
		bears all time with him
		rounded to his grave


	9. SEPTEMBER 2ND

		In the evening there were flocks of nighthawks
		passing southward over the valley. The tall
		sunflowers stood, burning on their stalks
		to cold seed, by the still river. And high
		up the birds rose into sight against the darkening
		clouds. They tossed themselves among the fading
		landscapes of the sky like rags, as in
		abandonment to the summons their blood knew.
		And in my mind, where had stood a garden
		straining to the light, there grew
		an acceptance of decline. Having worked,
		I would sleep, my leaves all dissolved in flight.


	10. THE BURIAL OF THE OLD

		The old, whose bodies encrust their lives,
		die, and that is well.
		They unhinder what has struggled in them.
		
		The light, painfully loved, that narrowed
		and darkened in their minds
		becomes again the sky.
		
		The young, who have looked on dying,
		turn back to the world, grown strangely
		alert to each other’s bodies.


	11. THE COUNTRY OF MARRIAGE

		I
		
		I dream of you walking at night along the streams 
		of the country of my birth, warm blooms and the nightsongs 
		of birds opening around you as you walk. 
		You are holding in your body the dark seed of my sleep. 
		
		
		II
		
		This comes after silence. Was it something I said 
		that bound me to you, some mere promise 
		or, worse, the fear of loneliness and death? 
		A man lost in the woods in the dark, I stood 
		still and said nothing. And then there rose in me, 
		like the earth’s empowering brew rising 
		in root and branch, the words of a dream of you 
		I did not know I had dreamed. I was a wanderer 
		who feels the solace of his native land 
		under his feet again and moving in his blood. 
		I went on, blind and faithful. Where I stepped 
		my track was there to steady me. It was no abyss 
		that lay before me, but only the level ground. 
		
		
		III
		
		Sometimes our life reminds me 
		of a forest in which there is a graceful clearing 
		and in that opening a house, 
		an orchard and garden, 
		comfortable shades, and flowers 
		red and yellow in the sun, a pattern 
		made in the light for the light to return to. 
		The forest is mostly dark, its ways 
		to be made anew day after day, the dark 
		richer than the light and more blessed, 
		provided we stay brave 
		enough to keep on going in. 
		
		
		IV
		
		How many times have I come to you out of my head 
		with joy, if ever a man was, 
		for to approach you I have given up the light 
		and all directions. I come to you 
		lost, wholly trusting as a man who goes 
		into the forest unarmed. It is as though I descend 
		slowly earthward out of the air. I rest in peace 
		in you, when I arrive at last. 
		
		
		V
		
		Our bond is no little economy based on the exchange 
		of my love and work for yours, so much for so much 
		of an expendable fund. We don’t know what its limits are-- 
		that puts us in the dark. We are more together 
		than we know, how else could we keep on discovering 
		we are more together than we thought? 
		You are the known way leading always to the unknown, 
		and you are the known place to which the unknown is always 
		leading me back. More blessed in you than I know, 
		I possess nothing worthy to give you, nothing 
		not belittled by my saying that I possess it. 
		Even an hour of love is a moral predicament, a blessing 
		a man may be hard up to be worthy of. He can only 
		accept it, as a plant accepts from all the bounty of the light 
		enough to live, and then accepts the dark, 
		passing unencumbered back to the earth, as I 
		have fallen tine and again from the great strength 
		of my desire, helpless, into your arms. 
		
		
		VI
		
		What I am learning to give you is my death 
		to set you free of me, and me from myself 
		into the dark and the new light. Like the water 
		of a deep stream, love is always too much. We 
		did not make it. Though we drink till we burst 
		we cannot have it all, or want it all. 
		In its abundance it survives our thirst. 
		In the evening we come down to the shore 
		to drink our fill, and sleep, while it 
		flows through the regions of the dark. 
		It does not hold us, except we keep returning 
		to its rich waters thirsty. We enter, 
		willing to die, into the commonwealth of its joy. 
		
		
		VII
		
		I give you what is unbounded, passing from dark to dark, 
		containing darkness: a night of rain, an early morning. 
		I give you the life I have let live for the love of you: 
		a clump of orange-blooming weeds beside the road, 
		the young orchard waiting in the snow, our own life 
		that we have planted in the ground, as I 
		have planted mine in you. I give you my love for all 
		beautiful and honest women that you gather to yourself 
		again and again, and satisfy--and this poem, 
		no more mine than any man’s who has loved a woman.


	12. THE COUNTRY TOWN IN EARLY SUMMER MORNING

		The town has grown here, angular
		and white on its hill pelted
		with thickets, in the passage
		of a darkness; the houses, two-ranked,
		peristyle of morning’s long shade
		a thing of nature, made
		deviously in all the black
		filled hollows of its time, its
		history of acts and briars.
		It rose up with the first
		singing and light to surprise
		its dreamers. Among declivities
		and groves of the inert hill,
		channeled and splined by the
		seasonal escapade of streams,
		where its graves and garbage
		choke the ravines, old shoes
		in a milling of stones commemorate
		the town laid waste. By morning’s
		instantaneous contrivance, mottled
		shade and light, the day upholds
		carved orange lilies in a calm
		dreamers no longer dream but know.


	13. THE DEAD CALF

		Dead at the pasture edge,
		his head is without eyes, becalmed
		on the grass. There was no escaping
		the heaviness that came on him,
		the darkness that rose
		under his belly as though he stood
		in a black sucking pool.
		Earth’s weight grew in him,
		and he lay down. As he died
		a great bird took his eyes.
		
		Where is the horror in it?
		Not in him, for he came to it
		as a shadow into the night.
		It was nameless and familiar.
		He was fitted to it. In me
		is where the horror is. In my mind
		he does not yield. I cannot believe
		the deep peace that has come to him.
		I am afraid that where the light
		is torn there is a wound.
		There is a darkness in the soul
		that loves the eyes. There is a light
		in the mind that sees only light
		and will not enter the darkness.
		
		But I would have a darkness
		in my mind like the dark
		the dead calf makes for a time
		on the grass where he lies, and will make
		in the earth as he is carried down.
		May all dead things lie down in me
		and be at peace, as in the ground.


	14. THE HABIT OF WAKING

		_Do you not know, O speech, how
		the buds beneath you are folded?_
		
		I
		
		Snow, melting, leaves the landscape pied;
		waking, in vacancy like a dream, withdraws
		the cloth of sleep; the false earth of winter
		recedes, is dried, on the dead grass, the merging green;
		
		white, unthawed, along the drains, marks
		the conjectural forking, down-gathering
		of a river. Bulked at troughs, cattle feed
		in the provisional enclosure of the farmer’s mind.
		
		Flocks birth in the female barns. Green
		fevers in the black woods. The wind, now,
		makes purpose of its accidents, becoming mild;
		the weather’s dispassionate benevolence,
		
		returning, stirs the mind again
		to the ancient perilous advancement. Stripped
		of the old cumulus of growths, cessations,
		dreams, the house completes its seasonal closure,
		
		having forestalled the winter, sheltering
		as needful, its divisive entrances armed
		against cold; having held a compacted light
		tokening, in excess of necessity, joy:
		
		at the window’s interior the scarlet bloom
		of tulips has burned and glowed in the reflected
		light of snow. The inward and outward house,
		containment of that gentleness, and its defense,
		is continent of the intellect, venturing
		
		with its dreams into the weather’s judgment.
		The young spring, returning, turns
		the transparency of windows outward;
		forked cherry branches figure the barren glass,
		
		unleaved. We prepare this vacancy a little
		for the coming of spring; the tree is cut back
		for a fuller blooming, heavier fruit.
		This waking wakes, advances to a new
		
		envisionment, the old renewal of desire.
		The mind lays claim to its summer,
		dreams a perfect ripening, weighted harvest,
		in the sun’s cruel beneficence, foreshadowing
		
		harsher culminations, sterner quittances.
		Waking is a leaf, a hand, a light--envisioning
		white hands among foliage, red fruit, gathering.
		
		
		II
		
		It’s a weather of engines,
		also, into which spring comes
		--among the sounds of traffic
		at the roadside, where bloom
		the yellow first jonquils;
		a drift of snow melted there
		a week ago--now it’s
		just the memory of snow
		draws back from the yellow
		cup-lips. The traffic goes by,
		the engines unwearying
		as weather, gathering places,
		tires pelting the asphalt,
		moving to destinations
		each way; the jonquils
		bloom in their silence
		and yellow. It’s the wind
		that stirs them, the wind at large
		over the hill now becoming
		green under the heavy weather
		of March and the weather of engines;
		the hill leans back to the root
		of the wind, the flowerheads
		lean away; having come a long
		journey, unbroken, the wind
		is voluble and strong, taking
		its hurdles, surrounding the
		stolid fenceposts along the roadway,
		crossing the stream of traffic
		which crosses the wind.
		
		The color of the jonquils
		has to do with the weather
		of March--a cool yellow,
		receptive of the smallest
		light, the frailest warmth;
		and has to do, by its silence,
		purely, with the sounds
		of engines--acceptive; the plant
		dares its bloom above ground
		to be lovely, or trampled.
		The life in it is its motive.
		
		Wakened and touched
		by the thin yellow of jonquils,
		the house stands in the cross-grain
		of wind and the roadway, in transversed
		distances comprehending cities
		--approached, approaching.
		The house stands in a vision
		of journeys bearing recognitions
		toward it; and in all degrees
		recognizes and is recognized
		by who comes to it, and who passes.
		The house and the city, though
		the bulk of a continent balks
		between them, have to do
		with one another; the knowledge
		of one is a knowledge of the other,
		acknowledges the other.
		
		In the same dark wherein
		the periled jonquils remain
		--and the traffic beats on
		between cities, continuing
		into the tunnel of headlights
		parting the embankments, entering
		distance as by the force of light
		blooming, entering the violable
		blossoming of the desire
		of the place of arrival or the place
		of sleep--a dark craft, vaulting
		its possible crash, arches
		its mathematic trajectory
		over the house, its lights
		lighted, a tentative constellation
		marking one height of the sky.
		But it measures
		one depth of darkness also,
		and circumscribes the paltry known;
		its course is a severance
		above which lights are meaningless.
		And outward from that fight hunt
		the made moons of our darkness
		and desire, their circuits
		ticking and aware, leaning
		to the void; our listening strains
		into the galaxial silence
		beyond expectancy, unmeaning,
		wishing to hear.
		
		And in the selfsame dark
		the creeks, in the aftermath
		of the first heavy rains,
		are audible to the hilltop
		--the wash of sound entering
		the consciousness of walls.
		Among the soaked grasses
		along the down-meaning streams
		in the weather of engines
		the old singing of the frogs
		begins. The dark breeds
		dawn, a deeper melting.


	15. THE HANDING DOWN

		I. _The Conversation_
		
		Speaker and hearer, words
		making a passage between them,
		begin a community.
		
				Two minds
		
		in succession, grandfather
		and grandson, they sit and talk
		on the enclosed porch,
		
		looking out at the town, which
		takes its origin in their talk
		and is carried forward.
		
		
		Their conversation has
		no pattern of its own,
		but alludes casually
		
		to a shaped knowledge
		in the minds of the two men
		who love each other.
		
		The quietness of knowing in common
		is half of it. Silences come into it
		easily, and break it
		
		while the old man thinks
		or concentrates on his pipe
		and the strong smoke
		
		climbs over the brim of his hat.
		He has lived a long time.
		He has seen the changes of times
		
		and grown used to the world
		again. Having been wakeful so long,
		the loser of so many years,
		
		his mind moves back and forth,
		sorting and counting,
		among all he knows.
		
		His memory has become huge,
		and surrounds him,
		and fills his silences.
		
		He lifts his head
		and speaks of an old day
		that amuses him or grieves him
		
		or both . . .
		Under the windows opposite them
		there’s a long table, loaded
		
		with potted plants, the foliage
		staining and shadowing the daylight
		as it comes in.
		
		
		II. _The New House_
		
		At the foot of his long shadow
		he walked across the town
		early in the morning
		
		to watch the carpenters at work
		on a new house. Their saws released
		the warm pine-smell into the air
		
		--the scent of time to come, freshly
		opened. He was comforted by that,
		and by the new unblemished wood
		
		That times goes, making
		the jointures of households, for better
		or worse, is no comfort.
		
		That, for the men and women
		still to be born, time is coming
		is a comfort of sorts.
		
		That there’s a little of the good
		left over from a few lives
		is a comfort of sorts.
		
		He has grown eager
		in his love for the good dead
		and all the unborn.
		
		That failed hope
		doesn’t prove the failure of hope
		is a comfort of sorts.
		
		Grown old and wise, he takes
		what comfort he can get, as gladly as once
		he’d have taken the comfort he wished for.
		
		For a man knowing evil--how surely
		it grows up in any ground and makes seed--
		the building of a house is a craft indeed.
		
		
		III. _The Heaviness of His Wisdom_
		
		The incredible happens, he knows.
		The worst possibilities are real.
		The terrible justifies
		
		his dread of it. He knows winter
		despondences, the mind inundated
		by its excrement, hope gone
		
		and not remembered.
		And he knows vernal transfigurations,
		the sentence in the stems of trees
		
		noisy with old memory made new,
		troubled with the seed
		of the being of what has not been.
		
		He trusts the changes of the sun and air:
		dung and carrion made dirt,
		richness that forgets what it was.
		
		He knows, if he can hold out
		long enough, the good
		is given its chance.
		
		he has dreamed of a town
		fit for the abiding of souls
		and bodies that might live forever.
		
		He has seen it as in a far off
		white and gold evening
		of summer, the black flight
		
		of swifts turning above it
		in the air. There’s a clarity
		in which he hasn’t become clear,
		
		his body dragging a shadow,
		half hidden in it.
		
		
		IV. _The Freedom of Loving_
		
		After his long wakeful life,
		he has come to love the world
		as though it’s not to be lost.
		
		Though he faces darkness, his hands
		have no weight or harshness
		on his small granddaughters’ heads.
		
		His love doesn’t ask that they understand
		it includes them. It includes, as freely,
		the green plant leaves in the window,
		
		clusters of white ripe peaches weighting
		the branch among the weightless leaves.
		There was an agony in ripening.
		
		which becomes irrelevant at last
		to ripeness. His love
		turned away from death, freely,
		
		is equal to it.
		
		
		V. _The Fern_
		
		His intimate the green fern
		lives in his eye, its profusion
		veiling the earthen pot,
		
		the leaves lighted and shadowed
		among the actions of the morning.
		Between the fern and the old man
		
		there has been conversation
		all their lives. The leaves
		have spoken to his eyes.
		
		He has replied with his hands.
		In his handing it has come down
		until now--a living
		
		which has survived
		all successions and sheddings.
		Even when he was a boy
		
		plants were his talent. His mother
		would give him the weak ones
		until he made them grow,
		
		then buy them, healed, for dimes.
		And from her he inherits
		the fern, the life of it
		
		on which the new leaves crest.
		It feeds on the sun and the dirt
		and does not hasten.
		
		It has forgotten all deaths.
		
		
		VI. _He’s in the Habit of the World_
		
		The world has finally worn him
		until he’s no longer strange to it.
		His face has grown comfortable on him.
		
		His hat is shaped to his way
		of putting it on and taking it off,
		the crown bordered
		
		with the dark graph of his sweat.
		He has become a scholar of plants
		and gardens, the student
		
		of his memory, attentive to pipesmoke
		and the movements of shadows. His days
		come to him as if they know him.
		
		He has become one of the familiars
		of the place, like a landmark
		the birds no longer fear.
		
		Among the greens of full summer,
		among shadows like monuments,
		he makes his way down,
		
		loving the earth he will become.
		
		
		VII. _The Young Man, Thinking of the Old_
		
		While we talk we hear across the town
		two hammers galloping on a roof, and the high
		curving squeal of an electric saw.
		
		That’s happening deep in the town’s being.
		It’s as weighted and clumsy with its hope
		as a pregnant woman or a loaded barge.
		
		And the old man sitting beside me knows
		the tools and vision of a builder
		of houses, and the uses of those.
		
		His strong marriage has made
		the accuracy of his dwelling.
		As though always speaking openly
		
		in a clear room, he has made
		the ways of neighborhood
		between his house and the town.
		
		His life has been a monument to the place.
		His garden rows go back through all
		his summers, bearing their fading
		
		script of vine and bloom,
		what he has written on the ground,
		its kind abundance, taken kindly from it.
		
		Now, resting from his walk,
		he’s comforted by the sounds
		of hammering, half listened to,
		
		as his eyes rest in the greenness
		of the fern, with attention
		deeper than consciousness.
		
		The strength of the living town
		forces into the design of a house
		--blindly, he knows,
		
		as the life of a tree is forced
		into a shell holding the seed
		for a use or disaster not known.
		
		He’s comforted, not because he hopes
		for much, but because he knows
		of hope, its losses and uses.
		
		He has gone in the world, visioning
		a house worthy of the child
		newborn in it.


	16. THE PEACE OF WILD THINGS

		When despair for the world grows in me
		and I wake in the night at the least sound
		in fear of what my life and my children’s lives may be,
		I go and lie down where the wood drake
		rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds.
		I come into the peace of wild things
		who do not tax their lives with forethought
		of grief. I come into the presence of still water.
		And I feel above me the day-blind stars
		waiting with their light. For a time
		I rest in the grace of the world, and am free.


	17. THE REAL WORK

		It may be that when we no longer know what to do 
		we have come to our real work, 
		
		and that when we no longer know which way to go 
		we have come to our real journey. 
		
		The mind that is not baffled is not employed. 
		
		The impeded stream is the one that sings.


	18. THE RIVER VOYAGERS

		I
		
		Where the light’s bells ring
		Morning on the river,
		Waking the town to its round of spires
		And burials, is only half
		The world; this very light shapes a country
		Green of leaf and river
		In the sleep of the dead voyagers;
		Or their death also
		Is a river where morning returns
		And is welcome.
		The scarlet bird chanting
		Its renewal in a tree of shade
		As constantly sings
		To their earthen unhearing ears.
		
		
		II
		
		The ghosts of the voyagers are gay
		In the total sleep of their bones.
		From the green noon shade of the river
		Their vision slowly loves the sky,
		Accepting bird flight, dawn and dark;
		Rage for flesh and possession over,
		They are gentle now; their boats, swamped
		With voyages and drowned, release the stream.
		Through the broad country of their sleep,
		Burnished towers and belfries of the sun,
		The river runs to noon forever;
		The clear light rings with bees.


	19. THE SILENCE

		Though the air is full of singing 
		my head is loud 
		with the labor of words. 
		
		Though the season is rich 
		with fruit, my tongue 
		hungers for the sweet of speech. 
		
		Though the beech is golden 
		I cannot stand beside it 
		mute, but must say 
		
		‘It is golden,‘ while the leaves 
		stir and fall with a sound 
		that is not a name. 
		
		It is in the silence 
		that my hope is, and my aim. 
		A song whose lines 
		
		I cannot make or sing 
		sounds men’s silence 
		like a root. Let me say 
		
		and not mourn: the world 
		lives in the death of speech 
		and sings there.


	20. THE VACATION

		Once there was a man who filmed his vacation. 
		He went flying down the river in his boat 
		with his video camera to his eye, making 
		a moving picture of the moving river 
		upon which his sleek boat moved swiftly 
		toward the end of his vacation. He showed 
		his vacation to his camera, which pictured it, 
		preserving it forever: the river, the trees, 
		the sky, the light, the bow of his rushing boat 
		behind which he stood with his camera 
		preserving his vacation even as he was having it 
		so that after he had had it he would still 
		have it. It would be there. With a flick 
		of a switch, there it would be. But he 
		would not be in it. He would never be in it.


	21. THE WISH TO BE GENEROUS

		ALL that I serve will die, all my delights, 
		the flesh kindled from my flesh, garden and field, 
		the silent lilies standing in the woods, 
		the woods, the hill, the whole earth, all 
		will burn in man’s evil, or dwindle 
		in its own age. Let the world bring on me 
		the sleep of darkness without stars, so I may know 
		my little light taken from me into the seed 
		of the beginning and the end, so I may bow 
		to mystery, and take my stand on the earth 
		like a tree in a field, passing without haste 
		or regret toward what will be, my life 
		a patient willing descent into the grass.


	22. THEY SIT TOGETHER ON THE PORCH

		They sit together on the porch, the dark
		Almost fallen, the house behind them dark.
		Their supper done with, they have washed and dried
		The dishes--only two plates now, two glasses,
		Two knives, two forks, two spoons--small work for two.
		She sits with her hands folded in her lap,
		At rest. He smokes his pipe. They do not speak,
		And when they speak at last it is to say
		What each one knows the other knows. They have
		One mind between them, now, that finally
		For all its knowing will not exactly know
		Which one goes first through the dark doorway, bidding
		Goodnight, and which sits on a while alone.


	23. TO THINK OF THE LIFE OF A MAN

		In a time that breaks
		in cutting pieces all around,
		when men, voiceless
		against thing-ridden men,
		set themselves on fire, it seems
		too difficult and rare
		to think of the life of a man
		grown whole in the world,
		at peace and in place.
		But having thought of it
		I am beyond the time
		I might have sold my hands
		or sold my voice and mind
		to the arguments of power
		that go blind against
		what they would destroy.
		I leave all that behind.


*** John Berryman (1914 - 1972)

	1. 28 July

		Calmly, while sat up friendlies & made noise
		delight fuller than he can ready sing
		or studiously say,
		on hearing that the year had swung to pause
		and culminated in an abundant thing,
		came his Lady’s birthday.
		
		Dogs fill daylight, doing each other ill:
		my own in love was lugged so many blocks
		we had to have a vet.
		Comes unrepentant round the lustful mongrel
		again today, glaring at her bandages & locks:
		his bark has grit.
		
		This screen-porch where my puppy suffers and 
		I swarm I hope with heartless love is now
		towards the close of day
		the scene of a vision of friendlies who withstand
		animal nature so far as to allow
		grace awhile to stay.


	2. DREAM SONG 1

		Huffy Henry hid the day,
		unappeasable Henry sulked.
		I see his point,--a trying to put things over.
		It was the thought that they thought
		they could do it made Henry wicked & away.
		But he should have come out and talked.
		
		All the world like a woolen lover
		once did seem on Henry’s side.
		Then came a departure.
		Thereafter nothing fell out as it might or ought.
		I don’t see how Henry, pried
		open for all the world to see, survived.
		
		What he has now to say is a long
		wonder the world can bear & be.
		Once in a sycamore I was glad
		all at the top, and I sang.
		Hard on the land wears the strong sea
		and empty grows every bed.


	3. DREAM SONG 122

		He published his girl’s bottom in staid pages
		of an old weekly. Where will next his rages
		ridiculous Henry land?
		Tranquil & chaste, de-hammocked, he descended--
		upon which note the fable should have ended--
		towards the ground, and
		
		while fable wound itself upon him thick
		and coats upon his tongue formed, white, terrific:
		he stretched out still.
		Assembled bands to do obsequious music
		at hopeless noon. He bayed before he obeyed,
		doing at last their will.
		
		This seemed perhaps one of the best of dogs
		during his barking. Many thronged & lapped
		at his delicious stone.
		Cats to a distance kept--one of their own--
		having in mind that down he lay & napped
		in the realm of whiskers & fogs.


	4. DREAM SONG 13

		God bless Henry. He lived like a rat,
		with a thatch of hair on his head
		in the beginning.
		Henry was not a coward. Much.
		He never deserted anything; instead
		he stuck, when things like pity were thinning.
		
		So may be Henry was a human being.
		Let’s investigate that.
		. . . We did; okay.
		He is a human American man.
		That’s true. My lass is braking.
		My brass is aching. Come & diminish me, & map my way.
		
		God’s Henry’s enemy. We’re in business . . . Why,
		what business must be clear.
		A cornering.
		I couldn’t feel more like it.--Mr. Bones,
		as I look on the saffron sky,
		you strikes me as ornery.


	5. DREAM SONG 14

		Life, friends, is boring. We must not say so.   
		After all, the sky flashes, the great sea yearns,   
		we ourselves flash and yearn,
		and moreover my mother told me as a boy   
		(repeatingly) ‘Ever to confess you’re bored   
		means you have no
		
		Inner Resources.’ I conclude now I have no   
		inner resources, because I am heavy bored.
		Peoples bore me,
		literature bores me, especially great literature,   
		Henry bores me, with his plights & gripes   
		as bad as achilles,
		
		who loves people and valiant art, which bores me.   
		And the tranquil hills, & gin, look like a drag   
		and somehow a dog
		has taken itself & its tail considerably away
		into mountains or sea or sky, leaving            
		behind: me, wag.


	6. DREAM SONG 29

		There sat down, once, a thing on Henry’s heart   
		só heavy, if he had a hundred years
		& more, & weeping, sleepless, in all them time   
		Henry could not make good.
		Starts again always in Henry’s ears
		the little cough somewhere, an odour, a chime.
		
		And there is another thing he has in mind   
		like a grave Sienese face a thousand years
		would fail to blur the still profiled reproach of. Ghastly,   
		with open eyes, he attends, blind.
		All the bells say: too late. This is not for tears;   
		thinking.
		
		But never did Henry, as he thought he did,
		end anyone and hacks her body up
		and hide the pieces, where they may be found.
		He knows: he went over everyone, & nobody’s missing.   
		Often he reckons, in the dawn, them up.
		Nobody is ever missing.


	7. DREAM SONG 4

		Filling her compact & delicious body
		with chicken páprika, she glanced at me
		twice.
		Fainting with interest, I hungered back
		and only the fact of her husband & four other people
		kept me from springing on her
		
		or falling at her little feet and crying
		‘You are the hottest one for years of night
		Henry’s dazed eyes
		have enjoyed, Brilliance.’ I advanced upon
		(despairing) my spumoni.--Sir Bones: is stuffed,
		de world, wif feeding girls.
		
		--Black hair, complexion Latin, jewelled eyes
		downcast . . . The slob beside her feasts . . . What wonders is
		she sitting on, over there?
		The restaurant buzzes. She might as well be on Mars.
		Where did it all go wrong? There ought to be a law against Henry.
		--Mr. Bones: there is.


	8. DREAM SONG 76

		Nothin very bad happen to me lately.
		How you explain that?--I explain that, Mr Bones,
		terms o’ your bafflin odd sobriety.
		Sober as man can get, no girls, no telephones,
		what could happen bad to Mr Bones?
		--If life is a handkerchief sandwich,
		
		in a modesty of death I join my father
		who dared so long agone leave me.
		A bullet on a concrete stoop
		close by a smothering southern sea
		spreadeagled on an island, by my knee.
		--You is from hunger, Mr Bones,
		
		I offers you this handkerchief, now set
		your left foot by my right foot,
		shoulder to shoulder, all that jazz,
		arm in arm, by the beautiful sea,
		hum a little, Mr Bones.
		--I saw nobody coming, so I went instead.


	9. ELEVEN ADDRESSES TO THE LORD

		1
		
		Master of beauty, craftsman of the snowflake,
		inimitable contriver,
		endower of Earth so gorgeous & different from the boring Moon,
		thank you for such as it is my gift.
		
		I have made up a morning prayer to you
		containing with precision everything that most matters.
		‘According to Thy will’ the thing begins.
		It took me off & on two days. It does not aim at eloquence.
		
		You have come to my rescue again & again
		in my impassable, sometimes despairing years.
		You have allowed my brilliant friends to destroy themselves
		and I am still here, severely damaged, but functioning.
		
		Unknowable, as I am unknown to my guinea pigs:
		how can I ‘love’ you?
		I only as far as gratitude & awe
		confidently & absolutely go.
		
		I have no idea whether we live again.
		It doesn’t seem likely
		from either the scientific or the philosophical point of view
		but certainly all things are possible to you,
		
		and I believe as fixedly in the Resurrection-appearances to Peter & to Paul
		as I believe I sit in this blue chair.
		Only that may have been a special case
		to establish their initiatory faith.
		
		Whatever your end may be, accept my amazement.
		May I stand until death forever at attention
		for any your least instruction or enlightenment.
		I even feel sure you will assist me again, Master of insight & beauty.
		
		
		2
		
		Holy, as I suppose I dare to call you
		without pretending to know anything about you
		but infinite capacity everywhere & always
		& in particular certain goodness to me.
		
		Yours is the crumpling, to my sister-in-law terrifying thunder,
		yours the candelabra buds sticky in Spring,
		Christ’s mercy,
		the gloomy wisdom of godless Freud:
		
		yours the lost souls in ill-attended wards,
		those agonized thro’ the world
		It this instant of time, all evil men,
		Belsen, Omaha Beach,--
		
		incomprehensible to man your ways.
		May be the Devil after all exists.
		‘I don’t try to reconcile anything’ said the poet at eighty,
		‘This is a damned strange world.’
		
		Man is ruining the pleasant earth & man.
		What at last, my Lord, will you allow?
		Postpone till after my children’s deaths your doom
		if it be thy ineffable, inevitable will.
		
		I say ‘Thy kingdom come’, it means nothing to me.
		Hast Thou prepared astonishments for man?
		One sudden Coming? Many so believe.
		So not, without knowing anything, do I.
		
		
		3
		
		Sole watchman of the flying stars, guard me
		against my flicker of impulse lust: teach me
		to see them as sisters & daughters. Sustain
		my grand endeavours: husbandship & crafting.
		
		Forsake me not when my wild hours come;
		grant me sleep nightly, grace soften my dreams;
		achieve in me patience till the thing be done,
		a careful view of my achievement come.
		
		Make me from time to time the gift of the shoulder.
		When all hurt nerves whine shut away the whiskey.
		Empty my heart toward Thee.
		Let me pace without fear the common path of death.
		
		Cross am I sometimes with my little daughter:
		fill her eyes with tears. Forgive me, Lord.
		Unite my various soul,
		sole watchman of the wide & single stars.
		
		
		4
		
		If I say Thy name, art Thou there? It may be so.
		Thou art not absent-minded, as I am.
		I am so much so I had to give up driving.
		You attend, I feel, to the matters of man.
		
		Across the ages certain blessings swarm,
		horrors accumulate, the best men fail:
		Socrates, Lincoln, Christ mysterious.
		Who can search Thee out?
		
		except Isaiah & Pascal, who saw.
		I dare not ask that vision, though a piece of it
		at last in crisis was vouchsafèd me.
		I altered then for good, to become yours.
		
		Caretaker! take care, for we run in straits.
		Daily, by night, we walk naked to storm,
		some threat of wholesale loss, to ruinous fear.
		Gift us with long cloaks & adrenalin.
		
		Who haunt the avenues of Angkor Wat
		recalling all that prayer, that glory dispersed,
		haunt me at the corner of Fifth & Hennepin.
		Shield & fresh fountain! Manifester! Even mine.
		
		
		5
		
		Holy, & holy. The damned are said to say
		‘We never thought we would come into this place.’
		I’m fairly clear, my Friend, there’s no such place
		ordained for inappropriate & evil man.
		
		Surely they fall dull, & forget. We too,
		the more or less just, I feel fall asleep
		dreamless forever while the worlds hurl out.
		Rest may be your ultimate gift.
		
		Rest or transfiguration! come & come
		whenever Thou wilt. My daughter & my son
		fend will without me, when my work is done
		in Your opinion.
		
		Strengthen my widow, let her dream on me
		thro’ tranquil hours less & down to less.
		Abrupt elsewhere her heart, I sharply hope.
		I leave her in wise Hands.
		
		
		6
		
		Under new management, Your Majesty:
		Thine. I have solo’d mine since childhood, since
		my father’s suicide when I was twelve
		blew out my most bright candle faith, and look at me.
		
		I served at Mass six dawns a week from five,
		adoring Father Boniface & you,
		memorizing the Latin he explained.
		Mostly we worked alone. One or two women.
		
		Then my poor father frantic. Confusions & afflictions
		followed my days. Wives left me.
		Bankrupt I closed my doors. You pierced the roof
		twice & again. Finally you opened my eyes.
		
		My double nature fused in that point of time
		three weeks ago day before yesterday.
		Now, brooding thro’ a history of the early Church,
		I identify with everybody, even the heresiarchs.
		
		
		7
		
		After a Stoic, a Peripatetic, a Pythagorean,
		Justin Martyr studied the words of the Saviour,
		finding them short, precise, terrible, & full of refreshment.
		I am tickled to learn this.
		
		Let one day desolate Sherry, fair, thin, tall,
		at 29 today her life the Sahara Desert,
		who has never once enjoyed a significant relation,
		so find His lightning words.
		
		
		_A Prayer for the Self_
		
		Who am I worthless that You spent such pains
		and take may pains again?
		I do not understand; but I believe.
		Jonquils respond with wit to the teasing breeze.
		
		Induct me down my secrets. Stiffen this heart
		to stand their horrifying cries, O cushion
		the first the second shocks, will to a halt
		in mid-air there demons who would be at me.
		
		May fade before, sweet morning on sweet morning,
		I wake my dreams, my fan-mail go astray,
		and do me little goods I have not thought of,
		ingenious & beneficial Father.
		
		Ease in their passing my beloved friends,
		all others too I have cared for in a travelling life,
		anyone anywhere indeed. Lift up
		sober toward truth a scared self-estimate.
		
		
		9
		
		Surprise me on some ordinary day
		with a blessing gratuitous. Even I’ve done good
		beyond their expectations. What count we then
		upon Your bounty?
		
		Interminable: an old theologian
		asserts that even to say You exist is misleading.
		Uh-huh. I buy that Second-century fellow.
		I press his withered glorifying hand.
		
		You certainly do not as I exist,
		impersonating as well the meteorite
		& flaring in your sun your waterfall
		or blind in caves pallid fishes.
		
		Bear in mind me, Who have forgotten nothing,
		& Who continues. I may not foreknow
		& fail much to remember. You sustain
		imperial desuetudes, at the kerb a widow.
		
		
		10
		
		Fearful I peer upon the mountain path
		where once Your shadow passed, Limner of the clouds
		up their phantastic guesses. I am afraid,
		I never until now confessed.
		
		I fell back in love with you, Father, for two reasons:
		You were good to me, & a delicious author,
		rational & passionate. Come on me again,
		as twice you came to Azarias & Misael.
		
		President of the brethren, our mild assemblies
		inspire, & bother the priest not to be dull;
		keep us week-long in order; love my children,
		my mother far & ill, far brother, my spouse.
		
		Oil all my turbulence as at Thy dictation
		I sweat out my wayward works.
		Father Hopkins said the only true literary critic is Christ.
		Let me lie down exhausted, content with that.
		
		
		11
		
		Germanicus leapt upon the wild lion in Smyrna,
		wishing to pass quickly from a lawless life.
		The crowd shook the stadium.
		The proconsul marvelled.
		
		‘Eighty & six years have I been his servant,
		and he has done me no harm.
		How can I blaspheme my King who saved me?’
		Polycarp, John’s pupil, facing the fire.
		
		Make too me acceptable at the end of time
		in my degree, which then Thou wilt award.
		Cancer, senility, mania,
		I pray I may be ready with my witness.


	10. FARE WELL

		Motions of waking trouble winter air,
		I wonder, and his face as it were forms
		Solemn, canorous, under the howled alarms,--
		The eyes shadowed and shut.
		Certainly for this sort of thing it is very late,
		I shudder, while my love longs and I pour
		My bright eyes towards the moving shadow . . . where?
		Out, like a plucked gut
		
		What has been taken away will not return,
		I take it, whether upon the crouch of night
		Or for my mountain need to share a morning’s light,--
		No! I am alone.
		What has been taken away should not have been shown,
		I complain, torturing, and then withdrawn.
		After so long, can I still long so and burn,
		Imperishable son?
		
		O easy the phoenix in the tree of the heart,
		Each in its time, his twigs and spices fixes
		To make a last nest, and marvellously relaxes,--
		Out of the fire, weak peep! . . .
		Father I fought for Mother, sleep where you sleep!
		I slip into a snowbed with no hurt
		Where warm will warm be warm enough to part
		Us. As I sink, I weep.


	11. FOUR DREAM SONGS

		I
		
		The greens of the Ganges delta foliate.
		Of heartless youth made late aware he pled:
		Brownies, please come.
		To Henry in his sparest times sometimes
		the little people spread, & did friendly things;
		then he was glad.
		
		Pleased, at the worst, except with man, he shook
		the brightest winter sun.
		All the green lives
		of the great delta, hours, hurt his migrant heart
		in a safety of the steady plane. Please, please
		come.
		
		My friends,--he has been known to mourn,--I’ll die;
		live you, in the most wild, kindly, green
		partly forgiving wood,
		sort of forever and all those human sings
		close not your better ears to, while good Spring
		returns with a dance and a sigh.
		
		
		II
		
		Henry’s pelt was put on sundry walls
		where it did much resemble Henry and
		them persons was delighted. Especially his long & glowing tail
		by all them was admired, and visitors.
		They whistled: This is _it!_
		
		Golden, whilst your frozen daiquiris
		whir at midnight, gleams on you his fur
		& silky & black.
		Mission accomplished, pal.
		My molten yellow & moonless bag,
		drained, hangs at rest.
		
		Collect in the cold depths barracuda. Ay,
		in Sealdah Station some possessionless
		hundreds exist & die.
		The Chinese communes hum. Two daiquiris
		withdrew into a corner of the gorgeous room
		and one told the other a lie.
		
		--I doubts you did or do. De choice is lost.
		--It’s fool’s gold. But I go in for that.
		The boy & the bear
		looked at each other. Man all is tossed
		& lost with groin-wounds by the grand bulls, cat.
		William Faulkner’s where?
		
		(Frost being still around.)
		
		
		III
		
		Spellbound held subtle Henry all his four
		hearers in the racket of the market
		with ancient signs, infamous characters,
		new rhythms. On the steps he was belov’d,
		hours a day, by all his four, or more,
		depending. And they paid him.
		
		It was not, so, like no one listening
		but critics famed & Henry’s pals or other
		writers at all
		chiefly in another country. No.
		He by the heart & brains & tail, because
		of their love for it, had them.
		
		Junk he said to all them open-mouth’d.
		Weather would govern. When the monsoon spread
		its floods, few came, two.
		Came a day when none, though he began
		in his accustomed way on the filthy steps
		in a crash of waters, came.
		
		
		IV
		
		The high ones die, die. They die. You look up and who’s there?
		--Easy, easy, Mr. Bones. I is on your side.
		I smell your grief.
		--I sent my grief away. I cannot care
		forever. With them all again & again I died
		and cried, and I have to live.
		--Now there _you_ exaggerate, Sah. We hafta _die_.
		That is our ‘pointed task. Love & die.
		--Yes; that makes sense.
		But what makes sense between, then? What if I
		roiling & babbling & braining, brood on why and
		just sat on the fence?


	12. FROM JOB

		_Job:_
		
		Perish the day’s fire in where I was born, and that
		 night’s joy crying ‘A boy!’
		That day let God enquire not down for, no brightness
		 burn there,
		But a dark of midnight claim, a black cloud seize it
		 wholly,
		Let all that stains & shrouds terrify that day.
		Disjoin from its fellow days it, exiled from the toil of
		 the months.
		Stony that night turn, joyless, empty of all song;
		Enchanters mark it curst, whose baleful power calls up
		 Leviathan;
		Its twilight stars be darkt, unseen the eyelids of its dawn;
		For it shut not the hole of my womb, but let me out to
		 trouble.
		
		Why died not I from the womb, incht-out still-born,
		Or fail aborted, carelessly buried, like children who
		 never saw light?
		Why my father’s knee accepting, breasts giving me
		 suck,--
		When now I should have lain still, and slept, and slept
		 at rest,
		With kings and the world’s counsellors, who built up
		 ruins to their glory,
		With princes heavy with gold, who houses filled with
		 silver;
		Where the wicked cease from raging, where the
		 exhausted rest,
		Where prisoners glad together hear not the voice of the
		 guard,
		Where small & great are the same, and the slave free
		 from a master.
		Wherefore is light to the miserable, wherefore living to
		 the bitter
		Who long for a death unforthcoming, and dig for it
		 like treasure,
		Whose hearts leap at a mound, a small mound, strain
		 toward a grave,
		Whose way is lockt off, who are hedged in by God
		 himself?
		To me moans came for food, my roars poured forth
		 like drink.
		I fear a fear: it comes. That which I dread comes to me.
		No ease was mine, no quiet, no rest; yet trouble came.
		
		
		_Eliphass:_
		
		Will it do if we speak to you? for who can here be still?
		Lo, you admonisht many, and to the frail sprang support,
		Your speech arrested those falling, you stiffened the
		 folding knees.
		Now it comes on, and you faint; touches you, fear.
		Is not good fear your boldness, this your integrity hope?
		Who perished ever,--remember?--pure? Where were
		 the good destroyed?
		Evil ones I have seen pluckt up, reaping an empty house,
		Their children cast away justiceless in the gates courts;
		I have seen a sowing of evil, until the wind-blast of God.
		The old hoarse lions roar, assailed, and the young lions
		 teeth are broken,
		And starve do old & young, and the lady’s cubs are
		 crusht forth.
		
		Now secretly a word came, and I gathered a little of it,
		In piecemeal visions of the night, when deep sleep takes
		 men;
		Entered me fear, and trembling, and all my bones shook,
		Before my face a spirit passed, my head’s hair shuddered,
		It stood still, no part of that appearance clear to me,
		A form was before my eyes, in silence, and I heard a
		 voice:
		(_word unclear_) men can be just before God? Can a man
		 be pure as his maker?
		Who can place trust in His servants? His angels fail to
		 you;
		Then what in those whose houses are mud, whose
		 foundations are mud.
		
		Who crunch like a moth, between the dawn and evening,
		Who are shattered, so, and unseen perish for ever.
		Rage is the foolish man’s enemy, resentment doubles
		 his woe;
		I have seen him taking root, and curst his house suddenly,
		For his children are unsafe, and suffer in the gate, unaided.
		Their harvest any hungry eat--even from thorns, and
		 the snare gapes.
		From the dust woe comes not, nor shoots from the
		 ground.
		But man is born to trouble, as the angels fly off.
		Were it mine, I would seek Shaddai and put the case
		 there,
		Who ancient enigmatic great deeds does, marvellous at,
		 numberless,
		Rain-donor here, prolific of waters elsewhere, anywhere,
		Place-alterer, lifting up the low, restoring the mourning,
		Who moves on the crafty’s schemes, emptying their
		 hands,
		Who takes the wise in their own devices, the wily’s
		 counsels blows away;
		Darkness at noon abruptly they meet, and grope, and
		 grope:
		The Good from their mouths he snatches, the poor
		 from their power,
		So that the poor have hope, and evil shuts its mouth.
		
		Lo, happy a man whom God corrects, who Shaddai’s
		 training takes;
		For first He hurts, then heals; wounds, and His hands
		 make whole;
		Out from six woes He saves you,--seven, and He saves;
		In famine keeps you from dying, in war from the sword’s
		 power.
		From spells you sheltered, scathless when demons come:
		At them and hunger laugh, look upon beasts without fear,
		For you be in league with the satyrs of the fields, at
		 peace with the wild beasts.
		And your tent shall be at peace, your home-place whole.
		Many your seed, in your confidence, your offspring
		 like the grass.
		You shall die unimpaired, & old, as a shock of corn in
		 its season.
		So: here is our knowing, & truth, & proven: hear it in
		 your heart.


	13. FROM THE BLACK BOOK

		_not him_
		
		Grandfather, sleepless in a room upstairs,
		Seldom came down; so when they tript him down
		We wept. The blind light sang about his ears,
		Later we heard. Brother had pull. In pairs
		He, some, slept upon stone.
		Later they stamped him down in mud.
		The windlass drew him silly & odd-eyed, blood
		Broke from his ears before they quit.
		Before they trucked him home they cleaned him up
		   somewhat.
		
		Only the loose eyes’ glaze they could not clean
		And soon he died. He howled a night and shook
		Our teeth before the end; we breathed again
		When he stopt. Abraham, what we have seen
		Write, I beg, in your Book.
		No more the solemn and high bells
		Call to our pall; we crawl or gibber; Hell’s
		Irritable & treacherous
		Despairs here here (not him) reach now to shatter us.
		
		
		2
		
		_Luftmenschen_ dream, the men who live on air,
		Of other values, in the blackness watching
		Peaceful for gangs or a quick raid,
		The ghetto nods a mortal head
		Soundless but for a scurry, a sigh, retching,--
		No moan of generation fear.
		Hands hold each other limper
		While the moon lengthens on the sliding river.
		
		Prolong the woolen night--Solomon sang--
		And never the soul with its own revenge encumber
		But like a cry of cranes dies out,
		Ecstatic, faint, a moment float--
		ing, fying soul, or flares like August timber
		In wild woe vanishing.
		Blue grows from grey, towards slaughter.
		(An Ashkenazi genius stoned Ivan; a sculptor.)
		
		“Boleslaus brought us here, surnamed the Good,
		Whose dust rolls nearly seven hundred years
		Towards Sirius: we thank that King
		As for the ledge whereto we cling,
		Night in the caves under the ruins; stars,
		Armbands come off, for which we could
		Be glad but the black troops gather.”
		So those who kneel in the paling sky and shiver.
		
		Dawn like a rose unfolds--flower of parks--
		Alleys of limetrees, villas, ponds, a palace
		Down a deserted riverbed,
		The Lazienki Gardens’ pride,
		Monument to a king able and callous
		Who far Vienna from the Turks
		Bloodily did deliver.
		For foreigners, now, a sort of theatre.
		
		One officer in black demarches here
		Cupshot, torn collar by a bitch unwilling
		Native & blonde through the debauch
		That kept him all night from his couch,
		Hurts his head and from the others’ howling
		Drove him out for morning air.
		Brooding over the water
		He reddens suddenly. He went back & shot her.
		
		
		_the will_
		
		A frail vague man, in whom our senses ached
		With nothing, began to whisper with himself
		At line-up, from the rear,--
		We trembled for him,--shook the scald that caked
		His skull, totting up phantoms none could solve,
		Fag-end of a career.
		
		(Shadowless in a cairn, four lights. Farewell,
		The legacy trots off,
		A swimming moment of the stiff’s desire
		Such decades since. Or nothing trots to tell
		Intestate once with love
		Pain brain stood up a bit out of time’s mire.)
		He scrambled one night out
		And dodged between their lights far to the wire,
		Where he lodged. I suppose he crisped, dying in fire;
		A shot or so, a shout;
		But certainly, lifting our scalps, well beyond fear,
		He suddenly sang, sang, hanging on the wire.
		
		
		_the waiting_
		
		Nearer, my heart, to me . . . My cigarette
		Endures an apotheosis; I feel
		More for the grey twirl than I mull or whet
		God’s promise . . . probably the butt is real.
		Now I seem less so. Than tissue & ash
		I am more indistinct, than fire and weed
		Yielding to fire, as fire to the weed’s trash:
		Do pins & feathers kill? Can a root bleed?
		Master my heart will nothing to my side?
		Otherwhere, neither broods nor aches for me
		Regitive by the iron door unterrified
		Foully it leans. That hole, my mystery,
		
		Which once its bolt, the muscle of their State,
		Opened to drop me in, cannot keep shut!
		Lancet intensities I anticipate!
		Feathery movement twires about my thought!
		
		The frontier posts, disfigured sphincters, spill
		Invaders home; heart through the ribs returns;
		How corn & wine return, transfigured, fill
		Sleepy lands, our land. Ice on my brow burns,
		
		Ebbing, blackfellow-dull, when the bolt shoots
		Over the tigerish flood may I soar steady
		Whither the latched starless & heartless roots
		O need blindly night. I am almost ready--


	14. HE STARED AT RUIN

		He stared at ruin. Ruin stared straight back.
		He thought they was old friends. He felt on the stair
		where her father found them bare
		they became familiar. When the papers were lost
		rich with pals’ secrets, he thought he had the knack
		of ruin. Their paths crossed
		
		and once they crossed in jail; they crossed in bed;
		and over an unsigned letter their eyes met,
		and in an Asian city
		directionless & lurching at two & three,
		and trembling to a telephone’s fresh threat,
		and when some wired his head
		
		to reach a wrong opinion, ‘Epileptic’
		But he noted now that: they were not old friends.
		He did not know this one.
		This one was a stranger, come to make amends
		for all the imposters, and to make it stick.
		Henry nodded, un-.


	15. INNOCENT

		Cats’ eyes could see a flub of blood.
		Hm. Not her eyes whose pain
		Arched in the dark by the roadside.
		No cats, nothing. She tried, & tried,
		Troubling not Christ’s night in vain.
		
		Scum of the moon caught on her chin,
		Harmless & sickle moon, a slack
		Drink-dull passer noticed her,
		To gather the beggar out of the blur
		Into his wagon, sick, and track.
		
		The soft flesh melted from the bones
		Of the child born dead, for days & days
		In the wood’s edge. Birds, nothing came.
		Bones go. All is the same, the same,--
		Except our envy O wintry praise!


	16. SONNET

		Sometimes the night echoes to prideless wailing
		Low as I hunch home late and fever-tired,
		Near you not, nearing the sharer I desired,
		Toward whom till now I sailed back . . but that sailing
		Yaws, from the cabin orders like a failing
		Dribble, the stores disordered and then fired
		Skid wild, the men are glaring, the mate has wired
		_Hopeless:_ Locked in, and humming, the Captain’s nailing
		A false log to the lurching table. Lies
		And passion sing in the cabin on the voyage home,
		The burgee should fly Jolly Roger: wind
		Madness like the tackle of a crane (outcries
		Ascend) around to heave him from the foam
		Irresponsible, since all the stars rain blind.


	17. SURVIVING LOVE

		The clapper hovers, but why run so hard?
		What he wants, has,
		--more than will make him ease;
		No god calls down,--he’s not been on his knees
		This man, for years, and he is off his guard.
		What then does he dream of
		Sweating through day?--Surviving love.
		
		Cold he knows he comes, once to the dark,
		All that waste of cold, leaving all cold
		Behind him hearts, forgotten when he’s tolled,
		His books are split and sold, the pencil mark
		He made erased, his wife
		Gone brave and quick to her new life.
		
		And so he spins to find out something warm
		To think on when the glaze fastens his eyes
		And he begins to freeze. He slows and tries
		To hear a promise: ‘After, after your storm
		I will grieve and remember,
		Miss you and be warm and remember.’
		
		But really nothing replies to the poor man,
		He never hears this, or the voice he hears
		(He thinks) he loses ah when next appears
		The hood of the bell, seeing which he began.
		His skull rings with his end,
		He runs on, love for love.


	18. THE BALL POEM

		What is the boy now, who has lost his ball.
		What, what is he to do? I saw it go
		Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
		Merrily over—there it is in the water!
		No use to say ‘O there are other balls’:
		An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
		As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
		All his young days into the harbour where
		His ball went. I would not intrude on him,
		A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
		He senses first responsibility
		In a world of possessions. People will take balls,
		Balls will be lost always, little boy,
		And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
		He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
		The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
		Knowing what every man must one day know
		And most know many days, how to stand up
		And gradually light returns to the street,
		A whistle blows, the ball is out of sight.
		Soon part of me will explore the deep and dark
		Floor of the harbour . . I am everywhere,
		I suffer and move, my mind and my heart move
		With all that move me, under the water
		Or whistling, I am not a little boy.


	19. THE DISPOSSESSED

		‘and something that . . that is theirs--no longer ours’
		stammered to me the Italian page. A wood
		seeded & towered suddenly. I understood.--
		
		The Leading Man’s especially, and the Juvenile Lead’s,
		and the Leading Lady’s thigh that switches and warms,
		and their grimaces, and their flying arms:
		
		_our_ arms, our story. Every seat was sold.
		A crone met in a clearing sprouts a beard
		and has a tirade. Not a word we heard.
		
		Movement of stone within a woman’s heart,
		abrupt and dominant. They gesture how
		fings really are. Rarely a child sings now.
		
		My harpsichord weird as a koto drums
		_adagio_ for twilight, for the storm-worn dove
		no more de-iced, and the spidery business of love.
		
		The Juvenile Lead’s the Leader’s arm, one arm
		running the whole bole, branches, roots, (O watch)
		and the faceless fellow waving from her crotch,
		
		Stalin-unanimous! who procured a vote
		and care not use it, who have kept an eye
		and care not use it, percussive vote, clear eye.
		
		That which a captain and a weaponeer
		one day and one more day did, we did, _ach_
		we did not, _They_ did . . cam slid, the great lock
		
		lodged, and no soul of us all was near was near,--
		an evil sky (where the umbrella bloomed)
		twirled its mustaches, hissed, the ingenue fumed,
		
		poor virgin, and no hero rides. The race
		is done. Drifts through, between the cold black trunks,
		the peachblow glory of the perishing sun
		
		in empty houses where old things take place.


	20. WHOLLY FAIL

		Sir Partofall, our Best, O the Physicist is
		(Wizards of Oak Ridge and Los Alamos)
		Your questrist foxing up a drug that may
		Or may not, who knows . . so (but not a word)
		“A livens wife’s and mother’s and son’s coffee
		His own, therewith one holy night; next day
		None descends, if the silence in the house
		Is unusual and complete, like a curtain,
		He will know (or will not, will he) he has failed.
		Such a good Doctor nominate a beast
		Or madman: if he reached the Chair alive,
		O lucky Doctor. Let us hang our faith
		--To master the power of the grave, much; more,
		The power to unwit; most, curst and clouded shore,
		The power of despair.--
		Instead on him on to the Grail, throw the State there
		To see what he can find
		Useful for mankind,
		Useful although uncertain:
		Where Partsusall, transfigured, white with joy,
		Smiles thro’ the blast and fiery wind spreading out from
		 zero--


	21. WINTER LANDSCAPE

		The three men coming down the winter hill
		In brown, with tall poles and a pack of hounds
		At heel, through the arrangement of the trees,
		Past the five figures at the burning straw,
		Returning cold and silent to their town,
		
		Returning to the drifted snow, the rink
		Lively with children, to the older men,
		The long companions they can never reach,
		The blue light, men with ladders, by the church
		The sledge and shadow in the twilit street,
		
		Are not aware that in the sandy time
		To come, the evil waste of history
		Outstretched, they will be seen upon the brow
		Of that same hill: when all their company
		Will have been irrecoverably lost,
		
		These men, this particular three in brown
		Witnessed by birds will keep the scene and say
		By their configuration with the trees,
		The small bridge, the red houses and the fire,
		What place, what time, what morning occasion
		
		Sent them into the wood, a pack of hounds
		At heel and the tall poles upon their shoulders,
		Thence to return as now we see them and
		Ankle-deep in snow down the winter hill
		Descend, while three birds watch and the fourth flies.


*** Elizabeth Bishop (1911 - 1979)

	1. A COLD SPRING

		_Nothing is so beautiful as spring._ --Hopkins
		
		A cold spring:
		the violet was flawed on the lawn.
		For two weeks or more the trees hesitated;
		the little leaves waited,
		carefully indicating their characteristics.
		Finally a grave green dust
		settled over your big and aimless hills.
		One day, in a chill white blast of sunshine,
		on the side of one a calf was born.
		The mother stopped lowing
		and took a long time eating the after-birth,
		a wretched flag,
		but the calf got up promptly
		and seemed inclined to feel gay.
		
		The next day
		was much warmer.
		Greenish-white dogwood infiltrated the wood,
		each petal burned, apparently, by a cigarette-butt;
		and the blurred redbud stood
		beside it, motionless, but almost more
		like movement than any placeable color.
		Four deer practiced leaping over your fences.
		The infant oak-leaves swung through the sober oak.
		Song-sparrows were wound up for the summer,
		and in the maple the complementary cardinal
		cracked a whip, and the sleeper awoke,
		stretching miles of green limbs from the south.
		
		In his cap the lilacs whitened,
		then one day they fell like snow.
		Now, in the evening,
		a new moon comes.
		The hills grow softer. Tufts of long grass show
		where each cow-flop lies.
		The bull-frogs are sounding,
		slack strings plucked by heavy thumbs.
		Beneath the light, against your white front door,
		the smallest moths, like Chinese fans,
		flatten themselves, silver and silver-gilt
		over pale yellow, orange, or gray.
		Now, from the thick grass, the fireflies
		begin to rise:
		up, then down, then up again:
		lit on the ascending flight,
		drifting simultaneously to the same height,
		--exactly like the bubbles in champagne.
		--Later on they rise much higher.
		And your shadowy pastures will be able to offer
		these particular glowing tributes
		every evening now throughout the summer.


	2. A MIRACLE FOR BREAKFAST

		_“Miracles enable us to judge of doctrine, and doctrine enables us to
		judge of miracles.”_
		
		At six o’clock we were waiting for coffee,
		Waiting for coffee and the charitable crumb
		That was going to be served from a certain balcony,
		--Like kings of old, or like a miracle.
		It was still dark. One foot of the sun
		Steadied itself on a long ripple in the river.
		
		The first ferry of the day had just crossed the river.
		It was so cold we hoped the coffee
		Would be very hot, seeing that the sun
		Was not going to warm us; and that the crumb
		Would be a loaf each buttered, by a miracle.
		At seven a man stepped out on the balcony.
		
		He stood for a minute alone on the balcony
		Looking over our heads towards the river.
		A servant handed him the makings of the miracle,
		Consisting of one lone cup of coffee
		And one roll, which he proceeded to crumb,
		His head, so to speak, in the clouds--along with the sun.
		
		Was the man crazy? What under the sun
		Was he trying to do, up there on his balcony!
		Each man received one rather hard crumb,
		Which some flicked scornfully into the river,
		And, in a cup, one drop of the coffee.
		Some of us stood around, waiting for the miracle.
		
		I can tell what I saw next; it was not a miracle.
		A beautiful villa stood in the sun
		And from its doors came the smell of hot coffee.
		In front, a baroque white plaster balcony
		Added by birds, who nest along the river,
		--I saw it with one eye close to the crumb--
		
		And galleries and marble chambers. My crumb
		My mansion, made for me by a miracle,
		Through ages, by insects, birds, and the river
		Working the stone. Every day, in the sun,
		At breakfast time I sit on my balcony
		With my feet up, and drink gallons of coffee.
		
		We licked up the crumb and swallowed the coffee.
		A window across the river caught the sun
		As if the miracle were working, on the wrong balcony.


	3. ARRIVAL AT SANTOS

		Here is a coast; here is a harbor;
		here, after a meager diet of horizon, is some scenery;
		impractically shaped and--who knows?--self-pitying mountains,
		sad and harsh beneath their frivolous greenery,
		
		with a little church on top of one. And warehouses,
		some of them painted a feeble pink, or blue,
		and some tall, uncertain palms. Oh, tourist,
		is this how this country is going to answer you
		
		and your immodest demands for a different world,
		and a better life, and complete comprehension
		of both at last, and immediately,
		after eighteen days of suspension?
		
		Finish your breakfast. The tender is coming,
		a strange and ancient craft, flying a strange and brilliant rag.
		So that’s the flag. I never saw it before.
		I somehow never thought of there being a flag,
		
		but of course there was, all along. And coins, I presume,
		and paper money; they remain to be seen.
		And gingerly now we climb down the ladder backward,
		myself and a fellow passenger named Miss Breen,
		
		descending into the midst of twenty-six freighters
		waiting to be loaded with green coffee beans.
		Please, boy, do be more careful with that boat hook!
		Watch out! Oh! It has caught Miss Breen’s
		
		skirt! There! Miss Breen is about seventy,
		a retired police lieutenant, six feet tall,
		with beautiful bright blue eyes and a kind expression.
		Her home, when she is at home, is in Glens Fall
		
		s, New York. There. We are settled.
		The customs officials will speak English, we hope,
		and leave us our bourbon and cigarettes.
		Ports are necessities, like postage stamps, or soap,
		
		but they seldom seem to care what impression they make,
		or, like this, only attempt, since it does not matter,
		the unassertive colors of soap, or postage stamps--
		wasting away like the former, slipping the way the latter
		
		do when we mail the letteres we wrote on the boat,
		either because the glue here is very inferior
		or because of the heat. We leave Santos at once;
		we are driving to the interior.


	4. AT THE FISHHOUSES

		Although it is a cold evening,
		down by one of the fishhouses
		an old man sits netting,
		his net, in the gloaming almost invisible,
		a dark purple-brown,
		and his shuttle worn and polished.
		The air smells so strong of codfish
		it makes one’s nose run and one’s eyes water.
		The five fishhouses have steeply peaked roofs
		and narrow, cleated gangplanks slant up
		to storerooms in the gables
		for the wheelbarrows to be pushed up and down on.
		All is silver: the heavy surface of the sea,
		swelling slowly as if considering spilling over,
		is opaque, but the silver of the benches,
		the lobster pots, and masts, scattered
		among the wild jagged rocks,
		is of an apparent translucence
		like the small old buildings with an emerald moss
		growing on their shoreward walls.
		The big fish tubs are completely lined
		with layers of beautiful herring scales
		and the wheelbarrows are similarly plastered
		with creamy iridescent coats of mail,
		with small iridescent flies crawling on them.
		Up on the little slope behind the houses,
		set in the sparse bright sprinkle of grass,
		is an ancient wooden capstan,
		cracked, with two long bleached handles
		and some melancholy stains, like dried blood,
		where the ironwork has rusted.
		The old man accepts a Lucky Strike.
		He was a friend of my grandfather.
		We talk of the decline in the population
		and of codfish and herring
		while he waits for a herring boat to come in.
		There are sequins on his vest and on his thumb.
		He has scraped the scales, the principal beauty,
		from unnumbered fish with that black old knife,
		the blade of which is almost worn away.
		
		Down at the water’s edge, at the place
		where they haul up the boats, up the long ramp
		descending into the water, thin silver
		tree trunks are laid horizontally
		across the gray stones, down and down
		at intervals of four or five feet.
		
		Cold dark deep and absolutely clear,
		element bearable to no mortal,
		to fish and to seals . . . One seal particularly
		I have seen here evening after evening.
		He was curious about me. He was interested in music;
		like me a believer in total immersion,
		so I used to sing him Baptist hymns.
		I also sang “A Mighty Fortress Is Our God.”
		He stood up in the water and regarded me
		steadily, moving his head a little.
		Then he would disappear, then suddenly emerge
		almost in the same spot, with a sort of shrug
		as if it were against his better judgment.
		Cold dark deep and absolutely clear,
		the clear gray icy water . . . Back, behind us,
		the dignified tall firs begin.
		Bluish, associating with their shadows,
		a million Christmas trees stand
		waiting for Christmas. The water seems suspended
		above the rounded gray and blue-gray stones.
		I have seen it over and over, the same sea, the same,
		slightly, indifferently swinging above the stones,
		icily free above the stones,
		above the stones and then the world.
		If you should dip your hand in,
		your wrist would ache immediately,
		your bones would begin to ache and your hand would burn
		as if the water were a transmutation of fire
		that feeds on stones and burns with a dark gray flame.
		If you tasted it, it would first taste bitter,
		then briny, then surely burn your tongue.
		It is like what we imagine knowledge to be:
		dark, salt, clear, moving, utterly free,
		drawn from the cold hard mouth
		of the world, derived from the rocky breasts
		forever, flowing and drawn, and since
		our knowledge is historical, flowing, and flown.   


	5. CRUSOE IN ENGLAND

		A new volcano has erupted,
		the papers say, and last week I was reading   
		where some ship saw an island being born:   
		at first a breath of steam, ten miles away;   
		and then a black fleck--basalt, probably--
		rose in the mate’s binoculars
		and caught on the horizon like a fly.
		They named it. But my poor old island’s still   
		un-rediscovered, un-renamable.
		None of the books has ever got it right.
		
		Well, I had fifty-two
		miserable, small volcanoes I could climb   
		with a few slithery strides--
		volcanoes dead as ash heaps.
		I used to sit on the edge of the highest one   
		and count the others standing up,
		naked and leaden, with their heads blown off.   
		I’d think that if they were the size   
		I thought volcanoes should be, then I had   
		become a giant;
		and if I had become a giant,
		I couldn’t bear to think what size   
		the goats and turtles were,
		or the gulls, or the overlapping rollers   
		--a glittering hexagon of rollers   
		closing and closing in, but never quite,   
		glittering and glittering, though the sky   
		was mostly overcast.
		
		My island seemed to be
		a sort of cloud-dump. All the hemisphere’s   
		left-over clouds arrived and hung
		above the craters--their parched throats   
		were hot to touch.
		Was that why it rained so much?
		And why sometimes the whole place hissed?   
		The turtles lumbered by, high-domed,   
		hissing like teakettles.
		(And I’d have given years, or taken a few,   
		for any sort of kettle, of course.)
		The folds of lava, running out to sea,
		would hiss. I’d turn. And then they’d prove   
		to be more turtles.
		The beaches were all lava, variegated,   
		black, red, and white, and gray;
		the marbled colors made a fine display.   
		And I had waterspouts. Oh,
		half a dozen at a time, far out,
		they’d come and go, advancing and retreating,   
		their heads in cloud, their feet in moving patches   
		of scuffed-up white.
		Glass chimneys, flexible, attenuated,   
		sacerdotal beings of glass . . . I watched   
		the water spiral up in them like smoke.   
		Beautiful, yes, but not much company.
		
		I often gave way to self-pity.
		“Do I deserve this? I suppose I must.
		I wouldn’t be here otherwise. Was there   
		a moment when I actually chose this?
		I don’t remember, but there could have been.”   
		What’s wrong about self-pity, anyway?
		With my legs dangling down familiarly   
		over a crater’s edge, I told myself
		“Pity should begin at home.” So the more   
		pity I felt, the more I felt at home.
		
		The sun set in the sea; the same odd sun   
		rose from the sea,
		and there was one of it and one of me.   
		The island had one kind of everything:   
		one tree snail, a bright violet-blue
		with a thin shell, crept over everything,   
		over the one variety of tree,
		a sooty, scrub affair.
		Snail shells lay under these in drifts   
		and, at a distance,
		you’d swear that they were beds of irises.   
		There was one kind of berry, a dark red.   
		I tried it, one by one, and hours apart.   
		Sub-acid, and not bad, no ill effects;   
		and so I made home-brew. I’d drink   
		the awful, fizzy, stinging stuff
		that went straight to my head
		and play my home-made flute
		(I think it had the weirdest scale on earth)   
		and, dizzy, whoop and dance among the goats.   
		Home-made, home-made! But aren’t we all?   
		I felt a deep affection for
		the smallest of my island industries.   
		No, not exactly, since the smallest was   
		a miserable philosophy.
		
		Because I didn’t know enough.
		Why didn’t I know enough of something?   
		Greek drama or astronomy? The books   
		I’d read were full of blanks;
		the poems--well, I tried
		reciting to my iris-beds,
		“They flash upon that inward eye,
		which is the bliss . . .” The bliss of what?   
		One of the first things that I did
		when I got back was look it up.
		
		The island smelled of goat and guano.   
		The goats were white, so were the gulls,   
		and both too tame, or else they thought   
		I was a goat, too, or a gull.
		Baa, baa, baa and shriek, shriek, shriek,
		baa . . . shriek . . . baa . . . I still can’t shake   
		them from my ears; they’re hurting now.
		The questioning shrieks, the equivocal replies   
		over a ground of hissing rain
		and hissing, ambulating turtles
		got on my nerves.
		When all the gulls flew up at once, they sounded
		like a big tree in a strong wind, its leaves.   
		I’d shut my eyes and think about a tree,   
		an oak, say, with real shade, somewhere.   
		I’d heard of cattle getting island-sick.   
		I thought the goats were.
		One billy-goat would stand on the volcano
		I’d christened Mont d’Espoir or Mount Despair 
		(I’d time enough to play with names),   
		and bleat and bleat, and sniff the air.   
		I’d grab his beard and look at him.   
		His pupils, horizontal, narrowed up
		and expressed nothing, or a little malice.   
		I got so tired of the very colors!   
		One day I dyed a baby goat bright red   
		with my red berries, just to see   
		something a little different.
		And then his mother wouldn’t recognize him.
		
		Dreams were the worst. Of course I dreamed of food
		and love, but they were pleasant rather
		than otherwise. But then I’d dream of things   
		like slitting a baby’s throat, mistaking it   
		for a baby goat. I’d have
		nightmares of other islands
		stretching away from mine, infinities   
		of islands, islands spawning islands,   
		like frogs’ eggs turning into polliwogs   
		of islands, knowing that I had to live   
		on each and every one, eventually,   
		for ages, registering their flora,   
		their fauna, their geography.
		
		Just when I thought I couldn’t stand it   
		another minute longer, Friday came.   
		(Accounts of that have everything all wrong.)   
		Friday was nice.
		Friday was nice, and we were friends.   
		If only he had been a woman!
		I wanted to propagate my kind,   
		and so did he, I think, poor boy.
		He’d pet the baby goats sometimes,
		and race with them, or carry one around.   
		--Pretty to watch; he had a pretty body.
		
		And then one day they came and took us off.
		
		Now I live here, another island,
		that doesn’t seem like one, but who decides?
		My blood was full of them; my brain   
		bred islands. But that archipelago
		has petered out. I’m old.
		I’m bored, too, drinking my real tea,   
		surrounded by uninteresting lumber.
		The knife there on the shelf--
		it reeked of meaning, like a crucifix.
		It lived. How many years did I   
		beg it, implore it, not to break?
		I knew each nick and scratch by heart,
		the bluish blade, the broken tip,
		the lines of wood-grain on the handle . . .
		Now it won’t look at me at all.   
		The living soul has dribbled away.   
		My eyes rest on it and pass on.
		
		The local museum’s asked me to
		leave everything to them:
		the flute, the knife, the shrivelled shoes,
		my shedding goatskin trousers
		(moths have got in the fur),
		the parasol that took me such a time   
		remembering the way the ribs should go.
		It still will work but, folded up,
		looks like a plucked and skinny fowl.
		How can anyone want such things?
		--And Friday, my dear Friday, died of measles
		seventeen years ago come March.


	6. FILLING STATION

		Oh, but it is dirty!
		--this little filling station,
		oil-soaked, oil-permeated
		to a disturbing, over-all
		black translucency.
		Be careful with that match!
		
		Father wears a dirty,
		oil-soaked monkey suit
		that cuts him under the arms,
		and several quick and saucy
		and greasy sons assist him
		(it’s a family filling station),
		all quite thoroughly dirty.
		
		Do they live in the station?
		It has a cement porch
		behind the pumps, and on it
		a set of crushed and grease-
		impregnated wickerwork;
		on the wicker sofa
		a dirty dog, quite comfy.
		
		Some comic books provide
		the only note of color--
		of certain color. They lie
		upon a big dim doily
		draping a taboret
		(part of the set), beside
		a big hirsute begonia.
		
		Why the extraneous plant?
		Why the taboret?
		Why, oh why, the doily?
		(Embroidered in daisy stitch
		with marguerites, I think,
		and heavy with gray crochet.)
		
		Somebody embroidered the doily.
		Somebody waters the plant,
		or oils it, maybe. Somebody
		arranges the rows of cans
		so that they softly say:
		ESSO--SO--SO--SO
		to high-strung automobiles.
		Somebody loves us all.


	7. FROM THE COUNTRY TO THE CITY

		    The long, long legs,
		League-boots of land, that carry the city nowhere,
		    Nowhere; the lines
		That we drive on (the satin-stripes on harlequin’s
		    Trousers, tights) ;
		His tough trunk dressed in tatters, scribbled over with
		    Nonsensical signs;
		His shadowy, tall dunce-cap; and best of all his
		    Shows and sights,
		His brain appears, throned in “fantastic triumph.”
		    And shines through his hat
		With jewelled works at work at intermeshing crowns,
		    Lamé with lights.
		As we approach, wickedest clown, your heart and head
		    We can see that
		Glittering arrangement of your brain consists, now,
		    Of mermaid-like,
		Seated, ravishing sirens, each waving her hand-mirror;
		    And we start at
		Series of slight disturbances up in the telephone wires
		    On the turnpike.
		Flocks of short, shining wires seem to be flying sidewise.
		    Are they birds?
		They flash again. No. They are vibrations of the tuning-fork
		    You hold and strike
		Against the mirror-frames, then draw for miles, your dreams,
		    Out country-wards.
		We bring a message from the long black length of body:
		    “Subside,” it begs and begs.


	8. IN THE WAITING ROOM

		In Worcester, Massachusetts,
		I went with Aunt Consuelo
		to keep her dentist’s appointment
		and sat and waited for her
		in the dentist’s waiting room.
		It was winter. It got dark
		early. The waiting room
		was full of grown-up people,
		arctics and overcoats,
		lamps and magazines.
		My aunt was inside
		what seemed like a long time
		and while I waited I read
		the National Geographic
		(I could read) and carefully
		studied the photographs:
		the inside of a volcano,
		black, and full of ashes;
		then it was spilling over
		in rivulets of fire.
		Osa and Martin Johnson
		dressed in riding breeches,
		laced boots, and pith helmets.
		A dead man slung on a pole
		--“Long Pig,“ the caption said.
		Babies with pointed heads
		wound round and round with string;
		black, naked women with necks
		wound round and round with wire
		like the necks of light bulbs.
		Their breasts were horrifying.
		I read it right straight through.
		I was too shy to stop.
		And then I looked at the cover:
		the yellow margins, the date.
		Suddenly, from inside,
		came an oh! of pain
		--Aunt Consuelo’s voice--
		not very loud or long.
		I wasn’t at all surprised;
		even then I knew she was
		a foolish, timid woman.
		I might have been embarrassed,
		but wasn’t. What took me
		completely by surprise
		was that it was me:
		my voice, in my mouth.
		Without thinking at all
		I was my foolish aunt,
		I--we--were falling, falling,
		our eyes glued to the cover
		of the National Geographic,
		February, 1918.
		
		I said to myself: three days
		and you’ll be seven years old.
		I was saying it to stop
		the sensation of falling off
		the round, turning world.
		into cold, blue-black space.
		But I felt: you are an I,
		you are an Elizabeth,
		you are one of them.
		Why should you be one, too?
		I scarcely dared to look
		to see what it was I was.
		I gave a sidelong glance
		--I couldn’t look any higher--
		at shadowy gray knees,
		trousers and skirts and boots
		and different pairs of hands
		lying under the lamps.
		I knew that nothing stranger
		had ever happened, that nothing
		stranger could ever happen.
		
		Why should I be my aunt,
		or me, or anyone?
		What similarities--
		boots, hands, the family voice
		I felt in my throat, or even
		the National Geographic
		and those awful hanging breasts--
		held us all together
		or made us all just one?
		How--I didn’t know any
		word for it--how “unlikely” . . .
		How had I come to be here,
		like them, and overhear
		a cry of pain that could have
		got loud and worse but hadn’t?
		
		The waiting room was bright
		and too hot. It was sliding
		beneath a big black wave,
		another, and another.
		
		Then I was back in it.
		The War was on. Outside,
		in Worcester, Massachusetts,
		were night and slush and cold,
		and it was still the fifth
		of February, 1918.


	9. LITTLE EXERCISE

		Think of the storm roaming the sky uneasily
		like a dog looking for a place to sleep in,
		listen to it growling.
		
		Think how they must look now, the mangrove keys
		lying out there unresponsive to the lightning
		in dark, coarse-fibred families,
		
		where occasionally a heron may undo his head,
		shake up his feathers, make an uncertain comment
		when the surrounding water shines.
		
		Think of the boulevard and the little palm trees
		all stuck in rows, suddenly revealed
		as fistfuls of limp fish-skeletons.
		
		It is raining there. The boulevard
		and its broken sidewalks with weeds in every crack
		are relieved to be wet, the sea to be freshened.
		
		Now the storm goes away again in a series
		of small, badly lit battle-scenes,
		each in “Another part of the field.”
		
		Think of someone sleeping in the bottom of a row-boat
		tied to a mangrove root or the pile of a bridge;
		think of him as uninjured, barely disturbed.


	10. ONE ART

		The art of losing isn’t hard to master;
		so many things seem filled with the intent
		to be lost that their loss is no disaster.
		
		Lose something every day. Accept the fluster
		of lost door keys, the hour badly spent.
		The art of losing isn’t hard to master.
		
		Then practice losing farther, losing faster:
		places, and names, and where it was you meant
		to travel. None of these will bring disaster.
		
		I lost my mother’s watch. And look! my last, or
		next-to-last, of three loved houses went.
		The art of losing isn’t hard to master.
		
		I lost two cities, lovely ones. And, vaster,
		some realms I owned, two rivers, a continent.
		I miss them, but it wasn’t a disaster.
		
		--Even losing you (the joking voice, a gesture
		I love) I shan’t have lied. It’s evident
		the art of losing’s not too hard to master
		though it may look like (Write it!) like disaster.


	11. PARIS, 7 A.M.

		I make a trip to each clock in the apartment:
		Some hands point histrionically one way
		And some point others, from the ignorant faces.
		Time is an Etoile; the hours diverge
		So much that days are journeys round the suburbs,
		Circles surrounding stars, overlapping circles.
		The short, half-tone scale of winter weathers
		Is a spread pigeon’s wing.
		Winter lives under a pigeon’s wing, a dead wing with damp feathers.
		
		Look down into the courtyard. All the houses
		Are built that way, with ornamental urns
		Set on the mansard roof-tops where the pigeons
		Take their walks. It is like introspection
		To stare inside, or retrospection,
		A star inside a rectangle, a recollection:
		This hollow square could easily have been there.
		--The childish snow-forts, built in flashier winters,
		Could have reached these proportions and been houses;
		The mighty snow-forts, four, five, stories high,
		Withstanding spring as sand-forts do the tide,
		Their walls, their shape, could not dissolve and die,
		Only be overlapping in a strong chain, turned to stone,
		And grayed and yellowed now like these.
		
		Where is the ammunition, the piled-up balls
		With the star-splintered hearts of ice?
		This sky is no carrier-warrior-pigeon
		Escaping endless intersecting circles.
		It is a dead one, or the sky from which a dead one fell.
		The urns have caught his ashes or his feathers.
		When did the star dissolve, or was it captured
		By the sequence of squares and squares and circles, circles?
		Can the clocks say; is it there below,
		About to tumble in snow?


	12. SESTINA

		September rain falls on the house. 
		In the failing light, the old grandmother 
		sits in the kitchen with the child 
		beside the Little Marvel Stove, 
		reading the jokes from the almanac, 
		laughing and talking to hide her tears. 
		 
		She thinks that her equinoctial tears 
		and the rain that beats on the roof of the house  
		were both foretold by the almanac, 
		but only known to a grandmother. 
		The iron kettle sings on the stove. 
		She cuts some bread and says to the child, 
		 
		It’s time for tea now; but the child 
		is watching the teakettle’s small hard tears 
		dance like mad on the hot black stove, 
		the way the rain must dance on the house. 
		Tidying up, the old grandmother 
		hangs up the clever almanac 
		 
		on its string. Birdlike, the almanac 
		hovers half open above the child, 
		hovers above the old grandmother 
		and her teacup full of dark brown tears. 
		She shivers and says she thinks the house 
		feels chilly, and puts more wood in the stove. 
		 
		It was to be, says the Marvel Stove. 
		I know what I know, says the almanac. 
		With crayons the child draws a rigid house 
		and a winding pathway. Then the child 
		puts in a man with buttons like tears 
		and shows it proudly to the grandmother. 
		 
		But secretly, while the grandmother 
		busies herself about the stove, 
		the little moons fall down like tears 
		from between the pages of the almanac 
		into the flower bed the child 
		has carefully placed in the front of the house. 
		 
		Time to plant tears, says the almanac. 
		The grandmother sings to the marvelous stove 
		and the child draws another inscrutable house.


	13. SONG

		Summer is over upon the sea.
		The pleasure yacht, the social being,
		That danced on the endless polished floor,
		Stepped and side-stepped like Fred Astaire,
		Is gone, is gone, docked somewhere ashore.
		
		The friends have left, the sea is bare
		That was strewn with floating, fresh green weeds.
		Only the rusty-sided freighter
		Goes past the moon’s marketless craters
		And the stars are the only ships of pleasure.


	14. THE ARMADILLO

		This is the time of year
		when almost every night
		the frail, illegal fire balloons appear.
		Climbing the mountain height,
		
		rising toward a saint
		still honored in these parts,
		the paper chambers flush and fill with light
		that comes and goes, like hearts.
		
		Once up against the sky it’s hard
		to tell them from the stars--
		planets, that is--the tinted ones:
		Venus going down, or Mars,
		
		or the pale green one. With a wind,
		they flare and falter, wobble and toss;
		but if it’s still they steer between
		the kite sticks of the Southern Cross,
		
		receding, dwindling, solemnly
		and steadily forsaking us,
		or, in the downdraft from a peak,
		suddenly turning dangerous.
		
		Last night another big one fell.
		It splattered like an egg of fire
		against the cliff behind the house.
		The flame ran down. We saw the pair
		
		of owls who nest there flying up
		and up, their whirling black-and-white
		stained bright pink underneath, until
		they shrieked up out of sight.
		
		The ancient owls’ nest must have burned.
		Hastily, all alone,
		a glistening armadillo left the scene,
		rose-flecked, head down, tail down,
		
		and then a baby rabbit jumped out,
		_short_-eared, to our surprise.
		So soft!--a handful of intangible ash
		with fixed, ignited eyes.
		
		_Too pretty, dreamlike mimicry!
		O falling fire and piercing cry 
		and panic, and a weak mailed fist
		clenched ignorant against the sky!_


	15. THE MAN-MOTH

		    _Man-Moth: Newspaper misprint for “mammoth.”_
		
		Here, above,
		cracks in the buildings are filled with battered moonlight.
		The whole shadow of Man is only as big as his hat.
		It lies at his feet like a circle for a doll to stand on,
		and he makes an inverted pin, the point magnetized to the moon.
		He does not see the moon; he observes only her vast properties,
		feeling the queer light on his hands, neither warm nor cold,
		of a temperature impossible to record in thermometers.
		
		                     But when the Man-Moth
		pays his rare, although occasional, visits to the surface,
		the moon looks rather different to him. He emerges
		from an opening under the edge of one of the sidewalks
		and nervously begins to scale the faces of the buildings.
		He thinks the moon is a small hole at the top of the sky,
		proving the sky quite useless for protection.
		He trembles, but must investigate as high as he can climb.
		
		                     Up the façades,
		his shadow dragging like a photographer’s cloth behind him
		he climbs fearfully, thinking that this time he will manage
		to push his small head through that round clean opening
		and be forced through, as from a tube, in black scrolls on the light.
		(Man, standing below him, has no such illusions.)
		But what the Man-Moth fears most he must do, although
		he fails, of course, and falls back scared but quite unhurt.
		
		                     Then he returns
		to the pale subways of cement he calls his home. He flits,
		he flutters, and cannot get aboard the silent trains
		fast enough to suit him. The doors close swiftly.
		The Man-Moth always seats himself facing the wrong way
		and the train starts at once at its full, terrible speed,
		without a shift in gears or a gradation of any sort.
		He cannot tell the rate at which he travels backwards.
		
		                     Each night he must
		be carried through artificial tunnels and dream recurrent dreams.
		Just as the ties recur beneath his train, these underlie
		his rushing brain. He does not dare look out the window,
		for the third rail, the unbroken draught of poison,
		runs there beside him. He regards it as a disease
		he has inherited the susceptibility to. He has to keep
		his hands in his pockets, as others must wear mufflers.
		
		                     If you catch him,
		hold up a flashlight to his eye. It’s all dark pupil,
		an entire night itself, whose haired horizon tightens
		as he stares back, and closes up the eye. Then from the lids
		one tear, his only possession, like the bee’s sting, slips.
		Slyly he palms it, and if you’re not paying attention
		he’ll swallow it. However, if you watch, he’ll hand it over,
		cool as from underground springs and pure enough to drink.


	16. THE MAP

		Land lies in water; it is shadowed green.
		Shadows, or are they shallows, at its edges
		showing the line of long sea-weeded ledges
		where weeds hang to the simple blue from green.
		Or does the land lean down to lift the sea from under,
		drawing it unperturbed around itself?
		Along the fine tan sandy shelf
		is the land tugging at the sea from under?
		
		The shadow of Newfoundland lies flat and still.
		Labrador’s yellow, where the moony Eskimo
		has oiled it. We can stroke these lovely bays,
		under a glass as if they were expected to blossom,
		or as if to provide a clean cage for invisible fish.
		The names of seashore towns run out to sea,
		the names of cities cross the neighboring mountains
		--the printer here experiencing the same excitement
		as when emotion too far exceeds its cause.
		These peninsulas take the water between thumb and finger
		like women feeling for the smoothness of yard-goods.
		
		Mapped waters are more quiet than the land is,
		lending the land their waves’ own conformation:
		and Norway’s hare runs south in agitation,
		profiles investigate the sea, where land is.
		Are they assigned, or can the countries pick their colors?
		--What suits the character or the native waters best.
		Topography displays no favorites; North’s as near as West.
		More delicate than the historians’ are the map-makers’ colors.


	17. THE MOOSE

		From narrow provinces   
		of fish and bread and tea,   
		home of the long tides
		where the bay leaves the sea   
		twice a day and takes
		the herrings long rides,
		
		where if the river
		enters or retreats
		in a wall of brown foam   
		depends on if it meets   
		the bay coming in,
		the bay not at home;
		
		where, silted red,
		sometimes the sun sets   
		facing a red sea,
		and others, veins the flats’   
		lavender, rich mud
		in burning rivulets;
		
		on red, gravelly roads,
		down rows of sugar maples,   
		past clapboard farmhouses   
		and neat, clapboard churches,   
		bleached, ridged as clamshells,   
		past twin silver birches,
		
		through late afternoon
		a bus journeys west,
		the windshield flashing pink,   
		pink glancing off of metal,   
		brushing the dented flank   
		of blue, beat-up enamel;
		
		down hollows, up rises,   
		and waits, patient, while   
		a lone traveller gives   
		kisses and embraces
		to seven relatives
		and a collie supervises.
		
		Goodbye to the elms,   
		to the farm, to the dog.   
		The bus starts. The light   
		grows richer; the fog,   
		shifting, salty, thin,
		comes closing in.
		
		Its cold, round crystals   
		form and slide and settle   
		in the white hens’ feathers,   
		in gray glazed cabbages,   
		on the cabbage roses
		and lupins like apostles;
		
		the sweet peas cling
		to their wet white string   
		on the whitewashed fences;   
		bumblebees creep
		inside the foxgloves,
		and evening commences.
		
		One stop at Bass River.   
		Then the Economies--
		Lower, Middle, Upper;   
		Five Islands, Five Houses,
		where a woman shakes a tablecloth   
		out after supper.
		
		A pale flickering. Gone.   
		The Tantramar marshes   
		and the smell of salt hay.   
		An iron bridge trembles   
		and a loose plank rattles   
		but doesn’t give way.
		
		On the left, a red light   
		swims through the dark:   
		a ship’s port lantern.   
		Two rubber boots show,   
		illuminated, solemn.   
		A dog gives one bark.
		
		A woman climbs in
		with two market bags,   
		brisk, freckled, elderly.   
		“A grand night. Yes, sir,   
		all the way to Boston.”   
		She regards us amicably.
		
		Moonlight as we enter
		the New Brunswick woods,   
		hairy, scratchy, splintery;   
		moonlight and mist
		caught in them like lamb’s wool   
		on bushes in a pasture.
		
		The passengers lie back.   
		Snores. Some long sighs.   
		A dreamy divagation  
		begins in the night,
		a gentle, auditory,
		slow hallucination . . .
		
		In the creakings and noises,   
		an old conversation
		--not concerning us,
		but recognizable, somewhere,   
		back in the bus:
		Grandparents’ voices
		
		uninterruptedly
		talking, in Eternity:
		names being mentioned,   
		things cleared up finally;   
		what he said, what she said,   
		who got pensioned;
		
		deaths, deaths and sicknesses;   
		the year he remarried;
		the year (something) happened.   
		She died in childbirth.
		That was the son lost
		when the schooner foundered.
		
		He took to drink. Yes.
		She went to the bad.
		When Amos began to pray   
		even in the store and
		finally the family had
		to put him away.
		
		“Yes . . .” that peculiar   
		affirmative. “Yes . . .”
		A sharp, indrawn breath,   
		half groan, half acceptance,   
		that means “Life’s like that.   
		We know it (also death).”
		
		Talking the way they talked   
		in the old featherbed,   
		peacefully, on and on,
		dim lamplight in the hall,   
		down in the kitchen, the dog   
		tucked in her shawl.
		
		Now, it’s all right now   
		even to fall asleep
		just as on all those nights.   
		--Suddenly the bus driver   
		stops with a jolt,
		turns off his lights.
		
		A moose has come out of
		the impenetrable wood
		and stands there, looms, rather,   
		in the middle of the road.
		It approaches; it sniffs at
		the bus’s hot hood.
		
		Towering, antlerless,   
		high as a church,
		homely as a house
		(or, safe as houses).
		A man’s voice assures us   
		“Perfectly harmless . . .”
		
		Some of the passengers   
		exclaim in whispers,   
		childishly, softly,
		“Sure are big creatures.”   
		“It’s awful plain.”   
		“Look! It’s a she!”
		
		Taking her time,
		she looks the bus over,   
		grand, otherworldly.   
		Why, why do we feel   
		(we all feel) this sweet   
		sensation of joy?
		
		“Curious creatures,”
		says our quiet driver,   
		rolling his r’s.
		“Look at that, would you.”   
		Then he shifts gears.
		For a moment longer,
		
		by craning backward,   
		the moose can be seen
		on the moonlit macadam;   
		then there’s a dim
		smell of moose, an acrid   
		smell of gasoline.


	18. THE MOUNTAIN

		At evening, something behind me.
		I start for a second, I blench,
		or staggeringly halt and burn.
		I do not know my age.
		
		In the morning it is different.
		An open book confronts me,
		too close to read in comfort.
		Tell me how old I am.
		
		And then the valleys stuff
		impenetrable mists
		like cotton in my ears.
		I do not know my age.
		
		I do not mean to complain.
		They say it is my fault.
		Nobody tells me anything.
		Tell me how old I am.
		
		The deepest demarcation
		can slowly spread and sink
		like any blurred tattoo.
		I do not know my age.
		
		Shadows fall down; lights climb.
		Clambering lights, oh children!
		you never stay long enough.
		Tell me how old I am.
		
		Stone wings have sifted here
		with feathers hardening feathers.
		The claws are lost somewhere.
		I do not know my age.
		
		I am growing deaf. Bird-calls
		dribble and the waterfalls
		go unwiped. What is my age?
		Tell me how old I am.
		
		Let the moon go hang,
		the stars go fly their kites.
		I want to know my age.
		Tell me how old I am. 


	19. VISITS TO ST. ELIZABETHS

		This is the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is the man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is the time
		of the tragic man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is a wristwatch
		telling the time
		of the talkative man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is a sailor
		wearing the watch
		that tells the time
		of the honored man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is the roadstead all of board
		reached by the sailor
		wearing the watch
		that tells the time
		of the old, brave man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		These are the years and the walls of the ward,
		the winds and clouds of the sea of board
		sailed by the sailor
		wearing the watch
		that tells the time
		of the cranky man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
		that dances weeping down the ward
		over the creaking sea of board
		beyond the sailor
		winding his watch
		that tells the time
		of the cruel man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is a world of books gone flat.
		This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
		that dances weeping down the ward
		over the creaking sea of board
		of the batty sailor
		that winds his watch
		that tells the time
		of the busy man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is a boy that pats the floor
		to see if the world is there, is flat,
		for the widowed Jew in the newspaper hat
		that dances weeping down the ward
		waltzing the length of a weaving board
		by the silent sailor
		that hears his watch
		that ticks the time
		of the tedious man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		These are the years and the walls and the door
		that shut on a boy that pats the floor
		to feel if the world is there and flat.
		This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
		that dances joyfully down the ward
		into the parting seas of board
		past the staring sailor
		that shakes his watch
		that tells the time
		of the poet, the man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.
		
		This is the soldier home from the war.
		These are the years and the walls and the door
		that shut on a boy that pats the floor
		to see if the world is round or flat.
		This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
		that dances carefully down the ward,
		walking the plank of a coffin board
		with the crazy sailor
		that shows his watch
		that tells the time
		of the wretched man
		that lies in the house of Bedlam.


*** Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson (1832 - 1910)

	1. ALONE AND REPENTANT

		A friend I possess, whose whispers just said, 
		“God’s peace!” to my night-watching mind. 
		When daylight is gone and darkness brings dread, 
		He ever the way can find. 
		
		He utters no word to smite and to score; 
		He, too, has known sin and its grief. 
		He heals with his look the place that is sore, 
		And stays till I have relief. 
		
		He takes for his own the deed that is such 
		That sorrows of heart increase. 
		He cleanses the wound with so gentle a touch, 
		The pain must give way to peace. 
		
		He followed each hope the heights that would scale 
		Reproached not a hapless descent. 
		He stands here just now, so mild, but so pale;-- 
		In time he shall know what it meant.


	2. IN THE FOREST

		List to the forest-voice murmuring low:
		All that it saw when alone with its laughter,
		All that it suffered in times that came after,
		Mournful it tells, that the wind may know.


	3. MASTER OR SLAVE

		Lo, this land that lifts around it
		Threatening peaks, while stern seas bound it,
		With cold winters, summers bleak,
		Curtly smiling, never meek,
		‘Tis the giant we must master,
		Till he work our will the faster.
		He shall carry, though he clamor,
		He shall haul and saw and hammer,
		Turn to light the tumbling torrent,--
		All his din and rage abhorrent
		Shall, if we but do our duty,
		Win for us a realm of beauty.


	4. THE OCEAN

		Oceanward I am ever yearning,
		Where far it rolls in its calm and grandeur,
		The weight of mountain-like fogbanks bearing,
		Forever wandering and returning.
		The skies may lower, the land may call it,
		It knows no resting and knows no yielding.
		In nights of summer, in storms of winter,
		Its surges murmur the self-same longing.
		
		Yes, oceanward I am ever yearning,
		Where far is lifted its broad, cold forehead!
		Thereon the world throws its deepest shadow
		And mirrors whispering all its anguish.
		Though warm and blithesome the bright sun stroke it
		With joyous message, that life is gladness,
		Yet ice-cold, changelessly melancholy,
		It drowns the sorrow and drowns the solace.
		
		The full moon pulling, the tempest lifting,
		Must loose their hold on the flowing water.
		Down whirling lowlands and crumbling mountains
		It to eternity tireless washes.
		What forth it draws must the one way wander.
		What once is sunken arises never.
		No message comes thence, no cry is heard thence;
		Its voice, its silence, can none interpret.
		
		Yes, toward the ocean, far out toward ocean,
		That knows no hour of self-atonement!
		For all that suffer release it offers,
		But trails forever its own enigma.
		A strange alliance with Death unites it,
		That all it give Him,--itself excepting!
		
		I feel, vast Ocean, thy solemn sadness,
		To thee abandon my weak devices,
		To thee let fly all my anxious longings:
		May thy cool breath to my heart bring healing!
		Let Death now follow, his booty seeking:
		The moves are many before the checkmate!
		Awhile I’ll harass thy love of plunder,
		As on I scud ‘neath thy angry eyebrows;
		Thou only fillest my swelling mainsail,
		Though Death ride fast on thy howling tempest;
		Thy billows raging shall bear the faster
		My little vessel to quiet waters.
		
		Ah! Thus alone at the helm in darkness,
		By all forsaken, by Death forgotten,
		When sails unknown far away are wafted
		And some swift-coursing by night are passing,
		To note the ground-swell’s resistless current,
		The sighing heart of the breathing ocean--
		Or small waves plashing along the planking,
		Its quiet pastime amid its sadness.
		Then glide my lingering longings over
		Into the ocean-deep grief of nature,
		The night’s, the water’s united coldness
		Prepares my spirit for death’s dark dwelling.
		
		Then comes day’s dawning! My soul bounds upward
		On beams of light to the vault of heaven;
		My ship-steed sniffing its flank is laving
		With buoyant zest in the cooling billow.
		With song the sailor to masthead clambers
		To clear the sail that shall swell more freely,
		And thoughts are flying like birds aweary
		Round mast and yard-arm, but find no refuge . . .
		Yes, toward the ocean! To follow Vikar!
		To sail like him and to sink as he did,
		For great King Olaf the prow defending!
		With keel unswerving the cold thought cleaving,
		But hope deriving from lightest breezes!
		Death’s eager fingers so near the rudder,
		While heaven’s clearness the way illumines!
		
		And then at last in the final hour
		To feel the bolts and the nails are yielding
		And Death is pressing the seams asunder,
		That in may stream the absolving water!
		Wet winding-sheets shall be folded round me,
		And I descend to eternal silence,
		While rolling billows my name bear shoreward
		In spacious nights ‘neath the cloudless moonlight!


*** William Blake (1757 - 1827)

	1. A DIVINE IMAGE

		Cruelty has a human heart,
		 And Jealousy a human face;
		Terror the human form divine,
		 And Secresy the human dress.
		
		The human dress is forged iron,
		 The human form a fiery forge,
		The human face a furnace sealed,
		 The human heart its hungry gorge.


	2. A LITTLE BOY LOST

		“Nought loves another as itself,
		 Nor venerates another so,
		Nor is it possible to thought
		 A greater than itself to know.
		
		“And, father, how can I love you
		 Or any of my brothers more?
		I love you like the little bird
		 That picks up crumbs around the door.”
		
		The Priest sat by and heard the child;
		 In trembling zeal he seized his hair,
		He led him by his little coat,
		 And all admired the priestly care.
		
		And standing on the altar high,
		 “Lo, what a fiend is here!“ said he:
		“One who sets reason up for judge
		 Of our most holy mystery.”
		
		The weeping child could not be heard,
		 The weeping parents wept in vain:
		They stripped him to his little shirt,
		 And bound him in an iron chain,
		
		And burned him in a holy place
		 Where many had been burned before;
		The weeping parents wept in vain.
		 Are such thing done on Albion’s shore?


	3. A MEMORABLE FANCY

		As I was walking among the fires of Hell, delighted with the enjoyments
		of Genius, which to Angels look like torment and insanity, I collected
		some of their proverbs, thinking that as the sayings used in a nation
		mark its character, so the proverbs of Hell show the nature of infernal
		wisdom better than any description of buildings or garments.
		
		When I came home, on the abyss of the five senses, where a flat-sided
		steep frowns over the present world, I saw a mighty Devil folded in
		black clouds hovering on the sides of the rock; with corroding fires
		he wrote the following sentence now perceived by the minds of men, and
		read by them on earth:--
		
		   _“How do you know but every bird
		       that cuts the airy way
		   Is an immense world of delight,
		       closed by your senses five?”_


	4. A POISON TREE

		I was angry with my friend:
		I told my wrath, my wrath did end.
		I was angry with my foe:
		I told it not, my wrath did grow.
		
		And I watered it in fears
		Night and morning with my tears,
		And I sunned it with smiles
		And with soft deceitful wiles.
		
		And it grew both day and night,
		Till it bore an apple bright,
		And my foe beheld it shine,
		and he knew that it was mine,--
		
		And into my garden stole
		When the night had veiled the pole;
		In the morning, glad, I see
		My foe outstretched beneath the tree.


	5. A SONG

		Sweet dreams, form a shade
		O’er my lovely infant’s head!
		Sweet dreams of pleasant streams
		By happy, silent, moony beams!
		
		Sweet Sleep, with soft down
		Weave thy brows an infant crown
		Sweet Sleep, angel mild,
		Hover o’er my happy child!
		
		Sweet smiles, in the night
		Hover over my delight!
		Sweet smiles, mother’s smile,
		All the livelong night beguile.
		
		Sweet moans, dovelike sighs,
		Chase not slumber from thine eyes!
		Sweet moan, sweeter smile,
		All the dovelike moans beguile.
		
		Sleep, sleep, happy child!
		All creation slept and smiled.
		Sleep, sleep, happy sleep,
		While o’er thee doth mother weep.
		
		Sweet babe, in thy face
		Holy image I can trace;
		Sweet babe, once like thee
		Thy Maker lay, and wept for me:
		
		Wept for me, for thee, for all,
		When He was an infant small.
		Thou His image ever see,
		Heavenly face that smiles on thee!
		
		Smiles on thee, on me, on all,
		Who became an infant small;
		Infant smiles are his own smiles;
		Heaven and earth to peace beguiles.


	6. A SONG OF LIBERTY

		1. The Eternal Female groan’d; it was heard over all the earth:
		
		2. Albion’s coast is sick silent; the American meadows faint.
		
		3. Shadows of prophecy shiver along by the lakes and the rivers, and
		mutter across the ocean. France, rend down thy dungeon!
		
		4. Golden Spain, burst the barriers of old Rome!
		
		5. Cast thy keys, O Rome, into the deep--down falling, even to eternity
		down falling;
		
		6. And weep!
		
		7. In her trembling hands she took the new-born terror, howling.
		
		8. On those infinite mountains of light now barr’d out by the Atlantic
		sea, the new-born fire stood before the starry king.
		
		9. Flagg’d with grey-brow’d snows and thunderous visages, the jealous
		wings wav’d over the deep.
		
		10. The speary hand burn’d aloft; unbuckled was the shield; forth went
		the hand of jealousy among the flaming hair, and hurl’d the new-born
		wonder through the starry night.
		
		11. The fire, the fire is falling!
		
		12. Look up! look up! O citizen of London, enlarge thy countenance! O
		Jew, leave counting gold; return to thy oil and wine! O African, black
		African! (Go, winged thought, widen his forehead.)
		
		13. The fiery limbs, the flaming hair shot like the sinking sun into
		the Western sea.
		
		14. Wak’d from his eternal sleep, the hoary element roaring fled away.
		
		15. Down rush’d, beating his wings in vain, the jealous king, his
		grey-brow’d councillors, thunderous warriors, curl’d veterans, among
		helms and shields, and chariots, horses, elephants, banners, castles,
		slings, and rocks.
		
		16. Falling, rushing, ruining; buried in the ruins, on Urthona’s dens.
		
		17. All night beneath the ruins; then their sullen flames, faded,
		emerge round the gloomy king.
		
		18. With thunder and fire, leading his starry hosts through the waste
		wilderness, he promulgates his ten commandments, glancing his beamy
		eyelids over the deep in dark dismay.
		
		19. Where the Son of Fire in his Eastern cloud, while the Morning
		plumes her golden breast,
		
		20. Spurning the clouds written with curses, stamps the stony law
		to dust, loosing the eternal horses from the dens of night, crying:
		“Empire is no more! and now the lion and wolf shall cease.”


	7. DIVINE IMAGE

		To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
		 All pray in their distress,
		And to these virtues of delight
		 Return their thankfulness.
		
		For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
		 Is God our Father dear;
		And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
		 Is man, his child and care.
		
		For Mercy has a human heart
		 Pity, a human face;
		And Love, the human form divine;
		 And Peace, the human dress.
		
		Then every man, of every clime,
		 That prays in his distress,
		Prays to the human form divine:
		 Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace.
		
		And all must love the human form,
		 In heathen, Turk, or Jew.
		Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell,
		 There God is dwelling too.


	8. EARTH’S ANSWER

		Earth raised up her head
		From the darkness dread and drear,
		Her light fled,
		Stony, dread,
		And her locks covered with grey despair.
		
		“Prisoned on watery shore,
		Starry jealousy does keep my den
		Cold and hoar;
		Weeping o’er,
		I hear the father of the ancient men.
		
		“Selfish father of men!
		Cruel, jealous, selfish fear!
		Can delight,
		Chained in night,
		The virgins of youth and morning bear?
		
		“Does spring hide its joy,
		When buds and blossoms grow?
		Does the sower
		Sow by night,
		Or the plowman in darkness plough?
		
		“Break this heavy chain,
		That does freeze my bones around!
		Selfish, vain,
		Eternal bane,
		That free love with bondage bound.”


	9. HOLY THURSDAY

		Is this a holy thing to see
		 In a rich and fruitful land,--
		Babes reduced to misery,
		 Fed with cold and usurous hand?
		
		Is that trembling cry a song?
		 Can it be a song of joy?
		And so many children poor?
		 It is a land of poverty!
		
		And their son does never shine,
		 And their fields are bleak and bare,
		And their ways are filled with thorns:
		 It is eternal winter there.
		
		For where’er the sun does shine,
		 And where’er the rain does fall,
		Babes should never hunger there,
		 Nor poverty the mind appall.


	10. LAUGHING SONG

		When the green woods laugh with the voice of joy,
		And the dimpling stream runs laughing by;
		When the air does laugh with our merry wit,
		And the green hill laughs with the noise of it;
		
		when the meadows laugh with lively green,
		And the grasshopper laughs in the merry scene,
		When Mary and Susan and Emily
		With their sweet round mouths sing “Ha, ha he!”
		
		When the painted birds laugh in the shade,
		Where our table with cherries and nuts is spread:
		Come live, and be merry, and join with me,
		To sing the sweet chorus of “Ha, ha, he!”


	11. LONDON

		I wandered through each chartered street,
		 Near where the chartered Thames does flow,
		A mark in every face I meet,
		 Marks of weakness, marks of woe.
		
		In every cry of every man,
		 In every infant’s cry of fear,
		In every voice, in every ban,
		 The mind-forged manacles I hear:
		
		How the chimney-sweeper’s cry
		 Every blackening church appalls,
		And the hapless soldier’s sigh
		 Runs in blood down palace-walls.
		
		But most, through midnight streets I hear
		 How the youthful harlot’s curse
		Blasts the new-born infant’s tear,
		 And blights with plagues the marriage-hearse.


	12. MY PRETTY ROSE TREE

		A flower was offered to me,
		 Such a flower as May never bore;
		But I said “I’ve a pretty rose tree,”
		 And I passed the sweet flower o’er.
		
		Then I went to my pretty rose tree,
		 To tend her by day and by night;
		But my rose turned away with jealousy,
		 And her thorns were my only delight.


	13. NIGHT

		The sun descending in the west,
		The evening star does shine;
		The birds are silent in their nest,
		And I must seek for mine.
		 The moon, like a flower
		 In heaven’s high bower,
		 With silent delight,
		 Sits and smiles on the night.
		
		Farewell, green fields and happy grove,
		Where flocks have ta’en delight.
		Where lambs have nibbled, silent move
		The feet of angels bright;
		 Unseen they pour blessing,
		 And joy without ceasing,
		 On each bud and blossom,
		 And each sleeping bosom.
		
		They look in every thoughtless nest
		Where birds are covered warm;
		They visit caves of every beast,
		To keep them all from harm:
		 If they see any weeping
		 That should have been sleeping,
		 They pour sleep on their head,
		 And sit down by their bed.
		
		When wolves and tigers howl for prey,
		They pitying stand and weep;
		Seeking to drive their thirst away,
		And keep them from the sheep.
		 But, if they rush dreadful,
		 The angels, most heedful,
		 Receive each mild spirit,
		 New worlds to inherit.
		
		And there the lion’s ruddy eyes
		Shall flow with tears of gold:
		And pitying the tender cries,
		And walking round the fold:
		 Saying: “Wrath by His meekness,
		 And, by His health, sickness,
		 Are driven away
		 From our immortal day.
		
		“And now beside thee, bleating lamb,
		I can lie down and sleep,
		Or think on Him who bore thy name,
		Graze after thee, and weep.
		 For, washed in life’s river,
		 My bright mane for ever
		 Shall shine like the gold,
		 As I guard o’er the fold.”


	14. ON ANOTHER’S SORROW

		Can I see another’s woe,
		And not be in sorrow too?
		Can I see another’s grief,
		And not seek for kind relief?
		
		Can I see a falling tear,
		And not feel my sorrow’s share?
		Can a father see his child
		Weep, nor be with sorrow filled?
		
		Can a mother sit and hear
		An infant groan, an infant fear?
		No, no!  never can it be!
		Never, never can it be!
		
		And can He who smiles on all
		Hear the wren with sorrows small,
		Hear the small bird’s grief and care,
		Hear the woes that infants bear--
		
		And not sit beside the next,
		Pouring pity in their breast,
		And not sit the cradle near,
		Weeping tear on infant’s tear?
		
		And not sit both night and day,
		Wiping all our tears away?
		Oh no! never can it be!
		Never, never can it be!
		
		He doth give his joy to all:
		He becomes an infant small,
		He becomes a man of woe,
		He doth feel the sorrow too.
		
		Think not thou canst sigh a sigh,
		And thy Maker is not by:
		Think not thou canst weep a tear,
		And thy Maker is not near.
		
		Oh He gives to us his joy,
		That our grief He may destroy:
		Till our grief is fled an gone
		He doth sit by us and moan.


	15. PROVERBS OF HELL

		In seed-time learn, in harvest teach, in winter enjoy.
		
		Drive your cart and your plough over the bones of the dead.
		
		The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.
		
		Prudence is a rich ugly old maid courted by Incapacity.
		
		He who desires, but acts not, breeds pestilence.
		
		The cut worm forgives the plough.
		
		Dip him in the river who loves water.
		
		A fool sees not the same tree that a wise man sees.
		
		He whose face gives no light shall never become a star.
		
		Eternity is in love with the productions of time.
		
		The busy bee has no time for sorrow.
		
		The hours of folly are measured by the clock, but of wisdom no clock
		can measure.
		
		All wholesome food is caught without a net or a trap.
		
		Bring out number, weight, and measure in a year of dearth.
		
		No bird soars too high if he soars with his own wings.
		
		A dead body revenges not injuries.
		
		The most sublime act is to set another before you.
		
		If the fool would persist in his folly he would become wise.
		
		Folly is the cloak of knavery.
		
		Shame is Pride’s cloak.
		
		Prisons are built with stones of law, brothels with bricks of religion.
		
		The pride of the peacock is the glory of God.
		
		The lust of the goat is the bounty of God.
		
		The wrath of the lion is the wisdom of God.
		
		The nakedness of woman is the work of God.
		
		Excess of sorrow laughs, excess of joy weeps.
		
		The roaring of lions, the howling of wolves, the raging of the stormy
		sea, and the destructive sword, are portions of Eternity too great for
		the eye of man.
		
		The fox condemns the trap, not himself.
		
		Joys impregnate, sorrows bring forth.
		
		Let man wear the fell of the lion, woman the fleece of the sheep.
		
		The bird a nest, the spider a web, man friendship.
		
		The selfish smiling fool and the sullen frowning fool shall be both
		thought wise that they may be a rod.
		
		What is now proved was once only imagined.
		
		The rat, the mouse, the fox, the rabbit watch the roots; the lion, the
		tiger, the horse, the elephant watch the fruits.
		
		The cistern contains, the fountain overflows.
		
		One thought fills immensity.
		
		Always be ready to speak your mind, and a base man will avoid you.
		
		Everything possible to be believed is an image of truth.
		
		The eagle never lost so much time as when he submitted to learn of the
		crow.
		
		The fox provides for himself, but God provides for the lion.
		
		Think in the morning, act in the noon, eat in the evening, sleep in the
		night.
		
		He who has suffered you to impose on him knows you.
		
		As the plough follows words, so God rewards prayers.
		
		The tigers of wrath are wiser than the horses of instruction.
		
		Expect poison from the standing water.
		
		You never know what is enough unless you know what is more than enough.
		
		Listen to the fool’s reproach; it is a kingly title.
		
		The eyes of fire, the nostrils of air, the mouth of water, the beard
		of earth.
		
		The weak in courage is strong in cunning.
		
		The apple tree never asks the beech how he shall grow, nor the lion the
		horse how he shall take his prey.
		
		The thankful receiver bears a plentiful harvest.
		
		If others had not been foolish we should have been so.
		
		The soul of sweet delight can never be defiled.
		
		When thou seest an eagle, thou seest a portion of Genius. Lift up thy
		head!
		
		As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so
		the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys.
		
		To create a little flower is the labour of ages.
		
		Damn braces; bless relaxes.
		
		The best wine is the oldest, the best water the newest.
		
		Prayers plough not; praises reap not; joys laugh not; sorrows weep not.
		
		The head Sublime, the heart Pathos, the genitals Beauty, the hands and
		feet Proportion.
		
		As the air to a bird, or the sea to a fish, so is contempt to the
		contemptible.
		
		The crow wished everything was black; the owl that everything was white.
		
		Exuberance is Beauty.
		
		If the lion was advised by the fox, he would be cunning.
		
		Improvement makes straight roads, but the crooked roads without
		Improvement are roads of Genius.
		
		Sooner murder an infant in its cradle than nurse unacted desires.
		
		Where man is not, nature is barren.
		
		Truth can never be told so as to be understood and not to be believed.
		
		Enough! or Too much.


	16. SONGS OF EXPERIENCE

		Hear the voice of the Bard,
		Who present, past, and future, sees;
		Whose ears have heard
		The Holy Word
		That walked among the ancient tree;
		
		Calling the lapsed soul,
		And weeping in the evening dew;
		That might control
		The starry pole,
		And fallen, fallen light renew!
		
		“O Earth, O Earth, return!
		Arise from out the dewy grass!
		Night is worn,
		And the morn
		Rises from the slumbrous mass.
		
		“Turn away no more;
		Why wilt thou turn away?
		The starry floor,
		The watery shore,
		Are given thee till the break of day.”


	17. SPRING

		    Sound the flute!
		    Now it’s mute!
		    Bird’s delight,
		    Day and night,
		    Nightingale,
		    In the dale,
		    Lark in sky,--
		    Merrily,
		Merrily merrily, to welcome in the year.
		
		    Little boy,
		    Full of joy;
		    Little girl,
		    Sweet and small;
		    Cock does crow,
		    So do you;
		    Merry voice,
		    Infant noise;
		Merrily, merrily, to welcome in the year.
		
		    Little lamb,
		    Here I am;
		    Come and lick
		    My white neck;
		    Let me pull
		    Your soft wool;
		    Let me kiss
		    Your soft face;
		Merrily, merrily, to welcome in the year.


	18. THE ANGEL

		I dreamt a dream!  What can it mean?
		And that I was a maiden Queen
		Guarded by an Angel mild:
		Witless woe was ne’er beguiled!
		
		And I wept both night and day,
		And he wiped my tears away;
		And I wept both day and night,
		And hid from him my heart’s delight.
		
		So he took his wings, and fled;
		Then the morn blushed rosy red.
		I dried my tears, and armed my fears
		With ten-thousand shields and spears.
		
		Soon my Angel came again;
		I was armed, he came in vain;
		For the time of youth was fled,
		And grey hairs were on my head.


	19. THE ARGUMENT

		Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burden’d air,
		Hungry clouds swag on the deep.
		
		Once meek, and in a perilous path
		The just man kept his course along
		The Vale of Death.
		Roses are planted where thorns grow,
		And on the barren heath
		Sing the honey bees.
		
		Then the perilous path was planted,
		And a river and a spring
		On every cliff and tomb;
		And on the bleached bones
		Red clay brought forth:
		Till the villain left the paths of ease
		To walk in perilous paths, and drive
		The just man into barren climes.
		
		Now the sneaking serpent walks
		In mild humility;
		And the just man rages in the wilds
		Where lions roam.
		
		Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burden’d air,
		Hungry clouds swag on the deep.


	20. THE CHIMNEY-SWEEPER

		When my mother died I was very young,
		And my father sold me while yet my tongue
		Could scarcely cry “Weep! weep! weep! weep!”
		So your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep.
		
		There’s little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head,
		That curled like a lamb’s back, was shaved; so I said,
		“Hush, Tom! never mind it, for, when your head’s bare,
		You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair.”
		
		And so he was quiet, and that very night,
		As Tom was a-sleeping, he had such a sight!--
		That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned, and Jack,
		Were all of them locked up in coffins of black.
		
		And by came an angel, who had a bright key,
		And he opened the coffins, and let them all free;
		Then down a green plain, leaping, laughing, they run,
		And wash in a river, and shine in the sun.
		
		Then naked and white, all their bags left behind,
		They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind;
		And the Angel told Tom, if he’d be a good boy,
		He’d have God for his father, and never want joy.
		
		And so Tom awoke, and we rose in the dark,
		And got with our bags and our brushes to work.
		Though the morning was cold, Tom was happy and warm:
		So, if all do their duty, they need not fear harm.


	21. THE CLOD AND THE PEBBLE

		“Love seeketh not itself to please,
		 Nor for itself hath any care,
		But for another gives it ease,
		 And builds a heaven in hell’s despair.”
		
		So sang a little clod of clay,
		 Trodden with the cattle’s feet,
		But a pebble of the brook
		 Warbled out these metres meet:
		
		“Love seeketh only Self to please,
		 To bind another to its delight,
		Joys in another’s loss of ease,
		 And builds a hell in heaven’s despite.”


	22. THE ECHOING GREEN

		The sun does arise,
		And make happy the skies;
		The merry bells ring
		To welcome the Spring;
		The skylark and thrush,
		The birds of the bush,
		Sing louder around
		To the bells’ cheerful sound;
		While our sports shall be seen
		On the echoing Green.
		
		Old John, with white hair,
		Does laugh away care,
		Sitting under the oak,
		Among the old folk.
		They laugh at our play,
		And soon they all say,
		“Such, such were the joys
		When we all--girls and boys--
		In our youth-time were seen
		On the echoing Green.”
		
		Till the little ones, weary,
		No more can be merry:
		The sun does descend,
		And our sports have an end.
		Round the laps of their mothers
		Many sisters and brothers,
		Like birds in their nest,
		Are ready for rest,
		And sport no more seen
		On the darkening green.


	23. THE FLY

		Little Fly,
		Thy summer’s play
		My thoughtless hand
		Has brushed away.
		
		Am not I
		A fly like thee?
		Or art not thou
		A man like me?
		
		For I dance
		And drink, and sing,
		Till some blind hand
		Shall brush my wing.
		
		If thought is life
		And strength and breath
		And the want
		Of thought is death;
		
		Then am I
		A happy fly,
		If I live,
		Or if I die.


	24. THE GARDEN OF LOVE

		I laid me down upon a bank,
		 Where Love lay sleeping;
		I heard among the rushes dank
		 Weeping, weeping.
		
		Then I went to the heath and the wild,
		 To the thistles and thorns of the waste;
		And they told me how they were beguiled,
		 Driven out, and compelled to the chaste.
		
		I went to the Garden of Love,
		 And saw what I never had seen;
		A Chapel was built in the midst,
		 Where I used to play on the green.
		
		And the gates of this Chapel were shut
		 And “Thou shalt not,“ writ over the door;
		So I turned to the Garden of Love
		 That so many sweet flowers bore.
		
		And I saw it was filled with graves,
		 And tombstones where flowers should be;
		And priests in black gowns were walking their rounds,
		 And binding with briars my joys and desires.


	25. THE HUMAN ABSTRACT

		Pity would be no more
		If we did not make somebody poor,
		And Mercy no more could be
		If all were as happy as we.
		
		And mutual fear brings Peace,
		Till the selfish loves increase;
		Then Cruelty knits a snare,
		And spreads his baits with care.
		
		He sits down with his holy fears,
		And waters the ground with tears;
		Then Humility takes its root
		Underneath his foot.
		
		Soon spreads the dismal shade
		Of Mystery over his head,
		And the caterpillar and fly
		Feed on the Mystery.
		
		And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
		Ruddy and sweet to eat,
		And the raven his nest has made
		In its thickest shade.
		
		The gods of the earth and sea
		Sought through nature to find this tree,
		But their search was all in vain:
		There grows one in the human Brain.


	26. THE LAMB

		 Little Lamb, who made thee
		 Dost thou know who made thee,
		Gave thee life, and bid thee feed
		By the stream and o’er the mead;
		Gave thee clothing of delight,
		Softest clothing, woolly, bright;
		Gave thee such a tender voice,
		Making all the vales rejoice?
		 Little Lamb, who made thee?
		 Dost thou know who made thee?
		
		 Little Lamb, I’ll tell thee;
		 Little Lamb, I’ll tell thee:
		He is called by thy name,
		For He calls Himself a Lamb
		He is meek, and He is mild,
		He became a little child.
		I a child, and thou a lamb,
		We are called by His name.
		 Little Lamb, God bless thee!
		 Little Lamb, God bless thee!


	27. THE LITTLE BOY LOST AND FOUND

		“Father, father, where are you going?
		 Oh do not walk so fast!
		Speak, father, speak to your little boy,
		 Or else I shall be lost.”
		
		The night was dark, no father was there,
		 The child was wet with dew;
		The mire was deep, and the child did weep,
		 And away the vapour flew.
		
		The little boy lost in the lonely fen,
		 Led by the wandering light,
		Began to cry, but God, ever nigh,
		 Appeared like his father, in white.
		
		He kissed the child, and by the hand led,
		 And to his mother brought,
		Who in sorrow pale, through the lonely dale,
		 The little boy weeping sought.


	28. THE LITTLE VAGABOND

		Dear mother, dear mother, the Church is cold;
		But the Alehouse is healthy, and pleasant, and warm.
		Besides, I can tell where I am used well;
		The poor parsons with wind like a blown bladder swell.
		
		But, if at the Church they would give us some ale,
		And a pleasant fire our souls to regale,
		We’d sing and we’d pray all the livelong day,
		Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray.
		
		Then the Parson might preach, and drink, and sing,
		And we’d be as happy as birds in the spring;
		And modest Dame Lurch, who is always at church,
		Would not have bandy children, nor fasting, nor birch.
		
		And God, like a father, rejoicing to see
		His children as pleasant and happy as he,
		Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the barrel,
		But kiss him, and give him both drink and apparel.


	29. THE SCHOOLBOY

		I love to rise on a summer morn,
		 When birds are singing on every tree;
		The distant huntsman winds his horn,
		 And the skylark sings with me:
		 Oh what sweet company!
		
		But to go to school in a summer morn,--
		 Oh it drives all joy away!
		Under a cruel eye outworn,
		 The little ones spend the day
		 In sighing and dismay.
		
		Ah then at times I drooping sit,
		 And spend many an anxious hour;
		Nor in my book can I take delight,
		 Nor sit in learning’s bower,
		 Worn through with the dreary shower.
		
		How can the bird that is born for joy
		 Sit in a cage and sing?
		How can a child, when fears annoy,
		 But droop his tender wing,
		 And forget his youthful spring?
		
		Oh father and mother, if buds are nipped,
		 And blossoms blown away;
		And if the tender plants are stripped
		 Of their joy in the springing day,
		 By sorrow and care’s dismay,--
		
		How shall the summer arise in joy,
		 Or the summer fruits appear?
		Or how shall we gather what griefs destroy,
		 Or bless the mellowing year,
		 When the blasts of winter appear?


	30. THE TYGER

		Tyger, tyger, burning bright
		In the forests of the night,
		What immortal hand or eye
		Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
		
		In what distant deeps or skies
		Burnt the fire of thine eyes?
		On what wings dare he aspire?
		What the hand dare seize the fire?
		
		And what shoulder and what art
		Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
		And, when thy heart began to beat,
		What dread hand and what dread feet?
		
		What the hammer? what the chain?
		In what furnace was thy brain?
		What the anvil? what dread grasp
		Dare its deadly terrors clasp?
		
		When the stars threw down their spears,
		And watered heaven with their tears,
		Did he smile his work to see?
		Did he who made the lamb make thee?
		
		Tyger, tyger, burning bright
		In the forests of the night,
		What immortal hand or eye
		Dare frame thy fearful symmetry?


	31. TO TIRZAH

		Whate’er is born of mortal birth
		Must be consumed with the earth,
		To rise from generation free:
		Then what have I to do with thee?
		The sexes sprang from shame and pride,
		Blown in the morn, in evening died;
		But mercy changed death into sleep;
		The sexes rose to work and weep.
		
		Thou, mother of my mortal part,
		With cruelty didst mould my heart,
		And with false self-deceiving tears
		Didst bind my nostrils, eyes, and ears,
		
		Didst close my tongue in senseless clay,
		And me to mortal life betray.
		The death of Jesus set me free:
		Then what have I to do with thee?


*** Alexander Blok (1880 - 1921)

	1. THE STRANGER

		The restaurants on hot spring evenings
		Lie under a dense and savage air.
		Foul drafts and hoots from dunken revelers
		Contaminate the thoroughfare.
		Above the dusty lanes of suburbia
		Above the tedium of bungalows
		A pretzel sign begilds a bakery
		And children screech fortissimo.
		
		And every evening beyond the barriers
		Gentlemen of practiced wit and charm
		Go strolling beside the drainage ditches--
		A tilted derby and a lady at the arm.
		
		The squeak of oarlocks comes over the lake water
		A woman’s shriek assaults the ear
		While above, in the sky, inured to everything,
		The moon looks on with a mindless leer.
		
		And every evening my one companion
		Sits here, reflected in my glass.
		Like me, he has drunk of bitter mysteries.
		Like me, he is broken, dulled, downcast.
		
		The sleepy lackeys stand beside tables
		Waiting for the night to pass
		And tipplers with the eyes of rabbits
		Cry out: “In vino veritas!”
		
		And every evening (or am I imagining?)
		Exactly at the appointed time
		A girl’s slim figure, silk raimented,
		Glides past the window’s mist and grime.
		
		And slowly passing throught the revelers,
		Unaccompanied, always alone,
		Exuding mists and secret fragrances,
		She sits at the table that is her own.
		
		Something ancient, something legendary
		Surrounds her presence in the room,
		Her narrow hand, her silk, her bracelets,
		Her hat, the rings, the ostrich plume.
		
		Entranced by her presence, near and enigmatic,
		I gaze through the dark of her lowered veil
		And I behold an enchanted shoreline
		And enchanted distances, far and pale.
		
		I am made a guardian of the higher mysteries,
		Someone’s sun is entrusted to my control.
		Tart wine has pierced the last convolution
		of my labyrinthine soul.
		
		And now the drooping plumes of ostriches
		Asway in my brain droop slowly lower
		And two eyes, limpid, blue, and fathomless
		Are blooming on a distant shore.
		
		Inside my soul a treasure is buried.
		The key is mine and only mine.
		How right you are, you drunken monster!
		I know: the truth is in the wine.


	2. TO THE MUSE

		In your hidden memories
		There are fatal tidings of doom . . .
		A curse on sacred traditions,
		A desecration of happiness;
		
		And a power so alluring
		That I am ready to repeat the rumour
		That you have brought angels down from heaven,
		Enticing them with your beauty . . .
		
		And when you mock at faith,
		That pale, greyish-purple halo
		Which I once saw before
		Suddenly begins to shine above you.
		
		Are you evil or good? You are altogether from another world
		They say strange things about you
		For some you are the Muse and a miracle.
		For me you are torment and hell.
		
		I do not know why in the hour of dawn,
		When no strength was left to me,
		I did not perish, but caught sight of your face
		And begged you to comfort me.
		
		I wanted us to be enemies;
		Why then did you make me a present
		Of a flowery meadow and of the starry firmament--
		The whole curse of your beauty?
		
		Your fearful caresses were more treacherous
		Than the northern night,
		More intoxicating than the golden champagne of Aï,
		Briefer than a gypsy woman’s love . . .
		
		And there was a fatal pleasure
		In trampling on cherished and holy things;
		And this passion, bitter as wormwood,
		Was a frenzied delight for the heart!


*** Robert Bly (1926 - 2021)

	1. A BOY ON THE FARM

		I was one of the saved.
		The chickens were, too
		Morning came; only
		The hired girl was ready.
		
		The rest of us dozed,
		And got up, and fed chickens.
		The guinea hens rose
		From unimaginable places.
		
		We couldn’t understand
		How strange they were.
		They slept in trees
		And had better nights.


	2. AFTER WORKING

		I
		
		After many strange thoughts,
		Thoughts of distant harbors, and new life,
		I came in and found the moonlight lying in the room.
		
		
		II
		
		Outside it covers the trees like pure sound,
		The sound of tower bells, or of water moving under the ice,
		The sound the deaf hear through the bones of their heads.
		
		
		III
		
		We know the road; as the moonlight
		Lifts everything, so in a night like this,
		The road goes on ahead, it is all clear.


	3. CLEAR AIR OF OCTOBER

		I can see outdoors the gold wings without birds
		Flying around, and the wells of cold water
		Without walls standing eighty feet up in the air,
		I can feel the crickets’ singing carrying them into the sky.
		
		I know these shadows are falling for hundreds of miles,
		Crossing lawns in tiny towns, and the doors of Catholic churches;
		I know the horse of darkness is riding fast to the east,
		Carrying a thin man with no coat.
		
		And I know the sun is sinking down great stairs,
		Like an executioner with a great blade walking into a cellar,
		And the gold animals, the lions, and the zebras, and the pheasants,
		Are waiting at the head of the stairs with robbers’ eyes.


	4. COME WITH ME

		Come with me into those things that have felt this despair for
			so long--
		Those removed Chevrolet wheels that howl with a terrible lone-
			liness,
		Lying on their backs in the cindery dirt, like men drunk and
			naked,
		Staggering off down a hill to drown at last in a pond;
		Shredded inner tubes abandoned on the shoulders of thruways,
		Black and collapsed souls, who tried and burst
		And were left behind,
		And those curled steel shavings scattered about on oily benches,
		Sometimes still warm, gritty when we hold them,
		Who have given up, and blame everything on the government,
		And those roads in South Dakota that feel around in the dark-
			ness . . . 


	5. FALL

		From far out in the center of the naked lake
		A loon’s cry came--
		It was the cry of someone who owned very little.


	6. HURRYING AWAY FROM THE EARTH

		The poor, and the dazed, and the idiots
		Are with us, they live in the casket of the sun
		And the moon’s coffin, as I walk out tonight
		Seeing the night wheeling their dark wheelbarrow
		All about the plains of heaven,
		And the stars inexorable rising.
		Dark moon! Sinister tears!
		Shadow of slums and of the conquering dead!
		
		Some men have pierced the chest with a long needle
		To stop their heart from beating any more;
		Another put blocks of ice in his bed
		So he would die, women
		Have washed their hair, and hung themselves
		In the long braids, one climbed
		A high tree above her house
		And lawn and swallowed poisonous spiders--
		
		The time for exhortation is past. I have heard
		The iron chairs scraping in asylums,
		As the cold bird hunches into the winter
		In the windy nights of November.
		The coal miners rise from their pits
		Like a flash flood,
		Like a rice field disintegrating.
		Now men cry when they hear stories of someone
			rising from the dead.


	7. IN BOWLING GREEN, KENTUCKY

		The mourning dove’s call woke me
		In the still night, when it was still night
		To me. Those sounds came from a time
		Before the box radio, even, and they said,
		A man is walking alone down the canyon.
		There’s a baby lost. I saw my dead father
		Last night near the cottonwood grove.
		
		The mourning dove’s story, so lonely
		In the morning, is a tale of water. It says:
		Remember that the cool egg is waiting
		Still on the floor of the swift river,
		And my calls will bring it forth.
		Then this world of taxes will disappear
		And you’ll be with your mother again.


	8. SNOWFALL IN THE NOVEMBER AFTERNOON

		I
		
		The grass is half-covered with snow.
		It was the kind of snowfall that starts in late afternoon,
		And now the little houses of the grass are growing dark.
		
		
		II
		
		If I reached my hands down, near the earth,
		I could take handfulls of darkness!
		That darkness was always there, which we never noticed.
		
		
		III
		
		As the snow grows heavier, the cornstalks fade farther away,
		And the barn moves nearer to the house.
		The barn moves all alone in the growing storm.
		
		IV
		
		The barn is full of corn, and moving toward us now
		Like a hulk blown toward us in a storm at sea;
		All the sailors on deck have been blind for many years.


	9. THE BEAUTY OF WOMEN

		Delicate women, with eyes open,
		Arms hung lightly as they ride,
		Naked feet covered with jewels,
		Some small scarf trailing from their wrists,
		Shoulders of the spirit:
		This is the secret of Nonnus and Pelagia,
		A chorus of old men shouting Amen.


	10. THE CONFUSION OF AMERICA

		I
		
		The lace that lay around the bones of Danish kings
		Rises at dawn in the grass of North Dakota;
		The torture rack is the steering wheel of a Dodge,
		And the Assyrian lions blaze above the soybean fields;
		The last haven of Jehovah, down from the old heavens,
		Hugs a sooty corner of the murdered pine;
		Phoenician priests carrying Arabic numerals
		Walk the earth dressed as bankers and hunters of bear,
		And at night our sleep is invaded by stealthy diamonds.
		
		
		II
		
		The old jewels of Charlemagne fall in the flakes of snow
		And lie drifted in the door of a pig-house,
		Left abandoned all winter in a barnyard in Montana;
		Our bodies are mingled among bills and relics
		Like Bibles and carbines in the Sears Roebuck catalog;
		Saxophones and gears fly together in the nightmares
		Rising, like feathers, from the grave of Hannibal,
		And tiny beetles, bright as Cadillacs, toil down
		The long dusty roads into the mountains of South Dakota.
		
		
		III
		
		We meet men who travelled in Canada for Astor,
		And also strange animals, men with wings of fur,
		Cars that fly through the air with the faces of women,
		Sheep come in hotels wearing crow feathers painted red,
		Rocks climb up stairs balancing on the feet of birds,
		Glasses of water swallow tiny cities with gypsy fairs,
		Poor accountants awake one day with the paws of bears;
		High in the beanplant that has grown from Carnegie’s dime,
		Tiny loaves of bread with ears lie on the President’s table.


	11. THINKING OF HIGH SCHOOL GIRLS

		Smoke rising over the full moon,
		Like a cloud forming inside a transparent stone,
		Smouldering fires,
		Leaves raked together still not having met the fire,
		But all the other girls nearby going up in heavy smoke.


	12. WANTING SUMPTUOUS HEAVENS

		No one grumbles among the oyster clans, 
		And lobsters play their bone guitars all summer. 
		Only we, with our opposable thumbs, want 
		Heaven to be, and God to come, again. 
		There is no end to our grumbling; we want 
		Comfortable earth and sumptuous Heaven. 
		But the heron standing on one leg in the bog 
		Drinks his dark rum all day, and is content.


	13. WHY WE DON’T DIE

		In late September many voices
		Tell you you will die.
		That leaf says it, that coolness.
		All of them are right.
		
		Our many souls--what
		Can they do about it?
		Nothing. They’re already
		Part of the invisible.
		
		Our souls have been
		Longing to go home
		Anyway. “It’s late,” they say,
		“Lock the door, let’s go.”
		
		The body doesn’t agree. It says
		“We buried a little iron
		Ball under that tree.
		Let’s go get it.”


*** Louise Bogan (1897 - 1970)

	1. BETROTHED

		You have put your two hands upon me, and your mouth,
		You have said my name as a prayer.
		Here where trees are planted by the water
		I have watched your eyes, cleansed from regret,
		And your lips, closed over all that love cannot say,
		
		        My mother remembers the agony of her womb
		        And long years that seemed to promise more than this.
		        She says, “You do not love me,
		        You do not want me,
		        You will go away.”
		
		        In the country whereto I go
		        I shall not see the face of my friend
		        Nor her hair the color of sunburnt grasses;
		        Together we shall not find
		        The land on whose hills bends the new moon
		        In air traversed of birds.
		        
		What have I thought of love?
		I have said, “It is beauty and sorrow.”
		I have thought that it would bring me lost delights, and splendor
		As a wind out of old time . . .
		
		But there is only the evening here,
		And the sound of willows
		Now and again dipping their long oval leaves in the water.


	2. MEDUSA

		I had come to the house, in a cave of trees,
		Facing a sheer sky.
		Everything moved,--a bell hung ready to strike,
		Sun and reflection wheeled by.
		
		When the bare eyes were before me
		And the hissing hair,
		Held up at a window, seen through a door.
		The stiff bald eyes, the serpents on the forehead
		Formed in the air.
		
		This is a dead scene forever now.
		Nothing will ever stir.
		The end will never brighten it more than this,
		Nor the rain blur.
		
		The water will always fall, and will not fall,
		And the tipped bell make no sound.
		The grass will always be growing for hay
		Deep on the ground.
		
		And I shall stand here like a shadow
		Under the great balanced day,
		My eyes on the yellow dust, that was lifting in the wind,
		And does not drift away.


	3. WORDS FOR DEPARTURE

		I
		
		Nothing was remembered, nothing forgotten.
		When we awoke, wagons were passing on the warm summer   
		         pavements,
		The window-sills were wet from rain in the night,
		Birds scattered and settled over chimneypots
		As among grotesque trees.
		
		Nothing was accepted, nothing looked beyond.
		Slight-voiced bells separated hour from hour,
		The afternoon sifted coolness
		And people drew together in streets becoming deserted.
		There was a moon, and light in a shop-front,
		And dusk falling like precipitous water.
		
		Hand clasped hand
		Forehead still bowed to forehead--
		Nothing was lost, nothing possessed
		There was no gift nor denial.
		
		
		II
		
		I have remembered you.
		You were not the town visited once,
		Nor the road falling behind running feet.
		
		You were as awkward as flesh
		And lighter than frost or ashes.
		
		You were the rind,
		And the white-juiced apple,
		The song, and the words waiting for music.
		
		
		III
		
		You have learned the beginning;
		Go from mine to the other.
		
		Be together; eat, dance, despair,
		Sleep, be threatened, endure.
		You will know the way of that.
		
		But at the end, be insolent;
		Be absurd--strike the thing short off;
		Be mad--only do not let talk
		Wear the bloom from silence.
		
		And go away without fire or lantern
		Let there be some uncertainty about your departure.


*** Jorge Luis Borges (1899 - 1986)

	1. HISTORY OF THE NIGHT

		Throughout the course of the generations
		men constructed the night.
		At first she was blindness; 
		thorns raking bare feet,
		fear of wolves.
		We shall never know who forged the word
		for the interval of shadow 
		dividing the two twilights;
		we shall never know in what age it came to mean
		the starry hours.
		Others created the myth.
		They made her the mother of the unruffled Fates
		that spin our destiny,
		they sacrificed black ewes to her, and the cock
		who crows his own death. 
		The Chaldeans assigned to her twelve houses;
		to Zeno, infinite words.
		She took shape from Latin hexameters
		and the terror of Pascal.
		Luis de Leon saw in her the homeland
		of his stricken soul.
		Now we feel her to be inexhaustible
		like an ancient wine
		and no one can gaze on her without vertigo
		and time has charged her with eternity.
		
		And to think that she wouldn’t exist 
		except for those fragile instruments, the eyes.


	2. LIMITS

		Of all the streets that blur in to the sunset,
		There must be one (which, I am not sure)
		That I by now have walked for the last time
		Without guessing it, the pawn of that Someone
		
		Who fixes in advance omnipotent laws,
		Sets up a secret and unwavering scale
		for all the shadows, dreams, and forms
		Woven into the texture of this life.
		
		If there is a limit to all things and a measure
		And a last time and nothing more and forgetfulness,
		Who will tell us to whom in this house
		We without knowing it have said farewell?
		
		Through the dawning window night withdraws
		And among the stacked books which throw
		Irregular shadows on the dim table,
		There must be one which I will never read.
		
		There is in the South more than one worn gate,
		With its cement urns and planted cactus,
		Which is already forbidden to my entry,
		Inaccessible, as in a lithograph.
		
		There is a door you have closed forever
		And some mirror is expecting you in vain;
		To you the crossroads seem wide open,
		Yet watching you, four-faced, is a Janus.
		
		There is among all your memories one
		Which has now been lost beyond recall.
		You will not be seen going down to that fountain
		Neither by white sun nor by yellow moon.
		
		You will never recapture what the Persian
		Said in his language woven with birds and roses,
		When, in the sunset, before the light disperses,
		You wish to give words to unforgettable things.
		
		And the steadily flowing Rhone and the lake,
		All that vast yesterday over which today I bend?
		They will be as lost as Carthage,
		Scourged by the Romans with fire and salt.
		
		At dawn I seem to hear the turbulent
		Murmur of crowds milling and fading away;
		They are all I have been loved by, forgotten by;
		Space, time, and Borges now are leaving me.


*** Bertolt Brecht (1898 - 1956)

	1. ALABAMA SONG

		Show me the way to the next whisky bar
		Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
		Show me the way to the next whisky bar
		Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
		For if we don’t find the next whisky bar
		I tell you we must die
		I tell you we must die
		I tell you
		I tell you
		I tell you we must die
		
		Oh, moon of Alabama
		We now must say say good-bye
		We’ve lost our good old mamma
		And must have whisky
		Oh, you know why.
		
		Show me the way to the next pretty girl
		Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
		Show me the way to the next pretty girl
		Oh don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
		For if we don’t find the next pretty girl
		I tell you we must die
		I tell you we must die
		I tell you
		I tell you
		I tell you we must die
		
		Oh, moon of Alabama
		We now must say good-bye
		We’ve lost our good old mamma
		And must have a girl
		Oh, you know why.
		
		Show me the way to the next little dollar
		Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
		Show me the way to the next little dollar
		Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
		For if we don’t find the next little dollar
		I tell you we must die
		I tell you we must die
		I tell you
		I tell you
		I tell you we must die
		
		Oh, moon of Alabama
		We now must say good-bye
		We’ve lost our good old mamma
		And must have dollars
		Oh, you know why.


	2. CONTEMPLATING HELL

		Contemplating Hell, as I once heard it,
		My brother Shelley found it to be a place
		Much like the city of London. I,
		Who do not live in London, but in Los Angeles,
		Find, contemplating Hell, that it
		Must be even more like Los Angeles.
		
		Also in Hell,
		I do not doubt it, there exist these opulent gardens
		With flowers as large as trees, wilting, of course,
		Very quickly, if they are not watered with very expensive water. And fruit markets
		With great leaps of fruit, which nonetheless
		
		Possess neither scent nor taste. And endless trains of autos,
		Lighter than their own shadows, swifter than
		Foolish thoughts, shimmering vehicles, in which
		Rosy people, coming from nowhere, go nowhere.
		And houses, designed for happiness, standing empty,
		Even when inhabited.
		
		Even the houses in Hell are not all ugly.
		But concern about being thrown into the street
		Consumes the inhabitants of the villas no less
		Than the inhabitants of the barracks.


	3. HOW FORTUNATE THE MAN WITH NONE

		You saw sagacious Solomon
		You know what came of him,
		To him complexities seemed plain.
		He cursed the hour that gave birth to him
		And saw that everything was vain.
		How great and wise was Solomon.
		The world however did not wait
		But soon observed what followed on.
		It’s wisdom that had brought him to this state.
		How fortunate the man with none.
		
		You saw courageous Caesar next
		You know what he became.
		They deified him in his life
		Then had him murdered just the same.
		And as they raised the fatal knife
		How loud he cried: you too my son!
		The world however did not wait
		But soon observed what followed on.
		It’s courage that had brought him to that state.
		How fortunate the man with none.
		
		You heard of honest Socrates
		The man who never lied:
		They weren’t so grateful as you’d think
		Instead the rulers fixed to have him tried
		And handed him the poisoned drink.
		How honest was the people’s noble son.
		The world however did not wait
		But soon observed what followed on.
		It’s honesty that brought him to that state.
		How fortunate the man with none.
		
		Here you can see respectable folk
		Keeping to God’s own laws.
		So far he hasn’t taken heed.
		You who sit safe and warm indoors
		Help to relieve our bitter need.
		How virtuously we had begun.
		The world however did not wait
		But soon observed what followed on.
		It’s fear of god that brought us to that state.
		How fortunate the man with none.


	4. I NEVER LOVED YOU MORE

		I never loved you more, ma soeur
		Than as I walked away from you that evening.
		The forest swallowed me, the blue forest, ma soeur
		The blue forest and above it pale stars in the west.
		
		I did not laugh, not one little bit, ma soeur
		As I playfully walked towards a dark fate--
		While the faces behind me
		Slowly paled in the evening of the blue forest.
		
		Everything was grand that one night, ma soeur
		Never thereafter and never before--
		I admit it: I was left with nothing but the big birds
		And their hungry cries in the dark evening sky.


	5. I’M NOT SAYING ANYTHING AGAINST ALEXANDER

		Timur, I hear, took the trouble to conquer the earth.
		I don’t understand him.
		With a bit of hard liquor you can forget the earth.
		
		I’m not saying anything against Alexander,
		Only I have seen people who were remarkable,
		Highly deserving of your admiration
		For the fact that they were alive at all.
		
		Great men generate too much sweat.
		In all of this I see just a proof that
		They couldn’t stand being on their own
		And smoking and drinking and the like.
		And they must be too mean-spirited to get
		Contentment from sitting by a woman.


	6. NOT WHAT WAS MEANT

		When the Academy of Arts demanded freedom
		Of artistic expression from narrow-minded bureaucrats
		There was a howl and a clamour in its immediate vicinity
		But roaring above everything
		Came a deafening thunder of applause
		From beyond the Sector boundary.
		Freedom! it roared. Freedom for the artists!
		Freedom all round! Freedom for all!
		Freedom for the exploiters! Freedom for the warmongers!
		Freedom for the Ruhr cartels! Freedom for Hitler’s generals!
		Softly, my dear fellows...
		The Judas kiss for the artists follows
		Hard on the Judas kiss for the workers.
		The arsonist with his bottle of petrol
		Sneaks up grinning to
		The Academy of Arts.
		But it was not to embrace him, just
		To knock the bottle out of his dirty hand that
		We asked for elbow room.
		Even the narrowest minds
		In which peace is harboured
		Are more welcome to the arts than the art lover
		
		Who is also a lover of the art of war.


	7. SEND ME A LEAF

		Send me a leaf, but from a bush
		That grows at least one half hour
		Away from your house, then
		You must go and will be strong, and I
		Thank you for the pretty leaf.


	8. TO POSTERITY

		I
		
		Indeed I live in the dark ages!
		A guileless word is an absurdity. A smooth forehead betokens
		A hard heart. He who laughs
		Has not yet heard
		The terrible tidings.
		
		Ah, what an age it is
		When to speak of trees is almost a crime
		For it is a kind of silence about injustice!
		And he who walks calmly across the street,
		Is he not out of reach of his friends
		In trouble?
		
		It is true: I earn my living
		But, believe me, it is only an accident.
		Nothing that I do entitles me to eat my fill.
		By chance I was spared. (If my luck leaves me
		I am lost.)
		
		They tell me: eat and drink. Be glad you have it!
		But how can I eat and drink
		When my food is snatched from the hungry
		And my glass of water belongs to the thirsty?
		And yet I eat and drink.
		
		I would gladly be wise.
		The old books tell us what wisdom is:
		Avoid the strife of the world
		Live out your little time
		Fearing no one
		Using no violence
		Returning good for evil--
		Not fulfillment of desire but forgetfulness
		Passes for wisdom.
		I can do none of this:
		Indeed I live in the dark ages!
		
		
		II
		
		I came to the cities in a time of disorder
		When hunger ruled.
		I came among men in a time of uprising
		And I revolted with them.
		So the time passed away
		Which on earth was given me.
		
		I ate my food between massacres.
		The shadow of murder lay upon my sleep.
		And when I loved, I loved with indifference.
		I looked upon nature with impatience.
		So the time passed away
		Which on earth was given me.
		
		In my time streets led to the quicksand.
		Speech betrayed me to the slaughterer.
		There was little I could do. But without me
		The rulers would have been more secure. This was my hope.
		So the time passed away
		Which on earth was given me.
		
		
		III
		
		You, who shall emerge from the flood
		In which we are sinking,
		Think--
		When you speak of our weaknesses,
		Also of the dark time
		That brought them forth.
		
		For we went, changing our country more often than our shoes.
		In the class war, despairing
		When there was only injustice and no resistance.
		
		For we knew only too well:
		Even the hatred of squalor
		Makes the brow grow stern.
		Even anger against injustice
		Makes the voice grow harsh. Alas, we
		Who wished to lay the foundations of kindness
		Could not ourselves be kind.
		
		But you, when at last it comes to pass
		That man can help his fellow man,
		Do no judge us
		Too harshly.


	9. TO THOSE BORN AFTER

		I
		
		To the cities I came in a time of disorder
		That was ruled by hunger.
		I sheltered with the people in a time of uproar
		And then I joined in their rebellion.
		That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
		
		I ate my dinners between the battles,
		I lay down to sleep among the murderers,
		I didn’t care for much for love
		And for nature’s beauties I had little patience.
		That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
		
		The city streets all led to foul swamps in my time,
		My speech betrayed me to the butchers.
		I could do only little
		But without me those that ruled could not sleep so easily:
		That’s what I hoped.
		That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
		
		Our forces were slight and small,
		Our goal lay in the far distance
		Clearly in our sights,
		If for me myself beyond my reaching.
		That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
		
		
		II
		
		You who will come to the surface
		From the flood that’s overwhelmed us and drowned us all
		Must think, when you speak of our weakness in times of darkness
		That you’ve not had to face:
		
		Days when we were used to changing countries
		More often than shoes,
		Through the war of the classes despairing
		That there was only injustice and no outrage.
		
		Even so we realised
		Hatred of oppression still distorts the features,
		Anger at injustice still makes voices raised and ugly.
		Oh we, who wished to lay for the foundations for peace and friendliness,
		Could never be friendly ourselves.
		
		And in the future when no longer
		Do human beings still treat themselves as animals,
		Look back on us with indulgence.


	10. WHAT HAS HAPPENED?

		The industrialist is having his aeroplane serviced.
		The priest is wondering what he said in his sermon eight weeks ago
		about tithes.
		The generals are putting on civvies and looking like bank clerks.
		Public officials are getting friendly.
		The policeman points out the way to the man in the cloth cap.
		The landlord comes to see whether the water supply is working.
		The journalists write the word People with capital letters.
		The singers sing at the opera for nothing.
		Ships’ captains check the food in the crew’s galley,
		Car owners get in beside their chauffeurs.
		Doctors sue the insurance companies.
		Scholars show their discoveries and hide their decorations.
		Farmers deliver potatoes to the barracks.
		The revolution has won its first battle:
		That’s what has happened.


*** Robert Bridges (1844 - 1930)

	1. AWAKE, MY HEART

		Awake, my heart, to be loved, awake, awake!
		
		The darkness silvers away, the morn doth break,
		It leaps in the sky: unrisen lustres slake
		The o’ertaken moon. Awake, O heart, awake!
		
		She too that loveth awaketh and hopes for thee:
		Her eyes already have sped the shades that flee,
		Already they watch the path thy feet shall take:
		Awake, O heart, to be loved, awake, awake!
		
		And if thou tarry from her,--if this could be,--
		She cometh herself, O heart, to be loved, to thee;
		For thee would unashamed herself forsake:
		Awake, to be loved, my heart, awake, awake!
		
		Awake! The land is scattered with light, and see,
		Uncanopied sleep is flying from field and tree;
		And blossoming boughs of April in laughter shake:
		Awake, O heart, to be loved, awake, awake!
		
		Lo, all things wake and tarry and look for thee:
		She looketh and saith, “O sun, now bring him to me.
		Come, more adored, O adored, for his coming’s sake,
		And awake, my heart, to be loved, awake, awake!”


	2. CHRISTMAS EVE

		_Pax hominibus bonae voluntatis_
		
		A frosty Christmas Eve 
		   when the stars were shining
		Fared I forth alone 
		   where westward falls the hill,
		And from many a village 
		   in the water’d valley
		Distant music reach’d me 
		   peals of bells aringing:
		The constellated sounds 
		   ran sprinkling on earth’s floor
		As the dark vault above 
		   with stars was spangled o’er.
		Then sped my thoughts to keep 
		   that first Christmas of all
		When the shepherds watching 
		   by their folds ere the dawn
		Heard music in the fields 
		   and marveling could not tell
		Whether it were angels 
		   or the bright stars singing.
		
		Now blessed be the tow’rs 
		   that crown England so fair
		That stand up strong in prayer 
		   unto God for our souls
		Blessed be their founders 
		   (said I) an’ our country folk
		Who are ringing for Christ 
		   in the belfries to-night
		With arms lifted to clutch 
		   the rattling ropes that race
		Into the dark above 
		   and the mad romping din.
		
		But to me heard afar 
		   it was starry music
		Angels’ song, comforting 
		   as the comfort of Christ
		When he spake tenderly 
		   to his sorrowful flock:
		The old words came to me 
		   by the riches of time
		Mellow’d and transfigured 
		   as I stood on the hill
		Heark’ning in the aspect 
		   of th’ eternal silence.


	3. EROS

		Why hast thou nothing in thy face? 
		Thou idol of the human race, 
		Thou tyrant of the human heart, 
		The flower of lovely youth that art; 
		Yea, and that standest in thy youth 
		An image of eternal Truth, 
		With thy exuberant flesh so fair, 
		That only Pheidias might compare, 
		Ere from his chaste marmoreal form 
		Time had decayed the colours warm; 
		Like to his gods in thy proud dress, 
		Thy starry sheen of nakedness. 
		
		Surely thy body is thy mind, 
		For in thy face is nought to find, 
		Only thy soft unchristen’d smile, 
		That shadows neither love nor guile, 
		But shameless will and power immense, 
		In secret sensuous innocence. 
		
		O king of joy, what is thy thought? 
		I dream thou knowest it is nought, 
		And wouldst in darkness come, but thou 
		Makest the light where’er thou go. 
		Ah yet no victim of thy grace, 
		None who e’er long’d for thy embrace, 
		Hath cared to look upon thy face.


	4. I WILL NOT LET THEE GO

		I will not let thee go.
		Ends all our month-long love in this?
		Can it be summed up so,
		Quit in a single kiss?
		I will not let thee go.
		
		I will not let thee go.
		If thy words’ breath could scare thy deeds,
		As the soft south can blow
		And toss the feathered seeds,
		Then might I let thee go.
		
		I will not let thee go.
		Had not the great sun seen, I might;
		Or were he reckoned slow
		To bring the false to light,
		Then might I let thee go.
		
		I will not let thee go.
		The stars that crowd the summer skies
		Have watched us so below
		With all their million eyes,
		I dare not let thee go.
		
		I will not let thee go.
		Have we chid the changeful moon,
		Now rising late, and now
		Because she set too soon,
		And shall I let thee go?
		
		I will not let thee go.
		Have not the young flowers been content,
		Plucked ere their buds could blow,
		To seal our sacrament?
		I cannot let thee go.
		
		I will not let thee go.
		I hold thee by too many bands:
		Thou sayest farewell, and lo!
		I have thee by the hands,
		And will not let thee go.


	5. LONDON SNOW

		When men were all asleep the snow came flying, 
		In large white flakes falling on the city brown, 
		Stealthily and perpetually settling and loosely lying, 
		     Hushing the latest traffic of the drowsy town; 
		Deadening, muffling, stifling its murmurs failing; 
		Lazily and incessantly floating down and down: 
		     Silently sifting and veiling road, roof and railing; 
		Hiding difference, making unevenness even, 
		Into angles and crevices softly drifting and sailing. 
		     All night it fell, and when full inches seven 
		It lay in the depth of its uncompacted lightness, 
		The clouds blew off from a high and frosty heaven; 
		     And all woke earlier for the unaccustomed brightness 
		Of the winter dawning, the strange unheavenly glare: 
		The eye marvelled--marvelled at the dazzling whiteness; 
		     The ear hearkened to the stillness of the solemn air; 
		No sound of wheel rumbling nor of foot falling, 
		And the busy morning cries came thin and spare. 
		     Then boys I heard, as they went to school, calling, 
		They gathered up the crystal manna to freeze 
		Their tongues with tasting, their hands with snowballing; 
		     Or rioted in a drift, plunging up to the knees; 
		Or peering up from under the white-mossed wonder, 
		‘O look at the trees!’ they cried, ‘O look at the trees!’ 
		     With lessened load a few carts creak and blunder, 
		Following along the white deserted way, 
		A country company long dispersed asunder: 
		     When now already the sun, in pale display 
		Standing by Paul’s high dome, spread forth below 
		His sparkling beams, and awoke the stir of the day. 
		     For now doors open, and war is waged with the snow; 
		And trains of sombre men, past tale of number, 
		Tread long brown paths, as toward their toil they go: 
		     But even for them awhile no cares encumber 
		Their minds diverted; the daily word is unspoken, 
		The daily thoughts of labour and sorrow slumber 
		At the sight of the beauty that greets them, for the charm they have broken.


	6. NORTH WIND IN OCTOBER

		In the golden glade the chestnuts are fallen all;
		From the sered boughs of the oak the acorns fall:
		The beech scatters her ruddy fire;
		The lime hath stripped to the cold,
		And standeth naked above her yellow attire:
		The larch thinneth her spire
		To lay the ways of the wood with cloth of gold.
		
		Out of the golden-green and white Of the brake the fir-trees stand upright
		In the forest of flame, and wave aloft
		To the blue of heaven their blue-green tuftings soft.
		
		But swiftly in shuddering gloom the splendours fail,
		As the harrying North-wind beareth
		A cloud of skirmishing hail
		The grieved woodland to smite:
		In a hurricane through the trees he teareth,
		Raking the boughs and the leaves rending,
		And whistleth to the descending
		Blows of his icy flail.
		Gold and snow he mixeth in spite,
		And whirleth afar; as away on his winnowing flight
		He passeth, and all again for ahile is bright.


	7. ON A DEAD CHILD

		Perfect little body, without fault or stain on thee, 
		With promise of strength and manhood full and fair! 
		Though cold and stark and bare, 
		The bloom and the charm of life doth awhile remain on thee. 
		
		Thy mother’s treasure wert thou;--alas! no longer 
		To visit her heart with wondrous joy; to be 
		Thy father’s pride;--ah, he 
		Must gather his faith together, and his strength make stronger. 
		
		To me, as I move thee now in the last duty, 
		Dost thou with a turn or gesture anon respond; 
		Startling my fancy fond 
		With a chance attitude of the head, a freak of beauty. 
		
		Thy hand clasps, as ’twas wont, my finger, and holds it: 
		But the grasp is the clasp of Death, heartbreaking and stiff; 
		Yet feels to my hand as if 
		’Twas still thy will, thy pleasure and trust that enfolds it. 
		
		So I lay thee there, thy sunken eyelids closing,-- 
		Go lie thou there in thy coffin, thy last little bed!-- 
		Propping thy wise, sad head, 
		Thy firm, pale hands across thy chest disposing. 
		
		So quiet! doth the change content thee?--Death, whither hath he taken thee? 
		To a world, do I think, that rights the disaster of this? 
		The vision of which I miss, 
		Who weep for the body, and wish but to warm thee and awaken thee? 
		
		Ah! little at best can all our hopes avail us 
		To lift this sorrow, or cheer us, when in the dark, 
		Unwilling, alone we embark, 
		And the things we have seen and have known and have heard of, fail us. 


	8. PATER FILIO

		Sense with keenest edge unusèd, 
		Yet unsteel’d by scathing fire; 
		Lovely feet as yet unbruisèd 
		On the ways of dark desire; 
		Sweetest hope that lookest smiling
		O’er the wilderness defiling! 
		
		Why such beauty, to be blighted 
		By the swarm of foul destruction? 
		Why such innocence delighted, 
		When sin stalks to thy seduction? 
		All the litanies e’er chaunted 
		Shall not keep thy faith undaunted. 
		
		I have pray’d the sainted Morning 
		To unclasp her hands to hold thee; 
		From resignful Eve’s adorning 
		Stol’n a robe of peace to enfold thee; 
		With all charms of man’s contriving 
		Arm’d thee for thy lonely striving. 
		
		Me too once unthinking Nature, 
		--Whence Love’s timeless mockery took me,-- 
		Fashion’d so divine a creature, 
		Yea, and like a beast forsook me. 
		I forgave, but tell the measure 
		Of her crime in thee, my treasure.


	9. SO SWEET LOVE SEEMED THAT APRIL MORN

		So sweet love seemed that April morn,
		When first we kissed beside the thorn,
		So strangely sweet, it was not strange
		We thought that love could never change.
		
		But I can tell--let truth be told--
		That love will change in growing old;
		Though day by day is naught to see,
		So delicate his motions be.
		
		And in the end ‘twill come to pass
		Quite to forget what once he was,
		Nor even in fancy to recall
		The pleasure that was all in all.
		
		His little spring, that sweet we found,
		So deep in summer floods is drowned,
		I wonder, bathed in joy complete,
		How love so young could be so sweet.


*** Joseph Brodsky (1940 - 1996)

	1. A PART OF SPEECH

		I was born and grew up in the Baltic marshland
		by zinc-gray breakers that always marched on
		in twos. Hence all rhymes, hence that wan flat voice
		that ripples between them like hair still moist,
		if it ripples at all. Propped on a pallid elbow,
		the helix picks out of them no sea rumble
		but a clap of canvas, of shutters, of hands, a kettle
		on the burner, boiling--lastly, the seagull’s metal
		cry. What keeps hearts from falseness in this flat region
		is that there is nowhere to hide and plenty of room for vision.
		Only sound needs echo and dreads its lack.
		A glance is accustomed to no glance back
		
		A list of some observations. In a corner, it’s warm.
		A glance leaves an imprint on anything it’s dwelt on.
		Water is glass’s most public form.
		Man is more frightening than his skeleton.
		A nowhere winter evening with wine. A black
		porch resists an osier’s stiff assaults.
		Fixed on an elbow, the body bulks
		like a glacier’s debris, a moraine of sorts.
		A millenium hence, they’ll no doubt expose
		a fossil bivalve propped behind this gauze
		cloth, with the print of lips under the print of fringe,
		mumbling “Good night” to a window hinge.
		
		I recognize this wind battering the limp grass
		that submits to it as they did to the Tartar mass.
		I recognize this leaf splayed in the roadside mud
		like a prince empurpled in his own blood.
		Fanning wet arrows that blow aslant
		the cheek of a wooden hut in another land,
		autumn tells, like geese by their flying call,
		a tear by its face. And as I roll
		my eyes to the ceiling, I chant herein
		not the lay of that eager man’s campaign
		but utter your Kazakh name which till now was stored
		in my throat as a password into the Horde.
		
		A navy-blue dawn in a frosted pane
		recalls yellow streetlamps in the snow-piled lane,
		icy pathways, crossroads, drifts on either hand,
		a jostling cloakroom in Europe’s eastern end.
		“Hannibal . . .” drones on there, a worn-out motor,
		parallel bars in the gym reek with armpit odor;
		as for that scary blackboard you failed to see through,
		it has stayed just as black. And its reverse side, too.
		Silvery hoarfrost has transformed the rattling bell
		into crystal. As regards all that parallel-
		line stuff, it’s turned out true and bone-clad, indeed.
		Don’t want to get up now. And never did.
		
		You’ve forgotten that village lost in the rows and rows
		of swamp in a pine-wooded territory where no scarecrows
		ever stand in orchards: the crops aren’t worth it,
		and the roads are also just ditches and brushwood surface.
		Old Nastasia is dead, I take it, and Pesterev, too, for sure,
		and if not, he’s sitting drunk in the cellar or
		is making something out of the headboard of our bed:
		a wicket gate, say, or some kind of shed.
		And in winter they’re chopping wood, and turnips is all they live on,
		and a star blinks from all the smoke in the frosty heaven,
		and no bride in chintz at the window, but dust’s gray craft,
		plus the emptiness where once we loved.
		
		In the little town out of which death sprawled over the classroom map
		the cobblestones shine like scales that coat a carp,
		on the secular chestnut tree melting candles hang,
		and a cast-iron lion pines for a good harangue.
		Through the much laundered, pale window gauze
		woundlike carnations and kirchen needles ooze;
		a tram rattles far off, as in days of yore,
		but no one gets off at the stadium anymore.
		The real end of the war is a sweet blonde’s frock
		across a Viennese armchair’s fragile back
		while the humming winged silver bullets fly,
		taking lives southward, in mid-July.
		                                                                                                                 
		As for the stars, they are always on.
		That is, one appears, then others adorn the inklike
		sphere. That’s the best way from there to look upon
		here: well after hours, blinking.
		The sky looks better when they are off.
		Though, with them, the conquest of space is quicker.
		Provided you haven’t got to move
		from the bare veranda and squeaking rocker.
		As one spacecraft pilot has said, his face
		half sunk in the shadow, it seems there is
		no life anywhere, and a thoughtful gaze
		can be rested on none of these.
		
		Near the ocean, by candlelight. Scattered farms,
		fields overrun with sorrel, lucerne, and clover.
		Toward nightfall, the body, like Shiva, grows extra arms
		reaching out yearningly to a lover.
		A mouse rustles through grass. An owl drops down.
		Suddenly creaking rafters expand a second.
		One sleeps more soundly in a wooden town,
		since you dream these days only of things that happened.
		There’s a smell of fresh fish. An armchair’s profile
		is glued to the wall. The gauze is too limp to bulk at
		the slightest breeze.. And a ray of the moon, meanwhile,
		draws up the tide like a slipping blanket.
		
		The Laocoön of a tree, casting the mountain weight
		off his shoulders, wraps them in an immense
		cloud. From a promontory, wind gushes in. A voice
		pitches high, keeping words on a string of sense.
		Rain surges down; its ropes twisted into lumps,
		lash, like the bather’s shoulders, the naked backs of these
		hills. The Medhibernian Sea stirs round colonnaded stumps
		like a salt tongue behind broken teeth.
		The heart, however grown savage, still beats for two.
		Every good boy deserves fingers to indicate
		that beyond today there is always a static to-
		morrow, like a subject’s shadowy predicate.
		
		If anything’s to be praised, it’s most likely how
		the west wind becomes the east wind, when a frozen bough
		sways leftward, voicing its creaking protests,
		and your cough flies across the Great Plains to Dakota’s forests.
		At noon, shouldering a shotgun, fire at what may well
		be a rabbit in snowfields, so that a shell
		widens the breach between the pen that puts up these limping
		awkward lines and the creature leaving
		real tracks in the white. On occasion the head combines
		its existence with that of a hand, not to fetch more lines
		but to cup an ear under the pouring slur
		of their common voice. Like a new centaur.
		
		There is always a possibility left--to let
		yourself out to the street whose brown length
		will soothe the eye with doorways, the slender forking
		of willows, the patchwork puddles, with simply walking.
		The hair on my gourd is stirred by a breeze
		and the street, in distance, tapering to a V, is
		like a face to a chin; and a barking puppy
		flies out of a gateway like crumpled paper.
		A street. Some houses, let’s say,
		are better than others. To take one item,
		some have richer windows. What’s more, if you go insane,
		it won’t happen, at least, inside them.
		
		. . . and when “the future” is uttered, swarms of mice
		rush out of the Russian language and gnaw a piece
		of ripened memory which is twice
		as hole-ridden as real cheese.
		After all these years it hardly matters who
		or what stands in the corner, hidden by heavy drapes,
		and your mind resounds not with a seraphic “do,”
		only their rustle. Life, that no one dares
		to appraise, like that gift horse’s mouth,
		bares its teeth in a grin at each
		encounter. What gets left of a man amounts
		to a part. To his spoken part. To a part of speech.
		
		Not that I am losing my grip; I am just tired of summer.
		You reach for a shirt in a drawer and the day is wasted.
		If only winter were here for snow to smother
		all these streets, these humans; but first, the blasted
		green. I would sleep in my clothes or just pluck a borrowed
		book, while what’s left of the year’s slack rhythm,
		like a dog abandoning its blind owner,
		crosses the road at the usual zebra. Freedom
		is when you forget the spelling of the tyrant’s name
		and your mouth’s saliva is sweeter than Persian pie,
		and though your brain is wrung tight as the horn of a ram
		nothing drops from your pale-blue eye.


	2. A SONG

		I wish you were here, dear,
		I wish you were here. 
		I wish you sat on the sofa 
		and I sat near. 
		The handkerchief could be yours, 
		the tear could be mine, chin-bound. 
		Though it could be, of course, 
		the other way around.
		
		I wish you were here, dear, 
		I wish you were here. 
		I wish we were in my car 
		and you’d shift the gear. 
		We’d find ourselves elsewhere, 
		on an unknown shore. 
		Or else we’d repair 
		to where we’ve been before.
		
		I wish you were here, dear, 
		I wish you were here. 
		I wish I knew no astronomy 
		when stars appear, 
		when the moon skims the water 
		that sighs and shifts in its slumber.
		I wish it were still a quarter 
		to dial your number.
		
		I wish you were here, dear, 
		in this hemisphere, 
		as I sit on the porch 
		sipping a beer. 
		It’s evening, the sun is setting; 
		boys shout and gulls are crying. 
		What’s the point of forgetting 
		if it’s followed by dying?


	3. AT A LECTURE

		Since mistakes are inevitable, I can easily be taken
		for a man standing before you in this room filled
		with yourselves. Yet in about an hour
		this will be corrected, at your and at my expense,
		and the place will be reclaimed by elemental particles
		free from the rigidity of a particular human shape
		or type of assembly. Some particles are still free. It’s not all dust.
		
		So my unwillingness to admit it’s I
		facing you now, or the other way around,
		has less to do with my modesty or solipsism
		than with my respect for the premises’ instant future,
		for those afore-mentioned free-floating particles
		settling upon the shining surface
		of my brain. Inaccessible to a wet cloth eager to wipe them off.
		
		The most interesting thing about emptiness
		is that it is preceded by fullness.
		The first to understand this were, I believe, the Greek
		gods, whose forte indeed was absence.
		Regard, then, yourselves as rehearsing perhaps for the divine encore,
		with me playing obviously to the gallery.
		We all act out of vanity. But I am in a hurry.
		
		Once you know the future, you can make it come
		earlier. The way it’s done by statues or by one’s furniture.
		Self-effacement is not a virtue
		but a necessity, recognised most often
		toward evening. Though numerically it is easier
		not to be me than not to be you. As the swan confessed
		to the lake: I don’t like myself. But you are welcome to my reflection.


	4. BELFAST TUNE

		Here’s a girl from a dangerous town
		        She crops her dark hair short
		so that less of her has to frown
		        when someone gets hurt.
		
		She folds her memories like a parachute.
		        Dropped, she collects the peat
		and cooks her veggies at home: they shoot
		        here where they eat.
		
		Ah, there’s more sky in these parts than, say,
		        ground. Hence her voice’s pitch,
		and her stare stains your retina like a gray
		        bulb when you switch
		
		hemispheres, and her knee-length quilt
		        skirt’s cut to catch the squall,
		I dream of her either loved or killed
		        because the town’s too small.


	5. CONSTANCY

		Constancy is an evolution of one’s living quarters into
		a thought: a continuation of a parallelogram or a rectangle
		by means--as Clausewitz would have put it--
		of the voice and, ultimately, the gray matter.
		Ah, shrunken to the size of a brain-cell parlor
		with a lampshade, an armoire in the “Slavic
		Glory” fashion, four studded chairs, a sofa,
		a bed, a bedside table with
		little medicine bottles left there standing like
		a kremlin or, better yet, manhattan.
		To die, to abandon a family, to go away for good,
		to change hemispheres, to let new ovals
		be painted into the square--the more
		volubly will the gray cell insist
		on its actual measurements, demanding
		daily sacrifice from the new locale,
		from the furniture, from the silhouette in a yellow
		dress; in the end--from your very self.
		A spider revels in shading especially the fifth corner.
		Evolution is not a species’
		adjustment to a new environment but one’s memories’
		triumph over reality, the ichthyosaurus pining
		for the amoeba, the slack vertebrae of a train
		thundering in the darkness, past
		the mussel shells, tightly shut for the night, with their
		spineless, soggy, pearl-shrouding contents.


	6. DECEMBER 24, 1971

		When it’s Christmas we’re all of us magi.
		At the grocers’ all slipping and pushing.
		Where a tin of halvah, coffee-flavored,
		is the cause of a human assault-wave
		by a crowd heavy-laden with parcels:
		each one his own king, his own camel.
		
		Nylon bags, carrier bags, paper cones,
		caps and neckties all twisted up sideways.
		Reek of vodka and resin and cod,
		orange mandarins, cinnamon, apples.
		Floods of faces, no sign of a pathway
		toward Bethlehem, shut off by blizzard.
		
		And the bearers of moderate gifts
		leap on buses and jam all the doorways,
		disappear into courtyards that gape,
		though they know that there’s nothing inside there:
		not a beast, not a crib, nor yet her,
		round whose head gleams a nimbus of gold.
		
		Emptiness. But the mere thought of that
		brings forth lights as if out of nowhere.
		Herod reigns but the stronger he is,
		the more sure, the more certain the wonder.
		In the constancy of this relation
		is the basic mechanics of Christmas.
		
		That’s what they celebrate everywhere,
		for its coming push tables together.
		No demand for a star for a while,
		but a sort of good will touched with grace
		can be seen in all men from afar,
		and the shepherds have kindled their fires.
		
		Snow is falling: not smoking but sounding
		chimney pots on the roof, every face like a stain.
		Herod drinks. Every wife hides her child.
		He who comes is a mystery: features
		are not known beforehand, men’s hearts may
		not be quick to distinguish the stranger.
		
		But when drafts through the doorway disperse
		the thick mist of the hours of darkness
		and a shape in a shawl stands revealed,
		both a newborn and Spirit that’s Holy
		in your self you discover; you stare
		skyward, and it’s right there: a star.


	7. GALATEA ENCORE

		As though the mercury’s under its tongue, it won’t 
		talk. As though with the mercury in its sphincter, 
		immobile, by a leaf-coated pond 
		a statue stands white like a blight of winter. 
		After such snow, there is nothing indeed: the ins 
		and outs of centuries, pestered heather. 
		That’s what coming full circle means-- 
		when your countenance starts to resemble weather, 
		when Pygmalion’s vanished. And you are free 
		to cloud your folds, to bare the navel. 
		Future at last! That is, bleached debris 
		of a glacier amid the five-lettered “never.”
		Hence the routine of a goddess, nee 
		alabaster, that lets roving pupils gorge on 
		the heart of color and the temperature of the knee. 
		That’s what it looks like inside a virgin.


	8. HISTORY OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

		 _The Sun’s in its orbit,
		 yet I feel morbid._
		
		Act 1
		
		_Prologue_
		
		Ladies and gentlemen and the day! 
		All ye made of sweet human clay! 
		Let me tell you: you are o’kay. 
		
		Our show is to start without much delay. 
		So let me inform you right away: 
		this is not a play but the end of the play 
		
		that has been on for some eighty years. 
		It received its boos and received its cheers. 
		It won’t last for long, one fears. 
		
		Men and machines lie to rest or rust. 
		Nothing arrives as quick as the Past. 
		What we’ll show you presently is the cast 
		
		of characters who have ceased to act. 
		Each of these lives has become a fact 
		from which you presumably can subtract 
		
		but to which you blissfully cannot add. 
		The consequences of that could be bad 
		for your looks or your blood. 
		
		For they are the cause, you are the effect. 
		because they lie flat, you are still erect. 
		Citizens! Don’t neglect 
		
		history! History holds the clue 
		to your taxes and to your flu, 
		to what comes out of the blue. 
		
		We’ll show you battlefields, bedrooms, labs, 
		sinking ships and escaping subs, 
		cradles, weddings, divorces, slabs. 
		
		Folks! The curtain’s about to rise! 
		What you’ll see won’t look like a Paradise. 
		Still, the Past may moisten a pair of eyes, 
		
		for its prices were lower than our sales, 
		for it was ruining cities: not blood cells; 
		for on the horizon it’s not taut sails 
		
		but the wind that fails. 
		
		
		1900. A quiet year, you bet. 
		True: none of you is alive as yet. 
		The ‘00’ stands for the lack of you. 
		Still, things are happening, quite a few. 
		In China, the Boxers are smashing whites. 
		In Russia, A. P. Chekhov writes. 
		In Italy, Floria Tosca screams. 
		Freud, in Vienna, interprets dreams. 
		The Impressionists paint, Rodin still sculpts. 
		In Africa, Boers grab the British scalps 
		or vice versa (who cares, my dear?). 
		And McKinley is re-elected here. 
		There are four great empires, three good democracies. 
		The rest of the world sports loin-cloths and moccasins, 
		speaking both figuratively and literally. 
		Upstaging “Umberto’s” in Little Italy, 
		in the big one Umberto the Ist’s shot dead. 
		(Not all that’s written on walls is read). 
		And marking the century’s real turn, 
		Friedrich Nietzsche dies, Louis Armstrong’s born 
		to refute the great Kraut’s unholy 
		“God is dead” with “Hello, Dolly.” 
		
		The man of the year, though, is an engineer. 
		John Browning is his name. 
		He’s patented something. So let us hear 
		about John’s claim to fame. 
		
		_( John Moses Browning )_
		
		“I looked at the calendar, and I saw 
		that there are a hundred years to go. 
		That made me a little nervous 
		for I thought of my neighbors. 
		I’ve multiplied them one hundred times: 
		it came to them being all over! 
		So I went to my study that looks out on limes 
		and invented this cute revolver!” 
		
		
		1901. A swell, modest time. 
		A T-bone steak is about a dime. 
		Queen Victoria dies; but then Australia 
		repeats her silhouette and, inter alia, 
		joins the Commonwealth. In the humid woods 
		of Tahiti, Gauguin paints his swarthy nudes. 
		In China, the Boxers take the rap. 
		Max Planck in his lab (not on his lap 
		yet) in studying radiation. 
		Verdi dies too. But our proud nation, 
		represented by Mrs.Disney, awards the world 
		with a kid by the name of Walt 
		who’ll animate the screen. Off screen, 
		the British launch their first submarine. 
		But it’s a cake-walk or a Strindberg play 
		or Freud’s “Psychopathology of Everyday 
		Life” that really are not to be missed! 
		And McKinley’s shot dead by an anarchist. 
		
		The man of the year is Signore Marconi. 
		He is an Italian, a Roman. 
		His name prophetically rhymes with “Sony”: 
		they have a few things in common. 
		
		_( Guglieimo Marconi )_
		
		“In a Catholic country where the sky is blue 
		and clouds look like cherubs’ vestiges, 
		one daily receives through the air a few 
		wordless but clear messages. 
		Regular speech has its boring spoils: 
		it leads to more speech, to violence, 
		it looks like spaghetti, it also coils. 
		That’s why I’ve built the wireless!” 
		
		
		1902. Just another bland 
		peaceful year. They dissect a gland 
		and discover hormones. And a hormone 
		once discovered is never gone. 
		The Boer War (ten thousand dead) is over. 
		Elsewhere, kind Europeans offer 
		railroad chains to a noble savage. 
		A stork leaves a bundle in a Persian cabbage 
		patch, and the tag reads “Khomeini”. Greeks, Serbs, Croats, 
		and Bulgars are at each others’ throats. 
		Claude Monet paints bridges nevertheless. 
		The population of the U.S. 
		is approximately 76 
		million: all of them having sex 
		to affect our present rent. 
		Plus Teddy Roosevelt’s the President. 
		
		The man of the year is Arthur Conan Doyle, 
		a writer. The subjects of his great toil 
		are a private dick and a paunchy doc; 
		occasionally, a dog. 
		
		( Sir Arthur Conan Doyle )
		
		“Imagine the worst: your subconscious is 
		as dull as your conscience. And you, a noble 
		soul, grab a Luger and make Swiss cheese 
		out of your skull. Better take my novel 
		about the Hound of the Baskervilles! 
		It’ll save a handful of your brain cells 
		and beef up your dreams. For it simply kills 
		time and somebody else!” 
		
		1903. You may start to spy 
		on the future. Old Europe’s sky 
		is a little dim. To increase its dimness, 
		The Krupp Works in Essen erect their chimneys. 
		(Thus the sense of Geld breeds the sense of guilt.) 
		Still, more smoke comes from London, from a smoke-filled 
		room where with guile and passion 
		Bolsheviks curse Mensheviks in Russian. 
		Speaking of Slavs: The Serbian King and Queen 
		are done by local well-wishers in. 
		Painters Whistler, Gauguin, Pissarro are gone. 
		Panama rents us its Canal Zone. 
		While bidding their maidens bye-bye and cheerio, 
		the tommies sail off to grab Nigeria 
		and turn it into a British colony: 
		to date, a nation’s greatest felony 
		is if it’s neither friend nor foe. 
		My father is born. So is Evelyn Waugh. 
		
		Man of the year, I am proud to say 
		is two men. They are brothers. Together, they 
		sport two heads, four legs and four hands-which brings 
		us to their bird’s four wings. 
		
		_( The Wright Brothers )_
		
		“We are Orville and Wilbur Wright. 
		Our name simply rhymes with ‘flight’! 
		This may partially explain 
		why we decided to build a plane. 
		Oh there are no men in the skies, just wind! 
		Cities look like newspaper print. 
		Mountains glitter and rivers bend. 
		But the ultimate plane’d rather bomb than land!” 
		
		
		1904. Things which were in store 
		hit the counter. There is a war. 
		Japan, ever so smiling, gnashes 
		teeth and bites off what, in fact, in Russia’s. 
		Other than that, in Milan police 
		crack local skulls. But more common is 
		the touch of the new safety razor blade. 
		The nuances of the White Slave Trade, 
		Mount St.Victoire by Monsieur Cezanne 
		and other trifles under the sun 
		including popular French disgust 
		with the Vatican, are discussed 
		in every Partisan cafeteria. 
		Radioactivity - still a theory - 
		is stated by Rutherford (when a particle 
		brings you a lordship we call it practical). 
		And as the first Rolls Royce engines churn, 
		Chekhov dies but Graham Greene is born, 
		so is George Balanchine, to upgrade the stage, 
		so too - though it’s sin to disclose her age - 
		is Miss Dietrich, to daunt the screen. 
		And New York hears its subway’s first horrid scream! 
		
		The man of the year is a Hottentot. 
		South-West Africa’s where he dwells. 
		In a German colony. And is being taught 
		German. So he rebels. 
		
		_( A Hottentot )_
		
		“Germans to me are extremely white. 
		They are white in broad daylight and what’s more, at night. 
		Plus if you try to win minds and hearts 
		of locals, you don’t call a black guy “schwarz” - 
		“Schwarz” sounds shoddy and worse than “black”. 
		Change your language and then come back! 
		Fly, my arrow, and hit a Hans 
		to cure a Hans of his arrogance!” 
		
		
		1905. In the news: Japan. 
		Which means that the century is upon 
		us. Diminishing the lifespan 
		of Russian dreadnoughts to naught, Japan 
		tells urbi et orbi it’s loathe to lurk 
		in the wings of geography. In Petersburg 
		those whose empty stomachs churn 
		take to the streets. Yet they won’t return 
		home, for the Cossacks adore long streets. 
		A salesman of the Singer sewing devices greets 
		in Latvia the arrival of yet another 
		daughter, who is to become my mother. 
		In Spain, unaware of this clever ploy, 
		Pablo Picasso depicts his “Boy 
		With Pipe” in blue. While the shades of blonde, 
		Swedes and Norwegians, dissolve their bond. 
		And Norway goes independent; yet 
		that’s not enough to turn brunette. 
		Speaking of things that sound rather queer, 
		E is equated to MC square 
		by Albert Einstein, and the Fauvists 
		(Les Fauves is the French for unruly beasts) 
		unleash Henri Matisse in Paris. 
		“The Merry Widow” by Franz Lehar is 
		the toast of the town. Plus Transvaal gets its 
		constitution called by the natives “the pits”. 
		And Greta Garbo, La belle dame sans 
		merci, is born. So are neon signs. 
		
		The man of the year, our record tells, 
		is neither Strindberg nor H.G.Wells, 
		he is not Albert Schweitzer, not Oscar Wilde: 
		his name is obscured by his own brain-child. 
		
		_( Camouflage )_
		
		“I am what gentleman wear in the field 
		when they are afraid that they may be killed. 
		I am called camouflage. Sporting me, each creature 
		feels both safer and close to Nature. 
		The green makes your simper’s pupil sore. 
		That’s what forests and swamps are for. 
		The planet itself wears me: the design 
		is as French as it is divine.” 
		
		
		1906. Time stands at ease. 
		Having one letter in common with 
		his subject, Freud adds to our bookshelf 
		preparing the century for itself. 
		On the whole, Europeans become much nicer 
		to each other: in Africa. Still, the Kaiser 
		when asked of the growth of his navy, lies. 
		The Japs, for some reason, nationalize 
		their railroads of whose existence none, 
		save several spices, had known. 
		Along the same, so to speak cast-iron 
		lines, aping the rod of Aaron, 
		the Simplon Tunnel opens to hit your sight 
		with a smoking non-stop Vis-a-vis. Aside 
		from that the civilized world condemns 
		night shifts (in factories though) for dames. 
		Prime ministers are leapfrogging in 
		Russia, as though they’ve seen 
		in a crystal ball that the future keeps 
		no room for these kinds of leaps. 
		The French Government warily says “pardon” 
		to Captain Dreyfus, a Jew who’s done 
		ten years in the slimmer on the charge of treason. 
		Still, this distinction between a prison 
		and a Jew has no prophetic air. 
		The U.S. troops have a brief affair 
		with the Island of Cuba: their first tete-a-tete. 
		Samuel Beckett is born. Paul Cezanne is dead. 
		
		The man of the year is Herr von Pirquet. 
		He stings like honey-bee. 
		The sting screams like Prince Hamlet’s sick parakeet: 
		TB or not TB. 
		
		_( Dr. Clement von Pirquet )_
		
		“What I call allergy, you call rash. 
		I’ll give you an analogy: each time you blush, 
		it shows you’re too susceptible to something lurid, 
		obscene and antiseptical to hope to cure it. 
		This, roughly, is the principle that guides my needle. 
		To prove you are invincible it hurts a little; 
		it plucks from your pale cheeks the blooming roses 
		and checks their petals for tuberculosis!” 
		
		
		As for 1907, it’s neither here 
		not there. But Auden is born this year! 
		This birth is the greatest of all prologues! 
		Still, Pavlov gets interested in dogs. 
		Next door Mendeleev, his bearded neighbor 
		who gave the universe the table 
		of its elements, slips into a coma. 
		The Cubists’ first show, while Oklahoma 
		becomes the Union’s 46th 
		state. Elsewhere New Zeland seeks 
		to fly the Union Jack. Lumiere 
		develops the colored pictures ere 
		anyone else (we all owe it to him!) 
		The Roman Pope takes a rather dim 
		view of modernism: jealous Iago! 
		Having squashed (4-0) Detroit, Chicago 
		forever thirsting for Gloria Mundi 
		wins the World Series. In Swinemunde 
		Nicholas the IInd meets the German Kaiser 
		for a cup of tea. That, again, is neither 
		here not there, like Kalamazoo. 
		And Carl Hagenbeck opens his careless zoo 
		where walruses swim, lions pace, birds fly 
		proving: animals also can live a lie. 
		
		The man of the year, you won’t believe, 
		is Joseph Stalin, then just a tried. 
		He is young; he is twenty-eight; 
		but History’s there, and he cannot wait. 
		
		_( Joseph Dzhugashvili, alias Stalin )_
		
		“My childhood was rotten, I lived in mud. 
		I hold up banks ‘cause I miss my dad. 
		So to help the party, for all my troubles 
		one day I took four hundred grand in roubles. 
		Thus far, it was the greatest heist 
		in the Russian history after Christ. 
		Some call me eager, some call me zealous; 
		I just like big figures with their crowd of zeroes.” 
		
		
		1908 is a real bore 
		though it provides a new high in gore 
		by means of an earthquake in the Southern part 
		of Calabria, Italy. Still, the world of art 
		tries to replace those one hundred fifty 
		thousand victims with things as nifty 
		as Monet’s depiction of the Ducal Palace 
		in Venice, or with Isadora’s galas, 
		or with the birth of Ian Fleming: to fill the crater. 
		In the World Series Chicago’s again a winner. 
		In the Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
		are taken by Austria (for what it took 
		it will pay somewhat later with its Archduke). 
		And the fountain pen is in vogue worldwide. 
		The gas of helium’s liquefied 
		in Holland which means the rising of 
		that flat country a bit above 
		sea level, which means thoughts vertical. 
		The king and the crown prince are killed in Portugal, 
		for horizontality’s sake no doubt. 
		Also, the first Model T is out 
		in Dearborn to roam our blissful quarters 
		trailed by the news that General Motors 
		is incorporated. The English Edward 
		and Russia’s Nicholas make an effort 
		to know each other aboard a yacht. 
		The Germans watch it but don’t react - 
		or do, but that cannot be photographed. 
		And the Republic calls on William Taft. 
		
		The man of the year is German scientist 
		Paul Ehrlich. He digs bacterias 
		and sires immunology. All the sapiens 
		owe a lot to his theories. 
		
		_( Paul Ehrlich )_
		
		“The world is essentially a community 
		and to syphilis, nobody has immunity. 
		So what I’ve invented beefs up your arsenal 
		for living a life that’s a bit more personal. 
		I’ve made Salvarsan. Oh my Salvarsan! 
		It may cure your wife, it may cure your son, 
		it may cure yourself and your mistress fast. 
		Think of Paul Ehrlich as you pull or thrust!” 
		
		
		1909 trots a fine straight line. 
		Three Lives are published by Gertrude Stein. 
		(On the strength of this book, if its author vies 
		for the man of the year, she sure qualifies.) 
		Other than that, there is something murky 
		about the political life in Turkey: 
		in those parts, every man has a younger brother, 
		and as Sultans they love to depose each other. 
		The same goes apparently in Iran: 
		Ahmed Shah tells Mohammed Ali: “I run 
		the show”, though he’s 12 years old. 
		In Paris, Sergei Diaghilev strikes gold 
		with his “Ballets Russes”. While in Honduras, 
		screaming the usual “God, endure us!” 
		peasants slaughter each other: it’s a civil war. 
		Sigmund Freud crosses the waters for 
		to tell our Wonderland’s cats and Alices 
		a few things about psychoanalysis. 
		But David Griffith of Motion Pictures, 
		boggling one’s dreams, casts Mary Pickford. 
		The Brits, aping the Royal Dutch 
		Shell Company, too, legalize their touch 
		on the Persian oil. The Rockefeller 
		Foundation is launched to stall a failure 
		and to boost a genus. Leaving all the blight, 
		glitter and stuff made of Bake light 
		(that heralds the Plastic Age) far below, the weary 
		bearded and valiant Captain Robert Peary 
		reaches the North Pole, and thus subscribes 
		virginal white to the Stars and Stripes. 
		Ah those days when one’s thoughts were glued 
		to this version of the Absolute! 
		
		The man of the year is the unknown 
		nameless hairdresser in London Town. 
		Stirred either by its cumulous firmament 
		or by the British anthem, he invents the permanent. 
		
		_( A London hairdresser )_
		
		“The Sun never sets over this Empire. 
		Still, all empires one day expire. 
		They go to pieces, they get undone. 
		The wind of history is no fun. 
		Let England be England and rule the waves! 
		And let those waves be real raves. 
		Let them be dark, red, chestnut, blonde 
		unruffled by great events beyond!” 
		
		
		1910 marks the end of the first decade. 
		As such, it can definitely be okayed. 
		For there is clearly a democratic 
		trend. Though at times things take an erratic 
		turn. Like when Egypt’s Prime Minister, through no fault 
		of his, gets murdered. But the revolt 
		in Albania is the work of masses 
		(although how they tell their oppressed from their ruling class is 
		anyone’s guess). Plus Portugal bravely rids 
		itself of its king, and as he’s hugged by the Brits, 
		becomes a republic. As for the Brits themselves, 
		one more generation of them learns God saves 
		no king, and mourning the sad demise 
		of Edward the Seventh, they fix their eyes 
		on George the Fifth. Mark Twain and Tolstoy die too. 
		But Karl May has just published his Winnetou 
		in German. In Paris, they’ve seen and heard 
		Stravinsky-****-Diaghilev’s “Firebird”. 
		That causes some riot, albeit a tiny one. 
		Whereas the twangs of the Argentinean 
		Tango do to the world what the feared and hailed 
		Halley’s comet, thank heavens, failed 
		to do. And our watchful Congress 
		finds it illegal if not incongruous 
		to take ladies across state lines 
		for purposes it declines 
		to spell out, while Japan moves nearer 
		to Korea: a face that invades a mirror. 
		
		The man of the year is an architect. 
		His name is Frank Lloyd Wright. 
		Things that he’s built still stand erect, 
		nay! hug what they stand on tight. 
		
		_(Frank Lloyd Wright)_
		
		“Nature and space have no walls or doors, 
		and roaming at will is what man adores. 
		So, a builder of houses, I decide 
		to bring the outside inside. 
		You don’t build them tall: you build them flat. 
		That’s what Nature is so good at. 
		You go easy on bricks and big on glass 
		so that space may sashay your parquets like grass.” 
		
		
		1911 is wholly given 
		to looking balanced albeit uneven. 
		In Hamburg, stirring his nation’s helm 
		the German Kaiser (for you, Wilhelm 
		the Second) demands what sounds weird for some: 
		“A Place for Germany in the Sun”. 
		It you were French, you would say C’est tout. 
		Yet Hitler is barely twenty-two 
		and things in the sun aren’t so hot besides. 
		The activity of the sun excites 
		the Chinese to abolish pigtails and then 
		proclaim a republic with Sun Yat-Sen 
		their first President. (Although how three hundred 
		twenty-five millions can be handled 
		by a Parliament, frankly, beats 
		me. That is, how many seats 
		would they have had in that grand pavilion? 
		And even if it’s just one guy per million 
		what would a minority of, say, ten percent 
		add up to? This is like counting sand! 
		For this democracy has no lexicon!) 
		Along the same latitude, the Mexican 
		Civil War is over, and saintly, hesitant 
		Francisco Madero becomes the President. 
		Italy finding the Turks too coarse 
		to deal with, resorts to the air force 
		for the first time in history, while da Vinci’s 
		Mona Lisa gets stolen from the Louver - which is 
		why the cops in Paris grab Monsieur Guillaume 
		Apollinaire who though born in Rome, 
		writes in French, and has other energies. 
		Rilke prints his Duinese Elegies 
		and in London, suffragettes poke their black 
		umbrellas at Whitehall and cry Alack! 
		
		Man of the year is a great Norwegian. 
		The crucial word in their tongue is “Skol”. 
		They are born wearing turtlenecks in that region. 
		When they go South, they hit the Pole. 
		
		_( Roald Amundsen )_
		
		“I am Roald Amundsen. I like ice. 
		The world is my oyster for it’s capped twice 
		with ice: first, Arctical, then Antarctical. 
		Human life in those parts is a missing article. 
		O! when the temperature falls subzero 
		the eyes grow blue, the heart sincere. 
		There are neither doubts nor a question mark: 
		it’s the tails of your huskies which pull and bark”. 
		
		
		1912. Captain Robert Scott 
		reaches the South Pole also. Except he got 
		there later than Amundsen. He stares at ice, 
		thinks of his family, prays, and dies. 
		Ice, however, is not through yet. 
		S.S. Titanic hits an iceberg at 
		full speed and goes down. The bell grimly tolls 
		at Lloyd’s in London. Fifteen hundred souls 
		are lost, if not more. Therefore, let’s turn 
		to Romania where Eugene Ionesco’s born 
		or to Turkey and her Balkan neighbors: each 
		one of them feels an itch to reach 
		for the gun; on reflection, though, they abandon 
		the idea. It’s peace everywhere. In London 
		by now there are five hundred movie theaters 
		which makes an issue of baby-sitters. 
		At home, after having less done than said; 
		Woodrow Wilson becomes the Prez. Dead-set 
		to pocket the dizzy with flipping coin 
		New Mexico and Arizona join 
		the Union. For all its steel mills and farms 
		the Union keeps currently under arms 
		only one hundred thousand men. That’s barmy 
		considering five million in the Russian Army, 
		or four million in Germany, or the French 
		who, too, have as many to fill a trench. 
		This sounds to some like a lack of caution. 
		But then there is the Atlantic Ocean 
		between the Continent and the U.S., 
		and it’s only 1912, God bless, 
		and the hemispheres luckily seem unable 
		to play the now popular Cain and Abel. 
		
		The man of the year is both short and tall. 
		He’s nameless, and well he should 
		stay nameless: for spoiling for us free fall 
		by using a parachute. 
		
		_(Captain Albert Berry)_
		
		“Leaving home with umbrella? Take a parachute! 
		When it rains from below, that is when they shoot 
		down a plane and its pilot objects to die, 
		when you wand to grab Holland or drop a spy 
		behind enemy lines, you need parachutes. 
		O, they’ll be more popular than a pair of shoes. 
		In their soft descent they suggest a dove. 
		Aye! it’s not only love that comes from above!” 
		
		
		1913. Peace is wearing thin 
		in the Balkans. Great powers try their pristine 
		routine of talks, but only soil white gloves: 
		Turkey and the whole bunch of Slavs 
		slash one another as if there is no tomorrow. 
		The States think there is; and being thorough 
		introduce the federal income tax. 
		Still, what really spells the Pax 
		Americana is the assembly line 
		Ford installs in Michigan. Some decline 
		of capitalism! No libertine or Marxist 
		could foresee this development in the darkest 
		possible dream. Speaking of such a dream, 
		California hears the first natal scream 
		of Richard Nixon. However, the most 
		loaded sounds are those uttered by Robert Frost 
		whose A Boy’s Will and North of Boston 
		are printed in England and nearly lost on 
		his compatriots eyeing in sentimental 
		rapture the newly-built Grand Central 
		Station where they later would 
		act as though hired by Hollywood. 
		In the meantime, M.Proust lets his stylus saunter 
		the Swann’s Way, H.Geyger designs his counter; 
		probing nothing perilous or perdu, 
		Stravinsky produces Le Sacre du 
		Printemps, a ballet, in Paris, France. 
		But the fox-trot is what people really dance. 
		And as Schweitzer cures lepers and subs dive deeper, 
		the hottest news is the modest zipper. 
		Think of the preliminaries it skips 
		timing your lips with you fingertips! 
		
		The man of the year is, I fear, Niels Bohr. 
		He comes from the same place as danishes. 
		He builds what one feels like when one can’t score 
		or what one looks like when one vanishes. 
		
		_(Niels Bohr)_
		
		Atoms are small. Atoms are nice. Until you split one, of course. 
		Then they get large enough to play dice with your whole universe. 
		A model of an atom is what I’ve built! Something both small and big! 
		Inside, it resembles the sense of guilt. Outside, the lunar dig. 
		
		
		1914.
		
		Nineteen-fourteen! Oh, nineteen-fourteen! 
		Ah, some years shouldn’t be let out of quarantine! 
		Well, this is one of them. Things get raw: 
		In Paris, the editor of Figaro 
		is shot dead by the wife of the French finance 
		minister, for printing this lady’s--sans 
		merci, should we add?--steamy letters to 
		--ah, who cares! . . . And apparently it’s c’est tout 
		also for a socialist and pacifist 
		of all times, Jean Jaures. He who shook his fist 
		at the Parliament urging hot heads to cool it, 
		dies, as he dines, by some bigot’s bullet 
		in a cafe. Ah, those early, single 
		shots of Nineteen-fourteen! ah, the index finger 
		of an assassin! ah, white puffs in the blue acrylic! . . .
		There is something pastoral, nay! idyllic 
		about these murders. About that Irish enema 
		the Brits suffer in Dublin again. And about Panama 
		Canal’s grand opening. Or about that doc 
		and his open heart surgery on his dog . . .
		Well, to make these things disappear forever, 
		the Archduke is arriving at Sarajevo; 
		and there is in the crowd that unshaven, timid 
		youth, with his handgun . . . (To be continued).


	9. I SIT BY THE WINDOW

		I said fate plays a game without a score,
		and who needs fish if you’ve got caviar?
		The triumph of the Gothic style would come to pass
		and turn you on--no need for coke, or grass.
		I sit by the window. Outside, an aspen.
		When I loved, I loved deeply. It wasn’t often.
		
		I said the forest’s only part of a tree.
		Who needs the whole girl if you’ve got her knee?
		Sick of the dust raised by the modern era,
		the Russian eye would rest on an Estonian spire.
		I sit by the window. The dishes are done.
		I was happy here. But I won’t be again.
		
		I wrote: The bulb looks at the flower in fear,
		and love, as an act, lacks a verb; the zer-
		o Euclid thought the vanishing point became
		wasn’t math--it was the nothingness of Time.
		I sit by the window. And while I sit
		my youth comes back. Sometimes I’d smile. Or spit.
		
		I said that the leaf may destory the bud;
		what’s fertile falls in fallow soil--a dud;
		that on the flat field, the unshadowed plain
		nature spills the seeds of trees in vain.
		I sit by the window. Hands lock my knees.
		My heavy shadow’s my squat company.
		
		My song was out of tune, my voice was cracked,
		but at least no chorus can ever sing it back.
		That talk like this reaps no reward bewilders
		no one--no one’s legs rest on my sholders.
		I sit by the window in the dark. Like an express,
		the waves behind the wavelike curtain crash.
		
		A loyal subject of these second-rate years,
		I proudly admit that my finest ideas
		are second-rate, and may the future take them
		as trophies of my struggle against suffocation.
		I sit in the dark. And it would be hard to figure out
		which is worse; the dark inside, or the darkness out.


	10. JANUARY 1, 1965

		The Wise Men will unlearn your name.
		Above your head no star will flame.
		One weary sound will be the same--
		the hoarse roar of the gale.
		The shadows fall from your tired eyes
		as your lone bedside candle dies,
		for here the calendar breeds nights
		till stores of candles fail.
		
		What prompts this melancholy key?
		A long familiar melody.
		It sounds again. So let it be.
		Let it sound from this night.
		Let it sound in my hour of death—
		as gratefulness of eyes and lips
		for that which sometimes makes us lift
		our gaze to the far sky.
		
		You glare in silence at the wall.
		Your stocking gapes: no gifts at all.
		It’s clear that you are now too old
		to trust in good Saint Nick;
		that it’s too late for miracles.
		--But suddenly, lifting your eyes
		to heaven’s light, you realize:
		your life is a sheer gift.


	11. LETTER TO AN ARCHAEOLOGIST

		Citizen, enemy, mama’s boy, sucker, utter
		garbage, panhandler, swine, refujew, verrucht;
		a scalp so often scalded with boiling water
		that the puny brain feels completely cooked.
		Yes, we have dwelt here: in this concrete, brick, wooden
		rubble which you now arrive to sift.
		All our wires were crossed, barbed, tangled, or interwoven.
		Also: we didn’t love our women, but they conceived.
		Sharp is the sound of pickax that hurts dead iron;
		still, it’s gentler than what we’ve been told or have said ourselves.
		Stranger! move carefully through our carrion:
		what seems carrion to you is freedom to our cells.
		Leave our names alone. Don’t reconstruct those vowels,
		consonants, and so forth: they won’t resemble larks
		but a demented bloodhound whose maw devours 
		its own traces, feces, and barks, and barks.


	12. LETTERS TO THE ROMAN FRIEND

		_From Martial_
		
		Now is windy and the waves are cresting over 
		Fall is soon to come to change the place entirely. 
		Change of colors moves me, Postum, even stronger 
		Than a girlfriend while she’s changing her attire. 
		  
		Maidens comfort you but to a certain limit--
		Can’t go further than an elbow or a kneeline. 
		While apart from body, beauty is more splendid-- 
		An embrace is as impossible as treason. 
		
		  
		I’m sending to you, Postum-friend, some reading. 
		How’s the capital? Soft bed and rude awakening? 
		How’s Caesar? What’s he doing? Still intriguing? 
		Still intriguing, I imagine, and engorging. 
		  
		In my garden, I am sitting with a night-light 
		No maid nor mate, not even a companion 
		But instead of weak and mighty of this planet, 
		Buzzing pests in their unanimous dominion. 
		  
		  
		Here, was laid away an Asian merchant. Clever 
		Merchant was he--very diligent yet decent. 
		He died suddenly--malaria. To barter 
		Business did he come, and surely not for this one. 
		  
		Next to him--a legionnaire under a quartz grave. 
		In the battles, he brought fame to the Empire. 
		Many times could have been killed! Yet died an old brave. 
		Even here, there is no ordinance, my dear. 
		  
		
		Maybe, chicken really aren’t birds, my Postum, 
		Yet a chicken brain should rather take precautions. 
		An empire, if you happened to be born to, 
		better live in distant province, by the ocean. 
		  
		Far away from Caesar, and away from tempests 
		No need to cringe, to rush or to be fearful, 
		You are saying procurators are all looters, 
		But I’d rather choose a looter than a slayer. 
		  
		
		Under thunderstorm, to stay with you, hetaera,--
		I agree but let us deal without haggling: 
		To demand sesterces from a flesh that covers 
		is the same as stripping roofs of their own shingle. 
		  
		Are you saying that I leak? Well, where’s a puddle? 
		Leaving puddles hasn’t been among my habits. 
		Once you find yourself some-body for a husband, 
		Then you’ll see him take a leak under your blankets. 
		  
		
		Here, we’ve covered more than half of our life span 
		As an old slave, by the tavern, has just said it, 
		«Turning back, we look but only see old ruins». 
		Surely, his view is barbaric, but yet candid. 
		    
		’ve been to hills and now busy with some flowers. 
		Have to find a pitcher, so to pour them water. 
		How’s in Libya, my Postum, or wherever? 
		Is it possible that we are still at war there? 
		    
		
		You remember, friend, the procurator’s sister? 
		On the skinny side, however with those plump legs. 
		You have slept with her then... she became a priestess. 
		Priestess, Postum, and confers with the creators. 
		    
		Do come here, we’ll have a drink with bread and olives--
		Or with plums. You’ll tell me news about the nation. 
		In the garden you will sleep under clear heavens, 
		And I’ll tell you how they name the constellations. 
		  
		
		Postum, friend of yours once tendered to addition, 
		Soon shall reimburse deduction, his old duty… 
		Take the savings, which you’ll find under my cushion. 
		Haven’t got much but for funeral--it’s plenty. 
		  
		On your skewbald, take a ride to the hetaeras, 
		Their house is right by the town limit, 
		Bid the price we used to pay--for them to love us--
		They should now get the same--for their lament. 
		    
		
		Laurel’s leaves so green--it makes your body shudder. 
		Wide ajar the door--a tiny window’s dusty--
		Long deserted bed--an armchair is abandoned--
		Noontime sun has been absorbed by the upholstery. 
		  
		With the wind, by sea point cape, a boat, is wrestling. 
		Roars the gulf behind the black fence of the pine trees. 
		On the old and wind-cracked bench--Pliny the Elder. 
		And a thrush is chirping in the mane of cypress.


	13. LINES ON THE WINTER CAMPAIGN, 1980

		_The scorching noon, the vale in Dagestan . . ._
		                                          --Mikhail Lermontov
		
		I
		
		A bullet’s velocity in low temperatures
		greatly depends on its target’s virtues,
		on its urge to warm up in the plaited muscles
		of the torso, in the neck’s webbed sinews.
		Stones lie flat like a second army.
		The shade hugs the loam to itself willy-nilly.
		The sky resembles peeling stucco.
		An aircraft dissolves in it like a clothes moth,
		and like a spring from a ripped-up mattress
		an explosion sprouts up. Outside the crater,
		the blood, like boiled milk, powerless to seep into
		the ground, is seized by a film’s hard ripples.
		 
		
		II
		
		Shepherd and sower, the North is driving 
		herds to the sea, spreading cold to the South. 
		A bright, frosty noon in a Wogistan valley. 
		A mechanical elephant, trunk wildly waving 
		at the horrid sight of the small black rodent 
		of a snow-covered mine, spews out throat-clogging 
		lumps, possessed of that old desire 
		of Mahomet’s, to move a mountain. 
		Summits loom white; the celestial warehouse 
		lends them at noontime its flaking surplus. 
		The mountains lack any motion, passing 
		their immobility to the scattered bodies.
		
		
		III
		
		The doleful, echoing Slavic singing 
		at evening in Asia. Dank and freezing, 
		sprawling piles of human pig meat
		cover the caravansary’s mud bottom.
		The fuel dung smolders, legs stiffen in numbness.
		It smells of old socks, of forgotten bath days.
		The dreams are identical, as are the greatcoats.
		Plenty of cartridges, few recollections,
		and the tang in the mouth of too many “hurrahs.”
		Glory to those who, their glances lowered,
		marched in the sixties to abortion tables,
		sparing the homeland its present stigma.
		
		
		IV
		
		What is contained in the drone’s dull buzzing? 
		And what in the sound of the aero-engine?
		Living is getting as complicated
		as building a house with grapes’ green marbles 
		or little lean-tos with spades and diamonds. 
		Nothing is stable (one puff and it’s over): 
		families, private thoughts, clay shanties. 
		Night over ruins of a mountain village. 
		Armor, wetting its metal sheets with oil slick,
		freezes in thorn scrub. Afraid of drowning 
		in a discarded jackboot, the moon
		hides in a cloud as in Allah’s turban.
		
		
		V
		
		Idle, inhaled now by no one, air.
		Imported, carelessly piled-up silence.
		Rising like dough that’s leavened,
		emptiness. If the stars had life-forms,
		space would erupt with a brisk ovation;
		a gunner, blinking, runs to the footlights.
		Murder’s a blatant way of dying,
		a tautology, the art form of parrots,
		a manual matter, the knack for catching
		life’s fly in the hairs of the gunsight
		by youngsters acquainted with blood through either
		hearsay or violating virgins.
		
		
		VI
		
		Pull up the blanket, dig a hole in the palliasse.
		Flop down and give ear to the _oo_ of the siren.
		The Ice Age is coming--slavery’s ice age is coming,
		oozing over the atlas. Its moraines force under
		nations, fond memories, muslin blouses.
		Muttering, rolling our eyeballs upward,
		we are becoming a new kind of bivalve,
		our voice goes unheard, as though we were trilobites.
		There’s a draft from the corridor, draft from the square windows.
		Turn off the light, wrap up in a bundle.
		The vertebra craves eternity. Unlike a ringlet.
		In the morning the limbs are past all uncoiling.
		
		
		VII
		
		Up in the stratosphere, thought of by no one, 
		the little bitch barks as she peers through the porthole: 
		“Beach Ball! Beach Ball! Over. It's Rover.”
		The beach ball’s below. With the equator on it
		like a dog collar. Slopes, fields, and gullies 
		repeat in their whiteness cheekbones 
		(the color of shame has all gone to the banners). 
		And the hens in their snowed-in hen coops, 
		also a-shake from the shock of reveille, 
		lay their eggs of immaculate color.
		If anything blackens, it’s just the letters, 
		like the tracks of some rabbit, preserved by a wonder.


	14. MAY 24, 1980

		I have braved, for want of wild beasts, steel cages,
		carved my term and nickname on bunks and rafters,
		lived by the sea, flashed aces in an oasis,
		dined with the-devil-knows-whom, in tails, on truffles.
		From the height of a glacier I beheld half a world, the earthly
		width. Twice have drowned, thrice let knives rake my nitty-gritty.
		Quit the country the bore and nursed me.
		Those who forgot me would make a city.
		I have waded the steppes that saw yelling Huns in saddles,
		worn the clothes nowadays back in fashion in every quarter,
		planted rye, tarred the roofs of pigsties and stables,
		guzzled everything save dry water.
		I’ve admitted the sentries’ third eye into my wet and foul
		dreams. Munched the bread of exile; it’s stale and warty.
		Granted my lungs all sounds except the howl;
		switched to a whisper. Now I am forty.
		What should I say about my life? That it’s long and abhors transparence.
		Broken eggs make me grieve; the omelet, though, makes me vomit.
		Yet until brown clay has been rammed down my larynx,
		only gratitude will be gushing from it.


	15. ODYSSEUS TO TELEMACHUS

		My dear Telemachus,
		The Trojan War 
		is over now; I don’t recall who won it. 
		The Greeks, no doubt, for only they would leave
		so many dead so far from their own homeland. 
		But still, my homeward way has proved too long. 
		While we were wasting time there, old Poseidon, 
		it almost seems, stretched and extended space.
		
		I don’t know where I am or what this place 
		can be. It would appear some filthy island, 
		with bushes, buildings, and great grunting pigs. 
		A garden choked with weeds; some queen or other. 
		Grass and huge stones . . . Telemachus, my son! 
		To a wanderer the faces of all islands 
		resemble one another. And the mind 
		trips, numbering waves; eyes, sore from sea horizons, 
		run; and the flesh of water stuffs the ears. 
		I can’t remember how the war came out; 
		even how old you are--I can’t remember.
		
		Grow up, then, my Telemachus, grow strong. 
		Only the gods know if we’ll see each other 
		again. You’ve long since ceased to be that babe 
		before whom I reined in the plowing bullocks. 
		Had it not been for Palamedes’ trick 
		we two would still be living in one household. 
		But maybe he was right; away from me 
		you are quite safe from all Oedipal passions, 
		and your dreams, my Telemachus, are blameless.


	16. SEAWARD

		Darling, you think it’s love, it’s just a midnight journey. 
		Best are the dales and rivers removed by force, 
		as from the next compartment throttles “Oh, stop it, Bernie,” 
		yet the rhythm of those paroxysms is exactly yours. 
		Hook to the meat! Brush to the red-brick dentures, 
		alias cigars, smokeless like a driven nail! 
		Here the works are fewer than monkey wrenches, 
		and the phones are whining, dwarfed by to-no-avail. 
		Bark, then, with joy at Clancy, Fitzgibbon, Miller. 
		Dogs and block letters care how misfortune spells. 
		Still, you can tell yourself in the john by the spat-at mirror, 
		slamming the flush and emerging with clean lapels. 
		Only the liquid furniture cradles the dwindling figure. 
		Man shouldn’t grow in size once he’s been portrayed. 
		Look: what’s been left behind is about as meager 
		as what remains ahead. Hence the horizon’s blade. 


	17. STAR OF THE NATIVITY

		In the cold season, in a locality accustomed to heat more than
		to cold, to horizontality more than to a mountain,
		a child was born in a cave in order to save the world;
		it blew as only in deserts in winter it blows, athwart.
		
		To Him, all things seemed enormous: His mother’s breast, the steam
		out of the ox’s nostrils, Caspar, Balthazar, Melchior--the team
		of Magi, their presents heaped by the door, ajar.
		He was but a dot, and a dot was the star.
		
		Keenly, without blinking, through pallid, stray
		clouds, upon the child in the manger, from far away--
		from the depth of the universe, from its opposite end--the star
		was looking into the cave. And that was the Father’s stare.


	18. THE END OF A BEAUTIFUL ERA

		Since the stern art of poetry calls for words, I, morose,
		deaf, and balding ambassador of a more or less
		    insignificant nation that’s stuck in this super
		power, wishing to spare my old brain,
		hand myself my own topcoat and head for the main
		    street: to purchase the evening paper.
		
		Wind disperses the foliage. The dimness of old bulbs in these
		sorry quarters, whose motto’s “The mirror will please,”
		    gives a sense of abundance supported by puddles.
		Even thieves here steal apples by scratching the amalgam first.
		Yet the feeling one gets, from one’s own sweet reflection--this feeling I’ve lost.
		      That’s what really puzzles.
		
		Everything in these parts is geared for winter: long dreams,
		prison walls, overcoats, bridal dresses of whiteness that seems
		    snowlike. Drinks. Kinds of soap matching dirt in dark corners.
		Sparrow vests, second hand of the watch round your wrist,
		puritanical mores, underwear. And, tucked in the violinists’
		    palms, old redwood hand warmers.
		
		This whole realm is just static. Imagining the output of lead
		and cast iron, and shaking your stupefied head,
		   you recall bayonets, Cossack whips of old power.
		Yet the eagles land like good lodestones on the scraps.
		Even wicker chairs here are built mostly with bolts and with nuts,
		   one is bound to discover.
		
		Only fish in the sea seem to know freedom’s price.
		Still, their muteness compels us to sit and devise
		    cashier booths of our own. And space rises like some bill of fare.
		Time’s invented by death. In its search for the objects, it deals
		with raw vegetables first That’s why cocks are so keen on the bells
		    chiming deafly somewhere.
		
		To exist in the Era of Deeds and to stay elevated, alert
		ain’t so easy, alas. Having raised a long skirt,
		    you will find not new wonders but what you expected.
		And it’s not that they play Lobachevsky’s ideas by ear,
		but the widened horizons should narrow somewhere, and here--
		    here’s the end of perspective.
		
		Either old Europe’s map has been swiped by the gents in plain clothes,
		or the famous five-sixths of remaining landmass has just lost
		    its poor infamous colleague, or a fairy casts spells over shabby
		me, who knows--but I cannot escape from this place;
		I pour wine for myself (service here’s a disgrace),
		    sip, and rub my old tabby.
		
		Thus the brain earned a slug, as a spot where an error occurred
		earns a good pointing finger. Or should I hit waterways, sort
		     of like Christ? Anyway, in these laudable quarters,
		eyes dumbfounded by ice and by booze
		will reproach you alike for whatever you choose:
		     traceless rails, traceless waters.
		
		Now let’s see what they say in the papers about lawsuits.
		“The condemned has been dealt with.” Having read this, a denizen puts
		    on his metal-rimmed glasses that help to relate it
		to a man lying flat, his face down, by the wall;
		though he isn’t asleep. Since dreams spurn a skull
		     that has been perforated.
		
		The keen-sightedness of our era takes root in the times
		which were short, in their blindness, of drawing clear lines
		    twixt those fallen from cradles and fallen from saddles.
		Though there are plenty of saucers, there is no one to turn tables with
		to subject you, poor Rurik, to a sensible quiz;
		    that’s what really saddens.
		
		The keen-sightedness of our days is the sort that befits the dead end
		whose concrete begs for spittle and not for a witty comment.
		   Wake up a dinosaur, not a prince, to recite you the moral!
		Birds have feathers for penning last words, though it’s better to ask.
		All the innocent head has in store for itself is an ax
		   plus the evergreen laurel.


	19. THE FUNERAL OF BOBÓ

		1
		
		Bobó is dead, but don’t take off your hat. 
		You can’t explain why there’s no consolation. 
		We cannot pin a butterfly upon 
		the Admiralty spire--we’d only crush it. 
		The squares of windows no matter where 
		one looks on every side. And as reply 
		to “what happened?” you open up 
		an empty can: “Apparently, this did.” 
		Bobó is dead. Wednesday ends. 
		On streets devoid of spots to spend the night 
		it’s white, so white. Only the black water 
		in the night river does not retain the snow. 
		
		
		2
		
		Bobó is dead--a line containing grief. 
		The squares of windows, archways’ semicircle. 
		Such freezing frost that if one’s to be killed, 
		then let it be from firearms. 
		Farewell, Bobó, my beautiful Bobó. 
		My tear would suit sliced cheese. 
		We are too frail to follow after you, 
		nor are we strong enough to stay in place. 
		In heat-waves and in devastating cold 
		I know beforehand, your image will 
		not diminish--but quite to the contrary--
		in Rossi’s inimitable prospect. 
		
		3
		
		
		Bobó is dead. This is a feeling which can 
		be shared, but slippery like soap. 
		Today I dreamed that I was lying 
		upon my bed. And so it was in fact. 
		Tear off a page, correct the date: 
		the list of losses opens with a zero. 
		Dreams without Bobó suggest reality. 
		A square of air comes in the window vent. 
		Bobó is dead. And, one’s lips somewhat 
		apart, one wants to say “it shouldn’t be”. 
		No doubt it’s emptiness that follows death. 
		Both far more probable, and worse than Hell. 
		
		
		4
		
		You were everything. But because you are 
		dead now, my Bobó, you have become 
		nothing--more precisely, a glob of emptiness. 
		Which, if one considers it, is quite a lot. 
		Bobó is dead. On rounded eyes 
		the sight of the horizon is like a knife, 
		but neither Kiki nor Zaza, Bobó, 
		will take your place. That is impossible. 
		Thursday is coming. I believe in emptiness. 
		It’s quite like Hell there, only ----tier. 
		And the new Dante bends toward the page, 
		and on an empty spot he sets a word.


	20. THE HAWK’S CRY IN AUTUMN

		Wind from the northwestern quarter is lifting him high above
		the dove-gray, crimson, umber, brown
		Connecticut Valley. Far beneath,
		chickens daintily pause and move
		unseen in the yard of the tumbledown
		farmstead, chipmunks blend with the heath.
		
		Now adrift on the airflow, unfurled, alone,
		all that he glimpses--the hills’ lofty, ragged
		ridges, the silver stream that threads
		quivering like a living bone
		of steel, badly notched with rapids,
		the townships like strings of beads
		
		strewn across New England. Having slid down to nil
		thermometers--those household gods in niches--
		freeze, inhibiting thus the fire
		of leaves and churches’ spires. Still,
		no churches for him. In the windy reaches,
		undreamt of by the most righteous choir,
		
		he soars in a cobalt-blue ocean, his beak clamped shut,
		his talons clutched tight into his belly
		--claws balled up like a sunken fist--
		sensing in each wisp of down the thrust
		from below, glinting back the berry
		of his eyeball, heading south-southeast
		
		to the Rio Grande, the Delta, the beech groves and farther still:
		to a nest hidden in the mighty groundswell
		of grass whose edges no fingers trust,
		sunk amid forest’s odors, filled
		with splinters of red-speckled eggshell,
		with a brother or a sister’s ghost.
		
		The heart overgrown with flesh, down, feather, wing,
		pulsing at feverish rate, nonstopping,
		propelled by internal heat and sense,
		the bird goes slashing and scissoring
		the autumnal blue, yet by the same swift token,
		enlarging it at the expense
		
		of its brownish speck, barely registering on the eye,
		a dot, sliding far above the lofty
		pine tree; at the expense of the empty look
		of that child, arching up at the sky,
		that couple that left the car and lifted
		their heads, that woman on the stoop.
		
		But the uprush of air is still lifting him
		higher and higher. His belly feathers
		feel the nibbling cold. Casting a downward gaze,
		he sees the horizon growing dim,
		he sees, as it were, the features
		of the first thirteen colonies whose
		
		chimneys all puff out smoke. Yet it’s their total within his sight
		that tells the bird of his elevation,
		of what altitude he’s reached this trip.
		What am I doing at such a height?
		He senses a mixture of trepidation
		and pride. Heeling over a tip
		
		of wing, he plummets down. But the resilient air
		bounces him back, winging up to glory,
		to the colorless icy plane.
		His yellow pupil darts a sudden glare
		of rage, that is, a mix of fury
		and terror. So once again
		
		he turns and plunges down. But as walls return
		rubber balls, as sins send a sinner to faith, or near,
		he’s driven upward this time as well!
		He! whose innards are still so warm!
		Still higher! Into some blasted ionosphere!
		That astronomically objective hell
		
		of birds that lacks oxygen, and where the milling stars
		play millet served from a plate or a crescent.
		What, for the bipeds, has always meant
		height, for the feathered is the reverse.
		Not with his puny brain but with shriveled air sacs
		he guesses the truth of it: it’s the end.
		
		And at this point he screams. From the hooklike beak
		there tears free of him and flies ad luminem
		the sound Erinyes make to rend
		souls: a mechanical, intolerable shriek,
		the shriek of steel that devours aluminum;
		“mechanical,” for it’s meant
		
		for nobody, for no living ears:
		not man’s, not yelping foxes’,
		not squirrels’ hurrying to the ground
		from branches; not for tiny field mice whose tears
		can’t be avenged this way, which forces
		them into their burrows. And only hounds
		
		lift up their muzzles. A piercing, high-pitched squeal,
		more nightmarish than the D-sharp grinding
		of the diamond cutting glass,
		slashes the whole sky across. And the world seems to reel
		for an instant, shuddering from this rending.
		For the warmth burns space in the highest as
		
		badly as some iron fence down here
		brands incautious gloveless fingers.
		We, standing where we are, exclaim
		“There!” and see far above the tear
		that is a hawk, and hear the sound that lingers
		in wavelets, a spider skein
		
		swelling notes in ripples across the blue vault of space
		whose lack of echo spells, especially in October,
		an apotheosis of pure sound.
		And caught in this heavenly patterned lace,
		starlike, spangled with hoarfrost powder,
		silver-clad, crystal-bound,
		
		the bird sails to the zenith, to the dark-blue high
		of azure. Through binoculars we foretoken
		him, a glittering dot, a pearl.
		We hear something ring out in the sky,
		like some family crockery being broken,
		slowly falling aswirl,
		
		yet its shards, as they reach our palms, don’t hurt
		but melt when handled. And in a twinkling
		once more one makes out curls, eyelets, strings,
		rainbowlike, multicolored, blurred
		commas, ellipses, spirals, linking
		heads of barley, concentric rings--
		
		the bright doodling pattern the feather once possessed,
		a map, now a mere heap of flying
		pale flakes that make a green slope appear
		white. And the children, laughing and brightly dressed,
		swarm out of doors to catch them, crying
		with a loud shout in English, “Winter's here!”


	21. TORNFALLET

		There is a meadow in Sweden 
		where I lie smitten, 
		eyes stained with clouds’
		white ins and outs. 
		
		And about that meadow 
		roams my widow 
		plaiting a clover 
		wreath for her lover. 
		
		I took her in marriage 
		in a granite parish. 
		The snow lent her whiteness, 
		a pine was a witness. 
		
		She’d swim in the oval 
		lake whose opal 
		mirror, framed by bracken, 
		felt happy, broken. 
		
		And at night the stubborn 
		sun of her auburn 
		hair shone from my pillow 
		at post and pillar. 
		
		Now in the distance 
		I hear her descant. 
		She sings “Blue Swallow,”
		but I can’t follow. 
		
		The evening shadow 
		robs the meadow 
		of width and color. 
		It’s getting colder. 
		
		As I lie dying 
		here, I’m eyeing 
		stars. Here’s Venus; 
		no one between us.


	22. TRANSATLANTIC

		The last twenty years were good for practically everybody
		save the dead. But maybe for them as well.
		Maybe the Almighty Himself has turned a bit bourgeois
		and uses a credit card. For otherwise time’s passage
		makes no sense. Hence memories, recollections,
		values, deportment. One hopes one hasn’t
		spent one’s mother or father or both, or a handful of friends entirely
		as they cease to hound one’s dreams. One’s dreams,
		unlike the city, become less populous
		the older one gets. That’s why the eternal rest
		cancels analysis. The last twenty years were good
		for practically everybody and constituted
		the afterlife for the dead. Its quality could be questioned
		but not its duration. The dead, one assumes, would not
		mind attaining a homeless status, and sleep in archways
		or watch pregnant submarines returning
		to their native pen after a worldwide journey
		without destroying life on earth, without
		even a proper flag to hoist.


	23. TSUSHIMA SCREEN

		The perilous yellow sun follows with its slant eyes
		masts of the shuddered grove steaming up to capsize
		in the frozen straits of Epiphany. February has fewer
		days than the other months; therefore, it’s more cruel
		than the rest. Dearest, it’s more sound
		to wrap up our sailing round 
		the globe with habitual naval grace,
		moving your cot to the fireplace
		where our dreadnought is going under
		in great smoke. Only fire can grasp a winter!
		Golder unharnessed stallions in the chimney
		dye their manes to more corvine shades as they near the finish,
		and the dark room fills with the plaintive, incessant chirring
		of a naked, lounging grasshopper one cannot cup in fingers.


	24. TWO HOURS IN RESERVOIR

		1
		
		I am an anti-fascist . . . anti-Faust 
		Ich liebe life and I admire chaos 
		Ich bin to wish, Genosse Offizieren, 
		Dem Zeit zum Faust for a while spazieren. 
		  
		
		2
		
		Without embracing Polish propaganda, 
		In Krakow he had missed his Vaterland, and 
		He dreamt of the philosopher’s true diamond 
		And sometimes doubted his own talent. 
		He gently picked, off ground, ladies' tissues, 
		He got excited with the gender issues, 
		Along, in school he played the polo's virtues. 
		
		He studied deeply gambling catechismus, 
		And learned to taste the sweetness of Cartesian. 
		Then crawled deep down into the Artesian 
		well of ego-centrism. The military slyness 
		For which was famous Mr. Clausewitz, 
		For him remained apparently unknown, 
		Whereas to Vater was a wood artisan. 
		
		Zum beispiel, in outbreak of glaucoma, 
		The plague, cholera und Tuberculosen, 
		He saved himself by schwarze Papierossen. 
		Attracted by the Gypsies and the Moors. 
		He then became a bachelor alumnus. 
		Was granted then a licentiate laurus 
		And sang to students, «Cambrian . . . dinosaurs . . .» 
		
		A German man--a German cerebrum. 
		Without mentioning, Cogito ergo sum. 
		Undoubtedly--Deutschland uber alles. 
		(One's ears can catch a famous Vienna's waltz). 
		He parted with Krakow with some heart cheer, 
		And took a carriage in a rush to sheer 
		To chair the school with honest glass of beer. 
		  
		
		3
		
		A splendid C-moon shines out of the clouds. 
		Tremendous foliant. A man above it. 
		A wrinkle darkens right ‘twixt the eyebrows, 
		His eyes--the lacework devilry of Arabs. 
		With a Cordovan black chalk in his right hand 
		And from the corner, he’s watched at profile length 
		By Meph-ibn-Stopheles: an Arab agent. 
		
		The candles burning. Screeches under clothes-bin. 
		«Herr Doktor, midnight». «Jawohl, schlafen, schlafen...» 
		Two dark black muzzles open utter «meow», 
		From kitchen quietly comes a Yiddish Frau. 
		She holds a sizzling omelet with fried bacon. 
		Herr doctor jots the address on the letter: 
		«Gott Strafe. England. London. Francis Bacon». 
		
		Concerns and demons come and go further, 
		The years and guests do come and go further... 
		One can't recall then dresses, words, or weather. 
		That's how all the years have passed and gone swift. 
		He knew the Arabic, but didn’t know Sanskrit. 
		And yet quite late, hey, Faust had discovered 
		Before him, eine kleine Fraulein Margaret. 
		
		And then to Cairo he had sent epistle 
		By which he voted back his soul from devil. 
		Meph had arrived while he had changed his clothes. 
		He gazed into the mirrow and saw close 
		That he forever is metamorphosed. 
		To maiden’s boudoir, with flowers, kitschy 
		He then set off. Und veni, vidi, vici. 
		  
		
		4
		
		Ich liebe clearness. Ja. Ich liebe promptness. 
		Ich bin to ask to see here no vileness. 
		You’re hinting that he loved the flower lasses. 
		Ich understanden, das ist ganze swiftness. 
		But this transaction macht der grosse Minus. 
		Die righte Sprache, macht der grosse Sinus: 
		The heart and spirit nein gehabt in surplus. 
		
		In vain you alles would expect from creatures: 
		«Behold--said to the moment--you're so gorgeous» 
		The devil all the time among us wanders 
		And by the minute he awaits this phrase. 
		Nevertheless, a man, mein liebe Herren, 
		Is so uncertain in his greatest darings, 
		That each time lies as if he sells the air 
		And yet like Goethe could not goof by chance. 
		
		Und grosser Dichter Goethe made a blooper 
		With which subjected to a ganze risk that matter. 
		And Thomas Mann had ruined his best seller 
		And cher Gounod confused his lady actor. 
		The fine art is the fine art is the fine art... 
		I'd rather sing in skies than fib in concert. 
		Die Kunst gehabt the need in truthful kind heart. 
		
		By all fair means, of death, he could be scared. 
		From where the demons come, he was aware. 
		He fed der dog on all Galens, Ibn-Sinas. 
		He could das Wasser drain in knees and fingers. 
		He could define the tree age by the log rings, 
		He knew where to the stars' ways lead us rightly.
		
		But Doctor Faust nichts knew of Almighty. 
		  
		
		5
		
		There's mystique. There's faith. And there is God. 
		There's difference between them. And there's oneness. 
		Some men are itched by flesh, while some are saved. 
		Unfaith is sightlessness, or rather swine-ness. 
		
		The Lord looks down. Up above look men. 
		Yet everybody seeks his own profit.. 
		God's infinite. Indeed. And what is man? 
		And man, most probably, is very finite. 
		
		A man has got his ceiling, which in fact 
		Could always be up there, a little mobile. 
		A flatterer will find his way to heart. 
		And life no more is seen beyond the devil. 
		
		That's how Doctor Faust was. Likewise 
		Marlowe, and Goethe, Thomas Mann and masses 
		of singers, intellectuals und, alas, 
		The readers in milieu of other classes. 
		
		Same flow sweeps away their foot steps too, 
		Their retorts,--Donnerwetter!,--vibes and musings... 
		So grant them, God, the time to scream «Where to?» 
		And listen to the answers of their Muses. 
		
		An honest German for der Weg zuruck 
		Won't wait until he's summoned by the others. 
		He takes his Walter out of his warm slacks 
		And then forever leaves to a Walter-Closet. 
		  
		
		6
		
		Fraulein, please tell me was ist das «incubus»? 
		Incubus das ist eine kleine globus. 
		Noch grosser Dichter Goethe gave us rebus 
		And Ibycus's evil bearing cranes, 
		When having fled off Weimar's foggy cloud, 
		They, of the pocket, snatched a key right out, 
		By Eckermann’s insight, not being rescued. 
		And now we got, Matrosen, in a fix. 
		
		There are spiritually thuthful queries. 
		Mystique is indication of a failure 
		In an attempt to handle them. However, 
		Ich bin--unworthy topic to debate--. 
		Zum beispiel: Ceiling starts the roofing layers; 
		One poem lavisher . . . one human--nietzsche-r. 
		I can recall Godmother in a niche there. 
		Abundant Fruhstuck served right into bed. 
		
		Again September, Boredom. Full moon's blown. 
		Gray witch does «meow» at my feet below. 
		I put a hatchet right beneath my pillow... 
		Some schnapps will do! Well this is apgemacht! 
		Jawohl, September. Character gets rotten 
		And spinning, in a field a roaring tractor. 
		
		Ich liebe life and «Volkisch Beobachter». 
		Gut Nacht, mein liebe Herren. Ja, gut Nacht.


*** Emily Brontë (1818 - 1848)

	1. FALL, LEAVES, FALL

		Fall, leaves, fall; die, flowers, away;
		Lengthen night and shorten day;
		Every leaf speaks bliss to me
		Fluttering from the autumn tree.
		I shall smile when wreaths of snow
		Blossom where the rose should grow;
		I shall sing when night’s decay
		Ushers in a drearier day.


	2. NO COWARD SOUL IS MINE

		No coward soul is mine
		No trembler in the world’s storm-troubled sphere
		I see Heaven’s glories shine
		And Faith shines equal arming me from Fear
		
		O God within my breast
		Almighty ever-present Deity
		Life, that in me hast rest,
		As I Undying Life, have power in Thee
		
		Vain are the thousand creeds
		That move men’s hearts, unutterably vain,
		Worthless as withered weeds
		Or idlest froth amid the boundless main
		
		To waken doubt in one
		Holding so fast by thy infinity,
		So surely anchored on
		The steadfast rock of Immortality.
		
		With wide-embracing love
		Thy spirit animates eternal years
		Pervades and broods above,
		Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates and rears
		
		Though earth and moon were gone
		And suns and universes ceased to be
		And Thou wert left alone
		Every Existence would exist in thee
		
		There is not room for Death
		Nor atom that his might could render void
		Since thou art Being and Breath
		And what thou art may never be destroyed.


	3. REMEMBRANCE

		Cold in the earth—and the deep snow piled above thee, 
		Far, far removed, cold in the dreary grave! 
		Have I forgot, my only Love, to love thee, 
		Severed at last by Time’s all-severing wave? 
		
		Now, when alone, do my thoughts no longer hover 
		Over the mountains, on that northern shore, 
		Resting their wings where heath and fern-leaves cover 
		Thy noble heart forever, ever more? 
		
		Cold in the earth—and fifteen wild Decembers, 
		From those brown hills, have melted into spring: 
		Faithful, indeed, is the spirit that remembers 
		After such years of change and suffering! 
		
		Sweet Love of youth, forgive, if I forget thee, 
		While the world’s tide is bearing me along; 
		Other desires and other hopes beset me, 
		Hopes which obscure, but cannot do thee wrong! 
		
		No later light has lightened up my heaven, 
		No second morn has ever shone for me; 
		All my life’s bliss from thy dear life was given, 
		All my life’s bliss is in the grave with thee. 
		
		But, when the days of golden dreams had perished, 
		And even Despair was powerless to destroy, 
		Then did I learn how existence could be cherished, 
		Strengthened, and fed without the aid of joy. 
		
		Then did I check the tears of useless passion— 
		Weaned my young soul from yearning after thine; 
		Sternly denied its burning wish to hasten 
		Down to that tomb already more than mine. 
		
		And, even yet, I dare not let it languish, 
		Dare not indulge in memory’s rapturous pain; 
		Once drinking deep of that divinest anguish, 
		How could I seek the empty world again? 


	4. SHALL EARTH NO MORE INSPIRE THEE

		Shall earth no more inspire thee,
		Thou lonely dreamer now?
		Since passion may not fire thee
		Shall Nature cease to bow?
		
		Thy mind is ever moving
		In regions dark to thee;
		Recall its useless roving--
		Come back and dwell with me.
		
		I know my mountain breezes
		Enchant and soothe thee still--
		I know my sunshine pleases
		Despite thy wayward will.
		
		When day with evening blending
		Sinks from the summer sky,
		I’ve seen thy spirit bending
		In fond idolatry.
		
		I’ve watched thee every hour;
		I know my mighty sway,
		I know my magic power
		To drive thy griefs away.
		
		Few hearts to mortals given
		On earth so wildly pine;
		Yet none would ask a heaven
		More like this earth than thine.
		
		Then let my winds caress thee;
		Thy comrade let me be--
		Since nought beside can bless thee,
		Return and dwell with me.


	5. THE TWO CHILDREN

		Heavy hangs the raindrop 
		From the burdened spray; 
		Heavy broods the damp mist 
		On uplands far away; 
		
		Heavy looms the dull sky, 
		Heavy rolls the sea-- 
		And heavy beats the young heart 
		Beneath that lonely tree. 
		
		Never has a blue streak 
		Cleft the clouds since morn-- 
		Never has his grim Fate 
		Smiled since he was born. 
		
		Frowning on the infant, 
		Shadowing childhood’s joy, 
		Guardian angel knows not 
		That melancholy boy. 
		
		Day is passing swiftly 
		Its sad and sombre prime; 
		Youth is fast invading 
		Sterner manhood’s time. 
		
		All the flowers are praying 
		For sun before they close, 
		And he prays too, unknowing, 
		That sunless human rose! 
		
		Blossoms, that the west wind 
		Has never wooed to blow, 
		Scentless are your petals, 
		Your dew as cold as snow. 
		
		Soul, where kindred kindness 
		No early promise woke, 
		Barren is your beauty 
		As weed upon the rock. 
		
		Wither, Brothers, wither, 
		You were vainly given-- 
		Earth reserves no blessing 
		For the unblessed of Heaven! 
		
		Child of Delight! with sunbright hair, 
		And seablue, seadeep eyes; 
		Spirit of Bliss, what brings thee here, 
		Beneath these sullen skies? 
		
		Thou shouldst live in eternal spring, 
		Where endless day is never dim; 
		Why, seraph, has thy erring wing 
		Borne thee down to weep with him? 
		
		“Ah, not from heaven am I descended, 
		And I do not come to mingle tears; 
		But sweet is day, though with shadows blended; 
		And, though clouded, sweet are youthful years. 
		
		“I, the image of light and gladness, 
		Saw and pitied that mournful boy, 
		And I swore to take his gloomy sadness, 
		And give to him my beamy joy. 
		
		“Heavy and dark the night is closing; 
		Heavy and dark may its biding be: 
		Better for all from grief reposing, 
		And better for all who watch like me. 
		
		“Guardian angel, he lacks no longer; 
		Evil fortune he need not fear: 
		Fate is strong, but Love is stronger; 
		And more unsleeping than angel’s care.” 


*** Rupert Brooke (1887 - 1915)

	1. DUST

		When the white flame in us is gone,
		And we that lost the world’s delight
		Stiffen in darkness, left alone
		To crumble in our separate night;
		
		When your swift hair is quiet in death,
		And through the lips corruption thrust
		Has stilled the labour of my breath--
		When we are dust, when we are dust!--
		
		Not dead, not undesirous yet,
		Still sentient, still unsatisfied,
		We’ll ride the air, and shine, and flit,
		Around the places where we died,
		
		And dance as dust before the sun,
		And light of foot, and unconfined,
		Hurry from road to road, and run
		About the errands of the wind.
		
		And every mote, on earth or air,
		Will speed and gleam, down later days,
		And like a secret pilgrim fare
		By eager and invisible ways,
		
		Nor ever rest, nor ever lie,
		Till, beyond thinking, out of view,
		One mote of all the dust that’s I
		Shall meet one atom that was you.
		
		Then in some garden hushed from wind,
		Warm in a sunset’s afterglow,
		The lovers in the flowers will find
		A sweet and strange unquiet grow
		
		Upon the peace; and, past desiring,
		So high a beauty in the air,
		And such a light, and such a quiring,
		And such a radiant ecstasy there,
		
		They’ll know not if it’s fire, or dew,
		Or out of earth, or in the height,
		Singing, or flame, or scent, or hue,
		Or two that pass, in light, to light,
		
		Out of the garden, higher, higher. . . .
		But in that instant they shall learn
		The shattering ecstasy of our fire,
		And the weak passionless hearts will burn
		
		And faint in that amazing glow,
		Until the darkness close above;
		And they will know--poor fools, they’ll know!--
		One moment, what it is to love.


	2. THE OLD VICARAGE, GRANTCHESTER

		Just now the lilac is in bloom,
		All before my little room;
		And in my flower-beds, I think,
		Smile the carnation and the pink;
		And down the borders, well I know,
		The poppy and the pansy blow . . .
		Oh! there the chestnuts, summer through,
		Beside the river make for you
		A tunnel of green gloom, and sleep
		Deeply above; and green and deep
		The stream mysterious glides beneath,
		Green as a dream and deep as death.
		--Oh, damn! I know it! and I know
		How the May fields all golden show,
		And when the day is young and sweet,
		Gild gloriously the bare feet
		That run to bathe . . .
		`Du lieber Gott!’
		
		Here am I, sweating, sick, and hot,
		And there the shadowed waters fresh
		Lean up to embrace the naked flesh.
		Temperamentvoll German Jews
		Drink beer around;--and THERE the dews
		Are soft beneath a morn of gold.
		Here tulips bloom as they are told;
		Unkempt about those hedges blows
		An English unofficial rose;
		And there the unregulated sun
		Slopes down to rest when day is done,
		And wakes a vague unpunctual star,
		A slippered Hesper; and there are
		Meads towards Haslingfield and Coton
		Where das Betreten’s not verboten.
		
		εἴθε γενοίμην . . . would I were
		In Grantchester, in Grantchester!--
		Some, it may be, can get in touch
		With Nature there, or Earth, or such.
		And clever modern men have seen
		A Faun a-peeping through the green,
		And felt the Classics were not dead,
		To glimpse a Naiad’s reedy head,
		Or hear the Goat-foot piping low: . . .
		But these are things I do not know.
		I only know that you may lie
		Day long and watch the Cambridge sky,
		And, flower-lulled in sleepy grass,
		Hear the cool lapse of hours pass,
		Until the centuries blend and blur
		In Grantchester, in Grantchester . . .
		Still in the dawnlit waters cool
		His ghostly Lordship swims his pool,
		And tries the strokes, essays the tricks,
		Long learnt on Hellespont, or Styx.
		Dan Chaucer hears his river still
		Chatter beneath a phantom mill.
		Tennyson notes, with studious eye,
		How Cambridge waters hurry by . . .
		And in that garden, black and white,
		Creep whispers through the grass all night;
		And spectral dance, before the dawn,
		A hundred Vicars down the lawn;
		Curates, long dust, will come and go
		On lissom, clerical, printless toe;
		And oft between the boughs is seen
		The sly shade of a Rural Dean . . .
		Till, at a shiver in the skies,
		Vanishing with Satanic cries,
		The prim ecclesiastic rout
		Leaves but a startled sleeper-out,
		Grey heavens, the first bird’s drowsy calls,
		The falling house that never falls.
		
		God! I will pack, and take a train,
		And get me to England once again!
		For England’s the one land, I know,
		Where men with Splendid Hearts may go;
		And Cambridgeshire, of all England,
		The shire for Men who Understand;
		And of THAT district I prefer
		The lovely hamlet Grantchester.
		For Cambridge people rarely smile,
		Being urban, squat, and packed with guile;
		And Royston men in the far South
		Are black and fierce and strange of mouth;
		At Over they fling oaths at one,
		And worse than oaths at Trumpington,
		And Ditton girls are mean and dirty,
		And there’s none in Harston under thirty,
		And folks in Shelford and those parts
		Have twisted lips and twisted hearts,
		And Barton men make Cockney rhymes,
		And Coton’s full of nameless crimes,
		And things are done you’d not believe
		At Madingley on Christmas Eve.
		Strong men have run for miles and miles,
		When one from Cherry Hinton smiles;
		Strong men have blanched, and shot their wives,
		Rather than send them to St. Ives;
		Strong men have cried like babes, bydam,
		To hear what happened at Babraham.
		But Grantchester! ah, Grantchester!
		There’s peace and holy quiet there,
		Great clouds along pacific skies,
		And men and women with straight eyes,
		Lithe children lovelier than a dream,
		A bosky wood, a slumbrous stream,
		And little kindly winds that creep
		Round twilight corners, half asleep.
		In Grantchester their skins are white;
		They bathe by day, they bathe by night;
		The women there do all they ought;
		The men observe the Rules of Thought.
		They love the Good; they worship Truth;
		They laugh uproariously in youth;
		(And when they get to feeling old,
		They up and shoot themselves, I’m told) . . .
		
		Ah God! to see the branches stir
		Across the moon at Grantchester!
		To smell the thrilling-sweet and rotten
		Unforgettable, unforgotten
		River-smell, and hear the breeze
		Sobbing in the little trees.
		Say, do the elm-clumps greatly stand
		Still guardians of that holy land?
		The chestnuts shade, in reverend dream,
		The yet unacademic stream?
		Is dawn a secret shy and cold
		Anadyomene, silver-gold?
		And sunset still a golden sea
		From Haslingfield to Madingley?
		And after, ere the night is born,
		Do hares come out about the corn?
		Oh, is the water sweet and cool,
		Gentle and brown, above the pool?
		And laughs the immortal river still
		Under the mill, under the mill?
		Say, is there Beauty yet to find?
		And Certainty? and Quiet kind?
		Deep meadows yet, for to forget
		The lies, and truths, and pain? . . . oh! yet
		Stands the Church clock at ten to three?
		And is there honey still for tea?


	3. THE SOLDIER

		If I should die, think only this of me:
		     That there’s some corner of a foreign field
		That is for ever England. There shall be
		     In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
		A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
		     Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam;
		A body of England’s, breathing English air,
		     Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.
		
		And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
		     A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
		           Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
		Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
		     And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness,
		           In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.


*** Gwendolyn Brooks (1917 - 2000)

	1. A SUNSET OF THE CITY

		Already I am no longer looked at with lechery or love.
		My daughters and sons have put me away with marbles and dolls,
		Are gone from the house.
		My husband and lovers are pleasant or somewhat polite
		And night is night.
		It is a real chill out,
		The genuine thing.
		I am not deceived, I do not think it is still summer
		Because sun stays and birds continue to sing.
		It is summer-gone that I see, it is summer-gone.
		The sweet flowers indrying and dying down,
		The grasses forgetting their blaze and consenting to brown.
		It is a real chill out. The fall crisp comes.
		I am aware there is winter to heed.
		There is no warm house
		That is fitted with my need.
		I am cold in this cold house this house
		Whose washed echoes are tremulous down lost halls.
		I am a woman, and dusty, standing among new affairs.
		I am a woman who hurries through her prayers.
		Tin intimations of a quiet core to be my
		Desert and my dear relief
		Come: there shall be such islanding from grief,
		And small communion with the master shore.
		Twang they. And I incline this ear to tin,
		Consult a dual dilemma. Whether to dry
		In humming pallor or to leap and die.
		Somebody muffed it? Somebody wanted to joke.


	2. THE BEAN EATERS

		They eat beans mostly, this old yellow pair.
		Dinner is a casual affair.
		Plain chipware on a plain and creaking wood,
		Tin flatware.
		
		Two who are Mostly Good.
		Two who have lived their day,
		But keep on putting on their clothes
		And putting things away.
		
		And remembering . . .
		Remembering, with twinklings and twinges,
		As they lean over the beans in their rented back room that
		is full of beads and receipts and dolls and cloths,
		tobacco crumbs, vases and fringes.


	3. THE LOVERS OF THE POOR

		arrive. The Ladies from the Ladies’ Betterment League
		Arrive in the afternoon, the late light slanting   
		In diluted gold bars across the boulevard brag
		Of proud, seamed faces with mercy and murder hinting   
		Here, there, interrupting, all deep and debonair,
		The pink paint on the innocence of fear;   
		Walk in a gingerly manner up the hall.
		Cutting with knives served by their softest care,   
		Served by their love, so barbarously fair.
		Whose mothers taught: You’d better not be cruel!   
		You had better not throw stones upon the wrens!   
		Herein they kiss and coddle and assault   
		Anew and dearly in the innocence   
		With which they baffle nature. Who are full,   
		Sleek, tender-clad, fit, fiftyish, a-glow, all   
		Sweetly abortive, hinting at fat fruit,   
		Judge it high time that fiftyish fingers felt   
		Beneath the lovelier planes of enterprise.   
		To resurrect. To moisten with milky chill.   
		To be a random hitching-post or plush.
		To be, for wet eyes, random and handy hem.
		                       Their guild is giving money to the poor.
		The worthy poor. The very very worthy
		And beautiful poor. Perhaps just not too swarthy?
		perhaps just not too dirty nor too dim   
		Nor--passionate. In truth, what they could wish
		Is--something less than derelict or dull.
		Not staunch enough to stab, though, gaze for gaze!
		God shield them sharply from the beggar-bold!   
		The noxious needy ones whose battle’s bald   
		Nonetheless for being voiceless, hits one down.
		                       But it’s all so bad! and entirely too much for them.
		The stench; the urine, cabbage, and dead beans,
		Dead porridges of assorted dusty grains,
		The old smoke, heavy diapers, and, they’re told,
		Something called chitterlings. The darkness. Drawn
		Darkness, or dirty light. The soil that stirs.   
		The soil that looks the soil of centuries.
		And for that matter the general oldness. Old   
		Wood. Old marble. Old tile. Old old old.
		Not homekind Oldness! Not Lake Forest, Glencoe.
		Nothing is sturdy, nothing is majestic,
		There is no quiet drama, no rubbed glaze, no   
		Unkillable infirmity of such
		A tasteful turn as lately they have left,   
		Glencoe, Lake Forest, and to which their cars   
		Must presently restore them. When they’re done
		With dullards and distortions of this fistic
		Patience of the poor and put-upon.
		                       They’ve never seen such a make-do-ness as   
		Newspaper rugs before! In this, this “flat,”   
		Their hostess is gathering up the oozed, the rich   
		Rugs of the morning (tattered! the bespattered. . . .)   
		Readies to spread clean rugs for afternoon.   
		Here is a scene for you. The Ladies look,   
		In horror, behind a substantial citizeness   
		Whose trains clank out across her swollen heart.   
		Who, arms akimbo, almost fills a door.
		All tumbling children, quilts dragged to the floor   
		And tortured thereover, potato peelings, soft-
		Eyed kitten, hunched-up, haggard, to-be-hurt.
		                       Their League is allotting largesse to the Lost.   
		But to put their clean, their pretty money, to put   
		Their money collected from delicate rose-fingers   
		Tipped with their hundred flawless rose-nails seems . . .
		                       They own Spode, Lowestoft, candelabra,   
		Mantels, and hostess gowns, and sunburst clocks,   
		Turtle soup, Chippendale, red satin “hangings,”   
		Aubussons and Hattie Carnegie. They Winter   
		In Palm Beach; cross the Water in June; attend,   
		When suitable, the nice Art Institute;
		Buy the right books in the best bindings; saunter   
		On Michigan, Easter mornings, in sun or wind.   
		Oh Squalor! This sick four-story hulk, this fibre   
		With fissures everywhere! Why, what are bringings   
		Of loathe-love largesse? What shall peril hungers   
		So old old, what shall flatter the desolate?   
		Tin can, blocked fire escape and chitterling
		And swaggering seeking youth and the puzzled wreckage   
		Of the middle passage, and urine and stale shames   
		And, again, the porridges of the underslung
		And children children children. Heavens! That
		Was a rat, surely, off there, in the shadows? Long
		And long-tailed? Gray? The Ladies from the Ladies’   
		Betterment League agree it will be better
		To achieve the outer air that rights and steadies,
		To hie to a house that does not holler, to ring
		Bells elsetime, better presently to cater
		To no more Possibilities, to get
		Away. Perhaps the money can be posted.
		Perhaps they two may choose another Slum!
		Some serious sooty half-unhappy home!--
		Where loathe-love likelier may be invested.
		                       Keeping their scented bodies in the center   
		Of the hall as they walk down the hysterical hall,   
		They allow their lovely skirts to graze no wall,
		Are off at what they manage of a canter,
		And, resuming all the clues of what they were,
		Try to avoid inhaling the laden air.


	4. TRUTH

		And if sun comes
		How shall we greet him?
		Shall we not dread him,
		Shall we not fear him
		After so lengthy a
		Session with shade?
		
		Though we have wept for him,
		Though we have prayed
		All through the night-years--
		What if we wake one shimmering morning to
		Hear the fierce hammering
		Of his firm knuckles
		Hard on the door?
		
		Shall we not shudder?--
		Shall we not flee
		Into the shelter, the dear thick shelter
		Of the familiar
		Propitious haze?
		
		Sweet is it, sweet is it
		To sleep in the coolness
		Of snug unawareness.
		
		The dark hangs heavily
		Over the eyes.


*** Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806 - 1861)

	1. A MUSICAL INSTRUMENT

		I. 
		
		WHAT was he doing, the great god Pan, 
		   Down in the reeds by the river ? 
		Spreading ruin and scattering ban, 
		Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat, 
		And breaking the golden lilies afloat 
		   With the dragon-fly on the river. 
		
		
		II. 
		
		He tore out a reed, the great god Pan, 
		   From the deep cool bed of the river : 
		The limpid water turbidly ran, 
		And the broken lilies a-dying lay, 
		And the dragon-fly had fled away, 
		   Ere he brought it out of the river. 
		
		
		III. 
		
		High on the shore sate the great god Pan, 
		   While turbidly flowed the river ; 
		And hacked and hewed as a great god can, 
		With his hard bleak steel at the patient reed, 
		Till there was not a sign of a leaf indeed 
		   To prove it fresh from the river. 
		
		
		IV. 
		
		He cut it short, did the great god Pan, 
		   (How tall it stood in the river !) 
		Then drew the pith, like the heart of a man, 
		Steadily from the outside ring, 
		And notched the poor dry empty thing 
		   In holes, as he sate by the river. 
		
		
		V. 
		
		This is the way,’ laughed the great god Pan, 
		   Laughed while he sate by the river,) 
		The only way, since gods began 
		To make sweet music, they could succeed.’ 
		Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed, 
		   He blew in power by the river. 
		
		
		VI. 
		
		Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan ! 
		   Piercing sweet by the river ! 
		Blinding sweet, O great god Pan ! 
		The sun on the hill forgot to die, 
		And the lilies revived, and the dragon-fly 
		   Came back to dream on the river. 
		
		
		VII. 
		
		Yet half a beast is the great god Pan, 
		   To laugh as he sits by the river, 
		Making a poet out of a man : 
		The true gods sigh for the cost and pain,-- 
		For the reed which grows nevermore again 
		   As a reed with the reeds in the river. 


	2. GRIEF

		I tell you, hopeless grief is passionless; 
		That only men incredulous of despair, 
		Half-taught in anguish, through the midnight air 
		Beat upward to God’s throne in loud access 
		Of shrieking and reproach. Full desertness, 
		In souls as countries, lieth silent-bare 
		Under the blanching, vertical eye-glare 
		Of the absolute heavens. Deep-hearted man, express 
		Grief for thy dead in silence like to death--
		Most like a monumental statue set 
		In everlasting watch and moveless woe 
		Till itself crumble to the dust beneath. 
		Touch it; the marble eyelids are not wet: 
		If it could weep, it could arise and go. 


	3. LOVE

		We cannot live, except thus mutually 
		We alternate, aware or unaware, 
		The reflex act of life: and when we bear 
		Our virtue onward most impulsively, 
		Most full of invocation, and to be 
		Most instantly compellant, certes, there 
		We live most life, whoever breathes most air 
		And counts his dying years by sun and sea. 
		But when a soul, by choice and conscience, doth 
		Throw out her full force on another soul, 
		The conscience and the concentration both 
		Make mere life, Love. For Life in perfect whole 
		And aim consummated, is Love in sooth, 
		As nature’s magnet-heat rounds pole with pole. 


	4. MY HEART AND I

		I. 
		
		ENOUGH ! we’re tired, my heart and I. 
		We sit beside the headstone thus, 
		And wish that name were carved for us. 
		The moss reprints more tenderly 
		The hard types of the mason’s knife, 
		As heaven’s sweet life renews earth’s life 
		With which we’re tired, my heart and I. 
		
		
		II. 
		
		You see we’re tired, my heart and I. 
		We dealt with books, we trusted men, 
		And in our own blood drenched the pen, 
		As if such colours could not fly. 
		We walked too straight for fortune’s end, 
		We loved too true to keep a friend ; 
		At last we’re tired, my heart and I. 
		
		
		III. 
		
		How tired we feel, my heart and I ! 
		We seem of no use in the world ; 
		Our fancies hang grey and uncurled 
		About men’s eyes indifferently ; 
		Our voice which thrilled you so, will let 
		You sleep; our tears are only wet : 
		What do we here, my heart and I ? 
		
		
		IV. 
		
		So tired, so tired, my heart and I ! 
		It was not thus in that old time 
		When Ralph sat with me ‘neath the lime 
		To watch the sunset from the sky. 
		Dear love, you’re looking tired,’ he said; 
		I, smiling at him, shook my head : 
		‘Tis now we’re tired, my heart and I. 
		
		
		V. 
		
		So tired, so tired, my heart and I ! 
		Though now none takes me on his arm 
		To fold me close and kiss me warm 
		Till each quick breath end in a sigh 
		Of happy languor. Now, alone, 
		We lean upon this graveyard stone, 
		Uncheered, unkissed, my heart and I. 
		
		
		VI. 
		
		Tired out we are, my heart and I. 
		Suppose the world brought diadems 
		To tempt us, crusted with loose gems 
		Of powers and pleasures ? Let it try. 
		We scarcely care to look at even 
		A pretty child, or God’s blue heaven, 
		We feel so tired, my heart and I. 
		
		
		VII. 
		
		Yet who complains ? My heart and I ? 
		In this abundant earth no doubt 
		Is little room for things worn out : 
		Disdain them, break them, throw them by 
		And if before the days grew rough 
		We once were loved, used,-- well enough, 
		I think, we’ve fared, my heart and I. 


	5. THE CRY OF THE CHILDREN

		“Pheu pheu, ti prosderkesthe m ommasin, tekna;” 
		_Alas, alas, why do you gaze at me with your eyes, my children._ --Medea.
		
		Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers, 
		     Ere the sorrow comes with years ? 
		They are leaning their young heads against their mothers,-- 
		     And that cannot stop their tears. 
		The young lambs are bleating in the meadows ; 
		  The young birds are chirping in the nest ; 
		The young fawns are playing with the shadows ; 
		  The young flowers are blowing toward the west-- 
		But the young, young children, O my brothers, 
		     They are weeping bitterly ! 
		They are weeping in the playtime of the others, 
		     In the country of the free. 
		
		Do you question the young children in the sorrow, 
		     Why their tears are falling so ? 
		The old man may weep for his to-morrow 
		     Which is lost in Long Ago-- 
		The old tree is leafless in the forest-- 
		  The old year is ending in the frost-- 
		The old wound, if stricken, is the sorest-- 
		  The old hope is hardest to be lost : 
		But the young, young children, O my brothers, 
		     Do you ask them why they stand 
		Weeping sore before the bosoms of their mothers, 
		     In our happy Fatherland ? 
		
		They look up with their pale and sunken faces, 
		     And their looks are sad to see, 
		For the man’s grief abhorrent, draws and presses 
		     Down the cheeks of infancy-- 
		“Your old earth,” they say, “is very dreary;” 
		  “Our young feet,” they say, “are very weak !” 
		Few paces have we taken, yet are weary-- 
		  Our grave-rest is very far to seek ! 
		Ask the old why they weep, and not the children, 
		     For the outside earth is cold-- 
		And we young ones stand without, in our bewildering, 
		     And the graves are for the old !” 
		
		“True,” say the children, “it may happen 
		     That we die before our time ! 
		Little Alice died last year her grave is shapen 
		     Like a snowball, in the rime. 
		We looked into the pit prepared to take her-- 
		  Was no room for any work in the close clay : 
		From the sleep wherein she lieth none will wake her, 
		  Crying, ‘Get up, little Alice ! it is day.’ 
		If you listen by that grave, in sun and shower, 
		  With your ear down, little Alice never cries ; 
		Could we see her face, be sure we should not know her, 
		  For the smile has time for growing in her eyes ,-- 
		And merry go her moments, lulled and stilled in 
		     The shroud, by the kirk-chime ! 
		It is good when it happens,” say the children, 
		     “That we die before our time !” 
		
		Alas, the wretched children ! they are seeking 
		     Death in life, as best to have ! 
		They are binding up their hearts away from breaking, 
		     With a cerement from the grave. 
		Go out, children, from the mine and from the city-- 
		  Sing out, children, as the little thrushes do-- 
		Pluck you handfuls of the meadow-cowslips pretty 
		  Laugh aloud, to feel your fingers let them through ! 
		But they answer, ” Are your cowslips of the meadows 
		     Like our weeds anear the mine ? 
		Leave us quiet in the dark of the coal-shadows, 
		     From your pleasures fair and fine! 
		
		“For oh,” say the children, “we are weary, 
		     And we cannot run or leap-- 
		If we cared for any meadows, it were merely 
		     To drop down in them and sleep. 
		Our knees tremble sorely in the stooping-- 
		  We fall upon our faces, trying to go ; 
		And, underneath our heavy eyelids drooping, 
		  The reddest flower would look as pale as snow. 
		For, all day, we drag our burden tiring, 
		     Through the coal-dark, underground-- 
		Or, all day, we drive the wheels of iron 
		     In the factories, round and round. 
		
		“For all day, the wheels are droning, turning,-- 
		     Their wind comes in our faces,-- 
		Till our hearts turn,-- our heads, with pulses burning, 
		     And the walls turn in their places 
		Turns the sky in the high window blank and reeling-- 
		  Turns the long light that droppeth down the wall,-- 
		Turn the black flies that crawl along the ceiling-- 
		  All are turning, all the day, and we with all !-- 
		And all day, the iron wheels are droning ; 
		     And sometimes we could pray, 
		‘O ye wheels,’ (breaking out in a mad moaning) 
		     ‘Stop ! be silent for to-day ! ’ ” 
		
		Ay ! be silent ! Let them hear each other breathing 
		     For a moment, mouth to mouth-- 
		Let them touch each other’s hands, in a fresh wreathing 
		     Of their tender human youth ! 
		Let them feel that this cold metallic motion 
		  Is not all the life God fashions or reveals-- 
		Let them prove their inward souls against the notion 
		  That they live in you, or under you, O wheels !-- 
		Still, all day, the iron wheels go onward, 
		     As if Fate in each were stark ; 
		And the children’s souls, which God is calling sunward, 
		     Spin on blindly in the dark. 
		
		Now tell the poor young children, O my brothers, 
		     To look up to Him and pray-- 
		So the blessed One, who blesseth all the others, 
		     Will bless them another day. 
		They answer, ” Who is God that He should hear us, 
		  While the rushing of the iron wheels is stirred ? 
		When we sob aloud, the human creatures near us 
		  Pass by, hearing not, or answer not a word ! 
		And we hear not (for the wheels in their resounding) 
		     Strangers speaking at the door : 
		Is it likely God, with angels singing round Him, 
		     Hears our weeping any more ? 
		
		“ Two words, indeed, of praying we remember ; 
		     And at midnight’s hour of harm,-- 
		‘Our Father,’ looking upward in the chamber, 
		     We say softly for a charm. 
		We know no other words, except ‘Our Father,’ 
		  And we think that, in some pause of angels’ song, 
		God may pluck them with the silence sweet to gather, 
		  And hold both within His right hand which is strong. 
		‘Our Father !’ If He heard us, He would surely 
		     (For they call Him good and mild) 
		Answer, smiling down the steep world very purely, 
		     ‘Come and rest with me, my child.’ 
		
		“But, no !” say the children, weeping faster, 
		     ” He is speechless as a stone ; 
		And they tell us, of His image is the master 
		     Who commands us to work on. 
		Go to ! ” say the children,--“up in Heaven, 
		  Dark, wheel-like, turning clouds are all we find ! 
		Do not mock us ; grief has made us unbelieving-- 
		  We look up for God, but tears have made us blind.” 
		Do ye hear the children weeping and disproving, 
		     O my brothers, what ye preach ? 
		For God’s possible is taught by His world’s loving-- 
		     And the children doubt of each. 
		
		And well may the children weep before you ; 
		     They are weary ere they run ; 
		They have never seen the sunshine, nor the glory 
		     Which is brighter than the sun : 
		They know the grief of man, without its wisdom ; 
		  They sink in the despair, without its calm-- 
		Are slaves, without the liberty in Christdom,-- 
		  Are martyrs, by the pang without the palm,-- 
		Are worn, as if with age, yet unretrievingly 
		     No dear remembrance keep,-- 
		Are orphans of the earthly love and heavenly : 
		     Let them weep ! let them weep ! 
		
		They look up, with their pale and sunken faces, 
		     And their look is dread to see, 
		For they think you see their angels in their places, 
		     With eyes meant for Deity ;-- 
		“How long,” they say, “how long, O cruel nation, 
		  Will you stand, to move the world, on a child’s heart,-- 
		Stifle down with a mailed heel its palpitation, 
		  And tread onward to your throne amid the mart ? 
		Our blood splashes upward, O our tyrants, 
		     And your purple shews your path ; 
		But the child’s sob curseth deeper in the silence 
		     Than the strong man in his wrath !”


*** Robert Browning (1812 - 1889)

	1. AMONG THE ROCKS

		Oh, good gigantic smile o’ the brown old earth, 
		This autumn morning! How he sets his bones 
		To bask i’ the sun, and thrusts out knees and feet 
		For the ripple to run over in its mirth; 
		Listening the while, where on the heap of stones 
		The white breast of the sea-lark twitters sweet. 
		
		That is the doctrine, simple, ancient, true; 
		Such is life’s trial, as old earth smiles and knows. 
		If you loved only what were worth your love, 
		Love were clear gain, and wholly well for you: 
		Make the low nature better by your throes! 
		Give earth yourself, go up for gain above!


	2. CONFESSIONS

		What is he buzzing in my ears? 
		“Now that I come to die, 
		Do I view the world as a vale of tears?” 
		Ah, reverend sir, not I! 
		
		What I viewed there once, what I view again 
		Where the physic bottles stand 
		On the table’s edge,--is a suburb lane, 
		With a wall to my bedside hand. 
		
		That lane sloped, much as the bottles do, 
		From a house you could descry 
		O’er the garden-wall; is the curtain blue 
		Or green to a healthy eye? 
		
		To mine, it serves for the old June weather 
		Blue above lane and wall; 
		And that farthest bottle labelled “Ether” 
		Is the house o’ertopping all. 
		
		At a terrace, somewhere near the stopper, 
		There watched for me, one June, 
		A girl: I know, sir, it’s improper, 
		My poor mind’s out of tune. 
		
		Only, there was a way... you crept 
		Close by the side, to dodge 
		Eyes in the house, two eyes except: 
		They styled their house “The Lodge.” 
		
		What right had a lounger up their lane? 
		But, by creeping very close, 
		With the good wall’s help,--their eyes might strain 
		And stretch themselves to Oes, 
		
		Yet never catch her and me together, 
		As she left the attic, there, 
		By the rim of the bottle labelled “Ether,” 
		And stole from stair to stair, 
		
		And stood by the rose-wreathed gate. Alas, 
		We loved, sir--used to meet: 
		How sad and bad and mad it was-- 
		But then, how it was sweet! 


	3. EPILOGUE

		At the midnight in the silence of the sleep-time,
		 When you set your fancies free,
		Will they pass to where--by death, fools think, imprisoned--
		Low he lies who once so loved you, whom you loved so,
		         --Pity me?
		
		Oh to love so, be so loved, yet so mistaken!
		 What had I on earth to do
		With the slothful, with the mawkish, the unmanly?
		Like the aimless, helpless, hopeless, did I drivel
		         --Being--who?
		
		One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
		 Never doubted clouds would break,
		Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
		Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
		         Sleep to wake.
		
		No, at noonday in the bustle of man’s work-time
		 Greet the unseen with a cheer!
		Bid him forward, breast and back as either should be,
		“Strive and thrive!” cry “Speed,--fight on, fare ever
		         There as here!”


	4. NOW

		Out of your whole life give but one moment! 
		All of your life that has gone before, 
		All to come after it,--so you ignore, 
		So you make perfect the present,--condense, 
		In a rapture of rage, for perfection’s endowment, 
		Thought and feeling and soul and sense--
		Merged in a moment which gives me at last 
		You around me for once, you beneath me, above me--
		Me--sure that despite of time future, time past,--
		This tick of our life-time’s one moment you love me! 
		How long such suspension may linger? Ah, Sweet--
		The moment eternal--just that and no more--
		When ecstasy’s utmost we clutch at the core 
		While cheeks burn, arms open, eyes shut and lips meet! 


	5. THE LOST MISTRESS

		I
		
		All’s over, then: does truth sound bitter
		 As one at first believes?
		Hark, ‘tis the sparrows’ good-night twitter
		 About your cottage eaves!
		
		
		II
		
		And the leaf-buds on the vine are woolly,
		 I noticed that, to-day;
		One day more bursts them open fully
		 --You know the red turns grey.
		
		
		III
		
		To-morrow we meet the same then, dearest?
		 May I take your hand in mine?
		Mere friends are we,--well, friends the merest
		 Keep much that I resign:
		
		
		IV
		
		For each glance of the eye so bright and black,
		 Though I keep with heart’s endeavour,--
		Your voice, when you wish the snowdrops back,
		 Though it stay in my soul for ever!--
		
		
		V
		
		Yet I will but say what mere friends say,
		 Or only a thought stronger;
		I will hold your hand but as long as all may,
		 Or so very little longer!


	6. THE REAL AND TRUE AND SURE

		Marriage on earth seems such a counterfeit, 
		Mere imitation of the inimitable: 
		In heaven we have the real and true and sure. 
		’Tis there they neither marry nor are given 
		In marriage but are as the angels: right, 
		Oh how right that is, how like Jesus Christ 
		To say that! Marriage-making for the earth, 
		With gold so much,--birth, power, repute so much, 
		Or beauty, youth so much, in lack of these! 
		Be as the angels rather, who, apart, 
		Know themselves into one, are found at length 
		Married, but marry never, no, nor give 
		In marriage; they are man and wife at once 
		When the true time is: here we have to wait 
		Not so long neither! Could we by a wish 
		Have what we will and get the future now, 
		Would we wish aught done undone in the past? 
		So, let him wait God’s instant men call years; 
		Meantime hold hard by truth and his great soul, 
		Do out the duty! Through such souls alone 
		God stooping shows sufficient of His light 
		For us i’ the dark to rise by. And I rise. 


*** William Cullen Bryant (1794 - 1878)

	1. A SCENE ON THE BANKS OF THE HUDSON

		Cool shades and dews are round my way,
		And silence of the early day;
		Mid the dark rocks that watch his bed,
		Glitters the mighty Hudson spread,
		Unrippled, save by drops that fall
		From shrubs that fringe his mountain wall;
		And o’er the clear still water swells
		The music of the Sabbath bells.
		
		All, save this little nook of land
		Circled with trees, on which I stand;
		All, save that line of hills which lie
		Suspended in the mimic sky--
		Seems a blue void, above, below,
		Through which the white clouds come and go,
		And from the green world’s farthest steep
		I gaze into the airy deep.
		
		Loveliest of lovely things are they,
		On earth, that soonest pass away.
		The rose that lives its little hour
		Is prized beyond the sculptured flower.
		Even love, long tried and cherished long,
		Becomes more tender and more strong,
		At thought of that insatiate grave
		From which its yearnings cannot save.
		
		River! in this still hour thou hast
		Too much of heaven on earth to last;
		Nor long may thy still waters lie,
		An image of the glorious sky.
		Thy fate and mine are not repose,
		And ere another evening close,
		Thou to thy tides shalt turn again,
		And I to seek the crowd of men.


	2. A SUMMER RAMBLE

		The quiet August noon has come,
		 A slumberous silence fills the sky,
		The fields are still, the woods are dumb,
		 In glassy sleep the waters lie.
		
		And mark yon soft white clouds that rest
		 Above our vale, a moveless throng;
		The cattle on the mountain’s breast
		 Enjoy the grateful shadow long.
		
		Oh, how unlike those merry hours
		 In early June when Earth laughs out,
		When the fresh winds make love to flowers,
		 And woodlands sing and waters shout.
		
		When in the grass sweet voices talk,
		 And strains of tiny music swell
		From every moss-cup of the rock,
		 From every nameless blossom’s bell.
		
		But now a joy too deep for sound,
		 A peace no other season knows,
		Hushes the heavens and wraps the ground,
		 The blessing of supreme repose.
		
		Away! I will not be, to-day,
		 The only slave of toil and care.
		Away from desk and dust! away!
		 I’ll be as idle as the air.
		
		Beneath the open sky abroad,
		 Among the plants and breathing things,
		The sinless, peaceful works of God,
		 I’ll share the calm the season brings.
		
		Come, thou, in whose soft eyes I see
		 The gentle meanings of thy heart,
		One day amid the woods with me,
		 From men and all their cares apart.
		
		And where, upon the meadow’s breast,
		 The shadow of the thicket lies,
		The blue wild flowers thou gatherest
		 Shall glow yet deeper near thine eyes.
		
		Come, and when mid the calm profound,
		 I turn, those gentle eyes to seek,
		They, like the lovely landscape round,
		 Of innocence and peace shall speak.
		
		Rest here, beneath the unmoving shade,
		 And on the silent valleys gaze,
		Winding and widening, till they fade
		 In yon soft ring of summer haze.
		
		The village trees their summits rear
		 Still as its spire, and yonder flock
		At rest in those calm fields appear
		 As chiselled from the lifeless rock.
		
		One tranquil mount the scene o’erlooks--
		 There the hushed winds their sabbath keep
		While a near hum from bees and brooks
		 Comes faintly like the breath of sleep.
		
		Well may the gazer deem that when,
		 Worn with the struggle and the strife,
		And heart-sick at the wrongs of men,
		 The good forsakes the scene of life;
		
		Like this deep quiet that, awhile,
		 Lingers the lovely landscape o’er,
		Shall be the peace whose holy smile
		 Welcomes him to a happier shore.


	3. A WINTER PIECE

		 The time has been that these wild solitudes,
		Yet beautiful as wild, were trod by me
		Oftener than now; and when the ills of life
		Had chafed my spirit--when the unsteady pulse
		Beat with strange flutterings--I would wander forth
		And seek the woods. The sunshine on my path
		Was to me as a friend. The swelling hills,
		The quiet dells retiring far between,
		With gentle invitation to explore
		Their windings, were a calm society
		That talked with me and soothed me. Then the chant
		Of birds, and chime of brooks, and soft caress
		Of the fresh sylvan air, made me forget
		The thoughts that broke my peace, and I began
		To gather simples by the fountain’s brink,
		And lose myself in day-dreams. While I stood
		In nature’s loneliness, I was with one
		With whom I early grew familiar, one
		Who never had a frown for me, whose voice
		Never rebuked me for the hours I stole
		From cares I loved not, but of which the world
		Deems highest, to converse with her. When shrieked
		The bleak November winds, and smote the woods,
		And the brown fields were herbless, and the shades,
		That met above the merry rivulet,
		Were spoiled, I sought, I loved them still,--they seemed
		Like old companions in adversity.
		Still there was beauty in my walks; the brook,
		Bordered with sparkling frost-work, was as gay
		As with its fringe of summer flowers. Afar,
		The village with its spires, the path of streams,
		And dim receding valleys, hid before
		By interposing trees, lay visible
		Through the bare grove, and my familiar haunts
		Seemed new to me. Nor was I slow to come
		Among them, when the clouds, from their still skirts,
		Had shaken down on earth the feathery snow,
		And all was white. The pure keen air abroad,
		Albeit it breathed no scent of herb, nor heard
		Love-call of bird, nor merry hum of bee,
		Was not the air of death. Bright mosses crept
		Over the spotted trunks, and the close buds,
		That lay along the boughs, instinct with life,
		Patient, and waiting the soft breath of Spring,
		Feared not the piercing spirit of the North.
		The snow-bird twittered on the beechen bough,
		And ‘neath the hemlock, whose thick branches bent
		Beneath its bright cold burden, and kept dry
		A circle, on the earth, of withered leaves,
		The partridge found a shelter. Through the snow
		The rabbit sprang away. The lighter track
		Of fox, and the racoon’s broad path, were there,
		Crossing each other. From his hollow tree,
		The squirrel was abroad, gathering the nuts
		Just fallen, that asked the winter cold and sway
		Of winter blast, to shake them from their hold.
		
		 But Winter has yet brighter scenes,--he boasts
		Splendours beyond what gorgeous Summer knows;
		Or Autumn with his many fruits, and woods
		All flushed with many hues. Come when the rains
		Have glazed the snow, and clothed the trees with ice;
		While the slant sun of February pours
		Into the bowers a flood of light. Approach!
		The incrusted surface shall upbear thy steps,
		And the broad arching portals of the grove
		Welcome thy entering. Look! the massy trunks
		Are cased in the pure crystal; each light spray,
		Nodding and tinkling in the breath of heaven,
		Is studded with its trembling water-drops,
		That stream with rainbow radiance as they move.
		But round the parent stem the long low boughs
		Bend, in a glittering ring, and arbours hide
		The glassy floor. Oh! you might deem the spot
		The spacious cavern of some virgin mine,
		Deep in the womb of earth--where the gems grow,
		And diamonds put forth radiant rods and bud
		With amethyst and topaz--and the place
		Lit up, most royally, with the pure beam
		That dwells in them. Or haply the vast hall
		Of fairy palace, that outlasts the night,
		And fades not in the glory of the sun;--
		Where crystal columns send forth slender shafts
		And crossing arches; and fantastic aisles
		Wind from the sight in brightness, and are lost
		Among the crowded pillars. Raise thine eye,--
		Thou seest no cavern roof, no palace vault;
		There the blue sky and the white drifting cloud
		Look in. Again the wildered fancy dreams
		Of spouting fountains, frozen as they rose,
		And fixed, with all their branching jets, in air,
		And all their sluices sealed. All, all is light;
		Light without shade. But all shall pass away
		With the next sun. From numberless vast trunks,
		Loosened, the crashing ice shall make a sound
		Like the far roar of rivers, and the eve
		Shall close o’er the brown woods as it was wont.
		
		 And it is pleasant, when the noisy streams
		Are just set free, and milder suns melt off
		The plashy snow, save only the firm drift
		In the deep glen or the close shade of pines,--
		‘Tis pleasant to behold the wreaths of smoke
		Roll up among the maples of the hill,
		Where the shrill sound of youthful voices wakes
		The shriller echo, as the clear pure lymph,
		That from the wounded trees, in twinkling drops,
		Falls, mid the golden brightness of the morn,
		Is gathered in with brimming pails, and oft,
		Wielded by sturdy hands, the stroke of axe
		Makes the woods ring. Along the quiet air,
		Come and float calmly off the soft light clouds,
		Such as you see in summer, and the winds
		Scarce stir the branches. Lodged in sunny cleft,
		Where the cold breezes come not, blooms alone
		The little wind-flower, whose just opened eye
		Is blue as the spring heaven it gazes at--
		Startling the loiterer in the naked groves
		With unexpected beauty, for the time
		Of blossoms and green leaves is yet afar.
		And ere it comes, the encountering winds shall oft
		Muster their wrath again, and rapid clouds
		Shade heaven, and bounding on the frozen earth
		Shall fall their volleyed stores rounded like hail,
		And white like snow, and the loud North again
		Shall buffet the vexed forest in his rage.


	4. AFTER A TEMPEST

		 The day had been a day of wind and storm;--
		 The wind was laid, the storm was overpast,--
		 And stooping from the zenith bright and warm
		 Shone the great sun on the wide earth at last.
		 I stood upon the upland slope, and cast
		 My eye upon a broad and beauteous scene,
		 Where the vast plain lay girt by mountains vast,
		 And hills o’er hills lifted their heads of green,
		With pleasant vales scooped out and villages between.
		
		 The rain-drops glistened on the trees around,
		 Whose shadows on the tall grass were not stirred,
		 Save when a shower of diamonds, to the ground,
		 Was shaken by the flight of startled bird;
		 For birds were warbling round, and bees were heard
		 About the flowers; the cheerful rivulet sung
		 And gossiped, as he hastened ocean-ward;
		 To the gray oak the squirrel, chiding, clung,
		And chirping from the ground the grasshopper upsprung.
		
		 And from beneath the leaves that kept them dry
		 Flew many a glittering insect here and there,
		 And darted up and down the butterfly,
		 That seemed a living blossom of the air.
		 The flocks came scattering from the thicket, where
		 The violent rain had pent them; in the way
		 Strolled groups of damsels frolicksome and fair;
		 The farmer swung the scythe or turned the hay,
		And ‘twixt the heavy swaths his children were at play.
		
		 It was a scene of peace--and, like a spell,
		 Did that serene and golden sunlight fall
		 Upon the motionless wood that clothed the fell,
		 And precipice upspringing like a wall,
		 And glassy river and white waterfall,
		 And happy living things that trod the bright
		 And beauteous scene; while far beyond them all,
		 On many a lovely valley, out of sight,
		Was poured from the blue heavens the same soft golden light.
		
		 I looked, and thought the quiet of the scene
		 An emblem of the peace that yet shall be,
		 When o’er earth’s continents, and isles between,
		 The noise of war shall cease from sea to sea,
		 And married nations dwell in harmony;
		 When millions, crouching in the dust to one,
		 No more shall beg their lives on bended knee,
		 Nor the black stake be dressed, nor in the sun
		The o’erlaboured captive toil, and wish his life were done.
		
		 Too long, at clash of arms amid her bowers
		 And pools of blood, the earth has stood aghast,
		 The fair earth, that should only blush with flowers
		 And ruddy fruits; but not for aye can last
		 The storm, and sweet the sunshine when ‘tis past.
		 Lo, the clouds roll away--they break--they fly,
		 And, like the glorious light of summer, cast
		 O’er the wide landscape from the embracing sky,
		On all the peaceful world the smile of heaven shall lie.


	5. AN EVENING REVERY

		 The summer day is closed--the sun is set:
		Well they have done their office, those bright hours,
		The latest of whose train goes softly out
		In the red West. The green blade of the ground
		Has risen, and herds have cropped it; the young twig
		Has spread its plaited tissues to the sun;
		Flowers of the garden and the waste have blown
		And withered; seeds have fallen upon the soil,
		From bursting cells, and in their graves await
		Their resurrection. Insects from the pools
		Have filled the air awhile with humming wings,
		That now are still for ever; painted moths
		Have wandered the blue sky, and died again;
		The mother-bird hath broken for her brood
		Their prison shell, or shoved them from the nest,
		Plumed for their earliest flight. In bright alcoves,
		In woodland cottages with barky walls,
		In noisome cells of the tumultuous town,
		Mothers have clasped with joy the new-born babe.
		Graves by the lonely forest, by the shore
		Of rivers and of ocean, by the ways
		Of the thronged city, have been hollowed out
		And filled, and closed. This day hath parted friends
		That ne’er before were parted; it hath knit
		New friendships; it hath seen the maiden plight
		Her faith, and trust her peace to him who long
		Had wooed; and it hath heard, from lips which late
		Were eloquent of love, the first harsh word,
		That told the wedded one her peace was flown.
		Farewell to the sweet sunshine! One glad day
		Is added now to Childhood’s merry days,
		And one calm day to those of quiet Age.
		Still the fleet hours run on; and as I lean,
		Amid the thickening darkness, lamps are lit,
		By those who watch the dead, and those who twine
		Flowers for the bride. The mother from the eyes
		Of her sick infant shades the painful light,
		And sadly listens to his quick-drawn breath.
		
		 Oh thou great Movement of the Universe,
		Or Change, or Flight of Time--for ye are one!
		That bearest, silently, this visible scene
		Into night’s shadow and the streaming rays
		Of starlight, whither art thou bearing me?
		I feel the mighty current sweep me on,
		Yet know not whither. Man foretells afar
		The courses of the stars; the very hour
		He knows when they shall darken or grow bright;
		Yet doth the eclipse of Sorrow and of Death
		Come unforewarned. Who next, of those I love,
		Shall pass from life, or, sadder yet, shall fall
		From virtue? Strife with foes, or bitterer strife
		With friends, or shame and general scorn of men--
		Which who can bear?--or the fierce rack of pain,
		Lie they within my path? Or shall the years
		Push me, with soft and inoffensive pace,
		Into the stilly twilight of my age?
		Or do the portals of another life
		Even now, while I am glorying in my strength,
		Impend around me? Oh! beyond that bourne,
		In the vast cycle of being which begins
		At that broad threshold, with what fairer forms
		Shall the great law of change and progress clothe
		Its workings? Gently--so have good men taught--
		Gently, and without grief, the old shall glide
		Into the new; the eternal flow of things,
		Like a bright river of the fields of heaven,
		Shall journey onward in perpetual peace.


	6. AUTUMN WOODS

		    Ere, in the northern gale,
		The summer tresses of the trees are gone,
		The woods of Autumn, all around our vale,
		    Have put their glory on.
		
		    The mountains that infold,
		In their wide sweep, the coloured landscape round,
		Seem groups of giant kings, in purple and gold,
		    That guard the enchanted ground.
		
		    I roam the woods that crown
		The upland, where the mingled splendours glow,
		Where the gay company of trees look down
		    On the green fields below.
		
		    My steps are not alone
		In these bright walks; the sweet south-west, at play,
		Flies, rustling, where the painted leaves are strown
		    Along the winding way.
		
		    And far in heaven, the while,
		The sun, that sends that gale to wander here,
		Pours out on the fair earth his quiet smile,--
		    The sweetest of the year.
		
		    Where now the solemn shade,
		Verdure and gloom where many branches meet;
		So grateful, when the noon of summer made
		    The valleys sick with heat?
		
		    Let in through all the trees
		Come the strange rays; the forest depths are bright?
		Their sunny-coloured foliage, in the breeze,
		    Twinkles, like beams of light.
		
		    The rivulet, late unseen,
		Where bickering through the shrubs its waters run,
		Shines with the image of its golden screen,
		    And glimmerings of the sun.
		
		    But ‘neath yon crimson tree,
		Lover to listening maid might breathe his flame,
		Nor mark, within its roseate canopy,
		    Her blush of maiden shame.
		
		    Oh, Autumn! why so soon
		Depart the hues that make thy forests glad;
		Thy gentle wind and thy fair sunny noon,
		    And leave thee wild and sad!
		
		    Ah! ‘twere a lot too blessed
		For ever in thy coloured shades to stray;
		Amid the kisses of the soft south-west
		    To rove and dream for aye;
		
		    And leave the vain low strife
		That makes men mad--the tug for wealth and power,
		The passions and the cares that wither life,
		    And waste its little hour.


	7. GREEN RIVER

		 When breezes are soft and skies are fair,
		I steal an hour from study and care,
		And hie me away to the woodland scene,
		Where wanders the stream with waters of green,
		As if the bright fringe of herbs on its brink
		Had given their stain to the wave they drink;
		And they, whose meadows it murmurs through,
		Have named the stream from its own fair hue.
		
		 Yet pure its waters--its shallows are bright
		With coloured pebbles and sparkles of light,
		And clear the depths where its eddies play,
		And dimples deepen and whirl away,
		And the plane-tree’s speckled arms o’ershoot
		The swifter current that mines its root,
		Through whose shifting leaves, as you walk the hill,
		The quivering glimmer of sun and rill
		With a sudden flash on the eye is thrown,
		Like the ray that streams from the diamond stone.
		Oh, loveliest there the spring days come,
		With blossoms, and birds, and wild bees’ hum;
		The flowers of summer are fairest there,
		And freshest the breath of the summer air;
		And sweetest the golden autumn day
		In silence and sunshine glides away.
		
		 Yet fair as thou art, thou shunnest to glide,
		Beautiful stream! by the village side;
		But windest away from haunts of men,
		To quiet valley and shaded glen;
		And forest, and meadow, and slope of hill,
		Around thee, are lonely, lovely, and still.
		Lonely--save when, by thy rippling tides,
		From thicket to thicket the angler glides;
		Or the simpler comes with basket and book,
		For herbs of power on thy banks to look;
		Or haply, some idle dreamer, like me,
		To wander, and muse, and gaze on thee.
		Still--save the chirp of birds that feed
		On the river cherry and seedy reed,
		And thy own wild music gushing out
		With mellow murmur and fairy shout,
		From dawn to the blush of another day,
		Like traveller singing along his way.
		
		 That fairy music I never hear,
		Nor gaze on those waters so green and clear,
		And mark them winding away from sight,
		Darkened with shade or flashing with light,
		While o’er them the vine to its thicket clings,
		And the zephyr stoops to freshen his wings,
		But I wish that fate had left me free
		To wander these quiet haunts with thee,
		Till the eating cares of earth should depart,
		And the peace of the scene pass into my heart;
		And I envy thy stream, as it glides along,
		Through its beautiful banks in a trance of song.
		
		 Though forced to drudge for the dregs of men,
		And scrawl strange words with the barbarous pen,
		And mingle among the jostling crowd,
		Where the sons of strife are subtle and loud--
		I often come to this quiet place,
		To breathe the airs that ruffle thy face,
		And gaze upon thee in silent dream,
		For in thy lonely and lovely stream
		An image of that calm life appears
		That won my heart in my greener years.


	8. JUNE

		I gazed upon the glorious sky
		 And the green mountains round,
		And thought that when I came to lie
		 Within the silent ground,
		‘Twere pleasant, that in flowery June,
		When brooks send up a cheerful tune,
		 And groves a joyous sound,
		The sexton’s hand, my grave to make,
		The rich, green mountain turf should break.
		
		A cell within the frozen mould,
		 A coffin borne through sleet,
		And icy clods above it rolled,
		 While fierce the tempests beat--
		Away!--I will not think of these--
		Blue be the sky and soft the breeze,
		 Earth green beneath the feet,
		And be the damp mould gently pressed
		Into my narrow place of rest.
		
		There through the long, long summer hours,
		 The golden light should lie,
		And thick young herbs and groups of flowers
		 Stand in their beauty by.
		The oriole should build and tell
		His love-tale close beside my cell;
		 The idle butterfly
		Should rest him there, and there be heard
		The housewife bee and humming-bird.
		
		And what if cheerful shouts at noon
		 Come, from the village sent,
		Or songs of maids, beneath the moon
		 With fairy laughter blent?
		And what if, in the evening light,
		Betrothed lovers walk in sight
		 Of my low monument?
		I would the lovely scene around
		Might know no sadder sight nor sound.
		
		I know, I know I should not see
		 The season’s glorious show,
		Nor would its brightness shine for me,
		 Nor its wild music flow;
		But if, around my place of sleep,
		The friends I love should come to weep,
		 They might not haste to go.
		Soft airs, and song, and light, and bloom,
		Should keep them lingering by my tomb.
		
		These to their softened hearts should bear
		 The thought of what has been,
		And speak of one who cannot share
		 The gladness of the scene;
		Whose part, in all the pomp that fills
		The circuit of the summer hills,
		 Is--that his grave is green;
		And deeply would their hearts rejoice
		To hear again his living voice.


	9. MIDSUMMER

		A power is on the earth and in the air,
		 From which the vital spirit shrinks afraid,
		 And shelters him, in nooks of deepest shade,
		From the hot steam and from the fiery glare.
		Look forth upon the earth--her thousand plants
		 Are smitten; even the dark sun-loving maize
		 Faints in the field beneath the torrid blaze;
		The herd beside the shaded fountain pants;
		For life is driven from all the landscape brown;
		 The bird has sought his tree, the snake his den,
		 The trout floats dead in the hot stream, and men
		Drop by the sun-stroke in the populous town:
		 As if the Day of Fire had dawned, and sent
		 Its deadly breath into the firmament.


	10. MONUMENT MOUNTAIN

		 Thou who wouldst see the lovely and the wild
		Mingled in harmony on Nature’s face,
		Ascend our rocky mountains. Let thy foot
		Fail not with weariness, for on their tops
		The beauty and the majesty of earth,
		Spread wide beneath, shall make thee to forget
		The steep and toilsome way. There, as thou stand’st,
		The haunts of men below thee, and around
		The mountain summits, thy expanding heart
		Shall feel a kindred with that loftier world
		To which thou art translated, and partake
		The enlargement of thy vision. Thou shalt look
		Upon the green and rolling forest tops,
		And down into the secrets of the glens,
		And streams, that with their bordering thickets strive
		To hide their windings. Thou shalt gaze, at once,
		Here on white villages, and tilth, and herds,
		And swarming roads, and there on solitudes
		That only hear the torrent, and the wind,
		And eagle’s shriek. There is a precipice
		That seems a fragment of some mighty wall,
		Built by the hand that fashioned the old world,
		To separate its nations, and thrown down
		When the flood drowned them. To the north, a path
		Conducts you up the narrow battlement.
		Steep is the western side, shaggy and wild
		With mossy trees, and pinnacles of flint,
		And many a hanging crag. But, to the east,
		Sheer to the vale go down the bare old cliffs,--
		Huge pillars, that in middle heaven upbear
		Their weather-beaten capitals, here dark
		With the thick moss of centuries, and there
		Of chalky whiteness where the thunderbolt
		Has splintered them. It is a fearful thing
		To stand upon the beetling verge, and see
		Where storm and lightning, from that huge gray wall,
		Have tumbled down vast blocks, and at the base
		Dashed them in fragments, and to lay thine ear
		Over the dizzy depth, and hear the sound
		Of winds, that struggle with the woods below,
		Come up like ocean murmurs. But the scene
		Is lovely round; a beautiful river there
		Wanders amid the fresh and fertile meads,
		The paradise he made unto himself,
		Mining the soil for ages. On each side
		The fields swell upward to the hills; beyond,
		Above the hills, in the blue distance, rise
		The mighty columns with which earth props heaven.
		
		 There is a tale about these reverend rocks,
		A sad tradition of unhappy love,
		And sorrows borne and ended, long ago,
		When over these fair vales the savage sought
		His game in the thick woods. There was a maid,
		The fairest of the Indian maids, bright-eyed,
		With wealth of raven tresses, a light form,
		And a gay heart. About her cabin-door
		The wide old woods resounded with her song
		And fairy laughter all the summer day.
		She loved her cousin; such a love was deemed,
		By the morality of those stern tribes,
		Incestuous, and she struggled hard and long
		Against her love, and reasoned with her heart,
		As simple Indian maiden might. In vain.
		Then her eye lost its lustre, and her step
		Its lightness, and the gray-haired men that passed
		Her dwelling, wondered that they heard no more
		The accustomed song and laugh of her, whose looks
		Were like the cheerful smile of Spring, they said,
		Upon the Winter of their age. She went
		To weep where no eye saw, and was not found
		When all the merry girls were met to dance,
		And all the hunters of the tribe were out;
		Nor when they gathered from the rustling husk
		The shining ear; nor when, by the river’s side,
		Thay pulled the grape and startled the wild shades
		With sounds of mirth. The keen-eyed Indian dames
		Would whisper to each other, as they saw
		Her wasting form, and say _the girl will die_.
		
		 One day into the bosom of a friend,
		A playmate of her young and innocent years,
		She poured her griefs. “Thou know’st, and thou alone,”
		She said, “for I have told thee, all my love,
		And guilt, and sorrow. I am sick of life.
		All night I weep in darkness, and the morn
		Glares on me, as upon a thing accursed,
		That has no business on the earth. I hate
		The pastimes and the pleasant toils that once
		I loved; the cheerful voices of my friends
		Have an unnatural horror in mine ear.
		In dreams my mother, from the land of souls,
		Calls me and chides me. All that look on me
		Do seem to know my shame; I cannot bear
		Their eyes; I cannot from my heart root out
		The love that wrings it so, and I must die.”
		
		 It was a summer morning, and they went
		To this old precipice. About the cliffs
		Lay garlands, ears of maize, and shaggy skins
		Of wolf and bear, the offerings of the tribe
		Here made to the Great Spirit, for they deemed,
		Like worshippers of the elder time, that God
		Doth walk on the high places and affect
		The earth-o’erlooking mountains. She had on
		The ornaments with which her father loved
		To deck the beauty of his bright-eyed girl,
		And bade her wear when stranger warriors came
		To be his guests. Here the friends sat them down,
		And sang, all day, old songs of love and death,
		And decked the poor wan victim’s hair with flowers,
		And prayed that safe and swift might be her way
		To the calm world of sunshine, where no grief
		Makes the heart heavy and the eyelids red.
		Beautiful lay the region of her tribe
		Below her--waters resting in the embrace
		Of the wide forest, and maize-planted glades
		Opening amid the leafy wilderness.
		She gazed upon it long, and at the sight
		Of her own village peeping through the trees,
		And her own dwelling, and the cabin roof
		Of him she loved with an unlawful love,
		And came to die for, a warm gush of tears
		Ran from her eyes. But when the sun grew low
		And the hill shadows long, she threw herself
		From the steep rock and perished. There was scooped
		Upon the mountain’s southern slope, a grave;
		And there they laid her, in the very garb
		With which the maiden decked herself for death,
		With the same withering wild flowers in her hair.
		And o’er the mould that covered her, the tribe
		Built up a simple monument, a cone
		Of small loose stones. Thenceforward all who passed,
		Hunter, and dame, and virgin, laid a stone
		In silence on the pile. It stands there yet.
		And Indians from the distant West, who come
		To visit where their fathers’ bones are laid,
		Yet tell the sorrowful tale, and to this day
		The mountain where the hapless maiden died
		Is called the Mountain of the Monument.


	11. NOON

		 ‘Tis noon. At noon the Hebrew bowed the knee
		And worshipped, while the husbandmen withdrew
		From the scorched field, and the wayfaring man
		Grew faint, and turned aside by bubbling fount,
		Or rested in the shadow of the palm.
		
		 I, too, amid the overflow of day,
		Behold the power which wields and cherishes
		The frame of Nature. From this brow of rock
		That overlooks the Hudson’s western marge,
		I gaze upon the long array of groves,
		The piles and gulfs of verdure drinking in
		The grateful heats. They love the fiery sun;
		Their broadening leaves grow glossier, and their sprays
		Climb as he looks upon them. In the midst,
		The swelling river, into his green gulfs,
		Unshadowed save by passing sails above,
		Takes the redundant glory, and enjoys
		The summer in his chilly bed. Coy flowers,
		That would not open in the early light,
		Push back their plaited sheaths. The rivulet’s pool,
		That darkly quivered all the morning long
		In the cool shade, now glimmers in the sun;
		And o’er its surface shoots, and shoots again,
		The glittering dragon-fly, and deep within
		Run the brown water-beetles to and fro.
		
		 A silence, the brief sabbath of an hour,
		Reigns o’er the fields; the laborer sits within
		His dwelling; he has left his steers awhile,
		Unyoked, to bite the herbage, and his dog
		Sleeps stretched beside the door-stone in the shade.
		Now the grey marmot, with uplifted paws,
		No more sits listening by his den, but steals
		Abroad, in safety, to the clover field,
		And crops its juicy blossoms. All the while
		A ceaseless murmur from the populous town
		Swells o’er these solitudes: a mingled sound
		Of jarring wheels, and iron hoofs that clash
		Upon the stony ways, and hammer-clang,
		And creak of engines lifting ponderous bulks,
		And calls and cries, and tread of eager feet,
		Innumerable, hurrying to and fro.
		Noon, in that mighty mart of nations, brings
		No pause to toil and care. With early day
		Began the tumult, and shall only cease
		When midnight, hushing one by one the sounds
		Of bustle, gathers the tired brood to rest.
		
		 Thus, in this feverish time, when love of gain
		And luxury possess the hearts of men,
		Thus is it with the noon of human life.
		We, in our fervid manhood, in our strength
		Of reason, we, with hurry, noise, and care,
		Plan, toil, and strife, and pause not to refresh
		Our spirits with the calm and beautiful
		Of God’s harmonious universe, that won
		Our youthful wonder; pause not to inquire
		Why we are here; and what the reverence
		Man owes to man, and what the mystery
		That links us to the greater world, beside
		Whose borders we but hover for a space.


	12. NOVEMBER

		Yet one smile more, departing, distant sun!
		   One mellow smile through the soft vapoury air,
		Ere, o’er the frozen earth, the loud winds run,
		   Or snows are sifted o’er the meadows bare.
		One smile on the brown hills and naked trees,
		   And the dark rocks whose summer wreaths are cast,
		And the blue gentian flower, that, in the breeze,
		   Nods lonely, of her beauteous race the last.
		Yet a few sunny days, in which the bee
		   Shall murmur by the hedge that skirts the way,
		The cricket chirp upon the russet lea,
		   And man delight to linger in thy ray.
		Yet one rich smile, and we will try to bear
		The piercing winter frost, and winds, and darkened air.


	13. OCTOBER

		Ay, thou art welcome, heaven’s delicious breath,
		 When woods begin to wear the crimson leaf,
		 And suns grow meek, and the meek suns grow brief,
		And the year smiles as it draws near its death.
		Wind of the sunny south! oh still delay
		 In the gay woods and in the golden air,
		 Like to a good old age released from care,
		Journeying, in long serenity, away.
		In such a bright, late quiet, would that I
		 Might wear out life like thee, mid bowers and brooks,
		 And, dearer yet, the sunshine of kind looks,
		And music of kind voices ever nigh;
		And when my last sand twinkled in the glass,
		Pass silently from men, as thou dost pass.


	14. SONG OF THE STARS

		When the radiant morn of creation broke,
		And the world in the smile of God awoke,
		And the empty realms of darkness and death
		Were moved through their depths by his mighty breath,
		And orbs of beauty and spheres of flame
		From the void abyss by myriads came,--
		In the joy of youth as they darted away,
		Through the widening wastes of space to play,
		Their silver voices in chorus rang,
		And this was the song the bright ones sang:
		
		“Away, away, through the wide, wide sky,
		The fair blue fields that before us lie,--
		Each sun with the worlds that round him roll,
		Each planet, poised on her turning pole;
		With her isles of green, and her clouds of white,
		And her waters that lie like fluid light.
		
		“For the source of glory uncovers his face,
		And the brightness o’erflows unbounded space;
		And we drink as we go the luminous tides
		In our ruddy air and our blooming sides:
		Lo, yonder the living splendours play;
		Away, on our joyous path, away!
		
		“Look, look, through our glittering ranks afar,
		In the infinite azure, star after star,
		How they brighten and bloom as they swiftly pass!
		How the verdure runs o’er each rolling mass!
		And the path of the gentle winds is seen,
		Where the small waves dance, and the young woods lean.
		
		“And see where the brighter day-beams pour,
		How the rainbows hang in the sunny shower;
		And the morn and eve, with their pomp of hues,
		Shift o’er the bright planets and shed their dews;
		And ‘twixt them both, o’er the teeming ground,
		With her shadowy cone the night goes round!
		
		“Away, away! in our blossoming bowers,
		In the soft air wrapping these spheres of ours,
		In the seas and fountains that shine with morn,
		See, Love is brooding, and Life is born,
		And breathing myriads are breaking from night,
		To rejoice, like us, in motion and light.
		
		“Glide on in your beauty, ye youthful spheres,
		To weave the dance that measures the years;
		Glide on, in the glory and gladness sent,
		To the farthest wall of the firmament,--
		The boundless visible smile of Him,
		To the veil of whose brow your lamps are dim.”


	15. THE DAMSEL OF PERU

		Where olive leaves were twinkling in every wind that blew,
		There sat beneath the pleasant shade a damsel of Peru.
		Betwixt the slender boughs, as they opened to the air,
		Came glimpses of her ivory neck and of her glossy hair;
		And sweetly rang her silver voice, within that shady nook,
		As from the shrubby glen is heard the sound of hidden brook.
		
		‘Tis a song of love and valour, in the noble Spanish tongue,
		That once upon the sunny plains of old Castile was sung;
		When, from their mountain holds, on the Moorish rout below,
		Had rushed the Christians like a flood, and swept away the foe.
		A while that melody is still, and then breaks forth anew
		A wilder rhyme, a livelier note, of freedom and Peru.
		
		For she has bound the sword to a youthful lover’s side,
		And sent him to the war the day she should have been his bride,
		And bade him bear a faithful heart to battle for the right,
		And held the fountains of her eyes till he was out of sight.
		Since the parting kiss was given, six weary months are fled,
		And yet the foe is in the land, and blood must yet be shed.
		
		A white hand parts the branches, a lovely face looks forth,
		And bright dark eyes gaze steadfastly and sadly toward the north
		Thou look’st in vain, sweet maiden, the sharpest sight would fail.
		To spy a sign of human life abroad in all the vale;
		For the noon is coming on, and the sunbeams fiercely beat,
		And the silent hills and forest-tops seem reeling in the heat.
		
		That white hand is withdrawn, that fair sad face is gone,
		But the music of that silver voice is flowing sweetly on,
		Not as of late, in cheerful tones, but mournfully and low,--
		A ballad of a tender maid heart-broken long ago,
		Of him who died in battle, the youthful and the brave,
		And her who died of sorrow, upon his early grave.
		
		But see, along that mountain’s slope, a fiery horseman ride;
		Mark his torn plume, his tarnished belt, the sabre at his side.
		His spurs are buried rowel-deep, he rides with loosened rein,
		There’s blood upon his charger’s flank and foam upon the mane;
		He speeds him toward the olive-grove, along that shaded hill:
		God shield the helpless maiden there, if he should mean her ill!
		
		And suddenly that song has ceased, and suddenly I hear
		A shriek sent up amid the shade, a shriek--but not of fear.
		For tender accents follow, and tenderer pauses speak
		The overflow of gladness, when words are all too weak:
		“I lay my good sword at thy feet, for now Peru is free,
		And I am come to dwell beside the olive-grove with thee.”


	16. THE DEATH OF THE FLOWERS

		The melancholy days are come, the saddest of the year,
		Of wailing winds, and naked woods, and meadows brown and sear.
		Heaped in the hollows of the grove, the autumn leaves lie dead;
		They rustle to the eddying gust, and to the rabbit’s tread.
		The robin and the wren are flown, and from the shrubs the jay,
		And from the wood-top calls the crow through all the gloomy day.
		
		Where are the flowers, the fair young flowers, that lately sprang and stood
		In brighter light, and softer airs, a beauteous sisterhood?
		Alas! they all are in their graves, the gentle race, of flowers
		Are lying in their lowly beds, with the fair and good of ours.
		The rain is falling where they lie, but the cold November rain
		Calls not from out the gloomy earth the lovely ones again.
		
		The wind-flower and the violet, they perished long ago,
		And the brier-rose and the orchis died amid the summer glow;
		But on the hill the golden-rod, and the aster in the wood,
		And the yellow sun-flower by the brook in autumn beauty stood,
		Till fell the frost from the clear cold heaven, as falls the plague on men,
		And the brightness of their smile was gone, from upland, glade, and glen.
		
		And now, when comes the calm mild day, as still such days will come,
		To call the squirrel and the bee from out their winter home;
		When the sound of dropping nuts is heard, though all the trees are still,
		And twinkle in the smoky light the waters of the rill,
		The south wind searches for the flowers whose fragrance late he bore,
		And sighs to find them in the wood and by the stream no more.
		
		And then I think of one who in her youthful beauty died,
		The fair meek blossom that grew up and faded by my side:
		In the cold moist earth we laid her, when the forest cast the leaf,
		And we wept that one so lovely should have a life so brief:
		Yet not unmeet it was that one, like that young friend of ours,
		So gentle and so beautiful, should perish with the flowers.


	17. THE FOUNTAIN

		 Fountain, that springest on this grassy slope,
		Thy quick cool murmur mingles pleasantly,
		With the cool sound of breezes in the beach,
		Above me in the noontide. Thou dost wear
		No stain of thy dark birthplace; gushing up
		From the red mould and slimy roots of earth,
		Thou flashest in the sun. The mountain air,
		In winter, is not clearer, nor the dew
		That shines on mountain blossom. Thus doth God
		Bring, from the dark and foul, the pure and bright.
		
		 This tangled thicket on the bank above
		Thy basin, how thy waters keep it green!
		For thou dost feed the roots of the wild vine
		That trails all over it, and to the twigs
		Ties fast her clusters. There the spice-bush lifts
		Her leafy lances; the viburnum there,
		Paler of foliage, to the sun holds up
		Her circlet of green berries. In and out
		The chipping sparrow, in her coat of brown,
		Steals silently, lest I should mark her nest.
		
		 Not such thou wert of yore, ere yet the axe
		Had smitten the old woods. Then hoary trunks
		Of oak, and plane, and hickory, o’er thee held
		A mighty canopy. When April winds
		Grew soft, the maple burst into a flush
		Of scarlet flowers. The tulip-tree, high up,
		Opened, in airs of June, her multitude
		Of golden chalices to humming-birds
		And silken-winged insects of the sky.
		
		 Frail wood-plants clustered round thy edge in Spring.
		The liverleaf put forth her sister blooms
		Of faintest blue. Here the quick-footed wolf,
		Passing to lap thy waters, crushed the flower
		Of sanguinaria, from whose brittle stem
		The red drops fell like blood. The deer, too, left
		Her delicate foot-print in the soft moist mould,
		And on the fallen leaves. The slow-paced bear,
		In such a sultry summer noon as this,
		Stopped at thy stream, and drank, and leaped across.
		
		 But thou hast histories that stir the heart
		With deeper feeling; while I look on thee
		They rise before me. I behold the scene
		Hoary again with forests; I behold
		The Indian warrior, whom a hand unseen
		Has smitten with his death-wound in the woods,
		Creep slowly to thy well-known rivulet,
		And slake his death-thirst. Hark, that quick fierce cry
		That rends the utter silence; ‘tis the whoop
		Of battle, and a throng of savage men
		With naked arms and faces stained like blood,
		Fill the green wilderness; the long bare arms
		Are heaved aloft, bows twang and arrows stream;
		Each makes a tree his shield, and every tree
		Sends forth its arrow. Fierce the fight and short,
		As is the whirlwind. Soon the conquerors
		And conquered vanish, and the dead remain
		Mangled by tomahawks. The mighty woods
		Are still again, the frighted bird comes back
		And plumes her wings; but thy sweet waters run
		Crimson with blood. Then, as the sun goes down,
		Amid the deepening twilight I descry
		Figures of men that crouch and creep unheard,
		And bear away the dead. The next day’s shower
		Shall wash the tokens of the fight away.
		
		 I look again--a hunter’s lodge is built,
		With poles and boughs, beside thy crystal well,
		While the meek autumn stains the woods with gold,
		And sheds his golden sunshine. To the door
		The red man slowly drags the enormous bear
		Slain in the chestnut thicket, or flings down
		The deer from his strong shoulders. Shaggy fells
		Of wolf and cougar hang upon the walls,
		And loud the black-eyed Indian maidens laugh,
		That gather, from the rustling heaps of leaves,
		The hickory’s white nuts, and the dark fruit
		That falls from the gray butternut’s long boughs.
		
		 So centuries passed by, and still the woods
		Blossomed in spring, and reddened when the year
		Grew chill, and glistened in the frozen rains
		Of winter, till the white man swung the axe
		Beside thee--signal of a mighty change.
		Then all around was heard the crash of trees,
		Trembling awhile and rushing to the ground,
		The low of ox, and shouts of men who fired
		The brushwood, or who tore the earth with ploughs.
		The grain sprang thick and tall, and hid in green
		The blackened hill-side; ranks of spiky maize
		Rose like a host embattled; the buckwheat
		Whitened broad acres, sweetening with its flowers
		The August wind. White cottages were seen
		With rose-trees at the windows; barns from which
		Came loud and shrill the crowing of the cock;
		Pastures where rolled and neighed the lordly horse,
		And white flocks browsed and bleated. A rich turf
		Of grasses brought from far o’ercrept thy bank,
		Spotted with the white clover. Blue-eyed girls
		Brought pails, and dipped them in thy crystal pool;
		And children, ruddy-cheeked and flaxen-haired,
		Gathered the glistening cowslip from thy edge.
		
		 Since then, what steps have trod thy border! Here
		On thy green bank, the woodmann of the swamp
		Has laid his axe, the reaper of the hill
		His sickle, as they stooped to taste thy stream.
		The sportsman, tired with wandering in the still
		September noon, has bathed his heated brow
		In thy cool current. Shouting boys, let loose
		For a wild holiday, have quaintly shaped
		Into a cup the folded linden leaf,
		And dipped thy sliding crystal. From the wars
		Returning, the plumed soldier by thy side
		Has sat, and mused how pleasant ‘twere to dwell
		In such a spot, and be as free as thou,
		And move for no man’s bidding more. At eve,
		When thou wert crimson with the crimson sky,
		Lovers have gazed upon thee, and have thought
		Their mingled lives should flow as peacefully
		And brightly as thy waters. Here the sage,
		Gazing into thy self-replenished depth,
		Has seen eternal order circumscribe
		And bind the motions of eternal change,
		And from the gushing of thy simple fount
		Has reasoned to the mighty universe.
		
		 Is there no other change for thee, that lurks
		Among the future ages? Will not man
		Seek out strange arts to wither and deform
		The pleasant landscape which thou makest green?
		Or shall the veins that feed thy constant stream
		Be choked in middle earth, and flow no more
		For ever, that the water-plants along
		Thy channel perish, and the bird in vain
		Alight to drink? Haply shall these green hills
		Sink, with the lapse of years, into the gulf
		Of ocean waters, and thy source be lost
		Amidst the bitter brine? Or shall they rise,
		Upheaved in broken cliffs and airy peaks,
		Haunts of the eagle and the snake, and thou
		Gush midway from the bare and barren steep?


	18. THE MAIDEN’S SORROW

		Seven long years has the desert rain
		 Dropped on the clods that hide thy face;
		Seven long years of sorrow and pain
		 I have thought of thy burial-place.
		
		Thought of thy fate in the distant west,
		 Dying with none that loved thee near;
		They who flung the earth on thy breast
		 Turned from the spot williout a tear.
		
		There, I think, on that lonely grave,
		 Violets spring in the soft May shower;
		There, in the summer breezes, wave
		 Crimson phlox and moccasin flower.
		
		There the turtles alight, and there
		 Feeds with her fawn the timid doe;
		There, when the winter woods are bare,
		 Walks the wolf on the crackling snow.
		
		Soon wilt thou wipe my tears away;
		 All my task upon earth is done;
		My poor father, old and gray,
		 Slumbers beneath the churchyard stone.
		
		In the dreams of my lonely bed,
		 Ever thy form before me seems;
		All night long I talk with the dead,
		 All day long I think of my dreams.
		
		This deep wound that bleeds and aches,
		 This long pain, a sleepless pain--
		When the Father my spirit takes,
		 I shall feel it no more again.


	19. THE OLD MAN’S COUNSEL

		 Among our hills and valleys, I have known
		Wise and grave men, who, while their diligent hands
		Tended or gathered in the fruits of earth,
		Were reverent learners in the solemn school
		Of nature. Not in vain to them were sent
		Seed-time and harvest, or the vernal shower
		That darkened the brown tilth, or snow that beat
		On the white winter hills. Each brought, in turn,
		Some truth, some lesson on the life of man,
		Or recognition of the Eternal mind
		Who veils his glory with the elements.
		
		 One such I knew long since, a white-haired man,
		Pithy of speech, and merry when he would;
		A genial optimist, who daily drew
		From what he saw his quaint moralities.
		Kindly he held communion, though so old,
		With me a dreaming boy, and taught me much
		That books tell not, and I shall ne’er forget.
		
		 The sun of May was bright in middle heaven,
		And steeped the sprouting forests, the green hills
		And emerald wheat-fields, in his yellow light.
		Upon the apple-tree, where rosy buds
		Stood clustered, ready to burst forth in bloom,
		The robin warbled forth his full clear note
		For hours, and wearied not. Within the woods,
		Whose young and half transparent leaves scarce cast
		A shade, gay circles of anemones
		Danced on their stalks; the shadbush, white with flowers,
		Brightened the glens; the new-leaved butternut
		And quivering poplar to the roving breeze
		Gave a balsamic fragrance. In the fields
		I saw the pulses of the gentle wind
		On the young grass. My heart was touched with joy
		At so much beauty, flushing every hour
		Into a fuller beauty; but my friend,
		The thoughtful ancient, standing at my side,
		Gazed on it mildly sad. I asked him why.
		
		 “Well mayst thou join in gladness,“ he replied,
		“With the glad earth, her springing plants and flowers,
		And this soft wind, the herald of the green
		Luxuriant summer. Thou art young like them,
		And well mayst thou rejoice. But while the flight
		Of seasons fills and knits thy spreading frame,
		It withers mine, and thins my hair, and dims
		These eyes, whose fading light shall soon be quenched
		In utter darkness. Hearest thou that bird?”
		
		 I listened, and from midst the depth of woods
		Heard the love-signal of the grouse, that wears
		A sable ruff around his mottled neck;
		Partridge they call him by our northern streams,
		And pheasant by the Delaware. He beat
		‘Gainst his barred sides his speckled wings, and made
		A sound like distant thunder; slow the strokes
		At first, then fast and faster, till at length
		They passed into a murmur and were still.
		
		 “There hast thou,“ said my friend, “a fitting type
		Of human life. ‘Tis an old truth, I know,
		But images like these revive the power
		Of long familiar truths. Slow pass our days
		In childhood, and the hours of light are long
		Betwixt the morn and eve; with swifter lapse
		They glide in manhood, and in age they fly;
		Till days and seasons flit before the mind
		As flit the snow-flakes in a winter storm,
		Seen rather than distinguished. Ah! I seem
		As if I sat within a helpless bark
		By swiftly running waters hurried on
		To shoot some mighty cliff. Along the banks
		Grove after grove, rock after frowning rock,
		Bare sands and pleasant homes, and flowery nooks,
		And isles and whirlpools in the stream, appear
		Each after each, but the devoted skiff
		Darts by so swiftly that their images
		Dwell not upon the mind, or only dwell
		In dim confusion; faster yet I sweep
		By other banks, and the great gulf is near.
		
		 “Wisely, my son, while yet thy days are long,
		And this fair change of seasons passes slow,
		Gather and treasure up the good they yield--
		All that they teach of virtue, of pure thoughts
		And kind affections, reverence for thy God
		And for thy brethren; so when thou shalt come
		Into these barren years, thou mayst not bring
		A mind unfurnished and a withered heart.”
		
		 Long since that white-haired ancient slept--but still,
		When the red flower-buds crowd the orchard bough,
		And the ruffed grouse is drumming far within
		The woods, his venerable form again
		Is at my side, his voice is in my ear.


	20. THE STRANGE LADY

		The summer morn is bright and fresh, the birds are darting by,
		As if they loved to breast the breeze that sweeps the cool clear sky;
		Young Albert, in the forest’s edge, has heard a rustling sound,
		An arrow slightly strikes his hand and falls upon the ground.
		
		A dark-haired woman from the wood comes suddenly in sight;
		Her merry eye is full and black, her cheek is brown and bright;
		Her gown is of the mid-sea blue, her belt with beads is strung,
		And yet she speaks in gentle tones, and in the English tongue.
		
		“It was an idle bolt I sent, against the villain crow;
		Fair sir, I fear it harmed thy hand; beshrew my erring bow!”
		“Ah! would that bolt had not been spent! then, lady, might I wear
		A lasting token on my hand of one so passing fair!”
		
		“Thou art a flatterer like the rest, but wouldst thou take with me
		A day of hunting in the wilds, beneath the greenwood tree,
		I know where most the pheasants feed, and where the red-deer herd,
		And thou shouldst chase the nobler game, and I bring down the bird.”
		
		Now Albert in her quiver lays the arrow in its place,
		And wonders as he gazes on the beauty of her face:
		“Those hunting-grounds are far away, and, lady, ‘twere not meet
		That night, amid the wilderness, should overtake thy feet.”
		
		“Heed not the night; a summer lodge amid the wild is mine,--
		‘Tis shadowed by the tulip-tree, ‘tis mantled by the vine;
		The wild plum sheds its yellow fruit from fragrant thickets nigh,
		And flowery prairies from the door stretch till they meet the sky.
		
		“There in the boughs that hide the roof the mock-bird sits and sings,
		And there the hang-bird’s brood within its little hammock swings;
		A pebbly brook, where rustling winds among the hopples sweep,
		Shall lull thee till the morning sun looks in upon thy sleep.”
		
		Away, into the forest depths by pleasant paths they go,
		He with his rifle on his arm, the lady with her bow,
		Where cornels arch their cool dark boughs o’er beds of winter-green,
		And never at his father’s door again was Albert seen.
		
		That night upon the woods came down a furious hurricane,
		With howl of winds and roar of streams, and beating of the rain;
		The mighty thunder broke and drowned the noises in its crash;
		The old trees seemed to fight like fiends beneath the lightning-flash.
		
		Next day, within a mossy glen, ‘mid mouldering trunks were found
		The fragments of a human form upon the bloody ground;
		White bones from which the flesh was torn, and locks of glossy hair;
		They laid them in the place of graves, yet wist not whose they were.
		
		And whether famished evening wolves had mangled Albert so,
		Or that strange dame so gay and fair were some mysterious foe,
		Or whether to that forest lodge, beyond the mountains blue,
		He went to dwell with her, the friends who mourned him never knew.


	21. THE TWENTY-SECOND OF DECEMBER

		Wild was the day; the wintry sea
		 Moaned sadly on New-England’s strand,
		When first the thoughtful and the free,
		 Our fathers, trod the desert land.
		
		They little thought how pure a light,
		 With years, should gather round that day;
		How love should keep their memories bright,
		 How wide a realm their sons should sway.
		
		Green are their bays; but greener still
		 Shall round their spreading fame be wreathed,
		And regions, now untrod, shall thrill
		 With reverence when their names are breathed.
		
		Till where the sun, with softer fires,
		 Looks on the vast Pacific’s sleep,
		The children of the pilgrim sires
		 This hallowed day like us shall keep.


	22. THE WHITE-FOOTED DEER

		It was a hundred years ago,
		 When, by the woodland ways,
		The traveller saw the wild deer drink,
		 Or crop the birchen sprays.
		
		Beneath a hill, whose rocky side
		 O’erbrowed a grassy mead,
		And fenced a cottage from the wind,
		 A deer was wont to feed.
		
		She only came when on the cliffs
		 The evening moonlight lay,
		And no man knew the secret haunts
		 In which she walked by day.
		
		White were her feet, her forehead showed
		 A spot of silvery white,
		That seemed to glimmer like a star
		 In autumn’s hazy night.
		
		And here, when sang the whippoorwill,
		 She cropped the sprouting leaves,
		And here her rustling steps were heard
		 On still October eves.
		
		But when the broad midsummer moon
		 Rose o’er that grassy lawn,
		Beside the silver-footed deer
		 There grazed a spotted fawn.
		
		The cottage dame forbade her son
		 To aim the rifle here;
		“It were a sin,“ she said, “to harm
		 Or fright that friendly deer.
		
		“This spot has been my pleasant home
		 Ten peaceful years and more;
		And ever, when the moonlight shines,
		 She feeds before our door.
		
		“The red men say that here she walked
		 A thousand moons ago;
		They never raise the war-whoop here,
		 And never twang the bow.
		
		“I love to watch her as she feeds,
		 And think that all is well
		While such a gentle creature haunts
		 The place in which we dwell.”
		
		The youth obeyed, and sought for game
		 In forests far away,
		Where, deep in silence and in moss,
		 The ancient woodland lay.
		
		But once, in autumn’s golden time,
		 He ranged the wild in vain,
		Nor roused the pheasant nor the deer,
		 And wandered home again.
		
		The crescent moon and crimson eve
		 Shone with a mingling light;
		The deer, upon the grassy mead,
		 Was feeding full in sight.
		
		He raised the rifle to his eye,
		 And from the cliffs around
		A sudden echo, shrill and sharp,
		 Gave back its deadly sound.
		
		Away into the neighbouring wood
		 The startled creature flew,
		And crimson drops at morning lay
		 Amid the glimmering dew.
		
		Next evening shone the waxing moon
		 As sweetly as before;
		The deer upon the grassy mead
		 Was seen again no more.
		
		But ere that crescent moon was old,
		 By night the red men came,
		And burnt the cottage to the ground,
		 And slew the youth and dame.
		
		Now woods have overgrown the mead,
		 And hid the cliffs from sight;
		There shrieks the hovering hawk at noon,
		 And prowls the fox at night.


	23. TO A CLOUD

		Beautiful cloud! with folds so soft and fair,
		 Swimming in the pure quiet air!
		Thy fleeces bathed in sunlight, while below
		 Thy shadow o’er the vale moves slow;
		Where, midst their labour, pause the reaper train
		 As cool it comes along the grain.
		Beautiful cloud! I would I were with thee
		 In thy calm way o’er land and sea:
		To rest on thy unrolling skirts, and look
		 On Earth as on an open book;
		On streams that tie her realms with silver bands,
		 And the long ways that seem her lands;
		And hear her humming cities, and the sound
		 Of the great ocean breaking round.
		Ay--I would sail upon thy air-borne car
		 To blooming regions distant far,
		To where the sun of Andalusia shines
		 On his own olive-groves and vines,
		Or the soft lights of Italy’s bright sky
		 In smiles upon her ruins lie.
		But I would woo the winds to let us rest
		 O’er Greece long fettered and oppressed,
		Whose sons at length have heard the call that comes
		 From the old battle-fields and tombs,
		And risen, and drawn the sword, and on the foe
		 Have dealt the swift and desperate blow,
		And the Othman power is cloven, and the stroke
		 Has touched its chains, and they are broke.
		Ay, we would linger till the sunset there
		 Should come, to purple all the air,
		And thou reflect upon the sacred ground
		 The ruddy radiance streaming round.
		
		Bright meteor! for the summer noontide made!
		 Thy peerless beauty yet shall fade.
		The sun, that fills with light each glistening fold,
		 Shall set, and leave thee dark and cold:
		The blast shall rend thy skirts, or thou mayst frown
		 In the dark heaven when storms come down;
		And weep in rain, till man’s inquiring eye
		 Miss thee, for ever, from the sky.


	24. TO A MUSQUITO

		Fair insect! that, with threadlike legs spread out,
		 And blood-extracting bill and filmy wing,
		Does murmur, as thou slowly sail’st about,
		 In pitiless ears full many a plaintive thing,
		And tell how little our large veins should bleed,
		Would we but yield them to thy bitter need.
		
		Unwillingly, I own, and, what is worse,
		 Full angrily men hearken to thy plaint;
		Thou gettest many a brush, and many a curse,
		 For saying thou art gaunt, and starved, and faint:
		Even the old beggar, while he asks for food,
		Would kill thee, hapless stranger, if he could.
		
		I call thee stranger, for the town, I ween,
		 Has not the honour of so proud a birth,--
		Thou com’st from Jersey meadows, fresh and green,
		 The offspring of the gods, though born on earth;
		For Titan was thy sire, and fair was she,
		The ocean nymph that nursed thy infancy.
		
		Beneath the rushes was thy cradle swung,
		 And when, at length, thy gauzy wings grew strong,
		Abroad to gentle airs their folds were flung,
		 Rose in the sky and bore thee soft along;
		The south wind breathed to waft thee on thy way,
		And danced and shone beneath the billowy bay.
		
		Calm rose afar the city spires, and thence
		 Came the deep murmur of its throng of men,
		And as its grateful odours met thy sense,
		 They seemed the perfumes of thy native fen.
		Fair lay its crowded streets, and at the sight
		Thy tiny song grew shriller with delight.
		
		At length thy pinions fluttered in Broadway--
		 Ah, there were fairy steps, and white necks kissed
		By wanton airs, and eyes whose killing ray
		 Shone through the snowy veils like stars through mist;
		And fresh as morn, on many a cheek and chin,
		Bloomed the bright blood through the transparent skin.
		
		Sure these were sights to touch an anchorite!
		 What! do I hear thy slender voice complain?
		Thou wailest, when I talk of beauty’s light,
		 As if it brought the memory of pain:
		Thou art a wayward being--well--come near,
		And pour thy tale of sorrow in my ear.
		
		What sayst thou--slanderer!--rouge makes thee sick?
		 And China bloom at best is sorry food?
		And Rowland’s Kalydor, if laid on thick,
		 Poisons the thirsty wretch that bores for blood?
		Go! ‘twas a just reward that met thy crime--
		But shun the sacrilege another time.
		
		That bloom was made to look at, not to touch;
		 To worship, not approach, that radiant white;
		And well might sudden vengeance light on such
		 As dared, like thee, most impiously to bite.
		Thou shouldst have gazed at distance and admired,
		Murmured thy adoration and retired.
		
		Thou’rt welcome to the town--but why come here
		 To bleed a brother poet, gaunt like thee?
		Alas! the little blood I have is dear,
		 And thin will be the banquet drawn from me.
		Look round--the pale-eyed sisters in my cell,
		Thy old acquaintance, Song and Famine, dwell.
		
		Try some plump alderman, and suck the blood
		 Enriched by generous wine and costly meat;
		On well-filled skins, sleek as thy native mud,
		 Fix thy light pump and press thy freckled feet:
		Go to the men for whom, in ocean’s hall,
		The oyster breeds, and the green turtle sprawls.
		
		There corks are drawn, and the red vintage flows
		 To fill the swelling veins for thee, and now
		The ruddy cheek and now the ruddier nose
		 Shall tempt thee, as thou flittest round the brow;
		And when the hour of sleep its quiet brings,
		No angry hand shall rise to brush thy wings.


*** Charles Bukowski (1920 - 1994)

	1. BLUEBIRD

		there’s a bluebird in my heart that
		wants to get out
		but I’m too tough for him,
		I say, stay in there, I’m not going
		to let anybody see
		you.
		there’s a bluebird in my heart that
		wants to get out
		but I pour whiskey on him and inhale
		cigarette smoke
		and the whores and the bartenders
		and the grocery clerks
		never know that
		he’s
		in there.
		
		there’s a bluebird in my heart that
		wants to get out
		but I’m too tough for him,
		I say,
		stay down, do you want to mess
		me up?
		you want to screw up the
		works?
		you want to blow my book sales in
		Europe?
		there’s a bluebird in my heart that
		wants to get out
		but I’m too clever, I only let him out
		at night sometimes
		when everybody’s asleep.
		I say, I know that you’re there,
		so don’t be
		sad.
		then I put him back,
		but he’s singing a little
		in there, I haven’t quite let him
		die
		and we sleep together like
		that
		with our
		secret pact
		and it’s nice enough to
		make a man
		weep, but I don’t
		weep, do
		you?


	2. TO THE WHORE WHO TOOK MY POEMS

		some say we should keep personal remorse from the
		poem,
		stay abstract, and there is some reason in this,
		but jezus;
		twelve poems gone and I don’t keep carbons and you have
		my
		paintings too, my best ones; its stifling:
		are you trying to crush me out like the rest of them?
		why didn’t you take my money? they usually do
		from the sleeping drunken pants sick in the corner.
		next time take my left arm or a fifty
		but not my poems:
		I’m not Shakespeare
		but sometime simply
		there won’t be any more, abstract or otherwise;
		there’ll always be money and whores and drunkards
		down to the last bomb,
		but as God said,
		crossing his legs,
		I see where I have made plenty of poets
		but not so very much
		poetry.


*** Ivan Bunin (1870 - 1953)

	1. A FAREWELL

		Blasting the malachites beneath the rudder, 
		The seething sea spews pearly blobs of foam. 
		The shore sails nearer as we move from under 
		The ship’s smooth, towering shape and make for home. 
		
		The pier is empty. Pigeons coo and chatter 
		And peck at corn and scraps of food . . . At sea, 
		The ship’s stern sways, the bowsprit draws a pattern 
		Upon the dimming sky’s dark canopy. 
		
		Where now? March. Dusk. In port, the church bells ringing. 
		Of spring and sadness full this soul of mine. 
		Lights at the inn . . . No, home I’ll go, I’m thinking! 
		For I am drunk--drunk though I’ve touched no wine.


	2. LONELINESS

		The rain and the wind and the murk 
		Reign over cold desert of fall, 
		Here, life’s interrupted till spring; 
		Till the spring, gardens barren and tall. 
		I’m alone in my house, it’s dim 
		At the easel, and drafts through the rims. 
		
		The other day, you came to me, 
		But I feel you are bored with me now. 
		The somber day’s over, it seemed 
		You were there for me as my spouse. 
		Well, so long, I will somehow strive 
		To survive till the spring with no wife. 
		
		The clouds, again, have today 
		Returned, passing, patch after patch. 
		Your footprints got smudged by the rain, 
		And are filling with water by the porch. 
		As I sink into lonesome despair 
		From the vanishing late autumn’s glare. 
		
		I gasped to call after you fast: 
		Please come back, you’re a part of me, dear; 
		To a woman, there is no past 
		Once love ends, you’re a stranger to her; 
		I’ll get drunk, I will watch burning logs, 
		Would be splendid to get me a dog.


*** Basil Bunting (1900 - 1985)

	1. NOTHING

		Nothing
		substance utters or time
		stills and restrains
		joins design and
		
		supple measure deftly
		as thought’s intricate polyphonic
		score dovetails with the tread
		sensuous things
		keep in our consciousness.
		
		Celebrate man’s craft
		and the word spoken in shapeless night, the
		sharp tool paring away
		waste and the forms
		cut out of mystery!
		
		When taut string’s note
		passes ears’ reach or red rays or violet
		fade, strong over unseen
		forces the word
		ranks and enumerates . . .
		
		mimes clouds condensed
		and hewn hills and bristling forests,
		steadfast corn in its season
		and the seasons
		in their due array,
		
		life of man’s own body
		and death . . .
		The sound thins into melody,
		discourse narrowing, craft
		failing, design
		petering out.
		
		Ears heavy to breeze of speech and
		thud of the ictus. 


	2. THE EARTHY SHIELDS

		Lavender and contorted
		Only and lavender
		Outrageous and very
		
		This flipper may back and
		beckon, but it
		is absurdly hidden
		Into a streamed fly a short man
		has seemed contorted
		Formless as a
		hay, more formless than shield
		
		The rain saying our
		face, its own calling skin
		Appeal has rotted in our curved
		bank
		Gloom is so homeward-bound
		it has mourned it
		Hearing an earthy gross year from under
		old decent water
		Our hand thickening, motionless
		and farcical, our arm rotting 


*** Robert Burns (1759 - 1796)

	1. A DIRGE

		The wintry west extends his blast,
		And hail and rain does blaw;
		Or, the stormy north sends driving forth
		The blinding sleet and snaw:
		While tumbling brown, the burn comes down,
		And roars frae bank to brae;
		And bird and beast in covert rest,
		And pass the heartless day.
		
		The sweeping blast, the sky o’ercast,
		The joyless winter-day,
		Let others fear, to me more dear
		Than all the pride of May:
		The tempest’s howl, it soothes my soul,
		My griefs it seems to join;
		The leafless trees my fancy please,
		Their fate resembles mine!
		
		Thou Pow’r Supreme, whose mighty scheme
		These woes of mine fulfil,
		Here, firm, I rest, they must be best,
		Because they are Thy will!
		Then all I want (O, do Thou grant
		This one request of mine!)
		Since to enjoy Thou dost deny,
		Assist me to resign.


	2. A RED, RED ROSE

		O my Luve is like a red, red rose 
		  That’s newly sprung in June; 
		O my Luve is like the melody 
		  That’s sweetly played in tune. 
		
		So fair art thou, my bonnie lass, 
		  So deep in luve am I; 
		And I will luve thee still, my dear, 
		  Till a’ the seas gang dry. 
		
		Till a’ the seas gang dry, my dear, 
		  And the rocks melt wi’ the sun; 
		I will love thee still, my dear, 
		  While the sands o’ life shall run. 
		
		And fare thee weel, my only luve! 
		  And fare thee weel awhile! 
		And I will come again, my luve, 
		  Though it were ten thousand mile.


	3. A WINTER NIGHT

		When biting Boreas, fell and doure, 
		Sharp shivers thro’ the leafless bow’r; 
		When Phoebus gies a short-liv’d glow’r, 
		        Far south the lift, 
		Dim-dark’ning thro’ the flaky show’r, 
		        Or whirling drift: 
		
		Ae night the storm the steeples rocked, 
		Poor Labour sweet in sleep was locked, 
		While burns, wi’ snawy wreeths upchoked, 
		        Wild-eddying swirl, 
		Or thro’ the mining outlet bocked, 
		        Down headlong hurl. 
		
		List’ning, the doors an’ winnocks rattle, 
		I thought me on the ourie cattle, 
		Or silly sheep, wha bide this brattle 
		        O’ winter war, 
		And thro’ the drift, deep-lairing, sprattle, 
		        Beneath a scar. 
		
		Ilk happing bird, wee, helpless thing! 
		That, in the merry months o’ spring, 
		Delighted me to hear thee sing, 
		        What comes o’ thee? 
		Whare wilt thou cow’r thy chittering wing 
		        An’ close thy e’e? 
		
		Ev’n you on murd’ring errands toil’d, 
		Lone from your savage homes exil’d, 
		The blood-stain’d roost, and sheep-cote spoil’d 
		        My heart forgets, 
		While pityless the tempest wild 
		        Sore on you beats. 


	4. AE FOND KISS

		Ae fond kiss, and then we sever; 
		Ae fareweel, and then forever! 
		Deep in heart-wrung tears   I’ll pledge thee, 
		Warring sighs and groans I’ll wage thee. 
		Who shall say that Fortune grieves him, 
		While the star of hope she leaves him? 
		Me, nae cheerfu’ twinkle lights me; 
		Dark despair around benights me. 
		
		I’ll ne’er blame my partial fancy, 
		Naething could resist my Nancy; 
		But to see her was to love her; 
		Love but her, and love forever. 
		Had we never lov’d sae kindly, 
		Had we never lov’d sae blindly, 
		Never met--or never parted-- 
		We had ne’er been broken-hearted. 
		
		Fare thee weel, thou first and fairest! 
		Fare thee weel, thou best and dearest! 
		Thine be ilka joy and treasure, 
		Peace. enjoyment, love, and pleasure! 
		Ae fond kiss, and then we sever; 
		Ae fareweel, alas, forever! 
		Deep in heart-wrung tears   I’ll pledge thee, 
		Warring sighs and groans I’ll wage thee! 


	5. AFTON WATER

		Flow gently, sweet Afton, among thy green braes, 
		Flow gently, I’ll sing thee a song in thy praise; 
		My Mary’s asleep by thy murmuring stream, 
		Flow gently, sweet Afton, disturb not her dream. 
		
		Thou stock-dove, whose echo resounds thro’ the glen, 
		Ye wild whistling blackbirds in yon thorny den, 
		Thou green-crested lapwing, thy screaming forbear, 
		I charge you disturb not my slumbering fair. 
		
		How lofty, sweet Afton, thy neighbouring hills, 
		Far mark’d with the courses of clear winding rills; 
		There daily I wander as noon rises high, 
		My flocks and my Mary’s sweet cot in my eye. 
		
		How pleasant thy banks and green valleys below, 
		Where wild in the woodlands the primroses blow; 
		There oft, as mild Ev’ning sweeps over the lea, 
		The sweet-scented birk shades my Mary and me. 
		
		Thy crystal stream, Afton, how lovely it glides, 
		And winds by the cot where my Mary resides, 
		How wanton thy waters her snowy feet lave, 
		As gathering sweet flowrets she stems thy clear wave. 
		
		Flow gently, sweet Afton, among thy green braes, 
		Flow gently, sweet river, the theme of my lays; 
		My Mary’s asleep by thy murmuring stream, 
		Flow gently, sweet Afton, disturb not her dream. 


	6. FOR A’ THAT AN’ A’ THAT

		Is there, for honest poverty, 
		        That hings his head, an’ a’ that? 
		The coward slave, we pass him by, 
		        We dare be poor for a’ that! 
		               For a’ that, an’ a’ that, 
		                       Our toils obscure, an’ a’ that; 
		               The rank is but the guinea’s stamp; 
		                       The man’s the gowd for a’ that, 
		
		What tho’ on hamely fare we dine, 
		        Wear hoddin-gray, an’ a’ that; 
		Gie fools their silks, and knaves their wine, 
		        A man’s a man for a’ that. 
		               For a’ that, an’ a’ that, 
		                       Their tinsel show an’ a’ that; 
		               The honest man, tho’ e’er sae poor, 
		                       Is king o’ men for a’ that. 
		
		Ye see yon birkie, ca’d a lord 
		        Wha struts, an’ stares, an’ a’ that; 
		Tho’ hundreds worship at his word, 
		        He’s but a coof for a’ that: 
		               For a’ that, an’ a’ that, 
		                       His riband, star, an’ a’ that, 
		               The man o’ independent mind, 
		                       He looks and laughs at a’ that. 
		
		A prince can mak a belted knight, 
		        A marquis, duke, an’ a’ that; 
		But an honest man’s aboon his might, 
		        Guid faith he mauna fa’ that! 
		               For a’ that, an’ a’ that, 
		                       Their dignities, an’ a’ that, 
		               The pith o’ sense, an’ pride o’ worth, 
		                       Are higher rank than a’ that. 
		
		Then let us pray that come it may, 
		        As come it will for a’ that, 
		That sense and worth, o’er a’ the earth, 
		        May bear the gree, an’ a’ that. 
		               For a’ that, an’ a’ that, 
		                       It’s coming yet, for a’ that, 
		               That man to man, the warld o’er, 
		                       Shall brothers be for a’ that. 


	7. HALLOWEEN

		Upon that night, when fairies light
		On Cassilis Downans dance,
		Or owre the lays, in splendid blaze,
		On sprightly coursers prance;
		Or for Colean the route is ta’en,
		Beneath the moon’s pale beams;
		There, up the cove, to stray and rove,
		Among the rocks and streams
		To sport that night.
		
		Among the bonny winding banks,
		Where Doon rins, wimplin’ clear,
		Where Bruce ance ruled the martial ranks,
		And shook his Carrick spear,
		Some merry, friendly, country-folks,
		Together did convene,
		To burn their nits, and pou their stocks,
		And haud their Halloween
		Fu’ blithe that night.
		
		The lasses feat, and cleanly neat,
		Mair braw than when they’re fine;
		Their faces blithe, fu’ sweetly kythe,
		Hearts leal, and warm, and kin’;
		The lads sae trig, wi’ wooer-babs,
		Weel knotted on their garten,
		Some unco blate, and some wi’ gabs,
		Gar lasses’ hearts gang startin’
		Whiles fast at night.
		
		Then, first and foremost, through the kail,
		Their stocks maun a’ be sought ance;
		They steek their een, and graip and wale,
		For muckle anes and straught anes.
		Poor hav’rel Will fell aff the drift,
		And wander’d through the bow-kail,
		And pou’t, for want o’ better shift,
		A runt was like a sow-tail,
		Sae bow’t that night.
		
		Then, staught or crooked, yird or nane,
		They roar and cry a’ throu’ther;
		The very wee things, todlin’, rin,
		Wi’ stocks out owre their shouther;
		And gif the custoc’s sweet or sour.
		Wi’ joctelegs they taste them;
		Syne cozily, aboon the door,
		Wi cannie care, they’ve placed them
		To lie that night.
		
		The lasses staw frae ‘mang them a’
		To pou their stalks of corn:
		But Rab slips out, and jinks about,
		Behint the muckle thorn:
		He grippet Nelly hard and fast;
		Loud skirl’d a’ the lasses;
		But her tap-pickle maist was lost,
		When kitlin’ in the fause-house
		Wi’ him that night.
		
		The auld guidwife’s well-hoordit nits,
		Are round and round divided,
		And monie lads’ and lasses’ fates
		Are there that night decided:
		Some kindle coothie, side by side,
		And burn thegither trimly;
		Some start awa, wi’ saucy pride,
		And jump out-owre the chimlie
		Fu’ high that night.
		
		Jean slips in twa wi’ tentie ee;
		Wha ‘twas she wadna tell;
		But this is Jock, and this is me,
		She says in to hersel:
		He bleezed owre her, and she owre him,
		As they wad never mair part;
		Till, fuff! he started up the lum,
		And Jean had e’en a sair heart
		To see’t that night.
		
		Poor Willie, wi’ his bow-kail runt,
		Was brunt wi’ primsie Mallie;
		And Mallie, nae doubt, took the drunt,
		To be compared to Willie;
		Mall’s nit lap out wi’ pridefu’ fling,
		And her ain fit it brunt it;
		While Willie lap, and swore by jing,
		‘Twas just the way he wanted
		To be that night.
		
		Nell had the fause-house in her min’,
		She pits hersel and Rob in;
		In loving bleeze they sweetly join,
		Till white in ase they’re sobbin’;
		Nell’s heart was dancin’ at the view,
		She whisper’d Rob to leuk for’t:
		Rob, stowlins, prie’d her bonny mou’,
		Fu’ cozie in the neuk for’t,
		Unseen that night.
		
		But Merran sat behint their backs,
		Her thoughts on Andrew Bell;
		She lea’es them gashin’ at their cracks,
		And slips out by hersel:
		She through the yard the nearest taks,
		And to the kiln goes then,
		And darklins graipit for the bauks,
		And in the blue-clue throws then,
		Right fear’t that night.
		
		And aye she win’t, and aye she swat,
		I wat she made nae jaukin’,
		Till something held within the pat,
		Guid Lord! but she was quakin’!
		But whether ‘was the deil himsel,
		Or whether ‘twas a bauk-en’,
		Or whether it was Andrew Bell,
		She didna wait on talkin’
		To spier that night.
		
		Wee Jennie to her grannie says,
		“Will ye go wi’ me, grannie?
		I’ll eat the apple at the glass
		I gat frae Uncle Johnnie:”
		She fuff’t her pipe wi’ sic a lunt,
		In wrath she was sae vap’rin’,
		She notice’t na, an aizle brunt
		Her braw new worset apron
		Out through that night.
		
		“Ye little skelpie-limmer’s face!
		I daur you try sic sportin’,
		As seek the foul thief ony place,
		For him to spae your fortune.
		Nae doubt but ye may get a sight!
		Great cause ye hae to fear it;
		For mony a ane has gotten a fright,
		And lived and died deleeret
		On sic a night.
		
		“Ae hairst afore the Sherramoor,--
		I mind’t as weel’s yestreen,
		I was a gilpey then, I’m sure
		I wasna past fifteen;
		The simmer had been cauld and wat,
		And stuff was unco green;
		And aye a rantin’ kirn we gat,
		And just on Halloween
		It fell that night.
		
		“Our stibble-rig was Rab M’Graen,
		A clever sturdy fallow:
		His son gat Eppie Sim wi’ wean,
		That lived in Achmacalla:
		He gat hemp-seed, I mind it weel,
		And he made unco light o’t;
		But mony a day was by himsel,
		He was sae sairly frighted
		That very night.”
		
		Then up gat fechtin’ Jamie Fleck,
		And he swore by his conscience,
		That he could saw hemp-seed a peck;
		For it was a’ but nonsense.
		The auld guidman raught down the pock,
		And out a hanfu’ gied him;
		Syne bade him slip frae ‘mang the folk,
		Some time when nae ane see’d him,
		And try’t that night.
		
		He marches through amang the stacks,
		Though he was something sturtin;
		The graip he for a harrow taks.
		And haurls it at his curpin;
		And every now and then he says,
		“Hemp-seed, I saw thee,
		And her that is to be my lass,
		Come after me, and draw thee
		As fast this night.”
		
		He whistled up Lord Lennox’ march
		To keep his courage cheery;
		Although his hair began to arch,
		He was say fley’d and eerie:
		Till presently he hears a squeak,
		And then a grane and gruntle;
		He by his shouther gae a keek,
		And tumbled wi’ a wintle
		Out-owre that night.
		
		He roar’d a horrid murder-shout,
		In dreadfu’ desperation!
		And young and auld came runnin’ out
		To hear the sad narration;
		He swore ‘twas hilchin Jean M’Craw,
		Or crouchie Merran Humphie,
		Till, stop! she trotted through them
		And wha was it but grumphie
		Asteer that night!
		
		Meg fain wad to the barn hae gaen,
		To win three wechts o’ naething;
		But for to meet the deil her lane,
		She pat but little faith in:
		She gies the herd a pickle nits,
		And two red-cheekit apples,
		To watch, while for the barn she sets,
		In hopes to see Tam Kipples
		That very nicht.
		
		She turns the key wi cannie thraw,
		And owre the threshold ventures;
		But first on Sawnie gies a ca’
		Syne bauldly in she enters:
		A ratton rattled up the wa’,
		And she cried, Lord, preserve her!
		And ran through midden-hole and a’,
		And pray’d wi’ zeal and fervour,
		Fu’ fast that night;
		
		They hoy’t out Will wi’ sair advice;
		They hecht him some fine braw ane;
		It chanced the stack he faddom’d thrice
		Was timmer-propt for thrawin’;
		He taks a swirlie, auld moss-oak,
		For some black grousome carlin;
		And loot a winze, and drew a stroke,
		Till skin in blypes cam haurlin’
		Aff’s nieves that night.
		
		A wanton widow Leezie was,
		As canty as a kittlin;
		But, och! that night amang the shaws,
		She got a fearfu’ settlin’!
		She through the whins, and by the cairn,
		And owre the hill gaed scrievin,
		Whare three lairds’ lands met at a burn
		To dip her left sark-sleeve in,
		Was bent that night.
		
		Whyles owre a linn the burnie plays,
		As through the glen it wimpl’t;
		Whyles round a rocky scaur it strays;
		Whyles in a wiel it dimpl’t;
		Whyles glitter’d to the nightly rays,
		Wi’ bickering, dancing dazzle;
		Whyles cookit underneath the braes,
		Below the spreading hazel,
		Unseen that night.
		
		Among the brackens, on the brae,
		Between her and the moon,
		The deil, or else an outler quey,
		Gat up and gae a croon:
		Poor Leezie’s heart maist lap the hool!
		Near lav’rock-height she jumpit;
		but mist a fit, and in the pool
		Out-owre the lugs she plumpit,
		Wi’ a plunge that night.
		
		In order, on the clean hearth-stane,
		The luggies three are ranged,
		And every time great care is ta’en’,
		To see them duly changed:
		Auld Uncle John, wha wedlock joys
		Sin’ Mar’s year did desire,
		Because he gat the toom dish thrice,
		He heaved them on the fire
		In wrath that night.
		
		Wi’ merry sangs, and friendly cracks,
		I wat they didna weary;
		And unco tales, and funny jokes,
		Their sports were cheap and cheery;
		Till butter’d so’ns, wi’ fragrant lunt,
		Set a’ their gabs a-steerin’;
		Syne, wi’ a social glass o’ strunt,
		They parted aff careerin’
		Fu’ blythe that night.


	8. HIGHLAND MARY

		Ye banks, and braes, and streams around 
		        The castle o’ Montgomery, 
		Green be your woods, and fair your flowers, 
		        Your waters never drumlie! 
		There Simmer first unfald her robes, 
		        And there the langest tarry: 
		For there I took the last Fareweel 
		        O’ my sweet Highland Mary. 
		
		How sweetly bloom’d the gay, green birk, 
		        How rich the hawthorn’s blossom; 
		As underneath their fragrant shade, 
		        I clasp’d her to my bosom! 
		The golden Hours, on angel wings, 
		        Flew o’er me and my Dearie; 
		For dear to me as light and life 
		        Was my sweet Highland Mary. 
		
		Wi’ mony a vow, and lock’d embrace, 
		        Our parting was fu’ tender; 
		And pledging aft to meet again, 
		        We tore oursels asunder: 
		But Oh! fell Death’s untimely frost, 
		        That nipt my Flower sae early! 
		Now green’s the sod, and cauld’s the clay, 
		        That wraps my Highland Mary! 
		
		O pale, pale now, those rosy lips, 
		        I aft hae kiss’d sae fondly! 
		And clos’d for ay the sparkling glance, 
		        That dwalt on me sae kindly! 
		And mouldering now in silent dust, 
		        That heart that lo’ed me dearly! 
		But still within my bosom’s core 
		        Shall live my Highland Mary.


	9. THE SILVER TASSIE

		I
		
		Go, fetch to me a pint o’ wine,
		 And fill it in a silver tassie,
		That I may drink before I go
		 A service to my bonie lassie!
		The boat rocks at the pier o’ Leith,
		 Fu’ loud the wind blaws frae the Ferry,
		The ship rides by the Berwick-Law,
		 And I maun leave my bonie Mary.
		
		
		II
		
		The trumpets sound, the banners fly,
		 The glittering spears are rankèd ready,
		The shouts o’ war are heard afar,
		The battle closes deep and bloody.
		It’s not the roar o’ sea or shore
		 Wad mak me langer wish to tarry,
		Nor shouts o’ war that’s heard afar:
		 It’s leaving thee, my bonie Mary!


*** Witter Bynner (1881 - 1968)

	1. A FARMER REMEMBERS LINCOLN

		‘LINCOLN?-- 
		Well, I was in the old Second Maine, 
		The first regiment in Washington from the Pine Tree State. 
		Of course I didn’t get the butt of the clip; 
		We was there for guardin’ Washington-- 
		We was all green. 
		
		‘I ain’t never ben to the theayter in my life-- 
		I didn’t know how to behave. 
		I ain’t never ben since. 
		I can see as plain as my hat the box where he sat in 
		When he was shot. 
		I can tell you, sir, there was a panic 
		When we found our President was in the shape he was in! 
		Never saw a soldier in the world but what liked him. 
		
		‘Yes, sir. His looks was kind o’ hard to forget. 
		He was a spare man, 
		An old farmer. 
		Everything was all right, you know, 
		But he wasn’t a smooth-appearin’ man at all-- 
		Not in no ways; 
		Thin-faced, long-necked, 
		And a swellin’ kind of a thick lip like. 
		
		‘And he was a jolly old fellow--always cheerful; 
		He wasn’t so high but the boys could talk to him their own ways. 
		While I was servin’ at the Hospital 
		He’d come in and say, ‘You look nice in here,’
		Praise us up, you know. 
		And he’d bend over and talk to the boys-- 
		And he’d talk so good to ‘em--so close-- 
		That’s why I call him a farmer. 
		I don’t mean that everything about him wasn’t all right, you understand, 
		It’s just--well, I was a farmer-- 
		And he was my neighbor, anybody’s neighbor. 
		I guess even you young folks would ‘a’ liked him.’


	2. GRIEVE NOT FOR BEAUTY

		Grieve not for the invisible, transported brow
		On which like leaves the dark hair grew,
		Nor for the lips of laughter that are now
		Laughing inaudibly in sun and dew,
		Nor for those limbs that, fallen low
		And seeming faint and slow,
		Shall yet pursue
		More ways of swiftness than the swallow dips
		Among . . . and find more winds than ever blew
		The straining sails of unimpeded ships!
		Mourn not!--yield only happy tears
		To deeper beauty than appears!


	3. SANTE FE

		Among the automobiles and in a region 
		Now Democratic, now Republican, 
		With a department-store, a branch of the Legion, 
		A Chamber of Commerce and a moving-van, 
		In spite of cities crowding on the Trail, 
		Here is a mountain-town that prays and dances 
		With something left, though much besides may fail, 
		Of the ancient faith and wisdom of St. Francis. 
		
		His annual feast has come. His image moves 
		Along these streets of people. And the trees 
		And kneeling women, just as they did before, 
		Welcome and worship him because he proves 
		That natural sinners put him at his ease, 
		And so he enters the cathedral-door.


	4. THE MYSTIC

		By seven vineyards on one hill 
		  We walked. The native wine 
		In clusters grew beside us two, 
		  For your lips and for mine, 
		
		When, “Hark!” you said,--“Was that a bell 
		  Or a bubbling spring we heard?“ 
		But I was wise and closed my eyes 
		  And listened to a bird; 
		
		For as summer leaves are bent and shake 
		  With singers passing through, 
		So moves in me continually 
		  The winged breath of you. 
		
		You tasted from a single vine 
		  And took from that your fill-- 
		But I inclined to every kind, 
		  All seven on one hill.


*** Lord Byron (1788 - 1824)

	1. AND THOU ART DEAD, AS YOUNG AND FAIR

		And thou art dead, as young and fair 
		As aught of mortal birth; 
		And form so soft, and charms so rare, 
		Too soon return’d to Earth! 
		Though Earth receiv’d them in her bed, 
		And o’er the spot the crowd may tread 
		In carelessness or mirth, 
		There is an eye which could not brook 
		A moment on that grave to look. 
		
		I will not ask where thou liest low, 
		Nor gaze upon the spot; 
		There flowers or weeds at will may grow, 
		So I behold them not: 
		It is enough for me to prove 
		That what I lov’d, and long must love, 
		Like common earth can rot; 
		To me there needs no stone to tell, 
		‘T is Nothing that I lov’d so well. 
		
		Yet did I love thee to the last 
		As fervently as thou, 
		Who didst not change through all the past, 
		And canst not alter now. 
		The love where Death has set his seal, 
		Nor age can chill, nor rival steal, 
		Nor falsehood disavow: 
		And, what were worse, thou canst not see 
		Or wrong, or change, or fault in me. 
		
		The better days of life were ours; 
		The worst can be but mine: 
		The sun that cheers, the storm that lowers, 
		Shall never more be thine. 
		The silence of that dreamless sleep 
		I envy now too much to weep; 
		Nor need I to repine 
		That all those charms have pass’d away, 
		I might have watch’d through long decay. 
		
		The flower in ripen’d bloom unmatch’d 
		Must fall the earliest prey; 
		Though by no hand untimely snatch’d, 
		The leaves must drop away: 
		And yet it were a greater grief 
		To watch it withering, leaf by leaf, 
		Than see it pluck’d to-day; 
		Since earthly eye but ill can bear 
		To trace the change to foul from fair. 
		
		I know not if I could have borne 
		To see thy beauties fade; 
		The night that follow’d such a morn 
		Had worn a deeper shade: 
		Thy day without a cloud hath pass’d, 
		And thou wert lovely to the last, 
		Extinguish’d, not decay’d; 
		As stars that shoot along the sky 
		Shine brightest as they fall from high. 
		
		As once I wept, if I could weep, 
		My tears might well be shed, 
		To think I was not near to keep 
		One vigil o’er thy bed; 
		To gaze, how fondly! on thy face, 
		To fold thee in a faint embrace, 
		Uphold thy drooping head; 
		And show that love, however vain, 
		Nor thou nor I can feel again. 
		
		Yet how much less it were to gain, 
		Though thou hast left me free, 
		The loveliest things that still remain, 
		Than thus remember thee! 
		The all of thine that cannot die 
		Through dark and dread Eternity 
		Returns again to me, 
		And more thy buried love endears 
		Than aught except its living years. 


	2. DARKNESS

		I had a dream, which was not all a dream. 
		The bright sun was extinguish’d, and the stars 
		Did wander darkling in the eternal space, 
		Rayless, and pathless, and the icy earth 
		Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air; 
		Morn came and went--and came, and brought no day, 
		And men forgot their passions in the dread 
		Of this their desolation; and all hearts 
		Were chill’d into a selfish prayer for light: 
		And they did live by watchfires--and the thrones, 
		The palaces of crowned kings--the huts, 
		The habitations of all things which dwell, 
		Were burnt for beacons; cities were consum’d, 
		And men were gather’d round their blazing homes 
		To look once more into each other’s face; 
		Happy were those who dwelt within the eye 
		Of the volcanos, and their mountain-torch: 
		A fearful hope was all the world contain’d; 
		Forests were set on fire--but hour by hour 
		They fell and faded--and the crackling trunks 
		Extinguish’d with a crash--and all was black. 
		The brows of men by the despairing light 
		Wore an unearthly aspect, as by fits 
		The flashes fell upon them; some lay down 
		And hid their eyes and wept; and some did rest 
		Their chins upon their clenched hands, and smil’d; 
		And others hurried to and fro, and fed 
		Their funeral piles with fuel, and look’d up 
		With mad disquietude on the dull sky, 
		The pall of a past world; and then again 
		With curses cast them down upon the dust, 
		And gnash’d their teeth and howl’d: the wild birds shriek’d 
		And, terrified, did flutter on the ground, 
		And flap their useless wings; the wildest brutes 
		Came tame and tremulous; and vipers crawl’d 
		And twin’d themselves among the multitude, 
		Hissing, but stingless--they were slain for food. 
		And War, which for a moment was no more, 
		Did glut himself again: a meal was bought 
		With blood, and each sate sullenly apart 
		Gorging himself in gloom: no love was left; 
		All earth was but one thought--and that was death 
		Immediate and inglorious; and the pang 
		Of famine fed upon all entrails--men 
		Died, and their bones were tombless as their flesh; 
		The meagre by the meagre were devour’d, 
		Even dogs assail’d their masters, all save one, 
		And he was faithful to a corse, and kept 
		The birds and beasts and famish’d men at bay, 
		Till hunger clung them, or the dropping dead 
		Lur’d their lank jaws; himself sought out no food, 
		But with a piteous and perpetual moan, 
		And a quick desolate cry, licking the hand 
		Which answer’d not with a caress--he died. 
		The crowd was famish’d by degrees; but two 
		Of an enormous city did survive, 
		And they were enemies: they met beside 
		The dying embers of an altar-place 
		Where had been heap’d a mass of holy things 
		For an unholy usage; they rak’d up, 
		And shivering scrap’d with their cold skeleton hands 
		The feeble ashes, and their feeble breath 
		Blew for a little life, and made a flame 
		Which was a mockery; then they lifted up 
		Their eyes as it grew lighter, and beheld 
		Each other’s aspects--saw, and shriek’d, and died-- 
		Even of their mutual hideousness they died, 
		Unknowing who he was upon whose brow 
		Famine had written Fiend. The world was void, 
		The populous and the powerful was a lump, 
		Seasonless, herbless, treeless, manless, lifeless-- 
		A lump of death--a chaos of hard clay. 
		The rivers, lakes and ocean all stood still, 
		And nothing stirr’d within their silent depths; 
		Ships sailorless lay rotting on the sea, 
		And their masts fell down piecemeal: as they dropp’d 
		They slept on the abyss without a surge-- 
		The waves were dead; the tides were in their grave, 
		The moon, their mistress, had expir’d before; 
		The winds were wither’d in the stagnant air, 
		And the clouds perish’d; Darkness had no need 
		Of aid from them--She was the Universe. 


	3. SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY

		She walks in beauty, like the night 
		Of cloudless climes and starry skies; 
		And all that’s best of dark and bright 
		Meet in her aspect and her eyes; 
		Thus mellowed to that tender light 
		Which heaven to gaudy day denies. 
		
		One shade the more, one ray the less, 
		Had half impaired the nameless grace 
		Which waves in every raven tress, 
		Or softly lightens o’er her face; 
		Where thoughts serenely sweet express, 
		How pure, how dear their dwelling-place. 
		
		And on that cheek, and o’er that brow, 
		So soft, so calm, yet eloquent, 
		The smiles that win, the tints that glow, 
		But tell of days in goodness spent, 
		A mind at peace with all below, 
		A heart whose love is innocent!


	4. SNATCHED AWAY IN BEAUTY’S BLOOM

		I
		
		 Oh! snatched away in beauty’s bloom,
		 On thee shall press no ponderous tomb;
		   But on thy turf shall roses rear
		   Their leaves, the earliest of the year;
		And the wild cypress wave in tender gloom:
		
		
		II
		
		 And oft by yon blue gushing stream
		   Shall Sorrow lean her drooping head,
		 And feed deep thought with many a dream,
		   And lingering pause and lightly tread;
		Fond wretch! as if her step disturbed the dead!
		
		
		III
		
		 Away! we know that tears are vain,
		   That Death nor heeds nor hears distress:
		   Will this unteach us to complain?
		     Or make one mourner weep the less?
		   And thou--who tell’st me to forget,
		   Thy looks are wan, thine eyes are wet.


*** Scott Cairns (1954 - )

	1. A PRIOR DESPAIR

		When I saw that I had lost her completely, I sought the dulcet
		taste of her on the lips of each subsequent woman, her fragrant
		flesh in the fold of every lover’s nape thereafter, and her heat
		welling with my own and drawing out an urgency in each
		ambiguous woman met in that tortured interim.
		
		When I saw that I had lost her I was lost, and held
		my eyes shut tight that I might so delude my wits as to trust
		that it was she receiving me, that it was she returning
		with delight the urgent drive against the unbearable
		distance--two bodies, struggling toward agreeable repose.
		
		Then, tasting once a sudden kiss so suddenly presented,
		I saw another prospect rise to view, and knew reprieve
		from the familiar ring of hell, from which I rose and marveled
		at the offer of another life whose heat and heady fragrance
		rose, delirious to burn deliciously, and not consume.


	2. EARLY FROST

		This morning the world’s white face reminds us
		that life intends to become serious again.
		And the same loud birds that all summer long
		annoyed us with their high attitudes and chatter
		silently line the gibbet of the fence a little stunned,
		chastened enough.
		
		They look as if they’re waiting for things
		to grow worse, but are watching the house,
		as if somewhere in their dim memories
		they recall something about this abandoned garden
		that could save them.
		
		The neighbor’s dog has also learned to wake
		without exaggeration. And the neighbor himself
		has made it to his car with less noise, starting
		the small engine with a kind of reverence. At the window
		his wife witnesses this bleak tableau, blinking
		her eyes, silent.
		
		I fill the feeders to the top and cart them
		to the tree, hurrying back inside
		to leave the morning to these ridiculous
		birds, who, reminded, find the rough shelters,
		bow, and then feed.


	3. LATE RESULTS

		And the few willing to listen demanded that we confess on television.
		So we kept our sins to ourselves, and they became less troubling.
		
		The halt and the lame arranged to have their hips replaced.
		Lepers coated their sores with a neutral foundation, avoided strong light.
		
		The hungry ate at grand buffets and grew huge, though they remained hungry.
		Prisoners became indistinguishable from the few who visited them.
		
		Widows remarried and became strangers to their kin.
		The orphans finally grew up and learned to fend for themselves.
		
		Even the prophets suspected they were mad, and kept their mouths shut.
		Only the poor--who are with us always--only they continued in the hope.


*** Luís de Camões (1525 - 1580)

	1. AN ADIEU TO TAGUS

		Waters of gentle Tagus, calmly flowing 
		Through these green fields ye freshen as ye flow, 
		On flocks and herds, plants, flowers, all things that grow, 
		On shepherds and on nymphs delight bestowing; 
		I know not, ah! sweet streams, despair of knowing 
		When I shall come again; for as I go, 
		And ponder why, ye fill me with such woe, 
		That in my heart a deep distrust is growing. 
		The Fates have e’en decreed this sad adieu, 
		Aiming to change my joys into despair, 
		This sad adieu that weighs upon my years: 
		Of them complaining, yearning after you, 
		With sighs I shall invade some distant air, 
		And trouble other waters with my tears.


	2. BEHOLDING HER

		When I behold you, Lady! when my eyes
		Dwell on the deep enjoyment of your sight,
		I give my spirit to that one delight,
		And earth appears to me a Paradise.
		And when I hear you speak, and see you smile,
		Full satisfied, absorb’d, my centr’d mind
		Deems all the world’s vain hopes and joys the while
		As empty as the unsubstantial wind.
		Lady! I feel your charms, yet dare not raise
		To that high theme the unequal song of praise,--
		A power for that to language was not given;
		Nor marvel I, when I those beauties view,
		Lady! that He, whose power created you,
		Could form the stars and yonder glorious heaven.


	3. HIS INSUFFICIENCY OF PRAISE

		So sweet the lyre, so musical the strain,
		By which my suit, Belovëd! is expressed,
		That, hearing them, no such indifferent breast
		But welcomes Love and his delicious pain,
		And opes to his innumerable train
		Of sweet persuasions, lovely mysteries,
		Brief angers, gentle reconcilements, sighs
		And ardour unabash’d by proud disdain.
		Yet, when I strive to sing what beauty dwells
		Upon thy brow, so oft in scorn array’d,
		My song upon the unworthy lips expires.
		It must be loftier verse than mine that tells
		Of loveliness like thine. My Muse, dismay’d,
		Folds her weak wing and silently retires.


	4. LOVE

		Love is a fire that burns unseen, 
		a wound that aches yet isn’t felt, 
		an always discontent contentment, 
		a pain that rages without hurting, 
		
		a longing for nothing but to long, 
		a loneliness in the midst of people, 
		a never feeling pleased when pleased, 
		a passion that gains when lost in thought. 
		
		It’s being enslaved of your own free will; 
		it’s counting your defeat a victory; 
		it’s staying loyal to your killer. 
		
		But if it’s so self-contradictory, 
		how can Love, when Love chooses, 
		bring human hearts into sympathy? 


*** Roy Campbell (1901 - 1957)

	1. HORSES ON THE CAMARGUE

		In the grey wastes of dread, 
		The haunt of shattered gulls where nothing moves 
		But in a shroud of silence like the dead, 
		I heard a sudden harmony of hooves, 
		And, turning, saw afar 
		A hundred snowy horses unconfined, 
		The silver runaways of Neptune’s car 
		Racing, spray-curled, like waves before the wind. 
		Sons of the Mistral, fleet 
		As him with whose strong gusts they love to flee, 
		Who shod the flying thunders on their feet 
		And plumed them with the snortings of the sea; 
		Theirs is no earthly breed 
		Who only haunts the verges of the earth 
		And only on the sea’s salt herbage feed--
		Surely the great white breakers gave them birth. 
		For when for years a slave, 
		A horse of the Camargue, in alien lands, 
		Should catch some far-off fragrance of the wave 
		Carried far inland from this native sands, 
		Many have told the tale 
		Of how in fury, foaming at the rein, 
		He hurls his rider; and with lifted tail, 
		With coal-red eyes and catarcating mane, 
		Heading his course for home, 
		Though sixty foreign leagues before him sweep, 
		Will never rest until he breathes the foam 
		And hears the native thunder of the deep. 
		And when the great gusts rise 
		And lash their anger on these arid coasts, 
		When the scared gulls career with mournful cries 
		And whirl across the waste like driven ghosts; 
		When hail and fire converge, 
		The only souls to which they strike no pain 
		Are the white crested fillies of the surge 
		And the white horses of the windy plain. 
		Then in their strength and pride 
		The stallions of the wilderness rejoice; 
		They feel their Master’s trident in their side, 
		And high and shrill they answer to his voice. 
		With white tails smoking free, 
		Long streaming manes, and arching necks, they show 
		Their kinship to their sisters of the sea--
		And forward hurl their thunderbolts of snow. 
		Still out of hardship bred, 
		Spirits of power and beauty and delight 
		Have ever on such frugal pasture fed 
		And loved to course with tempests through the night.


	2. MASS AT DAWN

		I dropped my sail and dried my dripping seines 
		Where the white quay is chequered by cool planes 
		In whose great branches, always out of sight, 
		The nightingales are singing day and night. 
		Though all was grey beneath the moon’s grey beam, 
		My boat in her new paint shone like a bride, 
		And silver in my baskets shone the bream: 
		My arms were tired and I was heavy-eyed, 
		But when with food and drink, at morning-light, 
		The children met me at the water-side, 
		Never was wine so red or bread so white. 


	3. THE FLAMING TERRAPIN

		How often have I lost this fervent mood, 
		And gone down dingy thoroughfares to brood 
		On evils like my own from day to day: 
		‘Life is a dusty corridor,’ I say, 
		‘Shut at both ends.’ But far across the plain, 
		Old Ocean growls and tosses his grey mane, 
		Pawing the rocks in all his old unrest 
		Or lifting lazily on some white crest 
		His pale foam-feathers for the moon to burn--
		Then to my veins I feel new sap return, 
		Strength tightens up my sinews long grown dull, 
		And in the old charred crater of the skull 
		Light strikes the slow somnambulistic mind 
		And sweeps her forth to ride the rushing wind, 
		And stamping on the hill-tops high in air, 
		To shake the golden bonfire of her hair. 
		This sudden strength that catches up men’s souls 
		And rears them up like giants in the sky, 
		Giving them fins where the dark ocean rolls, 
		And wings of eagles when the whirlwinds fly, 
		Stand visible to me in its true self 
		(No spiritual essence or wing’d elf 
		Like Ariel on the empty winds to spin). 
		I see him as a mighty Terrapin, 
		Rafting whole islands on his stormy back, 
		Built of strong metals molten from the black 
		Roots of the inmost earth . . . 
		
		The Ark is launched; cupped by the streaming breeze, 
		The stiff sails tug the long reluctant keel, 
		And Noah, spattered by the rising seas, 
		Stands with his great fist fastened to the wheel. 
		Like driven clouds, the waves went rustling by, 
		Feathered and fanned across their liquid sky, 
		And, like those waves, the clouds in silver bars 
		Creamed on the scattered shingle of the stars. 
		All night he watched black water coil and burn, 
		And the white wake of phosphorus astern 
		Lit up the sails and made the lanterns dim, 
		Until it seemed the whole sea burned for him . . . 
		The Flaming Terrapin, his labours done, 
		Humped like a cloud o’er mountain, crag and field 
		Rose on the skyline. The far-shooting sun 
		Splintered its arrows on his fiery shield, 
		From whose bright dome in sudden ricochets 
		Recoiling flashed the long reflected rays: 
		While, rolling his red eyes, a double moon 
		That lit the hillsides with a second noon, 
		He sank to rest. His golden ridges, tiered 
		Above the foam, now slowly disappeared: 
		And as clouds roll immense and globed and still 
		To burst in thunder round a lonely hill, 
		The slow foam gathered round him: o’er his wild 
		Mountainous outline, ponderously piled, 
		It hung one moment, poised in grim suspense, 
		And then swamped crashing down, and from its dense 
		Vortex of thunder, with a gradual sweep 
		Rolled forth in groaning circles on the deep . . . 
		
		Though the dark sky has gathered stormy numbers 
		Of vultures to be snowed upon my corpse; 
		Though the weak arc of Heaven warps 
		Beneath the darkness that encumbers 
		The night beyond; though we believe the end 
		Is but the end, and that the torn flesh crumbles 
		And the fierce soul, rent from its temple, tumbles 
		Into the gloom where empty winds contend, 
		In gnat-like vortex droning--what is this 
		That makes us stamp upon the mountain-tops, 
		So fearless at the brink of the abyss, 
		Where into space the sharp rock-rampart drops 
		And bleak winds hiss? 
		It is the silent chanting of the soul: 
		‘Though times shall change and stormy ages roll, 
		I am that ancient hunter of the plains 
		That raked the shaggy flitches of the Bison: 
		Pass world: I am the dreamer that remains, 
		The Man, clear-cut against the last horizon!’


*** Ernesto Cardenal (1925 - 2020)

	1. DRAKE IN THE SOUTHERN SEA

		I set out from the Port of Acapulco on the twenty-third of March
		And kept a steady course until Saturday, the fourth of April, when
		A half hour before dawn, we saw by the light of the moon
		That a ship had come alongside
		With sails and a bow that seemed to be of silver.
		Our helmsman cried out to them to stand off
		But no one answered, as though they were all asleep.
		Again we called out: “WHERE DID THEIR SHIP COME FROM?”
		And they said: Peru!
		After which we heard trumpets, and muskets firing,
		And they ordered me to come down into their longboat
		To cross over to where their Captain was.
		I found him walking the deck,
		Went up to him, kissed his hands and he asked me:
		“What silver or gold I had aboard that ship?”
		I said, “None at all,
		None at all, My Lord, only my dishes and cups.”
		So then he asked me if I knew the Viceroy.
		I said I did. And I asked the Captain,
		“If he were Captain Drake himself and no other?”
		The Captain replied that
		“He was the very Drake I spoke of.”
		We spoke together a long time, until the hour of dinner,
		And he commanded that I sit by his side.
		His dishes and cups are of silver, bordered with gold
		With his crest upon them.
		He has with him many perfumes and scented waters in crystal vials
		Which, he said, the Queen had given him.
		He dines and sups always with music of violins
		And also takes with him everywhere painters who keep painting
		All the coast for him.
		He is a man of some twenty-four years, small, with a reddish beard.
		He is a nephew of Juan Aquinas, the pirate.
		And is one of the greatest mariners there are upon the sea.
		The day after, which was Sunday, he clothed himself in splendid garments
		And had them hoist all their flags
		With pennants of divers colors at the mastheads,
		The bronze rings, and chains, and the railings and
		The lights on the Alcazar shining like gold.
		His ship was like a gold dragon among the dolphins.
		And we went, with his page, to my ship to look at the coffers.
		All day long until night he spent looking at what I had.
		What he took from me was not much,
		A few trifles of my own,
		And he gave me a cutlass and a silver brassart for them,
		Asking me to forgive him
		Since it was for his lady that he was taking them:
		He would let me go, he said, the next morning, as soon as there was a breeze;
		For this I thanked him, and kissed his hands.
		He is carrying, in his galleon, three thousand bars of silver
		Three coffers full of gold
		Twelve great coffers of pieces of eight:
		And he says he is heading for China
		Following the charts and steered by a Chinese pilot whom he captured . . .


	2. LIKE EMPTY BEER CANS

		My days have been like empty beer cans
		and stubbed-out cigarette ends.
		My life has passed me by like the figures who appear
		and disappear on a television screen.
		Like cars passing by at speed along the roads
		with girls laughing and music from the radio . . .
		And beauty was as transient as the models of those cars
		and the fleeting hits that blasted from the radios
		and were forgotten.
		
		And nothing is left of those days,
		nothing, besides the empty cans and stubbed-out dog-ends,
		smiles on washed-out photos, torn coupons,
		and the sawdust with which, at dawn,
		they swept out the bars.


*** Giosuè Carducci (1835 - 1907)

	1. AT THE STATION

		O the lamps--how they chase
		each other lazily there behind the trees,
		yawning their light through dripping
		branches onto the mud.
		
		Faint, fine, shrill, a nearby
		steam engine hisses. A lead sky
		and the autumn morning
		enwrap us like a great chimera.
		
		Where and to what are they going, these people,
		cloaked and silent, hurrying to dark cars--
		to what unforeseeable sorrows
		or pangs of remote hope?
		
		Even you, rapt Lydia, give
		to the conductor your torn ticket,
		and to pressing time your beautiful years,
		your memories and moments of joy.
		
		Along the black train come
		the trainmen hooded in black
		like shadows, with dim lanterns
		and iron sledges, and the iron
		
		brakes when plied make a long
		enervated clang: from the soul’s depths,
		an echo of languor makes its sad
		reply, like a shudder.
		
		And the doors slammed shut
		seem like outrages: a quick jibe
		sounds the final farewell:
		thundering on heavy panes, the rain.
		
		Already the monster, owning its metallic
		soul, fumes, slouches, pants, opens
		wide its fiery eyes; defies the heavens,
		whistling through the gloom.
		
		The unholy monster goes; with a horrible tug,
		beating its wings, it carries away my love.
		Ah, the alabaster face and fine veil,
		hailing me, disappear in darkness.
		
		O sweet face of pale rose,
		o starlit placid eyes, o snow-white
		forehead ringed with luxuriant curls
		gently bending in a nod of love.
		
		The warm air was throbbing with life;
		the summer throbbed when she looked on me,
		and the youthful June sun
		liked to shower her cheek
		
		with kisses of light, reflected through
		auburn hair: like a halo
		more brilliant than the sun, my dreams
		encircle her soft shape . . .
		
		Beneath the rain, I return through
		the haze; and I would lose myself in it.
		I stagger like a drunk. I touch myself
		to see if I also have become a ghost.
		
		O how the leaves are falling--cold,
		incessant, mute, heavy--on my soul.
		I know that everywhere in the world,
		solitary and eternal, it is November.
		
		Better he who’s lost the sense of life,
		better this shadow, this haze:
		I want O how I want to lie myself down
		in doldrums that will last forever.


	2. DEATH

		When the precise diva drops down on our houses,
		the far off roar of her flying is heard,
		
		and the shadow of her icy wing, icily advancing,
		spreads wide a melancholy silence.
		
		When she comes, men bow their heads,
		but the women fall to pining.
		
		Thus the treetops, when July winds gather,
		do not sway on the green hills:
		
		the trees stand almost utterly still,
		and only the hoarse moan of the creek is heard.
		
		She enters, passes, touches, and without even turning levels
		the saplings, delighted by their young branches;
		
		she shears the golden wheat, and strips even hanging grapes,
		scoops up the good wives and innocent girls
		
		and tiny children: pink between black wings they reach their arms
		to the sun, to their games, and smile.
		
		O sad homes, where before their fathers’ faces,
		silent, livid diva, you put out young lives.
		
		Therein, rooms no longer sound with laughter and merrymaking
		or with whispers, like birds’ nests in May:
		
		therein, no more the sound of joyful rearing,
		nor love’s woes, nor wedding dances:
		
		they grow old therein, the shadowed survivors; to the roar
		of your return their ears incline, O goddess.


	3. KINGFISHER

		Not under a steel nib that scratches in nasty furrows
		its dull thoughts onto dry white paper;
		
		but under the ripe sun, as breezes gust
		through wide-open clearings beside a swift stream,
		
		the heart’s sighs, dwindling into infinity, are born,
		the sweet, wistful flower of melody is born.
		
		Here redolent May shines in rose-scented air,
		brilliant the hollow eyes, hearts asleep in their chests;
		
		the heart sleeps, but ears are easily roused
		by the chromatic cries of La Gioconda.
		
		O Muses’ altar of green, white-capped
		above the sea. Alcman leads the chaste choir:
		
		“I want to fly with you, maidens, fly into a dance,
		as the kingfisher flies drawn by halcyons:
		
		he flies with halcyons over spindrift waves in a gale,
		kingfisher, purple herald of spring.”


*** Lewis Carroll (1832 - 1898)

	1. A BOAT BENEATH A SUNNY SKY

		A boat beneath a sunny sky,
		Lingering onward dreamily
		In an evening of July--
		
		Children three that nestle near,
		Eager eye and willing ear,
		Pleased a simple tale to hear--
		
		Long has paled that sunny sky:
		Echoes fade and memories die:
		Autumn frosts have slain July.
		
		Still she haunts me, phantomwise,
		Alice moving under skies
		Never seen by waking eyes.
		
		Children yet, the tale to hear,
		Eager eye and willing ear,
		Lovingly shall nestle near.
		
		In a Wonderland they lie,
		Dreaming as the days go by,
		Dreaming as the summers die:
		
		Ever drifting down the stream--
		Lingering in the golden gleam--
		Life, what is it but a dream?


	2. A SEA DIRGE

		THERE are certain things--as, a spider, a ghost,
		  The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three--
		That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most
		  Is a thing they call the Sea.
		
		Pour some salt water over the floor--
		  Ugly I’m sure you’ll allow it to be:
		Suppose it extended a mile or more,
		  _That’s_ very like the Sea.
		
		Beat a dog till it howls outright--
		  Cruel, but all very well for a spree:
		Suppose that he did so day and night,
		  _That_ would be like the Sea.
		
		I had a vision of nursery-maids;
		  Tens of thousands passed by me--
		All leading children with wooden spades,
		  And this was by the Sea.
		
		Who invented those spades of wood?
		  Who was it cut them out of the tree?
		None, I think, but an idiot could--
		  Or one that loved the Sea.
		
		It is pleasant and dreamy, no doubt, to float
		  With ‘thoughts as boundless, and souls as free’:
		But, suppose you are very unwell in the boat,
		  How do you like the Sea?
		
		There is an insect that people avoid
		  (Whence is derived the verb ‘to flee’).
		Where have you been by it most annoyed?
		  In lodgings by the Sea.
		
		If you like your coffee with sand for dregs,
		  A decided hint of salt in your tea,
		And a fishy taste in the very eggs--
		  By all means choose the Sea.
		
		And if, with these dainties to drink and eat,
		  You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree,
		And a chronic state of wet in your feet,
		  Then—I recommend the Sea.
		
		For _I_ have friends who dwell by the coast--
		  Pleasant friends they are to me!
		It is when I am with them I wonder most
		  That anyone likes the Sea.
		
		They take me a walk: though tired and stiff,
		  To climb the heights I madly agree;
		And, after a tumble or so from the cliff,
		  They kindly suggest the Sea.
		
		I try the rocks, and I think it cool
		  That they laugh with such an excess of glee,
		As I heavily slip into every pool
		  That skirts the cold cold Sea.


	3. A VALENTINE

		_Sent to a friend who had complained that I was glad enough to see him
		when he came, but didn’t seem to miss him if he stayed away._
		
		  And cannot pleasures, while they last,
		  Be actual unless, when past,
		  They leave us shuddering and aghast,
		        With anguish smarting?
		  And cannot friends be firm and fast,
		        And yet bear parting?
		
		  And must I then, at Friendship’s call,
		  Calmly resign the little all
		  (Trifling, I grant, it is and small)
		        I have of gladness,
		  And lend my being to the thrall
		        Of gloom and sadness?
		
		  And think you that I should be dumb,
		  And full _dolorum omnium_,
		  Excepting when _you_ choose to come
		        And share my dinner?
		  At other times be sour and glum
		        And daily thinner?
		
		  Must he then only live to weep,
		  Who’d prove his friendship true and deep
		  By day a lonely shadow creep,
		        At night-time languish,
		  Oft raising in his broken sleep
		        The moan of anguish?
		
		  The lover, if for certain days
		  His fair one be denied his gaze,
		  Sinks not in grief and wild amaze,
		        But, wiser wooer,
		  He spends the time in writing lays,
		        And posts them to her.
		
		  And if the verse flow free and fast,
		  Till even the poet is aghast,
		  A touching Valentine at last
		        The post shall carry,
		  When thirteen days are gone and past
		        Of February.
		
		  Farewell, dear friend, and when we meet,
		  In desert waste or crowded street,
		  Perhaps before this week shall fleet,
		        Perhaps to-morrow.
		  I trust to find _your_ heart the seat
		        Of wasting sorrow.


	4. ATALANTA IN CAMDEN-TOWN

		        Ay, ’twas here, on this spot,
		           In that summer of yore,
		        Atalanta did not
		           Vote my presence a bore,
		Nor reply to my tenderest talk “She had
		     heard all that nonsense before.”
		
		        She’d the brooch I had bought
		           And the necklace and sash on,
		        And her heart, as I thought,
		           Was alive to my passion;
		And she’d done up her hair in the style that
		     the Empress had brought into fashion.
		
		        I had been to the play
		           With my pearl of a Peri--
		        But, for all I could say,
		           She declared she was weary,
		That “the place was so crowded and hot, and
		     she couldn’t abide that Dundreary.”
		
		        Then I thought “Lucky boy!
		           ’Tis for _you_ that she whimpers!”
		        And I noted with joy
		           Those sensational simpers:
		And I said “This is scrumptious!”—a
		     phrase I had learned from the Devonshire shrimpers.
		
		        And I vowed “’Twill be said
		           I’m a fortunate fellow,
		        When the breakfast is spread,
		           When the topers are mellow,
		When the foam of the bride-cake is white,
		     and the fierce orange-blossoms are yellow!”
		
		        O that languishing yawn!
		           O those eloquent eyes!
		        I was drunk with the dawn
		           Of a splendid surmise—
		I was stung by a look, I was slain by a tear,
		     by a tempest of sighs.
		
		        Then I whispered “I see
		           The sweet secret thou keepest.
		        And the yearning for _ME_
		           That thou wistfully weepest!
		And the question is ‘License or Banns?’,
		     though undoubtedly Banns are the cheapest.”
		
		        “Be my Hero,” said I,
		           “And let _me_ be Leander!”
		        But I lost her reply--
		           Something ending with “gander”--
		For the omnibus rattled so loud that no
		     mortal could quite understand her.


	5. FAME’S PENNY-TRUMPET

		_Affectionately dedicated to all “original researchers” who pant for
		“endowment.”_
		
		  BLOW, blow your trumpets till they crack,
		     Ye little men of little souls!
		  And bid them huddle at your back--
		     Gold-sucking leeches, shoals on shoals!
		
		  Fill all the air with hungry wails--
		     “Reward us, ere we think or write!
		  Without your Gold mere Knowledge fails
		     To sate the swinish appetite!”
		
		  And, where great Plato paced serene,
		     Or Newton paused with wistful eye,
		  Rush to the chace with hoofs unclean
		     And Babel-clamour of the sty
		
		  Be yours the pay: be theirs the praise:
		     We will not rob them of their due,
		  Nor vex the ghosts of other days
		     By naming them along with you.
		
		  They sought and found undying fame:
		     They toiled not for reward nor thanks:
		  Their cheeks are hot with honest shame
		     For you, the modern mountebanks!
		
		  Who preach of Justice—plead with tears
		     That Love and Mercy should abound--
		  While marking with complacent ears
		     The moaning of some tortured hound:
		
		  Who prate of Wisdom—nay, forbear,
		     Lest Wisdom turn on you in wrath,
		  Trampling, with heel that will not spare,
		     The vermin that beset her path!
		
		  Go, throng each other’s drawing-rooms,
		     Ye idols of a petty clique:
		  Strut your brief hour in borrowed plumes,
		     And make your penny-trumpets squeak.
		
		  Deck your dull talk with pilfered shreds
		     Of learning from a nobler time,
		  And oil each other’s little heads
		     With mutual Flattery’s golden slime:
		
		  And when the topmost height ye gain,
		     And stand in Glory’s ether clear,
		  And grasp the prize of all your pain--
		     So many hundred pounds a year--
		
		  Then let Fame’s banner be unfurled!
		     Sing Pæans for a victory won!
		  Ye tapers, that would light the world,
		     And cast a shadow on the Sun--
		
		  Who still shall pour His rays sublime,
		     One crystal flood, from East to West,
		  When _ye_ have burned your little time
		     And feebly flickered into rest!


	6. JABBERWOCKY

		’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves 
		     Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: 
		All mimsy were the borogoves, 
		     And the mome raths outgrabe. 
		
		“Beware the Jabberwock, my son! 
		     The jaws that bite, the claws that catch! 
		Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun 
		     The frumious Bandersnatch!” 
		
		He took his vorpal sword in hand; 
		     Long time the manxome foe he sought— 
		So rested he by the Tumtum tree 
		     And stood awhile in thought. 
		
		And, as in uffish thought he stood, 
		     The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame, 
		Came whiffling through the tulgey wood, 
		     And burbled as it came! 
		
		One, two! One, two! And through and through 
		     The vorpal blade went snicker-snack! 
		He left it dead, and with its head 
		     He went galumphing back. 
		
		“And hast thou slain the Jabberwock? 
		     Come to my arms, my beamish boy! 
		O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!” 
		     He chortled in his joy. 
		
		’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves 
		     Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: 
		All mimsy were the borogoves, 
		     And the mome raths outgrabe.


	7. MELANCHOLETTA

		WITH saddest music all day long
		  She soothed her secret sorrow:
		At night she sighed “I fear ’twas wrong
		  Such cheerful words to borrow.
		Dearest, a sweeter, sadder song
		  I’ll sing to thee to-morrow.”
		
		I thanked her, but I could not say
		  That I was glad to hear it:
		I left the house at break of day,
		  And did not venture near it
		Till time, I hoped, had worn away
		  Her grief, for nought could cheer it!
		
		My dismal sister! Couldst thou know
		  The wretched home thou keepest!
		Thy brother, drowned in daily woe,
		  Is thankful when thou sleepest;
		For if I laugh, however low,
		  When thou’rt awake, thou weepest!
		
		I took my sister t’other day
		  (Excuse the slang expression)
		To Sadler’s Wells to see the play
		  In hopes the new impression
		Might in her thoughts, from grave to gay
		  Effect some slight digression.
		
		I asked three gay young dogs from town
		  To join us in our folly,
		Whose mirth, I thought, might serve to drown
		  My sister’s melancholy:
		The lively Jones, the sportive Brown,
		  And Robinson the jolly.
		
		The maid announced the meal in tones
		  That I myself had taught her,
		Meant to allay my sister’s moans
		  Like oil on troubled water:
		I rushed to Jones, the lively Jones,
		  And begged him to escort her.
		
		Vainly he strove, with ready wit,
		  To joke about the weather—
		To ventilate the last ‘_on dit_’--
		  To quote the price of leather--
		She groaned “Here I and Sorrow sit:
		  Let us lament together!”
		
		I urged “You’re wasting time, you know:
		  Delay will spoil the venison.”
		“My heart is wasted with my woe!
		  There is no rest—in Venice, on
		The Bridge of Sighs!” she quoted low
		  From Byron and from Tennyson.
		
		I need not tell of soup and fish
		  In solemn silence swallowed,
		The sobs that ushered in each dish,
		  And its departure followed,
		Nor yet my suicidal wish
		  To _be_ the cheese I hollowed.
		
		Some desperate attempts were made
		  To start a conversation;
		“Madam,” the sportive Brown essayed,
		  “Which kind of recreation,
		Hunting or fishing, have you made
		  Your special occupation?”
		
		Her lips curved downwards instantly,
		  As if of india-rubber.
		“Hounds _in full cry_ I like,” said she:
		  (Oh how I longed to snub her!)
		“Of fish, a whale’s the one for me,
		  _It is so full of blubber_!”
		
		The night’s performance was “King John.”
		  “It’s dull,” she wept, “and so-so!”
		Awhile I let her tears flow on,
		  She said they soothed her woe so!
		At length the curtain rose upon
		  ‘Bombastes Furioso.’
		
		In vain we roared; in vain we tried
		  To rouse her into laughter:
		Her pensive glances wandered wide
		  From orchestra to rafter--
		“_Tier upon tier_!” she said, and sighed;
		  And silence followed after.
		
		  


	8. THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER

		“The sun was shining on the sea,
		     Shining with all his might:
		He did his very best to make
		     The billows smooth and bright--
		And this was odd, because it was
		     The middle of the night.
		
		The moon was shining sulkily,
		     Because she thought the sun
		Had got no business to be there
		     After the day was done--
		“It’s very rude of him,“ she said,
		     “To come and spoil the fun.”
		
		The sea was wet as wet could be,
		     The sands were dry as dry.
		You could not see a cloud, because
		     No cloud was in the sky:
		No birds were flying overhead--
		     There were no birds to fly.
		
		The Walrus and the Carpenter
		     Were walking close at hand;
		They wept like anything to see
		     Such quantities of sand:
		If this were only cleared away,’
		     They said, it would be grand!’
		
		If seven maids with seven mops
		     Swept it for half a year,
		Do you suppose,‘ the Walrus said,
		     That they could get it clear?’
		I doubt it,‘ said the Carpenter,
		     And shed a bitter tear.
		
		O Oysters, come and walk with us!’
		     The Walrus did beseech.
		A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
		     Along the briny beach:
		We cannot do with more than four,
		     To give a hand to each.’
		
		The eldest Oyster looked at him,
		     But never a word he said:
		The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
		     And shook his heavy head--
		Meaning to say he did not choose
		     To leave the oyster-bed.
		
		But four young Oysters hurried up,
		     All eager for the treat:
		Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
		     Their shoes were clean and neat--
		And this was odd, because, you know,
		     They hadn’t any feet.
		
		Four other Oysters followed them,
		     And yet another four;
		And thick and fast they came at last,
		     And more, and more, and more--
		All hopping through the frothy waves,
		     And scrambling to the shore.
		
		The Walrus and the Carpenter
		     Walked on a mile or so,
		And then they rested on a rock
		     Conveniently low:
		And all the little Oysters stood
		     And waited in a row.
		
		The time has come,‘ the Walrus said,
		     To talk of many things:
		Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--
		     Of cabbages--and kings--
		And why the sea is boiling hot--
		     And whether pigs have wings.’
		
		But wait a bit,‘ the Oysters cried,
		     Before we have our chat;
		For some of us are out of breath,
		     And all of us are fat!’
		No hurry!‘ said the Carpenter.
		     They thanked him much for that.
		
		A loaf of bread,‘ the Walrus said,
		     Is what we chiefly need:
		Pepper and vinegar besides
		     Are very good indeed--
		Now if you’re ready, Oysters dear,
		     We can begin to feed.’
		
		But not on us!‘ the Oysters cried,
		     Turning a little blue.
		After such kindness, that would be
		     A dismal thing to do!’
		The night is fine,‘ the Walrus said.
		     Do you admire the view?
		
		It was so kind of you to come!
		     And you are very nice!’
		The Carpenter said nothing but
		     Cut us another slice:
		I wish you were not quite so deaf--
		     I’ve had to ask you twice!’
		
		It seems a shame,‘ the Walrus said,
		     To play them such a trick,
		After we’ve brought them out so far,
		     And made them trot so quick!’
		The Carpenter said nothing but
		     The butter’s spread too thick!’
		
		I weep for you,‘ the Walrus said:
		     I deeply sympathize.’
		With sobs and tears he sorted out
		     Those of the largest size,
		Holding his pocket-handkerchief
		     Before his streaming eyes.
		
		O Oysters,‘ said the Carpenter,
		     You’ve had a pleasant run!
		Shall we be trotting home again?’
		     But answer came there none--
		And this was scarcely odd, because
		     They’d eaten every one.”


	9. THREE SUNSETS

		He saw her once, and in the glance,
		 A moment’s glance of meeting eyes,
		His heart stood still in sudden trance:
		 He trembled with a sweet surprise--
		All in the waning light she stood,
		The star of perfect womanhood.
		
		That summer-eve his heart was light:
		 With lighter step he trod the ground:
		And life was fairer in his sight,
		 And music was in every sound:
		He blessed the world where there could be
		So beautiful a thing as she.
		
		There once again, as evening fell
		 And stars were peering overhead,
		Two lovers met to bid farewell:
		 The western sun gleamed faint and red,
		Lost in a drift of purple cloud
		That wrapped him like a funeral-shroud.
		
		Long time the memory of that night--
		 The hand that clasped, the lips that kissed,
		The form that faded from his sight
		 Slow sinking through the tearful mist--
		In dreamy music seemed to roll
		Through the dark chambers of his soul.
		
		So after many years he came
		 A wanderer from a distant shore:
		The street, the house, were still the same,
		 But those he sought were there no more:
		His burning words, his hopes and fears,
		Unheeded fell on alien ears.
		
		Only the children from their play
		 Would pause the mournful tale to hear,
		Shrinking in half-alarm away,
		 Or, step by step, would venture near
		To touch with timid curious hands
		That strange wild man from other lands.
		
		He sat beside the busy street,
		 There, where he last had seen her face:
		And thronging memories, bitter-sweet,
		 Seemed yet to haunt the ancient place:
		Her footfall ever floated near:
		Her voice was ever in his ear.
		
		He sometimes, as the daylight waned
		 And evening mists began to roll,
		In half-soliloquy complained
		 Of that black shadow on his soul,
		And blindly fanned, with cruel care,
		The ashes of a vain despair.
		
		The summer fled: the lonely man
		 Still lingered out the lessening days;
		Still, as the night drew on, would scan
		 Each passing face with closer gaze--
		Till, sick at heart, he turned away,
		And sighed “she will not come to-day.”
		
		So by degrees his spirit bent
		 To mock its own despairing cry,
		In stern self-torture to invent
		 New luxuries of agony,
		And people all the vacant space
		With visions of her perfect face.
		
		Then for a moment she was nigh,
		 He heard no step, but she was there;
		As if an angel suddenly
		 Were bodied from the viewless air,
		And all her fine ethereal frame
		Should fade as swiftly as it came.
		
		So, half in fancy’s sunny trance,
		 And half in misery’s aching void
		With set and stony countenance
		 His bitter being he enjoyed,
		And thrust for ever from his mind
		The happiness he could not find.
		
		As when the wretch, in lonely room,
		 To selfish death is madly hurled,
		The glamour of that fatal fume
		 Shuts out the wholesome living world--
		So all his manhood’s strength and pride
		One sickly dream had swept aside.
		
		Yea, brother, and we passed him there,
		 But yesterday, in merry mood,
		And marveled at the lordly air
		 That shamed his beggar’s attitude,
		Nor heeded that ourselves might be
		Wretches as desperate as he;
		
		Who let the thought of bliss denied
		 Make havoc of our life and powers,
		And pine, in solitary pride,
		 For peace that never shall be ours,
		Because we will not work and wait
		In trustful patience for our fate.
		
		And so it chanced once more that she
		 Came by the old familiar spot:
		The face he would have died to see
		 Bent o’er him, and he knew it not;
		Too rapt in selfish grief to hear,
		Even when happiness was near.
		
		And pity filled her gentle breast
		 For him that would not stir nor speak
		The dying crimson of the west,
		 That faintly tinged his haggard cheek,
		Fell on her as she stood, and shed
		A glory round the patient head.
		
		Ah, let him wake! The moments fly:
		 This awful tryst may be the last.
		And see, the tear, that dimmed her eye,
		 Had fallen on him ere she passed--
		She passed: the crimson paled to gray:
		And hope departed with the day.
		
		The heavy hours of night went by,
		 And silence quickened into sound,
		And light slid up the eastern sky,
		 And life began its daily round--
		But light and life for him were fled:
		His name was numbered with the dead.


*** Willa Cather (1873 - 1947)

	1. A LIKENESS

		In every line a supple beauty--
		   The restless head a little bent--
		Disgust of pleasure, scorn of duty,
		   The unseeing eyes of discontent.
		I often come to sit beside him,
		   This youth who passed and left no trace
		Of good or ill that did betide him,
		   Save the disdain upon his face.
		
		The hope of all his House, the brother
		   Adored, the golden-hearted son,
		Whom Fortune pampered like a mother;
		   And then--a shadow on the sun.
		Whether he followed Caesar’s trumpet,
		   Or chanced the riskier game at home
		To find how favour played the strumpet
		   In fickle politics at Rome;
		
		Whether he dreamed a dream in Asia
		   He never could forget by day,
		Or gave his youth to some Aspasia,
		   Or gamed his heritage away--
		Once lost, across the Empire’s border
		   This man would seek his peace in vain;
		His look arraigns a social order
		   Somehow entrammelled with his pain.
		
		“The dice of gods are always loaded”;
		   One gambler, arrogant as they,
		Fierce, and by fierce injustice goaded,
		   Left both his hazard and the play.
		Incapable of compromises,
		   Unable to forgive or spare,
		The strange awarding of the prizes
		   He had no fortitude to bear.
		
		Tricked by the forms of things material,--
		   The solid-seeming arch and stone,
		The noise of war, the pomp Imperial,
		   The heights and depths about a throne--
		He missed, among the shapes diurnal,
		   The old, deep-travelled road from pain,
		The thoughts of men, which are eternal,
		   In which, eternal, men remain.
		
		_Ritratto D’ignoto_; defying
		   Things unsubstantial as a dream--
		An empire, long in ashes lying--
		   His face still set against the stream--
		Yes, so he looked, that gifted brother
		   I loved, who passed and left no trace,
		Not even--luckier than this other--
		   His sorrow in a marble face.


	2. A SILVER CUP

		In Venice,
		Under the Rialto bridge, one summer morning,
		In a mean shop I bought a silver goblet.
		It was a place of poor and sordid barter,
		A damp hole filled with rags and rusty kettles,
		Fire-tongs and broken grates and mended bellows,
		And common crockery, coarse in use and fashion.
		Everything spoke the desperate needs of body,
		The breaking up and sale of wretched shelters,
		The frail continuance even of hunger.
		Misery under all--and that so fleeting!
		The fight to fill the pots and pans soon over,
		And then this wretched litter left from living.
		
		The goblet
		Stood in a dusty window full of charcoal,
		The only bright, the only gracious object.
		Because my heart was full to overflowing,
		Because my day to weep had not come near me,
		Because the world was full of love, I bought it.
		From all the wreckage there I took no warning;--
		Those ugly things outlasting hearts and houses,
		And all the life that men build into houses.
		Out of the jaws of hunger toothed with iron,
		Into the sun exultantly I bore it.
		Then, in the brightness of the summer sunshine,
		I saw the loops and flourishes of letters,
		The scattered trace of some outworn inscription,--
		Six lines or more, rubbed flat into the silver,
		Dashes and strokes, like rain-marks in a snowdrift.
		Was it a prize, perhaps, or gift of friendship?
		Was its inscription hope, or recognition?
		Not heeding still, I bade my oarsman quicken,
		And once ashore, across the Square I hastened,
		Precipitate through the idlers and the pigeons,
		Behind the Clock Tower, to a cunning craftsman,
		There to exhort and urge the deft engraver,
		And crowd upon my cup another story;
		A name and promise in my memory singing.
		
		In Venice,
		Under the Rialto bridge, I bought you.
		Now you come back to me, such long years after,
		Your promise never kept, your hope defeated,
		Your legend now a thing for tears and laughter;--
		Though both your names are names of living people,
		Cut by the steady hand of that engraver
		While I stood over him and urged his deftness.
		He played the part; nor stopped to smile and tell me
		That for such words his art was too enduring.
		His living was to cut such stuff in silver!
		And now I have you, what to do, I wonder?
		The names, another smith can soon efface them,--
		But leave, so beautifully cut, the legend.
		Not from a poet’s book, but from the living
		Sad mouth of a young peasant boy, I took it;
		Four words, which mean that life is sweet together.
		
		In some dark junk-shop window I shall leave you,
		Some place of poor effects from broken houses,
		Where desperate women go to sell a saucepan
		And frightened men to buy a baby’s cradle.
		Here, in New York, a city full of exiles,
		Short marriages and early deaths and heart-breaks:
		In some such window, with the blue glass vases,
		The busts of Presidents in plaster, gilded,
		Pawned watches, and the rings and chains and bracelets
		Given for love and sold for utter anguish,
		There I shall leave you, a sole gracious object.
		
		And hope some blind, bright eye will one day spy you--
		Some boy with too much love and empty pockets
		May read with quickening pulse your brief inscription,
		Cut in his mother-language, half forgotten,
		Four words which mean that life is sweet together;
		Rush in and count his coins upon the table,
		(A cup his own as if his heart had made it!)
		And bear you off to one who hopes as he does.
		So, one day, may the wish, for you, be granted.
		They will not know, these two, the names you cover;
		Mine and another, razed by violence from you,
		Nor his, worn down by time, the first possessor’s--
		Who had his story, which you never told me.


	3. AFTERMATH

		Canst thou conjure a vanished morn of spring,
		 Or bid the ashes of the sunset glow
		Again to redness? Are we strong to wring
		 From trodden grapes the juice drunk long ago?
		Can leafy longings stir in autumn’s blood,
		 Or can I wear a pearl dissolved in wine,
		Or go a-Maying in a winter wood,
		 Or paint with youth thy wasted cheek, or mine?
		What bloom, then, shall abide, since ours hath sped?
		 Thou art more lost to me than they who dwell
		In Egypt’s sepulchres, long ages fled;
		 And would I touch--Ah me! I might as well
		Covet the gold of Helen’s vanished head,
		 Or kiss back Cleopatra from the dead!


	4. ARCADIAN WINTER

		Woe is me to tell it thee,
		Winter winds in Arcady!
		Scattered is thy flock and fled
		From the glades where once it fed,
		And the snow lies drifted white
		In the bower of our delight,
		Where the beech threw gracious shade
		On the cheek of boy and maid:
		And the bitter blasts make roar
		Through the fleshless sycamore.
		
		White enchantment holds the spring,
		Where thou once wert wont to sing,
		And the cold hath cut to death
		Reeds melodious of thy breath.
		He, the rival of thy lyre,
		Nightingale with note of fire,
		Sings no more; but far away,
		From the windy hill-side gray,
		Calls the broken note forlorn
		Of an aged shepherd’s horn.
		
		Still about the fire they tell
		How it long ago befell
		That a shepherd maid and lad
		Met and trembled and were glad;
		When the swift spring waters ran,
		And the wind to boy or man
		Brought the aching of his sires--
		Song and love and all desires.
		Ere the starry dogwoods fell
		They were lovers, so they tell.
		
		Woe is me to tell it thee,
		Winter winds in Arcady!
		Broken pipes and vows forgot,
		Scattered flocks returning not,
		Frozen brook and drifted hill,
		Ashen sun and song-birds still;
		Songs of summer and desire
		Crooned about the winter fire;
		Shepherd lads with silver hair,
		Shepherd maids no longer fair.


	5. AUTUMN MELODY

		In the autumn days, the days of parting,
		   Days that in a golden silence fall,
		When the air is quick with bird-wings starting,
		   And the asters darken by the wall;
		
		Strong and sweet the wine of heaven is flowing,
		   Bees and sun and sleep and golden dyes;
		Long forgot is budding-time and blowing,
		   Sunk in honeyed sleep the garden lies.
		
		Spring and storm and summer midnight madness
		   Dream within the grape but never wake;
		Bees and sun and sweetness,--oh, and sadness!
		   Sun and sweet that reach the heart--and break.
		
		Ah, the pain at heart forever starting,
		   Ah, the cup untasted that we spilled
		In the autumn days, the days of parting!
		   Would our shades could drink it, and be stilled.


	6. EVENING SONG

		Dear love, what thing of all the things that be
		Is ever worth one thought from you or me,
		       Save only Love,
		       Save only Love?
		
		The days so short, the nights so quick to flee,
		The world so wide, so deep and dark the sea,
		       So dark the sea;
		
		So far the suns and every listless star,
		Beyond their light--Ah! dear, who knows how far,
		       Who knows how far?
		
		One thing of all dim things I know is true,
		The heart within me knows, and tells it you,
		       And tells it you.
		
		So blind is life, so long at last is sleep,
		And none but Love to bid us laugh or weep,
		       And none but Love,
		       And none but Love.


	7. FIDES, SPES

		Joy is come to the little
		       Everywhere;
		Pink to the peach and pink to the apple,
		       White to the pear.
		Stars are come to the dogwood,
		       Astral, pale;
		Mists are pink on the red-bud,
		       Veil after veil.
		Flutes for the feathery locusts,
		       Soft as spray;
		Tongues of lovers for chestnuts, poplars,
		       Babbling May.
		Yellow plumes for the willows’
		       Wind-blown hair;
		Oak trees and sycamores only
		       Comfortless, bare.
		Sore from steel and the watching,
		       Somber and old,
		(Wooing robes for the beeches, larches,
		       Splashed with gold,
		Breath of love from the lilacs,
		       Warm with noon,)
		Great hearts cold when the little
		       Beat mad so soon.
		What is their faith to bear it
		       Till it come,
		Waiting with rain-cloud and swallow,
		       Frozen, dumb?


	8. GOING HOME

		How smoothly the trains run beyond the Missouri;
		Even in my sleep I know when I have crossed the river.
		The wheels turn as if they were glad to go;
		The sharp curves and windings left behind,
		The roadway wide open,
		(_The crooked straight_
		_And the rough places plain._)
		
		They run smoothly, they run softly, too.
		There is not noise enough to trouble the lightest sleeper.
		Nor jolting to wake the weary-hearted.
		I open my window and let the air blow in,
		The air of morning,
		That smells of grass and earth--
		Earth, the grain-giver.
		
		How smoothly the trains run beyond the Missouri;
		Even in my sleep I know when I have crossed the river.
		The wheels turn as if they were glad to go;
		They run like running water,
		Like Youth, running away...
		They spin bright along the bright rails,
		Singing and humming,
		Singing and humming.
		They run remembering,
		They run rejoicing,
		As if they, too, were going home.


	9. GRANDMITHER, THINK NOT I FORGET

		Grandmither, think not I forget, when I come back to town,
		An’ wander the old ways again an’ tread them up an’ down.
		I never smell the clover bloom, nor see the swallows pass,
		Without I mind how good ye were unto a little lass.
		I never hear the winter rain a-pelting all night through,
		Without I think and mind me of how cold it falls on you.
		And if I come not often to your bed beneath the thyme,
		Mayhap ’t is that I’d change wi’ ye, and gie my bed for thine,
		     Would like to sleep in thine.
		
		I never hear the summer winds among the roses blow,
		Without I wonder why it was ye loved the lassie so.
		Ye gave me cakes and lollipops and pretty toys a score,--
		I never thought I should come back and ask ye now for more.
		Grandmither, gie me your still, white hands, that lie upon your breast,
		For mine do beat the dark all night and never find me rest;
		They grope among the shadows an’ they beat the cold black air,
		They go seekin’ in the darkness, an’ they never find him there,
		     An’ they never find him there.
		
		Grandmither, gie me your sightless eyes, that I may never see
		His own a-burnin’ full o’ love that must not shine for me.
		Grandmither, gie me your peaceful lips, white as the kirkyard snow,
		For mine be red wi’ burnin’ thirst, an’ he must never know.
		Grandmither, gie me your clay-stopped ears, that I may never hear
		My lad a-singin’ in the night when I am sick wi’ fear;
		A-singin’ when the moonlight over a’ the land is white--
		Aw God! I’ll up an’ go to him a-singin’ in the night,
		     A-callin’ in the night.
		
		Grandmither, gie me your clay-cold heart that has forgot to ache,
		For mine be fire within my breast and yet it cannot break.
		It beats an’ throbs forever for the things that must not be,--
		An’ can ye not let me creep in an’ rest awhile by ye?
		A little lass afeard o’ dark slept by ye years agone--
		Ah, she has found what night can hold ’twixt sunset an’ the dawn!
		So when I plant the rose an’ rue above your grave for ye,
		Ye’ll know it’s under rue an’ rose that I would like to be,
		     That I would like to be.


	10. I SOUGHT THE WOOD IN WINTER

		I sought the wood in summer
		       When every twig was green;
		The rudest boughs were tender,
		       And buds were pink between.
		Light-fingered aspens trembled
		       In fitful sun and shade,
		And daffodils were golden
		       In every starry glade.
		The brook sang like a robin--
		       My hand could check him where
		The lissome maiden willows
		       Shook out their yellow hair.
		
		“How frail a thing is Beauty,”
		       I said, “when every breath
		She gives the vagrant summer
		       But swifter woos her death.
		For this the star dust troubles,
		       For this have ages rolled:
		To deck the wood for bridal
		       And slay her with the cold.”
		
		I sought the wood in winter
		       When every leaf was dead;
		Behind the wind-whipped branches
		       The winter sun set red.
		The coldest star was rising
		       To greet that bitter air,
		The oaks were writhen giants;
		       Nor bud nor bloom was there.
		The birches, white and slender,
		       In deathless marble stood,
		The brook, a white immortal,
		       Slept silent in the wood.
		
		“How sure a thing is Beauty,”
		       I cried. “No bolt can slay,
		No wave nor shock despoil her,
		       No ravishers dismay.
		Her warriors are the angels
		       That cherish from afar,
		Her warders people Heaven
		       And watch from every star.
		The granite hills are slighter,
		       The sea more like to fail;
		Behind the rose the planet,
		       The Law behind the veil.”


	11. IN MEDIA VITA

		Streams of the spring a-singing,
		 Winds of the May that blow,
		Birds from the Southland winging,
		 Buds in the grasses below.
		Clouds that speed hurrying over,
		 And the climbing rose by the wall,
		Singing of bees in the clover,
		 And the dead, under all!
		
		Lads and their sweethearts lying
		 In the cleft of the windy hill;
		Hearts that are hushed of their sighing,
		 Lips that are tender and still.
		Stars in the purple gloaming,
		 Flowers that suffuse and fall,
		Twitter of bird-mates homing,
		 And the dead, under all!
		
		Herdsman abroad with his collie,
		 Girls on their way to the fair,
		Young lads a-chasing their folly,
		 Parsons a-praying their prayer.
		Children their kites a-flying,
		 Grandsires that nod by the wall,
		Mothers soft lullabies sighing,
		 And the dead, under all!


	12. IN ROSE-TIME

		_Oh, this is the joy of the rose:
		         That it blows,
		           And goes._
		
		Winter lasts a five-month,
		 Spring-time stays but one;
		Yellow blow the rye-fields
		 When the rose is done.
		Pines are clad at Yuletide
		 When the birch is bare,
		And the holly’s greenest
		 In the frosty air.
		
		Sorrow keeps a stone house
		 Builded grim and gray;
		Pleasure hath a straw thatch
		 Hung with lanterns gay.
		On her petty savings
		 Niggard Prudence thrives,
		Passion, ere the moonset,
		 Bleeds a thousand lives.
		
		Virtue hath a warm hearth--
		 Folly’s dead and drowned;
		Friendship hath her own when
		 Love is underground.
		Ah! for me the madness
		 Of the spendthrift flower,
		Burning myriad sunsets
		 In a single hour.
		
		_For this is the joy of the rose:
		         That it blows,
		           And goes._


	13. L’ENVOI

		Where are the loves that we have loved before
		When once we are alone, and shut the door?
		No matter whose the arms that held me fast,
		The arms of Darkness hold me at the last.
		No matter down what primrose path I tend,
		I kiss the lips of Silence in the end.
		No matter on what heart I found delight,
		I come again unto the breast of Night.
		No matter when or how love did befall,
		’Tis Loneliness that loves me best of all,
		And in the end she claims me, and I know
		That she will stay, though all the rest may go.
		No matter whose the eyes that I would keep
		Near in the dark, ’tis in the eyes of Sleep
		That I must look and look forever more,
		When once I am alone, and shut the door.


	14. MACON PRAIRIE

		She held me for a night against her bosom,
		The aunt who died when I was yet a baby,
		The girl who scarcely lived to be a woman.
		Stricken, she left familiar earth behind her,
		Mortally ill, she braved the boisterous ocean,
		Dying, she crossed irrevocable rivers,
		Hailed the blue Lakes, and saw them fade forever,
		Hungry for distances;--her heart exulting
		That God had made so many seas and countries
		To break upon the eye and sweep behind her.
		From one whose love was tempered by discretion,
		From all the net of caution and convenience
		She snatched her high heart for the great adventure,
		Broke her bright bubble under far horizons,--
		Among the skirmishers that teased the future,
		Precursors of the grave slow-moving millions
		Already destined to the Westward-faring.
		
		They came, at last, to where the railway ended,
		The strange troop captained by a dying woman;
		The father, the old man of perfect silence,
		The mother, unresisting, broken-hearted,
		The gentle brother and his wife, both timid,
		Not knowing why they left their native hamlet;
		Going as in a dream, but ever going.
		
		In all the glory of an Indian summer,
		The lambent transmutations of October,
		They started with the great ox-teams from Hastings
		And trekked in a southwesterly direction,
		Boring directly toward the fiery sunset.
		Over the red grass prairies, shaggy-coated,
		Without a goal the caravan proceeded;
		Across the tablelands and rugged ridges,
		Through the coarse grasses which the oxen breasted,
		Blue-stem and bunch-grass, red as sea-marsh samphire.
		Always the similar, soft undulations
		Of the free-breathing earth in golden sunshine,
		The hardy wind, and dun hawks flying over
		Against the unstained firmament of heaven.
		
		In the front wagon, under the white cover,
		Stretched on her feather-bed and propped with pillows,
		Never dismayed by the rude oxen’s scrambling,
		The jolt of the tied wheel or brake or hold-back,
		She lay, the leader of the expedition;
		And with her burning eyes she took possession
		Of the red waste,--for hers, and theirs, forever.
		
		A wagon-top, rocking in seas of grasses,
		A camp-fire on a prairie chartless, trackless,
		A red spark under the dark tent of heaven.
		Surely, they said, by day she saw a vision,
		Though her exhausted strength could not impart it,--
		Her breathing hoarser than the tired cattle.
		
		When cold, bright stars the sunburnt days succeeded,
		She took me in her bed to sleep beside her,--
		A sturdy bunch of life, born on the ocean.
		Always she had the wagon cover lifted
		Before her face. The sleepless hours till daybreak
		She read the stars.
		
		“Plenty of time for sleep,” she said, “hereafter.”
		
		She pointed out the spot on Macon prairie,
		Telling my father that she wished to lie there.
		“And plant, one day, an apple orchard round me,
		In memory of woman’s first temptation,
		And man’s first cowardice.”
		That night, within her bosom,
		I slept.
		                     Before the morning
		I cried because the breast was cold behind me.
		
		Now, when the sky blazes like blue enamel,
		Brilliant and hard over the blond cornfields,
		And through the autumn days our wind is blowing
		Like the creative breath of God Almighty--
		Then I rejoice that offended love demanded
		Such wide retreat, and such self-restitution;
		Forged an explorer’s will in a frail woman,
		Asked of her perfect faith and renunciation,
		Hardships and perils, prophecy and vision,
		The leadership of kin, and happy ending
		On the red rolling land of Macon prairie.


	15. PARADOX

		I knew them both upon Miranda’s isle,
		 Which is of youth a sea-bound seigniory:
		Misshapen Caliban, so seeming vile,
		 And Ariel, proud prince of minstrelsy,
		Who did forsake the sunset for my tower
		 And like a star above my slumber burned.
		The night was held in silver chains by power
		 Of melody, in which all longings yearned--
		Star-grasping youth in one wild strain expressed,
		 Tender as dawn, insistent as the tide;
		The heart of night and summer stood confessed.
		 I rose aglow and flung the lattice wide--
		Ah, jest of art, what mockery and pang!
		 Alack, it was poor Caliban who sang.


	16. PRAIRIE DAWN

		A crimson fire that vanquishes the stars;
		A pungent odor from the dusty sage;
		A sudden stirring of the huddled herds;
		A breaking of the distant table-lands
		Through purple mists ascending, and the flare
		Of water-ditches silver in the light;
		A swift, bright lance hurled low across the world;
		A sudden sickness for the hills of home.


	17. PRAIRIE SPRING

		Evening and the flat land,
		Rich and somber and always silent;
		The miles of fresh-plowed soil,
		Heavy and black, full of strength and harshness;
		The growing wheat, the growing weeds,
		The toiling horses, the tired men;
		The long, empty roads,
		Sullen fires of sunset, fading,
		The eternal, unresponsive sky.
		Against all this, Youth,
		Flaming like the wild roses,
		Singing like the larks over the plowed fields,
		Flashing like a star out of the twilight;
		Youth with its insupportable sweetness,
		Its fierce necessity,
		Its sharp desire;
		Singing and singing,
		Out of the lips of silence,
		Out of the earthy dusk.


	18. PROVENÇAL LEGEND

		On his little grave and wild,
		Faustinus, the martyr child,
		 Candytuft and mustards grow.
		Ah, how many a June has smiled
		 On the turf he lies below.
		
		Ages gone they laid him there,
		Quit of sun and wholesome air,
		 Broken flesh and tortured limb;
		Leaving all his faith the heir
		 Of his gentle hope and him.
		
		Yonder, under pagan skies,
		Bleached by rains, the circus lies,
		 Where they brought him from his play.
		Comeliest his of sacrifice,
		 Youth and tender April day.
		
		“Art thou not the shepherd’s son?--
		There the hills thy lambkins run?--
		 These the fields thy brethren keep?”
		“On a higher hill than yon
		 Doth my Father lead His sheep.”
		
		“Bring thy ransom, then,” they say,
		“Gold enough to pave the way
		 From the temple to the Rhone.”
		When he came, upon his day,
		 Slender, tremulous, alone,
		
		Mustard flowers like these he pressed,
		Golden, flame-like, to his breast,
		 Blooms the early weanlings eat.
		When his Triumph brought him rest,
		 Yellow bloom lay at his feet.
		
		Golden play-days came: the air
		Called him, weanlings bleated there,
		 Roman boys ran fleet with spring;
		Shorn of youth and usage fair,
		 Hope nor hill-top days they bring.
		
		But the shepherd children still
		Come at Easter, warm or chill,
		 Come with violets gathered wild
		From his sloping pasture hill,
		Play-fellows who would fulfill
		 Play-time to that martyr child.


	19. RECOGNITION

		The old volcanic mountains
		That slope up from the sea--
		They dream and dream a thousand years
		And watch what-is-to-be.
		
		What gladness shines upon them
		When, white as white sea-foam,
		To the old, old ports of Beauty
		A new sail comes home!


	20. SLEEP, MINSTREL, SLEEP

		Sleep, minstrel, sleep; the winter wind’s awake,
		     And yellow April’s buried deep and cold.
		The wood is black, and songful things forsake
		     The haunted forest when the year is old.
		Above the drifted snow the aspens quake,
		     The scourging clouds a shrunken moon enfold,
		Denying all that nights of summer spake
		     And swearing false the summer’s globe of gold.
		
		Sleep, minstrel, sleep; in such a bitter night
		     Thine azure song would seek the stars in vain;
		Thy rose and roundelay the winter’s spite
		     Would scarcely spare--O never wake again!
		These leaden skies do not thy masques invite,
		     Thy sunny breath would warm not their disdain;
		How should’st thou sing to boughs with winter dight,
		     Or gather marigolds in winter rain?
		
		Sleep, minstrel, sleep; we do not grow more kind;
		     Your cloak was thin, your wound was wet and deep;
		More bitter breath there was than winter wind,
		     And hotter tears than now thy lovers weep.
		Upon the world-old breast of comfort find
		     How gentle Darkness thee will gently keep.
		Thou wert the summer’s, and thy joy declined
		     When winter winds awoke. Sleep, minstrel, sleep.


	21. SONG

		Troubadour, when you were gay,
		You wooed with rose and roundelay,
		Singing harp-strings, sweet as May.
		From beneath the crown of bay
		Fell the wild, abundant hair.
		Scent of cherry bloom and pear
		With you from the south did fare,
		Buds of myrtle for your wear.
		Soft as summer stars thine eyes,
		Planets pale in violet skies;
		Summer wind that sings and dies
		Was the music of thy sighs.
		
		Troubadour, one winter’s night,
		When the pasture-lands were white
		And the cruel stars were bright,
		Fortune held thee in despite.
		Then beneath my tower you bore
		Rose nor rondel as of yore,
		But a heavy grief and sore
		Laid in silence at my door.
		April yearneth, April goes;
		Not for me her violet blows,
		I have done for long with those.
		At my breast thy sorrow grows,
		Nearer to my heart, God knows,
		Than ever roundelay or rose!


	22. SPANISH JOHNNY

		The old West, the old time,
		   The old wind singing through
		The red, red grass a thousand miles,
		   And, Spanish Johnny, you!
		He’d sit beside the water-ditch
		   When all his herd was in,
		And never mind a child, but sing
		   To his mandolin.
		
		The big stars, the blue night,
		   The moon-enchanted plain:
		The olive man who never spoke,
		   But sang the songs of Spain.
		His speech with men was wicked talk--
		   To hear it was a sin;
		But those were golden things he said
		   To his mandolin.
		
		The gold songs, the gold stars,
		   The world so golden then:
		And the hand so tender to a child
		   Had killed so many men.
		He died a hard death long ago
		   Before the Road came in;
		The night before he swung, he sang
		   To his mandolin.


	23. STREET IN PACKINGTOWN

		In the gray dust before a frail gray shed,
		By a board fence obscenely chalked in red,
		A gray creek willow, left from country days,
		Flickers pallid in the haze.
		
		Beside the gutter of the unpaved street,
		Tin cans and broken glass about his feet,
		And a brown whisky bottle, singled out
		For play from prosier crockery strewn about,
		Twisting a shoestring noose, a Polack’s brat
		Joylessly torments a cat.
		
		His dress, some sister’s cast-off wear,
		Is rolled to leave his stomach bare.
		His arms and legs with scratches bleed;
		He twists the cat and pays no heed.
		He mauls her neither less nor more
		Because her claws have raked him sore.
		His eyes, faint-blue and moody, stare
		From under a pale shock of hair.
		Neither resentment nor surprise
		Lights the desert of those eyes--
		To hurt and to be hurt; he knows
		All he will know on earth, or need to know.
		
		But there, beneath his willow tree,
		His tribal, tutelary tree,
		The tortured cat across his knee,
		With hate, perhaps, a threat, maybe,
		Lithuania looks at me.


	24. THE HAWTHORN TREE

		Across the shimmering meadows--
		Ah, when he came to me!
		In the spring-time,
		In the night-time,
		In the starlight,
		Beneath the hawthorn tree.
		
		Up from the misty marsh-land--
		Ah, when he climbed to me!
		To my white bower,
		To my sweet rest,
		To my warm breast,
		Beneath the hawthorn tree.
		
		Ask of me what the birds sang,
		High in the hawthorn tree;
		What the breeze tells,
		What the rose smells,
		What the stars shine--
		Not what he said to me!


	25. THE PALATINE

		“Have you been with the King to Rome,
		       Brother, big brother?”
		“I’ve been there and I’ve come home.
		       Back to your play, little brother.”
		
		“Oh, how high is Caesar’s house,
		       Brother, big brother?”
		“Goats about the doorways browse:
		Night hawks nest in the burnt roof-tree,
		Home of the wild bird and home of the bee.
		A thousand chambers of marble lie
		Wide to the sun and the wind and the sky.
		Poppies we find amongst our wheat
		Grow on Caesar’s banquet seat.
		Cattle crop and neatherds drowse
		On the floors of Caesar’s house.”
		
		“But what has become of Caesar’s gold,
		       Brother, big brother?”
		“The times are bad and the world is old--
		Who knows the where of the Caesars’ gold?
		Night comes black on the Caesars’ hill;
		The wells are deep and the tales are ill.
		Fire-flies gleam in the damp and mould,--
		All that is left of the Caesars’ gold.
		       Back to your play, little brother.”
		
		“What has become of the Caesars’ men,
		       Brother, big brother?”
		“Dogs in the kennel and wolf in the den
		Howl for the fate of the Caesars’ men.
		Slain in Asia, slain in Gaul,
		By Dacian border and Persian wall;
		Rhineland orchard and Danube fen
		Fatten their roots on Caesar’s men.”
		
		“Why is the world so sad and wide,
		       Brother, big brother?”
		“Saxon boys by their fields that bide
		Need not know if the world is wide.
		Climb no mountain but Shire-end Hill,
		Cross no water but goes to mill;
		Ox in the stable and cow in the byre,
		Smell of the wood smoke and sleep by the fire;
		Sun-up in seed-time--a likely lad
		Hurts not his head that the world is sad.
		       Back to your play, little brother.”


	26. THE POOR MINSTREL

		_Does the darkness cradle thee
		Than mine arms more tenderly?_
		Do the angels God hath put
		 There to guard thy lonely sleep--
		One at head and one at foot--
		 Watch more fond and constant keep?
		When the black-bird sings in May,
		 And the spring is in the wood,
		Would you never trudge the way
		 Over hill-tops, if you could?
		Was my harp so hard a load
		 Even on the sunny morns
		When the plumèd huntsmen rode
		 To the music of their horns?
		Hath the love that lit the stars,
		 Fills the sea and moulds the flowers,
		Whose completeness nothing mars,
		 Made forgot what once was ours?
		Christ hath perfect rest to give--
		 Stillness and perpetual peace;
		You, who found it hard to live,
		 Sleep and sleep, without surcease.
		
		Christ hath stars to light thy porch,
		 Silence after fevered song;--
		I had but a minstrel’s torch
		 And the way was wet and long.
		Sleep. No more on winter nights,
		 Harping at some castle gate,
		Thou must see the revel lights
		 Stream upon our cold estate.
		Bitter was the bread of song
		 While you tarried in my tent,
		And the jeering of the throng
		 Hurt you, as it came and went.
		When you slept upon my breast
		 Grief had wed me long ago:
		Christ hath his perpetual rest
		 For thy weariness. But oh!
		When I sleep beside the road,
		 Thanking God thou liest not so,
		Brother to the owl and toad,
		 Could’st thou, Dear, but let me know,
		_Does the darkness cradle thee
		Than mine arms more tenderly?_


	27. THE SWEDISH MOTHER

		_“You shall hear the tale again--_
		   _Hush, my red-haired daughter.”_
		_Brightly burned the sunset gold_
		   _On the black pond water._
		
		_Red the pasture ridges gleamed_
		   _Where the sun was sinking._
		_Slow the windmill rasped and wheezed_
		   _Where the herd was drinking._
		
		_On the kitchen doorstep low_
		   _Sat a Swedish mother;_
		_In her arms one baby slept,_
		   _By her sat another._
		
		“All time, ’way back in old countree,
		Your grandpa, he been good to me.
		Your grandpa, he been young man, too,
		And I been yust li’l’ girl, like you.
		All time in spring, when evening come,
		We go bring sheep an’ li’l’ lambs home.
		We go big field, ’way up on hill,
		Ten times high like our windmill.
		One time your grandpa leave me wait
		While he call sheep down. By de gate
		I sit still till night come dark;
		Rabbits run an’ strange dogs bark,
		Old owl hoot, an’ your modder cry,
		She been so ’fraid big bear come by.
		Last, ’way off, she hear de sheep,
		Li’l’ bells ring and li’l’ lambs bleat.
		Then all sheep come over de hills,
		Big white dust, an’ old dog Nils.
		Then come grandpa, in his arm
		Li’l’ sick lamb dat somet’ing harm.
		He so young then, big and strong,
		Pick li’l’ girl up, take her ’long,--
		Poor li’l’ tired girl, yust like you,--
		Lift her up an’ take her too.
		Hold her tight an’ carry her far,--
		’Ain’t no light but yust one star.
		Sheep go ‘bah-h,’ an’ road so steep;
		Li’l’ girl she go fast asleep.”
		
		_Every night the red-haired child_
		   _Begs to hear the story,_
		_When the pasture ridges burn_
		   _With the sunset glory._
		
		_She can never understand,_
		   _Since the tale ends gladly,_
		_Why her mother, telling it,_
		   _Always smiles so sadly._
		
		_Wonderingly she looks away_
		   _Where her mother’s gazing;_
		_Only sees the drifting herd,_
		   _In the sunset grazing._


	28. THE TAVERN

		In the tavern of my heart
		 Many a one has sat before,
		Drunk red wine and sung a stave,
		 And, departing, come no more.
		When the night was cold without,
		 And the ravens croaked of storm,
		They have sat them at my hearth,
		 Telling me my house was warm.
		
		As the lute and cup went round,
		 They have rhymed me well in lay;--
		When the hunt was on at morn,
		 Each, departing, went his way.
		On the walls, in compliment,
		 Some would scrawl a verse or two,
		Some have hung a willow branch,
		 Or a wreath of corn-flowers blue.
		
		Ah! my friend, when thou dost go,
		 Leave no wreath of flowers for me;
		Not pale daffodils nor rue,
		 Violets nor rosemary.
		Spill the wine upon the lamps,
		 Tread the fire, and bar the door;
		So despoil the wretched place,
		 None will come forevermore.


	29. WINTER AT DELPHI

		Cold are the stars of the night,
		 Wild is the tempest crying,
		Fast through the velvet dark
		 Little white flakes are flying.
		Still is the House of Song.
		 But the fire on the hearth is burning;
		And the lamps are trimmed, and the cup
		 Is full for his day of returning.
		His watchers are fallen asleep,
		 They wait but his call to follow,
		Ay, to the ends of the earth--
		 But Apollo, the god, Apollo?
		
		Sick is the heart in my breast,
		 Mine eyes are blinded with weeping;
		The god who never comes back,
		 The watch that forever is keeping.
		Service of gods is hard;
		 Deep lies the snow on my pillow.
		For him the laurel and song,
		 Weeping for me and the willow:
		Empty my arms and cold
		 As the nest forgot of the swallow;
		Birds will come back with the spring,--
		 But Apollo, the god, Apollo?
		
		Hope will come back with the spring,
		 Joy with the lark’s returning;
		Love must awake betimes,
		 When crocus buds are a-burning.
		Hawthorns will follow the snow,
		 The robin his tryst be keeping;
		Winds will blow in the May,
		 Waking the pulses a-sleeping.
		Snowdrops will whiten the hills,
		 Violets hide in the hollow:
		Pan will be drunken and rage--
		 But Apollo, the god, Apollo?


*** Geoffrey Chaucer (1340 - 1400)

	1. FORTUNE

		_Pleintif_
		
		This wrecched worldes transmutacioun,
		As wele or wo, now povre and now honour,
		Withouten ordre or wys discrecioun
		Governed is by Fortunes errour.
		But natheles, the lak of hir favour
		Ne may nat don me singen though I dye,
		Jay tout perdu mon temps et mon labour;
		For fynally, Fortune, I thee defye.
		
		Yit is me left the light of my resoun
		To knowen frend fro fo in thy mirour.
		So muchel hath yit thy whirling up and doun
		Ytaught me for to knowen in an hour.
		But trewely, no force of thy reddour
		To him that over himself hath the maystrye.
		My suffisaunce shal be my socour,
		For fynally Fortune, I thee defye.
		
		O Socrates, thou stidfast champioun,
		She never mighte be thy tormentour;
		Thou never dreddest hir oppressioun,
		Ne in hir chere founde thou no savour.
		Thou knewe wel the deceit of hir colour,
		And that hir moste worshipe is to lye.
		I knowe hir eek a fals dissimulour,
		For fynally, Fortune, I thee defye!
		
		
		_La respounse de Fortune au Pleintif_
		
		No man is wrecched but himself it wene,
		And he that hath himself hath suffisaunce.
		Why seystow thanne I am to thee so kene,
		That hast thyself out of my governaunce?
		Sey thus: “Graunt mercy of thyn haboundaunce
		That thou hast lent or this.’ Why wolt thou stryve?
		What wostow yit how I thee wol avaunce?
		And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve.
		
		I have thee taught divisioun bitwene
		Frend of effect and frend of countenaunce;
		Thee nedeth nat the galle of noon hyene,
		That cureth eyen derked for penaunce;
		Now seestow cleer that were in ignoraunce.
		Yit halt thyn ancre and yit thou mayst arryve
		Ther bountee berth the keye of my substaunce,
		And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve.
		
		How many have I refused to sustene
		Sin I thee fostred have in thy plesaunce.
		Woltow than make a statut on thy quene
		That I shal been ay at thyn ordinaunce?
		Thou born art in my regne of variaunce,
		Aboute the wheel with other most thou dryve.
		My lore is bet than wikke is thy grevaunce,
		And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve.
		
		
		_La respounse du Pleintif countre Fortune_
		
		Thy lore I dampne; it is adversitee.
		My frend maystow nat reven, blind goddesse;
		That I thy frendes knowe, I thanke it thee.
		Tak hem agayn, lat hem go lye on presse.
		The negardye in keping hir richesse
		Prenostik is thou wolt hir tour assayle;
		Wikke appetyt comth ay before syknesse.
		In general, this reule may nat fayle.
		
		
		_La respounse de Fortune countre le Pleintif_
		
		Thou pinchest at my mutabilitee
		For I thee lente a drope of my richesse,
		And now me lyketh to withdrawe me.
		Why sholdestow my realtee oppresse?
		The see may ebbe and flowen more or lesse;
		The welkne hath might to shyne, reyne, or hayle;
		Right so mot I kythen my brotelnesse.
		In general, this reule may nat fayle.
		
		Lo, th’execucion of the majestee
		That al purveyeth of his rightwysnesse,
		That same thing “Fortune’” clepen ye,
		Ye blinde bestes ful of lewdednesse.
		The hevene hath propretee of sikernesse.
		This world hath ever resteles travayle;
		Thy laste day is ende of myn intresse.
		In general, this reule may nat fayle.
		
		
		_L’envoy de Fortune_
		
		Princes, I prey you of your gentilesse
		Lat nat this man on me thus crye and pleyne,
		And I shal quyte you your bisinesse
		At my requeste, as three of you or tweyne,
		And but you list releve him of his peyne,
		Preyeth his beste frend of his noblesse
		That to som beter estat he may atteyne.


	2. LAK OF STEDFASTNESSE

		Somtyme the world was so stedfast and stable
		That mannes word was obligacioun,
		And now it is so fals and deceivable
		That word and deed, as in conclusioun,
		Ben nothing lyk, for turned up-so-doun
		Is al this world for mede and wilfulnesse,
		That al is lost for lak of stedfastnesse.
		
		What maketh this world to be so variable
		But lust that folk have in dissensioun?
		For among us now a man is holde unable,
		But if he can by som collusioun
		Don his neighbour wrong or oppressioun.
		What causeth this but wilful wrecchednesse,
		That al is lost for lak of stedfastnesse?
		
		Trouthe is put doun, resoun is holden fable,
		Vertu hath now no dominacioun;
		Pitee exyled, no man is merciable.
		Through covetyse is blent discrecioun.
		The world hath mad a permutacioun
		Fro right to wrong, fro trouthe to fikelnesse,
		That al is lost for lak of stedfastnesse.
		
		O prince, desyre to be honourable,
		Cherish thy folk and hate extorcioun.
		Suffre nothing that may be reprevable
		To thyn estat don in thy regioun.
		Shew forth thy swerd of castigacioun,
		Dred God, do law, love trouthe and worthinesse,
		And wed thy folk agein to stedfastnesse.


	3. PROVERBS

		What should these clothes thus manifold,
		Lo! this hot summer’s day?
		After great heate cometh cold;
		No man cast his pilche away.
		Of all this world the large compass
		Will not in mine arms twain;
		Who so muche will embrace,
		Little thereof he shall distrain.
		
		The world so wide, the air so remuable,
		The silly man so little of stature;
		The green of ground and clothing so mutable,
		The fire so hot and subtile of nature;
		The water never in one--what creature
		That made is of these foure thus flitting,
		May steadfast be, as here, in his living?
		
		The more I go, the farther I am behind;
		The farther behind, the nearer my war’s end;
		The more I seek, the worse can I find;
		The lighter leave, the lother for to wend;
		The better I live, the more out of mind;
		Is this fortune, n’ot I, or infortune;
		Though I go loose, tied am I with a loigne.


	4. THE COMPLAINT UNTO PITY

		Pite, that I have sought so yore agoo
		With herte soore and ful of besy peyne,
		That in this world was never wight so woo
		Withoute deth--and yf I shal not feyne,
		My purpos was to Pite to compleyne
		Upon the crueltee and tirannye
		Of Love, that for my trouthe doth me dye.
		
		And when that I, be lengthe of certeyne yeres,
		Had evere in oon a tyme sought to speke,
		To Pitee ran I al bespreynt with teres
		To prayen hir on Cruelte me awreke.
		But er I myghte with any word outbreke
		Or tellen any of my peynes smerte,
		I fond hir ded, and buried in an herte.
		
		Adoun I fel when that I saugh the herse,
		Ded as a ston while that the swogh me laste;
		But up I roos with colour ful dyverse
		And pitously on hir myn eyen I caste,
		And ner the corps I gan to presen faste,
		And for the soule I shop me for to preye.
		I was but lorn, ther was no more to seye.
		
		Thus am I slayn sith that Pite is ded.
		Allas, that day, that ever hyt shulde falle.
		What maner man dar now hold up his hed?
		To whom shal any sorwful herte calle?
		Now Cruelte hath cast to slee us alle,
		In ydel hope, folk redeless of peyne,
		Syth she is ded, to whom shul we compleyne?
		
		But yet encreseth me this wonder newe,
		That no wight woot that she is ded, but I--
		So many men as in her tyme hir knewe--
		And yet she dyed not so sodeynly,
		For I have sought hir ever ful besely
		Sith first I hadde wit or mannes mynde,
		But she was ded er that I koude hir fynde.
		
		Aboute hir herse there stoden lustely,
		Withouten any woo as thoughte me,
		Bounte parfyt, wel armed and richely,
		And fresshe Beaute, Lust, and Jolyte,
		Assured Maner, Youthe, and Honeste,
		Wisdom, Estaat, Drede, and Governaunce,
		Confedred both by honde and alliaunce.
		
		A compleynt had I, writen in myn hond,
		For to have put to Pite as a bille;
		But when I al this companye ther fond,
		That rather wolden al my cause spille
		Then do me help, I held my pleynte stille,
		For to that folk, withouten any fayle,
		Withoute Pitee ther may no bille availe.
		
		Then leve I al these vertues, sauf Pite,
		Kepynge the corps as ye have herd me seyn,
		Confedered alle by bond of Cruelte[Riv., p. 641]
		And ben assented when I shal be sleyn.
		And I have put my complaynt up ageyn,
		For to my foes my bille I dar not shewe,
		Th’effect of which seith thus, in wordes fewe:
		
		
		_(The Bill of Complaint)_
		
		Humblest of herte, highest of reverence,
		Benygne flour, coroune of vertues alle,
		Sheweth unto youre rial excellence
		Youre servaunt, yf I durste me so calle,
		Hys mortal harm in which he is yfalle,
		And noght al oonly for his evel fare,
		But for your renoun, as he shal declare.
		
		Hit stondeth thus: your contraire, Crueltee,
		Allyed is ayenst your regalye
		Under colour of womanly Beaute--
		For men shulde not, lo, knowe hir tirannye--
		With Bounte, Gentilesse, and Curtesye,
		And hath depryved yow now of your place
		That hyghte “Beaute apertenant to Grace.’
		
		For kyndely by youre herytage ryght
		Ye ben annexed ever unto Bounte;
		And verrayly ye oughte do youre myght
		To helpe Trouthe in his adversyte.
		Ye be also the corowne of Beaute,
		And certes yf ye wanten in these tweyne,
		The world is lore; ther is no more to seyne.
		
		Eke what availeth Maner and Gentilesse
		Withoute yow, benygne creature?
		Shal Cruelte be your governeresse?
		Allas, what herte may hyt longe endure?
		Wherfore, but ye the rather take cure
		To breke that perilouse alliaunce,
		Ye sleen hem that ben in your obeisaunce.
		
		And further over yf ye suffre this,
		Youre renoun ys fordoo than in a throwe;
		Ther shal no man wite well what Pite is.
		Allas, that your renoun is falle so lowe!
		Ye be than fro youre heritage ythrowe
		By Cruelte that occupieth youre place,
		And we despeyred that seken to your grace.
		
		Have mercy on me, thow Herenus quene,
		That yow have sought so tendirly and yore;
		Let som strem of youre lyght on me be sene
		That love and drede yow ever lenger the more;
		For sothly for to seyne I bere the soore,
		And though I be not konnynge for to pleyne,
		For Goddis love have mercy on my peyne.
		
		My peyne is this, that what so I desire
		That have I not, ne nothing lyk therto;
		And ever setteth Desir myn hert on fire.
		Eke on that other syde where so I goo,
		What maner thing that may encrese my woo,
		That have I redy, unsoght, everywhere;
		Me lakketh but my deth and than my here.
		
		What nedeth to shewe parcel of my peyne?
		Syth every woo that herte may bethynke
		I suffre and yet I dar not to yow pleyne;
		For wel I wot although I wake or wynke,
		Ye rekke not whether I flete or synke.
		But natheles yet my trouthe I shal sustene
		Unto my deth, and that shal wel be sene.
		
		This is to seyne I wol be youres evere,
		Though ye me slee by Crueltee your foo,
		Algate my spirit shal never dissevere
		Fro youre servise for any peyne or woo.
		Sith ye be ded--allas that hyt is soo--
		Thus for your deth I may wel wepe and pleyne
		With herte sore and ful of besy peyne.


	5. TRUTH

		Fle fro the pres, and dwelle with sothefastnesse,
		Suffise thin owen thing, thei it be smal;
		For hord hath hate, and clymbyng tykelnesse,
		Prees hath envye, and wele blent overal.
		Savour no more thanne the byhove schal;
		Reule weel thiself, that other folk canst reede;
		And trouthe schal delyvere, it is no drede.
		
		     Tempest the nought al croked to redresse,
		In trust of hire that tourneth as a bal.
		Myche wele stant in litel besynesse;
		Bywar therfore to spurne ayeyns an al;
		Stryve not as doth the crokke with the wal.
		Daunte thiself, that dauntest otheres dede;
		And trouthe shal delyvere, it is no drede.
		
		     That the is sent, receyve in buxumnesse;
		The wrestlyng for the worlde axeth a fal.
		Here is non home, here nys but wyldernesse.
		Forth, pylgryme, forth! forth, beste, out of thi stal!
		Know thi contré! loke up! thonk God of al!
		Hold the heye weye, and lat thi gost the lede;
		And trouthe shal delyvere, it is no drede.
		
		     Therfore, thou Vache, leve thine olde wrechednesse;
		Unto the world leve now to be thral.
		Crie hym mercy, that of hys hie godnesse
		Made the of nought, and in espec{.i}al
		Draw unto hym, and pray in general
		For the, and eke for other, hevenelyche mede;
		And trouthe schal delyvere, it is no drede.


*** G. K. Chesterton (1874 - 1936)

	1. A BALLADE OF A BOOK-REVIEWER

		I have not read a rotten page
		Of “Sex-Hate“ or “The Social Test”
		And here comes “Husks“ and “Heritage“ . . .
		O Moses give us all a rest!
		“Ethics of Empire“! . . . I protest
		I will not even cut the strings
		I’ll read “Jack Redskin on the Quest”
		And feed my brain with better things.
		
		Somebody wants a Wiser Age
		(He also wants me to invest);
		Somebody likes the Finnish Stage
		Because the Jesters do not jest;
		And grey with dust is Dante’s crest
		The bell of Rabelais soundless swings;
		And the winds come out of the west
		And feed my brain with better things.
		
		Lord of our laughter and our rage.
		Look on us with our sins oppressed!
		I too have trodden mine heritage
		Wickedly wearying of the best.
		Burn from my brain and from my breast
		Sloth and the cowardice that clings
		And stiffness and the soul’s arrest:
		And feed my brain with better things.
		
		Envoi:
		
		Prince you are host and I am guest
		Therefore I shrink from cavillings . . .
		But I should have that fizz suppressed
		And feed my brain with better things.


	2. A BALLADE OF AN ANTI-PURITAN

		They spoke of Progress spiring round
		Of Light and Mrs. Humphry Ward--
		It is not true to say I frowned
		Or ran about the room and roared;
		I might have simply sat and snored--
		I rose politely in the club
		And said “I feel a little bored;
		Will someone take me to a pub?”
		
		The new world’s wisest did surround
		Me; and it pains me to record
		I did not think their views profound
		Or their conclusions well assured;
		The simple life I can’t afford
		Besides I do not like the grub--
		I wait a mash and sausage “scored“--
		Will someone take me to a pub?
		
		I know where Men can still be found
		Anger and clamorous accord
		And virtues growing from the ground
		And fellowship of beer and board
		And song that is a sturdy cord.
		And hope that is a hardy shrub
		And goodness that is God’s last word--
		Will someone take me to a pub?
		
		Envoi:
		
		Prince Bayard would have smashed his sword
		To see the sort of knights you dub--Is
		that the last of them--O Lord!
		Will someone take me to a pub?


	3. A BALLADE OF SUICIDE

		The gallows in my garden people say
		Is new and neat and adequately tall.
		I tie the noose on in a knowing way
		As one that knots his necktie for a ball;
		But just as all the neighbours--on the wall--
		Are drawing a long breath to shout “Hurray!”
		The strangest whim has seized me . . . After all
		I think I will not hang myself to-day.
		
		To-morrow is the time I get my pay--My
		uncle’s sword is hanging in the hall--
		I see a little cloud all pink and grey--
		Perhaps the rector’s mother will _not_ call--
		I fancy that I heard from Mr. Gall
		That mushrooms could be cooked another way--
		I never read the works of Juvenal--
		I think I will not hang myself to-day.
		
		The world will have another washing day;
		The decadents decay; the pedants pall;
		And H.G. Wells has found that children play.
		And Bernard Shaw discovered that they squall;
		Rationalists are growing rational--
		And through thick woods one finds a stream astray
		So secret that the very sky seems small--
		I think I will not hang myself to-day.
		
		_Envoi:_
		
		Prince I can hear the trumpet of Germinal
		The tumbrils toiling up the terrible way;
		Even to-day your royal head may fall--
		I think I will not hang myself to-day.


	4. A BALLADE OF THE FIRST RAIN

		The sky is blue with summer and the sun
		The woods are brown as autumn with the tan
		It might as well be Tropics and be done
		I might as well be born a copper Khan;
		I fashion me an oriental fan
		Made of the wholly unreceipted bills
		Brought by the ice-man sleeping in his van
		(A storm is coming on the Chiltern Hills).
		
		I read the Young Philosophers for fun
		--Fresh as our sorrow for the late Queen Anne--
		The Dionysians whom a pint would stun
		The Pantheists who never heard of Pan.
		--But through my hair electric needles ran
		And on my book a gout of water spills
		And on the skirts of heaven the guns began
		(A storm is coming on the Chiltern Hills).
		
		O fields of England cracked and dry and dun
		O soul of England sick of words and wan!--
		The clouds grow dark;--the down-rush has begun.
		--It comes it comes as holy darkness can
		Black as with banners ban and arriere-ban;
		A falling laughter all the valley fills
		Deep as God’s thunder and the thirst of man:
		(A storm is coming on the Chiltern Hills).
		
		Envoi:
		
		Prince Prince-Elective on the modern plan
		Fulfilling such a lot of People’s Wills
		You take the Chiltern Hundreds while you can--
		A storm is coming on the Chiltern Hills.


	5. A CHILD OF THE SNOWS

		There is heard a hymn when the panes dim
		 And never before or again
		When the nights are strong with a darkness long
		 And the dark is alive with rain.
		
		Never we know but in sleet and in snow
		 The place where the great fires are
		That the midst of the earth is a raging mirth
		 And the heart of the earth a star.
		
		And at night we win to the ancient inn
		 Where the child in the frost is furled
		We follow the feet where all souls meet
		 At the inn at the end of the world.
		
		The gods lie dead where the leaves lie red
		 For the flame of the sun is flown.
		The gods lie cold where the leaves lie gold.
		 And a Child comes forth alone.


	6. A CHRISTMAS SONG FOR THREE GUILDS

		To be sung a long time ago--or hence.
		
		_The Carpenters_
		
		St. Joseph to the Carpenters said on a Christmas Day:
		“The master shall have patience and the prentice shall obey;
		And your word unto your women shall be nowise hard or wild:
		For the sake of me your master who have worshipped Wife and Child.
		But softly you shall frame the fence and softly carve the door
		And softly plane the table--as to spread it for the poor
		And all your thoughts be soft and white as the wood of the white tree.
		But if they tear the Charter Jet the tocsin speak for me!
		Let the wooden sign above your shop be prouder to be scarred
		Than the lion-shield of Lancelot that hung at Joyous Garde.”
		
		
		_The Shoemakers_
		
		St. Crispin to the shoemakers said on a Christmastide:
		“Who fashions at another’s feet will get no good of pride.
		They were bleeding on the Mountain the feet that brought good news
		The latchet of whose shoes we were not worthy to unloose.
		See that your feet offend not nor lightly lift your head
		Tread softly on the sunlit roads the bright dust of the dead.
		Let your own feet be shod with peace; be lowly all your lives.
		But if they touch the Charter ye shall nail it with your knives.
		And the bill-blades of the commons drive in all as dense array
		As once a crash of arrows came upon St. Crispin’s Day.”
		
		
		_The Painters_
		
		St. Luke unto the painters on Christmas Day he said:
		“See that the robes are white you dare to dip in gold and red;
		For only gold the kings can give and only blood the saints;
		And his high task grows perilous that mixes them in paints.
		Keep you the ancient order; follow the men that knew
		The labyrinth of black and whits the maze of green and blue;
		Paint mighty things paint paltry things paint silly things or sweet.
		But if men break the Charter you may slay them in the street.
		And if you paint one post for them then . . . but you know it well
		You paint a harlot’s face to drag all heroes down to hell.”
		
		
		_All Together_
		
		Almighty God to all mankind on Christmas Day said He:
		“I rent you from the old red hills and rending made you free.
		There was charter there was challenge; in a blast of breath I gave;
		You can be all things other; you cannot be a slave.
		You shall be tired and tolerant of fancies as they fade
		But if men doubt the Charter ye shall call on the Crusade--
		Trumpet and torch and catapult cannon and bow and blade
		Because it was My challenge to all the things I made.”


	7. A CIDER SONG

		    _To J.S.M._
		
			_Extract from a romance which is not yet
			written and probably never will be._
		
		    The wine they drink in Paradise
		    They make in Haute Lorraine;
		    God brought it burning from the sod
		    To be a sign and signal rod
		    That they that drink the blood of God
		    Shall never thirst again.
		
		    The wine they praise in Paradise
		    They make in Ponterey
		    The purple wine of Paradise
		    But we have better at the price;
		    It’s wine they praise in Paradise
		    It’s cider that they pray.
		
		    The wine they want in Paradise
		    They find in Plodder’s End
		    The apple wine of Hereford
		    Of Hafod Hill and Hereford
		    Where woods went down to Hereford
		    And there I had a friend.
		
		    The soft feet of the blessed go
		    In the soft western vales
		    The road the silent saints accord
		    The road from Heaven to Hereford
		    Where the apple wood of Hereford
		    Goes all the way to Wales.


	8. A HYMN

		O God of earth and altar
		 Bow down and hear our cry
		Our earthly rulers falter
		 Our people drift and die;
		The walls of gold entomb us
		 The swords of scorn divide
		Take not thy thunder from us
		 But take away our pride.
		
		From all that terror teaches
		 From lies of tongue and pen
		From all the easy speeches
		 That comfort cruel men
		From sale and profanation
		 Of honour and the sword
		From sleep and from damnation
		 Deliver us good Lord!
		
		Tie in a living tether
		 The prince and priest and thrall
		Bind all our lives together
		 Smite us and save us all;
		In ire and exultation
		 Aflame with faith and free
		Lift up a living nation
		 A single sword to thee.


	9. A HYMN FOR THE CHURCH MILITANT

		Great God that bowest sky and star
		 Bow down our towering thoughts to thee
		And grant us in a faltering war
		 The firm feet of humility.
		
		Lord we that snatch the swords of flame
		 Lord we that cry about Thy car.
		We too are weak with pride and shame
		 We too are as our foemen are.
		
		Yea we are mad as they are mad
		 Yea we are blind as they are blind
		Yea we are very sick and sad
		 Who bring good news to all mankind.
		
		The dreadful joy Thy Son has sent
		 Is heavier than any care;
		We find as Cain his punishment
		 Our pardon more than we can bear.
		
		Lord when we cry Thee far and near
		 And thunder through all lands unknown
		The gospel into every ear
		 Lord let us not forget our own.
		
		Cleanse us from ire of creed or class
		 The anger of the idle tings;
		Sow in our souls like living grass
		 The laughter of all lowly things.


	10. A MARRIAGE SONG

		Why should we reck of hours that rend
		 While we two ride together?
		The heavens rent from end to end
		 Would be but windy weather
		The strong stars shaken down in spate
		 Would be a shower of spring
		And we should list the trump of fate
		 And hear a linnet sing.
		
		We break the line with stroke and luck
		 The arrows run like rain
		If you be struck or I be struck
		 There’s one to strike again.
		If you befriend or I befriend
		 The strength is in us twain
		And good things end and bad things end
		 And you and I remain.
		
		Why should we reck of ill or well
		 While we two ride together?
		The fires that over Sodom fell
		 Would be but sultry weather.
		Beyond all ends to all men given
		 Our race is far and fell
		We shall but wash our feet in heaven
		 And warm our hands in hell.
		
		Battles unborn and vast shall view
		 Our faltered standards stream
		New friends shall come and frenzies new.
		 New troubles toil and teem;
		New friends shall pass and still renew
		 One truth that does not seem
		That I am I and you are you
		 And Death a morning dream.
		
		Why should we reck of scorn or praise
		 While we two ride together?
		The icy air of godless days
		 Shall be but wintry weather.
		If hell were highest if the heaven
		 Were blue with devils blue
		I should have guessed that all was even
		 If I had dreamed of you.
		
		Little I reck of empty prides
		 Of creeds more cold than clay;
		To nobler ends and longer rides
		 My lady rides to-day.
		To swing our swords and take our sides
		 In that all-ending fray
		When stars fall down and darkness hides
		 When God shall turn to bay.
		
		Why should we reck of grin and groan
		 While we two ride together?
		The triple thunders of the throne
		 Would be but stormy weather.
		For us the last great fight shall roar
		 Upon the ultimate plains
		And we shall turn and tell once more
		 Our love in English lanes.


	11. A SONG OF DEFEAT

		The line breaks and the guns go under
		 The lords and the lackeys ride the plain;
		I draw deep breaths of the dawn and thunder
		 And the whole of my heart grows young again.
		For our Chiefs said “Done“ and I did not deem it;
		 Our Seers said “Peace“ and it was not peace;
		Earth will grow worse till men redeem it
		 And wars more evil ere all wars cease.
		But the old flags reel and the old drums rattle.
		 As once in my life they throbbed and reeled;
		I have found ray youth in the lost battle
		 I have found my heart on the battlefield.
		   For we that fight till the world is free
		   We are not easy in victory:
		   We have known each other too long my brother
		   And fought each other the world and we.
		
		And I dream of the days when work was scrappy
		 And rare in our pockets the mark of the mint
		When we were angry and poor and happy
		 And proud of seeing our names in print.
		For so they conquered and so we scattered
		 When the Devil rode and his dogs smelt gold
		And the peace of a harmless folk was shattered;
		 When I was twenty and odd years old.
		When the mongrel men that the market classes
		 Had slimy hands upon England’s rod
		And sword in hand upon Afric’s passes
		 Her last Republic cried to God.
		   For the men no lords can buy or sell
		   They sit not easy when all goes well.
		   They have said to each other what naught can smother
		   They have seen each other our souls and hell.
		
		It is all as of old; the empty clangour.
		 The Nothing scrawled on a five-foot page
		The huckster who mocking holy anger
		 Painfully paints his face with rage.
		And the faith of the poor is faint and partial
		 And the pride of the rich is all for sale
		And the chosen heralds of England’s Marshal
		 Are the sandwich-men of the “Daily Mail.”
		And the niggards that dare not give are glutted
		 And the feeble that dare not fail are strong
		So while the City of Toil is gutted
		 I sit in the saddle and sing my song.
		   For we that fight till the world is free
		   We have no comfort in victory;
		   We have read each other as Cain his brother
		   We know each other these slaves and we.


	12. A SONG OF GIFTS TO GOD

		When the first Christmas presents came the straw where Christ was rolled
		Smelt sweeter than their frankincense burnt brighter than their gold
		And a wise man said “We will not give; the thanks would be but cold.”
		
		“Nay“ said the next “To all new gifts to this gift or another
		Bends the high gratitude of God; even as He now my brother
		Who had a Father for all time yet thanks Him for a Mother.
		
		“Yet scarce for Him this yellow stone or prickly-smells and sparse.
		Who holds the gold heart of the sun that fed these timber bars
		Nor any scentless lily lives for One that smells the stars.”
		
		Then spake the third of the Wise Men; the wisest of the three:
		“We may not with the widest lives enlarge His liberty
		Whose wings are wider than the world. It is not He but we.
		
		“We say not He has more to gain but we have more to lose.
		Less gold shall go astray we say less gold if thus we choose
		Go to make harlots of the Greeks and hucksters of the Jews.
		
		“Less clouds before colossal feet redden in the under-light
		To the blind gods from Babylon less incense burn to-night
		To the high beasts of Babylon whose mouths make mock of right.”
		
		Babe of the thousand birthdays we that are young yet grey
		White with the centuries still can find no better thing to say
		We that with sects and whims and wars have wasted Christmas Day.
		
		Light Thou Thy censer to Thyself for all our fires are dim
		Stamp Thou Thine image on our coin for Caesar’s face grows dim
		And a dumb devil of pride and greed has taken hold of him.
		
		We bring Thee back great Christendom churches and towns and towers.
		And if our hands are glad O God to cast them down like flowers
		’Tis not that they enrich Thine hands but they are saved from ours.


	13. A SONG OF SWORDS

		    “A DROVE OF CATTLE CAME INTO A VILLAGE CALLED
		    SWORDS AND WAS STOPPED BY THE RIOTERS.” ---_Daily Paper_.
		
		In the place called Swords on the Irish road
		It is told for a new renown
		How we field the horns of the cattle and how
		We will hold the horns of the devil now
		Ere the lord of bell with the horn on his brow
		   Is crowned in Dublin town
		
		Light in the East and light in the West
		And light on the cruel lords
		On the souls that suddenly all men knew
		And the green flag flew and the red flag flew
		And many a wheel of the world stopped too
		   When the cattle were stopped at Swords.
		
		Be they sinners or less than saints
		That smite in the street for rage
		We know where the shame shines bright; we know
		You that they smite at you their foe
		Lords of the lawless wage and low.
		   This is your lawful wage.
		
		You pinched a child to a torture price
		That you dared not name in words;
		So black a jest was the silver bit
		That your own speech shook for the shame of
		And the coward was plain as a cow they hit
		   When the cattle have strayed at Swords.
		
		The wheel of the torment of wives went round
		To break men’s brotherhood;
		You gave the good Irish blood to grease
		The clubs of your country’s enemies;
		You saw the brave man beat to the knees:
		   And you saw that it was good.
		
		The rope of the rich is long and long--
		The longest of hangmen’s cords;
		But the kings and crowds are holding their bream
		In a giant shadow o’er all beneath
		Where God stands holding the scales of Death
		   Between the cattle and Swords.
		
		Haply the lords that hire and lend
		The lowest of all men’s lords
		Who sell their kind like kine at a fair.
		Will find no head of their cattle there;
		But faces of men where cattle were:
		   Faces of men--and Swords.
		
		And the name shining and terrible
		The sternest of all man’s words
		Still mark that place to seek or shun
		In the streets where the struggling cattle run--
		Grass and a silence of judgment done
		   In the place that is called Swords.


	14. A WORD

		A word came forth in Galilee a word like to a star;
		It climbed and rang and blessed and burnt wherever brave hearts are;
		A word of sudden secret hope of trial and increase
		Of wrath and pity fused in fire and passion kissing peace.
		A star that o’er the citied world beckoned a sword of flame;
		A star with myriad thunders tongued: a mighty word there came.
		
		The wedge’s dart passed into it the groan of timberwains
		The ringing of the rivet nails the shrieking of the planes;
		The hammering on the roofs at morn the busy workshop roar;
		The hiss of shavings drifted deep along the windy floor;
		The heat-browned toiler’s crooning song the hum of human worth--
		Mingled of all the noise of crafts the ringing word went forth.
		
		The splash of nets passed into it the grind of sand and shell
		The boat-hook’s clash the boat-oars’ jar the cries to buy and sell
		The flapping of the landed shoals the canvas crackling free
		And through all varied notes and cries the roaring of the sea
		The noise of little lives and brave of needy lives and high;
		In gathering all the throes of earth the living word went by.
		
		Earth’s giant sins bowed down to it in Empire’s huge eclipse
		When darkness sat above the thrones seven thunders on her lips
		The woe of cities entered it the clang of idols’ falls
		The scream of filthy Caesars stabbed high in their brazen halls
		The dim hoarse Hoods of naked men the worldrealms snapping girth
		The trumpets of Apocalypse the darkness of the earth:
		
		The wrath that brake the eternal lamp and hid the eternal hill
		A world’s destruction loading the word went onward still--
		The blaze of creeds passed into it the hiss of horrid fires
		The headlong spear the scarlet cross the hair-shirt and the briars
		The cloistered brethren’s thunderous chaunt the errant champion’s song
		The shifting of the crowns and thrones the tangle of the strong.
		
		The shattering fall of crest and crown and shield and cross and cope
		The tearing of the gauds of time the blight of prince and pope
		The reign of ragged millions leagued to wrench a loaded debt
		Loud with the many throated roar the word went forward yet.
		The song of wheels passed into it the roaring and the smoke
		The riddle of the want and wage the fogs that burn and choke.
		The breaking of the girths of gold the needs that creep and swell.
		The strengthening hope the dazing light the deafening evangel
		Through kingdoms dead and empires damned through changes without cease
		With earthquake chaos born and fed rose--and the word was “Peace.”


	15. AFRICA

		A sleepy people without priests or kings
		Dreamed here men say to drive us to the sea:
		O let us drive ourselves! For it is free
		And smells of honour and of English things.
		How came we brawling by these bitter springs
		 We of the North?--two kindly nations--we?
		Though the dice rattles and the clear coin rings
		 Here is no place for living men to be.
		Leave them the gold that worked and whined for it
		 Let them that have no nation anywhere
		   Be native here and fat and full of bread;
		But we whose sins were human we will quit
		 The land of blood and leave these vultures there
		   Noiselessly happy feeding on the dead.


	16. AN ELECTION ECHO

		This is their trumpet ripe and rounded
		They have burnt the wheat and gathered the chaff
		And we that have fought them we that have watched them
		Have we at least not cause to laugh?
		
		Never so low at least we stumbled--
		Dead we have been but not so dead
		As these that live on the life they squandered
		As these that drink of the blood they shed.
		
		We never boasted the thing we blundered
		We never Haunted the thing that fails
		We never quailed from the living laughter
		To howl to the dead who tell no tales
		
		‘Twas another finger at least that pointed
		Our wasted men or our emptied bags
		It was not we that sounded the trumpet
		In front of the triumph of wrecks and rags.
		
		Fear not these they have made their bargain
		They have counted the cost of the last of raids
		They have staked their lives on the things that live not
		They have burnt their house for a fire that fades.
		
		Five years ago and we might have feared them
		Been drubbed by the coward and taught by the dunce;
		Truth may endure and be told and re-echoed
		But a lie can never be young but once.
		
		Five years ago and we might have feared them;
		Now when they lift the laurelled brow
		There shall naught go up from our hosts assembled
		But a laugh like thunder. We know them now.


	17. BALLAD OF THE SUN

		O well for him that loves the sun
		That sees the heaven-race ridden or run
		The splashing seas of sunset won
		 And shouts for victory.
		
		God made the sun to crown his head
		And when death’s dart at last is sped
		At least it will not find him dead
		 And pass the carrion by.
		
		O ill for him that loves the sun;
		Shall the sun stoop for anyone?
		Shall the sun weep for hearts undone
		 Or heavy souls that pray?
		
		Not less for us and everyone
		Was that white web of splendour spun;
		O well for him who loves the sun
		 Although the sun should slay.


	18. BALLADE D’UNE GRANDE DAME

		Heaven shall forgive you Bridge at dawn
		The clothes you wear--or do not wear--
		And Ladies’ Leap-frog on the lawn
		And dyes and drugs and _petits verres._
		Your vicious things shall melt in air . . .
		. . . But for the Virtuous Things you do
		The Righteous Work the Public Care
		It shall not be forgiven you.
		
		Because you could not even yawn
		When your Committees would prepare
		To have the teeth of paupers drawn
		Or strip the slums of Human Hair;
		Because a Doctor Otto Maehr
		Spoke of “a segregated few“--
		And you sat smiling in your chair--
		It shall not be forgiven you.
		
		Though your sins cried to---Father Vaughan
		These desperate you could not spare
		Who steal with nothing left to pawn;
		You caged a man up like a bear
		For ever in a jailor’s care
		Because his sins were more than _two_ . . .
		. . . I know a house in Hoxton where
		It shall not be forgiven you.
		
		Envoi:
		
		Princess you trapped a guileless Mayor
		To meet some people that you knew . . .
		When the Last Trumpet rends the air
		It shall not be forgiven you.


	19. BAY COMBE

		With leaves below and leaves above
		And groping under tree and tree
		I found the home of my true love
		Who is a wandering home for me.
		
		Who lost in ruined worlds aloof
		Bore the dread dove wings like a roof;
		Who past the last lost stars of space
		Carried the fire-light on her face.
		
		Who passing as in idle hours
		Tamed the wild weeds to garden flowers;
		Stroked the strange whirlwind’s whirring wings
		And made the comets homely things.
		
		Where she went by upon her way
		The dark was dearer than the day;
		Where she paused in heaven or hell
		The whole world’s tale had ended well.
		
		_With leaves below and leaves above._
		_And groping under tree and tree_
		_I found the home of my true love_
		_Who is a wandering home for me_.
		
		Where she was flung above beneath
		By the rude dance of life and death
		Grow she at Gotham--die at Rome
		Between the pine trees is her home.
		
		In some strange town some silver morn
		She may have wandered to be born;
		Stopped at some motley crowd impressed
		And called them kinsfolk for a jest.
		
		If we again En goodness thrive
		And the dead saints become alive
		Then pedants bald and parchments brown
		May claim her blood for London town.
		
		_But leaves below and leaves above._
		_And groping under tree and tree_
		_I found the home of my true love_
		_Who is a wandering home for me_.
		
		The great gravestone she may pass by
		And without noticing may die;
		The streets of silver Heaven may tread
		With her grey awful eyes unfed.
		
		The city of great peace in pain
		May pass until she find again
		This little house of holm and fir
		God built before the stars for her.
		
		Here in the fallen leaves is furled
		Her secret centre of the world.
		We sit and feel in dusk and dun
		The stars swing round us like a sun.
		
		_For leaves below and leaves above._
		_And groping under tree and tree_
		_I found the home of my true love._
		_Who is a wandering home for me_.


	20. BLESSED ARE THE PEACEMAKERS

		Of old with a divided heart
		 I saw my people’s pride expand
		Since a man’s soul is torn apart
		 By mother earth and fatherland.
		
		I knew through many a tangled tale
		 Glory and truth not one but two:
		King Constable and Amirail
		 Took me like trumpets: but I knew
		
		A blacker thing than blood’s own dye
		 Weighed down great Hawkins on the sea;
		And Nelson turned his blindest eye
		 On Naples and on liberty.
		
		Therefore to you my thanks O throne
		 O thousandfold and frozen folk
		For whose cold frenzies all your own
		 The Battle of the Rivers broke;
		
		Who have no faith a man could mourn.
		 Nor freedom any man desires;
		But in a new clean light of scorn
		 Close up my quarrel with my sires;
		
		Who bring my English heart to me
		 Who mend me like a broken toy;
		Till I can see you fight and flee
		 And laugh as if I were a boy.


	21. CONFESSIONAL

		Now that I kneel at the throne O Queen
		Pity and pardon me.
		Much have I striven to sing the same
		Brother of beast and tree;
		Yet when the stars catch me alone
		Never a linnet sings--
		And the blood of a man is a bitter voice
		And cries for foolish things.
		
		Not for me be the vaunt of woe;
		Was not I from a boy
		Vowed with the helmet and spear and spur
		To the blood-red banner of joy?
		A man may sing his psalms to a stone
		Pour his blood for a weed
		But the tears of a man are a sudden thing
		And come not of his creed.
		
		Nay but the earth is kind to me
		Though I cry for a Star
		Leaves and grasses feather and flower
		Cover the foolish scar
		Prophets and saints and seraphim
		Lighten the load with song
		And the heart of a man is a heavy load
		For a man to bear along.


	22. GLENCOE

		The star-crowned cliffs seem hinged upon the sky
		The clouds are floating rags across them curled
		They open to us like the gates of God
		Cloven in the last great wall of all the world.
		
		I looked and saw the valley of my soul
		Where naked crests fight to achieve the skies
		Where no grain grows nor wine no fruitful thing
		Only big words and starry blasphemies.
		
		But you have clothed with mercy like a moss
		The barren violence of its primal wars
		Sterile although they be and void of rule
		You know my shapeless crags have Wed the stars.
		
		How shall I thank you O courageous heart.
		That of this wasteful world you had no fear;
		But bade it blossom in clear faith and sent
		Your fair flower-feeding rivers: even as here
		
		The peat burns brimming from their cups of stone
		Glow brown and blood-red down the vast decline
		As if Christ stood on yonder clouded peak
		And turned its thousand waters into wine.


	23. IN MEMORIAM P.D.

		If any in an island cradle curled
		Of comfort may make offerings to you
		Who in the day of all denial blew
		A bugle through the blackness of the world
		
		An English hand would touch your shroud in trust
		That truth again be told in English speech.
		And we too yet may practise what we preach
		Though it were practising the bayonet thrust.
		
		Cutting that giant neck from sand to sand
		From sea to sea; it was a little thing
		Beside your sudden shout and sabre-swing
		That cut the throat of thieves in every land.
		
		Heed not if half-wits mock your broken blade:
		Mammon our master doeth all things ill.
		You are the Fool that charged a windmill. Still
		The Miller is a Knave; and was afraid.
		
		Lay down your sword. Ruin will know her own.
		Let each small statesman sow his weak wild oat
		Or turn his coat to decorate his coat
		Or take the throne and perish by the throne.
		
		Lay down your sword. And let the White Flag fade
		To grey; and let the Red Flag fade to pink
		For these that climb and climb; and cannot sink
		So deep as death and honour Déroulède.


	24. LEPANTO

		White founts falling in the Courts of the sun
		And the Soldan of Byzantium is smiling as they run;
		There is laughter like the fountains in that face of all men feared
		It stirs the forest darkness the darkness of his beard
		It curls the blood-red crescent the crescent of his lips
		For the inmost sea of all the earth is shake with his ships.
		They have dared the white republics up the cape of Italy
		They have dashed the Adriatic round the Lion of the Sea
		And the Pope has cast his arms abroad for agony and loss
		And called the kings of Christendom for swords about the Cross.
		The cold queen of England is looking in the glass;
		The shadow of the Valois is yawning at the Mass;
		From evening isles fantastical rings faint the Spanish gun
		And the Lord upon the Golden Horn is laughing in the sun.
		
		Dim drums throbbing in the hills half heard
		Where only on a nameless throne a crownless prince has stirred
		Where risen from a doubtful seat and half attainted stall
		The last knight of Europe takes weapons from the wall
		The last and lingering troubadour to whom the bird has sung
		That once went singing southward when all the world was young.
		In that enormous silence tiny and unafraid
		Comes up along a winding road the noise of the Crusade.
		
		Strong gongs groaning as the guns boom far
		Don John of Austria is going to the war
		Stiff flags straining in the night-blasts cold
		In the gloom black-purple in the glint old-gold
		Torchlight crimson on the copper kettle-drums
		Then the tuckets then the trumpets then the cannon and he comes.
		Don John laughing in the brave beard curled.
		Spuming of his stirrups like the thrones of all the world
		Holding his head up for a flag of all the free.
		Love-light of Spain--hurrah!
		Death-light of Africa!
		Don John of Austria
		Is riding to the sea.
		
		Mahound is in his paradise above the evening star
		_(Don John of Austria is going to the war.)_
		He moves a mighty turban on the timeless houri’s knees
		His turban that is woven of the sunsets and the seas.
		He shakes the peacock gardens as he rises from his ease
		And he strides among the tree-tops and is taller than the trees
		And his voice through all the garden is a thunder sent to bring
		Black Azrael and Ariel and Ammon on the wing.
		Giants and the Genii
		Multiplex of wing and eye
		Whose strong obedience broke the sky
		When Solomon was king.
		
		They rush in red and purple from the red clouds of the morn
		From temples where the yellow gods shut up their eyes in scorn;
		They rise in green robes roaring from the green hells of the sea
		Where fallen skies and evil hues and eyeless creatures be;
		On them the sea-valves cluster and the grey sea-forests curl
		Splashed with a splendid sickness the sickness of the pearl;
		They swell in sapphire smoke out of the blue cracks of the ground--
		They gather and they wonder and give worship to Mahound.
		And he saith “Break up the mountains where the hermit-folk can hide
		And sift the red and silver sands lest bone of saint abide
		And chase the Giaours flying night and day not giving rest
		For that which was our trouble comes again out of the west.
		We have set the seal of Solomon on all things under sun
		Of knowledge and of sorrow and endurance of things done
		But a noise is in ‘the mountains in the mountains and I know
		The voice that shook our palaces--four hundred years ago:
		It is he that saith not ‘Kismet’; it is he that knows not Fate;
		It is Richard it is Raymond it is Godfrey in the gate!
		It is he whose loss is laughter when he counts the wager worth
		Put down your feet upon him that our peace be on the earth.”
		For he heard drums groaning and he heard guns jar
		_(Don John of Austria is going to the war.)_
		Sudden and still--hurrah!
		Bolt from Iberia!
		Don John of Austria
		Is gone by Alcalar.
		
		St. Michael’s on his Mountain in the sea-roads of the north
		_(Don John of Austria is girt and going forth.)_
		Where the grey seas glitter and the sharp tides shift
		And the sea-folk labour and the red sails lift.
		He shakes his lance of iron and he claps his wings of stone;
		The noise is gone through Normandy; the noise is gone alone;
		The North is full of tangled things and texts and aching eyes
		And dead is all the innocence of anger and surprise
		And Christian killeth Christian in a narrow dusty
		And Christian dreadeth Christ that hath a newer face of doom
		And Christian hateth Mary that God kissed in Galilee
		But Don John of Austria is riding to the sea.
		Don John calling through the blast and the eclipse
		Crying with the trumpet with the trumpet of his lips
		Trumpet that sayeth ha!
		   _Domino gloria_!
		Don John of Austria
		Is shouting to the ships.
		
		King Philip’s in his closet with the Fleece about his neck
		_(Don John of Austria is armed upon the deck.)_
		The walls are hung with velvet that is black and soft as sin
		And little dwarfs creep out of it and little dwarfs creep in.
		He holds a crystal phial that has colours like the moon
		He touches and it tingles and he trembles very
		And his face is as a fungus of a leprous white and grey
		Like plants in the high houses that are shuttered from the day.
		And death is in the phial and the end of noble work
		But Don John of Austria has fired upon the Turk.
		Don John’s hunting and his hounds have bayed--Booms
		away past Italy the rumour of his raid.
		Gun upon gun ha! ha!
		Gun upon gun hurrah!
		Don John of Austria
		Has loosed the cannonade.
		
		The Pope was in his chapel before day or battle broke
		_(Don John of Austria is hidden in the smoke.)_
		The hidden room in man’s house where God sits all the year
		The secret window whence the world looks small and very dear.
		He sees as in a mirror on the monstrous twilight sea
		The crescent of his cruel ships whose name is mystery;
		They fling great shadows foe-wards making Cross and Castle dark
		They veil the plumed lions on the galleys of St. Mark;
		And above the ships are palaces of brown black-bearded chiefs
		And below the ships are prisons where with multitudinous griefs
		Christian captives sick and sunless all a labouring race repines
		Like a race in sunken cities like a nation in the mines.
		They are lost like slaves that swat and in the skies of morning hung
		The stair-ways of the tallest gods when tyranny was young.
		They are countless voiceless hopeless as those fallen or fleeing on
		Before the high Kings’ horses in the granite of Babylon.
		And many a one grows witless in his quiet room in hell
		Where a yellow face looks inward through the lattice of his cell
		And he finds his God forgotten and he seeks no more a sign_(But
		Don John of Austria has burst the battle-line!)_
		Don John pounding from the slaughter-painted poop
		Purpling all the ocean like a bloody pirate’s sloop
		Scarlet running over on the silvers and the golds
		Breaking of the hatches up and bursting of the holds
		Thronging of the thousands up that labour under sex
		White for bliss and blind for sun and stunned for liberty.
		_Vivat Hispania!_
		_Domino Gloria!_
		Don John of Austria
		Has set his people free!
		
		Cervantes on his galley sets the sword back in the sheath
		_(Don John of Austria rides homeward with a wreath.)_
		And he sees across a weary land a straggling road in Spain
		Up which a lean and foolish knight for ever rides in vain
		And he smiles but not as Sultans smile and settles back the blade . . .
		_(But Don John of Austria rides home from the Crusade_.)


	25. LOVE’S TRAPPIST

		There is a place where lute and lyre are broken.
		Where scrolls are torn and on a wild wind go
		Where tablets stand wiped naked for a token
		Where laurels wither and the daisies grow.
		
		Lo: I too join the brotherhood of silence
		I am Love’s Trappist and you ask in vain
		For man through Love’s gate even as through Death’s gate
		Goeth alone and comes not back again.
		
		Yet here I pause look back across the threshold.
		Cry to my brethren though the world be old
		Prophets and sages questioners and doubters
		O world old world the best hath ne’er been told!


	26. MUSIC

		Sounding brass and tinkling cymbal
		 He that made me sealed my ears
		And the pomp of gorgeous noises
		 Waves of triumph waves of tears
		
		Thundered empty round and past me
		 Shattered lost for ever more
		Ancient gold of pride and passion
		 Wrecked like treasure on a shore.
		
		But I saw her cheek and forehead
		 Change as at a spoken word
		And I saw her head uplifted
		 Like a lily to the Lord.
		
		Nought is lost but all transmuted
		 Ears are sealed yet eyes have seen;
		Saw her smiles (O soul be worthy!)
		 Saw her tears (O heart be clean!).


	27. ON RIGHTEOUS INDIGNATION

		When Adam went from Paradise
		 He saw the Sword and ran;
		The dreadful shape the new device
		The pointed end of Paradise
		And saw what Peril is and Price
		 And knew he was a man.
		
		When Adam went from Paradise
		 He turned him back and cried
		For a little flower from Paradise;
		There came no flower from Paradise;
		The woods were dark in Paradise
		 And not a bird replied.
		
		For only comfort or contempt
		 For jest or great reward
		Over the walls of Paradise
		The flameless gates of Paradise
		The dumb shut doors of Paradise
		 God flung the flaming sword.
		
		It burns the hand that holds it
		 More than the skull it scores;
		It doubles like a snake and stings
		Yet he in whose hand it swings
		He is the most masterful of things
		 A scorner of the stars.


	28. SONNET

			On hearing a landlord accused (falsely for 
			all the bard can say) of neglecting one of the 
			numerous white horses that were or were not
			connected with Alfred the Great.
		
		    If you have picked your lawn of leaves and snails
		    If you have told your valet even with oaths
		    Once a week or so to brush your clothes.
		    If you have dared to clean your teeth or nails
		    While the Horse upon the holy mountain fails--
		    Then God that Alfred to his earth betrothes
		    Send on you screaming all that honour loathes
		    Horsewhipping Hounsditch debts and _Daily Mails_.
		
		    Can you not even conserve? For if indeed
		    The White Horse fades; then closer creeps the fight
		    When we shall scour the face of England white
		    Plucking such men as you up like a weed
		    And fling them far beyond a shaft shot right
		    When Wessex went to battle for the creed.


	29. THE BEATIFIC VISION

		Then Bernard smiled at me that I should gaze
		   But I had gazed already; caught the view
		Faced the unfathomable ray of rays
		   Which to itself and by itself is true.
		
		Then was my vision mightier than man’s speech;
		   Speech snapt before it like a flying spell;
		And memory and all that time can teach
		   Before that splendid outrage failed and fell.
		
		As when one dreameth and remembereth not
		   Waking what were his pleasures or his pains
		With every feature of the dream forgot
		   The printed passion of the dream remains:--
		
		Even such am I; within whose thoughts resides
		   No picture of that sight nor any part
		Nor any memory: in whom abides
		   Only a happiness within the heart
		
		A secret happiness that soaks the heart
		   As hills are soaked by slow unsealing snow
		Or secret as that wind without a chart
		   Whereon did the wild leaves of Sibyl go.
		
		O light uplifted from all mortal knowing
		   Send back a little of that glimpse of thee.
		That of its glory I may kindle glowing
		   One tiny spark for all men yet to be.


	30. THE CONVERT

		After one moment when I bowed my head
		And the whole world turned over and came upright
		And I came out where the old road shone white.
		I walked the ways and heard what all men said
		Forests of tongues like autumn leaves unshed
		Being not unlovable but strange and light;
		Old riddles and new creeds not in despite
		But softly as men smile about the dead
		
		The sages have a hundred maps to give
		That trace their crawling cosmos like a tree
		They rattle reason out through many a sieve
		That stores the sand and lets the gold go free:
		And all these things are less than dust to me
		Because my name is Lazarus and I live.


	31. THE CRUSADER RETURNS FROM CAPTIVITY

		I have come forth alive from the land of purple and poison and glamour
		 Where the charm is strong as the torture being chosen to change the mind;
		Torture of wordless dance and wineless feast without clamour
		 Palace hidden in palace garden with garden behind;
		
		Women veiled in the sun or bare as brass in the shadows
		 And the endless eyeless patterns where each thing seems an eye . . .
		And my stride is on Caesar’s sand where it slides to the English meadows
		 To the last low woods of Sussex and the road that goes to Rye.
		
		In the cool and careless woods the eyes of the eunuchs burned not
		 But the wild hawk went before me being free to return or roam
		The hills had broad unconscious backs; and the tree-tops turned not
		 And the huts were heedless of me: and I knew I was at home.
		
		And I saw my lady afar and her holy freedom upon her
		 A head without veil averted and not to be turned with charms
		And I heard above bannerets blown the intolerant trumpets of honour
		 That usher with iron laughter the coming of Christian arms.
		
		My shield hangs stainless still; but I shall not go where they praise it
		 A sword is still at my side but I shall not ride with the King.
		Only to walk and to walk and to stun my soul and amaze it
		 A day with the stone and the sparrow and every marvellous thing.
		
		I have trod the curves of the Crescent in the maze of them that adore it
		 Curved around doorless chambers and unbeholden abodes
		But I walk in the maze no more; on the sign of the cross I swore it
		 The wild white cross of freedom the sign of the white cross-roads.
		
		And the land shall leave me or take and the Woman take me or leave me
		 There shall be no more Night or nightmares seen in a glass;
		But Life shall hold me alive and Death shall never deceive me
		 As long as I walk in England in the lanes that let me pass.


	32. THE DEAD HERO

		We never saw you like our sires
		 For whom your face was Freedom’s face
		Nor know what office-tapes and wires
		 With such strong cords may interlace;
		We know not if the statesmen then
		 Were fashioned as the sort we see
		We know that not under your ken
		 Did England laugh at Liberty.
		
		Yea this one thing is known of you
		 We know that not till you were dumb
		Not till your course was thundered through
		 Did Mammon see his kingdom come.
		The songs of theft the swords of hire
		 The clerks that raved the troops that ran
		The empire of the world’s desire
		 The dance of all the dirt began.
		
		The happy jewelled alien men
		 Worked then but as a little leaven;
		From some more modest palace then
		 The Soul of Dives stank to Heaven.
		But when they planned with lisp and leer
		 Their careful war upon the weak
		They smote your body on its bier
		 For surety that you could not speak.
		
		A hero in the desert died;
		 Men cried that saints should bury him.
		And round the grave should guard and ride
		 A chivalry of Cherubim.
		God said: “There is a better place
		 A nobler trophy and more tall;
		The beasts that fled before his face
		 Shall come to make his funeral.
		
		“The mighty vermin of the void
		 That hid them from his bended bow
		Shall crawl from caverns overjoyed
		 Jackal and snake and carrion crow.
		And perched above the vulture’s eggs
		 Reversed upon its hideous head
		A blue-faced ape shall wave its legs
		 To tell the world that he is dead.”


	33. THE DEDICATION OF THE MAN WHO WAS THURSDAY

		A cloud was on the mind of men and wailing went the weather
		Yea a sick cloud upon the soul when we were boys together.
		Science announced nonentity and art admired decay;
		The world was old and ended: but you and I were gay.
		Round us in antic order their crippled vices came--
		Lust that had lost its laughter fear that had lost its shame.
		Like the white lock of Whistler that lit our aimless gloom
		Men showed their own white feather as proudly as a plume.
		Life was a fly that faded and death a drone that stung;
		The world was very old indeed when you and I were young.
		They twisted even decent sin to shapes not to be named:
		Men were ashamed of honour; but we were not ashamed.
		Weak if we were and foolish not thus we failed not thus;
		When that black Baal blocked the heavens he had no hymns from us.
		Children we were--our forts of sand were even as weak as we
		High as they went we piled them up to break that bitter sea.
		Fools as we were in motley all jangling and absurd
		When all church bells were silent our cap and bells were heard.
		
		Not all unhelped we held the fort our tiny flags unfurled;
		Some giants laboured in that cloud to lift it from the world.
		I find again the book we found I feel the hour that flings
		Far out of fish-shaped Paumanok some cry of cleaner things;
		And the Green Carnation withered as in forest fires that pass
		Roared in the wind of all the world ten million leaves of grass;
		Or sane and sweet and sudden as a bird sings in the rain
		Truth out of Tusitala spoke and pleasure out of pain.
		Yea cool and clear and sudden as a bird sings in the grey
		Dunedin to Samoa spoke and darkness unto day
		But we were young; we lived to see God break their bitter charms
		God and the good Republic come riding back in arms:
		We have seen the city of Mansoul even as it rocked relieved--Blessed
		are they who did not see but being blind believed.
		
		This is a tale of those old fears even of those emptied hells
		And none but you shall understand the true thing that it tells--
		Of what colossal gods of shame could cow men and yet crash
		Of what huge devils hid the stars yet fell at a pistol flash.
		The doubts that were so plain to chase so dreadful to withstand--
		Oh who shall understand but you; yea who shall understand?
		The doubts that drove us through the night as we two talked amain
		And day had broken on the streets e’er it broke upon the brain.
		Between us by the peace of God such truth can now be told;
		Yea there is strength in striking root and good in growing old.
		We have found common things at last and marriage and a creed.
		And I may safely write it now and you may safely read.


	34. THE DELUGE

		Though giant rains put out the sun
		 Here stand I for a sign.
		Though Earth be filled with waters dark
		 My cup is filled with wine.
		Tell to the trembling priests that here
		 Under the deluge rod
		One nameless tattered broken man
		 Stood up and drank to God.
		
		Sun has been where the rain is now
		 Bees in the heat to hum
		Haply a humming maiden came
		 Now let the Deluge come:
		Brown of aureole green of garb
		 Straight as a golden rod
		Drink to the throne of thunder now!
		 Drink to the wrath of God.
		
		High in the wreck I held the cup
		 I clutched my rusty sword
		I cocked my tattered feather
		 To the glory of the Lord.
		Not undone were the heaven and earth
		 This hollow world thrown up
		Before one man had stood up straight!
		 And drained it like a cup.


	35. THE DONKEY

		When fishes flew and forests walked
		   And figs grew upon thorn
		Some moment when the moon was blood
		   Then surely I was born.
		
		With monstrous head and sickening cry
		   And ears like errant wings
		The devil’s walking parody
		   On all four-footed things.
		
		The tattered outlaw of the earth
		   Of ancient crooked will;
		Starve scourge deride me: I am dumb
		   I keep my secret still.
		
		Fools! For I also had my hour;
		   One far fierce hour and sweet:
		There was a shout about my ears
		   And palms before my feet.


	36. THE EARTH’S VIGIL

		The old earth keepeth her watch the same.
		 Alone in a voiceless void doth stand
		Her orange flowers in her bosom flame
		 Her gold ring in her hand.
		The surfs of the long gold-crested morns
		 Break ever more at her great robe’s hem
		And evermore come the bleak moon-horns.
		 But she keepeth not watch for them.
		
		     She keepeth her watch through the awns
		       But the heart of her groweth not old
		     For the peal of the bridegroom’s paeans
		       And the tale she once was told.
		
		The nations shock and the cities reel
		 The empires travail and rive and rend
		And she looks on havoc and smoke and steel
		 And knoweth it is not the end.
		The faiths may choke and the powers despair
		 The powers re-arise and the faiths renew
		She is only a maiden waiting there
		 For the love whose word is true.
		
		     She keepeth her watch through the aeons
		       But the heart of her groweth not old
		     For the peal of the bridegroom’s paeans
		       And the tale she once was told.
		
		Through the cornfield’s gleam and the cottage shade
		 They wait unwearied the young and old
		Mother for child and man for maid.
		 For a love that once was told.
		The hair grows grey under thatch or slates
		 The eyes grow dim behind lattice panes
		The earth-race wait as the old earth waits
		 And the hope in the heart remains.
		
		     She keepeth her watch through the aeons
		       But the heart of her groweth not old
		     For the peal of the bridegroom’s paeans
		       And the tale she once was told.
		
		God’s gold ring on her hand is bound
		 She fires with blossom the grey hill-sides
		Her fields are quickened her forests crowned
		 While the love of her heart abides
		And we from the fears that fret and mar
		 Look up in hours and behold awhile
		Her face colossal mid star on star
		 Still looking forth with a smile.
		
		     She keepeth her watch through the sons
		       But the heart of her groweth not old
		     For the peal of the bridegroom’s paeans
		       And the tale she once was told.


	37. THE GREAT MINIMUM

		It is something to have wept as we have wept
		It is something to have done as we have done
		It is something to have watched when all men slept
		And seen the stars which never see the sun.
		
		It is something to have smelt the mystic rose
		Although it break and leave the thorny rods
		It is something to have hungered once as those
		Must hunger who have ate the bread of gods.
		
		To have seen you and your unforgotten face
		Brave as a blast of trumpets for the fray.
		Pure as white lilies in a watery space
		It were something though you went from me to-day.
		
		To have known the things that from the weak are furled
		Perilous ancient passions strange and high;
		It is something to be wiser than the world
		It is something to be older than the sky.
		
		In a time of sceptic moths and cynic rusts
		And fatted lives that of their sweetness tire
		In a world of flying loves and fading lusts
		It is something to be sure of a desire.
		
		Lo blessed are our ears for they have heard;
		Yea blessed are our eyes for they have seen:
		Let thunder break on man and beast and bird
		And the lightning. It is something to have been.


	38. THE HIGHER UNITY

		    “The Rev. Isaiah Bunter has disappeared into the interior
		    of the Solomon Islands and it is feared that he may have
		    been devoured by the natives as there has been a considerable
		    revival of religious customs among the Polynesians.”
		    _A real paragraph from a real Paper; only the names altered._
		
		It was Isaiah Bunter
		 Who sailed to the world’s end
		And spread religion in a way
		 That he did not intend.
		
		He gave if not the gospel-feast
		 At least a ritual meal;
		And in a highly painful sense
		 He was devoured with zeal.
		
		And who are we (as Henson says)
		 That we should close the door?
		And should not Evangelicals
		 All jump at shedding Gore?
		
		And many a man will melt in man
		 Becoming one not two
		When smacks across the startled earth
		 The Kiss of Kikuyu.
		
		When Man is the Turk and the Atheist
		Essene Erastian Whig
		And the Thug and the Druse and the Catholic
		 And the crew of the Captain’s gig.


	39. THE HORRIBLE HISTORY OF JONES

		Jones had a dog; it had a chain;
		Not often worn not causing pain;
		But as the I.K.L. had passed
		Their “Unleashed Cousins Act“ at last
		Inspectors took the chain away;
		Whereat the canine barked “hurray“!
		At which of course the S.P.U.
		(Whose Nervous Motorists’ Bill was through)
		Were forced to give the dog in charge
		For being Audibly at Large.
		None you will say were now annoyed
		Save haply Jones--the yard was void.
		But something being in the lease
		About “alarms to aid police”
		The U.S.U. annexed the yard
		For having no sufficient guards
		Now if there’s one condition
		The C.C.P. are strong upon
		It is that every house one buys
		Must have a yard for exercise;
		So Jones as tenant was unfit.
		His state of health was proof of it.
		Two doctors of the T.T.U.‘s
		Told him his legs from long disuse
		Were atrophied; and saying “So
		From step to higher step we go
		Till everything is New and True”
		They cut his legs off and withdrew.
		You know the E.T.S.T.‘s views
		Are stronger than the T.T.U.‘s:
		And soon (as one may say) took wing
		The Arms though not the Man I sing.
		To see him sitting limbless there
		Was more than the K.K. could bear
		“In mercy silence with all speed
		That mouth there are no hands to feed;
		What cruel sentimentalist
		O Jones would doom thee to exist--
		Clinging to selfish Selfhood yet?
		Weak one! Such reasoning might upset
		The Pump Act and the accumulation
		Of all constructive legislation;
		Let us construct you up a bit--”
		The head fell off when it was hit:
		Then words did rise and honest doubt
		And four Commissions sat about
		Whether the slash that left him dead
		Cut off his body or his head.
		
		An author in the Isle of Wight
		Observed with unconcealed delight
		A land of old and just renown
		Where Freedom slowly broadened down
		From Precedent to Precedent . . .
		And this I think was what he meant.


	40. THE HOUSE OF CHRISTMAS

		There fared a mother driven forth
		Out of an inn to roam;
		In the place where she was homeless
		All men are at home.
		The crazy stable close at hand
		With shaking timber and shifting sand
		Grew a stronger thing to abide and stand
		Than the square stones of Rome.
		
		For men are homesick in their homes
		And strangers under the sun
		And they lay their heads in a foreign land
		Whenever the day is done.
		Here we have battle and blazing eyes
		And chance and honour and high surprise
		Where the yule tale was begun.
		
		A Child in a foul stable
		Where the beasts feed and foam;
		Only where He was homeless
		Are you and I at home;
		We have hands that fashion and heads that
		But our hearts we lost--how long ago!
		In a place no chart nor ship can show
		Under the sky’s dome.
		
		This world is wild as an old wives’ tale
		And strange the plain things are
		The earth is enough and the air is enough
		For our wonder and our war;
		But our rest is as far as the fire-drake swings
		And our peace is put in impossible things
		Where clashed and thundered unthinkable wings
		Round an incredible star.
		
		To an open house in the evening
		Home shall men come
		To an older place than Eden
		And a taller town than Rome.
		To the end of the way of the wandering star
		To the things that cannot be and that are
		To the place where God was homeless
		And all men are at home.


	41. THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN

		Said the Lord God “Build a house
		 Build it in the gorge of death
		Found it in the throats of hell.
		 Where the lost sea muttereth
		Fires and whirlwinds build it well.”
		
		Laboured sternly flame and wind
		 But a little and they cry
		“Lord we doubt of this Thy will
		 We are blind and murmur why”
		And the winds are murmuring still.
		
		Said the Lord God “Build a house
		 Cleave its treasure from the earth
		With the jarring powers of hell
		 Strive with formless might and mirth
		Tribes and war-men build it well.”
		
		Then the raw red sons of men
		 Brake the soil and lopped the wood
		But a little and they shrill
		 “Lord we cannot view Thy good”
		And the wild men clamour still.
		
		Said the Lord God “Build a house
		 Smoke and iron spark and steam
		Speak and vote and buy and sell;
		 Let a new world throb and stream
		Seers and makers build it well.”
		
		Strove the cunning men and strong
		 But a little and they cry
		“Lord mayhap we are but clay
		 And we cannot know the why”
		And the wise men doubt to-day.
		
		Yet though worn and deaf and blind
		 Force and savage king and seer
		Labour still they know not why;
		 At the dim foundation here
		Knead and plough and think and ply.
		
		Till at last mayhap hereon
		 Fused of passion and accord
		Love its crown and peace its stay
		 Rise the city of the Lord
		That we darkly build to-day.


	42. THE LAST HERO

		The wind blew out from Bergen from the dawning to the day
		There was a wreck of trees and fall of towers a score of miles away
		And drifted like a livid leaf I go before its tide
		Spewed out of house and stable beggared of flag and bride.
		The heavens are bowed about my head shouting like seraph wars.
		With rains that might put out the sun and clean the sky of stars
		Rains like the fall of ruined seas from secret worlds above
		The roaring of the rains of God none but the lonely love.
		Feast in my hall O foemen and eat and drink and drain
		You never loved the sun in heaven as I have loved the rain.
		
		The chance of battle changes--so may all battle be;
		I stole my lady bride from them they stole her back from me.
		I rent her from her red-roofed hall I rode and saw arise
		More lovely than the living flowers the hatred in her eyes.
		She never loved me never bent never was less divine;
		The sunset never loved me; the wind was never mine.
		Was it all nothing that she stood imperial in duresse?
		Silence itself made softer with the sweeping of her dress.
		O you who drain the cup of life O you who wear the crown
		You never loved a woman’s smile as I have loved her frown.
		
		The wind blew out from Bergen from the dawning to the day
		They ride and run with fifty spears to break and bar my way
		I shall not die alone alone but kin to all the powers.
		As merry as the ancient sun and fighting like the flowers.
		How white their steel how bright their eyes! I love each laughing knave.
		Cry high and bid him welcome to the banquet of the brave.
		Yea I will bless them as they bend and love them where they lie
		When on their skulls the sword I swing falls shattering from the sky.
		The hour when death is like a light and blood is like a rose--
		You never loved your friends my friends as I shall love my foes.
		
		Know you what earth shall lose to-night what rich uncounted loans
		What heavy gold of tales untold you bury with my bones?
		My loves in deep dim meadows my ships that rode at ease
		Ruffling the purple plumage of strange and secret seas.
		To see this fair earth as it is to me alone was given
		The blow that breaks my brow to-night shall break the dome of heaven.
		The skies I saw the trees I saw after no eyes shall see.
		To-night I die the death of God; the stars shall die with me:
		One sound shall sunder all the spears and break the trumpet’s breath:
		You never laughed in all your life as I shall laugh in death.


	43. THE MARCH OF THE BLACK MOUNTAIN

		What will there be to remember
		 Of us in the days to be?
		Whose faith was a trodden ember
		 And even our doubt not free;
		Parliaments built of paper
		 And the soft swords of gold
		That twist like a waxen taper
		 In the weak aggressor’s hold;
		A hush around Hunger slaying
		 A city of serfs unfed;
		What shall we leave for a saying
		 To praise us when we are dead?
		But men shall remember the Mountain
		 That broke its forest chains
		And men shall remember the Mountain
		 When it arches against the plains:
		And christen their children from it
		 And season and ship and street
		When the Mountain came to Mahomet
		 And looked small before his feet.
		
		His head was as high as the crescent
		 Of the moon that seemed his crown
		And on glory of past and present
		 The light of his eyes looked down;
		One hand went out to the morning
		 Over Brahmin and Buddhist slain
		And one to the West in scorning
		 To point at the scars of Spain;
		One foot on the hills for warden
		 By the little Mountain trod;
		And one was in a garden
		 And stood on the grave of God.
		But men shall remember the Mountain
		 Though it fall down like a tree
		They shall see the sign of the Mountain
		 Faith cast into the sea;
		Though the crooked swords overcome it
		 And the Crooked Moon ride free
		When the Mountain comes to Mahomet
		 It has more life than he.
		
		But what will there be to remember
		 Or what will there be to see--
		Though our towns through a long November
		 Abide to the end and be?
		Strength of slave and mechanic
		 Whose iron is ruled by gold
		Peace of immortal panic
		 Love that is hate grown cold--
		Are these a bribe or a warning
		 That we turn not to the sun
		Nor look on the lands of morning
		 Where deeds at last are done?
		Where men shall remember the Mountain
		 When truth forgets the plain--
		And walk in the way of the Mountain
		 That did not fail in vain;
		Death and eclipse and comet
		 Thunder and seals that rend:
		When the Mountain came to Mahomet;
		 Because it was the end.


	44. THE NATIVITY

		The thatch on the roof was as golden
		 Though dusty the straw was and old
		The wind had a peal as of trumpets
		 Though blowing and barren and cold
		The mother’s hair was a glory
		 Though loosened and torn
		For under the eaves in the gloaming
		     A child was born.
		
		Have a myriad children been quickened.
		 Have a myriad children grown old
		Grown gross and unloved and embittered
		 Grown cunning and savage and cold?
		God abides In a terrible patience
		 Unangered unworn
		And again for the child that was squandered
		     A child is born.
		
		What know we of æons behind us
		 Dim dynasties lost long ago
		Huge empires like dreams unremembered
		 Huge cities for ages laid low?
		This at least--that with blight and with blessing
		 With flower and with thorn
		Love was there and his cry was among them
		     “A child is born.”
		
		Though the darkness be noisy with systems
		 Dark fancies that fret and disprove
		Still the plumes stir around us above us
		 The wings of the shadow of love:
		Oh! princes and priests have ye seen it
		 Grow pale through your scorn.
		Huge dawns sleep before us deep changes
		     A child is born.
		
		And the rafters of toil still are gilded
		 With the dawn of the star of the heart
		And the wise men draw near in the twilight
		 Who are weary of learning and art
		And the face of the tyrant is darkened.
		 His spirit is torn
		For a new King is enthroned; yea the sternest
		     A child is born.
		
		And the mother still joys for the whispered
		 First stir of unspeakable things
		Still feels that high moment unfurling
		 Red glory of Gabriel’s wings.
		Still the babe of an hour is a master
		 Whom angels adorn
		Emmanuel prophet anointed
		     A child is born.
		
		And thou that art still in thy cradle
		 The sun being crown for thy brow.
		Make answer our flesh make an answer
		 Say whence art thou come--who art thou?
		Art thou come back on earth for our teaching
		 To train or to warn--?
		Hush--how may we know?--knowing only
		     A child is born.


	45. THE NEW FREETHINKER

		John Grubby who was short and stout
		And troubled with religious doubt
		Refused about the age of three
		To sit upon the curate’s knee;
		(For so the eternal strife must rage
		Between the spirit of the age
		And Dogma which as is well known.
		Does simply hate to be outgrown).
		Grubby the young idea that shoots
		Outgrew the ages like old boots;
		While still to all appearance small
		Would have no Miracles at all;
		And just before the age of ten
		Firmly refused Free Will to men.
		The altars reeled the hen-ens shook
		Just as he read of in the book;
		Flung from his house went forth the youth
		Alone with tempests and the Truth
		Up to the distant city and dim
		Where his papa had bought for him
		A partnership in Chepe and Deer
		Worth say twelve hundred pounds a year.
		But he was resolute. Lord Brute
		Had found him useful; and Lord Loot
		With whom few other men would act
		Valued his promptitude and tact;
		Never did even philanthropy
		Enrich a man more rapidly:
		Twas he that stopped the Strike in Coal
		For hungry children racked his soul;
		To end their misery there and then
		He filled the mines with Chinamen--
		Sat in that House that broke the Kings
		And voted for all sores of things--
		And rose from Under-Sec. to Sec.
		Some grumbled. Growlers who gave less
		Than generous worship to success
		The little printers in Dundee
		Who got ten years for blasphemy
		(Although he let them off with seven)
		Respect him rather less than heaven.
		No matter. This can still be said:
		Never to supernatural dread
		Never to unseen deity
		Did Sir John Grubby bend the knee;
		Never did dream of hell or wrath
		Turn Viscount Grubby from his path;
		Nor was he bribed by fabled bliss
		To kneel to any world but this.
		The curate lives in Camden Town
		His lap still empty of renown
		And still across the waste of years
		John Grubby in the House of Peers
		Faces that curate proud and free
		And never sits upon his knee.


	46. THE SECRET PEOPLE

		Smile at us pay us pass us; but do not quite forget.
		For we are the people of England that never has spoken yet.
		There is many a fat farmer that drinks less cheerfully
		There is many a free French peasant who is richer and sadder than we.
		There are no folk in the whole world so helpless or so wise.
		There is hunger in our bellies there is laughter in our eyes;
		You laugh at us and love us both mugs and eyes are wet:
		Only you do not know us. For we have not spoken yet.
		
		The fine French kings came over in a flutter of flags and dames.
		We liked their smiles and battles but we never could say their names.
		The blood ran red to Bosworth and the High French lords went down;
		There was naught but a naked people under a naked crown.
		
		And the eyes of the King’s Servants turned terribly every way
		And the gold of the King’s Servants rose higher every day.
		They burnt the homes of the shaven men that had been quaint and kind
		Till there was no bed in a monk’s house nor food that man could find.
		The inns of God where no man paid that were the wall of the weak
		The King’s Servants ate them all. And Still we did not speak.
		
		And the face of the King’s Servants grew greater than the King:
		He tricked them and they trapped him and stood round him in a ring.
		The new grave lords closed round him that had eaten the abbey’s fruits.
		And the men of the new religion with their bibles in their boots.
		We saw their shoulders moving to menace or discuss
		And some were pure and some were vile; but none took heed of us.
		We saw the King as they killed him and his face was proud and pale;
		And a few men talked of freedom while England talked of ale.
		
		A war that we understood not came over the world and woke
		Americans Frenchmen Irish; but we knew not the things they spoke.
		They talked about rights and nature and peace and the people’s reign:
		And the squires our masters bade us fight; and never scorned us again.
		Weak if we be for ever could none condemn us then;
		Men called us serfs and drudges; men knew that we were men.
		In foam and flame at Trafalgar on Albuera plains
		We did and died like lions to keep ourselves in chains
		We lay in living ruins; firing and fearing not
		The strange fierce face of the Frenchmen who knew for what they fought
		And the man who seemed to be more than man we strained against and broke;
		And we broke our own rights with him. And still we never spoke.
		
		Our patch of glory ended; we never heard guns again.
		But the squire seemed struck in the saddle; he was foolish as if in pain
		He leaned on a staggering lawyer he clutched a cringing Jew
		He was stricken; it may be after all he was stricken at Waterloo.
		Or perhaps the shades of the shaven men whose spoil is in his house
		Come back in shining shapes at last to spoil his last carouse:
		We only know the last sad squires ride slowly towards the sea.
		And a new people takes the land: and still it is not we.
		
		They have given us into the hand of the new unhappy lords
		Lords without anger and honour who dare not carry their swords.
		They fight by shuffling papers; they have bright dead alien eyes;
		They look at our labour and laughter as a tired man looks at flies.
		And the load 01 their loveless pity is worse than the ancient wrongs
		Their doors are shut in the evening; and they know no songs.
		
		We hear men speaking for us of new laws strong and sweet
		Yet is there no man speaketh as we speak in the street.
		It may be we shall rise the last as Frenchmen rose the first
		Our wrath come after Russia’s wrath and our wrath be the worst.
		It may be we are meant to mark with our riot and our rest
		God’s scorn for all men governing. It may be beer is best.
		But we are the people of England; and we have not spoken yet.
		Smile at us pay us pass us. But do not quite forget.
		
		
		
		LOST
		
		
		So you have gained the golden crowns so you have piled together
		 The laurels and the jewels the pearls out of the blue
		But I will beat the bounding drum and I will fly the feather
		 For all the glory I have lost the good I never knew.
		
		I saw the light of morning pale on princely human faces
		 In tales irrevocably gone in final night enfurled
		I saw the tail of flying fights a glimpse of burning blisses
		 And laughed to think what I had lost--the wealth of all the world.
		
		Yea ruined in a royal game I was before my cradle;
		 Was ever gambler hurling gold who lost such things as I?
		The purple moth that died an hour ere I was born of
		 That great green sunset God shall make three days after I die.
		
		When all the lights are lost and done when all the skies are broken
		 Above the ruin of the stars my soul shall sit in state
		With a brain made rich with the irrevocable sunsets
		 And a closed heart happy in the fullness of a fate.
		
		So you have gained the golden crowns and grasped the golden weather
		 The kingdoms and the hemispheres that all men buy and sell
		But I will lash the leaping drum and swing the flaring feather
		 For the light of seven heavens that are lost to me like hell.


	47. THE SONG OF THE WHEELS.

		King Dives he was waiting in his garden all alone
		Where his flowers are made of iron and his trees are made of stone
		And his hives are full of thunder and the lightning leaps and kills
		For the mills of God grind slowly; and he works with other mills.
		Dives found a mighty silence; and he missed the throb and leap
		The noise of all the sleepless creatures singing him to sleep.
		And he said: “A screw has fallen--or a bolt has slipped aside--
		Some little thing has shifted“: and the little things replied:
		
		“Call upon the wheels master call upon the wheels;
		We are taking rest master finding how it feels
		Strict the law of thine and mine: theft we ever shun--
		All the wheels are thine master--tell the wheels to run!
		Yea the Wheels are mighty gods--set them going then!
		We are only men master have you heard of men?
		
		“O they live on earth like fishes and a gasp is all their breath.
		God for empty honours only gave them death and scorn of death
		And you walk the worms for carpet and you tread a stone that squeals--
		Only God that made them worms did not make them wheels.
		Man shall shut his heart against you and you shall not find the spring.
		Man who wills the thing he wants not the intolerable thing--
		Once he likes his empty belly better than your empty head
		Earth and heaven are dumb before him: he is stronger than the dead.
		
		“Call upon the wheels master call upon the wheels
		Steel is beneath your hand stone beneath your heels
		Steel will never laugh aloud hearing what we heard
		Stone will never break its heart mad with hope deferred--
		Men of tact that arbitrate slow reform that heals--
		Save the stinking grease master save it for the wheels.
		
		“King Dives in the garden we have naught to give or hold--
		(Even while the baby came alive the rotten sticks were sold.)
		The savage knows a cavern and the peasants keep a plot
		Of all the things that men have had--lo! we have them not.
		Not a scrap of earth where ants could lay their eggs--
		Only this poor lump of earth that walks about on legs--
		Only this poor wandering mansion only these two walking trees.
		Only hands and hearts and stomachs--what have you to do with these?
		You have engines big and burnished tall beyond our fathers’ ken
		Why should you make peace and traffic with such feeble folk as men?
		
		“Call upon the wheels master call upon the wheels
		They are deaf to demagogues deaf to crude appeals;
		Are our hands our own master?--how the doctors doubt!
		Are our legs our own master? wheels can run without--
		Prove the points are delicate--they will understand.
		All the wheels are loyal; see how still they stand!”
		
		King Dives he was walking in his garden in the sun
		He shook his hand at heaven and he called the wheels to run
		And the eyes of him were hateful eyes the lips of him were curled
		And he called upon his father that is lord below the world
		Sitting in the Gate of Treason in the gate of broken seals
		“Bend and bind them bend and bind them bend and bind them into wheels
		Then once more in all my garden there may swing and sound and sweep--
		The noise of all the sleepless things that sing the soul to sleep.”
		
		_Call upon the wheels master call upon the wheels._
		_Weary grow the holidays when you miss the meals_
		_Through the Gate of Treason through the gate within_
		_Cometh fear and greed of fame cometh deadly sin;_
		_If a man grow faint master take him ere he kneels._
		_Take him break him rend him end him roll him crush him with the wheels._


	48. THE STRANGE MUSIC

		Other loves may sink and settle other loves may loose and slack
		But I wander like a minstrel with a harp upon his back
		Though the harp be on my bosom though I finger and I fret
		Still my hope is all before me: for I cannot play it yet.
		
		In your strings is hid a music that no hand hath ere let fall
		In your soul is sealed a pleasure that you have not known at all;
		Pleasure subtle as your spirit strange and slender as your frame
		Fiercer than the pain that folds you softer than your sorrow’s name.
		
		Not as mine my soul’s anointed not as mine the rude and light
		Easy mirth of many faces swaggering pride of song and fight;
		Something stranger something sweeter something waiting you afar
		Secret as your stricken senses magic as your sorrows are.
		
		But on this God’s harp supernal stretched but to be stricken once.
		Hoary Time is a beginner Life a bungler Death a dunce.
		But I will not fear to match them--no by God I will not fear
		I will learn you I will play you and the stars stand still to hear.


	49. THE TRUCE OF CHRISTMAS

		Passionate peace is in the sky--
		And in the snow in silver sealed
		The beasts are perfect in the field
		And men seem men so suddenly--
		 (But take ten swords and ten times ten
		 And blow the bugle in praising men;
		 For we are for all men under the sun
		 And they are against us every one;
		 And misers haggle and madmen clutch
		 And there is peril in praising much.
		 And we have the terrible tongues uncurled
		 That praise the world to the sons of the world.)
		
		The idle humble hill and wood
		Are bowed upon the sacred birth
		And for one little hour the earth
		Is lazy with the love of good--
		 (But ready are you and ready am I
		 If the battle blow and the guns go by;
		 For we are for all men under the sun
		 And they are against us every one;
		 And the men that hate herd all together
		 To pride and gold and the great white feather
		 And the thing is graven in star and stone
		 That the men who love are all alone.)
		
		Hunger is hard and time is tough
		But bless the beggars and kiss the kings
		For hope has broken the heart of things
		And nothing was ever praised enough.
		 (But bold the shield for a sudden swing
		 And point the sword when you praise a thing
		 For we are for all men under the sun
		 And they are against us every one;
		 And mime and merchant thane and thrall
		 Hate us because we love them all;
		 Only till Christmastide go by
		 Passionate peace is in the sky.)


	50. THE WIFE OF FLANDERS

		Low and brown barns thatched and repatched and tattered
		 Where I had seven sons until to-day
		A little hill of hay your spur has scattered . . .
		 This is not Paris. You have lost the way.
		
		You staring at your sword to find it brittle
		 Surprised at the surprise that was your plan
		Who shaking and breaking barriers not a little
		 Find never more the death-door of Sedan.
		
		Must I for more than carnage call you claimant
		 Paying you a penny for each son you slay?
		Man the whole globe in gold were no repayment
		 For what _you_ have lost. And how shall I repay?
		
		What is the price of that red spark that caught me
		 From a kind farm that never had a name?
		What is the price of that dead man they brought me?
		 For other dead men do not look the same.
		
		How should I pay for one poor graven steeple
		 Whereon you shattered what you shall not know
		How should I pay you miserable people?
		 How should I pay you everything you owe?34
		
		Unhappy can I give you back your honour?
		 Though I forgave would any man forget?
		While all the great green land has trampled on her
		 The treason and terror of the night we met.
		
		Not any more in vengeance or in pardon
		 An old wife bargains for a bean that’s hers.
		You have no word to break: no heart to harden.
		 Ride on and prosper. You have lost your spurs.


	51. THE WISE MEN

		Step softly under snow or rain
		 To find the place where men can pray;
		The way is all so very plain
		That we may lose the way.
		
		Oh we have learnt to peer and pore
		 On tortured puzzles from our youth
		We know all labyrinthine lore
		We are the three wise mert of yore
		 And we know all things but the truth.
		
		We have gone round and round the hill
		 And lost the wood among the trees
		And learnt long names for every ill
		And served the mad gods naming still
		 The Furies the Eumenides.
		
		The gods of violence took the veil
		 Of vision and philosophy
		The Serpent that brought all men bale
		He bites his own accursed tail
		 And calls himself Eternity.
		
		Go humbly . . . it has hailed and snowed . . .
		 With voices low and lanterns lit;
		So very simple is the road
		 That we may stray from it.
		
		The world grows terrible and white
		 And blinding white the breaking day;
		We walk bewildered in the light
		For something is too large for sight
		 And something much too plain to say.
		
		The Child that was ere worlds begun
		 (. . . We need but walk a little way
		We need but see a latch undone . . .)
		The Child that played with moon and sun
		 Is playing with a little hay.
		
		The house from which the heavens are fed
		 The old strange house that is our own
		Where tricks of words are never said.
		And Mercy is as plain as bread
		 And Honour is as hard as stone.
		
		Go humbly; humble are the skies
		 And low and large and fierce the Star;
		So very near the Manger lies
		 That we may travel far.
		
		Hark! Laughter like a lion wakes
		 To roar to the resounding plain
		And the whole heaven shouts and shakes
		 For God Himself is born again
		And we are little children walking
		 Through the snow and rain.


	52. TRANSLATION FROM DU BELLAY

		Happy who like Ulysses or that lord
		 Who raped the fleece returning full and sage
		With usage and the world’s wide reason stored
		 With his own kin can wait the end of age.
		When shall I see when shall I see God knows!
		 My little village smoke; or pass the door
		The old dear door of that unhappy house
		 That is to me a kingdom and much more?
		Mightier to me the house my fathers made
		 Than your audacious heads O Halls of Rome!
		More than immortal marbles undecayed
		 The thin sad slates that cover up my home;
		More than your Tiber is my Loire to me
		 Than Palatine my little Lyré there;
		And more than all the winds of all the sea
		 The quiet kindness of the Angevin air.


	53. WHEN I CAME BACK TO FLEET STREET

		When I came back to Fleet Street
		 Through a sunset nook at night
		And saw the old Green Dragon
		 With the windows all alight
		And hailed the old Green Dragon
		 And the Cock I used to know
		Where all good fellows were my friends
		 A little while ago;
		
		I had been long in meadows
		 And the trees took hold of me
		And the still towns in the beech-woods
		 Where men were meant to be.
		But old things held; the laughter
		 The long unnatural night
		And all the truth they talk in hell
		 And all the lies they write.
		
		For I came back to Fleet Street
		 And not in peace I came;
		A cloven pride was in my heart
		 And half my love was shame.
		I came to fight in fairy-tale
		 Whose end shall no man know--
		To fight the old Green Dragon
		 Until the Cock shall crow!
		
		Under the broad bright windows
		 Of men I serve no more
		The groaning of the old great wheels
		 Thickened to a throttled roar;
		All buried things broke upward;
		 And peered from its retreat
		Ugly and silent like an elf
		 The secret of the street.
		
		They did not break the padlocks
		 Or clear the wall away.
		The men in debt that drank of old
		 Still drink in debt to-day;
		Chained to the rich by ruin
		 Cheerful in chains as then
		When old unbroken Pickwick walked
		 Among the broken men.
		
		Still he that dreams and rambles
		 Through his own elfin air
		Knows that the street’s a prison
		 Knows that the gates are there:
		Still he that scorns or struggles
		 Sees frightful and afar.
		All that they leave of rebels
		 Rot high on Temple Bar.
		
		All that I loved and hated
		 All that I shunned and knew
		Clears in broad battle lightning
		 Where they and I and you
		Run high the barricade that breaks
		 The barriers of the street
		And shout to them that shrink within
		 The Prisoners of the Fleet.


*** John Clare (1793 - 1864)

	1. AUTUMN

		The thistledown’s flying, though the winds are all still, 
		On the green grass now lying, now mounting the hill, 
		The spring from the fountain now boils like a pot; 
		Through stones past the counting it bubbles red-hot. 
		
		The ground parched and cracked is like overbaked bread, 
		The greensward all wracked is, bents dried up and dead. 
		The fallow fields glitter like water indeed, 
		And gossamers twitter, flung from weed unto weed. 
		
		Hill-tops like hot iron glitter bright in the sun, 
		And the rivers we’re eying burn to gold as they run; 
		Burning hot is the ground, liquid gold is the air; 
		Whoever looks round sees Eternity there. 


	2. I AM!

		I am--yet what I am none cares or knows; 
		My friends forsake me like a memory lost: 
		I am the self-consumer of my woes-- 
		They rise and vanish in oblivious host, 
		Like shadows in love’s frenzied stifled throes 
		And yet I am, and live--like vapours tossed 
		
		Into the nothingness of scorn and noise, 
		Into the living sea of waking dreams, 
		Where there is neither sense of life or joys, 
		But the vast shipwreck of my life’s esteems; 
		Even the dearest that I loved the best 
		Are strange--nay, rather, stranger than the rest. 
		
		I long for scenes where man hath never trod 
		A place where woman never smiled or wept 
		There to abide with my Creator, God, 
		And sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept, 
		Untroubling and untroubled where I lie 
		The grass below--above the vaulted sky.


	3. I HID MY LOVE

		I hid my love when young till I 
		Couldn’t bear the buzzing of a fly; 
		I hid my love to my despite 
		Till I could not bear to look at light: 
		I dare not gaze upon her face 
		But left her memory in each place; 
		Where’er I saw a wild flower lie 
		I kissed and bade my love good-bye. 
		
		I met her in the greenest dells, 
		Where dewdrops pearl the wood bluebells; 
		The lost breeze kissed her bright blue eye, 
		The bee kissed and went singing by, 
		A sunbeam found a passage there, 
		A gold chain round her neck so fair; 
		As secret as the wild bee’s song 
		She lay there all the summer long. 
		
		I hid my love in field and town 
		Till e’en the breeze would knock me down; 
		The bees seemed singing ballads o’er, 
		The fly’s bass turned a lion’s roar; 
		And even silence found a tongue, 
		To haunt me all the summer long; 
		The riddle nature could not prove 
		Was nothing else but secret love. 


	4. I LOVE TO SEE THE SUMMER BEAMING FORTH

		I love to see the summer beaming forth
		And white wool sack clouds sailing to the north
		I love to see the wild flowers come again
		And mare blobs stain with gold the meadow drain
		And water lilies whiten on the floods
		Where reed clumps rustle like a wind shook wood
		Where from her hiding place the Moor Hen pushes
		And seeks her flag nest floating in bull rushes
		I like the willow leaning half way o’er
		The clear deep lake to stand upon its shore
		I love the hay grass when the flower head swings
		To summer winds and insects happy wings
		That sport about the meadow the bright day
		And see bright beetles in the clear lake play


	5. LOVE LIVES BEYOND THE TOMB

		Love lives beyond 
		The tomb, the earth, which fades like dew-- 
		              I love the fond, 
		The faithful, and the true 
		
		              Love lives in sleep, 
		‘Tis happiness of healthy dreams 
		              Eve’s dews may weep, 
		But love delightful seems. 
		
		              ‘Tis seen in flowers, 
		And in the even’s pearly dew 
		              On earth’s green hours, 
		And in the heaven’s eternal blue. 
		
		              ‘Tis heard in spring 
		When light and sunbeams, warm and kind, 
		              On angels’ wing 
		Bring love and music to the wind. 
		
		              And where is voice, 
		So young, so beautiful and sweet 
		              As nature’s choice, 
		Where Spring and lovers meet? 
		
		              Love lives beyond 
		The tomb, the earth, the flowers, and dew. 
		              I love the fond, 
		The faithful, young and true. 


	6. MEET ME IN THE GREEN GLEN

		Love, meet me in the green glen, 
		Beside the tall elm-tree, 
		Where the sweetbriar smells so sweet agen; 
		There come with me. 
		Meet me in the green glen. 
		
		Meet me at the sunset 
		Down in the green glen, 
		Where we’ve often met 
		By hawthorn-tree and foxes’ den, 
		Meet me in the green glen. 
		
		Meet me in the green glen, 
		By sweetbriar bushes there; 
		Meet me by your own sen, 
		Where the wild thyme blossoms fair. 
		Meet me in the green glen. 
		
		Meet me by the sweetbriar, 
		By the mole-hill swelling there; 
		When the west glows like a fire 
		God’s crimson bed is there. 
		Meet me in the green glen. 


	7. SUMMER

		Come we to the summer, to the summer we will come, 
		For the woods are full of bluebells and the hedges full of bloom, 
		And the crow is on the oak a-building of her nest, 
		And love is burning diamonds in my true lover’s breast; 
		She sits beneath the whitethorn a-plaiting of her hair, 
		And I will to my true lover with a fond request repair; 
		I will look upon her face, I will in her beauty rest, 
		And lay my aching weariness upon her lovely breast. 
		
		The clock-a-clay is creeping on the open bloom of May, 
		The merry bee is trampling the pinky threads all day, 
		And the chaffinch it is brooding on its grey mossy nest 
		In the whitethorn bush where I will lean upon my lover’s breast; 
		I’ll lean upon her breast and I’ll whisper in her ear 
		That I cannot get a wink o’sleep for thinking of my dear; 
		I hunger at my meat and I daily fade away 
		Like the hedge rose that is broken in the heat of the day. 


	8. SUMMER IMAGES

		Now swarthy Summer, by rude health embrowned, 
		Precedence takes of rosy fingered Spring; 
		And laughing Joy, with wild flowers prank’d, and crown’d, 
		A wild and giddy thing, 
		And Health robust, from every care unbound, 
		Come on the zephyr’s wing, 
		And cheer the toiling clown. 
		
		Happy as holiday-enjoying face, 
		Loud tongued, and “merry as a marriage bell,“ 
		Thy lightsome step sheds joy in every place; 
		And where the troubled dwell, 
		Thy witching charms wean them of half their cares; 
		And from thy sunny spell, 
		They greet joy unawares. 
		
		Then with thy sultry locks all loose and rude, 
		And mantle laced with gems of garish light, 
		Come as of wont; for I would fain intrude, 
		And in the world’s despite, 
		Share the rude wealth that thy own heart beguiles; 
		If haply so I might 
		Win pleasure from thy smiles. 
		
		Me not the noise of brawling pleasure cheers, 
		In nightly revels or in city streets; 
		But joys which soothe, and not distract the ears, 
		That one at leisure meets 
		In the green woods, and meadows summer-shorn, 
		Or fields, where bee-fly greets 
		The ear with mellow horn. 
		
		The green-swathed grasshopper, on treble pipe, 
		Sings there, and dances, in mad-hearted pranks; 
		There bees go courting every flower that’s ripe, 
		On baulks and sunny banks; 
		And droning dragon-fly, on rude bassoon, 
		Attempts to give God thanks 
		In no discordant tune. 
		
		The speckled thrush, by self-delight embued, 
		There sings unto himself for joy’s amends, 
		And drinks the honey dew of solitude. 
		There Happiness attends 
		With inbred Joy until the heart o’erflow, 
		Of which the world’s rude friends, 
		Nought heeding, nothing know. 
		
		There the gay river, laughing as it goes, 
		Plashes with easy wave its flaggy sides, 
		And to the calm of heart, in calmness shows 
		What pleasure there abides, 
		To trace its sedgy banks, from trouble free: 
		Spots Solitude provides 
		To muse, and happy be. 
		
		There ruminating ‘neath some pleasant bush, 
		On sweet silk grass I stretch me at mine ease, 
		Where I can pillow on the yielding rush; 
		And, acting as I please, 
		Drop into pleasant dreams; or musing lie, 
		Mark the wind-shaken trees, 
		And cloud-betravelled sky. 
		
		There think me how some barter joy for care, 
		And waste life’s summer-health in riot rude, 
		Of nature, nor of nature’s sweets aware. 
		When passions vain intrude, 
		These, by calm musings, softened are and still; 
		And the heart’s better mood 
		Feels sick of doing ill. 
		
		There I can live, and at my leisure seek 
		Joys far from cold restraints--not fearing pride-- 
		Free as the winds, that breathe upon my cheek 
		Rude health, so long denied. 
		Here poor Integrity can sit at ease, 
		And list self-satisfied 
		The song of honey-bees. 
		
		The green lane now I traverse, where it goes 
		Nought guessing, till some sudden turn espies 
		Rude batter’d finger post, that stooping shows 
		Where the snug mystery lies; 
		And then a mossy spire, with ivy crown, 
		Cheers up the short surprise, 
		And shows a peeping town. 
		
		I see the wild flowers, in their summer morn 
		Of beauty, feeding on joy’s luscious hours; 
		The gay convolvulus, wreathing round the thorn, 
		Agape for honey showers; 
		And slender kingcup, burnished with the dew 
		Of morning’s early hours, 
		Like gold yminted new. 
		
		And mark by rustic bridge, o’er shallow stream, 
		Cow-tending boy, to toil unreconciled, 
		Absorbed as in some vagrant summer dream; 
		Who now, in gestures wild, 
		Starts dancing to his shadow on the wall, 
		Feeling self-gratified, 
		Nor fearing human thrall. 
		
		Or thread the sunny valley laced with streams, 
		Or forests rude, and the o’ershadow’d brims 
		Of simple ponds, where idle shepherd dreams, 
		Stretching his listless limbs; 
		Or trace hay-scented meadows, smooth and long, 
		Where joy’s wild impulse swims 
		In one continued song. 
		
		I love at early morn, from new mown swath, 
		To see the startled frog his route pursue; 
		To mark while, leaping o’er the dripping path, 
		His bright sides scatter dew, 
		The early lark that from its bustle flies, 
		To hail his matin new; 
		And watch him to the skies. 
		
		To note on hedgerow baulks, in moisture sprent, 
		The jetty snail creep from the mossy thorn, 
		With earnest heed, and tremulous intent, 
		Frail brother of the morn, 
		That from the tiny bent’s dew-misted leaves 
		Withdraws his timid horn, 
		And fearful vision weaves. 
		
		Or swallow heed on smoke-tanned chimney top, 
		Wont to be first unsealing Morning’s eye, 
		Ere yet the bee hath gleaned one wayward drop 
		Of honey on his thigh; 
		To see him seek morn’s airy couch to sing, 
		Until the golden sky 
		Bepaint his russet wing. 
		
		Or sauntering boy by tanning corn to spy, 
		With clapping noise to startle birds away, 
		And hear him bawl to every passer by 
		To know the hour of day; 
		While the uncradled breezes, fresh and strong, 
		With waking blossoms play, 
		And breathe Æolian song. 
		
		I love the south-west wind, or low or loud, 
		And not the less when sudden drops of rain 
		Moisten my glowing cheek from ebon cloud, 
		Threatening soft showers again, 
		That over lands new ploughed and meadow grounds, 
		Summer’s sweet breath unchain, 
		And wake harmonious sounds. 
		
		Rich music breathes in Summer’s every sound; 
		And in her harmony of varied greens, 
		Woods, meadows, hedge-rows, corn-fields, all around 
		Much beauty intervenes, 
		Filling with harmony the ear and eye; 
		While o’er the mingling scenes 
		Far spreads the laughing sky. 
		
		See, how the wind-enamoured aspen leaves 
		Turn up their silver lining to the sun! 
		And hark! the rustling noise, that oft deceives, 
		And makes the sheep-boy run: 
		The sound so mimics fast-approaching showers, 
		He thinks the rain’s begun, 
		And hastes to sheltering bowers. 
		
		But now the evening curdles dank and grey, 
		Changing her watchet hue for sombre weed; 
		And moping owls, to close the lids of day, 
		On drowsy wing proceed; 
		While chickering crickets, tremulous and long, 
		Light’s farewell inly heed, 
		And give it parting song. 
		
		The pranking bat its flighty circlet makes; 
		The glow-worm burnishes its lamp anew; 
		O’er meadows dew-besprent, the beetle wakes 
		Inquiries ever new, 
		Teazing each passing ear with murmurs vain, 
		As wanting to pursue 
		His homeward path again. 
		
		Hark! ‘tis the melody of distant bells 
		That on the wind with pleasing hum rebounds 
		By fitful starts, then musically swells 
		O’er the dim stilly grounds; 
		While on the meadow-bridge the pausing boy 
		Listens the mellow sounds, 
		And hums in vacant joy. 
		
		Now homeward-bound, the hedger bundles round 
		His evening faggot, and with every stride 
		His leathern doublet leaves a rustling sound, 
		Till silly sheep beside 
		His path start tremulous, and once again 
		Look back dissatisfied, 
		And scour the dewy plain. 
		
		How sweet the soothing calmness that distills 
		O’er the heart’s every sense its opiate dews, 
		In meek-eyed moods and ever balmy trills! 
		That softens and subdues, 
		With gentle Quiet’s bland and sober train, 
		Which dreamy eve renews 
		In many a mellow strain! 
		
		I love to walk the fields, they are to me 
		A legacy no evil can destroy; 
		They, like a spell, set every rapture free 
		That cheer’d me when a boy. 
		Play--pastime--all Time’s blotting pen conceal’d, 
		Comes like a new-born joy, 
		To greet me in the field. 
		
		For Nature’s objects ever harmonize 
		With emulous Taste, that vulgar deed annoys; 
		Which loves in pensive moods to sympathize, 
		And meet vibrating joys 
		O’er Nature’s pleasing things; nor slighting, deems 
		Pastimes, the Muse employs, 
		Vain and obtrusive themes.


	9. THE DYING CHILD

		He could not die when trees were green, 
		        For he loved the time too well. 
		His little hands, when flowers were seen, 
		        Were held for the bluebell, 
		        As he was carried o’er the green. 
		
		His eye glanced at the white-nosed bee; 
		        He knew those children of the spring: 
		When he was well and on the lea 
		        He held one in his hands to sing, 
		        Which filled his heart with glee. 
		
		Infants, the children of the spring! 
		        How can an infant die 
		When butterflies are on the wing, 
		        Green grass, and such a sky? 
		        How can they die at spring? 
		
		He held his hands for daisies white, 
		        And then for violets blue, 
		And took them all to bed at night 
		        That in the green fields grew, 
		        As childhood’s sweet delight. 
		
		And then he shut his little eyes, 
		        And flowers would notice not; 
		Birds’ nests and eggs caused no surprise, 
		        He now no blossoms got; 
		        They met with plaintive sighs. 
		
		When winter came and blasts did sigh, 
		        And bare were plain and tree, 
		As he for ease in bed did lie 
		        His soul seemed with the free, 
		        He died so quietly.


	10. THE STRANGER

		When trouble haunts me, need I sigh? 
		No, rather smile away despair; 
		For those have been more sad than I, 
		With burthens more than I could bear; 
		Aye, gone rejoicing under care 
		Where I had sunk in black despair. 
		
		When pain disturbs my peace and rest, 
		Am I a hopeless grief to keep, 
		When some have slept on torture’s breast 
		And smiled as in the sweetest sleep, 
		Aye, peace on thorns, in faith forgiven, 
		And pillowed on the hope of heaven? 
		
		Though low and poor and broken down, 
		Am I to think myself distrest? 
		No, rather laugh where others frown 
		And think my being truly blest; 
		For others I can daily see 
		More worthy riches worse than me. 
		
		Aye, once a stranger blest the earth 
		Who never caused a heart to mourn, 
		Whose very voice gave sorrow mirth-- 
		And how did earth his worth return? 
		It spurned him from its lowliest lot, 
		The meanest station owned him not; 
		
		An outcast thrown in sorrow’s way, 
		A fugitive that knew no sin, 
		Yet in lone places forced to stray-- 
		Men would not take the stranger in. 
		Yet peace, though much himself he mourned, 
		Was all to others he returned. 
		
		*    *    *    *    * 
		
		His presence was a peace to all, 
		He bade the sorrowful rejoice. 
		Pain turned to pleasure at his call, 
		Health lived and issued from his voice. 
		He healed the sick and sent abroad 
		The dumb rejoicing in the Lord. 
		
		The blind met daylight in his eye, 
		The joys of everlasting day; 
		The sick found health in his reply; 
		The cripple threw his crutch away. 
		Yet he with troubles did remain 
		And suffered poverty and pain. 
		
		Yet none could say of wrong he did, 
		And scorn was ever standing bye; 
		Accusers by their conscience chid, 
		When proof was sought, made no reply. 
		Yet without sin he suffered more 
		Than ever sinners did before.


	11. WHAT IS LIFE?

		And what is Life?--An hour-glass on the run,
		A Mist retreating from the morning sun,
		   A busy, bustling, still repeated dream;
		Its length?--A minute’s pause, a moment’s thought;
		   And happiness?--A bubble on the stream,
		That in the act of seizing shrinks to nought.
		
		What are vain Hopes?--The puffing gale of morn,
		   That of its charms divests the dewy lawn,
		And robs each flow’ret of its gem,--and dies;
		   A cobweb hiding disappointment’s thorn,
		Which stings more keenly through the thin disguise.
		
		And thou, O Trouble?--nothing can suppose,
		(And sure the power of wisdom only knows,)
		   What need requireth thee:
		So free and liberal as thy bounty flows,
		   Some necessary cause must surely be:
		But disappointments, pains, and every woe
		   Devoted wretches feel,
		The universal plagues of life below,
		   Are mysteries still ‘neath Fate’s unbroken seal.
		
		And what is Death? is still the cause unfound?
		That dark, mysterious name of horrid sound?--
		   A long and lingering sleep, the weary crave.
		And Peace? where can its happiness abound?--
		   No where at all, save heaven, and the grave.
		
		Then what is Life?--When stripp’d of its disguise,
		   A thing to be desir’d it cannot be;
		Since every thing that meets our foolish eyes
		   Gives proof sufficient of its vanity.
		‘Tis but a trial all must undergo;
		   To teach unthankful mortals how to prize
		That happiness vain man’s denied to know,
		   Until he’s call’d to claim it in the skies.


*** Leonard Cohen (1934 - 2016)

	1. ANTHEM

		The birds they sang
		at the break of day
		Start again
		I heard them say
		Don’t dwell on what
		has passed away
		or what is yet to be.
		Ah the wars they will
		be fought again
		The holy dove
		She will be caught again
		bought and sold
		and bought again
		the dove is never free.
		Ring the bells that still can ring
		Forget your perfect offering
		There is a crack in everything
		That’s how the light gets in.
		We asked for signs
		the signs were sent:
		the birth betrayed
		the marriage spent
		Yeah the widowhood
		of every government --
		signs for all to see.
		I can’t run no more
		with that lawless crowd
		while the killers in high places
		say their prayers out loud.
		But they’ve summoned, they’ve summoned up
		a thundercloud
		and they’re going to hear from me.
		Ring the bells that still can ring . . .
		You can add up the parts
		but you won’t have the sum
		You can strike up the march,
		there is no drum
		Every heart, every heart
		to love will come
		but like a refugee.
		Ring the bells that still can ring
		Forget your perfect offering
		There is a crack, a crack in everything
		That’s how the light gets in.
		Ring the bells that still can ring
		Forget your perfect offering
		There is a crack, a crack in everything
		That’s how the light gets in.
		That’s how the light gets in.
		That’s how the light gets in.


	2. BIRD ON THE WIRE

		Like a bird on the wire,
		like a drunk in a midnight choir
		I have tried in my way to be free.
		Like a worm on a hook,
		like a knight from some old fashioned book
		I have saved all my ribbons for thee.
		If I, if I have been unkind,
		I hope that you can just let it go by.
		If I, if I have been untrue
		I hope you know it was never to you.
		Like a baby, stillborn,
		like a beast with his horn
		I have torn everyone who reached out for me.
		But I swear by this song
		and by all that I have done wrong
		I will make it all up to thee.
		I saw a beggar leaning on his wooden crutch,
		he said to me, “You must not ask for so much.”
		And a pretty woman leaning in her darkened door,
		she cried to me, “Hey, why not ask for more?”
		Oh like a bird on the wire,
		like a drunk in a midnight choir
		I have tried in my way to be free.


	3. DANCE ME TO THE END OF LOVE

		Dance me to your beauty with a burning violin
		Dance me through the panic ‘til I’m gathered safely in
		Lift me like an olive branch and be my homeward dove
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the end of love
		Oh let me see your beauty when the witnesses are gone
		Let me feel you moving like they do in Babylon
		Show me slowly what I only know the limits of
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the wedding now, dance me on and on
		Dance me very tenderly and dance me very long
		We’re both of us beneath our love, we’re both of us above
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the children who are asking to be born
		Dance me through the curtains that our kisses have outworn
		Raise a tent of shelter now, though every thread is torn
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to your beauty with a burning violin
		Dance me through the panic till I’m gathered safely in
		Touch me with your naked hand or touch me with your glove
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the end of love
		Dance me to the end of love


	4. SISTERS OF MERCY

		Oh the sisters of mercy, they are not departed or gone.
		They were waiting for me when I thought that I just can’t go
		on.
		And they brought me their comfort and later they brought me
		this song.
		Oh I hope you run into them, you who’ve been travelling so
		long.
		Yes you who must leave everything that you cannot control.
		
		It begins with your family, but soon it comes around to your
		soul.
		Well I’ve been where you’re hanging, I think I can see how
		you’re pinned:
		When you’re not feeling holy, your loneliness says that
		you’ve sinned.
		Well they lay down beside me, I made my confession to
		them.
		They touched both my eyes and I touched the dew on their hem.
		
		If your life is a leaf that the seasons tear off and condemn
		they will bind you with love that is graceful and green as a
		stem.
		When I left they were sleeping, I hope you run into them
		soon.
		Don’t turn on the lights, you can read their address by the
		moon.
		And you won’t make me jealous if I hear that they sweetened
		your night:
		We weren’t lovers like that and besides it would still be all
		right,
		We weren’t lovers like that and besides it would still be all
		right.


	5. STORIES OF THE STREET

		The stories of the street are mine
		The Spanish voices laugh
		The Cadillacs go creeping now 
		Through the night and the poison gas
		And I lean from my window sill
		In this old hotel I chose
		Yes, one hand on my suicide
		One hand on the rose
		
		I know you’ve heard it’s over now
		And war must surely come
		The cities they all broke in half
		And the middlemen are gone
		But let me ask you one more time
		O children of the dusk
		All these hunters who are shrieking now 
		Oh, do they speak for us?
		And where do all these highways go
		Now that we are free?
		Why are the armies marching still
		That were coming home to me?
		
		O lady with your legs so fine
		O stranger at your wheel
		You are locked into your suffering 
		And your pleasures are the seal
		The age of lust is giving birth
		And both the parents ask
		The nurse to tell them fairy tales 
		On both sides of the glass
		And now the infant with his cord
		Is hauled in like a kite
		And one eye filled with blueprints
		One eye filled with night
		
		O come with me my little one
		We will find that farm
		And grow us grass and apples there
		And keep all the animals warm
		And if by chance I wake at night 
		And I ask you who I am
		O take me to the slaughterhouse
		I will wait there with the lamb
		With one hand on the hexagram
		And one hand on the girl
		I balance on a wishing well
		That all men call the world
		
		We are so small between the stars
		So large against the sky
		And lost among the subway crowds
		I try to catch your eye


	6. TAKE THIS WALTZ

		Now in Vienna there are ten pretty women.
		There’s a shoulder where death comes to cry.
		There’s a lobby with nine hundred windows.
		There’s a tree where the doves go to die.
		There’s a piece that was torn from the morning,
		and it hangs in the Gallery of Frost--
		Ay, ay ay ay
		Take this waltz, take this waltz,
		take this waltz with the clamp on its jaws.
		
		I want you, I want you, I want you
		on a chair with a dead magazine.
		In the cave at the tip of the lily,
		in some hallway where love’s never been.
		On a bed where the moon has been sweating,
		in a cry filled with footsteps and sand--
		Ay, ay ay ay
		Take this waltz, take this waltz,
		take its broken waist in your hand.
		
		This waltz, this waltz, this waltz, this waltz
		with its very own breath
		of brandy and death,
		dragging its tail in the sea.
		
		There’s a concert hall in Vienna
		where your mouth had a thousand reviews.
		There’s a bar where the boys have stopped talking,
		they’ve been sentenced to death by the blues.
		Ah, but who is it climbs to your picture
		with a garland of freshly cut tears?
		Ay, ay ay ay
		Take this waltz, take this waltz,
		take this waltz, it’s been dying for years.
		
		There’s an attic where children are playing,
		where I’ve got to lie down with you soon,
		in a dream of Hungarian lanterns,
		in the mist of some sweet afternoon.
		And I’ll see what you’ve chained to your sorrow,
		all your sheep and your lilies of snow--
		Ay, ay ay ay
		Take this waltz, take this waltz
		with its “I’ll never forget you, you know!”
		
		And I’ll dance with you in Vienna,
		I’ll be wearing a river’s disguise.
		The hyacinth wild on my shoulder
		my mouth on the dew of your thighs.
		And I’ll bury my soul in a scrapbook,
		with the photographs there and the moss.
		And I’ll yield to the flood of your beauty,
		my cheap violin and my cross.
		And you’ll carry me down on your dancing
		to the pools that you lift on your wrist--
		O my love, O my love
		Take this waltz, take this waltz,
		it’s yours now. It’s all that there is.


	7. THE FUTURE

		Give me back my broken night
		my mirrored room, my secret life
		it’s lonely here,
		there’s no one left to torture
		Give me absolute control
		over every living soul
		And lie beside me, baby,
		that’s an order!
		Give me crack and anal sex
		Take the only tree that’s left
		and stuff it up the hole
		in your culture
		Give me back the Berlin wall
		give me Stalin and St Paul
		I’ve seen the future, brother:
		it is murder.
		Things are going to slide, slide in all directions
		Won’t be nothing
		Nothing you can measure anymore
		The blizzard, the blizzard of the world
		has crossed the threshold
		and it has overturned
		the order of the soul
		When they said REPENT REPENT
		I wonder what they meant
		When they said REPENT REPENT
		I wonder what they meant
		When they said REPENT REPENT
		I wonder what they meant
		You don’t know me from the wind
		you never will, you never did
		I’m the little jew
		who wrote the Bible
		I’ve seen the nations rise and fall
		I’ve heard their stories, heard them all
		but love’s the only engine of survival
		Your servant here, he has been told
		to say it clear, to say it cold:
		It’s over, it ain’t going
		any further
		And now the wheels of heaven stop
		you feel the devil’s riding crop
		Get ready for the future:
		it is murder
		Things are going to slide . . .
		There’ll be the breaking of the ancient
		western code
		Your private life will suddenly explode
		There’ll be phantoms
		There’ll be fires on the road
		and the white man dancing
		You’ll see a woman
		hanging upside down
		her features covered by her fallen gown
		and all the lousy little poets
		coming round
		tryin’ to sound like Charlie Manson
		and the white man dancin’
		Give me back the Berlin wall
		Give me Stalin and St Paul
		Give me Christ
		or give me Hiroshima
		Destroy another fetus now
		We don’t like children anyhow
		I’ve seen the future, baby:
		it is murder.


*** Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772 - 1834)

	1. A CHRISTMAS CAROL

		I
		
		   The Shepherds went their hasty way,
		        And found the lowly stable-shed
		   Where the Virgin-Mother lay:
		        And now they checked their eager tread,
		For to the Babe, that at her bosom clung,
		A Mother’s song the Virgin-Mother sung.
		
		
		II
		
		   They told her how a glorious light,
		         Streaming from a heavenly throng,
		   Around them shone, suspending night!
		         While sweeter than a Mother’s song,
		Blest Angels heralded the Saviour’s birth,
		Glory to God on high! and Peace on Earth.
		
		
		III
		
		   She listened to the tale divine,
		         And closer still the Babe she pressed;
		   And while she cried, the Babe is mine!
		         The milk rushed faster to her breast:
		Joy rose within her, like a summer’s morn;
		Peace, Peace on Earth! the Prince of Peace is born.
		
		
		IV
		
		   Thou Mother of the Prince of Peace,
		         Poor, simple, and of low estate!
		   That Strife should vanish, Battle cease,
		         O why should this thy soul elate?
		Sweet Music’s loudest note, the Poet’s story,--
		Did’st thou ne’er love to hear of Fame and Glory?
		
		
		V
		
		   And is not War a youthful King,
		         A stately Hero clad in Mail?
		   Beneath his footsteps laurels spring;
		         Him Earth’s majestic monarchs hail
		Their Friend, their Playmate! and his bold bright eye
		Compels the maiden’s love-confessing sigh.
		
		
		VI
		
		   “Tell this in some more courtly scene,
		         “To maids and youths in robes of state!
		   “I am a woman poor and mean,
		         “And therefore is my Soul elate.
		“War is a ruffian, all with guilt defiled,
		“That from the aged Father tears his Child!
		
		
		VII
		
		   “A murderous fiend, by fiends adored,
		         “He kills the Sire and starves the Son;
		   “The Husband kills, and from her board
		         “Steals all his Widow’s toil had won;
		“Plunders God’s world of beauty; rends away
		“All safety from the Night, all comfort from the Day.
		
		
		VIII.
		
		   “Then wisely is my soul elate,
		         “That Strife should vanish, Battle cease:
		   “I’m poor and of a low estate,
		         “The Mother of the Prince of Peace.
		“Joy rises in me, like a summer’s morn:
		“Peace, Peace on Earth, the Prince of Peace is born.”   


	2. FROST AT MIDNIGHT

		The Frost performs its secret ministry, 
		Unhelped by any wind. The owlet’s cry 
		Came loud--and hark, again! loud as before. 
		The inmates of my cottage, all at rest, 
		Have left me to that solitude, which suits 
		Abstruser musings: save that at my side 
		My cradled infant slumbers peacefully. 
		‘Tis calm indeed! so calm, that it disturbs 
		And vexes meditation with its strange 
		And extreme silentness. Sea, hill, and wood, 
		This populous village! Sea, and hill, and wood, 
		With all the numberless goings-on of life, 
		Inaudible as dreams! the thin blue flame 
		Lies on my low-burnt fire, and quivers not; 
		Only that film, which fluttered on the grate, 
		
		Still flutters there, the sole unquiet thing. 
		Methinks, its motion in this hush of nature 
		Gives it dim sympathies with me who live, 
		Making it a companionable form, 
		Whose puny flaps and freaks the idling Spirit 
		By its own moods interprets, every where 
		Echo or mirror seeking of itself, 
		And makes a toy of Thought. 
		
		                     But O! how oft, 
		How oft, at school, with most believing mind, 
		Presageful, have I gazed upon the bars, 
		To watch that fluttering _stranger_ ! and as oft 
		With unclosed lids, already had I dreamt 
		Of my sweet birth-place, and the old church-tower, 
		Whose bells, the poor man’s only music, rang 
		From morn to evening, all the hot Fair-day, 
		So sweetly, that they stirred and haunted me 
		With a wild pleasure, falling on mine ear 
		Most like articulate sounds of things to come! 
		So gazed I, till the soothing things, I dreamt, 
		Lulled me to sleep, and sleep prolonged my dreams! 
		And so I brooded all the following morn, 
		Awed by the stern preceptor’s face, mine eye 
		Fixed with mock study on my swimming book: 
		Save if the door half opened, and I snatched 
		A hasty glance, and still my heart leaped up, 
		For still I hoped to see the _stranger_‘s face, 
		Townsman, or aunt, or sister more beloved, 
		My play-mate when we both were clothed alike! 
		
		        Dear Babe, that sleepest cradled by my side, 
		Whose gentle breathings, heard in this deep calm, 
		Fill up the intersperséd vacancies 
		And momentary pauses of the thought! 
		My babe so beautiful! it thrills my heart 
		With tender gladness, thus to look at thee, 
		And think that thou shalt learn far other lore, 
		And in far other scenes! For I was reared 
		In the great city, pent ‘mid cloisters dim, 
		And saw nought lovely but the sky and stars. 
		But _thou_, my babe! shalt wander like a breeze 
		By lakes and sandy shores, beneath the crags 
		Of ancient mountain, and beneath the clouds, 
		Which image in their bulk both lakes and shores 
		And mountain crags: so shalt thou see and hear 
		The lovely shapes and sounds intelligible 
		Of that eternal language, which thy God 
		Utters, who from eternity doth teach 
		Himself in all, and all things in himself. 
		Great universal Teacher! he shall mould 
		Thy spirit, and by giving make it ask. 
		
		        Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee, 
		Whether the summer clothe the general earth 
		With greenness, or the redbreast sit and sing 
		Betwixt the tufts of snow on the bare branch 
		Of mossy apple-tree, while the night-thatch 
		Smokes in the sun-thaw; whether the eave-drops fall 
		Heard only in the trances of the blast, 
		Or if the secret ministry of frost 
		Shall hang them up in silent icicles, 
		Quietly shining to the quiet Moon.


	3. KUBLA KHAN

		_Or, a vision in a dream. A Fragment._
		
		In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
		A stately pleasure-dome decree:
		Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
		Through caverns measureless to man
		  Down to a sunless sea.
		So twice five miles of fertile ground
		With walls and towers were girdled round;
		And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
		Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
		And here were forests ancient as the hills,
		Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
		
		But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
		Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
		A savage place! as holy and enchanted
		As e’er beneath a waning moon was haunted
		By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
		And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
		As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
		A mighty fountain momently was forced:
		Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst
		Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
		Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher’s flail:
		And mid these dancing rocks at once and ever
		It flung up momently the sacred river.
		Five miles meandering with a mazy motion
		Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
		Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
		And sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean;
		And ’mid this tumult Kubla heard from far
		Ancestral voices prophesying war!
		  The shadow of the dome of pleasure
		  Floated midway on the waves;
		  Where was heard the mingled measure
		  From the fountain and the caves.
		It was a miracle of rare device,
		A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!
		
		  A damsel with a dulcimer
		  In a vision once I saw:
		  It was an Abyssinian maid
		  And on her dulcimer she played,
		  Singing of Mount Abora.
		  Could I revive within me
		  Her symphony and song,
		  To such a deep delight ’twould win me,
		That with music loud and long,
		I would build that dome in air,
		That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
		And all who heard should see them there,
		And all should cry, Beware! Beware!
		His flashing eyes, his floating hair!
		Weave a circle round him thrice,
		And close your eyes with holy dread
		For he on honey-dew hath fed,
		And drunk the milk of Paradise.


	4. THE GOOD, GREAT MAN

		“How seldom, friend! a good great man inherits 
		Honour or wealth with all his worth and pains! 
		It sounds like stories from the land of spirits 
		If any man obtain that which he merits 
		Or any merit that which he obtains.“ 
		
		
		_Reply to the above:_
		
		For shame, dear friend, renounce this canting strain! 
		What would’st thou have a good great man obtain? 
		Place? titles? salary? a gilded chain? 
		Or throne of corses which his sword had slain? 
		Greatness and goodness are not _means_, but _ends_! 
		Hath he not always treasures, always friends, 
		The good great man? _three_ treasures, LOVE, and LIGHT, 
		And CALM THOUGHTS, regular as infant’s breath: 
		And three firm friends, more sure than day and night, 
		HIMSELF, his MAKER, and the ANGEL DEATH! 


	5. THE KNIGHT’S TOMB

		Where is the grave of Sir Arthur O’Kellyn?
		Where may the grave of that good man be?--
		By the side of a spring, on the breast of Helvellyn,
		Under the twigs of a young birch tree!
		The oak that in summer was sweet to hear,
		And rustled its leaves in the fall of the year,
		And whistled and roared in the winter alone,
		Is gone,--and the birch in its stead is grown.--
		The Knight’s bones are dust,
		And his good sword rust;--
		His soul is with the saints, I trust.


	6. YOUTH AND AGE

		Verse, a breeze mid blossoms straying, 
		Where Hope clung feeding, like a bee-- 
		Both were mine! Life went a-maying 
		With Nature, Hope, and Poesy, 
		When I was young! 
		
		When I was young?--Ah, woful When! 
		Ah! for the change ‘twixt Now and Then! 
		This breathing house not built with hands, 
		This body that does me grievous wrong, 
		O’er aery cliffs and glittering sands, 
		How lightly then it flashed along:-- 
		Like those trim skiffs, unknown of yore, 
		On winding lakes and rivers wide, 
		That ask no aid of sail or oar, 
		That fear no spite of wind or tide! 
		Nought cared this body for wind or weather 
		When Youth and I lived in’t together. 
		
		Flowers are lovely; Love is flower-like; 
		Friendship is a sheltering tree; 
		O! the joys, that came down shower-like, 
		Of Friendship, Love, and Liberty, 
		Ere I was old! 
		Ere I was old? Ah woful Ere, 
		Which tells me, Youth’s no longer here! 
		O Youth! for years so many and sweet, 
		‘Tis known, that Thou and I were one, 
		I’ll think it but a fond conceit-- 
		It cannot be that Thou art gone! 
		
		Thy vesper-bell hath not yet toll’d:-- 
		And thou wert aye a masker bold! 
		What strange disguise hast now put on, 
		To make believe, that thou are gone? 
		I see these locks in silvery slips, 
		This drooping gait, this altered size: 
		But Spring-tide blossoms on thy lips, 
		And tears take sunshine from thine eyes! 
		Life is but thought: so think I will 
		That Youth and I are house-mates still. 
		
		Dew-drops are the gems of morning, 
		But the tears of mournful eve! 
		Where no hope is, life’s a warning 
		That only serves to make us grieve, 
		When we are old: 
		That only serves to make us grieve 
		With oft and tedious taking-leave, 
		Like some poor nigh-related guest, 
		That may not rudely be dismist; 
		Yet hath outstay’d his welcome while, 
		And tells the jest without the smile. 


*** Abraham Cowley (1618 - 1667)

	1. DRINKING

		THE thirsty earth soaks up the rain,
		And drinks, and gapes for drink again.
		The plants suck in the earth, and are
		With constant drinking fresh and fair.
		The sea itself, which one would think
		Should have but little need of drink,
		Drinks ten thousand rivers up,
		So fill’d that they o’erflow the cup.
		The busy sun (and one would guess
		By’s drunken fiery face no less)
		Drinks up the sea, and when h’as done,
		The moon and stars drink up the sun.
		They drink and dance by their own light,
		They drink and revel all the night.
		Nothing in Nature’s sober found,
		But an eternal health goes round.
		Fill up the bowl then, fill it high,
		Fill all the glasses there, for why
		Should every creature drink but I,
		Why, man of morals, tell me why?


	2. THE CHANGE

		LOVE in her sunny eyes does basking play;
		Love walks the pleasant mazes of her hair;
		Love does on both her lips for ever stray
		And sows and reaps a thousand kisses there.
		In all her outward parts Love’s always seen;
		But, oh, He never went within.
		
		Within Love’s foes, his greatest foes abide,
		Malice, Inconstance, and Pride.
		So the Earth’s face, trees, herbs, and flowers do dress,
		With other beauties numberless;
		But at the center, darkness is, and Hell;
		There wicked spirits, and there the Damned dwell.
		
		With me alas, quite contrary it fares;
		Darkness and death lies in my weeping eyes,
		Despair and paleness in my face appears,
		And grief, and fear, Love’s greatest enemies;
		But, like the Persian tyrant, Love within
		Keeps his proud court, and ne’re is seen.
		
		Oh take my heart, and by that means you’ll prove
		Within, too stor’d enough of Love;
		Give me but yours, I’ll by that change so thrive,
		That Love in all my parts shall live.
		So powerful is this change, it render can,
		My outside woman, and your inside man.


	3. THE GIVEN HEART

		I wonder what those lovers mean, who say
		They have giv’n their hearts away.
		Some good kind lover tell me how;
		For mine is but a torment to me now.
		
		If so it be one place both hearts contain,
		For what do they complain?
		What courtesy can Love do more,
		Than to join hearts that parted were before?
		
		Woe to her stubborn heart, if once mine come
		Into the self-same room;
		‘Twill tear and blow up all within,
		Like a granado shot into a magazine.
		
		Then shall Love keep the ashes, and torn parts,
		Of both our broken hearts:
		Shall out of both one new one make,
		From hers, th’ allay; from mine, the metal take.
		
		For of her heart he from the flames will find
		But little left behind:
		Mine only will remain entire;
		No dross was there, to perish in the fire.


	4. THE WISH

		Well then; I now do plainly see
		This busy world and I shall ne’er agree.
		The very honey of all earthly joy
		Does of all meats the soonest cloy;
		And they (methinks) deserve my pity
		Who for it can endure the stings,
		The crowd, and buzz, and murmurings
		Of this great hive, the city.
		
		Ah, yet, ere I descend to th’ grave
		May I a small house and large garden have!
		And a few friends, and many books, both true,
		Both wise, and both delightful too!
		And since love ne’er will from me flee,
		A mistress moderately fair,
		And good as guardian angels are,
		Only belov’d, and loving me.
		
		O fountains! when in you shall I
		Myself eas’d of unpeaceful thoughts espy?
		O fields! O woods! when shall I be made
		The happy tenant of your shade?
		Here’s the spring-head of Pleasure’s flood:
		Here’s wealthy Nature’s treasury,
		Where all the riches lie that she
		Has coin’d and stamp’d for good.
		
		Pride and ambition here
		Only in far-fetch’d metaphors appear;
		Here nought but winds can hurtful murmurs scatter,
		And nought but Echo flatter.
		The gods, when they descended, hither
		From heaven did always choose their way:
		And therefore we may boldly say
		That ‘tis the way too thither.
		
		How happy here should I
		And one dear she live, and embracing die!
		She who is all the world, and can exclude
		In deserts solitude.
		I should have then this only fear:
		Lest men, when they my pleasures see,
		Should hither throng to live like me,
		And so make a city here.


*** William Cowper (1731 - 1800)

	1. ABUSE OF THE GOSPEL

		Too many, Lord, abuse Thy grace 
		In this licentious day, 
		And while they boast they see Thy face, 
		They turn their own away. 
		
		Thy book displays a gracious light 
		That can the blind restore; 
		But these are dazzled by the sight, 
		And blinded still the more. 
		
		The pardon such presume upon, 
		They do not beg but steal; 
		And when they plead it at Thy throne, 
		Oh! where’s the Spirit’s seal? 
		
		Was it for this, ye lawless tribe, 
		The dear Redeemer bled? 
		Is this the grace the saints imbibe 
		From Christ the living head? 
		
		Ah, Lord, we know Thy chosen few 
		Are fed with heavenly fare; 
		But these,--the wretched husks they chew, 
		Proclaim them what they are. 
		
		The liberty our hearts implore 
		Is not to live in sin; 
		But still to wait at Wisdom’s door, 
		Till Mercy calls us in.


	2. AN EXHORTATION TO PRAYER

		What various hindrances we meet 
		In coming to a mercy seat! 
		Yet who that knows the worth of prayer, 
		But wishes to be often there? 
		
		Prayer makes the darken’d cloud withdraw, 
		Prayer climbs the ladder Jacob saw, 
		Gives exercise to faith and love, 
		Brings every blessing from above. 
		
		Restraining prayer, we cease to fight; 
		Prayer makes the Christian’s armour bright; 
		And Satan trembles when he sees 
		The weakest saint upon his knees. 
		
		While Moses stood with arms spread wide, 
		Success was found on Israel’s side; 
		But when through weariness they fail’d, 
		That moment Amalek prevail’d. 
		
		Have you no words? Ah, think again, 
		Words flow apace when you complain, 
		And fill your fellow-creature’s ear 
		With the sad tale of all your care. 
		
		Were half the breath thus vainly spent 
		To heaven in supplication sent, 
		Your cheerful song would oftener be, 
		“Hear what the Lord has done for me.”


	3. LIGHT SHINING OUT OF DARKNESS

		God moves in a mysterious way,
		 His wonders to perform;
		He plants his footsteps in the sea,
		 And rides upon the storm.
		
		Deep in unfathomable mines
		 Of never-failing skill,
		He treasures up his bright designs,
		 And works his sov’reign will.
		
		Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take,
		 The clouds ye so much dread
		Are big with mercy, and shall break
		 In blessings on your head.
		
		Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,
		 But trust him for his grace;
		Behind a frowning providence
		 He hides a smiling face.
		
		His purposes will ripen fast,
		 Unfolding ev’ry hour;
		The bud may have a bitter taste,
		 But sweet will be the flow’r.
		
		Blind unbelief is sure to err,
		 And scan his work in vain;
		God is his own interpreter,
		 And he will make it plain.


	4. THE CASTAWAY

		Obscurest night involv’d the sky, 
		        Th’ Atlantic billows roar’d, 
		When such a destin’d wretch as I, 
		        Wash’d headlong from on board, 
		Of friends, of hope, of all bereft, 
		His floating home for ever left. 
		
		No braver chief could Albion boast 
		        Than he with whom he went, 
		Nor ever ship left Albion’s coast, 
		        With warmer wishes sent. 
		He lov’d them both, but both in vain, 
		Nor him beheld, nor her again. 
		
		Not long beneath the whelming brine, 
		        Expert to swim, he lay; 
		Nor soon he felt his strength decline, 
		        Or courage die away; 
		But wag’d with death a lasting strife, 
		Supported by despair of life. 
		
		He shouted: nor his friends had fail’d 
		        To check the vessel’s course, 
		But so the furious blast prevail’d, 
		        That, pitiless perforce, 
		They left their outcast mate behind, 
		And scudded still before the wind. 
		
		Some succour yet they could afford; 
		        And, such as storms allow, 
		The cask, the coop, the floated cord, 
		        Delay’d not to bestow. 
		But he (they knew) nor ship, nor shore, 
		Whate’er they gave, should visit more. 
		
		Nor, cruel as it seem’d, could he 
		        Their haste himself condemn, 
		Aware that flight, in such a sea, 
		        Alone could rescue them; 
		Yet bitter felt it still to die 
		Deserted, and his friends so nigh. 
		
		He long survives, who lives an hour 
		        In ocean, self-upheld; 
		And so long he, with unspent pow’r, 
		        His destiny repell’d; 
		And ever, as the minutes flew, 
		Entreated help, or cried—Adieu! 
		
		At length, his transient respite past, 
		        His comrades, who before 
		Had heard his voice in ev’ry blast, 
		        Could catch the sound no more. 
		For then, by toil subdued, he drank 
		The stifling wave, and then he sank. 
		
		No poet wept him: but the page 
		        Of narrative sincere; 
		That tells his name, his worth, his age, 
		        Is wet with Anson’s tear. 
		And tears by bards or heroes shed 
		Alike immortalize the dead. 
		
		I therefore purpose not, or dream, 
		        Descanting on his fate, 
		To give the melancholy theme 
		        A more enduring date: 
		But misery still delights to trace 
		  Its semblance in another’s case. 
		
		No voice divine the storm allay’d, 
		        No light propitious shone; 
		When, snatch’d from all effectual aid, 
		        We perish’d, each alone: 
		But I beneath a rougher sea, 
		And whelm’d in deeper gulfs than he. 


	5. TO MARY

		THE twentieth year is well-nigh past
		Since first our sky was overcast;
		Ah, would that this might be the last!
		                               My Mary!
		Thy spirits have a fainter flow,
		I see thee daily weaker grow--
		‘Twas my distress that brought thee low,
		                               My Mary!
		
		Thy needles, once a shining store,
		For my sake restless heretofore,
		Now rust disus’d, and shine no more,
		                               My Mary!
		
		For though thou gladly wouldst fulfil
		The same kind office for me still,
		Thy sight now seconds not thy will,
		                               My Mary!
		
		But well thou play’d'st the housewife’s part,
		And all thy threads with magic art
		Have wound themselves about this heart,
		                               My Mary!
		
		Thy indistinct expressions seem
		Like language utter’d in a dream;
		Yet me they charm, whate’er the theme,
		                               My Mary!
		
		Thy silver locks, once auburn bright,
		Are still more lovely in my sight
		Than golden beams of orient light,
		                               My Mary!
		
		For could I view nor them nor thee,
		What sight worth seeing could I see?
		The sun would rise in vain for me,
		                               My Mary!
		
		Partakers of thy sad decline,
		Thy hands their little force resign;
		Yet, gently prest, press gently mine,
		                               My Mary!
		
		And then I feel that still I hold
		A richer store ten thousandfold
		Than misers fancy in their gold,
		                               My Mary!
		
		Such feebleness of limbs thou prov’st,
		That now at every step thou mov’st
		Upheld by two; yet still thou lov’st,
		                               My Mary!
		
		And still to love, though prest with ill,
		In wintry age to feel no chill,
		With me is to be lovely still,
		                               My Mary!
		
		But ah! by constant heed I know,
		How oft the sadness that I show
		Transforms thy smiles to looks of woe,
		                               My Mary!
		
		And should my future lot be cast
		With much resemblance of the past,
		Thy worn-out heart will break at last--
		                               My Mary!


*** Hart Crane (1899 - 1932)

	1. FORGETFULNESS

		Forgetfulness is like a song
		That, freed from beat and measure, wanders.
		Forgetfulness is like a bird whose wings are reconciled,
		Outspread and motionless,--
		A bird that coasts the wind unwearyingly.
		
		Forgetfulness is rain at night,
		Or an old house in a forest,--or a child.
		Forgetfulness is white,--white as a blasted tree,
		And it may stun the sybil into prophecy,
		Or bury the Gods.
		
		I can remember much forgetfulness.


	2. LEGEND

		As silent as a mirror is believed
		Realities plunge in silence by . . .
		
		I am not ready for repentance;
		Nor to match regrets. For the moth
		Bends no more than the still
		Imploring flame. And tremorous
		In the white falling flakes
		Kisses are,--
		The only worth all granting.
		
		It is to be learned--
		This cleaving and this burning,
		But only by the one who
		Spends out himself again.
		
		Twice and twice
		(Again the smoking souvenir,
		Bleeding eidolon!) and yet again.
		Until the bright logic is won
		Unwhispering as a mirror
		Is believed.
		
		Then, drop by caustic drop, a perfect cry
		Shall string some constant harmony,--
		Relentless caper for all those who step
		The legend of their youth into the noon.


	3. MY GRANDMOTHER’S LOVE LETTERS

		There are no stars to-night
		But those of memory.
		Yet how much room for memory there is
		In the loose girdle of soft rain.
		
		There is even room enough
		For the letters of my mother’s mother,
		Elizabeth,
		That have been pressed so long
		Into a corner of the roof
		That they are brown and soft,
		And liable to melt as snow.
		
		Over the greatness of such space
		Steps must be gentle.
		It is all hung by an invisible white hair.
		It trembles as birch limbs webbing the air.
		
		And I ask myself:
		
		“Are your fingers long enough to play
		Old keys that are but echoes:
		Is the silence strong enough
		To carry back the music to its source
		And back to you again
		As though to her?”
		
		Yet I would lead my grandmother by the hand
		Through much of what she would not understand;
		And so I stumble. And the rain continues on the roof
		With such a sound of gently pitying laughter.


	4. NORTH LABRADOR

		A land of leaning ice
		Hugged by plaster-grey arches of sky,
		Flings itself silently
		Into eternity.
		
		“Has no one come here to win you,
		Or left you with the faintest blush
		Upon your glittering breasts?
		Have you no memories, O Darkly Bright?”
		
		Cold-hushed, there is only the shifting moments
		That journey toward no Spring--
		No birth, no death, no time nor sun
		In answer.


	5. PASSAGE

		Where the cedar leaf divides the sky
		I heard the sea.
		In sapphire arenas of the hills
		I was promised an improved infancy.
		
		Sulking, sanctioning the sun,
		My memory I left in a ravine,--
		Casual louse that tissues the buck-wheat,
		Aprons rocks, congregates pears
		In moonlit bushels
		And wakens alleys with a hidden cough.
		
		Dangerously the summer burned
		(I had joined the entrainments of the wind).
		The shadows of boulders lengthened my back:
		In the bronze gongs of my cheeks
		The rain dried without odour.
		
		“It is not long, it is not long;
		See where the red and black
		Vine-stanchioned valleys--“: but the wind
		Died speaking through the ages that you know
		And bug, chimney-sooted heart of man!
		So was I turned about and back, much as your smoke
		Compiles a too well-known biography.
		
		The evening was a spear in the ravine
		That throve through very oak. And had I walked
		The dozen particular decimals of time?
		Touching an opening laurel, I found
		A thief beneath, my stolen book in hand.
		
		“Why are you back here--smiling an iron coffin?
		“To argue with the laurel,” I replied:
		“Am justified in transience, fleeing
		Under the constant wonder of your eyes”
		
		He closed the book. And from the Ptolemies
		Sand troughed us in a glittering, abyss.
		A serpent swam a vertex to the sun
		--On unpaced beaches leaned its tongue and
		drummed.
		What fountains did I hear? What icy speeches?
		Memory, committed to the page, had broke.


*** Richard Crashaw (1613 - 1649)

	1. A SONG

		Lord, when the sense of thy sweet grace
		Sends up my soul to seek thy face.
		Thy blessed eyes breed such desire,
		I dy in love’s delicious Fire.
		O love, I am thy Sacrifice.
		Be still triumphant, blessed eyes.
		Still shine on me, fair suns! that I
		Still may behold, though still I dy.
		
		Though still I dy, I live again;
		Still longing so to be still slain,
		So gainfull is such losse of breath.
		I dy even in desire of death.
		Still live in me this loving strife
		Of living Death and dying Life.
		For while thou sweetly slayest me
		Dead to my selfe, I live in Thee.


	2. THE FLAMING HEART

		O heart, the equal poise of love’s both parts,
		Big alike with wounds and darts,
		Live in these conquering leaves; live all the same,
		And walk through all tongues one triumphant flame;
		Live here, great heart, and love and die and kill,
		And bleed and wound, and yield and conquer still.
		Let this immortal life, where’er it comes,
		Walk in a crowd of loves and martyrdoms;
		Let mystic deaths wait on ‘t, and wise souls be
		The love-slain witnesses of this life of thee.
		O sweet incendiary! show here thy art,
		Upon this carcass of a hard cold heart,
		Let all thy scatter’d shafts of light, that play
		Among the leaves of thy large books of day,
		Combin’d against this breast, at once break in
		And take away from me my self and sin;
		This gracious robbery shall thy bounty be,
		And my best fortunes such fair spoils of me.
		O thou undaunted daughter of desires!
		By all thy dow’r of lights and fires,
		By all the eagle in thee, all the dove,
		By all thy lives and deaths of love,
		By thy large draughts of intellectual day,
		And by thy thirsts of love more large than they,
		By all thy brim-fill’d bowls of fierce desire,
		By thy last morning’s draught of liquid fire,
		By the full kingdom of that final kiss
		That seiz’d thy parting soul and seal’d thee his,
		By all the heav’ns thou hast in him,
		Fair sister of the seraphim!
		By all of him we have in thee,
		Leave nothing of my self in me:
		Let me so read thy life that I
		Unto all life of mine may die.


	3. THE WEEPER

		HAIL, sister springs,
		Parents of silver-footed rills!
		Ever bubbling things,
		Thawing crystal, snowy hills!
		Still spending, never spent; I mean
		Thy fair eyes, sweet Magdalene.
		
		Heavens thy fair eyes be;
		Heavens of ever-falling stars;
		‘Tis seed-time still with thee,
		And stars thou sow’st whose harvest dares
		Promise the earth to countershine
		Whatever makes Heaven’s forehead fine.
		
		Every morn from hence
		A brisk cherub something sips
		Whose soft influence
		Adds sweetness to his sweetest lips;
		Then to his music: and his song
		Tastes of this breakfast all day long.
		
		When some new bright guest
		Takes up among the stars a room,
		And Heaven will make a feast,
		Angels with their bottles come,
		And draw from these full eyes of thine
		Their Master’s water, their own wine.
		
		The dew no more will weep
		The primrose’s pale cheek to deck;
		The dew no more will sleep
		Nuzzled in the lily’s neck:
		Much rather would it tremble here,
		And leave them both to be thy tear.
		
		When sorrow would be seen
		In her brightest majesty,
		--For she is a Queen--
		Then is she drest by none but thee:
		Then and only then she wears
		Her richest pearls--I mean thy tears.
		
		Not in the evening’s eyes,
		When they red with weeping are
		For the Sun that dies,
		Sits Sorrow with a face so fair.
		Nowhere but here did ever meet
		Sweetness so sad, sadness so sweet.
		
		Does the night arise?
		Still thy tears do fall and fall.
		Does night lose her eyes?
		Still the fountain weeps for all.
		Let day and night do what they will,
		Thou hast thy task, thou weepest still.
		
		Not So long she lived
		Will thy tomb report of thee;
		But So long she grieved:
		Thus must we date thy memory.
		Others by days, by months, by years,
		Measure their ages, thou by tears.
		
		Say, ye bright brothers,
		The fugitive sons of those fair eyes
		Your fruitful mothers,
		What make you here? What hopes can ‘tice
		You to be born? What cause can borrow
		You from those nests of noble sorrow?
		
		Whither away so fast
		For sure the sordid earth
		Your sweetness cannot taste,
		Nor does the dust deserve your birth.
		Sweet, whither haste you then? O say,
		Why you trip so fast away?
		
		We go not to seek
		The darlings of Aurora’s bed,
		The rose’s modest cheek,
		Nor the violet’s humble head.
		No such thing: we go to meet
		A worthier object--our Lord’s feet.


	4. VERSES FROM THE SHEPHERD’S HYMN

		WE saw Thee in Thy balmy nest,
		Young dawn of our eternal day;
		We saw Thine eyes break from the East,
		And chase the trembling shades away:
		We saw Thee, and we blest the sight,
		We saw Thee by Thine own sweet light.
		
		Poor world, said I, what wilt thou do
		To entertain this starry stranger?
		Is this the best thou canst bestow--
		A cold and not too cleanly manger?
		Contend, the powers of heaven and earth,
		To fit a bed for this huge birth.
		
		Proud world, said I, cease your contest,
		And let the mighty babe alone;
		The phoenix builds the phoenix’ nest,
		Love’s architecture is His own.
		The babe, whose birth embraves this morn,
		Made His own bed ere He was born.
		
		I saw the curl’d drops, soft and slow,
		Come hovering o’er the place’s head,
		Off’ring their whitest sheets of snow,
		To furnish the fair infant’s bed.
		Forbear, said I, be not too bold;
		Your fleece is white, but ‘tis too cold.
		
		I saw th’ obsequious seraphim
		Their rosy fleece of fire bestow,
		For well they now can spare their wings,
		Since Heaven itself lies here below.
		Well done, said I; but are you sure
		Your down, so warm, will pass for pure?
		
		No, no, your King ‘s not yet to seek
		Where to repose His royal head;
		See, see how soon His new-bloom’d cheek
		‘Twixt mother’s breasts is gone to bed!
		Sweet choice, said we; no way but so,
		Not to lie cold, you sleep in snow!
		
		She sings Thy tears asleep, and dips
		Her kisses in Thy weeping eye;
		She spreads the red leaves of Thy lips,
		That in their buds yet blushing lie.
		She ‘gainst those mother diamonds tries
		The points of her young eagle’s eyes.
		
		Welcome--tho’ not to those gay flies,
		Gilded i’ th’ beams of earthly kings,
		Slippery souls in smiling eyes--
		But to poor shepherds, homespun things,
		Whose wealth ‘s their flocks, whose wit ‘s to be
		Well read in their simplicity.
		
		Yet, when young April’s husband show’rs
		Shall bless the fruitful Maia’s bed,
		We’ll bring the first-born of her flowers,
		To kiss Thy feet and crown Thy head.
		To Thee, dread Lamb! whose love must keep
		The shepherds while they feed their sheep.
		
		To Thee, meek Majesty, soft King
		Of simple graces and sweet loves!
		Each of us his lamb will bring,
		Each his pair of silver doves!
		At last, in fire of Thy fair eyes,
		Ourselves become our own best sacrifice!


	5. WISHES TO HIS (SUPPOSED) MISTRESS

		Whoe’er she be,
		That not impossible she
		That shall command my heart and me;
		
		Where’er she lie,
		Locked up from mortal eye
		In shady leaves of destiny:
		
		Till that ripe birth
		Of studied fate stand forth,
		And teach her fair steps to our earth;
		
		Till that divine
		Idea take a shrine
		Of crystal flesh, through which to shine:
		
		Meet you her, my wishes,
		Bespeak her to my blisses,
		And be ye called my absent kisses.
		
		I wish her beauty,
		That owes not all its duty
		To gaudy tire, or glist’ring shoe-tie;
		
		Something more than
		Taffata or tissue can,
		Or rampant feather, or rich fan;
		
		More than the spoil
		Of shop, or silkworm’s toil,
		Or a bought blush, or a set smile.
		
		A face that’s best
		By its own beauty drest,
		And can alone commend the rest:
		
		A face made up
		Out of no other shop
		Than what nature’s white hand sets ope.
		
		A cheek where youth
		And blood with pen of truth
		Write what the reader sweetly ru’th.
		
		A cheek where grows
		More than a morning rose,
		Which to no box his being owes.
		
		Lips, where all day
		A lovers kiss may play,
		Yet carry nothing thence away.
		
		Looks that oppress
		Their richest tires, but dress
		And clothe their simplest nakedness.
		
		Eyes, that displaces
		The neighbour diamond, and outfaces
		That sunshine by their own sweet graces.
		
		Tresses, that wear
		Jewels, but to declare
		How much themselves more precious are;
		
		Whose native ray
		Can tame the wanton day
		Of gems that in their bright shades play.
		
		Each ruby there,
		Or pearl that dare appear,
		Be its own blush, be its own tear.
		
		A well-tamed heart,
		For whose more noble smart
		Love may be long choosing a dart.
		
		Eyes, that bestow
		Full quivers on Love’s bow,
		Yet pay less arrows than they owe.
		
		Smiles, that can warm
		The blood, yet teach a charm,
		That chastity shall take no harm.
		
		Blushes, that bin
		The burnish of no sin,
		Nor flames of aught too hot within.
		
		Joyes, that confess
		Virtue their mistress,
		And have no other head to dress.
		
		Fears, fond and flight
		As the coy bride’s when night
		First does the longing lover right.
		
		Tears, quickly fled
		And vain as those are shed
		For a dying maidenhead.
		
		Days, that need borrow
		No part of their good morrow
		From a forspent night of sorrow.
		
		Days, that, in spite
		Of darkness, by the light
		Of a clear mind are day all night.
		
		Nights, sweet as they,
		Made short by lovers’ play,
		Yet long by th’ absence of the day.
		
		Life, that dares send
		A challenge to its end,
		And when it comes say Welcome Friend.
		
		Sydneian showers
		Of sweet discourse, whose powers
		Can crown old winter’s head with flowers.
		
		Soft silken hours,
		Open suns, shady bowers
		‘Bove all; nothing within that lours.
		
		Whate’er delight
		Can make day’s forehead bright,
		Or give down to the wings of night.
		
		In her whole frame
		Have nature all the name,
		Art and ornament the shame.
		
		Her flattery
		Picture and poesy,
		Her counsel her own virtue be.
		
		I wish her store
		Of worth may leave her poor
		Of wishes; and I wish—no more.
		
		Now, if Time knows
		That Her, whose radiant brows
		Weave them a garland of my vows;
		
		Her, whose just bays
		My future hopes can raise,
		A trophy to her present praise;
		
		Her, that dares be
		What these lines wish to see:
		I seek no further, it is she.
		
		‘Tis she, and here
		Lo! I unclothe and clear
		My wishes’ cloudy character.
		
		May she enjoy it,
		Whose merit dare apply it,
		But modesty dares still deny it!
		
		Such worth as this is
		Shall fix my flying wishes,
		And determine them to kisses.
		
		Let her full glory,
		My fancies, fly before ye;
		Be ye my fictions, but her story.


*** John of the Cross (1542 - 1591)

	1. I LIVE YET DO NOT LIVE IN ME

		I live yet do not live in me,
		am waiting as my life goes by,
		and die because I do not die.
		
		No longer do I live in me,
		and without God I cannot live;
		to him or me I cannot give
		my self, so what can living be?
		A thousand deaths my agony
		waiting as my life goes by,
		dying because I do not die.
		
		This life I live alone I view
		as robbery of life, and so
		it is a constant death--with no
		way out until I live with you.
		God, hear me, what I say is true:
		I do not want this life of mine,
		and die because I do not die.
		
		Being so removed from you I say
		what kind of life can I have here
		but death so ugly and severe
		and worse than any form of pain?
		I pity me--and yet my fate
		is that I must keep up this lie,
		and die because I do not die.
		
		The fish taken out of the sea
		is not without a consolation:
		his dying is of brief duration
		and ultimately brings relief.
		Yet what convulsive death can be
		as bad as my pathetic life?
		The more I live the more I die.
		
		When I begin to feel relief
		on seeing you in the sacrament,
		I sink in deeper discontent,
		deprived of your sweet company.
		Now everything compels my grief:
		I want--yet can’t--see you nearby,
		and die because I do not die.
		
		Although I find my pleasure, Sir,
		in hope of someday seeing you,
		I see that I can lose you too,
		which makes my pain doubly severe,
		and so I live in darkest fear,
		and hope, wait as life goes by,
		dying because I do not die.
		
		Deliver me from death, my God,
		and give me life; now you have wound
		a rope about me; harshly bound
		I ask you to release the cord.
		See how I die to see you, Lord,
		and I am shattered where I lie,
		dying because I do not die.
		
		My death will trigger tears in me,
		and I shall mourn my life: a day
		annihilated by the way
		I fail and sin relentlessly.
		O Father God, when will it be
		that I can say without a lie:
		I live because I do not die?


	2. THE DARK NIGHT

		One dark night,
		fired with love’s urgent longings
		--ah, the sheer grace!--
		I went out unseen,
		my house being now all stilled.
		
		In darkness, and secure,
		by the secret ladder, disguised,
		--ah, the sheer grace!--
		in darkness and concealment,
		my house being now all stilled.
		
		On that glad night
		in secret, for no one saw me,
		nor did I look at anything
		with no other light or guide
		than the One that burned in my heart.
		
		This guided me
		more surely than the light of noon
		to where he was awaiting me
		--him I knew so well--
		there in a place where no one appeared.
		
		O guiding night!
		O night more lovely than the dawn!
		O night that has united
		the Lover with his beloved,
		transforming the Beloved into his Lover.
		
		Upon my flowering breast,
		which I kept wholly for him alone,
		there he lay sleeping,
		and I caressing him
		there in a breeze from the fanning cedars.
		
		When the breeze blew from the turret,
		as I parted his hair,
		it wounded my neck
		with its gentle hand,
		suspending all my senses.
		
		I abandoned and forgot myself,
		laying my face on my Beloved;
		all things ceased; I went out from myself,
		leaving my cares
		forgotten among the lilies.


	3. THE SPIRITUAL CANTICLE

		Where have you fled and vanished, 
		Beloved, since you left me here to moan? 
		Deer-like you leaped; then, banished 
		and wounded by my own, 
		I followed you with cries, but you had flown.
		
		Shepherds, if you discover, 
		going about this knoll to tend your sheep, 
		the dwelling of that lover 
		whose memory I keep, 
		tell him I sicken unto death and weep.
		
		To seek him, I shall scour 
		these trackless woods to where the rivers flow--
		not stop to pick a flower, 
		not run from beasts--but go 
		past every fort and border that I know.
		
		O forests darkly glooming, 
		seeded by my beloved’s very hand! 
		O pasture richly blooming, 
		you flower-jeweled band! 
		I beg you, say if he has crossed your land.
		
		Yes, with his thousand graces 
		streaming from him, he crossed these groves with speed, 
		and, glancing at these places--
		with no more word or deed--
		left them in his own beauty liveried.
		
		Alas, who can content me? 
		Give yourself up to me, at last, entire; 
		nor send, as you have sent me, 
		those messengers you hire 
		who cannot tell me all that I desire.
		
		And those who pass make clamor, 
		your thousand graces to my ear relaying, 
		wound me with words they stammer, 
		and kill me, ill-conveying 
		the who-knows-what that baffles all their saying.
		
		But how do you persever, 
		O life! in life not living, as you do, 
		pursued to death forever 
		by arrows that strike true, 
		aimed by that love the lover sows in you? 
		And why, having arrived 
		home to my heart, not heal it with relieving? 
		Why, since you have deprived 
		me of it, leave it grieving, 
		rather than grasp the plunder of your thieving?
		
		Extinguish all my plight, 
		since there is none but you alone to do it; 
		Be present to my sight, 
		Since you alone renew it, 
		and you alone, when seen, give value to it.
		
		Be present, drop your veil, 
		and let me die your beauty apprehending; 
		this grief that makes me pale 
		with love, can have no ending 
		without your presence, every joy transcending.
		
		O crystal fountain flowing, 
		if in your silver stream I might discern 
		them there, suddenly glowing--
		those eyes that make me burn, 
		deep in my heart inscribed--for which I yearn!
		
		Turn them, Beloved, from me, 
		or I must fly to find you! 
		
		
		_Turn, my dove, 
		love’s wound has overcome me; 
		Deer-like, I stand above, 
		cooled by the breezes stirred by wings of love._
		
		
		My lover is the highlands, 
		he is the wooded valleys lone and deep, 
		the far, mysterious islands, 
		the streams that sing and leap, 
		whispering winds that court the fields they sweep,
		
		the night whose stillness pleases 
		and ushers morning and the rising sun, 
		silence whose music eases, 
		music from silence spun, 
		and supper that delights when day is done.
		
		Hunt the quick foxes finding 
		our vineyard, where the tender shoots abound, 
		while we make garlands, binding 
		the stems of roses round, 
		and let no man be seen on the high ground.
		
		Halt, you North wind, death-maker; 
		now come, wind from the South, by love beguiled, 
		breathe on my flowered acre, 
		spreading your fragrance mild, 
		and my Lover shall graze where blooms grow wild.
		
		O, you Judean maidens! 
		Now that the rosetrees and the garden’s flowers 
		with rich perfume are laden, 
		keep to your distant bowers 
		and do not tread these thresholds that are ours.
		
		My dear one, hide, take shelter, 
		turn your face to the hills that stand in rows, 
		and speak not; see the welter 
		of maids about her where she goes, 
		wandering the strange islands no one knows.
		
		
		_Birds who fly hither lightly, 
		you lions, fawns, and leaping fallow deer, 
		woods, vales, and rivers sprightly, 
		winds, waters, heats that sear, 
		and terrors that surround the night with fear:
		
		By lyres and their soft sighing 
		I do beseech you, by the sirens’ song: 
		silence your angry crying, 
		halt where the walls rise strong, 
		to keep the sleeping bride secure from wrong.
		
		The bride has come to rest in 
		the pleasant garden’s most alluring space, 
		and at her ease to nest in 
		her quiet leaning place, 
		within the sweetness of the groom’s embrace.
		
		Under the apple boughs, 
		there did I take you when our troth was plighted, 
		there gave my hand and vows, 
		and there you were requited, 
		where once your mother was abased and slighted._
		
		
		Our marriage-couch, made festive 
		with flowers, with lion’s grottoes posted round, 
		all purple-hung, suggestive 
		of peace within it bound, 
		and with a thousand golden emblems crowned.
		
		There where your steps precede them, 
		the maidens follow in an eager line 
		where torches lead them, 
		and the spiced wine, 
		and the balsamic scent of the divine.
		
		In my Beloved’s cellar 
		I drank, and after tasting from his store, 
		wandered those fields, a dweller 
		in bliss, and cared no more 
		for the lost flocks that were my care before.
		
		There at his breast he fed me, 
		there taught me knowledge sweet, with pleasure rife; 
		there where he led me 
		I gave myself for life 
		entirely, and pledged to be his wife.
		
		My soul, in his employment, 
		spends all its wealth, forsakes its own affairs; 
		no flocks provide enjoyment, 
		no task, but that which bears 
		on love alone, and on no other cares.
		
		If, where the flocks are feeding, 
		from this day forth I am no longer found, 
		say Love is leading 
		me a dizzy round, 
		and I have let myself be lost--and bound.
		
		We shall weave emeralds, flowers 
		picked when the earliest rays of morning shine, 
		garlands grown by the powers 
		of your own love, to twine 
		about a single strand, a hair of mine.
		
		One hair you chanced to note, 
		about my neck, that did your glance awaken. 
		You glimpsed it at my throat, 
		were snared and shaken, 
		and wounded by my eye and wholly taken.
		
		Whenever you beheld me, 
		your eyes imprinted all their graces there, 
		mastered and quelled me; 
		and my eyes earned their share: 
		to worship all in you that sight laid bare.
		
		Do not, I beg, despise 
		the swarthy skin in which your sight first knew me; 
		look on me now: your eyes 
		have scattered through me 
		the beauty of the gaze with which you drew me.
		
		
		_That snowy little dove 
		bearing the branch back to the ark is flying--
		the turtle, high above--
		happily spying 
		on the green banks the Love for which she’s sighing.
		
		She once lived lonely, 
		and now, alone, has settled in her nest, 
		guided alone and only 
		by One she loves the best, 
		who, wounded for love’s sake, has come to rest._
		
		
		Let us find joy together, 
		Beloved, in your beauty find our looks 
		reflected, whether 
		on hills or in pure brooks; 
		let us go deep into those wooded nooks.
		
		Then to high, hidden 
		crevices in stony desert waste--
		caves none can find unbidden--
		we’ll go, untraced, 
		where pomegranate wine is ours to taste.
		
		You would delight me, showing 
		me, there, those things my spirit yearns to know, 
		and later by bestowing, 
		O Love I treasure so! 
		what first you gave to me some days ago.
		
		Air, in its even breathing; 
		the song sweet Philomel sings in her flight; 
		the grove, its peace bequeathing 
		to gentle night, 
		with flames consuming all in painless light.
		
		And none to apprehend it; 
		Aminadab quite gone, without a trace; 
		the siege quietly ended, 
		horsemen halting their race, 
		dismounting near the waters of that place.


*** E. E. Cummings (1894 - 1962)

	1. ALL IN GREEN MY LOVE WENT RIDING

		All in green went my love riding
		on a great horse of gold
		into the silver dawn.
		
		four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
		the merry deer ran before.
		
		Fleeter be they than dappled dreams
		the swift sweet deer
		the red rare deer.
		
		Four red roebuck at a white water
		the cruel bugle sang before.
		
		Horn at hip went my love riding
		riding the echo down
		into the silver dawn.
		
		four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
		the level meadows ran before.
		
		Softer be they than slippered sleep
		the lean lithe deer
		the fleet flown deer.
		
		Four fleet does at a gold valley
		the famished arrow sang before.
		
		Bow at belt went my love riding
		riding the mountain down
		into the silver dawn.
		
		four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
		the sheer peaks ran before.
		
		Paler be they than daunting death
		the sleek slim deer
		the tall tense deer.
		
		Four tall stags at a green mountain
		the lucky hunter sang before.
		
		All in green went my love riding
		on a great horse of gold
		into the silver dawn.
		
		four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
		my heart fell dead before.


	2. ANYONE LIVED IN A PRETTY HOW TOWN

		anyone lived in a pretty how town
		(with up so floating many bells down)
		spring summer autumn winter
		he sang his didn’t he danced his did.
		
		Women and men(both little and small)
		cared for anyone not at all
		they sowed their isn’t they reaped their same
		sun moon stars rain
		
		children guessed(but only a few
		and down they forgot as up they grew
		autumn winter spring summer)
		that noone loved him more by more
		
		when by now and tree by leaf
		she laughed his joy she cried his grief
		bird by snow and stir by still
		anyone’s any was all to her
		
		someones married their everyones
		laughed their cryings and did their dance
		(sleep wake hope and then)they
		said their nevers they slept their dream
		
		stars rain sun moon
		(and only the snow can begin to explain
		how children are apt to forget to remember
		with up so floating many bells down)
		
		one day anyone died i guess
		(and noone stooped to kiss his face)
		busy folk buried them side by side
		little by little and was by was
		
		all by all and deep by deep
		and more by more they dream their sleep
		noone and anyone earth by april
		wish by spirit and if by yes.
		
		Women and men(both dong and ding)
		summer autumn winter spring
		reaped their sowing and went their came
		sun moon stars rain


	3. I CARRY YOUR HEART WITH ME

		i carry your heart with me(i carry it in
		my heart)i am never without it(anywhere
		i go you go,my dear;and whatever is done
		by only me is your doing,my darling)
		                                                     i fear
		no fate(for you are my fate,my sweet)i want
		no world(for beautiful you are my world,my true)
		and it’s you are whatever a moon has always meant
		and whatever a sun will always sing is you
		
		here is the deepest secret nobody knows
		(here is the root of the root and the bud of the bud
		and the sky of the sky of a tree called life;which grows
		higher than soul can hope or mind can hide)
		and this is the wonder that’s keeping the stars apart
		
		i carry your heart(i carry it in my heart)


	4. LITTLE TREE

		little tree 
		little silent Christmas tree 
		you are so little 
		you are more like a flower 
		
		who found you in the green forest 
		and were you very sorry to come away? 
		see          i will comfort you 
		because you smell so sweetly 
		
		i will kiss your cool bark 
		and hug you safe and tight 
		just as your mother would, 
		only don’t be afraid 
		
		look          the spangles 
		that sleep all the year in a dark box 
		dreaming of being taken out and allowed to shine, 
		the balls the chains red and gold the fluffy threads, 
		
		put up your little arms 
		and i’ll give them all to you to hold 
		every finger shall have its ring 
		and there won’t be a single place dark or unhappy 
		
		then when you’re quite dressed 
		you’ll stand in the window for everyone to see 
		and how they’ll stare! 
		oh but you’ll be very proud 
		
		and my little sister and i will take hands 
		and looking up at our beautiful tree 
		we’ll dance and sing 
		”Noel Noel”


	5. SPRING OMNIPOTENT GODDESS

		SPRING omnipotent goddess Thou
		dost stuff parks
		with overgrown pimply
		chevaliers and gumchewing giggly
		
		damosels Thou dost
		persuade to serenade
		his lady the musical tom-cat
		Thou dost inveigle
		
		into crossing sidewalks the
		unwary june-bug and the frivolous
		angleworm
		Thou dost hang canary birds in parlour windows
		
		Spring slattern of seasons
		you have soggy legs
		and a muddy petticoat
		drowsy
		
		is your hair your
		eyes are sticky with
		dream and you have a sloppy body from
		
		being brought to bed of crocuses
		when you sing in your whisky voice
		the grass rises on the head of the earth
		and all the trees are put on edge
		
		spring
		of the excellent jostle of
		thy hips
		and the superior
		
		slobber of your breasts i
		am so very fond that my
		soul inside of me hollers
		for thou comest
		
		and your hands are the snow and thy
		fingers are the rain
		and your
		feet O your feet
		
		freakish
		feet feet incorrigible
		
		ragging the world


	6. THE CAMBRIDGE LADIES WHO LIVE IN FURNISHED SOULS

		the Cambridge ladies who live in furnished souls 
		are unbeautiful and have comfortable minds 
		(also, with the church’s protestant blessings 
		daughters,unscented shapeless spirited) 
		they believe in Christ and Longfellow, both dead, 
		are invariably interested in so many things— 
		at the present writing one still finds 
		delighted fingers knitting for the is it Poles? 
		perhaps. While permanent faces coyly bandy 
		scandal of Mrs. N and Professor D 
		.... the Cambridge ladies do not care, above 
		Cambridge if sometimes in its box of 
		sky lavender and cornerless, the 
		moon rattles like a fragment of angry candy 


	7. YOU SHALL ABOVE ALL THINGS BE GLAD AND YOUNG

		you shall above all things be glad and young
		For if you’re young,whatever life you wear
		
		it will become you;and if you are glad
		whatever’s living will yourself become.
		Girlboys may nothing more than boygirls need:
		i can entirely her only love
		
		whose any mystery makes every man’s
		flesh put space on;and his mind take off time
		
		that you should ever think,may god forbid
		and (in his mercy) your true lover spare:
		for that way knowledge lies,the foetal grave
		called progress,and negation’s dead undoom.
		
		I’d rather learn from one bird how to sing
		than teach ten thousand stars how not to dance


*** Donald Davie (1922 - 1995)

	1. A SPRING SONG

		   _“stooped to truth and moralized his song”﻿_
		
		Spring pricks a little. I get out the maps.
		Time to demoralize my song, high time.
		Vernal a little. _Primavera._ First
		Green, first truth and last.
		High time, high time.
		
		A high old time we had of it last summer?
		I overstate. But getting out the maps . . .
		Look! Up the valley of the Brenne,
		Louise de la Vallière . . . Syntax collapses.
		High time for that, high time.
		
		To Château-Renault, the tannery town whose marquis
		Rooke and James Butler whipped in Vigo Bay
		Or so the song says, an amoral song
		Like Ronsard’s where we go today
		Perhaps, perhaps tomorrow.
		
		Tomorrow and tomorrow and . . . Get well!
		Philip’s black-sailed familiar, avaunt
		Or some word as ridiculous, the whole
		Diction kit begins to fall apart.
		High time it did, high time.
		
		High time and a long time yet, my love!
		Get out that blessed map.
		Ageing, you take your glasses off to read it.
		Stooping to truth, we potter to Montoire.
		High time, my love. High time and a long time yet.


	2. ACROSS THE BAY

		A queer thing about those waters: there are no Birds there, or hardly any.
		I did not miss them, I do not remember
		Missing them, or thinking it uncanny.
		
		The beach so-called was a blinding splinter of limestone,
		A quarry outraged by hulls.
		We took pleasure in that: the emptiness, the hardness
		Of the light, the silence, and the water’s stillness.
		
		But this was the setting for one of our murderous scenes.
		This hurt, and goes on hurting:
		The venomous soft jelly, the undersides.
		We could stand the world if it were hard all over.


	3. COASTAL REDWOODS

		Imagination moves
		Along with damping reason
		Through unimpressive trees
		In famous giant groves.
		
		For trunks of girth with this
		That’s dead, its rings all numbered,
		Need not have lived its sum
		Of compact centuries.
		
		From mutable bark and leaf,
		Mere bulk’s persistence, idle,
		Boredom thus justified,
		I turn in mild relief
		
		And meet Identity’s
		Presence, achieved self-sameness,
		Being that proves its claim
		Living, a tree of trees!
		
		Two hundred and thirty feet
		Stout tapering, unbroken
		Poured to the sky and spoke
		Unasked, unspanned, complete.


	4. IN CALIFORNIA

		Chemicals ripen the citrus;
		There are rattlesnakes in the mountains,
		And on the shoreline
		Hygiene, inhuman caution.
		
		Beef in cellophane
		Tall as giraffes,
		The orange-rancher’s daughters
		Crop their own groves, mistrustful.
		
		Perpetual summer seems
		Precarious on the littoral. We drive
		Inland to prove
		The risk we sense. At once
		
		Winter claps-to like a shutter
		High over the Ojai valley, and discloses
		A double crisis,
		Winter and Drought.
		
		Ranges on mountain-ranges,
		Empty, unwatered, crumbling,
		Hot colours come at the eye.
		It is too cold
		
		For picnics at the trestle-tables. Claypit
		Yellow burns on the distance.
		The phantom walks
		Everywhere, of intolerable heat.
		
		At Ventucopa, elevation
		Two-eight-nine-six, the water hydrant frozen,
		Deserted or broken settlements,
		Gasoline stations closed and boarded.
		
		By nightfall, to the snows;
		And over the mile on tilted
		Mile of the mountain park
		The bright cars hazarded.


	5. JULY

		For work like mine, fine weather is inclement.
		“Know when to stop,” breathes hoarse July,
		A stalk in his blistered mouth.
		“Whatever end
		You seem to reach this month is fraudulent.”
		
		He would be cool: I see his bushy tufts
		Toss in their hanging ranks, or inky single
		In steeps of corn promise a stone-cold shade;
		And all such ovens, funnels of hot draughts!
		
		Frigidity can every day outwit
		And stone-cold stone outstrip him. But to freeze
		Distress and torpor in a finished gesture,
		Hard as it is, is not the half of it.
		
		Whatever would be natural is begun
		With a more troubled feeling: we’ve a duty,
		If nothing natural bears with finishing,
		To leave our work dishevelled and half-done.


	6. THE RED MILLS

		Each of us has the time,
		And both the times are wrong.
		Our needs and likings chime
		Sometimes, but not for long.
		
		Your watch is often fast,
		Mine usually slow.
		And yet you cling to the past,
		I laxly let it go.
		
		You are like a ferryman’s daughter,
		And I the stream that blurred
		Calls sent across that water
		Which loyally you have heard.
		
		My lapsings I acknowledge.
		And yet, on either hand
		Combed green, the river’s sedge
		Sweetens the fishwives’ island.
		
		But loyalty strings the reaches
		A river only spills.
		Necklace of bluffs and beaches,
		And the rubies under the mills!


*** Cecil Day-Lewis (1904 - 1972)

	1. COME, LIVE WITH ME AND BE MY LOVE

		Come, live with me and be my love,
		And we will all the pleasures prove
		Of peace and plenty, bed and board,
		That chance employment may afford.
		
		I’ll handle dainties on the docks
		And thou shalt read of summer frocks:
		At evening by the sour canals
		We’ll hope to hear some madrigals.
		
		Care on thy maiden brow shall put
		A wreath of wrinkles, and thy foot
		Be shod with pain: not silken dress
		But toil shall tire thy loveliness.
		
		Hunger shall make thy modest zone
		And cheat fond death of all but bone--
		If these delight thy mind may move,
		Then live with me and be my love.


	2. IS IT FAR TO GO?

		_Is it far to go?_
		A step--no further.
		_Is it hard to go?_
		Ask the melting snow,
		The eddying feather.
		
		_What can I take there?_
		Not a hank, not a hair.
		_What shall I leave behind?_
		Ask the hastening wind,
		The fainting star.
		
		_Shall I be gone long?_
		For ever and a day.
		_To whom there belong?_
		Ask the stone to say,
		Ask my song.
		
		_Who will say farewell?_
		The beating bell.
		_Will anyone miss me?_
		That I dare not tell--
		Quick, Rose, and kiss me.


	3. NEWSREEL

		Enter the dream-house, brothers and sisters, leaving 
		Your debts asleep, your history at the door: 
		This is the home for heroes, and this loving 
		Darkness a fur you can afford. 
		
		Fish in their tank electrically heated 
		Nose without envy the glass wall: for them 
		Clerk, spy, nurse, killer, prince, the great and the defeated, 
		Move in a mute day-dream. 
		
		Bathed in this common source, you gape incurious 
		At what your active hours have willed--
		Sleep-walking on that silver wall, the furious 
		Sick shapes and pregnant fancies of your world. 
		
		There is the mayor opening the oyster season: 
		A society wedding: the autumn hats look swell: 
		An old crocks’ race, and a politician 
		In fishing-waders to prove that all is well. 
		
		Oh, look at the warplanes! Screaming hysteric treble 
		In the low power-dive, like gannets they fall steep. 
		But what are they to trouble--
		These silver shadows-- to trouble your watery, womb-deep sleep? 
		
		See the big guns, rising, groping, erected 
		To plant death in your world’s soft womb. 
		Fire-bud, smoke-blossom, iron seed projected-- 
		Are these exotics? They will grow nearer home! 
		
		Grow nearer home-- and out of the dream-house stumbling 
		One night into a strangling air and the flung 
		Rags of children and thunder of stone niagaras tumbling, 
		You’ll know you slept too long.


	4. TEMPT ME NO MORE

		Tempt me no more; for I
		Have known the lightning’s hour,
		The poet’s inward pride,
		The certainty of power.
		Bayonets are closing round.
		I shrink; yet I must wring
		A living from despair
		And out of steel a song.
		Though song, though breath be short,
		I’ll share not the disgrace
		Of those that ran away
		Or never left the base.
		Comrades, my tongue can speak
		No comfortable words,
		Calls to a for lorn hope,
		Gives work and not rewards.
		Oh keep the sickle sharp
		And follow still the plough:
		Others may reap, though some
		See not the winter through.
		Father, who endest all,
		Pity our broken sleep;
		For we lie down with tears
		And waken but to weep.
		And if our blood alone
		Will melt this iron earth,
		Take it. It is well spent
		Easing a saviour’s birth


	5. THE CONFLICT

		I sang as one 
		Who on a tilting deck sings 
		To keep their courage up, thought the wave hangs 
		That shall cut off their sun. 
		
		As storm-cocks sing, 
		Flinging their natural answer in the wind’s teeth, 
		And care not if it is waste of breath 
		Or birth-control of spring. 
		
		As ocean-flyer clings 
		To height, to the last drop of spirit driving on 
		While yet ahead is land to be won 
		And work for wings. 
		
		Singing I was at peace, 
		Above the clouds, outside the ring: 
		For sorrow finds a swift release in song 
		And pride in poise. 
		
		Yet living here, 
		As one between two massive powers I live 
		Whom neutrality cannot save 
		Nor occupation cheer. 
		
		None such shall be left alive: 
		The innocent wing is soon shot down, 
		And private stars fade in the blood-red dawn 
		Where two worlds strive. 
		
		The red advance of life 
		Contracts pride, calls out the common blood, 
		Beats song into a single-blade, 
		Makes a depth-charge of grief. 
		
		Move then with new desires, 
		For where we used to build and love 
		Is no man’s land, and only ghosts can live 
		Between two fires.


	6. THE ECSTATIC

		Lark, skylark, spilling your rubbed and round 
		Pebbles of sounds in air’s still lake, 
		Whose widening circles fill the noon; yet none 
		Is known so small beside the sun: 
		
		Be strong your fervent soaring, your skyward air! 
		Tremble there, a nerve of song! 
		Float up there where voice and wing are one, 
		A singing star, a note of light! 
		
		Buoyed, embayed in heaven’s noon-wide reaches--
		For soon Light’s tide will turn--Oh Stay! 
		Cease not till day streams to the west, then down 
		That estuary drop down to peace.


	7. TWO TRAVELLERS

		One of us in the compartment stares 
		Out of his window the whole day long 
		With attentive mein, as if he knows, 
		There is hid in the journeying scene a song 
		To recall or compose 
		From snatches of vision, hints of vanishing airs. 
		
		He’ll mark the couched hares 
		In grass whereover the lapwing reel and twist: 
		He notes how the shockheaded sunflowers climb 
		Like boys on the wire by the railway line; 
		And for him those morning rivers are love-in-a-mist, 
		And the chimneystacks prayers. 
		
		The other is plainly a man of affairs, 
		A seasoned commuter. His looks assert, 
		As he opens a briefcase intent on perusing 
		Facts and figures, he’d never divert 
		With profitless musing 
		The longest journey, or notice the dress it wears. 
		
		Little he cares 
		For the coloured drift of his passage: no, not a thing 
		Values in all that is hurrying past, 
		Though dimly he senses from first to last 
		How flaps and waves the smoke of his travelling 
		At the window-squares. 
		
		One is preoccupied, one just stares, 
		While the whale-ribbed terminus nears apace 
		Where passengers all must change, and under 
		Its arch triumphal quickly disperse 
		So you may wonder 
		Watching these two whom the train indifferently bears.


	8. WALKING AWAY

		It is eighteen years ago, almost to the day--
		A sunny day with leaves just turning,
		The touch-lines new-ruled--since I watched you play
		Your first game of football, then, like a satellite
		Wrenched from its orbit, go drifting away
		
		Behind a scatter of boys. I can see
		You walking away from me towards the school
		With the pathos of a half-fledged thing set free
		Into a wilderness, the gait of one
		Who finds no path where the path should be.
		
		That hesitant figure, eddying away
		Like a winged seed loosened from its parent stem,
		Has something I never quite grasp to convey
		About nature’s give-and-take--the small, the scorching
		Ordeals which fire one’s irresolute clay.
		
		I have had worse partings, but none that so
		Gnaws at my mind still. Perhaps it is roughly
		Saying what God alone could perfectly show--
		How selfhood begins with a walking away,
		And love is proved in the letting go.


	9. WHERE ARE THE WAR POETS?

		They who in folly or mere greed 
		Enslaved religion, markets, laws, 
		Borrow our language now and bid 
		Us to speak up in freedom’s cause. 
		
		It is the logic of our times, 
		No subject for immortal verse-- 
		That we who lived by honest dreams 
		Defend the bad against the worse


*** James Dickey (1923 - 1997)

	1. CHERRYLOG ROAD

		Off Highway 106
		At Cherrylog Road I entered   
		The ’34 Ford without wheels,   
		Smothered in kudzu,
		With a seat pulled out to run
		Corn whiskey down from the hills,
		
		And then from the other side   
		Crept into an Essex
		With a rumble seat of red leather   
		And then out again, aboard   
		A blue Chevrolet, releasing   
		The rust from its other color,
		
		Reared up on three building blocks.   
		None had the same body heat;
		I changed with them inward, toward   
		The weedy heart of the junkyard,   
		For I knew that Doris Holbrook   
		Would escape from her father at noon
		
		And would come from the farm   
		To seek parts owned by the sun   
		Among the abandoned chassis,   
		Sitting in each in turn
		As I did, leaning forward
		As in a wild stock-car race
		
		In the parking lot of the dead.   
		Time after time, I climbed in   
		And out the other side, like   
		An envoy or movie star
		Met at the station by crickets.   
		A radiator cap raised its head,
		
		Become a real toad or a kingsnake   
		As I neared the hub of the yard,   
		Passing through many states,   
		Many lives, to reach
		Some grandmother’s long Pierce-Arrow   
		Sending platters of blindness forth
		
		From its nickel hubcaps
		And spilling its tender upholstery
		On sleepy roaches,
		The glass panel in between   
		Lady and colored driver   
		Not all the way broken out,
		
		The back-seat phone
		Still on its hook.
		I got in as though to exclaim,   
		“Let us go to the orphan asylum,   
		John; I have some old toys
		For children who say their prayers.”
		
		I popped with sweat as I thought   
		I heard Doris Holbrook scrape
		Like a mouse in the southern-state sun   
		That was eating the paint in blisters   
		From a hundred car tops and hoods.   
		She was tapping like code,
		
		Loosening the screws,   
		Carrying off headlights,   
		Sparkplugs, bumpers,
		Cracked mirrors and gear-knobs,   
		Getting ready, already,
		To go back with something to show
		
		Other than her lips’ new trembling   
		I would hold to me soon, soon,   
		Where I sat in the ripped back seat
		Talking over the interphone,   
		Praying for Doris Holbrook   
		To come from her father’s farm
		
		And to get back there
		With no trace of me on her face
		To be seen by her red-haired father
		Who would change, in the squalling barn,   
		Her back’s pale skin with a strop,
		Then lay for me
		
		In a bootlegger’s roasting car
		With a string-triggered I2-gauge shotgun   
		To blast the breath from the air.
		Not cut by the jagged windshields,   
		Through the acres of wrecks she came   
		With a wrench in her hand,
		
		Through dust where the blacksnake dies   
		Of boredom, and the beetle knows   
		The compost has no more life.
		Someone outside would have seen   
		The oldest car’s door inexplicably   
		Close from within:
		
		I held her and held her and held her,   
		Convoyed at terrific speed
		By the stalled, dreaming traffic around us,   
		So the blacksnake, stiff
		With inaction, curved back
		Into life, and hunted the mouse
		
		With deadly overexcitement,   
		The beetles reclaimed their field   
		As we clung, glued together,
		With the hooks of the seat springs   
		Working through to catch us red-handed   
		Amidst the gray breathless batting
		
		That burst from the seat at our backs.   
		We left by separate doors
		Into the changed, other bodies
		Of cars, she down Cherrylog Road   
		And I to my motorcycle
		Parked like the soul of the junkyard
		
		Restored, a bicycle fleshed
		With power, and tore off
		Up Highway 106, continually   
		Drunk on the wind in my mouth,   
		Wringing the handlebar for speed,   
		Wild to be wreckage forever.


	2. FALLING

			_A 29-year-old stewardess fell . . . to her
			death tonight when she was swept
			through an emergency door that sud-
			denly sprang open . . . The body . . .
			was found . . . three hours after the
			accident._                                             
		                             --New York Times
		
		The states when they black out and lie there rolling    when they turn
		To something transcontinental    move by    drawing moonlight out of the great
		One-sided stone hung off the starboard wingtip    some sleeper next to
		An engine is groaning for coffee    and there is faintly coming in
		Somewhere the vast beast-whistle of space. In the galley with its racks
		Of trays    she rummages for a blanket    and moves in her slim tailored
		Uniform to pin it over the cry at the top of the door. As though she blew
		
		The door down with a silent blast from her lungs    frozen    she is black
		Out finding herself    with the plane nowhere and her body taken by the throat
		The undying cry of the void    falling    living    beginning to be something
		That no one has ever been and lived through    screaming without enough air
		Still neat    lipsticked    stockinged    girdled by regulation    her hat
		Still on    her arms and legs in no world    and yet spaced also strangely
		With utter placid rightness on thin air    taking her time    she holds it
		In many places    and now, still thousands of feet from her death she seems
		To slow    she develops interest    she turns in her maneuverable body
		
		To watch it. She is hung high up in the overwhelming middle of things in her
		Self    in low body-whistling wrapped intensely    in all her dark dance-weight
		Coming down from a marvellous leap    with the delaying, dumfounding ease
		Of a dream of being drawn    like endless moonlight to the harvest soil
		Of a central state of one’s country    with a great gradual warmth coming
		Over her    floating    finding more and more breath in what she has been using
		For breath    as the levels become more human    seeing clouds placed honestly
		Below her left and right    riding slowly toward them    she clasps it all
		To her and can hang her hands and feet in it in peculiar ways    and
		Her eyes opened wide by wind, can open her mouth as wide    wider and suck
		All the heat from the cornfields    can go down on her back with a feeling
		Of stupendous pillows stacked under her    and can turn    turn as to someone
		In bed    smile, understood in darkness    can go away    slant    slide
		Off tumbling    into the emblem of a bird with its wings half-spread
		Or whirl madly on herself    in endless gymnastics in the growing warmth
		Of wheatfields rising toward the harvest moon.    There is time to live
		In superhuman health    seeing mortal unreachable lights far down seeing
		An ultimate highway with one late priceless car probing it    arriving
		In a square town    and off her starboard arm the glitter of water catches
		The moon by its one shaken side    scaled, roaming silver    My God it is good
		And evil    lying in one after another of all the positions for love
		Making    dancing    sleeping    and now cloud wisps at her no
		Raincoat    no matter    all small towns brokenly brighter from inside
		Cloud    she walks over them like rain    bursts out to behold a Greyhound
		Bus shooting light through its sides    it is the signal to go straight
		Down like a glorious diver    then feet first    her skirt stripped beautifully
		Up    her face in fear-scented cloths    her legs deliriously bare    then
		Arms out    she slow-rolls over    steadies out    waits for something great
		To take control of her    trembles near feathers    planes head-down
		The quick movements of bird-necks turning her head    gold eyes the insight-
		eyesight of owls blazing into the hencoops    a taste for chicken overwhelming
		Her    the long-range vision of hawks enlarging all human lights of cars
		Freight trains    looped bridges    enlarging the moon racing slowly
		Through all the curves of a river    all the darks of the midwest blazing
		From above. A rabbit in a bush turns white    the smothering chickens
		Huddle    for over them there is still time for something to live
		With the streaming half-idea of a long stoop    a hurtling    a fall
		That is controlled    that plummets as it wills    turns gravity
		Into a new condition, showing its other side like a moon    shining
		New Powers    there is still time to live on a breath made of nothing
		But the whole night    time for her to remember to arrange her skirt
		Like a diagram of a bat    tightly it guides her    she has this flying-skin
		Made of garments    and there are also those sky-divers on tv    sailing
		In sunlight    smiling under their goggles    swapping batons back and forth
		And He who jumped without a chute and was handed one by a diving
		Buddy. She looks for her grinning companion    white teeth    nowhere
		She is screaming    singing hymns    her thin human wings spread out
		From her neat shoulders    the air beast-crooning to her    warbling
		And she can no longer behold the huge partial form of the world    now
		She is watching her country lose its evoked master shape    watching it lose
		And gain    get back its houses and peoples    watching it bring up
		Its local lights    single homes    lamps on barn roofs    if she fell
		Into water she might live    like a diver    cleaving    perfect    plunge
		
		Into another    heavy silver    unbreathable    slowing    saving
		Element: there is water    there is time to perfect all the fine
		Points of diving    feet together    toes pointed    hands shaped right
		To insert her into water like a needle    to come out healthily dripping
		And be handed a Coca-Cola    there they are    there are the waters
		Of life    the moon packed and coiled in a reservoir    so let me begin
		To plane across the night air of Kansas    opening my eyes superhumanly
		Bright    to the damned moon    opening the natural wings of my jacket
		By Don Loper    moving like a hunting owl toward the glitter of water
		One cannot just fall    just tumble screaming all that time    one must use
		It    she is now through with all    through all    clouds    damp    hair
		Straightened    the last wisp of fog pulled apart on her face like wool revealing
		New darks    new progressions of headlights along dirt roads from chaos
		
		And night    a gradual warming    a new-made, inevitable world of one’s own
		Country    a great stone of light in its waiting waters    hold    hold out
		For water: who knows when what correct young woman must take up her body
		And fly    and head for the moon-crazed inner eye of midwest imprisoned
		Water    stored up for her for years    the arms of her jacket slipping
		Air up her sleeves to go    all over her? What final things can be said
		Of one who starts her sheerly in her body in the high middle of night
		Air    to track down water like a rabbit where it lies like life itself
		Off to the right in Kansas? She goes toward    the blazing-bare lake
		Her skirts neat    her hands and face warmed more and more by the air
		Rising from pastures of beans    and under her    under chenille bedspreads
		The farm girls are feeling the goddess in them struggle and rise brooding
		On the scratch-shining posts of the bed    dreaming of female signs
		Of the moon    male blood like iron    of what is really said by the moan
		Of airliners passing over them at dead of midwest midnight    passing
		Over brush fires    burning out in silence on little hills    and will wake
		To see the woman they should be    struggling on the rooftree to become
		Stars: for her the ground is closer    water is nearer    she passes
		It    then banks    turns    her sleeves fluttering differently as she rolls
		Out to face the east, where the sun shall come up from wheatfields she must
		Do something with water    fly to it    fall in it    drink it    rise
		From it    but there is none left upon earth    the clouds have drunk it back
		The plants have sucked it down    there are standing toward her only
		The common fields of death    she comes back from flying to falling
		Returns to a powerful cry    the silent scream with which she blew down
		The coupled door of the airliner    nearly    nearly losing hold
		Of what she has done    remembers    remembers the shape at the heart
		Of cloud    fashionably swirling    remembers she still has time to die
		Beyond explanation. Let her now take off her hat in summer air the contour
		Of cornfields    and have enough time to kick off her one remaining
		Shoe with the toes    of the other foot    to unhook her stockings
		With calm fingers, noting how fatally easy it is to undress in midair
		Near death    when the body will assume without effort any position
		Except the one that will sustain it    enable it to rise    live
		Not die    nine farms hover close    widen    eight of them separate, leaving
		One in the middle    then the fields of that farm do the same    there is no
		Way to back off    from her chosen ground    but she sheds the jacket
		With its silver sad impotent wings    sheds the bat’s guiding tailpiece
		Of her skirt    the lightning-charged clinging of her blouse    the intimate
		Inner flying-garment of her slip in which she rides like the holy ghost
		Of a virgin    sheds the long windsocks of her stockings    absurd
		Brassiere    then feels the girdle required by regulations squirming
		Off her: no longer monobuttocked    she feels the girdle flutter    shake
		In her hand    and float    upward    her clothes rising off her ascending
		Into cloud    and fights away from her head the last sharp dangerous shoe
		Like a dumb bird    and now will drop in    soon    now will drop
		
		In like this    the greatest thing that ever came to Kansas    down from all
		Heights    all levels of American breath    layered in the lungs from the frail
		Chill of space to the loam where extinction slumbers in corn tassels thickly
		And breathes like rich farmers counting: will come along them after
		Her last superhuman act    the last slow careful passing of her hands
		All over her unharmed body    desired by every sleeper in his dream:
		Boys finding for the first time their loins filled with heart’s blood
		Widowed farmers whose hands float under light covers to find themselves
		Arisen at sunrise    the splendid position of blood unearthly drawn
		Toward clouds    all feel something    pass over them as she passes
		Her palms over her long legs    her small breasts    and deeply between
		Her thighs    her hair shot loose from all pins    streaming in the wind
		Of her body    let her come openly    trying at the last second to land
		On her back    This is it    this
		                                                         All those who find her impressed
		In the soft loam    gone down    driven well into the image of her body
		The furrows for miles flowing in upon her where she lies very deep
		In her mortal outline    in the earth as it is in cloud    can tell nothing
		But that she is there    inexplicable    unquestionable    and remember
		That something broke in them as well    and began to live and die more
		When they walked for no reason into their fields to where the whole earth
		Caught her    interrupted her maiden flight    told her how to lie she cannot
		Turn    go away    cannot move    cannot slide off it and assume another
		Position    no sky-diver with any grin could save her    hold her in his arms
		Plummet with her    unfold above her his wedding silks    she can no longer
		Mark the rain with whirling women that take the place of a dead wife
		Or the goddess in Norwegian farm girls    or all the back-breaking whores
		Of Wichita. All the known air above her is not giving up quite one
		Breath    it is all gone    and yet not dead    not anywhere else
		Quite    lying still in the field on her back    sensing the smells
		Of incessant growth try to lift her    a little sight left in the corner
		Of one eye    fading    seeing something wave    lies believing
		That she could have made it    at the best part of her brief goddess
		State    to water    gone in headfirst    come out smiling    invulnerable
		Girl in a bathing-suit ad    but she is lying like a sunbather at the last
		Of moonlight    half-buried in her impact on the earth    not far
		From a railroad trestle    a water tank    she could see if she could
		Raise her head from her modest hole    with her clothes beginning
		To come down all over Kansas    into bushes    on the dewy sixth green
		Of a golf course    one shoe    her girdle coming down fantastically
		On a clothesline, where it belongs    her blouse on a lightning rod:
		
		Lies in the fields    in this field    on her broken back as though on
		A cloud she cannot drop through    while farmers sleepwalk without
		Their women from houses    a walk like falling toward the far waters
		Of life    in moonlight    toward the dreamed eternal meaning of their farms
		Toward the flowering of the harvest in their hands    that tragic cost
		Feels herself go    go toward    go outward    breathes at last fully
		Not    and tries    less    once    tries    tries    ah, god--


	3. FOR THE LAST WOLVERINE

		They will soon be down
		
		To one, but he still will be
		For a little while    still will be stopping
		
		The flakes in the air with a look,
		Surrounding himself with the silence
		Of whitening snarls. Let him eat
		The last red meal of the condemned
		
		To extinction, tearing the guts
		
		From an elk. Yet that is not enough
		For me. I would have him eat
		
		The heart, and from it, have an idea
		Stream into his gnarling head
		That he no longer has a thing
		To lose, and so can walk
		
		Out into the open, in the full
		
		Pale of the sub-Arctic sun
		Where a single spruce tree is dying
		
		Higher and higher. Let him climb it
		With all his meanness and strength.
		Lord, we have come to the end
		Of this kind of vision of heaven,
		
		As the sky breaks open
		
		Its fans around him and shimmers
		And into its northern gates he rises
		
		Snarling    complete    in the joy of a weasel
		With an elk’s horned heart in his stomach
		Looking straight into the eternal
		Blue, where he hauls his kind. I would have it all
		
		My way: at the top of that tree I place
		
		The New World’s last eagle
		Hunched in mangy feathers    giving
		
		Up on the theory of flight.
		Dear God of the wildness of poetry, let them mate
		To the death in the rotten branches,
		Let the tree sway and burst into flame
		
		And mingle them, crackling with feathers,
		
		In crownfire. Let something come
		Of it    something gigantic    legendary
		
		Rise beyond reason over hills
		Of ice    SCREAMING    that it cannot die,
		That it has come back, this time
		On wings, and will spare no earthly thing:
		
		That it will hover, made purely of northern
		
		Lights, at dusk    and fall
		On men building roads: will perch
		
		On the moose’s horn like a falcon
		Riding into battle    into holy war against
		Screaming railroad crews: will pull
		Whole traplines like fibres from the snow
		
		In the long-jawed night of fur trappers.
		
		But, small, filthy, unwinged,
		You will soon be crouching
		
		Alone, with maybe some dim racial notion
		Of being the last, but none of how much
		Your unnoticed going will mean:
		How much the timid poem needs
		
		The mindless explosion of your rage,
		
		The glutton’s internal fire    the elk’s
		Heart in the belly, sprouting wings,
		
		The pact of the “blind swallowing
		Thing,” with himself, to eat
		The world, and not to be driven off it
		Until it is gone, even if it takes
		
		Forever. I take you as you are
		
		And make of you what I will,
		Skunk-bear, carcajou, bloodthirsty
		
		Non-survivor.
		                       _Lord, let me die    but not die
		Out._


	4. MAY DAY SERMON

		Each year at this time I shall be telling you of the Lord
		-- Fog, gamecock, snake, and neighbor -- giving men all the help they need
		To drag their daughters into barns. Children, I shall be showing you
		The fox-hide stretched on the door     like a flying-squirrel     fly
		Open     to show you the dark where the one pole of light is paid out
		In spring by the loft, and in it the croker sacks sprawling and shuttling
		Themselves into place as it comes     comes     through spiders dead
		Drunk on their threads     the hogs’ fat bristling     the milk
		Snake in the rafters unbending through gnats to touch the last place
		Alive on the sun with his tongue     I shall be flickering from my mouth
		Oil     grease-cans     lard-cans     nubbins     cobs     night
		Coming     floating     each May with night coming I cannot help
		Telling you how he hauls her to the centerpole     how the tractor moves
		Over as he sets his feet and hauls     hauls     ravels her arms and hair
		In stump-chains:   Telling:   telling of Jehovah come and gone
		Down on His belly     descending     creek-curving     blowing His legs
		
		Like candles, out     putting North Georgia copper on His head
		To crawl in under the door in dust red enough to breathe
		The breath of Adam into:   Children, be brought where she screams and begs
		To the sacks of corn and coal     to nails     to the swelling ticks
		On the near side of mules, for the Lord’s own man has found the limp
		Rubber that lies in the gulley     the penis-skin like a serpent
		Under the weaving willow.
		                                           Listen:   often a girl in the country,
		Mostly sweating     mostly in spring, deep enough in the holy Bible
		Belt, will feel her hair rise up     arms rise, and this not any wish
		
		Of hers, and clothes like lint shredding off her     abominations
		In the sight of the Lord:   will hear the Book speak like a father
		Gone mad:   each year at this time will hear the utmost sound
		Of herself, as her lungs cut, one after one, every long track
		Spiders have coaxed from their guts     stunned spiders fall
		Into Pandemonium     fall     fall     and begin to dance like a girl
		On the red clay floor of Hell     she screaming     her father screaming
		Scripture     CHAPter and verse     beating it into her with a weeping
		Willow branch     the animals stomping     she prancing and climbing
		Her hair     beasts shifting from foot to foot about the stormed
		Steel of the anvil     the tractor gaslessly straining     believing
		It must pull up a stump     pull     pull down the walls of the barn
		Like Dagon’s temple     set the Ark of the Lord in its place     change all
		Things for good, by pain.   Each year at this time you will be looking up
		Gnats in the air     they boil     recombine     go mad with striving
		To form the face of her lover, as when he lay at Nickajack Creek
		With her by his motorcycle     looming     face trembling with exhaust
		Fumes     humming insanely -- each May you hear her father scream like God
		And King James as he flails     cuds richen     bulls chew themselves white-faced
		Deeper into their feed bags, and he cries something the Lord     cries
		Words! Words! Ah, when they leap     when they are let out of the Bible’s
		Black box     they whistle     they grab the nearest girl and do her hair up
		For her lover in root-breaking chains     and she knows she was born to hang
		In the middle of Gilmer County     to dance, on May Day, with holy
		Words all around her     with beasts with insects     O children NOW
		In five bags of chicken-feed the torsos of prophets form     writhe
		Die out as her freckled flesh     as flesh and the Devil twist and turn
		Her body to love     cram her mouth with defiance     give her words
		To battle with the Bible’s in the air:  she shrieks sweet Jesus and God
		
		I’m glad     O my God-darling     O lover     O angel-stud     dear heart
		Of life put it in me     give     you’re killing     KILLING:  each
		Night each year at this time I shall be telling you of the snake-
		doctor drifting from the loft, a dragonfly, where she is wringing
		Out the tractor’s muddy chains     where her cotton socks prance,
		Where her shoes as though one ankle were broken, stand with night
		Coming     and creatures drawn by the stars, out of their high holes
		By moon-hunger driven     part the leaves     crawl out of Grimes Nose
		And Brasstown Bald:  on this night only I can tell how the weasel pauses
		Each year in the middle of the road     looks up at the evening blue
		Star     to hear her say again     O again     YOU CAN BEAT ME TO DEATH 
		And I’ll still be glad:
		                                Sisters, it is time to show you rust
		Smashing the lard-cans more in     spring after spring     bullbats
		Swifts     barn swallows     mule-bits clashing on walls     mist turning
		Up white out of warm creeks:  all over, fog taking the soul from the body
		Of water     gaining     rising up trees     sifting up through smoking green
		Frenzied levels of gamecocks sleeping from the roots     stream-curves
		Of mist:  wherever on God’s land is water, roads rise up the shape of rivers
		Of no return:  O sisters, it is time     you cannot sleep with Jehovah
		
		Searching for what to be, on ground that has called Him from His Book:  
		Shall He be the pain in the willow, or the copperhead’s kingly riding
		In kudzu, growing with vines toward the cows     or the wild face working over
		A virgin, swarming like gnats     or the grass of the west field, bending
		East, to sweep into bags and turn brown     or shall He rise, white on white,
		From Nickajack Creek as a road?  The barn creaks like an Ark     beasts
		Smell everywhere the streams drawn out by their souls     the flood-
		sigh of grass in the spring     they shall be saved     they know as she screams 
		Of sin     as the weasel stares     the hog strains toward the woods 
		That hold its primeval powers:
		                                                Often a girl in the country will find herself 
		Dancing with God in a mule’s eye, twilight drifting in straws from the dark
		Overhead of hay     cows working their sprained jaws sideways at the hour
		Of night all things are called:   when gnats in their own midst and fury
		Of swarming-time, crowd into the barn     their sixty-year day consumed
		In this sunset     die in a great face of light that swarms and screams
		Of love.
		               Each May you will crouch like a sawhorse to make yourself
		More here     you will be cow-chips     chickens croaking for her hands
		That shook the corn over the ground     bouncing     kicked this way
		And that, by the many beaks     and every last one of you will groan
		Like nails barely holding     and your hair be full of the gray
		Glints of stump-chains.     Children, each year at this time you will have
		Back-pain, but also heaven     but also     also this lovely other life-
		pain between the thighs:  woman-child or woman in bed in Gilmer
		County     smiling in sleep like blood-beast and Venus together
		Dancing the road as I speak, get up     up in your socks and take
		The pain you were born for:   that rose through her body straight
		Up from the earth like a plant, like the process that raised overhead
		The limbs of the uninjured willow.
		                                                       Children, it is true
		That the kudzu advances, its copperheads drunk and tremendous
		With hiding, toward the cows     and wild fences cannot hold the string
		Beans as they overshoot their fields:   that in May the weasel loves love
		As much as blood     that in the dusk bottoms young deer stand half
		In existence, munching cornshucks     true that when the wind blows
		Right     Nickajack releases its mist     the willow leaves stiffen once
		More     altogether     you can hear     each year at this time you can hear
		No     Now, no     Now     Yes     Again     More     O     O my God     
		I love it     love you     don’t leave     don’t     don’t stop O GLORY
		Be:
		     More dark     more coming     fox-fire crawls over the okra-
		patch     as through it a real fox creeps to claim his father’s fur
		Flying on doornails     the quartermoon on the outhouse begins to shine
		With the quartermoonlight of this night     as she falls and rises,
		Chained to a sapling like a tractor     WHIPPED for the wind in the willow
		Tree     WHIPPED for Bathsheba and David     WHIPPED for the woman taken
		Anywhere     anytime     WHIPPED for the virgin sighing     bleeding
		From her body     for the sap and green of the year     for her own good
		And evil:
		              Sisters, who is your lover?   Has he done nothing but come
		And go?   Has your father nailed his cast skin to the wall as evidence
		Of sin?   Is it flying like a fox in the darkness     dripping pure radiant venom
		Of manhood?  
		                        Yes, but heis unreeling in hills between his long legs
		The concrete of the highway     his face in the moon beginning
		To burn     twitch     dance like an overhead swarm     he feels a nail
		Beat through his loins far away     he rises in pain and delight, as spirit
		Enters his sex     sways     forms     rises with the forced, choked red
		Blood of her red-headed image, in the red-dust, Adam-colored clay
		Whirling and leaping     creating     calling:  O on the dim, gray man-
		track of cement flowing into his mouth     each year he turns the moon back
		Around on his handlebars     her image going all over him like the wind
		Blasting up his sleeves.   He turns off the highway, and
		                                                                                         Ah, children,
		There is now something else to hear:  there is now this madness of engine
		Noise in the bushes     past reason     ungodly     squealing     reverting
		Like a hog turned loose in the woods     Yes, as he passes the first
		Trees of God’s land     game-hens overhead     and the farm is ON
		Him     everything is more     more     MORE as he enters the black
		Bible’s white swirling ground     O daughters     his heartbeat great
		With trees     some blue leaves coming     NOW     and right away fire
		In the right eye     Lord     more     MORE     O Glory     land
		Of Glory:  ground-branches hard to get through     coops where fryers huddle
		To death, as the star-beast dances and scratches at their home-boards,
		His rubber stiffens on its nails:  Sisters, understand about men and sheaths:
		
		About nakedness:  understand how butterflies, amazed, pass out
		Of their natal silks     how the tight snake takes a great breath     bursts
		Through himself and leaves himself behind     how a man casts finally
		Off everything that shields him from another     beholds his loins
		Shine with his children forever     burn with the very juice
		Of resurrection:  such shining is how the spring creek comes
		Forth from its sunken rocks     it is how the trout foams and turns on     
		Himself     heads upstream, breathing mist like water, for the cold
		Mountain of his birth     flowing     sliding in and through the ego-
		maniacal sleep of gamecocks     shooting past a man with one new blind
		Side     who feels his skinned penis rise like a fish through the dark
		Woods, in a strange lifted-loving form     a snake about to burst
		Through itself on May Day     and leave behind on the ground     still
		Still     the shape of a fooled thing’s body:
		                                                                  he comes on     comes
		Through the laurel, wiped out on his right by an eye-twig     now he
		Is crossing the cow track     his hat in his hand going on before
		His face     then up     slowly over     over like the Carolina moon
		Coming into Georgia     feels the farm close its Bible and ground-
		fog over him     his dark side blazing     something whipping
		By, beyond sight:   each year at this time I shall be letting you
		
		Know when she cannot stand     when the chains fall back on
		To the tractor     when you should get up     when neither she nor the pole
		Has any more sap     and her striped arms and red hair must keep her
		From falling     when she feels God’s willow laid on her, at last,
		With no more pressure than hay, and she has finished crying to her lover’s
		Shifting face     and his hand when he gave it     placed it, unconsumed,
		In her young burning bush.   Each year by dark she has learned
		
		That home is to hang in     home is where your father cuts the baby
		Fat from your flanks for the Lord, as you scream for the viny foreskin
		Of the motorcycle rider.  Children, by dark     by now, when he drops
		The dying branch and lets her down     when the red clay flats
		Of her feet hit the earth     all things have heard -- fog, gamecock
		Snake, and lover -- and we listen:  Listen children, for the fog to lift
		The form of sluggish creeks into the air:   each spring, each creek
		On the Lord’s land flows in two     O sisters, lovers, flows in two
		Places:   where it was, and in the low branches of pines where chickens
		Sleep in mist     and that is where you will find roads floating free
		Of the earth     winding     leading unbrokenly out of the farm of God
		The father:
		                  Each year at this time she is coming from the barn     she
		Falls once, hair hurting her back     stumbles walking naked
		With dignity     walks with no help to the house     lies face-down
		In her room, burning     tuning in     hearing in the spun rust-
		groan of bedsprings, his engine root and thunder like a pig,
		Knowing who it is     must be     knowing that the face of gnats will wake,
		In the woods, as a man:   there is nothing else this time of night
		But her dream of having wheels between her legs:   tires, man,
		Everything she can hold, pulsing together     her father walking
		Reading     intoning     calling     his legs blown out by the ground-
		fogging creeks of his land:  :  Listen     listen like females each year
		In May     O glory     to the sound     the sound of your man gone wild
		With love in the woods     let your nipples rise     and leave your feet
		To hear:  This is when moths flutter in from the open, and Hell
		Fire of the oil lamp shrivels them and     it is said
		To her:   said like the Lord’s voice trying to find a way
		Outside the Bible     O sisters     O women and children who will be
		Women of Gilmer County     you farm girls and Ellijay cotton mill
		Girls, get up     each May Day     up in your socks     it is the father
		Sound     going on about God     making, a hundred feet down,
		The well beat its bucket like a gong:  she goes to the kitchen,
		Stands with the inside grain of pinewood whirling on her like a cloud
		Of wire     picks up a useful object     two     they are not themselves
		Tonight     each hones itself as the moon does     new by phases
		Of fog     floating unchanged into the house     coming atom
		By atom     sheepswool     different smokes     breathed like the Word
		Of nothing, round her seated father.   Often a girl in the country,
		Mostly in spring     mostly bleeding     deep enough in the holy Bible
		Belt     will feel her arms rise up     up     and this not any wish
		Of hers     will stand, waiting for word.   O daughters, he is rambling
		In Obadiah     the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou
		That dwelleth in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high
		That saith in his heart     O daughters     who shall bring me down
		To the ground?   And she comes down     putting her back into
		The hatchet     often     often     he is brought down     laid out
		Lashing     smoking     sucking wind:   Children, each year at this time
		A girl will tend to take an ice pick in both hands     a lone pine
		Needle     will hover     hover:  Children, each year at this time
		Things happen quickly     and it is easy for a needle to pass
		Through the eye of a man bound for Heaven she leaves it     naked goes
		Without further sin through the house     floating in and out of all
		Four rooms     comes onto the porch on cloud-feet     steps down and out
		And around to the barn     pain changing     her old screams hanging
		By the hair around her:   Children, in May, often a girl in the country
		Will find herself lifting wood     her arms like hair rising up
		To undo locks     raise latches     set gates aside     turn all things
		Loose     shoo them out     shove     pull     O hogs are leaping ten
		Million years back through fog     cows walking worriedly     passing out
		Of the Ark     from stalls where God’s voice cursed and mumbled
		At milking-time     moving     moving     disappearing     drifting
		In cloud     cows in the alders already lowing far off     no one
		Can find them each year:  she comes back to the house and grabs double
		Handfuls of clothes
		                                 and her lover, with his one eye of amazing grace
		Of sight, sees her coming as she was born     swirling     developing
		Toward him     she hears him grunt     she hears him creaking
		His saddle     dead-engined     she conjures one foot whole from the ground-
		fog to climb him behind     he stands up     stomps     catches     roars
		Blasts the leaves from a blinding twig     wheels     they blaze up
		Together     she breathing to match him     her hands on his warm belly
		His hard blood renewing like a snake     O now     now as he twists
		His wrist, and takes off with their bodies:
		                                                                  each May you will hear it
		Said that the sun came as always     the sun of next day burned
		Them off with the mist:   that when the river fell back on its bed
		Of water     they fell from life     from limbs     they went with it
		To Hell     three-eyed     in love, their legs around an engine, her arms
		Around him.   But now, except for each year at this time, their sound
		Has died:   except when the creek-bed thicks its mist     gives up
		The white of its flow to the air     comes off     lifts into the pine-poles
		Of May Day     comes back as you come awake in your socks and crotch-hair
		On new-mooned nights of spring     I speak     you listen and the pines fill
		With motorcycle sound as they rise, stoned out of their minds on the white
		Lightning of fog     singing     the saddle bags full of her clothes
		Flying     snagging     shoes hurling away     stockings grabbed-off
		Unwinding and furling on twigs:   all we know     all we could follow
		Them by was her underwear     was stocking after stocking where it tore
		Away, and a long slip stretched on a thorn     all these few gave
		Out.   Children, you know it:   that place was where they took
		Off into the air     died     disappeared     entered my mouth     your mind
		Each year     each pale, curved breath     each year as she holds him
		Closer wherever he hurtles     taking her     taking her     she going forever
		Where he goes     with the highways of rivers     through one-eyed
		Twigs     through clouds of chickens     and grass with them bends
		Double     the animals lift their heads     peanuts and beans exchange
		Shells in joy     joy like the speed of the body and rock-bottom
		Joy:   joy by which the creek-bed appeared to bear them out of the Bible
		‘s farm     through pine-clouds of gamecocks where no earthly track
		Is, but those risen out of warm currents     streams born to hang
		In the pines of Nickajack Creek:  tonight her hands are under
		His crackling jacket     the pain in her back enough to go through
		Them both     her buttocks blazing in the sheepskin saddle:   tell those
		
		Who look for them     who follow by rayon stockings     who look on human
		Highways     on tracks of cement and gravel     black weeping roads
		Of tar:  tell them that she and her rider have taken no dirt
		Nor any paved road     no path for cattle     no county trunk or trail
		Or any track upon earth, but have roared like a hog on May Day
		Through pines and willows:  that when he met the insane vine
		Of the scuppernong     he tilted his handlebars back and took
		The road that rises in the cold mountain spring from warm creeks:
		O women in your rayon from Lindale, I shall be telling you to go
		To Hell     by cloud     down where the chicken-walk is running
		To weeds     and anyone can show you where the tire-marks gave out
		And her last stocking was cast     and you stand as still as a weasel
		Under Venus     before you dance     dance yourself blue with blood-
		joy looking into the limbs     looking up into where they rode
		Through cocks tightening roots with their sleep-claws. Children,
		They are gone:  gone as the owl rises, when God takes the stone
		Blind sun off its eyes, and it sees     sees hurtle in the utter dark
		Gold of its sight, a boy and a girl buried deep in the cloud
		Of their speed     drunk, children     drunk with pain and the throttle
		Wide open, in love     with a mindless sound     with her red hair
		In the wind streaming gladly for them both     more than gladly
		As the barn settles under the weight of its pain     the stalls fill once
		More with trampling like Exodus     the snake-doctor gone the rats beginning
		On the last beans     and all the chicks she fed, each year at this time
		Burst from their eggs as she passes:
		                                                         Children, it is true that mice
		No longer bunch on the rafters, but wade the fields like the moon,
		Shifting in patches     ravenous     the horse floats, smoking with flies,
		To the water-trough     coming back less often     learning to make
		Do with the flowing drink of deer     the mountain standing     cold
		Flowing into his mouth     grass underfoot     dew     horse or what
		ever he is now     moves back into trees where the bull walks
		With a male light spread between his horns     some say screams like a girl
		And her father yelling together:
		                                                  Ah, this night in the dark laurel 
		Green of the quartermoon I shall be telling you that the creek’s last
		Ascension is the same     is made of water and air     heat and cold
		This year as before:   telling you not to believe every scream you hear
		Is the Bible’s:  it may be you or me     it may be her sinful barn-
		howling for the serpent, as her father whips her, using the tried
		And true rhythms of the Lord.   Sisters, an old man at times like this
		Moon, is always being found     yes found with an ice pick on his mind,
		A willow limb in his hand.   By now, the night-moths have come
		Have taken his Bible and read it     have flown, dissolved, having found
		Nothing in it for them.   I shall be telling you each moon     each
		Year at this time, Venus rises     the weasel goes mad at the death
		In the egg, of the chicks she fed for him by hand:  mad in the middle
		Of human space he dances     blue-eyed     dances with Venus rising
		Like blood-lust over the road     O tell your daughters     tell them
		That the creek’s ghost can still     O still can carry double
		Weight of true lovers     any time     any night as the wild turkeys claw
		Into the old pines of gamecocks, and with a cow’s tongue, the Bible calls
		For its own, and is not heard     and even God’s unsettled great white father
		head with its ear to the ground, cannot hear     know     cannot pick
		Up where they are     where her red hair is streaming through the white
		Hairs of His centerless breast:  with the moon     He cries with the cow all
		Its life penned up with Noah in the barn     talk of original
		Sin as the milk spurts     talk of women     talk of judgment and flood
		And the promised land:
		                                     Telling on May Day, children:  telling 
		That the animals are saved without rain that they are long gone
		From here     gone with the sun     gone with the woman taken
		In speed     gone with the one-eyed mechanic     that the barn falls in
		Like Jericho at the bull’s voice     at the weasel’s dance     at the hog’s
		Primeval squeal     the uncut hay walks when the wind prophesies in the west
		Pasture the animals move     roam, with kudzu creating all the earth
		East of the hayfield:  Listen:  each year at this time the county speaks
		With its beasts and sinners     with its blood     the county speaks of nothing
		Else each year at this time:  speaks as beasts speak to themselves
		Of holiness learned in the barn: Listen     O daughters     turn     turn
		In your sleep     rise with your backs on fire     in spring     in your socks
		Into the arms of your lovers:   every last one of you, listen one-eyed
		With your man     in hiding     in fog where the animals walk through 
		The white breast of the Lord     muttering     walk with nothing
		To do but be     in the spring laurel in the mist and self-sharpened
		Moon     walk through the resurrected creeks     through the Lord
		At their own pace     the cow shuts its mouth and the Bible is still
		Still open at anything     we are gone the barn     wanders over the earth.


	5. THE FIREBOMBING

		_Deke daran, dass nach den grossen Zerstörungen
		Jedermann beweisen wird, dass er unschuldig war._
						Günter Bich
		
		_Or hast thou an arm like God?_
						The Book of Job
		
		Home-owners unite.
		
		All families lie together, though some are burned alive.
		The others try to feel
		For them. Some can, it is often said.
		
		Starve and take off
		
		Twenty years in the suburbs, and the palm trees willingly leap
		Into the flashlights,
		And there is beneath them also
		A booted crackling of snailshells and coral-sticks.
		There are cowl-flaps and the tilt’ cross of propellers,
		The shovel-marked clouds’ far sides against the moon,
		The enemy filling up the hills
		With ceremonial graves. At my somewhere among these,
		
		Snap, a bulb is tricked on in the cockpit
		
		And some technical-minded stranger with my hands
		Is sitting in a glass treasure-hole of blue light,
		Having potential fire under the undeodorized arms
		Of his wings, on thin bomb-shackles,
		The “tear-drop-shaped” 300-gallon drop-tanks
		Filled with napalm and gasoline.
		
		Thinking forward ten minutes
		From that, there is also the burst straight out
		Of the overcast into the moon; there is now
		The moon-metal-shine of propellers, the quarter-
		moonstone, aimed at the waves,
		Stopped on the cumulus.
		
		There is then this re-entry
		Into cloud, for the engines to ponder their sound.
		In white dark the aircraft shrinks; Japan
		
		Dilates around it like a thought.
		Coming out, the one who is here is over
		Land, passing over the all-night grainfields,
		In dark paint over
		The woods with one silver side,
		Rice-water calm at all levels
		Of the terraced hill.
		
						Enemy rivers and trees
		Sliding off me like snakeskin,
		Strips of vapor spooled from the wingtips
		
		Going    invisible    passing    over    on
		Over    bridges    roads for night-walkers
		Sunday night in the enemy’s country    absolute
		Calm  the moon’s face    coming    slowly
		About
			the inland sea
		Slants    is woven with wire thread
		Levels out    holds together like a quilt
		Of the starboard wing    cloud flickers
		At my glassed-off forehead    the moon’s now and again
		Uninterrupted face going forward
		Over the waves in a glide-path
		Lost into land.
		
		Going: going with it
		
		Combat booze by my side in a cratered canteen,
		Bourbon frighteningly mixed
		With GI pineapple juice,
		Dogs trembling under me for hundreds of miles, on many
		Islands, sleep-smelling that ungodly mixture
		Of napalm and high-octane fuel,
		Good bourbon and GI juice.
		
		Rivers circling behind me around
		Come to the fore, and bring
		A town with everyone darkened.
		Five thousand people are sleeping off
		An all-day American drone.
		Twenty years in the suburbs have not shown me
		Which ones were hit and which not.
		
		Haul on the wheel    racking slowly
		The aircraft blackly around
		In a dark dream    that    that is
		That is like flying inside someone’s head
		
		Think of this    think of this
		I did not think of my house
		
		But think of my house now
		Where the lawn-mower rests on its laurels
		Where the diet exists
		For my own good    where I try to drop
		Twenty years, eating figs in the pantry
		Blinded by each and all
		Of the eye-catching cans that gladly have caught my wife’s eye
		Until I cannot say
		Where the screwdriver is    where the children
		Get off the bus    where the new
		Scoutmaster lives    where the fly
		Hones his front legs    where the hammock folds
		Its erotic daydreams    where the Sunday
		School text for the day has been put
		where the fire
		Wood is    where the payments
		For everything under the sun
		Pile peacefully up,
		
		But in this half-paid-for pantry
		Among the red lids that screw off
		With an easy half-twist to the left
		And the long drawers crammed with dim spoons,
		I still have charge--secret charge--
		Of the fire developed to cling
		To everything: to golf carts and fingernail
		Scissors as yet unborn    tennis shoes
		Grocery baskets    toy fire engines
		New Buicks stalled by the half-moon
		
		Shining at midnight on crossroads    green paint
		Of jolly garden tools    red Christmas ribbons:
		
		Not atoms, these, but glue inspired
		By love of country to burn,
		The apotheosis of gelatin.
		
		Behind me having risen the Southern Cross
		Set up by chaplains in the Ryukyus--
		Orion, Scorpio, the immortal silver
		Like the myths of king-
		insects at swarming-time--
		One mosquito, dead drunk
		On altitude, drones on, far under the engines,
		And bites between
		The oxygen mask and the eye.
		The enemy-colored skin of families
		Determines to hold its color
		In sleep, as my hand turns whiter
		Than ever, clutching the toggle--
		The ship shakes    bucks
		Fire hangs    not yet fire
		In the air above Beppu
		For I am fulfilling
		An “anti-morale” raid upon it.
		All leashes of dogs
		Break under the first bomb, around those
		In bed, or late in the public baths: around those
		Who inch forward on their hands
		Into medicinal waters.
		Their heads come up with a roar
		Of Chicago fire:
		Come up with the carp pond showing
		The bath-house upside down,
		Standing stiller to show it more
		As I sail artistically over
		The resort town followed by farms,
		Singing and twisting
		All the handles in heaven    kicking
		The small cattle off their feet
		In a red costly blast
		Flinging jelly over the walls
		As in a chemical war-
		fare field demonstration.
		With fire of mine like a cat
		
		Holding onto another man’s walls,
		My hat should crawl on my head
		In streetcars, thinking of it,
		The fat on my body should pale.
		
		Gun down
		The engine, the eight blades sighing
		For the moment when the roofs will connect
		Their flames, and make a town burning with all
		American fire.
		               Reflections of houses catch;
		Fire shuttles from pond to pond
		In every direction, till hundreds flash with one death.
		With this in the dark of the mind,
		Death will not be what it should:
		Will not, even now, even when
		My exhaled face in the mirror
		Of bars, dilates in a cloud like Japan.
		The death of children is ponds
		Shutter-flashing; responding mirrors; it climbs
		The terraces of hills
		Smaller and smaller, a mote of red dust
		At a hundred feet; at a hundred and one it goes out
		That is what should have got in
		To my eye
		
		And shown the insides of houses, the low tables
		Catch fire from the floor mats,
		Blaze up in gas around their heads
		Like a dream of suddenly growing
		Too intense for war. Ah, under one’s dark arms
		Something strange-scented falls--when those on earth
		Die, there is not even sound;
		One is cool and enthralled in the cockpit,
		Turned blue by the power of beauty,
		In a pale treasure-hole of soft light
		Deep in aesthetic contemplation,
		Seeing the ponds catch fire
		And cast it through ring after ring
		Of land: O death in the middle
		Of acres of inch-deep water!    Useless
		
		Firing    small arms
		Speckles    from the river
		Bank    one ninety millimeter
		Misses    far down    wrong petals    gone
		
		It is this detachment,
		The honored aesthetic evil,
		The greatest sense of power in one’s life,
		That must be shed in bars, or by whatever
		Means, by starvation
		Visions in well-stocked pantries:
		The moment when the moon sails in between
		The tail-booms    the rudders nod    I swing
		Over    directly over the heart
		
		The _heart_ of the fire. A mosquito burns out on my cheek
		With the cold of my face
		there are the eyes
		In blue light    bar-light
		All masked but them    the moon
		Crossing from left to right    in the streams below
		Oriental fish form quickly
		In the chemical shine,
		In their eyes one tiny seed
		Of deranged, Old Testament light.
		
		Letting go    letting go
		The plane rises gently    dark forms
		Glide off me    long water    pales
		In safe zones    a new cry enters
		The voice-box of chained family dogs
		
		We buck    leap over something
		Not there    settle back
		Leave it    leave it clinging and crying
		It consumes them in a hot
		Body-flash, old age or menopause
		Of children, clings and burns
		               eating through
		And when a reed mat catches fire
		From me, it explodes through field after field
		Bearing its sleeper    another
		
		Bomb finds a home
		And clings to it like a child. And so
		
		Goodbye to the grassy mountains
		To cloud streaming from the night engines
		Flags    pennons    curved silks
		Of air    myself streaming also
		
		My body covered
		With flags, the air of flags
		Between the engines.
		Forever I do sleep in that position,
		Forever in a turn
		For home that breaks out streaming banners
		From my wingtips,
		Wholly in position to admire.
		
		O then I knock it off
		And turn for home over the black complex thread worked
		    through
		The silver night-sea,
		Following the huge, moon-washed stepping-stones
		Of the Ryukyus south,
		The nightgrass of mountains billowing softly
		In my rising heat.
		               Turn and tread down
		The yellow stones of the islands
		To where Okinawa burns,
		Pure gold, on the radar screen,
		Beholding beneath me the actual island form
		In the vast water-silver poured just above solid ground,
		An inch of water extending for thousands of miles
		Above flat ploughland. Say “down,” and it is done.
		
		All this, and I am still hungry,
		Still twenty years overweight, still unable
		To get down there or see
		What really happened.
		               But it may be that I could not,
		If I tried, say to any
		Who lived there, deep in my flames:    say, in cold
		Grinning sweat, as to another
		
		Of these home-owners who are always curving
		Near me down the different-grassed street:    say
		As though to the neighbor
		I borrowed the hedge-clippers from
		On the darker-grassed side of the two,
		Come in, my house is yours, come in
		If you can, if you
		Can pass this unfured door. It is that I can imagine
		At the threshold nothing
		With its ears crackling off
		Like powdery leaves,
		Nothing with children of ashes, nothing not
		Amiable, gentle, well-meaning,
		A little nervous for no
		Reason    a little worried    a little too loud
		Or too easy-going    nothing I haven’t lived with
		For twenty years, still nothing not as
		American as I am, and proud of it.
		
		Absolution? Sentence? No matter;
		The thing itself is in that.


	6. THE PERFORMANCE

		The last time I saw Donald Armstrong   
		He was staggering oddly off into the sun,   
		Going down, off the Philippine Islands.   
		I let my shovel fall, and put that hand
		Above my eyes, and moved some way to one side
		That his body might pass through the sun,
		
		And I saw how well he was not
		Standing there on his hands,
		On his spindle-shanked forearms balanced,   
		Unbalanced, with his big feet looming and waving   
		In the great, untrustworthy air
		He flew in each night, when it darkened.
		
		Dust fanned in scraped puffs from the earth
		Between his arms, and blood turned his face inside out,   
		To demonstrate its suppleness
		Of veins, as he perfected his role.
		Next day, he toppled his head off
		On an island beach to the south,
		
		And the enemy’s two-handed sword   
		Did not fall from anyone’s hands   
		At that miraculous sight,
		As the head rolled over upon
		Its wide-eyed face, and fell
		Into the inadequate grave
		
		He had dug for himself, under pressure.   
		Yet I put my flat hand to my eyebrows   
		Months later, to see him again
		In the sun, when I learned how he died,   
		And imagined him, there,
		Come, judged, before his small captors,
		
		Doing all his lean tricks to amaze them—
		The back somersault, the kip-up—
		And at last, the stand on his hands,   
		Perfect, with his feet together,
		His head down, evenly breathing,
		As the sun poured from the sea
		
		And the headsman broke down   
		In a blaze of tears, in that light   
		Of the thin, long human frame   
		Upside down in its own strange joy,
		And, if some other one had not told him,   
		Would have cut off the feet
		
		Instead of the head,
		And if Armstrong had not presently risen   
		In kingly, round-shouldered attendance,   
		And then knelt down in himself
		Beside his hacked, glittering grave, having done   
		All things in this life that he could.


*** Emily Dickinson (1830 - 1886)

	1. DEATH

		Because I could not stop for Death--
		He kindly stopped for me--
		The Carriage held but just Ourselves--
		And Immortality.
		
		We slowly drove--He knew no haste
		And I had put away
		My labor and my leisure too,
		For His Civility--
		
		We passed the School, where Children strove
		At Recess--in the Ring--
		We passed the Fields of Gazing Grain--
		We passed the Setting Sun--
		
		Or rather--He passed Us--
		The Dews drew quivering and Chill--
		For only Gossamer, my Gown--
		My Tippet--only Tulle--
		
		We paused before a House that seemed
		A Swelling of the Ground--
		The Roof was scarcely visible--
		The Cornice--in the Ground--
		
		Since then--‘tis Centuries--and yet
		Feels shorter than the Day
		I first surmised the Horses’ Heads
		Were toward Eternity--


	2. EXCLUSION

		The soul selects her own society
		Then shuts the door;
		On her divine majority
		Obtrude no more.
		
		Unmoved she notes the chariot’s pausing
		At her low gate;
		Unmoved an emperor is kneeling
		Upon her mat.
		
		I’ve known her from an ample nation
		Choose one;
		Then close the valves of her attention
		Like stone.


	3. FUNERAL

		I felt a Funeral, in my Brain,
		And Mourners to and fro
		Kept treading--treading--till it seemed
		That Sense was breaking through--
		
		And when they all were seated,
		A Service, like a Drum--
		Kept beating--beating--till I thought
		My mind was going numb--
		
		And then I heard them lift a Box
		And creak across my Soul
		With those same Boots of Lead, again,
		Then Space--began to toll,
		
		As all the Heavens were a Bell,
		And Being, but an Ear,
		And I, and Silence, some strange Race,
		Wrecked, solitary, here--
		
		And then a Plank in Reason, broke,
		And I dropped down, and down--
		And hit a World, at every plunge,
		And Finished knowing--then--


	4. HOPE

		Hope is the thing with feathers
		That perches in the soul
		And sings the tune without the words
		And never stops at all
		
		And sweetest in the gale is heard;
		And sore must be the storm
		That could abash the little bird
		That kept so many warm.
		
		I’ve heard it in the chillest land
		And on the strangest sea;
		Yet never in extremity
		It asked a crumb of me.


	5. HUNGER

		I had been hungry all the years;
		My noon had come to dine;
		I trembling drew the table near
		And touched the curious wine.
		
		‘T was this on tables I had seen
		When turning hungry lone
		I looked in windows for the wealth
		I could not hope to own.
		
		I did not know the ample bread
		‘T was so unlike the crumb
		The birds and I had often shared
		In Nature’s dining-room.
		
		The plenty hurt me ‘t was so new--
		Myself felt ill and odd
		As berry of a mountain bush
		Transplanted to the road.
		
		Nor was I hungry; so I found
		That hunger was a way
		Of persons outside windows
		The entering takes away.


	6. NOBODY

		I’m Nobody! Who are you?
		Are you--Nobody--too?
		Then there’s a pair of us!
		Don’t tell! they’d advertise--you know!
		
		How dreary--to be--Somebody!
		How public--like a Frog--
		To tell one’s name--the livelong June--
		To an admiring Bog!


	7. SUCCESS

		Success is counted sweetest
		By those who ne’er succeed.
		To comprehend a nectar
		Requires sorest need.
		
		Not one of all the purple Host
		Who took the Flag today
		Can tell the definition
		So clear of victory
		
		As he defeated--dying--
		On whose forbidden ear
		The distant strains of triumph
		Burst agonized and clear!


	8. THE BLUE JAY

		No brigadier throughout the year
		So civic as the jay.
		A neighbor and a warrior too
		With shrill felicity
		
		Pursuing winds that censure us
		A February day
		The brother of the universe
		Was never blown away.
		
		The snow and he are intimate;
		I ‘ve often seen them play
		When heaven looked upon us all
		With such severity
		
		I felt apology were due
		To an insulted sky
		Whose pompous frown was nutriment
		To their temerity.
		
		The pillow of this daring head
		Is pungent evergreens;
		His larder--terse and militant--
		Unknown refreshing things;
		
		His character a tonic
		His future a dispute;
		Unfair an immortality
		That leaves this neighbor out.


	9. THE SEA

		An everywhere of silver
		With ropes of sand
		To keep it from effacing
		The track called land.


	10. TRUTH

		Tell all the truth but tell it slant--
		Success in Circuit lies
		Too bright for our infirm Delight
		The Truth’s superb surprise
		As Lightning to the Children eased
		With explanation kind
		The Truth must dazzle gradually
		Or every man be blind--


	11. WILD NIGHTS

		Wild nights--Wild nights!
		Were I with thee
		Wild nights should be
		Our luxury!
		
		Futile--the winds--
		To a Heart in port--
		Done with the Compass--
		Done with the Chart!
		
		Rowing in Eden--
		Ah--the Sea!
		Might I but moor--tonight--
		In thee!


*** Annie Dillard (1945 - )

	1. A NATURAL HISTORY OF GETTING THROUGH THE YEAR

		_November 1, 1895_
		
		The mountains are on fire
		and everything is dry; insects gone.
		My private work this year will be:
		Biology, Bible, Art, Geology, Body,
		Literature. This term will be devoted
		to Art, Zoology, Bibles, Epics, Dramas,
		etc. I find the Entomostraca interesting.
		
		
		_January 25, 1896_
		
		I spent most of the day
		mounting butterflies from India.
		This finishes all the flies for this year
		until more are caught.
		Poisoned plants at night.
		Very warm. The brightest,
		warmest January I remember.
		
		
		_Plan of Nature Study for April_
		
		Birds and flowers will keep one busy.
		Make collections of both, and observe
		the battles and songs of birds. Watch
		for the eggs of Phoebe about the middle
		of the month. Study the circulation
		of the blood in a frog’s foot.
		Take up mental hygiene;
		because it is much needed now.


	2. MAYAKOVSKY IN NEW YORK

		New York: You take a train that rips through versts.
		It feels as if the trains were running over your ears.
		
		For many hours the train flies along the banks
		of the Hudson about two feet from the water. At the stops,
		passengers run out, buy up bunches of celery,
		and run back in, chewing the stalks as they go.
		
		Bridges leap over the train with increasing frequency.
		
		At each stop an additional story grows
		onto the roofs. Finally houses with squares
		and dots of windows rise up. No matter how far
		you throw back your head, there are no tops.
		
		Time and again, the telegraph poles are made
		of wood. Maybe it only seems that way.
		
		In the narrow canyons between the buildings, a sort
		of adventurer-wind howls and runs away
		along the versts of the ten avenues. Below
		flows a solid human mass. Only their yellow
		waterproof slickers hiss like samovars and blaze.
		The construction rises and with it the crane, as if
		the building were being lifted up off the ground
		by its pigtail. It is hard to take it seriously.
		
		The buildings are glowing with electricity; their evenly
		cut-out windows are like a stencil. Under awnings
		the papers lie in heaps, delivered by trucks.
		It is impossible to tear oneself away from this spectacle.
		
		At midnight those leaving the theaters drink a last soda.
		Puddles of rain stand cooling. Poor people scavenge
		bones. In all directions is a labyrinth of trains
		suffocated by vaults. There is no hope, your eyes
		are not accustomed to seeing such things.
		
		They are starting to evolve an American gait out
		of the cautious steps of the Indians on the paths of empty
		Manhattan. Maybe it only seems that way.


	3. MORNINGS LIKE THIS

		Sunday. What still sunny days
		We have now. And I alone in them.
		So brief--our best!
		
		So much is wrong, but not my hills.
		I have been thinking of writing
		A letter to the President of China.
		
		Do it, do it, do it, do it.
		I beseech you, I beseech you,
		I beseech you, I beseech you.
		
		Mornings like this: I look
		About the earth and the heavens:
		There is not enough to believe--
		
		Mornings like this. How heady
		The morning air! How sharp
		And sweet and clear the morning air!
		
		Authentic winter! The odor of campfires!
		Beans eighteen inches long!
		A billion chances--and I am here!
		
		And here I lie in the quiet room
		And read and read and read.
		So easy--so easy--so easy.
		
		Pools in old woods, full of leaves.
		Give me time enough in this place
		And I will surely make a beautiful thing.


	4. QUATRAIN OF THE BODY’S SLEEP

		I lure sleep. I bait sleep in with my white throat.
		I pretend to be asleep. Then everything happens at once.
		Sleep wraps me round in his dim coat;
		I weep; you leap from your corner and dance.


	5. THE HEART

		It’s the lobby of the Plaza,
		the systole and diastole
		of hard women in soft coats, soft
		men in hard coats, palming
		quarters, fungers, keys.
		Drop in any mailbox.
		I’ll answer. Please.
		
		It’s the murmur, the scarring fever,
		of a page, always the same,
		urgent, muted: calling
		Mr. Name. Calling Mr. Name
		
		You exsanguinate.
		For the carpets of indolence,
		for the cut-throat chandelier,
		for the forced forsythia
		on the table--you pay, dear.
		
		But some of it’s free. A knock
		and rise in the ribs, gardenia
		pectoris, and at four a muffled din:
		the revolving door is bearing balloons;
		look out--someone’s checking in.


*** John Donne (1572 - 1631)

	1. A LECTURE UPON THE SHADOW

		Stand still, and I will read to thee 
		A lecture, love, in love’s philosophy. 
		        These three hours that we have spent, 
		        Walking here, two shadows went 
		Along with us, which we ourselves produc’d. 
		But, now the sun is just above our head, 
		        We do those shadows tread, 
		        And to brave clearness all things are reduc’d. 
		So whilst our infant loves did grow, 
		Disguises did, and shadows, flow 
		From us, and our cares; but now ‘tis not so. 
		That love has not attain’d the high’st degree, 
		Which is still diligent lest others see. 
		
		Except our loves at this noon stay, 
		We shall new shadows make the other way. 
		        As the first were made to blind 
		        Others, these which come behind 
		Will work upon ourselves, and blind our eyes. 
		If our loves faint, and westwardly decline, 
		        To me thou, falsely, thine, 
		        And I to thee mine actions shall disguise. 
		The morning shadows wear away, 
		But these grow longer all the day; 
		But oh, love’s day is short, if love decay. 
		Love is a growing, or full constant light, 
		And his first minute, after noon, is night. 


	2. AIR AND ANGELS

		Twice or thrice had I lov’d thee, 
		Before I knew thy face or name; 
		So in a voice, so in a shapeless flame 
		Angels affect us oft, and worshipp’d be; 
		        Still when, to where thou wert, I came, 
		Some lovely glorious nothing I did see. 
		        But since my soul, whose child love is, 
		Takes limbs of flesh, and else could nothing do, 
		        More subtle than the parent is 
		Love must not be, but take a body too; 
		        And therefore what thou wert, and who, 
		               I bid Love ask, and now 
		That it assume thy body, I allow, 
		And fix itself in thy lip, eye, and brow. 
		
		Whilst thus to ballast love I thought, 
		And so more steadily to have gone, 
		With wares which would sink admiration, 
		I saw I had love’s pinnace overfraught; 
		        Ev’ry thy hair for love to work upon 
		Is much too much, some fitter must be sought; 
		        For, nor in nothing, nor in things 
		Extreme, and scatt’ring bright, can love inhere; 
		        Then, as an angel, face, and wings 
		Of air, not pure as it, yet pure, doth wear, 
		        So thy love may be my love’s sphere; 
		               Just such disparity 
		As is ‘twixt air and angels’ purity, 
		‘Twixt women’s love, and men’s, will ever be. 


	3. LOVE’S DEITY

		I long to talk with some old lover’s ghost, 
		     Who died before the god of love was born. 
		I cannot think that he, who then lov’d most, 
		     Sunk so low as to love one which did scorn. 
		But since this god produc’d a destiny, 
		And that vice-nature, custom, lets it be, 
		     I must love her, that loves not me. 
		
		  Sure, they which made him god, meant not so much, 
		     Nor he in his young godhead practis’d it. 
		But when an even flame two hearts did touch, 
		     His office was indulgently to fit 
		Actives to passives. Correspondency 
		Only his subject was; it cannot be 
		     Love, till I love her, that loves me. 
		
		  But every modern god will now extend 
		     His vast prerogative as far as Jove. 
		To rage, to lust, to write to, to commend, 
		     All is the purlieu of the god of love. 
		O! were we waken’d by this tyranny 
		To ungod this child again, it could not be 
		     I should love her, who loves not me. 
		
		  Rebel and atheist too, why murmur I, 
		     As though I felt the worst that love could do? 
		Love might make me leave loving, or might try 
		     A deeper plague, to make her love me too; 
		Which, since she loves before, I’am loth to see. 
		Falsehood is worse than hate; and that must be, 
		     If she whom I love, should love me. 


	4. THE ANNIVERSARY

		All Kings, and all their favourites,
		        All glory of honours, beauties, wits,
		   The sun itself, which makes times, as they pass,
		   Is elder by a year now than it was
		   When thou and I first one another saw:
		   All other things to their destruction draw,
		        Only our love hath no decay;
		   This no tomorrow hath, nor yesterday,
		   Running it never runs from us away,
		But truly keeps his first, last, everlasting day.
		
		        Two graves must hide thine and my corse;
		        If one might, death were no divorce.
		   Alas, as well as other Princes, we
		   (Who Prince enough in one another be)
		   Must leave at last in death these eyes and ears,
		   Oft fed with true oaths, and with sweet salt tears;
		        But souls where nothing dwells but love
		   (All other thoughts being inmates) then shall prove
		   This, or a love increasèd there above,
		When bodies to their graves, souls from their graves remove.
		
		        And then we shall be throughly blessed;
		        But we no more than all the rest.
		   Here upon earth we’re Kings, and none but we
		   Can be such Kings, nor of such subjects be;
		   Who is so safe as we? where none can do
		   Treason to us, except one of us two.
		        True and false fears let us refrain,
		   Let us love nobly, and live, and add again
		   Years and years unto years, till we attain
		To write threescore: this is the second of our reign.


	5. THE BAIT

		Come live with me, and be my love, 
		And we will some new pleasures prove 
		Of golden sands, and crystal brooks, 
		With silken lines, and silver hooks. 
		
		There will the river whispering run 
		Warm’d by thy eyes, more than the sun; 
		And there the ‘enamour’d fish will stay, 
		Begging themselves they may betray. 
		
		When thou wilt swim in that live bath, 
		Each fish, which every channel hath, 
		Will amorously to thee swim, 
		Gladder to catch thee, than thou him. 
		
		If thou, to be so seen, be’st loth, 
		By sun or moon, thou dark’nest both, 
		And if myself have leave to see, 
		I need not their light having thee. 
		
		Let others freeze with angling reeds, 
		And cut their legs with shells and weeds, 
		Or treacherously poor fish beset, 
		With strangling snare, or windowy net. 
		
		Let coarse bold hands from slimy nest 
		The bedded fish in banks out-wrest; 
		Or curious traitors, sleeve-silk flies, 
		Bewitch poor fishes’ wand’ring eyes. 
		
		For thee, thou need’st no such deceit, 
		For thou thyself art thine own bait: 
		That fish, that is not catch’d thereby, 
		Alas, is wiser far than I. 


	6. THE CANONIZATION

		For God’s sake hold your tongue, and let me love, 
		        Or chide my palsy, or my gout, 
		My five gray hairs, or ruined fortune flout, 
		        With wealth your state, your mind with arts improve, 
		               Take you a course, get you a place, 
		               Observe his honor, or his grace, 
		Or the king’s real, or his stampèd face 
		        Contemplate; what you will, approve, 
		        So you will let me love. 
		
		Alas, alas, who’s injured by my love? 
		        What merchant’s ships have my sighs drowned? 
		Who says my tears have overflowed his ground? 
		        When did my colds a forward spring remove? 
		               When did the heats which my veins fill 
		               Add one more to the plaguy bill? 
		Soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out still 
		        Litigious men, which quarrels move, 
		        Though she and I do love. 
		
		Call us what you will, we are made such by love; 
		        Call her one, me another fly, 
		We’re tapers too, and at our own cost die, 
		        And we in us find the eagle and the dove. 
		               The phœnix riddle hath more wit 
		               By us; we two being one, are it.
		So, to one neutral thing both sexes fit.
		        We die and rise the same, and prove
		        Mysterious by this love.
		
		We can die by it, if not live by love,
		        And if unfit for tombs and hearse
		Our legend be, it will be fit for verse;
		        And if no piece of chronicle we prove,
		               We’ll build in sonnets pretty rooms;
		               As well a well-wrought urn becomes
		The greatest ashes, as half-acre tombs,
		        And by these hymns, all shall approve
		        Us canonized for Love.
		
		And thus invoke us: “You, whom reverend love
		        Made one another’s hermitage;
		You, to whom love was peace, that now is rage;
		        Who did the whole world’s soul contract, and drove
		               Into the glasses of your eyes
		               (So made such mirrors, and such spies,
		That they did all to you epitomize)
		        Countries, towns, courts: beg from above
		        A pattern of your love!”


	7. THE EXPIRATION

		So, so breake off this last lamenting kisse, 
		   Which sucks two soules, and vapours Both away, 
		Turne thou ghost that way, and let mee turne this, 
		   And let our selves benight our happiest day, 
		We ask’d none leave to love; nor will we owe 
		   Any, so cheape a death, as saying, Goe; 
		
		Goe; and if that word have not quite kil’d thee, 
		   Ease mee with death, by bidding mee goe too. 
		Oh, if it have, let my word worke on mee, 
		   And a just office on a murderer doe. 
		Except it be too late, to kill me so, 
		   Being double dead, going, and bidding, goe. 


	8. THE FLEA

		Mark but this flea, and mark in this,   
		How little that which thou deniest me is;   
		It sucked me first, and now sucks thee,
		And in this flea our two bloods mingled be;   
		Thou know’st that this cannot be said
		A sin, nor shame, nor loss of maidenhead,
		   Yet this enjoys before it woo,
		   And pampered swells with one blood made of two,
		   And this, alas, is more than we would do.
		
		Oh stay, three lives in one flea spare,
		Where we almost, nay more than married are.   
		This flea is you and I, and this
		Our marriage bed, and marriage temple is;   
		Though parents grudge, and you, w’are met,   
		And cloistered in these living walls of jet.
		   Though use make you apt to kill me,
		   Let not to that, self-murder added be,
		   And sacrilege, three sins in killing three.
		
		Cruel and sudden, hast thou since
		Purpled thy nail, in blood of innocence?   
		Wherein could this flea guilty be,
		Except in that drop which it sucked from thee?   
		Yet thou triumph’st, and say’st that thou   
		Find’st not thy self, nor me the weaker now;
		   ’Tis true; then learn how false, fears be:
		   Just so much honor, when thou yield’st to me,
		   Will waste, as this flea’s death took life from thee.


	9. THE INDIFFERENT

		I can love both fair and brown, 
		Her whom abundance melts, and her whom want betrays, 
		Her who loves loneness best, and her who masks and plays, 
		Her whom the country formed, and whom the town, 
		Her who believes, and her who tries, 
		Her who still weeps with spongy eyes, 
		And her who is dry cork, and never cries; 
		I can love her, and her, and you, and you, 
		I can love any, so she be not true. 
		
		Will no other vice content you? 
		Will it not serve your turn to do as did your mothers? 
		Or have you all old vices spent, and now would find out others? 
		Or doth a fear that men are true torment you? 
		O we are not, be not you so; 
		Let me, and do you, twenty know. 
		Rob me, but bind me not, and let me go. 
		Must I, who came to travail thorough you, 
		Grow your fixed subject, because you are true? 
		
		Venus heard me sigh this song, 
		And by love’s sweetest part, variety, she swore, 
		She heard not this till now; and that it should be so no more. 
		She went, examined, and returned ere long, 
		And said, Alas! some two or three 
		Poor heretics in love there be, 
		Which think to ’stablish dangerous constancy. 
		But I have told them, Since you will be true, 
		You shall be true to them who are false to you. 


	10. THE TRIPLE FOOL

		I am two fools, I know, 
		     For loving, and for saying so 
		         In whining poetry; 
		But where’s that wiseman, that would not be I, 
		         If she would not deny? 
		Then as th’ earth’s inward narrow crooked lanes 
		   Do purge sea water’s fretful salt away, 
		I thought, if I could draw my pains 
		   Through rhyme’s vexation, I should them allay. 
		Grief brought to numbers cannot be so fierce, 
		For he tames it, that fetters it in verse. 
		
		     But when I have done so, 
		     Some man, his art and voice to show, 
		         Doth set and sing my pain; 
		And, by delighting many, frees again 
		         Grief, which verse did restrain. 
		To love and grief tribute of verse belongs, 
		   But not of such as pleases when ‘tis read. 
		Both are increased by such songs, 
		   For both their triumphs so are published, 
		And I, which was two fools, do so grow three; 
		Who are a little wise, the best fools be. 


	11. THIS IS MY PLAY’S LAST SCENE

		This is my play’s last scene; here heavens appoint 
		My pilgrimage’s last mile; and my race, 
		Idly, yet quickly run, hath this last pace, 
		My span’s last inch, my minute’s latest point; 
		And gluttonous death will instantly unjoint 
		My body and my soul, and I shall sleep a space; 
		But my’ever-waking part shall see that face 
		Whose fear already shakes my every joint. 
		Then, as my soul to’heaven, her first seat, takes flight, 
		And earth-born body in the earth shall dwell, 
		So fall my sins, that all may have their right, 
		To where they’are bred, and would press me, to hell. 
		Impute me righteous, thus purg’d of evil, 
		For thus I leave the world, the flesh, the devil. 


*** Mark Van Doren (1894 - 1972)

	1. AFTER LONG DROUGHT

		After long drought, commotion in the sky;
		After dead silence, thunder. Then it comes,
		The rain. It slashes leaves, and doubly drums
		On tin and shingle; beats and bends awry
		The flower heads; puddles dust, and with a sigh
		Like love sinks into grasses, where it hums
		As bees did once, among chrysanthemums
		And asters when the summer thought to die.
		
		The whole world dreamed of this, and has it now.
		Nor was the waking easy. The dull root
		Is jealous of its death; the sleepy brow
		Smiles in its slumber; and a heart can fear
		The very flood it longed for, roaring near.
		The spirit best remembers being mute.


	2. FAREWELL AND THANKSGIVING

		Whatever I have left unsaid
		When I am dead
		O’muse forgive me.
		You were always there,
		like light, like air.
		Those great good things
		of which the least bird sings,
		So why not I?
		Yet thank you even then,
		Sweet muse, Amen.


	3. HE LOVES ME

		That God should love me is more wonderful
		Than that I so imperfectly love him.
		My reason is mortality, and dim
		Senses; his--oh, insupportable--
		Is that he sees me. Even when I pull
		Dark thoughts about my head, each vein and limb
		Delights him, though remembrance in him, grim
		With my worst crimes, should prove me horrible.
		
		And he has terrors that he can release.
		But when he looks he loves me; which is why
		I wonder; and my wonder must increase
		Till more of it shall slay me. Yet I live,
		I live; and he has never ceased to give
		This glance at me that sweetens the whole sky.


	4. MORNING WORSHIP

		I wake and hearing it raining.
		Were I dead, what would I give
		Lazily to lie here,
		Like this, and live?
		
		Or better yet: birdsong,
		Brightening and spreading --
		How far would I come then
		To be at the world’s wedding?
		
		Now that I lie, though,
		Listening, living,
		(Oh, but not forever,
		Oh, end arriving)
		
		How shall I praise them:
		All the sweet beings
		Eternally that outlive
		Me and my dying?
		
		Mountains, I mean; wind, water, air;
		Grass, and huge trees; clouds, flowers,
		And thunder, and night.
		
		Turtles, I mean, and toads; hawks, herons, owls;
		Graveyards, and towns, and trout; roads, gardens,
		Red berries, and deer.
		
		Lightning, I mean, and eagles; fences; snow;
		Sunrise, and ferns; waterfalls, serpents,
		Green islands, and sleep.
		
		Horses, I mean; butterflies, whales;
		Mosses, and stars and gravelly
		Rivers, and fruit.
		
		Oceans, I mean; black valleys; corn;
		Brambles, and cliffs; rock, dirt, dust, ice;
		And warnings of flood.
		
		How shall I name them?
		And in what order?
		Each would be first.
		Omission is murder.
		
		Maidens, I mean, and apples; needles; leaves;
		Worms, and planers, and clover; whirlwinds; dew;
		Bulls; geese --
		
		Stop. Lie still.
		You will never be done.
		Leave them all there.
		Old lover. Live on.


	5. SPRING THUNDER

		Listen, The wind is still,
		And far away in the night--
		See! The uplands fill
		With a running light.
		
		Open the doors. It is warm;
		And where the sky was clear--
		Look! The head of a storm
		That marches here!
		
		Come under the trembling hedge--
		Fast, although you fumble . . .
		There! Did you hear the edge
		of winter crumble


*** John Dryden (1631 - 1700)

	1. A SONG FOR ST. CECELIA’S DAY

		From harmony, from Heav’nly harmony 
		              This universal frame began. 
		      When Nature underneath a heap 
		              Of jarring atoms lay, 
		      And could not heave her head, 
		The tuneful voice was heard from high, 
		              Arise ye more than dead. 
		Then cold, and hot, and moist, and dry, 
		      In order to their stations leap, 
		              And music’s pow’r obey. 
		From harmony, from Heav’nly harmony 
		              This universal frame began: 
		              From harmony to harmony 
		Through all the compass of the notes it ran, 
		      The diapason closing full in man. 
		
		What passion cannot music raise and quell! 
		               When Jubal struck the corded shell, 
		        His list’ning brethren stood around 
		        And wond’ring, on their faces fell 
		        To worship that celestial sound: 
		Less than a god they thought there could not dwell 
		               Within the hollow of that shell 
		               That spoke so sweetly and so well. 
		What passion cannot music raise and quell! 
		
		        The trumpet’s loud clangor 
		               Excites us to arms 
		        With shrill notes of anger 
		                       And mortal alarms. 
		        The double double double beat 
		               Of the thund’ring drum 
		        Cries, hark the foes come; 
		Charge, charge, ‘tis too late to retreat. 
		
		        The soft complaining flute 
		        In dying notes discovers 
		        The woes of hopeless lovers, 
		Whose dirge is whisper’d by the warbling lute. 
		
		        Sharp violins proclaim 
		Their jealous pangs, and desperation, 
		Fury, frantic indignation, 
		Depth of pains and height of passion, 
		        For the fair, disdainful dame. 
		
		But oh! what art can teach 
		        What human voice can reach 
		The sacred organ’s praise? 
		Notes inspiring holy love, 
		Notes that wing their Heav’nly ways 
		        To mend the choirs above. 
		
		Orpheus could lead the savage race; 
		And trees unrooted left their place; 
		               Sequacious of the lyre: 
		But bright Cecilia rais’d the wonder high’r; 
		        When to her organ, vocal breath was giv’n, 
		An angel heard, and straight appear’d 
		               Mistaking earth for Heav’n. 
		
		As from the pow’r of sacred lays 
		        The spheres began to move, 
		And sung the great Creator’s praise 
		        To all the bless’d above; 
		So when the last and dreadful hour 
		  This crumbling pageant shall devour, 
		The trumpet shall be heard on high, 
		        The dead shall live, the living die, 
		        And music shall untune the sky.


	2. CAN LIFE BE A BLESSING

		Can life be a blessing, 
		 Or worth the possessing,
		 Can life be a blessing if love were away?
		 Ah no! though our love all night keep us waking,
		 And though he torment us with cares all the day,
		 Yet he sweetens, he sweetens our pains in the taking,
		 There’s an hour at the last, there’s an hour to repay.
		
		 In ev’ry possessing,
		 The ravishing blessing,
		In ev’ry possessing the fruit of our pain,
		Poor lovers forget long ages of anguish,
		Whate’er they have suffer’d and done to obtain;
		‘Tis a pleasure, a pleasure to sigh and to languish,
		When we hope, when we hope to be happy again.


	3. DREAMS

		Dreams are but interludes which Fancy makes;
		When monarch Reason sleeps, this mimic wakes:
		Compounds a medley of disjointed things,
		A mob of cobblers, and a court of kings:
		Light fumes are merry, grosser fumes are sad;
		Both are the reasonable soul run mad;
		And many monstrous forms in sleep we see,
		That neither were, nor are, nor e’er can be.
		Sometimes forgotten things long cast behind
		Rush forward in the brain, and come to mind.
		The nurse’s legends are for truths received,
		And the man dreams but what the boy believed.
		Sometimes we but rehearse a former play,
		The night restores our actions done by day;
		As hounds in sleep will open for their prey.
		In short, the farce of dreams is of a piece,
		Chimeras all; and more absurd, or less.


	4. SONG FROM AN EVENING’S LOVE

		After the pangs of a desperate lover,
		When day and night I have sighed all in vain,
		Ah, what a pleasure it is to discover
		In her eyes pity, who causes my pain!
		
		When with unkindness our love at a stand is,
		And both have punished ourselves with the pain,
		Ah, what a pleasure the touch of her hand is!
		Ah, what a pleasure to touch it again!
		
		When the denial comes fainter and fainter,
		And her eyes give what her tongue does deny,
		Ah, what a trembling I feel when I venture!
		Ah, what a trembling does usher my joy!
		
		When, with a sigh, she accords me the blessing,
		And her eyes twinkle ‘twixt pleasure and pain,
		Ah, what a joy ‘tis beyond all expressing!
		Ah, what a joy to hear ‘Shall we again!’


	5. VENI, CREATOR SPIRITUS

		Creator Spirit, by whose aid 
		The world’s foundations first were laid, 
		Come, visit ev’ry pious mind; 
		Come, pour thy joys on human kind; 
		From sin, and sorrow set us free; 
		And make thy temples worthy Thee. 
		
		O, Source of uncreated Light, 
		The Father’s promis’d Paraclete! 
		Thrice Holy Fount, thrice Holy Fire, 
		Our hearts with heav’nly love inspire; 
		Come, and thy Sacred Unction bring 
		To sanctify us, while we sing! 
		
		Plenteous of grace, descend from high, 
		Rich in thy sev’n-fold energy! 
		Thou strength of his Almighty Hand, 
		Whose pow’r does heav’n and earth command: 
		Proceeding Spirit, our Defence, 
		Who do’st the gift of tongues dispence, 
		And crown’st thy gift with eloquence! 
		
		Refine and purge our earthly parts; 
		But, oh, inflame and fire our hearts! 
		Our frailties help, our vice control; 
		Submit the senses to the soul; 
		And when rebellious they are grown, 
		Then, lay thy hand, and hold ‘em down. 
		
		Chase from our minds th’ Infernal Foe; 
		And peace, the fruit of love, bestow; 
		And, lest our feet should step astray, 
		Protect, and guide us in the way. 
		
		Make us Eternal Truths receive, 
		And practise, all that we believe: 
		Give us thy self, that we may see 
		The Father and the Son, by thee. 
		
		Immortal honour, endless fame, 
		Attend th’ Almighty Father’s name: 
		The Saviour Son be glorified, 
		Who for lost Man’s redemption died: 
		And equal adoration be, 
		Eternal Paraclete, to thee. 


*** Paul Laurence Dunbar (1872 - 1906)

	1. CHRISTMAS CAROL

		    Ring out, ye bells!
		   All Nature swells
		With gladness at the wondrous story,--
		   The world was lorn,
		   But Christ is born
		To change our sadness into glory.
		
		   Sing, earthlings, sing!
		   To-night a King
		Hath come from heaven’s high throne to bless us.
		   The outstretched hand
		   O’er all the land
		Is raised in pity to caress us.
		
		   Come at his call;
		   Be joyful all;
		Away with mourning and with sadness!
		   The heavenly choir
		   With holy fire
		Their voices raise in songs of gladness.
		
		   The darkness breaks
		   And Dawn awakes,
		Her cheeks suffused with youthful blushes.
		   The rocks and stones
		   In holy tones
		Are singing sweeter than the thrushes.
		
		   Then why should we
		   In silence be,
		When Nature lends her voice to praises;
		   When heaven and earth
		   Proclaim the truth
		Of Him for whom that lone star blazes?
		
		   No, be not still,
		   But with a will
		Strike all your harps and set them ringing;
		   On hill and heath
		   Let every breath
		Throw all its power into singing!


	2. EMANCIPATION

		Fling out your banners, your honors be bringing,
		Raise to the ether your paeans of praise.
		Strike every chord and let music be ringing!
		Celebrate freely this day of all days.
		
		Few are the years since that notable blessing,
		Raised you from slaves to the powers of men.
		Each year has seen you my brothers progressing,
		Never to sink to that level again.
		
		Perched on your shoulders sits Liberty smiling,
		Perched where the eyes of the nations can see.
		Keep from her pinions all contact defiling;
		Show by your deeds what you’re destined to be.
		
		Press boldly forward nor waver, nor falter.
		Blood has been freely poured out in your cause,
		Lives sacrificed upon Liberty’s alter.
		Press to the front, it were craven to pause.
		
		Look to the heights that are worth your attaining
		Keep your feet firm in the path to the goal.
		Toward noble deeds every effort be straining.
		Worthy ambition is food for the soul!
		
		Up! Men and brothers, be noble, be earnest!
		Ripe is the time and success is assured;
		Know that your fate was the hardest and sternest
		When through those lash-ringing days you endured.
		
		Never again shall the manacles gall you
		Never again shall the whip stroke defame!
		Nobles and Freemen, your destinies call you
		Onward to honor, to glory and fame.


	3. SYMPATHY

		I know what the caged bird feels, alas!
		When the sun is bright on the upland slopes;
		When the wind stirs soft through the springing grass,
		And the river flows like a stream of glass;
		When the first bird sings and the first bud opes,
		And the faint perfume from its chalice steals--
		I know what the caged bird feels!
		
		I know why the caged bird beats his wing
		Till its blood is red on the cruel bars;
		For he must fly back to his perch and cling
		When he fain would be on the bough a-swing;
		And a pain still throbs in the old, old scars
		And they pulse again with a keener sting--
		I know why he beats his wing!
		
		I know why the caged bird sings, ah me,
		When his wing is bruised and his bosom sore,--
		When he beats his bars and he would be free;
		It is not a carol of joy or glee,
		But a prayer that he sends from his heart’s deep core,
		But a plea, that upward to Heaven he flings--
		I know why the caged bird sings!


	4. THE FARM HOUSE BY THE RIVER

		I know a little country place
		Where still my heart doth linger,
		And o’er its fields is every grace
		Lined out by memory’s finger.
		Back from the lane where poplar grew
		And aspens quake and quiver,
		There stands all bath’d in summer’s glow
		A farm house by the river.
		
		Its eaves are touched with golden light
		So sweetly, softly shining,
		And morning-glories full and bright
		About the doors are twining.
		And there endowed with every grace
		That nature’s hand could give her,
		There lived the angel of the place
		In the farm house by the river.
		
		Her eyes were blue, her hair was gold,
		Her face was bright and sunny;
		The songs that from her bosom rolled
		Were sweet as summer’s honey.
		And I loved her well, that maid divine,
		And I prayed the Gracious Giver,
		That I some day might call her mine
		In the farm house by the river.
		
		‘Twas not to be--but God knows best,
		His will for aye be heed!
		Perhaps amid the angels blest,
		My little love was needed.
		Her spirit from its thralldom torn
		Went singing o’er the river,
		And that sweet life my heart shall mourn
		Forever and forever.
		
		She died one morn at early light
		When all the birds are singing,
		And heaven itself in pure delight
		Its bells of joy seemed ringing.
		They laid her dust where soon and late
		The solemn grasses quiver,
		And left alone and disolate
		The farm house by the river.


	5. THE OLD APPLE TREE

		THERE’s a memory keeps a-runnin’
		Through my weary head to-night,
		An’ I see a picture dancin’
		In the fire-flames’ ruddy-light;
		‘Tis the picture of an orchard
		Wrapped in autumn’s purple haze,
		With the tender light about it
		That I loved in other days.
		An’ a-standin’ in a corner
		Once again I seem to see
		The verdant leaves an’ branches
		Of an old apple-tree.
		You perhaps would call it ugly,
		An’ I don’t know but it’s so,
		When you look the tree all over
		Unadorned by memory’s glow;
		For its boughs are gnarled an’ crooked,
		An’ its leaves are gettin’ thin,
		An’ the apples of its bearin’
		Wouldn’t fill so large a bin
		As they used to. But I tell you,
		When it comes to pleasin’ me,
		It’s the dearest in the orchard,--
		Is that old apple-tree.
		I would hide within its shelter,
		Settlin’ in some cosy nook,
		Where no calls nor threats could stir me
		From the pages o’ my book.
		Oh, that quiet, sweet seclusion
		In its fulness passeth words!
		It was deeper than the deepest
		That my sanctum now affords.
		Why, the jaybirds an’ the robins,
		They was hand in glove with me,
		As they winked at me ‘an warbled
		In that old apple-tree.
		It was on its sturdy branches
		That in summers long ago
		I would tie my swing an’ dangle
		In contentment to an’ fro,
		Idly dreaming’ childish fancies,
		Buildin’ castles in the air,
		Makin’ o’ myself a hero
		Of romances rich an’ rare.
		I kin shet my eyes an’ see it
		Jest as plain as plain kin be,
		That same old swing a-danglin’
		To the old apple-tree.
		There’s a rustic seat beneath it
		That I never kin forget.
		It’s the place where me an’ Hallie--
		Little sweetheart--used to set,
		When we’d wander to the orchard
		So’s no listenin’ ones could hear
		As I whispered sugared nonsense
		Into her little willin’ ear.
		Now my gray old wife is Hallie,
		An’ I’m grayer still than she,
		But I’ll not forget our courtin’
		‘Neath the old apple-tree,
		Life for us ain’t all been summer,
		But I guess we’ve had our share
		Of its flittin’ joys an’ pleasures,
		An’ a sprinklin’ of its care.
		Oft the skies have smiled upon us;
		Then again we’ve seen ‘em frown,
		Though our load was ne’er so heavy
		That we longed to lay it down.
		But when death does come a-callin’,
		This my last request shall be,--
		That they’ll bury me an’ Hallie
		‘Neath the old apple-tree.


*** Mona Van Duyn (1921 - 2004)

	1. LETTER FROM A FATHER

		I
		
		Ulcerated tooth keeps me awake, there is
		such pain, would have to go to the hospital to have
		it pulled or would bleed to death from the blood thinners,
		but can’t leave Mother, she falls and forgets her salve
		and her tranquilizers, her ankles swell so and her bowels
		are so bad, she almost had a stoppage and sometimes
		what she passes is green as grass. There are big holes
		in my thigh where my leg brace buckles the size of dimes.
		My head pounds from the high pressure. It is awful
		not to be able to get out, and I fell in the bathroom
		and the girl could hardly get me up at all.
		Sure thought my back was broken, it will be next time.
		Prostate is bad and heart has given out,
		feel bloated after supper. Have made my peace
		because am just plain done for and have no doubt
		that the Lord will come any day with my release.
		You say you enjoy your feeder, I don’t see why
		you want to spend good money on grain for birds
		and you say you have a hundred sparrows, I’d buy
		poison and get rid of their diseases and turds. 
		
		
		II
		
		We enjoyed your visit, it was nice of you to bring
		the feeder but a terrible waste of your money
		for that big bag of feed since we won’t be living
		more than a few weeks long. We can see
		them good from where we sit, big ones and little ones
		but you know when I farmed I used to like to hunt
		and we had many a good meal from pigeons
		and quail and pheasant but these birds won’t
		be good for nothing and are dirty to have so near
		the house. Mother likes the redbirds though.
		My bad knee is so sore and I can’t hardly hear
		and Mother says she is hoarse form yelling but I know
		it’s too late for a hearing aid. I belch up all the time
		and have a sour mouth and of course with my heart
		it’s no use to go to a doctor. Mother is the same.
		Has a scab she thinks is going to turn to a wart.
		
		
		III
		
		The birds are eating and fighting, Ha! Ha! All shapes
		and colors and sizes coming out of our woods
		but we don’t know what they are. Your Mother hopes
		you can send us a kind of book that tells about birds.
		There is one the folks called snowbirds, they eat on the ground,
		we had the girl sprinkle extra there, but say,
		they eat something awful. I sent the girl to town
		to buy some more feed, she had to go anyway.
		
		
		IV
		
		Almost called you on the telephone
		but it costs so much to call thought better write.
		Say, the funniest thing is happening, one
		day we had so many birds and they fight
		and get excited at their feed you know
		and it’s really something to watch and two or three
		flew right at us and crashed into our window
		and bang, poor little things knocked themselves silly.
		They come to after while on the ground and flew away.
		And they been doing that. We felt awful
		and didn’t know what to do but the other day
		a lady from our Church drove out to call
		and a little bird knocked itself out while she sat
		and she brought it in her hands right into the house,
		it looked like dead. It had a kind of hat
		of feathers sticking up on its head, kind of rose
		or pinky color, don’t know what it was,
		and I petted it and it come to life right there
		in her hands and she took it out and it flew. She says
		they think the window is the sky on a fair
		day, she feeds birds too but hasn’t got
		so many. She says to hang strips of aluminum foil
		in the window so we’ll do that. She raved about
		our birds. P.S. The book just come in the mail.
		
		
		V
		
		Say, that book is sure good, I study
		in it every day and enjoy our birds.
		Some of them I can’t identify
		for sure, I guess they’re females, the Latin words
		I just skip over. Bet you’d never guess
		the sparrow I’ve got here, House Sparrow you wrote,
		but I have Fox Sparrows, Song Sparrows, Vesper Sparrows,
		Pine Woods and Tree and Chipping and White Throat
		and White Crowned Sparrows. I have six Cardinals,
		three pairs, they come at early morning and night,
		the males at the feeder and on the ground the females.
		Juncos, maybe 25, they fight
		for the ground, that’s what they used to call snowbirds. I miss
		the Bluebirds since the weather warmed. Their breast
		is the color of a good ripe muskmelon. Tufted Titmouse
		is sort of blue with a little tiny crest.
		And I have Flicker and Red-Bellied and Red-
		Headed Woodpeckers, you would die laughing
		to see Red-Bellied, he hangs on with his head
		flat on the board, his tail braced up under,
		wing out. And Dickcissel and Ruby Crowned Kinglet
		and Nuthatch stands on his head and Veery on top
		the color of a bird dog and Hermit Thrush with spot
		on breast, Blue Jay so funny, he will hop
		right on the backs of the other birds to get the grain.
		We bought some sunflower seeds just for him.
		And Purple Finch I bet you never seen,
		color of a watermelon, sits on the rim
		of the feeder with his streaky wife, and the squirrels,
		you know, they are cute too, they sit tall
		and eat with their little hands, they eat bucketfuls.
		I pulled my own tooth, it didn’t bleed at all.
		
		
		VI
		
		It’s sure a surprise how well Mother is doing,
		she forgets her laxative but bowels move fine.
		Now that windows are open she says our birds sing
		all day. The girl took a Book of Knowledge on loan
		from the library and I am reading up
		on the habits of birds, did you know some males have three
		wives, some migrate some don’t. I am going to keep
		feeding all spring, maybe summer, you can see
		they expect it. Will need thistle seed for Goldfinch and Pine
		Siskin next winter. Some folks are going to come see us
		from Church, some bird watchers, pretty soon.
		They have birds in town but nothing to equal this.
		
		So the world woos its children back for an evening kiss.


	2. THE GENTLE SNORER

		When summer came, we locked up our lives and fled 
		to the woods in Maine, and pulled up over our heads 
		a comforter filled with batts of piney dark, 
		tied with crickets’ chirretings and the bork 
		of frogs; we hid in a sleep of strangeness from 
		the human humdrum.
		
		A pleasant noise the unordered world makes wove 
		around us. Burrowed, we heard the scud of waves, 
		wrack of bending branch, or plop of a fish 
		on his heavy home; the little beasts rummaged the brush. 
		We dimmed to silence, slipped from the angry pull 
		of wishes and will.
		
		And then we had a three-week cabin guest 
		who snored; he broke the wilderness of our rest. 
		As all night long he sipped the succulent air, 
		that rhythm we shared made visible to the ear 
		a rich refreshment of the blood. We fed in 
		unison with him.
		
		A sound we dreamed and woke to, over the snuff 
		of wind, not loud enough to scare off the roof 
		the early morning chipmunks. Under our skins 
		we heard, as after disease, the bright, thin 
		tick of our time. Sleeping, he mentioned death 
		and celebrated breath.
		
		He went back home. The water flapped the shore. 
		A thousand bugs drilled at the darkness. Over 
		the lake a loon howled. Nothing spoke up for us, 
		salvagers always of what we have always lost; 
		and we thought what the night needed was more of man, 
		he left us so partisan.


*** Bob Dylan (1941 - )

	1. CHANGING OF THE GUARD

		Sixteen years,
		Sixteen banners united over the field
		Where the good shepherd grieves.
		Desperate men, desperate women divided,
		Spreading their wings ‘neath the falling leaves.
		Fortune calls,
		I step from the shadows, to the marketplace,
		Merchants and thieves hungry for power, my last deal gone down.
		She’s smelling sweet like the meadows where she was born,
		On midsummer’s eve, near the tower.
		
		The cold-blooded moon,
		The captain awaiting above the celebration
		Sending his thoughts to a beloved maid
		Whose ebony face is beyond communication.
		The captain is down but still believing that his love will be repaid.
		
		They shaved her head.
		She was torn between Jupiter and Apollo.
		A messenger arrived with a black nightingale.
		I seen her on the stairs and I couldn’t help but follow,
		Follow her down past the fountain where they lifted her veil.
		
		I struggled to my feet.
		I rode past destruction in the ditches
		With the stitches still mending ‘neath a heart-shaped tattoo.
		Renegade priests and treacherous young witches
		Were handing out the flowers that I’d given to you.
		
		The palace of mirrors
		Where dog soldiers are reflected,
		The endless road and the wailing of chimes,
		The empty rooms where her memory is protected,
		Where the angels’ voices whisper to the souls of previous times.
		
		She wakes him up
		Forty-eight hours later, the sun is breaking
		Near broken chains, mountain laurel and rolling rocks.
		She’s begging to know what measures he now will be taking.
		He’s pulling her down and she’s clutching on to his long golden locks.
		
		“Gentlemen,“ he said,
		“I don’t need your organization. I’ve shined your shoes,
		I’ve moved your mountains and marked your cards,
		But Eden is burning: either get ready for elimination
		Or else your hearts must have the courage for the changing of the guards.”
		
		Peace will come
		With tranquility and splendour, on the wheels of fire,
		But will offer no reward when her false idols fall
		And cruel death surrenders with its pale ghost retreating
		Between the King and the Queen of Swords.


	2. CHIMES OF FREEDOM

		Far between sundown’s finish an’ midnight’s broken toll
		We ducked inside the doorway, thunder crashing
		As majestic bells of bolts struck shadows in the sounds
		Seeming to be the chimes of freedom flashing
		Flashing for the warriors whose strength is not to fight
		Flashing for the refugees on the unarmed road of flight
		An’ for each an’ ev’ry underdog soldier in the night
		An’ we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing.
		
		In the city’s melted furnace, unexpectedly we watched
		With faces hidden as the walls were tightening
		As the echo of the wedding bells before the blowin’ rain
		Dissolved into the bells of the lightning
		Tolling for the rebel, tolling for the rake
		Tolling for the luckless, the abandoned an’ forsaked
		Tolling for the outcast, burnin’ constantly at stake
		An’ we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing.
		
		Through the mad mystic hammering of the wild ripping hail
		The sky cracked its poems in naked wonder
		That the clinging of the church bells blew far into the breeze
		Leaving only bells of lightning and its thunder
		Striking for the gentle, striking for the kind
		Striking for the guardians and protectors of the mind
		An’ the poet an the painter far behind his rightful time
		An’ we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing.
		
		In the wild cathedral evening the rain unraveled tales
		For the disrobed faceless forms of no position
		Tolling for the tongues with no place to bring their thoughts
		All down in taken-for granted situations
		Tolling for the deaf an’ blind, tolling for the mute
		For the mistreated, mateless mother, the mistitled prostitute
		For the misdemeanor outlaw, chased an’ cheated by pursuit
		An’ we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing.
		
		Even though a clouds’s white curtain in a far-off corner flashed
		An’ the hypnotic splattered mist was slowly lifting
		Electric light still struck like arrows, fired but for the ones
		Condemned to drift or else be kept from drifting
		Tolling for the searching ones, on their speechless, seeking trail
		For the lonesome-hearted lovers with too personal a tale
		An’ for each unharmfull, gentle soul misplaced inside a jail
		An’ we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing.
		
		Starry-eyed an’ laughing as I recall when we were caught
		Trapped by no track of hours for they hanged suspended
		As we listened one last time an’ we watched with one last look
		Spellbound an’ swallowed ‘til the tolling ended
		Tolling for the aching whose wounds cannot be nursed
		For the countless confused, accused, misused, strung-out ones an’ worse
		An’ for every hung-up person in the whole wide universe
		An’ we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing.


	3. DESOLATION ROW

		They’re selling postcards of the hanging, they’re painting the passports brown,
		The beauty parlor is filled with sailors, the circus is in town.
		Here comes the blind commissioner, they’ve got him in a trance,
		One hand is tied to the tight-rope walker, the other is in his pants.
		And the riot squad, they’re restless, they need somewhere to go
		As Lady and I look out tonight from Desolation Row.
		
		Cinderella, she seems so easy. “It takes one to know one,” she smiles
		And puts her hands into her back pocket Bette Davis-style.
		And in comes Romeo, he’s moaning, “You belong to me, I believe.”
		And someone turns and says to him, “My friend, you’d better leave.”
		And the only sound that’s left after the ambulances go
		Is Cinderella sweeping up on Desolation Row.
		
		Now, the moon is almost hidden, the stars, they’re just pretending to hide,
		The fortune-telling lady has even taken all her things inside.
		All except for Cain and Abel and the Hunchback of Notre Dame,
		Everyone is either making love or else expecting rain.
		And the Good Samaritan, he’s dressing, he’s getting ready for the show.
		He’s going to the carnival tonight on Desolation Row.
		
		Ophelia, she’s ‘neath the window, for her I feel so afraid,
		On her twenty-second birthday she already is an old maid.
		Now, to her death is quite romantic, she wears an iron vest,
		Her profession is her religion, her sin is her lifelessness.
		And, though her eyes are fixed upon Noah’s great rainbow,
		She spends her time peeking into Desolation Row.
		
		Einstein, disguised as Robin Hood, with his memories in a trunk,
		Passed this way an hour ago with his friend, some jealous monk.
		Now, he looked so immaculately frightful as he bummed a cigarette,
		Then he went off sniffing drainpipes and reciting the alphabet.
		You would not think to look at him, but he was famous long ago
		For playing the electric violin on Desolation Row.
		
		Dr. Filth, he keeps his world locked inside of his leather cup,
		But all his sexless patients, they’re trying to blow it up.
		Now, his nurse, some local loser, she’s in charge of the cyanide hole,
		She also keeps the cards that read “Have Mercy on His Soul”.
		They all play on the penny whistle, you can hear them blow
		If you lean your head out far enough from Desolation Row.
		
		Across the street they’ve nailed the curtains, they’re getting ready for the feast,
		The Phantom of the Opera in the perfect image of a priest.
		They are spoon-feeding Casanova to get him to feel more assured,
		Then they’ll kill him with self-confidence after poisoning him with words.
		And the Phantom shouts to skinny girls, “Get outta here if you don’t know
		Casanova, he’s just being punished for going to Desolation Row!”
		
		At midnight all the agents and the superhuman crew
		Come out and round up everyone that knows more than they do.
		Then they bring them to the factory where the heart-attack machine
		Is strapped across their shoulders and then the kerosene
		Is brought down from the castles by insurance men who go
		Check to see that no one is escaping to Desolation Row.
		
		Praise be to Nero’s Neptune, the Titanic sails at dawn,
		Everybody’s shouting, “Which side are you on?”
		And Ezra Pound and T.S. Eliot fighting in the captain’s tower
		While Calypso-singers laugh at them and fishermen hold flowers
		Between the windows of the sea where lovely mermaids flow
		And nobody has to think too much about Desolation Row.
		
		Yes, I received your letter yesterday about the time the door-knob broke.
		When you asked me how I was doing, was that some kind of joke?
		All these people that you mention, yes, I know them, they’re quite lame,
		I had to rearrange their faces and give them all another name.
		Right now I cannot read too well, don’t send me no more letters, no!
		Not unless you mail them from Desolation Row.


	4. EVERY GRAIN OF SAND

		In the time of my confession, in the hour of my deepest need
		When the pool of tears beneath my feet flood every newborn seed
		There’s a dying voice within me reaching out somewhere
		Toiling in the danger and in the morals of despair
		
		Don’t have the inclination to look back on any mistake
		Like Cain, I behold this chain of events that I must break
		In the fury of the moment, I can see the master’s hand
		In every leaf that trembles, in every grain of sand.
		
		Oh, the flowers of indulgence and the weeds of yesteryear
		Like criminals, they have choked the breath of conscience and good cheer
		And the sun beat down upon the steps of time to light the way
		To ease the pain of idleness and the memory of decay
		
		I gaze into the doorway of temptation’s angry flame
		And every time I pass that way I always hear my name
		Then onward in my journey, I come to understand
		That every hair is numbered like every grain of sand.
		
		I have gone from rags to riches in the sorrow of the night
		In the violence of a summer’s dream, in the chill of a wintery light
		In the bitter dance of loneliness fading into space
		In the broken mirror of innocence on each forgotten face
		
		I hear the ancient footsteps like the motion of the sea
		Sometimes I turn, there’s someone there, at times it’s only me
		I’m hanging in the balance of a perfect finished plan
		Like every sparrow falling, like every grain of sand.


	5. IT’S ALRIGHT MA, I’M ONLY BLEEDING

		Darkness at the break of noon
		Shadows even the silver spoon,
		The handmade blade, the child’s balloon,
		Eclipses both the sun and moon-–
		To understand you know too soon that there is no sense in trying.
		
		Pointed threats, they bluff with scorn,
		Suicide remarks are torn
		From the fool’s gold mouthpiece, the hollow horn
		Plays wasted words, it proves to warn
		He not a-busy being born is a-busy dying.
		
		Temptation’s page flies out the door,
		You follow, find yourself at war,
		Watch a-waterfalls of pity roar,
		Feel to moan, but unlike before
		You discover that you’d just a-be one more person crying.
		
		So, don’t fear if you hear
		A foreign sound to your ear,
		It’s alright, ma, I’m only sighing.
		
		Some warn victory, some downfall,
		Private reasons--great or small –
		Can be seen in the eyes of those that call
		To make all that should be killed to crawl,
		Others say, “Don’t hate nothing at all except a-hatred.”
		
		Disillusioned words a-like a-bullets bark,
		Human gods aim for their mark,
		Make everything from toy guns that spark
		To flesh-colored Christs that glow in the dark--
		It’s easy to see without looking too far that not much is really sacred.
		
		While preachers preach of evil fates,
		Teachers teach that knowledge waits,
		Can lead you to hundred-dollar plates,
		Goodness hides behind its gates,
		Even the president of the United States sometimes a-must have to stand naked.
		
		But, though the rules of the road have been lodged,
		It’s people’s games that you got to dodge,
		It’s alright, ma, I can make it.
		
		Advertising signs, they con,
		Con you into thinking that you’re the one
		That can do what’s a-never been done,
		That can win what’s a-never been won--
		Meantime life outside goes on all around you.
		
		You lose yourself, but then you reappear,
		You suddenly find you’ve got nothing to fear,
		Alone you stand with nobody near
		When a trembling, distant voice, unclear,
		Startles your ears to hear somebody thinks that they really have found you.
		
		A question in your nerves is lit,
		Yet you know that there is no answer fit
		To satisfy, ensure you not to quit,
		Keep it in your mind and don’t forget
		That it is not he or she or them or it that you belong to.
		
		But, though the masters make the rules
		For the wise men and the fools,
		I got nothing, ma, to live up to.
		
		Old-lady judges watch people in pairs,
		Limited in sex they dare
		Push fake morals, insult, and stare
		While money doesn’t talk, it swears,
		Obscenity--who really cares?--propaganda all is phony.
		
		While them that defend what they cannot see
		With a killer’s pride, security,
		It blows their minds a-most a-bitterly,
		For them that think death––death’s honesty
		Won’t fall upon ‘em naturally, life sometimes must get lonely.
		
		My eyes collide head-on with stuffed
		Graveyards and false goals, I scuff
		At pettiness, which plays so rough,
		Walk upside-down inside handcuffs,
		Kick my legs to crash it off,
		Say, “Alright, I’ve had enough, what else can you show me?”
		
		And, if my thought-dreams could be seen,
		They’d probably put my head in a guillotine,
		But it’s alright, ma, it’s life and life only.


	6. LAST THOUGHTS ON WOODY GUTHRIE

		When yer head gets twisted and yer mind grows numb
		When you think you’re too old, too young, too smart or too dumb
		When yer laggin’ behind an’ losin’ yer pace
		In a slow-motion crawl of life’s busy race
		No matter what yer doing if you start givin’ up
		If the wine don’t come to the top of yer cup
		If the wind’s got you sideways with with one hand holdin’ on
		And the other starts slipping and the feeling is gone
		And yer train engine fire needs a new spark to catch it
		And the wood’s easy findin’ but yer lazy to fetch it
		And yer sidewalk starts curlin’ and the street gets too long
		And you start walkin’ backwards though you know its wrong
		And lonesome comes up as down goes the day
		And tomorrow’s mornin’ seems so far away
		And you feel the reins from yer pony are slippin’
		And yer rope is a-slidin’ ‘cause yer hands are a-drippin’
		And yer sun-decked desert and evergreen valleys
		Turn to broken down slums and trash-can alleys
		And yer sky cries water and yer drain pipe’s a-pourin’
		And the lightnin’s a-flashing and the thunder’s a-crashin’
		And the windows are rattlin’ and breakin’ and the roof tops a-shakin’
		And yer whole world’s a-slammin’ and bangin’
		And yer minutes of sun turn to hours of storm
		And to yourself you sometimes say
		“I never knew it was gonna be this way
		Why didn’t they tell me the day I was born”
		
		And you start gettin’ chills and yer jumping from sweat
		And you’re lookin’ for somethin’ you ain’t quite found yet
		And yer knee-deep in the dark water with yer hands in the air
		And the whole world’s a-watchin’ with a window peek stare
		And yer good gal leaves and she’s long gone a-flying
		And yer heart feels sick like fish when they’re fryin’
		And yer jackhammer falls from yer hand to yer feet
		And you need it badly but it lays on the street
		And yer bell’s bangin’ loudly but you can’t hear its beat
		And you think yer ears might a been hurt
		Or yer eyes’ve turned filthy from the sight-blindin’ dirt
		And you figured you failed in yesterdays rush
		When you were faked out an’ fooled white facing a four flush
		And all the time you were holdin’ three queens
		And it’s makin you mad, it’s makin’ you mean
		Like in the middle of Life magazine
		Bouncin’ around a pinball machine
		
		And there’s something on yer mind you wanna be saying
		That somebody someplace oughta be hearin’
		But it’s trapped on yer tongue and sealed in yer head
		And it bothers you badly when your layin’ in bed
		And no matter how you try you just can’t say it
		And yer scared to yer soul you just might forget it
		And yer eyes get swimmy from the tears in yer head
		And yer pillows of feathers turn to blankets of lead
		And the lion’s mouth opens and yer staring at his teeth
		And his jaws start closin with you underneath
		And yer flat on your belly with yer hands tied behind
		And you wish you’d never taken that last detour sign
		
		And you say to yourself just what am I doin’
		On this road I’m walkin’, on this trail I’m turnin’
		On this curve I’m hanging
		On this pathway I’m strolling, in the space I’m talking
		In this air I’m inhaling
		Am I mixed up too much, am I mixed up too hard
		Why am I walking, where am I running
		What am I saying, what am I knowing
		On this guitar I’m playing, on this banjo I’m frailin’
		On this mandolin I’m strummin’, in the song I’m singin’
		In the tune I’m hummin’, in the words I’m writin’
		In the words that I’m thinkin’
		In this ocean of hours I’m all the time drinkin’
		Who am I helping, what am I breaking
		What am I giving, what am I taking
		
		But you try with your whole soul best
		Never to think these thoughts and never to let
		Them kind of thoughts gain ground
		Or make yer heart pound
		But then again you know why they’re around
		Just waiting for a chance to slip and drop down
		“Cause sometimes you hear’em when the night times comes creeping
		And you fear that they might catch you a-sleeping
		And you jump from yer bed, from yer last chapter of dreamin’
		And you can’t remember for the best of yer thinking
		If that was you in the dream that was screaming
		
		And you know that it’s something special you’re needin’
		And you know that there’s no drug that’ll do for the healin’
		And no liquor in the land to stop yer brain from bleeding
		And you need something special
		Yeah, you need something special all right
		You need a fast flyin’ train on a tornado track
		To shoot you someplace and shoot you back
		You need a cyclone wind on a stream engine howler
		That’s been banging and booming and blowing forever
		That knows yer troubles a hundred times over
		
		You need a Greyhound bus that don’t bar no race
		That won’t laugh at yer looks
		Your voice or your face
		And by any number of bets in the book
		Will be rollin’ long after the bubblegum craze
		You need something to open up a new door
		To show you something you seen before
		But overlooked a hundred times or more
		You need something to open your eyes
		You need something to make it known
		That it’s you and no one else that owns
		That spot that yer standing, that space that you’re sitting
		That the world ain’t got you beat
		That it ain’t got you licked
		It can’t get you crazy no matter how many
		Times you might get kicked
		
		You need something special all right
		You need something special to give you hope
		But hope’s just a word
		That maybe you said or maybe you heard
		On some windy corner ‘round a wide-angled curve
		But that’s what you need man, and you need it bad
		And yer trouble is you know it too good
		“Cause you look an’ you start getting the chills
		“Cause you can’t find it on a dollar bill
		And it ain’t on Macy’s window sill
		And it ain’t on no rich kid’s road map
		And it ain’t in no fat kid’s fraternity house
		And it ain’t made in no Hollywood wheat germ
		And it ain’t on that dimlit stage
		With that half-wit comedian on it
		Ranting and raving and taking yer money
		And you thinks it’s funny
		No you can’t find it in no night club or no yacht club
		And it ain’t in the seats of a supper club
		And sure as hell you’re bound to tell
		That no matter how hard you rub
		You just ain’t a-gonna find it on yer ticket stub
		No, and it ain’t in the rumors people’re tellin’ you
		And it ain’t in the pimple-lotion people are sellin’ you
		And it ain’t in no cardboard-box house
		Or down any movie star’s blouse
		And you can’t find it on the golf course
		And Uncle Remus can’t tell you and neither can Santa Claus
		And it ain’t in the cream puff hair-do or cotton candy clothes
		And it ain’t in the dime store dummies or bubblegum goons
		And it ain’t in the marshmallow noises of the chocolate cake voices
		That come knockin’ and tappin’ in Christmas wrappin’
		Sayin’ ain’t I pretty and ain’t I cute and look at my skin
		Look at my skin shine, look at my skin glow
		Look at my skin laugh, look at my skin cry
		When you can’t even sense if they got any insides
		These people so pretty in their ribbons and bows
		
		No you’ll not now or no other day
		Find it on the doorsteps made out-a paper mache
		And inside it the people made of molasses
		That every other day buy a new pair of sunglasses
		And it ain’t in the fifty-star generals and flipped-out phonies
		Who’d turn yuh in for a tenth of a penny
		Who breathe and burp and bend and crack
		And before you can count from one to ten
		Do it all over again but this time behind yer back
		My friend
		The ones that wheel and deal and whirl and twirl
		And play games with each other in their sand-box world
		And you can’t find it either in the no-talent fools
		That run around gallant
		And make all rules for the ones that got talent
		And it ain’t in the ones that ain’t got any talent but think they do
		And think they’re foolin’ you
		The ones who jump on the wagon
		Just for a while ‘cause they know it’s in style
		To get their kicks, get out of it quick
		And make all kinds of rnoney and chicks
		
		And you yell to yourself and you throw down yer hat
		Sayin’, “Christ do I gotta be like that
		Ain’t there no one here that knows where I’m at
		Ain’t there no one here that knows how I feel
		Good God Almighty
		THAT STUFF AINT REAL”
		
		No but that ain’t yer game, it ain’t even yer race
		You can’t hear yer name, you can’t see yer face
		You gotta look some other place
		And where do you look for this hope that yer seekin’
		Where do you look for this lamp that’s a-burnin’
		Where do you look for this oil well gushin’
		Where do you look for this candle that’s glowin’
		Where do you look for this hope that you know is there
		And out there somewhere
		
		And your feet can only walk down two kinds of roads
		Your eyes can only look through two kinds of windows
		Your nose can only smell two kinds of hallways
		You can touch and twist
		And turn two kinds of doorknobs
		You can either go to the church of your choice
		Or you can go to Brooklyn State Hospital
		And though it’s only my opinion
		I may be right or wrong
		You’ll find them both
		In the Grand Canyon
		At sundown


	7. LOVE IS JUST A FOUR-LETTER WORD

		Seems like only yesterday
		I left my mind behind
		Down in the Gypsy Cafe
		With a friend of a friend of mine--
		She sat with a baby heavy on her knee
		Yet spoke of life most free from slavery
		With eyes that showed no trace of misery--
		A phrase in connection first with she I heard
		That love is just a four-letter word.
		
		Outside a rambling store-front window
		Cats meowed to the break of day--
		Me, I kept my mouth shut,
		To you I had no words to say--
		My experience was limited and underfed--
		You were talking, while I hid,
		To the one who was the father of your kid:
		You probably didn’t think I did, but I heard
		You say that love is just a four-letter word.
		
		I said goodbye unnoticed,
		Pushed towards things in my own games,
		Drifting in and out of lifetimes
		Unmentionable by name,
		Searching for my double, looking for
		Complete evaporation to the core--
		Though I tried and failed at finding any door,
		I must have thought that there was nothing more absurd
		Than that love is just a four-letter word.
		
		Though I never knew just what you meant
		When you were speaking to your man,
		I could only think in terms of me
		And now I understand--
		After waking enough times to think I see
		The Holy Kiss that’s s’posed to last eternity
		Blow up in smoke, its destiny
		Falls on strangers, travels free--
		Yes, I know now, traps are only set by me
		And I do not really need to be assured
		That love is just a four-letter word.
		
		Strange it is to be beside you
		Many years, the tables turned--
		You’d probably not believe me
		If I told you all I’ve learned--
		And it is very, very weird indeed
		To hear words like “forever“ plead,
		So ships run through my mind, I cannot cheat--
		It’s like looking in a teacher’s face complete:
		I can say nothing to you but repeat what I heard--
		That love is just a four-letter word.


	8. MOST OF THE TIME

		Most of the time
		I’m clear focused all around,
		Most of the time
		I can keep both feet on the ground,
		I can follow the path, I can read the signs,
		Stay right with it, when the road unwinds,
		I can handle whatever I stumble upon,
		I don’t even notice she’s gone,
		Most of the time.
		Most of the time
		It’s well understood,
		Most of the time
		I wouldn’t change it if I could,
		I can make it all match up, I can hold my own,
		I can deal with the situation right down to the bone,
		I can survive, I can endure
		And I don’t even think about her
		Most of the time.
		
		Most of the time
		My head is on straight,
		Most of the time
		I’m strong enough not to hate,
		I don’t build up illusion ‘till it makes me sick,
		I ain’t afraid of confusion no matter how thick,
		I can smile in the face of mankind,
		Don’t even remember what her lips felt like on mine
		Most of the time.
		
		Most of the time
		She ain’t even in my mind,
		I wouldn’t know her if I saw her
		She’s that far behind.
		Most of the time
		I can’t even be sure
		If she was ever with me
		Or if I was ever with her.
		
		Most of the time
		I’m halfways content,
		Most of the time
		I’d know exactly whether it all went,
		I don’t cheat on myself, I don’t run and hide,
		Hide from the feelings that are buried inside,
		I don’t compromise and I don’t pretend,
		I don’t even care if I ever see her again
		Most of the time.


	9. NOT DARK YET

		Shadows are falling and I’ve been here all day,
		It’s too hot to sleep and time is running away.
		Feel like my soul has turned into steel,
		I’ve still got the scars that the sun did not heal.
		There’s not even room enough to be anywhere,
		It’s not dark yet, but it’s getting there.
		
		Well, my sense of humanity has gone down the drain,
		Behind every beautiful thing there’s been some kinda pain.
		She wrote me a letter and she wrote it so kind,
		She put down in writing what was in her mind.
		I just don’t see why I should even care,
		It’s not dark yet, but it’s getting there.
		
		Well, I’ve been to London and I’ve been to gay Paris,
		I’ve followed the river and I got to the sea.
		I’ve been down on the bottom of a world full of lies,
		I ain’t looking for nothing in anyone’s eyes.
		Sometimes my burden is more than I can bear,
		It’s not dark yet, but it’s getting there.
		
		I was born here and I’ll die here against my will,
		I know it looks like I’m moving, but I’m standing still.
		Every nerve in my body is so vacant and numb,
		I can’t even remember what it was I came here to get away from.
		Don’t even hear a murmur of a prayer,
		It’s not dark yet, but it’s getting there.


	10. TANGLED UP IN BLUE

		Early one morning the sun was shining, she was lying in bed,
		Wondering if she’d changed at all, if her hair was still red.
		Their folks, they said their lives together sure was a-gonna be rough,
		They never did like mama’s homemade dress, papa’s bankbook wasn’t big enough.
		And he was standing on the side of the road, rain falling on his shoes,
		Heading out for the East Coast--Lord knows, he’s paid some dues getting through,
		Tangled up in blue.
		
		She was married when they first met, soon to be divorced,
		He helped her out of a jam, I guess, but he used a little too much force.
		Then they drove that car as far as they could, abandoned it out west,
		Splitting up on a dark, sad night, both agreeing it was best.
		She turned around to look at him as he was a-walking away,
		Saying over her shoulder, “We’ll meet again someday on the avenue,
		Tangled up in blue.”
		
		He had a job in Santa Fe working in an old hotel,
		But he never did like it all that much and one day it just a-went to hell,
		So he drifted down to New Orleans, lucky not to be destroyed,
		Where he got him a job on a fishing boat docked outside Delacroix,
		But all the while he was alone, the past was close behind,
		He seen a lot of women but she never escaped his mind and he just grew
		Tangled up in blue.
		
		She was working in a topless place and I stopped in for a beer,
		I just kept looking at the side of her face in the spotlight so clear,
		And later on, when the crowd thinned out, I was just about to do the same,
		She was standing there right beside my chair, said, “Don’t tell me, let me guess your name,”
		I muttered something underneath my breath, she studied the lines of my face,
		I must admit, felt a little uneasy when she bent down to tie the laces of my shoe,
		Tangled up in blue.
		
		I lived with them on Montague Street, in a basement down the stairs,
		There was music in the cafés at night and revolution in the air,
		Till he started into dealing with slaves and something inside of him died,
		She had to sell everything she owned and froze up inside,
		And when it all came crashing down, I became withdrawn,
		The only thing I knew how to do was keep on keeping on like a bird that flew,
		Tangled up in blue.
		
		So now I’m going back on again, I got to get to them somehow,
		All the faces we used to know, they’re an illusion to me now.
		Some are mathematicians, some are truck drivers’ wives,
		Don’t know how it all got started, I don’t know what they’re doing with their lives,
		But me, I’m still on the road, heading for another joint,
		We always did feel the same, we just saw it from a different point of view,
		Tangled up in blue.


	11. VISIONS OF JOHANNA

		Ain’t it just like the night to play tricks when you’re trying to be so quiet?
		We sit here stranded though we all do our best to deny it
		And Louise holds a handful of rain tempting you to defy it.
		Lights flicker from the opposite loft,
		In this room the heat-pipes just cough,
		The country music station plays soft,
		But there’s nothing, really nothing to turn off,
		Just Louise and her lover so entwined
		And these visions of Johanna that conquer my mind.
		
		In the empty lot where the ladies play blindman’s bluff with the key-chain
		And the all-night girls, they whisper of escapades out on the D train,
		We can hear the night watchman click his flashlight, ask himself if it’s him or them who should be insane.
		But Louise, she’s alright, she’s just near,
		She’s delicate, she seems like the mirror,
		But she just makes it all too concise and too clear
		That Johanna’s not here.
		The ghost of ‘lectricity howls in the bones of her face
		Where these visions of Johanna have now taken my place.
		
		Little boy lost, he takes himself so seriously,
		He brags of his misery, he likes to live dangerously,
		And, when bringing her name up, he speaks of her farewell kiss to me.
		He’s sure got a lot of gall
		To be so useless and all,
		Muttering small talk at the wall
		While I’m in the hall.
		Oh, how can I explain? It’s so hard to get on
		And these visions of Johanna, they’ve kept me up past the dawn.
		
		Inside the museums infinity’s going up on trial,
		Voices echo, “This is what salvation must be like after a while”,
		But Mona Lisa musta had the highway blues, you can tell by the way she smiles.
		See the primitive wallflower freeze
		When the jelly-faced women all sneeze,
		Hear the one with the mustache say, “Jeez,
		I can’t find my knees.”
		Jewels and binoculars hang from the head of the mule,
		But these visions of Johanna, they make it all seem so cruel.
		
		The peddler now speaks to the countess who’s pretending to care for him,
		Saying, “Name me somebody that’s not a parasite and I’ll go out and say a prayer for him.”
		But, like Louise always says, “You can’t look at much, can you, man?” as she herself prepares for him.
		And Madonna, she still has not showed,
		We see this empty cage now corrode
		Where her cape of the stage once had flowed,
		The fiddler, he now steps to the road,
		He writes, “Everything’s been returned which was owed”
		On the back of the fish truck that loads
		While my conscience explodes.
		The harmonicas play the skeleton keys in the rain
		And these visions of Johanna are now all that remain.


	12. WATERED-DOWN LOVE

		Love that’s pure hopes all things,
		Believes all things, won’t pull no strings,
		Won’t sneak up into your room, tall, dark and handsome,
		Capture your soul and hold it for ransom.
		
		You don’t want a love that’s pure
		You wanna drown love
		You want a watered-down love
		
		Love that’s pure, it don’t make no false claims,
		Intercedes for you ‘stead of casting the blame,
		Will not deceive you or lead you into transgression,
		Won’t write it up and make you sign a false confession.
		
		You don’t want a love that’s pure
		You wanna drown love
		You want a watered-down love
		
		Love that’s pure won’t lead you astray,
		Won’t hold it back, won’t get in your way,
		Won’t pervert you, corrupt you with foolish wishes,
		It won’t make you envious, won’t a-make you suspicious.
		
		You don’t want a love that’s pure
		You wanna drown love
		You want a watered-down love
		
		Love that’s pure, no accident,
		It knows that it knows, and is always content,
		An eternal flame, quietly burning--
		Heaven needs to be proud, loud or restlessly yearning!
		
		You don’t want a love that’s pure
		You wanna drown love
		You want a watered-down love.


*** Richard Eberhart (1904 - 2005)

	1. BLESSED ARE THE ANGELS IN HEAVEN

		Blessed are the angels in heaven
		We are not with them on earth
		And blessed is their rationality
		Denied us from our birth
		
		And if any can say
		In our writhen, human condition
		Proud, red words to make us gay
		Let him say them and let him be
		
		A man of courage in a broken time
		And a great singer in the evening
		The master of our irrationality
		And lover of our scrivening
		
		And the angels in heaven who are blessed
		Will not hear him calling, calling
		For they have nothing to do with us
		And bind us to our barking heritage.


	2. EASTER ABSOLUTES

		Disaster lurks in Easter absolutes,
		The sun is straining blood through time,
		Heaven, is innocence so far away?
		Hell, are you gaping in your fury?
		
		To think, to feel, to see, to be
		Control confusion and force dispute
		Cringing before the cold, glad Easter
		Where dwell the ruthless relatives.
		
		Heavens of contemplation, and first
		Belief, that runs lamb-like here,
		Give me the order of the soul’s sway
		And harmony that teaches mastery.
		
		Christ now come from out the tomb,
		None other, and walk upon the ruined meadows,
		Dream-like vision, powerful beyond reality,
		Where the spirit is jocund, where it would go.


	3. THE FURY OF AERIAL BOMBARDMENT

		You would think the fury of aerial bombardment
		Would rouse God to relent; the infinite spaces
		Are still silent. He looks on shock-pried faces.
		History, even, does not know what is meant.
		
		You would feel that after so many centuries                
		God would give man to repent; yet he can kill
		As Cain could, but with multitudinous will,
		No farther advanced than in his ancient furies
		
		Was man made stupid to see his own stupidity?
		Is God by definition indifferent, beyond us all?                  
		Is the eternal truth man’s fighting soul
		Wherein the Beast ravens in its own avidity?
		
		Of Van Wettering I speak, and Averill,
		Names on a list, whose faces I do not recall
		But they are gone to early death, who late in school      
		Distinguished the belt feed lever from the belt holding pawl.


	4. THE GROUNDHOG

		In June, amid the golden fields,
		I saw a groundhog lying dead.
		Dead lay he; my senses shook,
		And mind outshot  our naked frailty.
		
		There lowly in the vigorous summer
		His form began its senseless change,
		And made my senses waver dim
		Seeing nature ferocious in him.
		
		Inspecting close maggots’ might
		And seething cauldron of his being,    
		Half with loathing, half with a strange love,
		I poked him with an angry stick.
		
		The fever arose, became a flame
		And Vigour circumscribed the skies,
		Immense energy in the sun,                    
		And through my frame a sunless trembling.
		
		My stick had done nor good nor harm.
		Then stood I silent in the day
		Watching the object, as before;
		And kept my reverence for knowledge          
		
		Trying for control, to be still,
		To quell the passion of the blood;
		Until I had bent down on my knees
		Praying for joy in the sight of decay.
		
		And so I left; and I returned                      
		In Autumn strict of eye, to see
		The sap gone out of the groundhog,
		But the bony sodden hulk remained
		
		But the year had lost its meaning,
		And in intellectual chains                                                  
		I lost both love and loathing,
		Mured up in the wall of wisdom.
		
		Another summer took the fields again
		Massive and burning, full of life,
		But when I chanced upon the spot              
		There was only a little hair left,
		
		And bones bleaching in the sunlight
		Beautiful as architecture;
		I watched them like a geometer,
		And cut a walking stick from a birch.
		
		It has been three years, now.
		There is no sign of the groundhog.
		I stood there in the whirling summer,
		My hand capped a withered heart,
		
		And thought of China and of Greece,          
		Of Alexander in his tent;
		Of Montaigne in his tower,
		Of Saint Theresa in her wild lament.


*** Max Ehrmann (1872 - 1945)

	1. A PRAYER

		Let me do my work each day; and if the darkened hours
		of despair overcome me, may I not forget the strength 
		that comforted me in the desolation of other times.
		
		May I still remember the bright hours that found me walking over 
		the silent hills of my childhood, or dreaming on the margin of a 
		quiet river, when a light glowed within me, and I promised 
		my early God to have courage amid the tempests of the changing years.
		
		Spare me from bitterness and from the sharp passions of unguarded moments. 
		May I not forget that poverty and riches are of the spirit. 
		
		Though the world knows me not, may my thoughts and actions 
		be such as shall keep me friendly with myself.
		
		Lift up my eyes from the earth, and let me not forget the uses 
		of the stars. Forbid that I should judge others lest I condemn myself. 
		
		Let me not follow the clamor of the world, but walk calmly in my path.
		
		Give me a few friends who will love me for what I am; 
		and keep ever burning before my vagrant steps the  kindly light of hope.
		
		And though age and infirmity overtake me, and I come not within sight 
		of the castle of my dreams, teach me still to be thankful for life, 
		and for time’s olden memories that are good and sweet; 
		and may the evening’s twilight find me gentle still.


	2. REFORMING ONESELF

		It has been raining again. 
		I have been indoors, meditating on the shortcomings of life.
		I wish there were more kindly persons in the world. 
		Our competitive life develops selfishness and unkindness.
		I am determined to do something about it. 
		I cannot hope to convert many persons. 
		To convert one person, I shall do well.
		I will begin with the person I know best--myself.
		When it rains and one is much indoors one is 
		likely to meditate on the shortcomings of life.
		Let me think--how shall I make myself kind, gentle considerate?
		I do believe it has stopped raining.
		I can go out now. I’ll go and shoot on the archery range.
		I’ll not bother to reform myself today. Perhaps tomorrow--
		if it is raining, and I must stay indoors, 
		and meditate on the shortcomings of life.


*** George Eliot (1819 - 1888)

	1. BLUE WINGS

		Warm whisp’ring through the slender olive leaves
		Came to me a gentle sound,
		Whis’pring of a secret found
		In the clear sunshine ‘mid the golden sheaves:
		
		Said it was sleeping for me in the morn,
		Called it gladness, called it joy,
		Drew me on ‘Come hither, boy.’
		To where the blue wings rested on the corn.
		
		I thought the gentle sound had whispered true
		Thought the little heaven mine,
		Leaned to clutch the thing divine,
		And saw the blue wings melt within the blue!


	2. COUNT THAT DAY LOST

		If you sit down at set of sun 
		And count the acts that you have done, 
		And, counting, find 
		One self-denying deed, one word 
		That eased the heart of him who heard, 
		One glance most kind 
		That fell like sunshine where it went-- 
		Then you may count that day well spent. 
		
		But if, through all the livelong day, 
		You’ve cheered no heart, by yea or nay-- 
		If, through it all 
		You’ve nothing done that you can trace 
		That brought the sunshine to one face-- 
		No act most small 
		That helped some soul and nothing cost-- 
		Then count that day as worse than lost.


	3. I AM LONELY

		The world is great: the birds all fly from me, 
		The stars are golden fruit upon a tree 
		All out of reach: my little sister went, 
		And I am lonely. 
		
		The world is great: I tried to mount the hill 
		Above the pines, where the light lies so still, 
		But it rose higher: little Lisa went 
		And I am lonely. 
		
		The world is great: the wind comes rushing by. 
		I wonder where it comes from; sea birds cry 
		And hurt my heart: my little sister went, 
		And I am lonely. 
		
		The world is great: the people laugh and talk, 
		And make loud holiday: how fast they walk! 
		I’m lame, they push me: little Lisa went, 
		And I am lonely.


	4. I GRANT YOU AMPLE LEAVE

		“I grant you ample leave
		To use the hoary formula ‘I am’
		Naming the emptiness where thought is not;
		But fill the void with definition, ‘I’
		Will be no more a datum than the words
		You link false inference with, the ‘Since’ & ‘so’
		That, true or not, make up the atom-whirl.
		Resolve your ‘Ego’, it is all one web
		With vibrant ether clotted into worlds:
		Your subject, self, or self-assertive ‘I’
		Turns nought but object, melts to molecules,
		Is stripped from naked Being with the rest
		Of those rag-garments named the Universe.
		Or if, in strife to keep your ‘Ego’ strong
		You make it weaver of the etherial light,
		Space, motion, solids & the dream of Time--
		Why, still ‘tis Being looking from the dark,
		The core, the centre of your consciousness,
		That notes your bubble-world: sense, pleasure, pain,
		What are they but a shifting otherness,
		Phantasmal flux of moments?--”


	5. SWEET SPRINGTIME

		It was in the prime
		Of the sweet springtime
		In the linnet’s throat
		Trembled the love note,
		And the love-stirred air
		Thrilled the blossoms there.
		Little shadows danced,
		Each a tiny elf
		Happy in large light
		And the thinnest self. 
		
		It was but a minute
		In a far-off spring,
		But each gentle thing,
		Sweetly wooing linnet,
		Soft thrilled hawthorn tree,
		Happy shadowy elf,
		With the thinnest self,
		Live on still in me.
		It was in the prime
		Of the past springtime!


	6. THE CHOIR INVISIBLE

		Oh, may I join the choir invisible
		Of those immortal dead who live again
		In minds made better by their presence; live
		In pulses stirred to generosity,
		In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
		For miserable aims that end with self,
		In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
		And with their mild persistence urge men’s search
		To vaster issues. So to live is heaven:
		To make undying music in the world,
		Breathing a beauteous order that controls
		With growing sway the growing life of man.
		So we inherit that sweet purity
		For which we struggled, failed, and agonized
		With widening retrospect that bred despair.
		Rebellious flesh that would not be subdued,
		A vicious parent shaming still its child,
		Poor anxious penitence, is quick dissolved;
		Its discords, quenched by meeting harmonies,
		Die in the large and charitable air,
		And all our rarer, better, truer self
		That sobbed religiously in yearning song,
		That watched to ease the burden of the world,
		Laboriously tracing what must be,
		And what may yet be better,--saw within
		A worthier image for the sanctuary,
		And shaped it forth before the multitude,
		Divinely human, raising worship so
		To higher reverence more mixed with love,--
		That better self shall live till human Time
		Shall fold its eyelids, and the human sky
		Be gathered like a scroll within the tomb
		Unread forever. This is life to come,--
		Which martyred men have made more glorious
		For us who strive to follow. May I reach
		That purest heaven,--be to other souls
		The cup of strength in some great agony,
		Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love,
		Beget the smiles that have no cruelty,
		Be the sweet presence of a good diffused,
		And in diffusion ever more intense!
		So shall I join the choir invisible
		Whose music is the gladness of the world.


	7. THE DEATH OF MOSES

		Moses, who spake with God as with his friend,
		And ruled his people with the twofold power
		Of wisdom that can dare and still be meek,
		Was writing his last word, the sacred name
		Unutterable of that Eternal Will
		Which was and is and evermore shall be.
		Yet was his task not finished, for the flock
		Needed its shepherd and the life-taught sage
		Leaves no successor; but to chosen men,
		The rescuers and guides of Israel,
		A death was given called the Death of Grace,
		Which freed them from the burden of the flesh
		But left them rulers of the multitude
		And loved companions of the lonely. This
		Was God’s last gift to Moses, this the hour
		When soul must part from self and be but soul.
		
		God spake to Gabriel, the messenger
		Of mildest death that draws the parting life
		Gently, as when a little rosy child
		Lifts up its lips from off the bowl of milk
		And so draws forth a curl that dipped its gold
		In the soft white—thus Gabriel draws the soul.
		“Go bring the soul of Moses unto me!”
		And the awe-stricken angel answered, “Lord,
		How shall I dare to take his life who lives
		Sole of his kind, not to be likened once
		In all the generations of the earth?”
		
		Then God called Michaël, him of pensive brow
		Snow-vest and flaming sword, who knows and acts:
		“Go bring the spirit of Moses unto me!”
		But Michaël with such grief as angels feel,
		Loving the mortals whom they succour, pled:
		“Almighty, spare me; it was I who taught
		Thy servant Moses; he is part of me
		As I of thy deep secrets, knowing them.”
		
		Then God called Zamaël, the terrible,
		The angel of fierce death, of agony
		That comes in battle and in pestilence
		Remorseless, sudden or with lingering throes.
		And Zamaël, his raiment and broad wings
		Blood-tinctured, the dark lustre of his eyes
		Shrouding the red, fell like the gathering night
		Before the prophet. But that radiance
		Won from the heavenly presence in the mount
		Gleamed on the prophet’s brow and dazzling pierced
		Its conscious opposite: the angel turned
		His murky gaze aloof and inly said:
		“An angel this, deathless to angel’s stroke.”
		
		But Moses felt the subtly nearing dark:—
		“Who art thou? and what wilt thou?” Zamaël then:
		“I am God’s reaper; through the fields of life
		I gather ripened and unripened souls
		Both willing and unwilling. And I come
		Now to reap thee.” But Moses cried,
		Firm as a seer who waits the trusted sign:
		“Reap thou the fruitless plant and common herb—
		Not him who from the womb was sanctified
		To teach the law of purity and love.”
		And Zamaël baffled from his errand fled.
		
		But Moses, pausing, in the air serene
		Heard now that mystic whisper, far yet near,
		The all-penetrating Voice, that said to him,
		“Moses, the hour is come and thou must die.”
		“Lord, I obey; but thou rememberest
		How thou, Ineffable, didst take me once
		Within thy orb of light untouched by death.”
		Then the voice answered, “Be no more afraid:
		With me shall be thy death and burial.”
		So Moses waited, ready now to die.
		
		And the Lord came, invisible as a thought,
		Three angels gleaming on his secret track,
		Prince Michaël, Zamaël, Gabriel, charged to guard
		The soul-forsaken body as it fell
		And bear it to the hidden sepulchre
		Denied for ever to the search of man.
		And the Voice said to Moses: “Close thine eyes.”
		He closed them. “Lay thine hand upon thine heart,
		And draw thy feet together.” He obeyed.
		And the Lord said, “O spirit! child of mine!
		A hundred years and twenty thou hast dwelt
		Within this tabernacle wrought of clay.
		This is the end: come forth and flee to heaven.”
		
		But the grieved soul with plaintive pleading cried,
		“I love this body with a clinging love:
		The courage fails me, Lord, to part from it.”
		
		“O child, come forth! for thou shalt dwell with me
		About the immortal throne where seraphs joy
		In growing vision and in growing love.”
		
		Yet hesitating, fluttering, like the bird
		With young wing weak and dubious, the soul
		Stayed. But behold! upon the death-dewed lips
		A kiss descended, pure, unspeakable—
		The bodiless Love without embracing Love
		That lingered in the body, drew it forth
		With heavenly strength and carried it to heaven.
		
		But now beneath the sky the watchers all,
		Angels that keep the homes of Israel
		Or on high purpose wander o’er the world
		Leading the Gentiles, felt a dark eclipse:
		The greatest ruler among men was gone.
		And from the westward sea was heard a wail,
		A dirge as from the isles of Javanim,
		Crying, “Who now is left upon the earth
		Like him to teach the right and smite the wrong?”
		And from the East, far o’er the Syrian waste,
		Came slowlier, sadlier, the answering dirge:
		“No prophet like him lives or shall arise
		In Israel or the world for evermore.”
		
		But Israel waited, looking toward the mount,
		Till with the deepening eve the elders came
		Saying, “His burial is hid with God.
		We stood far off and saw the angels lift
		His corpse aloft until they seemed a star
		That burnt itself away within the sky.”
		
		The people answered with mute orphaned gaze
		Looking for what had vanished evermore.
		Then through the gloom without them and within
		The spirit’s shaping light, mysterious speech,
		Invisible Will wrought clear in sculptured sound,
		The thought-begotten daughter of the voice,
		Thrilled on their listening sense: “He has no tomb.
		He dwells not with you dead, but lives as Law.”


*** T. S. Eliot (1888 - 1965)

	1. A COOKING EGG

		 _En l’an trentiesme de mon aage
		 Que toutes mes hontes j’ay beues . . ._
		
		
		Pipit sate upright in her chair
		 Some distance from where I was sitting;
		Views of the Oxford Colleges
		 Lay on the table, with the knitting.
		
		Daguerreotypes and silhouettes,
		 Her grandfather and great great aunts,
		Supported on the mantelpiece
		 An Invitation to the Dance.
		
		
		I shall not want Honour in Heaven
		 For I shall meet Sir Philip Sidney
		And have talk with Coriolanus
		 And other heroes of that kidney.
		
		I shall not want Capital in Heaven
		 For I shall meet Sir Alfred Mond:
		We two shall lie together, lapt
		 In a five per cent Exchequer Bond.
		
		I shall not want Society in Heaven,
		 Lucretia Borgia shall be my Bride;
		Her anecdotes will be more amusing
		 Than Pipit’s experience could provide.
		
		I shall not want Pipit in Heaven:
		 Madame Blavatsky will instruct me
		In the Seven Sacred Trances;
		 Piccarda de Donati will conduct me.
		
		
		But where is the penny world I bought
		 To eat with Pipit behind the screen?
		The red-eyed scavengers are creeping
		 From Kentish Town and Golder’s Green;
		
		Where are the eagles and the trumpets?
		
		 Buried beneath some snow-deep Alps.
		Over buttered scones and crumpets
		 Weeping, weeping multitudes
		Droop in a hundred A.B.C.‘s


	2. A GAME OF CHESS

		The Chair she sat in like a burnished throne
		Glowed on the marble where the glass
		Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines
		From which a golden Cupidon peeped out                                  
		(Another hid his eyes behind his wing)
		Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra
		Reflecting light upon the table as
		The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it
		From satin cases poured in rich profusion.
		In vials of ivory and coloured glass
		Unstoppered lurked her strange synthetic perfumes
		Unguent powdered or liquid--troubled confused
		And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air
		That freshened from the window these ascended                          
		In fattening the prolonged candle-flames
		Flung their smoke into the laquearia
		Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.
		Huge sea-wood fed with copper
		Burned green and orange framed by the coloured stone
		In which sad light a carvèd dolphin swam.
		Above the antique mantel was displayed
		As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene
		The change of Philomel by the barbarous king
		So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale                             
		Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
		And still she cried and still the world pursues
		“Jug Jug” to dirty ears.
		And other withered stumps of time
		Were told upon the walls; staring forms
		Leaned out leaning hushing the room enclosed.
		Footsteps shuffled on the stair.
		Under the firelight under the brush her hair
		Spread out in fiery points
		Glowed into words then would be savagely still.                        
		
		“My nerves are bad to-night. Yes bad. Stay with me.
		“Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
		“What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
		“I never know what you are thinking. Think.”
		
		I think we are in rats’ alley
		Where the dead men lost their bones.
		
		“What is that noise?”
		                            The wind under the door.
		“What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?”
		                            Nothing again nothing.                     
		                                                                 “Do
		“You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember
		“Nothing?”
		
		  I remember
		Those are pearls that were his eyes.
		“Are you alive or not? Is there nothing in your head?”
		                                                                   But
		O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag--
		It’s so elegant
		So intelligent                                                          
		“What shall I do now? What shall I do?”
		I shall rush out as I am and walk the street
		“With my hair down so. What shall we do tomorrow?
		“What shall we ever do?”
		                                    The hot water at ten.
		And if it rains a closed car at four.
		And we shall play a game of chess
		Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door.
		
		When Lil’s husband got demobbed I said--
		I didn’t mince my words I said to her myself                          
		HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
		Now Albert’s coming back make yourself a bit smart.
		He’ll want to know what you done with that money he gave you
		To get yourself some teeth. He did I was there.
		You have them all out Lil and get a nice set
		He said I swear I can’t bear to look at you.
		And no more can’t I I said and think of poor Albert
		He’s been in the army four years he wants a good time
		And if you don’t give it him there’s others will I said.
		Oh is there she said. Something o’ that I said.                       
		Then I’ll know who to thank she said and give me a straight look.
		HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
		If you don’t like it you can get on with it I said.
		Others can pick and choose if you can’t.
		But if Albert makes off it won’t be for lack of telling.
		You ought to be ashamed I said to look so antique.
		(And her only thirty-one.)
		I can’t help it she said pulling a long face
		It’s them pills I took to bring it off she said.
		(She’s had five already and nearly died of young George.)              
		The chemist said it would be all right but I’ve never been the same.
		You _are_ a proper fool I said.
		Well if Albert won’t leave you alone there it is I said
		What you get married for if you don’t want children?
		HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
		Well that Sunday Albert was home they had a hot gammon
		And they asked me in to dinner to get the beauty of it hot--
		HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
		HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
		Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.                    
		Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.
		Good night ladies good night sweet ladies good night good night.    


	3. A SONG FOR SIMEON

		Lord, they Roman hyacinths are blooming in bowls and
		The winter sun creeps by the snow hills;
		The stubborn season has made stand.
		My life is light, waiting for the death wind,
		Like a feather on the back of my hand.
		Dust in sunlight and memory in corners
		Wait for the wind that chills towards the dead land.
		
		Grant us they peace.
		I have walked many years in this city,
		Kept faith and fast, provided for the poor,
		have given and taken honour and ease.
		There went never any rejected from my door.
		Who shall remember my house, where shall live my children’s
		children?
		When the time of sorrow is come?
		They will take to the goat’s path, and the fox’s home,
		Fleeing from foreign faces and the foreign swords.
		
		Before the time of cords and scourges and lamentation
		Grant us thy peace.
		Before the stations of the mountain of desolation,
		Before the certain hour of maternal sorrow,
		Now at this birth season of decease,
		Let the Infant, the still unspeaking and unspoken Word,
		Grant Israel’s consolation
		To one who has eighty years and no to-morrow.
		
		According to thy word.
		They shall praise Thee and suffer in every generation
		With glory and derision,
		Light upon light, mounting the saints’ stair.
		Not for me the martyrdom, the ecstasy of thought and prayer,
		Not for me the ultimate vision.
		Grant me thy peace.
		(And a sword shall pierce thy heart,
		Thine also).
		I am tired with my own life and the lives of those after me,
		I am dying in my own death and the deaths of those after me.
		Let they servant depart,
		Having seen thy salvation.


	4. ASH WEDNESDAY

		I
		
		Because I do not hope to turn again
		Because I do not hope
		Because I do not hope to turn
		Desiring this man’s gift and that man’s scope
		I no longer strive to strive towards such things
		(Why should the agèd eagle stretch its wings?)
		Why should I mourn
		The vanished power of the usual reign?
		
		Because I do not hope to know
		The infirm glory of the positive hour
		Because I do not think
		Because I know I shall not know
		The one veritable transitory power
		Because I cannot drink
		There where trees flower and springs flow for there is
		nothing again
		
		Because I know that time is always time
		And place is always and only place
		And what is actual is actual only for one time
		And only for one place
		I rejoice that things are as they are and
		I renounce the blessèd face
		And renounce the voice
		Because I cannot hope to turn again
		Consequently I rejoice having to construct something
		Upon which to rejoice
		
		And pray to God to have mercy upon us
		And pray that I may forget
		These matters that with myself I too much discuss
		Too much explain
		Because I do not hope to turn again
		Let these words answer
		For what is done not to be done again
		May the judgement not be too heavy upon us
		
		Because these wings are no longer wings to fly
		But merely vans to beat the air
		The air which is now thoroughly small and dry
		Smaller and dryer than the will
		Teach us to care and not to care Teach us to sit still.
		
		Pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death
		Pray for us now and at the hour of our death.
		
		
		II
		
		Lady three white leopards sat under a juniper-tree
		In the cool of the day having fed to sateity
		On my legs my heart my liver and that which had been
		contained
		In the hollow round of my skull. And God said
		Shall these bones live? shall these
		Bones live? And that which had been contained
		In the bones (which were already dry) said chirping:
		Because of the goodness of this Lady
		And because of her loveliness and because
		She honours the Virgin in meditation
		We shine with brightness. And I who am here dissembled
		Proffer my deeds to oblivion and my love
		To the posterity of the desert and the fruit of the gourd.
		It is this which recovers
		My guts the strings of my eyes and the indigestible portions
		Which the leopards reject. The Lady is withdrawn
		In a white gown to contemplation in a white gown.
		Let the whiteness of bones atone to forgetfulness.
		There is no life in them. As I am forgotten
		And would be forgotten so I would forget
		Thus devoted concentrated in purpose. And God said
		Prophesy to the wind to the wind only for only
		The wind will listen. And the bones sang chirping
		With the burden of the grasshopper saying
		
		_Lady of silences
		Calm and distressed
		Torn and most whole
		Rose of memory
		Rose of forgetfulness
		Exhausted and life-giving
		Worried reposeful
		The single Rose
		Is now the Garden
		Where all loves end
		Terminate torment
		Of love unsatisfied
		The greater torment
		Of love satisfied
		End of the endless
		Journey to no end
		Conclusion of all that
		Is inconclusible
		Speech without word and
		Word of no speech
		Grace to the Mother
		For the Garden
		Where all love ends._
		
		Under a juniper-tree the bones sang scattered and shining
		We are glad to be scattered we did little good to each
		other
		Under a tree in the cool of day with the blessing of sand
		Forgetting themselves and each other united
		In the quiet of the desert. This is the land which ye
		Shall divide by lot. And neither division nor unity
		Matters. This is the land. We have our inheritance.
		
		
		III
		
		At the first turning of the second stair
		I turned and saw below
		The same shape twisted on the banister
		Under the vapour in the fetid air
		Struggling with the devil of the stairs who wears
		The deceitul face of hope and of despair.
		
		At the second turning of the second stair
		I left them twisting turning below;
		There were no more faces and the stair was dark
		Damp jaggèd like an old man’s mouth drivelling beyond
		repair
		Or the toothed gullet of an agèd shark.
		
		At the first turning of the third stair
		Was a slotted window bellied like the figs’s fruit
		And beyond the hawthorn blossom and a pasture scene
		The broadbacked figure drest in blue and green
		Enchanted the maytime with an antique flute.
		Blown hair is sweet brown hair over the mouth blown
		Lilac and brown hair;
		Distraction music of the flute stops and steps of the mind
		over the third stair 
		Fading fading; strength beyond hope and despair
		Climbing the third stair.
		
		Lord I am not worthy
		Lord I am not worthy
		
		but speak the word only. 
		
		
		IV
		
		Who walked between the violet and the violet
		Whe walked between
		The various ranks of varied green
		Going in white and blue in Mary’s colour
		Talking of trivial things
		In ignorance and knowledge of eternal dolour
		Who moved among the others as they walked
		Who then made strong the fountains and made fresh the springs
		
		Made cool the dry rock and made firm the sand
		In blue of larkspur blue of Mary’s colour
		Sovegna vos
		
		Here are the years that walk between bearing
		Away the fiddles and the flutes restoring
		One who moves in the time between sleep and waking wearing
		
		White light folded sheathing about her folded.
		The new years walk restoring
		Through a bright cloud of tears the years restoring
		With a new verse the ancient rhyme. Redeem
		The time. Redeem
		The unread vision in the higher dream
		While jewelled unicorns draw by the gilded hearse.
		
		The silent sister veiled in white and blue
		Between the yews behind the garden god
		Whose flute is breathless bent her head and signed but spoke
		no word
		
		But the fountain sprang up and the bird sang down
		Redeem the time redeem the dream
		The token of the word unheard unspoken
		
		Till the wind shake a thousand whispers from the yew
		
		And after this our exile
		
		
		V
		
		If the lost word is lost if the spent word is spent
		If the unheard unspoken
		Word is unspoken unheard;
		Still is the unspoken word the Word unheard
		The Word without a word the Word within
		The world and for the world;
		And the light shone in darkness and
		Against the Word the unstilled world still whirled
		About the centre of the silent Word.
		
		O my people what have I done unto thee.
		
		Where shall the word be found where will the word
		Resound? Not here there is not enough silence
		Not on the sea or on the islands not
		On the mainland in the desert or the rain land
		For those who walk in darkness
		Both in the day time and in the night time
		The right time and the right place are not here
		No place of grace for those who avoid the face
		No time to rejoice for those who walk among noise and deny
		the voice
		
		Will the veiled sister pray for
		Those who walk in darkness who chose thee and oppose thee
		Those who are torn on the horn between season and season
		time and time between
		Hour and hour word and word power and power those who wait
		In darkness? Will the veiled sister pray
		For children at the gate
		Who will not go away and cannot pray:
		Pray for those who chose and oppose
		
		O my people what have I done unto thee.
		
		Will the veiled sister between the slender
		Yew trees pray for those who offend her
		And are terrified and cannot surrender
		And affirm before the world and deny between the rocks
		In the last desert before the last blue rocks
		The desert in the garden the garden in the desert
		Of drouth spitting from the mouth the withered apple-seed.
		
		O my people.
		
		
		VI
		
		Although I do not hope to turn again
		Although I do not hope
		Although I do not hope to turn
		
		Wavering between the profit and the loss
		In this brief transit where the dreams cross
		The dreamcrossed twilight between birth and dying
		(Bless me father) though I do not wish to wish these things
		From the wide window towards the granite shore
		The white sails still fly seaward seaward flying
		Unbroken wings
		
		And the lost heart stiffens and rejoices
		In the lost lilac and the lost sea voices
		And the weak spirit quickens to rebel
		For the bent golden-rod and the lost sea smell
		Quickens to recover
		The cry of quail and the whirling plover
		And the blind eye creates
		The empty forms between the ivory gates
		And smell renews the salt savour of the sandy earth
		
		This is the time of tension between dying and birth
		The place of solitude where three dreams cross
		Between blue rocks
		But when the voices shaken from the yew-tree drift away
		Let the other yew be shaken and reply.
		
		Blessèd sister holy mother spirit of the fountain spirit
		of the garden
		Suffer us not to mock ourselves with falsehood
		Teach us to care and not to care
		Teach us to sit still
		Even among these rocks
		Our peace in His will
		And even among these rocks
		Sister mother
		And spirit of the river spirit of the sea
		Suffer me not to be separated
		
		And let my cry come unto Thee.


	5. AUNT HELEN

		Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
		And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
		Cared for by servants to the number of four.
		Now when she died there was silence in heaven
		And silence at her end of the street.
		The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet--
		He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
		The dogs were handsomely provided for,
		But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
		The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
		And the footman sat upon the dining-table
		Holding the second housemaid on his knees--
		Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.


	6. BURBANK WITH A BAEDEKER: BLEISTEIN WITH A CIGAR

		 _Tra-la-la-la-la-la-laire--nil nisi divinum stabile
		 est; caetera fumus--the gondola stopped, the old
		 palace was there, how charming its grey and pink--
		 goats and monkeys, with such hair too!--so the
		 countess passed on until she came through the
		 little park, where Niobe presented her with a
		 cabinet, and so departed._
		
		
		Burbank crossed a little bridge
		Descending at a small hotel;
		Princess Volupine arrived,
		They were together, and he fell.
		
		Defunctive music under sea
		Passed seaward with the passing bell
		Slowly: the God Hercules
		Had left him, that had loved him well.
		
		The horses, under the axletree
		Beat up the dawn from Istria
		With even feet. Her shuttered barge
		Burned on the water all the day.
		
		But this or such was Bleistein’s way:
		A saggy bending of the knees
		And elbows, with the palms turned out,
		Chicago Semite Viennese.
		
		A lustreless protrusive eye
		Stares from the protozoic slime
		At a perspective of Canaletto.
		The smoky candle end of time
		
		Declines. On the Rialto once.
		The rats are underneath the piles.
		The jew is underneath the lot.
		Money in furs. The boatman smiles,
		
		Princess Volupine extends
		A meagre, blue-nailed, phthisic hand
		To climb the waterstair. Lights, lights,
		She entertains Sir Ferdinand
		
		Klein. Who clipped the lion’s wings
		And flea’d his rump and pared his claws?
		Thought Burbank, meditating on
		Time’s ruins, and the seven laws.


	7. CONVERSATION GALANTE

		I observe: “Our sentimental friend the moon!
		Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
		It may be Prester John’s balloon
		Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
		To light poor travellers to their distress.”
		 She then: “How you digress!”
		
		And I then: “Some one frames upon the keys
		That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
		The night and moonshine; music which we seize
		To body forth our vacuity.”
		 She then: “Does this refer to me?”
		 “Oh no, it is I who am inane.”
		
		“You, madam, are the eternal humorist,
		The eternal enemy of the absolute,
		Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist!
		With your air indifferent and imperious
		At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--”
		 And--“Are we then so serious?”


	8. COUSIN NANCY

		Miss Nancy Ellicott Strode across the hills and broke them,
		Rode across the hills and broke them--
		The barren New England hills--
		Riding to hounds
		Over the cow-pasture.
		
		Miss Nancy Ellicott smoked
		And danced all the modern dances;
		And her aunts were not quite sure how they felt about it,
		But they knew that it was modern.
		
		Upon the glazen shelves kept watch
		Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith,
		The army of unalterable law.


	9. EYES THAT I LAST SAW IN TEARS

		Eyes that last I saw in tears 
		Through division 
		Here in death’s dream kingdom 
		The golden vision reappears 
		I see the eyes but not the tears 
		This is my affliction 
		
		This is my affliction 
		Eyes I shall not see again 
		Eyes of decision 
		Eyes I shall not see unless 
		At the door of death’s other kingdom 
		Where, as in this, 
		The eyes outlast a little while 
		A little while outlast the tears 
		And hold us in derision. 


	10. GERONTION

		 Thou hast nor youth nor age
		 But as it were an after dinner sleep
		 Dreaming of both.
		
		
		Here I am an old man in a dry month
		Being read to by a boy waiting for rain.
		I was neither at the hot gates
		Nor fought in the warm rain
		Nor knee deep in the salt marsh heaving a cutlass
		Bitten by flies fought.
		My house is a decayed house
		And the jew squats on the window sill the owner
		Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp
		Blistered in Brussels patched and peeled in London.
		The goat coughs at night in the field overhead;
		Rocks moss stonecrop iron merds.
		The woman keeps the kitchen makes tea
		Sneezes at evening poking the peevish gutter.
		
		                 I an old man
		A dull head among windy spaces.
		
		Signs are taken for wonders. “We would see a sign“:
		The word within a word unable to speak a word
		Swaddled with darkness. In the juvescence of the year
		Came Christ the tiger
		
		In depraved May dogwood and chestnut flowering Judas
		To be eaten to be divided to be drunk
		Among whispers; by Mr. Silvero
		With caressing hands at Limoges
		Who walked all night in the next room;
		By Hakagawa bowing among the Titians;
		By Madame de Tornquist in the dark room
		Shifting the candles; Fraulein von Kulp
		Who turned in the hall one hand on the door. Vacant shuttles
		Weave the wind. I have no ghosts
		An old man in a draughty house
		Under a windy knob.
		
		After such knowledge what forgiveness? Think now
		History has many cunning passages contrived corridors
		And issues deceives with whispering ambitions
		Guides us by vanities. Think now
		She gives when our attention is distracted
		And what she gives gives with such supple confusions
		That the giving famishes the craving. Gives too late
		What’s not believed in or if still believed
		In memory only reconsidered passion. Gives too soon
		Into weak hands what’s thought can be dispensed with
		Till the refusal propagates a fear. Think
		Neither fear nor courage saves us. Unnatural vices
		Are fathered by our heroism. Virtues
		Are forced upon us by our impudent crimes.
		These tears are shaken from the wrath-bearing tree.
		
		The tiger springs in the new year. Us he devours. Think at last
		We have not reached conclusion when I
		Stiffen in a rented house. Think at last
		I have not made this show purposelessly
		And it is not by any concitation
		Of the backward devils.
		I would meet you upon this honestly.
		I that was near your heart was removed therefrom
		To lose beauty in terror terror in inquisition.
		I have lost my passion: why should I need to keep it
		Since what is kept must be adulterated?
		I have lost my sight smell hearing taste and touch:
		How should I use it for your closer contact?
		
		These with a thousand small deliberations
		Protract the profit of their chilled delirium
		Excite the membrane when the sense has cooled
		With pungent sauces multiply variety
		In a wilderness of mirrors. What will the spider do
		Suspend its operations will the weevil
		Delay? De Bailhache Fresca Mrs. Cammel whirled
		Beyond the circuit of the shuddering Bear
		In fractured atoms. Gull against the wind in the windy straits
		Of Belle Isle or running on the Horn
		White feathers in the snow the Gulf claims
		And an old man driven by the Trades
		To a sleepy corner.
		
		                 Tenants of the house
		Thoughts of a dry brain in a dry season.


	11. HYSTERIA

		As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her
		laughter and being part of it, until her teeth were
		only accidental stars with a talent for squad-drill. I
		was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at each momentary
		recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her
		throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An
		elderly waiter with trembling hands was hurriedly
		spreading a pink and white checked cloth over the rusty
		green iron table, saying: “If the lady and gentleman
		wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and
		gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden . . .” I
		decided that if the shaking of her breasts could be
		stopped, some of the fragments of the afternoon might
		be collected, and I concentrated my attention with
		careful subtlety to this end.


	12. LA FIGLIA CHE PIANGE

		 _O quam te memorem Virgo . . ._
		
		
		Stand on the highest pavement of the stair--
		Lean on a garden urn--
		Weave weave the sunlight in your hair--
		Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise--
		Fling them to the ground and turn
		With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
		But weave weave the sunlight in your hair.
		
		So I would have had him leave
		So I would have had her stand and grieve
		So he would have left
		As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised
		As the mind deserts the body it has used.
		I should find
		Some way incomparably light and deft
		Some way we both should understand
		Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand.
		
		She turned away but with the autumn weather
		Compelled my imagination many days
		Many days and many hours:
		Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
		And I wonder how they should have been together!
		I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
		Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
		The troubled midnight and the noon’s repose.


	13. MORNING AT THE WINDOW

		They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
		And along the trampled edges of the street
		I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
		Sprouting despondently at area gates.
		The brown waves of fog toss up to me
		Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
		And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
		An aimless smile that hovers in the air
		And vanishes along the level of the roofs.


	14. MR. APOLLINAX

		When Mr. Apollinax visited the United States
		His laughter tinkled among the teacups.
		I thought of Fragilion, that shy figure among the birch-trees,
		And of Priapus in the shrubbery
		Gaping at the lady in the swing.
		In the palace of Mrs. Phlaccus, at Professor Channing-Cheetah’s
		He laughed like an irresponsible foetus.
		HWith your aid indiffeis laughter was submarine and profound
		Like the old man of the sea’s
		Hidden under coral islands
		Where worried bodies of drowned men drift down in the green silence,
		Dropping from fingers of surf.
		I looked for the head of Mr. Apollinax rolling under a chair
		Or grinning over a screen
		With seaweed in its hair.
		I heard the beat of centaur’s hoofs over the hard turf
		As his dry and passionate talk devoured the afternoon.
		“He is a charming man”--“But after all what did he mean?“--
		“His pointed ears . . . He must be unbalanced,“--
		“There was something he said that I might have challenged.”
		Of dowager Mrs. Phlaccus, and Professor and Mrs. Cheetah
		I remember a slice of lemon, and a bitten macaroon.


	15. MR. ELIOT’S SUNDAY MORNING SERVICE

		  Look look master here comes two religious
		  caterpillars.
		                The Jew of Malta.
		
		
		Polyphiloprogenitive
		The sapient sutlers of the Lord
		Drift across the window-panes.
		In the beginning was the Word.
		
		In the beginning was the Word.
		Superfetation of Greek text inserted here
		And at the mensual turn of time
		Produced enervate Origen.
		
		A painter of the Umbrian school
		Designed upon a gesso ground
		The nimbus of the Baptized God.
		The wilderness is cracked and browned
		
		But through the water pale and thin
		Still shine the unoffending feet
		And there above the painter set
		The Father and the Paraclete.
		
		
		The sable presbyters approach
		The avenue of penitence;
		The young are red and pustular
		Clutching piaculative pence.
		
		Under the penitential gates
		Sustained by staring Seraphim
		Where the souls of the devout
		Burn invisible and dim.
		
		Along the garden-wall the bees
		With hairy bellies pass between
		The staminate and pistilate
		Blest office of the epicene.
		
		Sweeney shifts from ham to ham
		Stirring the water in his bath.
		The masters of the subtle schools
		Are controversial polymath.


	16. PORTRAIT OF A LADY

		 _Thou hast committed--
		 Fornication: but that was in another country
		 And besides the wench is dead.
		 The Jew of Malta._
		
		
		I
		
		Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
		You have the scene arrange itself--as it will seem to do--
		With “I have saved this afternoon for you“;
		And four wax candles in the darkened room
		Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead
		An atmosphere of Juliet’s tomb
		Prepared for all the things to be said or left unsaid.
		We have been let us say to hear the latest Pole
		Transmit the Preludes through his hair and finger-tips.
		“So intimate this Chopin that I think his soul
		Should be resurrected only among friends
		Some two or three who will not touch the bloom
		That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room.”
		--And so the conversation slips
		Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
		Through attenuated tones of violins
		Mingled with remote cornets
		And begins.
		
		“You do not know how much they mean to me my friends
		And how how rare and strange it is to find
		In a life composed so much so much of odds and ends
		(For indeed I do not love it . . . you knew? you are not blind!
		How keen you are!)
		To find a friend who has these qualities
		Who has and gives
		Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
		How much it means that I say this to you--
		Without these friendships--life what cauchemar!”
		Among the windings of the violins
		And the ariettes
		Of cracked cornets
		Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
		Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own
		Capricious monotone
		That is at least one definite “false note.”
		--Let us take the air in a tobacco trance
		Admire the monuments
		Discuss the late events
		Correct our watches by the public clocks.
		Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.
		
		
		II
		
		Now that lilacs are in bloom
		She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
		And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
		“Ah my friend you do not know you do not know
		What life is you should hold it in your hands“;
		(Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
		“You let it flow from you you let it flow
		And youth is cruel and has no remorse
		And smiles at situations which it cannot see.”
		I smile of course
		And go on drinking tea.
		“Yet with these April sunsets that somehow recall
		My buried life and Paris in the Spring
		I feel immeasurably at peace and find the world
		To be wonderful and youthful after all.”
		
		The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
		Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
		“I am always sure that you understand
		My feelings always sure that you feel
		Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.
		
		You are invulnerable you have no Achilles’ heel.
		You will go on and when you have prevailed
		You can say: at this point many a one has failed.
		
		But what have I but what have I my friend
		To give you what can you receive from me?
		Only the friendship and the sympathy
		Of one about to reach her journey’s end.
		
		I shall sit here serving tea to friends....”
		
		I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
		For what she has said to me?
		You will see me any morning in the park
		Reading the comics and the sporting page.
		Particularly I remark An English countess goes upon the stage.
		A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance
		Another bank defaulter has confessed.
		I keep my countenance I remain self-possessed
		Except when a street piano mechanical and tired
		Reiterates some worn-out common song
		With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
		Recalling things that other people have desired.
		Are these ideas right or wrong?
		
		
		III
		
		The October night comes down; returning as before
		Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
		I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
		And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.
		
		“And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
		But that’s a useless question.
		You hardly know when you are coming back
		You will find so much to learn.”
		My smile falls heavily among the bric-à-brac.
		
		“Perhaps you can write to me.”
		My self-possession flares up for a second;
		This is as I had reckoned.
		
		“I have been wondering frequently of late
		(But our beginnings never know our ends!)
		Why we have not developed into friends.”
		I feel like one who smiles and turning shall remark
		Suddenly his expression in a glass.
		My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.
		
		“For everybody said so all our friends
		They all were sure our feelings would relate
		So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
		We must leave it now to fate.
		You will write at any rate.
		Perhaps it is not too late.
		I shall sit here serving tea to friends.”
		
		And I must borrow every changing shape
		To find expression . . . dance dance
		Like a dancing bear
		Cry like a parrot chatter like an ape.
		Let us take the air in a tobacco trance--
		Well! and what if she should die some afternoon
		Afternoon grey and smoky evening yellow and rose;
		Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
		With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
		Doubtful for quite a while
		Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
		Or whether wise or foolish tardy or too soon . . .
		Would she not have the advantage after all?
		This music is successful with a “dying fall”
		Now that we talk of dying--
		And should I have the right to smile?


	17. PRELUDES

		I
		
		The winter evening settles down
		With smell of steaks in passageways.
		Six o’clock.
		The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
		And now a gusty shower wraps
		The grimy scraps
		Of withered leaves about your feet
		And newspapers from vacant lots;
		The showers beat
		On broken blinds and chimney-pots
		And at the corner of the street
		A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.
		And then the lighting of the lamps.
		
		
		II
		
		The morning comes to consciousness
		Of faint stale smells of beer
		From the sawdust-trampled street
		With all its muddy feet that press
		To early coffee-stands.
		
		With the other masquerades
		That time resumes
		One thinks of all the hands
		That are raising dingy shades
		In a thousand furnished rooms.
		
		
		III
		
		You tossed a blanket from the bed
		You lay upon your back and waited;
		You dozed and watched the night revealing
		The thousand sordid images
		Of which your soul was constituted;
		They flickered against the ceiling.
		And when all the world came back
		And the light crept up between the shutters
		And you heard the sparrows in the gutters
		You had such a vision of the street
		As the street hardly understands;
		Sitting along the bed’s edge where
		You curled the papers from your hair
		Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
		In the palms of both soiled hands.
		
		
		IV
		
		His soul stretched tight across the skies
		That fade behind a city block
		Or trampled by insistent feet
		At four and five and six o’clock;
		And short square fingers stuffing pipes
		And evening newspapers and eyes
		Assured of certain certainties
		The conscience of a blackened street
		Impatient to assume the world.
		
		I am moved by fancies that are curled
		Around these images and cling:
		The notion of some infinitely gentle
		Infinitely suffering thing.
		
		Wipe your hand across your mouth and laugh;
		The worlds revolve like ancient women
		Gathering fuel in vacant lots.


	18. RHAPSODY ON A WINDY NIGHT

		Twelve o’clock.
		Along the reaches of the street
		Held in a lunar synthesis
		Whispering lunar incantations
		Disolve the floors of memory
		And all its clear relations
		Its divisions and precisions
		Every street lamp that I pass
		Beats like a fatalistic drum
		And through the spaces of the dark
		Midnight shakes the memory
		As a madman shakes a dead geranium.
		
		Half-past one
		The street lamp sputtered
		The street lamp muttered
		The street lamp said
		“Regard that woman
		Who hesitates toward you in the light of the door
		Which opens on her like a grin.
		You see the border of her dress
		Is torn and stained with sand
		And you see the corner of her eye
		Twists like a crooked pin.”
		
		The memory throws up high and dry
		A crowd of twisted things;
		A twisted branch upon the beach
		Eaten smooth and polished
		As if the world gave up
		The secret of its skeleton
		Stiff and white.
		A broken spring in a factory yard
		Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
		Hard and curled and ready to snap.
		
		Half-past two
		The street-lamp said
		“Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter
		Slips out its tongue
		And devours a morsel of rancid butter.”
		So the hand of the child automatic
		Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along
		the quay.
		I could see nothing behind that child’s eye.
		I have seen eyes in the street
		Trying to peer through lighted shutters
		And a crab one afternoon in a pool
		An old crab with barnacles on his back
		Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.
		
		Half-past three
		The lamp sputtered
		The lamp muttered in the dark.
		
		The lamp hummed:
		“Regard the moon
		La lune ne garde aucune rancune
		She winks a feeble eye
		She smiles into corners.
		She smooths the hair of the grass.
		The moon has lost her memory.
		A washed-out smallpox cracks her face
		Her hand twists a paper rose
		That smells of dust and old Cologne
		She is alone With all the old nocturnal smells
		That cross and cross across her brain.
		The reminiscence comes
		Of sunless dry geraniums
		And dust in crevices
		Smells of chestnuts in the streets
		And female smells in shuttered rooms
		And cigarettes in corridors
		And cocktail smells in bars.”
		
		The lamp said
		“Four o’clock
		Here is the number on the door.
		Memory!
		You have the key
		The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair
		Mount.
		The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall
		Put your shoes at the door sleep prepare for life.”
		
		The last twist of the knife.


	19. SWEENEY AMONG THE NIGHTINGALES

		 [Greek text inserted here]
		
		
		Apeneck Sweeney spreads his knees
		Letting his arms hang down to laugh,
		The zebra stripes along his jaw
		Swelling to maculate giraffe.
		
		The circles of the stormy moon
		Slide westward toward the River Plate,
		Death and the Raven drift above
		And Sweeney guards the hornèd gate.
		
		Gloomy Orion and the Dog
		Are veiled; and hushed the shrunken seas;
		The person in the Spanish cape
		Tries to sit on Sweeney’s knees
		
		Slips and pulls the table cloth
		Overturns a coffee-cup,
		Reorganized upon the floor
		She yawns and draws a stocking up;
		
		The silent man in mocha brown
		Sprawls at the window-sill and gapes;
		The waiter brings in oranges
		Bananas figs and hothouse grapes;
		
		The silent vertebrate in brown
		Contracts and concentrates, withdraws;
		Rachel née Rabinovitch
		Tears at the grapes with murderous paws;
		
		She and the lady in the cape
		Are suspect, thought to be in league;
		Therefore the man with heavy eyes
		Declines the gambit, shows fatigue,
		
		Leaves the room and reappears
		Outside the window, leaning in,
		Branches of wisteria
		Circumscribe a golden grin;
		
		The host with someone indistinct
		Converses at the door apart,
		The nightingales are singing near
		The Convent of the Sacred Heart,
		
		And sang within the bloody wood
		When Agamemnon cried aloud,
		And let their liquid droppings fall
		To stain the stiff dishonoured shroud.


	20. SWEENEY ERECT

		                     _And the trees about me,
		 Let them be dry and leafless; let the rocks
		 Groan with continual surges; and behind me
		 Make all a desolation. Look, look, wenches!_
		
		
		Paint me a cavernous waste shore
		Cast in the unstilted Cyclades,
		Paint me the bold anfractuous rocks
		Faced by the snarled and yelping seas.
		
		Display me Aeolus above
		Reviewing the insurgent gales
		Which tangle Ariadne’s hair
		And swell with haste the perjured sails.
		
		Morning stirs the feet and hands
		(Nausicaa and Polypheme),
		Gesture of orang-outang
		Rises from the sheets in steam.
		
		This withered root of knots of hair
		Slitted below and gashed with eyes,
		This oval O cropped out with teeth:
		The sickle motion from the thighs
		
		Jackknifes upward at the knees
		Then straightens out from heel to hip
		Pushing the framework of the bed
		And clawing at the pillow slip.
		
		Sweeney addressed full length to shave
		Broadbottomed, pink from nape to base,
		Knows the female temperament
		And wipes the suds around his face.
		
		(The lengthened shadow of a man
		Is history, said Emerson
		Who had not seen the silhouette
		Of Sweeney straddled in the sun).
		
		Tests the razor on his leg
		Waiting until the shriek subsides.
		The epileptic on the bed
		Curves backward, clutching at her sides.
		
		The ladies of the corridor
		Find themselves involved, disgraced,
		Call witness to their principles
		And deprecate the lack of taste
		
		Observing that hysteria
		Might easily be misunderstood;
		Mrs. Turner intimates
		It does the house no sort of good.
		
		But Doris, towelled from the bath,
		Enters padding on broad feet,
		Bringing sal volatile
		And a glass of brandy neat.


	21. THE BOSTON EVENING TRANSCRIPT

		The readers of the Boston Evening Transcript
		Sway in the wind like a field of ripe corn.
		When evening quickens faintly in the street,
		Wakening the appetites of life in some
		And to others bringing the Boston Evening Transcript,
		I mount the steps and ring the bell, turning
		Wearily, as one would turn to nod good-bye to Rochefoucauld,
		If the street were time and he at the end of the street,
		And I say, “Cousin Harriet, here is the Boston Evening Transcript.”


	22. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD

		April is the cruellest month breeding
		Lilacs out of the dead land mixing
		Memory and desire stirring
		Dull roots with spring rain.
		Winter kept us warm covering
		Earth in forgetful snow feeding
		A little life with dried tubers.
		Summer surprised us coming over the Starnbergersee
		With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade
		And went on in sunlight into the Hofgarten                            
		And drank coffee and talked for an hour.
		Bin gar keine Russin stamm’ aus Litauen echt deutsch.
		And when we were children staying at the archduke’s
		My cousin’s he took me out on a sled
		And I was frightened. He said Marie
		Marie hold on tight. And down we went.
		In the mountains there you feel free.
		I read much of the night and go south in the winter.
		
		What are the roots that clutch what branches grow
		Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man                                  
		You cannot say or guess for you know only
		A heap of broken images where the sun beats
		And the dead tree gives no shelter the cricket no relief
		And the dry stone no sound of water. Only
		There is shadow under this red rock
		(Come in under the shadow of this red rock)
		And I will show you something different from either
		Your shadow at morning striding behind you
		Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;
		I will show you fear in a handful of dust.                              
		    _Frisch weht der Wind
		    Der Heimat zu
		    Mein Irisch Kind
		    Wo weilest du?_
		“You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
		“They called me the hyacinth girl.”
		--Yet when we came back late from the Hyacinth garden
		Your arms full and your hair wet I could not
		Speak and my eyes failed I was neither
		Living nor dead and I knew nothing                                    
		Looking into the heart of light the silence.
		_Oed’ und leer das Meer_.
		
		Madame Sosostris famous clairvoyante
		Had a bad cold nevertheless
		Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe
		With a wicked pack of cards. Here said she
		Is your card the drowned Phoenician Sailor
		(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
		Here is Belladonna the Lady of the Rocks
		The lady of situations.                                                 
		Here is the man with three staves and here the Wheel
		And here is the one-eyed merchant and this card
		Which is blank is something he carries on his back
		Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find
		The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.
		I see crowds of people walking round in a ring.
		Thank you. If you see dear Mrs. Equitone
		Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:
		One must be so careful these days.
		
		Unreal City                                                            
		Under the brown fog of a winter dawn
		A crowd flowed over London Bridge so many
		I had not thought death had undone so many.
		Sighs short and infrequent were exhaled
		And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
		Flowed up the hill and down King William Street
		To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours
		With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.
		There I saw one I knew and stopped him crying “Stetson!
		“You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!                            
		“That corpse you planted last year in your garden
		“Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
		“Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?
		“Oh keep the Dog far hence that’s friend to men
		“Or with his nails he’ll dig it up again!
		“You! hypocrite lecteur!--mon semblable--mon frère!”    


	23. THE CULTIVATION OF CHRISTMAS TREES

		There are several attitudes towards Christmas,
		Some of which we may disregard:
		The social, the torpid, the patently commercial,
		The rowdy (the pubs being open till midnight),
		And the childish--which is not that of the child
		For whom the candle is a star, and the gilded angel
		Spreading its wings at the summit of the tree
		Is not only a decoration, but an angel.
		
		The child wonders at the Christmas Tree:
		Let him continue in the spirit of wonder
		At the Feast as an event not accepted as a pretext;
		So that the glittering rapture, the amazement
		Of the first-remembered Christmas Tree,
		So that the surprises, delight in new possessions
		(Each one with its peculiar and exciting smell),
		The expectation of the goose or turkey
		And the expected awe on its appearance,
		
		So that the reverence and the gaiety
		May not be forgotten in later experience,
		In the bored habituation, the fatigue, the tedium,
		The awareness of death, the consciousness of failure,
		Or in the piety of the convert
		Which may be tainted with a self-conceit
		Displeasing to God and disrespectful to children
		(And here I remember also with gratitude
		St.Lucy, her carol, and her crown of fire):
		
		So that before the end, the eightieth Christmas
		(By “eightieth” meaning whichever is last)
		The accumulated memories of annual emotion
		May be concentrated into a great joy
		Which shall be also a great fear, as on the occasion
		When fear came upon every soul:
		Because the beginning shall remind us of the end
		And the first coming of the second coming.


	24. THE FIRE SERMON

		The river’s tent is broken: the last fingers of leaf
		Clutch and sink into the wet bank. The wind
		Crosses the brown land unheard. The nymphs are departed.
		Sweet Thames run softly till I end my song.
		The river bears no empty bottles sandwich papers
		Silk handkerchiefs cardboard boxes cigarette ends
		Or other testimony of summer nights. The nymphs are departed.
		And their friends the loitering heirs of city directors;               
		Departed have left no addresses.
		By the waters of Leman I sat down and wept . . .
		Sweet Thames run softly till I end my song
		Sweet Thames run softly for I speak not loud or long.
		But at my back in a cold blast I hear
		The rattle of the bones and chuckle spread from ear to ear.
		A rat crept softly through the vegetation
		Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
		While I was fishing in the dull canal
		On a winter evening round behind the gashouse                           
		Musing upon the king my brother’s wreck
		And on the king my father’s death before him.
		White bodies naked on the low damp ground
		And bones cast in a little low dry garret
		Rattled by the rat’s foot only year to year.
		But at my back from time to time I hear
		The sound of horns and motors which shall bring
		Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
		O the moon shone bright on Mrs. Porter
		And on her daughter                                                     
		They wash their feet in soda water
		_Et O ces voix d’enfants chantant dans la coupole!_
		
		Twit twit twit
		Jug jug jug jug jug jug
		So rudely forc’d.
		Tereu
		
		Unreal City
		Under the brown fog of a winter noon
		Mr. Eugenides the Smyrna merchant
		Unshaven with a pocket full of currants                                
		C.i.f. London: documents at sight
		Asked me in demotic French
		To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
		Followed by a weekend at the Metropole.
		
		At the violet hour when the eyes and back
		Turn upward from the desk when the human engine waits
		Like a taxi throbbing waiting
		I Tiresias though blind throbbing between two lives
		Old man with wrinkled female breasts can see
		At the violet hour the evening hour that strives                       
		Homeward and brings the sailor home from sea
		The typist home at teatime clears her breakfast lights
		Her stove and lays out food in tins.
		Out of the window perilously spread
		Her drying combinations touched by the sun’s last rays
		On the divan are piled (at night her bed)
		Stockings slippers camisoles and stays.
		I Tiresias old man with wrinkled dugs
		Perceived the scene and foretold the rest--
		I too awaited the expected guest.                                       
		He the young man carbuncular arrives
		A small house agent’s clerk with one bold stare
		One of the low on whom assurance sits
		As a silk hat on a Bradford millionaire.
		The time is now propitious as he guesses
		The meal is ended she is bored and tired
		Endeavours to engage her in caresses
		Which still are unreproved if undesired.
		Flushed and decided he assaults at once;
		Exploring hands encounter no defence;                                   
		His vanity requires no response
		And makes a welcome of indifference.
		(And I Tiresias have foresuffered all
		Enacted on this same divan or bed;
		I who have sat by Thebes below the wall
		And walked among the lowest of the dead.)
		Bestows one final patronising kiss
		And gropes his way finding the stairs unlit . . .
		
		She turns and looks a moment in the glass
		Hardly aware of her departed lover;                                     
		Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass:
		“Well now that’s done: and I’m glad it’s over.”
		When lovely woman stoops to folly and
		Paces about her room again alone
		She smooths her hair with automatic hand
		And puts a record on the gramophone.
		
		“This music crept by me upon the waters”
		And along the Strand up Queen Victoria Street.
		O City city I can sometimes hear
		Beside a public bar in Lower Thames Street                             
		The pleasant whining of a mandoline
		And a clatter and a chatter from within
		Where fishmen lounge at noon: where the walls
		Of Magnus Martyr hold
		Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold.
		
		    The river sweats
		    Oil and tar
		    The barges drift
		    With the turning tide
		    Red sails                                                          
		    Wide
		    To leeward swing on the heavy spar.
		    The barges wash
		    Drifting logs
		    Down Greenwich reach
		    Past the Isle of Dogs.
		         Weialala leia
		         Wallala leialala
		    Elizabeth and Leicester
		    Beating oars                                                       
		    The stern was formed
		    A gilded shell
		    Red and gold
		    The brisk swell
		    Rippled both shores
		    Southwest wind
		    Carried down stream
		    The peal of bells
		    White towers
		         Weialala leia                                                 
		         Wallala leialala
		
		“Trams and dusty trees.
		Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew
		Undid me. By Richmond I raised my knees
		Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe.”
		
		“My feet are at Moorgate and my heart
		Under my feet. After the event
		He wept. He promised ‘a new start’.
		I made no comment. What should I resent?”
		“On Margate Sands.                                                      
		I can connect
		Nothing with nothing.
		The broken fingernails of dirty hands.
		My people humble people who expect
		Nothing.”
		    la la
		
		To Carthage then I came
		
		Burning burning burning burning
		O Lord Thou pluckest me out
		O Lord Thou pluckest                                                    
		
		burning    


	25. THE HIPPOPOTAMUS

		 _Similiter et omnes revereantur Diaconos ut
		 mandatum Jesu Christi; et Episcopum ut Jesum
		 Christum existentem filium Patris; Presbyteros
		 autem ut concilium Dei et conjunctionem
		 Apostolorum. Sine his Ecclesia non vocatur; de
		 quibus suadeo vos sic habeo.
		
		 S. IGNATII AD TRALLIANOS.
		
		 And when this epistle is read among you cause
		 that it be read also in the church of the
		 Laodiceans._
		
		
		The broad-backed hippopotamus
		Rests on his belly in the mud;
		Although he seems so firm to us
		He is merely flesh and blood.
		
		Flesh-and-blood is weak and frail
		Susceptible to nervous shock;
		While the True Church can never fail
		For it is based upon a rock.
		
		The hippo’s feeble steps may err
		In compassing material ends
		While the True Church need never stir
		To gather in its dividends.
		
		The ’potamus can never reach
		The mango on the mango-tree;
		But fruits of pomegranate and peach
		Refresh the Church from over sea.
		
		At mating time the hippo’s voice
		Betrays inflexions hoarse and odd
		But every week we hear rejoice
		The Church at being one with God.
		
		The hippopotamus’s day
		Is passed in sleep; at night he hunts;
		God works in a mysterious way-
		The Church can sleep and feed at once.
		
		I saw the ’potamus take wing
		Ascending from the damp savannas
		And quiring angels round him sing
		The praise of God in loud hosannas.
		
		Blood of the Lamb shall wash him clean
		And him shall heavenly arms enfold
		Among the saints he shall be seen
		Performing on a harp of gold.
		
		He shall be washed as white as snow
		By all the martyr’d virgins kiss
		While the True Church remains below
		Wrapt in the old miasmal mist.


	26. THE HOLLOW MEN

			I.
		
			_Mistah Kurtz-he dead
		           A penny for the Old Guy_
		
		               
		
		   We are the hollow men
		   We are the stuffed men
		   Leaning together
		   Headpiece filled with straw. Alas!
		   Our dried voices when
		   We whisper together
		   Are quiet and meaningless
		   As wind in dry grass
		   Or rats’ feet over broken glass
		   In our dry cellar
		   
		   Shape without form shade without colour
		   Paralysed force gesture without motion;
		   
		   Those who have crossed
		   With direct eyes to death’s other Kingdom
		   Remember us-if at all-not as lost
		   Violent souls but only
		   As the hollow men
		   The stuffed men.
		
			
			II.
		
		   Eyes I dare not meet in dreams
		   In death’s dream kingdom
		   These do not appear:
		   There the eyes are
		   Sunlight on a broken column
		   There is a tree swinging
		   And voices are
		   In the wind’s singing
		   More distant and more solemn
		   Than a fading star.
		   
		   Let me be no nearer
		   In death’s dream kingdom
		   Let me also wear
		   Such deliberate disguises
		   Rat’s coat crowskin crossed staves
		   In a field
		   Behaving as the wind behaves
		   No nearer-
		   
		   Not that final meeting
		   In the twilight kingdom
		
		
			III.
		
		   This is the dead land
		   This is cactus land
		   Here the stone images
		   Are raised here they receive
		   The supplication of a dead man’s hand
		   Under the twinkle of a fading star.
		   
		   Is it like this
		   In death’s other kingdom
		   Waking alone
		   At the hour when we are
		   Trembling with tenderness
		   Lips that would kiss
		   Form prayers to broken stone.
		
		
			IV.
		
		   The eyes are not here
		   There are no eyes here
		   In this valley of dying stars
		   In this hollow valley
		   This broken jaw of our lost kingdoms
		   
		   In this last of meeting places
		   We grope together
		   And avoid speech
		   Gathered on this beach of the tumid river
		   
		   Sightless unless
		   The eyes reappear
		   As the perpetual star
		   Multifoliate rose
		   Of death’s twilight kingdom
		   The hope only
		   Of empty men.
		
		   
			V.
		
		   Here we go round the prickly pear
		   Prickly pear prickly pear
		   Here we go round the prickly pear
		   At five o’clock in the morning.
		   
		   Between the idea
		   And the reality
		   Between the motion
		   And the act
		   Falls the Shadow
		                                   For Thine is the Kingdom
		   
		   Between the conception
		   And the creation
		   Between the emotion
		   And the response
		   Falls the Shadow
		                                   Life is very long
		   
		   Between the desire
		   And the spasm
		   Between the potency
		   And the existence
		   Between the essence
		   And the descent
		   Falls the Shadow
		                                   For Thine is the Kingdom
		   
		   For Thine is
		   Life is
		   For Thine is the
		   
		   This is the way the world ends
		   This is the way the world ends
		   This is the way the world ends
		   Not with a bang but a whimper.


	27. THE JOURNEY OF THE MAGI

		A cold coming we had of it,
		Just the worst time of the year
		For a journey, and such a long journey:
		The ways deep and the weather sharp,
		The very dead of winter.
		And the camels galled, sorefooted, refractory,
		Lying down in the melting snow.
		There were times we regretted
		The summer palaces on slopes, the terraces,
		And the silken girls bringing sherbet.
		Then the camel men cursing and grumbling
		and running away, and wanting their liquor and women,
		And the night-fires going out, and the lack of shelters,
		And the cities hostile and the towns unfriendly
		And the villages dirty and charging high prices:
		A hard time we had of it.
		At the end we preferred to travel all night,
		Sleeping in snatches,
		With the voices singing in our ears, saying
		That this was all folly.
		
		Then at dawn we came down to a temperate valley,
		Wet, below the snow line, smelling of vegetation;
		With a running stream and a water-mill beating the darkness,
		And three trees on the low sky,
		And an old white horse galloped away in the meadow.
		Then we came to a tavern with vine-leaves over the lintel,
		Six hands at an open door dicing for pieces of silver,
		And feet kicking the empty wine-skins.
		But there was no information, and so we continued
		And arriving at evening, not a moment too soon
		Finding the place; it was (you might say) satisfactory.
		
		All this was a long time ago, I remember,
		And I would do it again, but set down
		This set down
		This: were we led all that way for
		Birth or Death? There was a Birth, certainly
		We had evidence and no doubt. I had seen birth and death,
		But had thought they were different; this Birth was
		Hard and bitter agony for us, like Death, our death.
		We returned to our places, these Kingdoms,
		But no longer at ease here, in the old dispensation,
		With an alien people clutching their gods.
		I should be glad of another death.


	28. THE LOVE SONG OF J. ALFRED PRUFROCK

		  _S’io credesse che mia risposta fosse
		  A persona che mai tornasse al mondo
		  Questa fiamma staria senza piu scosse.
		  Ma perciocche giammai di questo fondo
		  Non torno vivo alcun s’i’odo il vero
		  Senza tema d’infamia ti rispondo._
		
		
		Let us go then you and I
		When the evening is spread out against the sky
		Like a patient etherized upon a table;
		Let us go through certain half-deserted streets
		The muttering retreats
		Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
		And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
		Streets that follow like a tedious argument
		Of insidious intent
		To lead you to an overwhelming question . . .
		Oh do not ask “What is it?”
		Let us go and make our visit.
		
		In the room the women come and go
		Talking of Michelangelo.
		
		The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes
		The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes
		Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening
		Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains
		Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys
		Slipped by the terrace made a sudden leap
		And seeing that it was a soft October night
		Curled once about the house and fell asleep.
		
		And indeed there will be time
		For the yellow smoke that slides along the street
		Rubbing its back upon the window panes;
		There will be time there will be time
		To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet
		There will be time to murder and create
		And time for all the works and days of hands
		That lift and drop a question on your plate;
		Time for you and time for me
		And time yet for a hundred indecisions
		And for a hundred visions and revisions
		Before the taking of a toast and tea.
		
		In the room the women come and go
		Talking of Michelangelo.
		
		And indeed there will be time
		To wonder “Do I dare?“ and “Do I dare?”
		Time to turn back and descend the stair
		With a bald spot in the middle of my hair--
		(They will say: “How his hair is growing thin!“)
		My morning coat my collar mounting firmly to the chin
		My necktie rich and modest but asserted by a simple pin--
		(They will say: “But how his arms and legs are thin!“)
		Do I dare
		Disturb the universe?
		In a minute there is time
		For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.
		
		For I have known them all already known them all:
		Have known the evenings mornings afternoons
		I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
		I know the voices dying with a dying fall
		Beneath the music from a farther room.
		  So how should I presume?
		
		And I have known the eyes already known them all--
		The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase
		And when I am formulated sprawling on a pin
		When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall
		Then how should I begin
		To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
		  And how should I presume?
		
		And I have known the arms already known them all--
		Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
		(But in the lamplight downed with light brown hair!)
		Is it perfume from a dress
		That makes me so digress?
		Arms that lie along a table or wrap about a shawl.
		  And should I then presume?
		  And how should I begin?
		
		.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
		
		Shall I say I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
		And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
		Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves leaning out of windows?
		
		I should have been a pair of ragged claws
		Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.
		
		.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
		
		And the afternoon the evening sleeps so peacefully!
		Smoothed by long fingers
		Asleep... tired... or it malingers.
		Stretched on the floor here beside you and me.
		Should I after tea and cakes and ices
		Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
		But though I have wept and fasted wept and prayed
		Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter
		I am no prophet--and here’s no great matter;
		I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker
		And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat and snicker
		And in short I was afraid.
		
		And would it have been worth it after all
		After the cups the marmalade the tea
		Among the porcelain among some talk of you and me
		Would it have been worth while
		To have bitten off the matter with a smile
		To have squeezed the universe into a ball
		To roll it toward some overwhelming question
		To say: “I am Lazarus come from the dead
		Come back to tell you all I shall tell you all“--
		If one settling a pillow by her head
		  Should say: “That is not what I meant at all;
		  That is not it at all.”
		
		And would it have been worth it after all
		Would it have been worth while
		After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets
		After the novels after the teacups after the skirts that trail along the
		    floor--
		And this and so much more?--
		It is impossible to say just what I mean!
		But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
		Would it have been worth while
		If one settling a  pillow or throwing off a shawl
		And turning toward the window should say:
		  “That is not it at all
		  That is not what I meant at all.”
		
		.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
		
		No! I am not Prince Hamlet nor was meant to be;
		Am an attendant lord one that will do
		To swell a progress start a scene or two
		Advise the prince; no doubt an easy tool
		Deferential glad to be of use
		Politic cautious and meticulous;
		Full of high sentence but a bit obtuse;
		At times indeed almost ridiculous--
		Almost at times the Fool.
		
		I grow old . . . I grow old . . .
		I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.
		
		Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?
		I shall wear white flannel trousers and walk upon the beach.
		I have heard the mermaids singing each to each.
		
		I do not think that they will sing to me.
		
		I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
		Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
		When the wind blows the water white and black.
		
		We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
		By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
		Till human voices wake us and we drown.


	29. WHAT THE THUNDER SAID

		After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
		After the frosty silence in the gardens
		After the agony in stony places
		The shouting and the crying
		Prison and palace and reverberation
		Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
		He who was living is now dead
		We who were living are now dying
		With a little patience                                                  
		
		Here is no water but only rock
		Rock and no water and the sandy road
		The road winding above among the mountains
		Which are mountains of rock without water
		If there were water we should stop and drink
		Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think
		Sweat is dry and feet are in the sand
		If there were only water amongst the rock
		Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit
		Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit                              
		There is not even silence in the mountains
		But dry sterile thunder without rain
		There is not even solitude in the mountains
		But red sullen faces sneer and snarl
		From doors of mudcracked houses
		                                                        If there were water
		And no rock
		If there were rock
		And also water
		And water                                                               
		A spring
		A pool among the rock
		If there were the sound of water only
		Not the cicada
		And dry grass singing
		But sound of water over a rock
		Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees
		Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
		But there is no water
		
		Who is the third who walks always beside you?
		When I count there are only you and I together                         
		But when I look ahead up the white road
		There is always another one walking beside you
		Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle hooded
		I do not know whether a man or a woman
		--But who is that on the other side of you?
		
		What is that sound high in the air
		Murmur of maternal lamentation
		Who are those hooded hordes swarming
		Over endless plains stumbling in cracked earth
		Ringed by the flat horizon only                                         
		What is the city over the mountains
		Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air
		Falling towers
		Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
		Vienna London
		Unreal
		
		A woman drew her long black hair out tight
		And fiddled whisper music on those strings
		And bats with baby faces in the violet light
		Whistled and beat their wings                                          
		And crawled head downward down a blackened wall
		And upside down in air were towers
		Tolling reminiscent bells that kept the hours
		And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells.
		
		In this decayed hole among the mountains
		In the faint moonlight the grass is singing
		Over the tumbled graves about the chapel
		There is the empty chapel only the wind’s home.
		It has no windows and the door swings
		Dry bones can harm no one.                                              
		Only a cock stood on the rooftree
		Co co rico co co rico
		In a flash of lightning. Then a damp gust
		Bringing rain
		
		Ganga was sunken and the limp leaves
		Waited for rain while the black clouds
		Gathered far distant over Himavant.
		The jungle crouched humped in silence.
		Then spoke the thunder
		DA                                                                      
		_Datta:_ what have we given?
		My friend blood shaking my heart
		The awful daring of a moment’s surrender
		Which an age of prudence can never retract
		By this and this only we have existed
		Which is not to be found in our obituaries
		Or in memories draped by the beneficent spider
		Or under seals broken by the lean solicitor
		In our empty rooms
		DA                                                                      
		_Dayadhvam:_ I have heard the key
		Turn in the door once and turn once only
		We think of the key each in his prison
		Thinking of the key each confirms a prison
		Only at nightfall aetherial rumours
		Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus
		DA
		_Damyata:_ The boat responded
		Gaily to the hand expert with sail and oar
		The sea was calm your heart would have responded                       
		Gaily when invited beating obedient
		To controlling hands
		
		                                    I sat upon the shore
		Fishing with the arid plain behind me
		Shall I at least set my lands in order?
		London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
		_Poi s’ascose nel foco che gli affina
		Quando fiam ceu chelidon_ -- O swallow swallow
		_Le Prince d’Aquitaine à la tour abolie_
		These fragments I have shored against my ruins                          
		Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo’s mad againe.
		Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.
		                          Shantih    shantih    shantih


	30. WHISPERS OF IMMORTALITY

		Webster was much possessed by death
		And saw the skull beneath the skin;
		And breastless creatures under ground
		Leaned backward with a lipless grin.
		
		Daffodil bulbs instead of balls
		Stared from the sockets of the eyes!
		He knew that thought clings round dead limbs
		Tightening its lusts and luxuries.
		
		Donne I suppose was such another
		Who found no substitute for sense;
		To seize and clutch and penetrate
		Expert beyond experience
		
		He knew the anguish of the marrow
		The ague of the skeleton;
		No contact possible to flesh
		Allayed the fever of the bone.
		
		
		Grishkin is nice: her Russian eye
		Is underlined for emphasis;
		Uncorseted her friendly bust
		Gives promise of pneumatic bliss.
		
		The couched Brazilian jaguar
		Compels the scampering marmoset
		With subtle effluence of cat;
		Grishkin has a maisonette;
		
		The sleek Brazilian jaguar
		Does not in its arboreal gloom
		Distil so rank a feline smell
		As Grishkin in a drawing-room.
		
		And even the Abstract Entities
		Circumambulate her charm;
		But our lot crawls between dry ribs
		To keep our metaphysics warm.


*** Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803 - 1882)

	1. EXPERIENCE

		The lords of life, the lords of life,--
		I saw them pass, 
		In their own guise, 
		Like and unlike, 
		Portly and grim,--
		Use and Surprise, 
		Surface and Dream, 
		Succession swift and spectral Wrong, 
		Temperament without a tongue, 
		And the inventor of the game 
		Omnipresent without name;--
		Some to see, some to be guessed, 
		They marched from east to west: 
		Little man, least of all, 
		Among the legs of his guardians tall, 
		Walked about with puzzled look. 
		Him by the hand dear Nature took, 
		Dearest Nature, strong and kind, 
		Whispered, ‘Darling, never mind! 
		To-morrow they will wear another face, 
		The founder thou; these are thy race!’ 


	2. GIVE ALL TO LOVE

		Give all to love; 
		Obey thy heart; 
		Friends, kindred, days, 
		Estate, good-fame, 
		Plans, credit and the Muse,-- 
		Nothing refuse. 
		
		’T is a brave master; 
		Let it have scope: 
		Follow it utterly, 
		Hope beyond hope: 
		High and more high 
		It dives into noon, 
		With wing unspent, 
		Untold intent: 
		But it is a god, 
		Knows its own path 
		And the outlets of the sky. 
		
		It was never for the mean; 
		It requireth courage stout. 
		Souls above doubt, 
		Valor unbending, 
		It will reward,-- 
		They shall return 
		More than they were, 
		And ever ascending. 
		
		Leave all for love; 
		Yet, hear me, yet, 
		One word more thy heart behoved, 
		One pulse more of firm endeavor,-- 
		Keep thee to-day, 
		To-morrow, forever, 
		Free as an Arab 
		Of thy beloved. 
		
		Cling with life to the maid; 
		But when the surprise, 
		First vague shadow of surmise 
		Flits across her bosom young, 
		Of a joy apart from thee, 
		Free be she, fancy-free; 
		Nor thou detain her vesture’s hem, 
		Nor the palest rose she flung 
		From her summer diadem. 
		
		Though thou loved her as thyself, 
		As a self of purer clay, 
		Though her parting dims the day, 
		Stealing grace from all alive; 
		Heartily know, 
		When half-gods go,   
		The gods arrive.


	3. GOOD-BYE

		Good-bye, proud world! I’m going home: 
		Thou art not my friend, and I’m not thine. 
		Long through thy weary crowds I roam; 
		A river-ark on the ocean brine, 
		Long I’ve been tossed like the driven foam; 
		But now, proud world! I’m going home. 
		
		Good-bye to Flattery’s fawning face; 
		To Grandeur with his wise grimace; 
		To upstart Wealth’s averted eye; 
		To supple Office, low and high; 
		To crowded halls, to court and street; 
		To frozen hearts and hasting feet; 
		To those who go, and those who come; 
		Good-bye, proud world! I’m going home. 
		
		I am going to my own hearth-stone, 
		Bosomed in yon green hills alone,--
		A secret nook in a pleasant land, 
		Whose groves the frolic fairies planned; 
		Where arches green, the livelong day, 
		Echo the blackbird’s roundelay, 
		And vulgar feet have never trod 
		A spot that is sacred to thought and God. 
		
		O, when I am safe in my sylvan home, 
		I tread on the pride of Greece and Rome; 
		And when I am stretched beneath the pines, 
		Where the evening star so holy shines, 
		I laugh at the lore and the pride of man, 
		At the sophist schools, and the learned clan; 
		For what are they all, in their high conceit, 
		When man in the bush with God may meet? 


	4. ODE TO BEAUTY

		Who gave thee, O Beauty, 
		The keys of this breast,--
		Too credulous lover 
		Of blest and unblest? 
		Say, when in lapsed ages 
		Thee knew I of old; 
		Or what was the service 
		For which I was sold? 
		When first my eyes saw thee, 
		I found me thy thrall, 
		By magical drawings, 
		Sweet tyrant of all! 
		I drank at thy fountain 
		False waters of thirst; 
		Thou intimate stranger, 
		Thou latest and first! 
		Thy dangerous glances 
		Make women of men; 
		New-born, we are melting 
		Into nature again. 
		
		Lavish, lavish promiser, 
		Nigh persuading gods to err! 
		Guest of million painted forms, 
		Which in turn thy glory warms! 
		The frailest leaf, the mossy bark, 
		The acorn’s cup, the raindrop’s arc, 
		The swinging spider’s silver line, 
		The ruby of the drop of wine, 
		The shining pebble of the pond, 
		Thou inscribest with a bond 
		In thy momentary play, 
		Would bankrupt nature to repay. 
		
		Ah, what avails it 
		To hide or to shun 
		Whom the Infinite One 
		Hath granted his throne? 
		The heaven high over 
		Is the deep’s lover; 
		The sun and sea, 
		Informed by thee, 
		Before me run 
		And draw me on, 
		Yet fly me still, 
		As Fate refuses 
		To me the heart Fate for me chooses. 
		Is it that my opulent soul 
		Was mingled from the generous whole; 
		Sea-valleys and the deep of skies 
		Furnished several supplies; 
		And the sands whereof I’m made 
		Draw me to them, self-betrayed? 
		I turn the proud portfolio 
		Which holds the grand designs 
		Of Salvator, of Guercino, 
		And Piranesi’s lines. 
		I hear the lofty paeans 
		Of the masters of the shell, 
		Who heard the starry music 
		And recount the numbers well; 
		Olympian bards who sung 
		Divine Ideas below, 
		Which always find us young 
		And always keep us so. 
		Oft in streets or humblest places, 
		I detect far-wandered graces, 
		Which, from Eden wide astray, 
		In lowly homes have lost their way. 
		
		Thee gliding through the sea of form, 
		Like the lightning through the storm, 
		Somewhat not to be possessed, 
		Somewhat not to be caressed, 
		No feet so fleet could ever find, 
		No perfect form could ever bind. 
		Thou eternal fugitive, 
		Hovering over all that live, 
		Quick and skilful to inspire 
		Sweet, extravagant desire, 
		Starry space and lily-bell 
		Filling with thy roseate smell, 
		Wilt not give the lips to taste 
		Of the nectar which thou hast. 
		
		All that’s good and great with thee 
		Works in close conspiracy; 
		Thou hast bribed the dark and lonely 
		To report thy features only, 
		And the cold and purple morning 
		Itself with thoughts of thee adorning; 
		The leafy dell, the city mart, 
		Equal trophies of thine art; 
		E’en the flowing azure air 
		Thou hast touched for my despair; 
		And, if I languish into dreams, 
		Again I meet the ardent beams. 
		
		Queen of things! I dare not die 
		In Being’s deeps past ear and eye; 
		Lest there I find the same deceiver. 
		And be the sport of Fate forever. 
		Dread Power, but dear! if God thou be, 
		Unmake me quite, or give thyself to me! 


	5. THE SNOW-STORM

		Announced by all the trumpets of the sky, 
		Arrives the snow, and, driving o’er the fields, 
		Seems nowhere to alight: the whited air 
		Hides hills and woods, the river, and the heaven, 
		And veils the farm-house at the garden’s end. 
		The sled and traveller stopped, the courier’s feet 
		Delayed, all friends shut out, the housemates sit 
		Around the radiant fireplace, enclosed 
		In a tumultuous privacy of storm. 
		
		Come see the north wind’s masonry. 
		Out of an unseen quarry evermore 
		Furnished with tile, the fierce artificer 
		Curves his white bastions with projected roof 
		Round every windward stake, or tree, or door. 
		Speeding, the myriad-handed, his wild work 
		So fanciful, so savage, nought cares he 
		For number or proportion. Mockingly, 
		On coop or kennel he hangs Parian wreaths; 
		A swan-like form invests the hidden thorn; 
		Fills up the farmer’s lane from wall to wall, 
		Maugre the farmer’s sighs; and, at the gate, 
		A tapering turret overtops the work. 
		And when his hours are numbered, and the world 
		Is all his own, retiring, as he were not, 
		Leaves, when the sun appears, astonished Art 
		To mimic in slow structures, stone by stone, 
		Built in an age, the mad wind’s night-work, 
		The frolic architecture of the snow. 


*** Ephrem the Syrian (306 - 373)

	1. HYMN TO THE LIGHT

		The Light of the just and joy of the upright is Christ Jesus our Lord.
		Begotten of the Father, He manifested himself to us.
		He came to rescue us from darkness and to fill us with the radiance of His light.
		Day is dawning upon us; the power of darkness is fading away.
		
		From the true Light there arises for us the light which illumines our darkened eyes.
		His glory shines upon the world and enlightens the very depths of the abyss.
		Death is annihilated, night has vanished, and the gates of Sheol are broken.
		Creatures lying in darkness from ancient times are clothed in light.
		The dead arise from the dust and sing because they have a Savior.
		He brings salvation and grants us life. He ascends to his Father on high.
		He will return in glorious splendor and shed His light on those gazing upon Him.
		
		Our King comes in majestic glory.
		
		Let us light our lamps and go forth to meet Him.
		Let us find our joy in Him, for He has found joy in us.
		He will indeed rejoice us with His marvelous light.
		
		Let us glorify the majesty of the Son and give thanks to the almighty Father
		Who, in an outpouring of love, sent Him to us, to fill us with hope and salvation.
		When He manifests Himself, the saints awaiting Him in weariness and sorrow,
		will go forth to meet Him with lighted lamps.
		
		The angels and guardians of heaven will rejoice
		in the glory of the just and upright people of earth;
		Together crowned with victory,
		they will sing hymns and psalms.
		
		Stand up then and be ready!
		Give thanks to our King and Savior,
		Who will come in great glory to gladden us
		with His marvelous light in His kingdom.


*** William Everson (1912 - 1994)

	1. DUST AND THE GLORY

		On a low Lorrainian knoll a leaning peasant sinking a pit
		Meets rotted rock and a slab.
		The slab cracks and is split, the old grave opened,
		His spade strikes iron and keenly rings.
		Out of the earth he picks an ancient sword,
		Hiltless with rust and the blade a long double curve,
		Steel of no Roman nor Teuton king,
		But metal struck in the sleeping East and lost in the raids.
		He turns it awhile in the thick hands,
		His thumb searching the eaten edge, and throws it aside.
		The brown strip winks in the light and is sunk;
		Winks once in a thousand years, in the sun and the singing air,
		And is lost again in the ground.
		Attila, you rode your hordes from the Asian slopes and swept to the west;
		In the screaming dawns you struck the rich earth and left it smoking;
		Struck and butchered and lived like the crimson arc of a cutting knife,
		Roaring down Rome and the north-born Goths.
		Through the reeling years you ran like a wolf,
		Side-slashing blindly from border to border the length of that bleeding land
		Till your own lust killed you, and the dark swarm broke.
		In the nights the moon crawls to the west and is hidden;
		The dawns bloom in the east; The fogs gather.
		Attila, in your frenzy of life you burned, but for nothing;
		You roared for an instant, shook the world’s width, broke the fierce tribes.
		You are outdone: the earth that you raped has been ravaged more foully;
		The cities you sacked have been burnt and rebuilt a hundred times.
		From your day to this the valleys you plundered
		Have known killing and looting, the sharp violence,
		The running thunder shaking the night,
		A gasping moment of peace and then at it again!
		Yet you struck deep: in the fields the earth gives up a curious sword;
		The bright-haired folk of a German farm
		Regard with doubt a baby born with oval eyes;
		In a gusty hut an old man hugs the hearth
		And tells an ancient story.


	2. KINGFISHER FLAT

		In the long drought 
		Impotence clutched on the veins of passion 
		Encircles our bed, a serpent of stone. 
		
		I think of the Fisher King, 
		All his domain parched in a sterile fixation of purpose, 
		Clenched on the core of the burning question 
		Gone unasked. 
		
		Oh, wife and companion! 
		The ancient taboo hangs over us, 
		A long suspension tightens its grip 
		On the seed of my passion and the flower of your hope. 
		Masks of drought deceive us. An inexorable forbearance 
		Falsifies the face of things, and makes inflexible 
		The flow of this life, the movement of this love. 
		
		I hear quaking grass 
		Shiver under the windowsill, and out along the road 
		The ripe mallow and the wild oat 
		Rustle in the wind. Deeper than the strict 
		Interdiction of denial or the serpentine coiling of time, 
		Woman and earth lie sunk in sleep, unsatisfied. 
		Each holds that bruise to her heart like a stone 
		And aches for rain.


	3. SEED

		Some seed in me, 
		Some troublous birth, 
		Like an awkward awakening, 
		stirs into life. 
		
		Terrible and instinctive 
		It touches my guts. 
		I fear and resist it, 
		Crouch down on my norms, a man’s 
		Patent assurances. 
		
		I don’t know its nature. 
		I have no term for it. 
		I cannot see its shape. 
		But, there, inscrutable, 
		Just underground, 
		Is the long-avoided tatency. 
		
		Like the mushrooms in the oak wood, 
		Where the high-sloped mountain 
		Benches the sea, 
		When the faint rains of November 
		Damp down the duff, 
		Wakening their spores--
		Like them, 
		Gross, thick and compelling, 
		What I fear and desire 
		Pokes up its head.


	4. THE POET IS DEAD

		Snow on the headland, 
		The strangely beautiful 
		Oblique concurrence, 
		The strangely beautiful 
		Setting of death. 
		
		The great tongue 
		Dries in the mouth. I told you. 
		The voiceless throat 
		Cools silence. And the sea-granite eyes. 
		Washed the sibilant waters 
		That stretched lips kiss peace. 
		
		The poet is dead. 
		
		Nor will ever again hear the sea lions 
		Grunt in the kelp at Point Lobos. 
		Nor look to the south when the grunion 
		Run the Pacific, and the plunging 
		Shearwaters, insatiable, 
		Stun themselves in the sea.


	5. WE IN THE FIELDS

		Dawn and a high film, the sun burned it,
		But noon had a thick sheet, and the clouds coming,
		The low rain-bringers, trooping in from the north,
		From the far cold fog-breeding seas, the womb of the storms.
		Dusk brought a wind and the sky opened;
		All down the west the broken strips lay snared in the light,
		Bellied and humped and heaped on the hills.
		The set sun threw the blaze up,
		The sky lived redly, banner on banner of far-burning flame,
		From south to the north, the furnace-door wide and the smoke rolling.
		We in the fields, the watchers from the burnt slope,
		Facing the west, facing the bright sky,
		Hopelessly longing to know the red beauty.
		But the unable eyes, the too-small intelligence,
		The insufficient organs of reception not a thousandth part enough to take and retain.
		We stared, and no speaking, and felt the deep loneness of incomprehension.--
		The flesh must turn cloud, the spirit, air,
		The transformation to sky and the burning,
		Absolute oneness with the west and the down sun.
		But we, being earth-stuck, watched from the fields
		Till the rising rim shut out the light,
		Till the sky changed, the long wounds healed,
		Till the rain fell.


*** Frederick William Faber (1814 - 1863)

	1. FIRST LOVE

		I have been long without a home, 
		And yearned too much for one; 
		And scanty are the deeds of faith 
		My lonely heart hath done: 
		For many a night my weary bed 
		Hath felt the weak tears run. 
		Cold armour of ambitious dreams 
		I bade my soul to wear, 
		And to false friendship’s wildfire sweet 
		Have laid my spirit bare; 
		And some few times pure heavenly thoughts 
		Awhile have lighted there. 
		
		But still my sickness grew, and still 
		The fever gained worse power; 
		And every star that gentlest shone 
		Above my dreary tower 
		Hath waned long since, or waneth now, 
		More palely every hour. 
		But I have felt thy light low voice, 
		Thy soft eye’s languid beam, 
		And light and colour have come back 
		Unto my purest dream, 
		And to my heart the old fresh blood 
		Hath mounted in a stream. 
		Health, power, deep gladness have come back 
		With shouts and songs of bliss; 
		Of all my loves in this bright crowd 
		There is not one I miss-- 
		Oh! never mortal soul hath had 
		A wakening like this! 
		
		No tossing now on feverish thoughts, 
		No sick heart’s burning swell, 
		No waiting day by day to bid 
		Each new false hope farewell, 
		Free, without chains, my spirit starts 
		And breaks the long dull spell. 
		It is not passion’s lurid light, 
		Nor friendship’s meteor way, 
		False gleams that through pale summer nights 
		From far-off tempests play, 
		But one rich golden orb that shines 
		Steady and large all day 
		A full, warm, fostering light wherein 
		The heart’s best foliage springs, 
		A flame to whose sweet sternness faith 
		Each brittle purpose brings, 
		An altar-fire where hope is fed, 
		And prayer and praise find wings. 
		
		Thou art too young for me to tell 
		My hidden love to thee; 
		And, till fit season, it must burn 
		In darkest privacy, 
		For years must pass and fortunes change 
		Till such fit season be. 
		Young as thou art, hadst thou but seen 
		This withered heart before, 
		And poured thy love, as o’er some plant 
		Thou dost fresh water pour, 
		And watched the fragrance and the hue 
		Grow into it once more-- 
		Thou wouldst, mayhap, have felt within 
		Thy first and sweetest strife, 
		And marvelled much at the new taste 
		And power it gave to life; 
		And so less like a dream had been 
		My first dream of a Wife.


	2. JESUS, GENTLEST SAVIOR

		Jesus, gentlest Savior, 
		God of might and power, 
		thou thyself art dwelling 
		in us at this hour. 
		
		Nature cannot hold thee, 
		heaven is all too strait 
		for thine endless glory 
		and thy royal state. 
		
		Out beyond the shining 
		of the furthest star 
		thou art ever stretching 
		infinitely far. 
		
		Yet the hearts of children 
		hold what worlds cannot, 
		and the God of wonders 
		loves the lowly spot. 
		
		Jesus, gentlest Savior, 
		dwelling in us now, 
		fill us full of goodness 
		till our hearts o’erflow. 
		
		Multiply our graces, 
		chiefly love and fear, 
		and, dear Lord, the chiefest, 
		grace to persevere.


	3. THE ROGATION DAYS

		_“Despise not thy mother when she is old.”_
		   --Prov. xxiii. 
		
		Heavy and sad the Church must go: 
		Full weary are her latter days, 
		And she must hush the voice of praise 
		While tears of penance flow. 
		And she must fast, though by her side 
		The Bridegroom yet on earth doth move; 
		And fear must be instead of love 
		For her own children’s pride. 
		
		Yet, holy Mother! Lent is past: 
		And long ago the Easter sun 
		Into the middle sky hath run;-- 
		Wherefore this second fast? 
		Mother! with us the Lord doth bide; 
		Yet but a little while He stays,-- 
		Then for three dim and lonely days 
		Why keep us from His side? 
		He said we should not fast when He 
		Came down to live with us below: 
		Then, holy Mother! why forego 
		Our ancient liberty? 
		When thou wert in thy virgin prime, 
		Those forty days through all the earth 
		Thy heart did swell with festal mirth-- 
		It was thy bridal time. 
		
		“Talk not, my son, of early days: 
		My precious stones were passing fair, 
		My life was Sacrament and prayer, 
		My unity was praise. 
		“These glories now are well-nigh past: 
		My son! the world is waxing strong; 
		The day is hot; the fight is long, 
		And therefore do I fast. 
		“And ye are weak, and cannot bear 
		Full forty days of Easter mirth: 
		And nought is left unstained of earth, 
		But penance, fast, and prayer. 
		“Oh! weary is my stay below; 
		And thus with strong and earnest cry, 
		As each Ascension-day glides by, 
		I fain with Him would go. 
		
		“Then watch and fast, like saints of yore; 
		These three new days perchance may bring 
		The earlier advent of our King, 
		And we shall fast no more!


	4. THE WILL OF GOD

		I worship thee, sweet will of God! 
		And all thy ways adore; 
		And every day I live, I seem 
		To love thee more and more. 
		
		Thou wert the end, the blessed rule 
		Of our Saviour’s toils and tears; 
		Thou wert the passion of his heart 
		Those three and thirty years. 
		
		And he hath breathed into my soul 
		A special love of thee, 
		A love to lose my will in his, 
		And by that loss be free. 
		
		I love to see thee bring to naught 
		The plans of wily men; 
		When simple hearts outwit the wise, 
		Oh, thou art loveliest then. 
		
		The headstrong world it presses hard 
		Upon the church full oft, 
		And then how easily thou turn’st 
		The hard ways into soft. 
		
		I love to kiss each print where thou 
		Hast set thine unseen feet; 
		I cannot fear thee, blessed will! 
		Thine empire is so sweet. 
		
		When obstacles and trials seem 
		Like prison walls to be, 
		I do the little I can do, 
		And leave the rest to thee. 
		
		I know not what it is to doubt, 
		My heart is ever gay; 
		I run no risk, for, come what will, 
		Thou always hast thy way. 
		
		I have no cares, O blessed will! 
		For all my cares are thine: 
		I live in triumph, Lord! for thou 
		Hast made thy triumphs mine. 
		
		And when it seems no chance or change 
		From grief can set me free, 
		Hope finds its strength in helplessness, 
		And gayly waits on thee. 
		
		Man’s weakness, waiting upon God, 
		Its end can never miss, 
		For men on earth no work can do 
		More angel-like than this. 
		
		Ride on, ride on, triumphantly, 
		Thou glorious will, ride on! 
		Faith’s pilgrim sons behind thee take 
		The road that thou hast gone. 
		
		He always wins who sides with God, 
		To him no chance is lost; 
		God’s will is sweetest to him, when 
		It triumphs at his cost. 
		
		Ill that he blesses is our good, 
		And unblessed good is ill; 
		And all is right that seems most wrong. 
		If it be his sweet will.


	5. THE WREN

		There is a bay, all still and lone, 
		And in the shade one broad grey stone 
		Where at the evening hour 
		The sun upon the water weaves 
		Motions of light among the leaves 
		Of a low-hanging bower: 
		And one old sycamore that dips 
		Into the stream its dark-green tips, 
		And drinks all day and night: 
		And opposite, the mountain high 
		Doth intercept the deep blue sky 
		And shuts it out from sight. 
		
		Last year it was my haunted seat, 
		And every evening did I meet 
		A grave and solemn Wren: 
		He sate and never spoke a word; 
		A holy and religious bird 
		He seemed unto me then. 
		I thought, perchance, that sin and strife 
		Might in a winged creature’s life 
		Be somehow strangely blent: 
		So hermit-like he lived apart, 
		And might be in his little heart 
		A woodland penitent! 
		Deceitful thing! into the brook, 
		Hour after hour, a stedfast look 
		From off his perch was sent; 
		And yet I thought his eyes too bright, 
		Too happy for an anchorite 
		On lonely penance bent. 
		
		Ah! yes--for long his nest hath been 
		Behind yon alder’s leafy screen 
		By Rothay’s chiming waters: 
		Two rapid years are run, and now 
		This monk hath peopled every bough 
		With little sons and daughters. 
		I will not blame thee, Friar Wren, 
		Because among stout-hearted men 
		Some truant monks there be; 
		And, if you could their names collect, 
		I rather more than half suspect 
		That I should not be free. 
		Erewhile I dreamed of cloistered cells, 
		Of gloomy courts and matin bells, 
		And painted windows rare; 
		But common life’s less real gleams 
		Shone warm on my monastic dreams, 
		And melted them to air. 
		
		My captive heart is altered now; 
		And, had I but one little bough 
		Of thy green alder-tree, 
		I would not live too long alone, 
		Or languish there for want of one 
		To share the nest with me!


*** William Faulkner (1897 - 1962)

	1. A POPLAR

		Why do you shiver there
		Between the white river and the road?
		You are not cold,
		With the sun light dreaming about you;
		And yet you lift your pliant supplicating arms as though
		To draw clouds from the sky to hide your slenderness.
		
		You are a young girl
		Trembling in the throes of ecstatic modesty,
		A white objective girl
		Whose clothing has been forcibly taken away from her.


	2. GRAY THE DAY

		Gray the day, all the year is cold,
		Across the empty land the swallows’ cry
		Marks the southflown spring. Naught is bowled
		Save winter, in the sky.
		
		O sorry earth, when this bleak bitter sleep
		Stirs and turns and time once more is green,
		In empty path and lane and grass will creep
		With none to tread it clean.
		
		April and May and June, and all the dearth
		Of heart to green it for, to hurt and wake;
		What good is budding, gray November earth?
		No need to break your sleep for greening’s sake.
		
		The hushed plaint of wind in stricken trees
		Shivers the grass in path and lane
		And Grief and Time are tideless golden seas--
		Hush, hush! He’s home again.


	3. NIGHT PIECE

		Trumpets of sun to silence fall
		On house and barn and stack and wall.
		Within the cottage, slowly wheeling,
		The lamplight’s gold turns on the ceiling.
		Beneath the stake and windless vane
		Cattle stamp and munch their grain;
		Below the starry apple bough
		Leans the warped and clotted plow.
		The moon rolls up, while far away
		And thin with sorrow, the sheepdog’s bay
		Fills the valley with lonely sound.
		Slow leaves of darkness steal around.
		The watch the watchman, Death will keep
		And man in amnesty may sleep.
		
		The world is still, for she is old
		And many’s the bead of a life she’s told.
		Her gossip there, the watching moon
		View hill and stream and wave and dune
		And many ‘s the fair one she’s seen wither:
		The pass and pass, she cares not whither--
		Lovers’ vows by her made bright,
		The outcast cursing at her light;
		Mazed within her lambence lies
		All the strife of flesh that dies.
		Then through the darkened room with whispers speaking
		There comes to man the sleep that all are seeking.
		
		The lurking thief, in sharp regret
		Watches the far world, waking yet,
		But which in sleep will soon be still;
		While he upon his misty hill
		Hears a dark bird briefly cry
		From its thicket on the sky,
		And curses the moon because her light
		Marks every outcast under night.
		
		Still swings the murderer, bent of knees
		In a slightly strained repose,
		Nor feels the faint hand of the breeze:
		He now with Solomon all things knows:
		That, lastly, breath is to a man
		But to want and fret a span.


*** Samuel Ferguson (1810 - 1886)

	1. LAMENT FOR THOMAS DAVIS

		I walked through Ballinderry in the spring-time,
		When the bud was on the tree;
		And I said, in every fresh-ploughed field beholding
		The sowers striding free,
		Scattering broadside forth the corn in golden plenty
		On the quick seed-clasping soil,
		“Even such this day, among the fresh-stirred hearts of Erin.
		Thomas Davis, is thy toil.”
		
		I Sat by Ballyshannon in the summer,
		And saw the salmon leap;
		And I said, as I beheld the gallant creatures
		Spring glittering from the deep,
		Through the spray, and through the prone heaps striving onward
		To the calm, clear streams above,
		“So seekest thou thy native founts of freedom, Thomas Davis,
		In thy brightness of strength and love.”
		
		I stood in Derrybawn in the autumn,
		And I heard the eagle call,
		With a clangorous cry of wrath and lamentation
		That filled the wide mountain hall,
		O’er the bare, deserted place of his plundered eyrie;
		And I said, as he screamed and soared,
		“So callest thou, thou wrathful, soaring Thomas Davis,
		For a nation’s rights restored!”
		
		And, alas! to think but now, and thou art lying,
		Dear Davis, dead at thy mother’s knee;
		And I, no mother near, on my own sick-bed,
		That face on earth shall never see;
		I may lie and try to feel that I am dreaming,
		I may lie and try to say, “Thy will be done,”
		But a hundred such as I will never comfort Erin
		For the loss of the noble son!
		
		Young husbandman of Erin’s fruitful seed-time,
		In the fresh track of danger’s plough!
		Who will walk the heavy, toilsome, perilous furrow,
		Girt with freedom’s seed-sheets, now?
		Who will banish with the wholesome crop of knowledge
		The daunting weed and the bitter thorn,
		Now that thou thyself art but a seed for hopeful planting
		Against the Resurrection morn?
		
		Young salmon of the flood-tide of freedom
		That swells round Erin’s shore!
		Thou wilt leap against their loud oppressive torrent
		Of bigotry and hate no more;
		Drawn downward by their prone material instinct,
		Let them thunder on their rocks and foam--
		Thou hast leapt, aspiring soul, to founts beyond their raging,
		Where troubled waters never come!
		
		But I grieve not, Eagle of the empty eyrie,
		That thy wrathful cry is still;
		And that the songs alone of peaceful mourners
		Are heard to-day on Earth’s hill;
		Better far, if brothers’ war be destined for us
		(God avert that horrid day I pray),
		That ere our hands be stained with slaughter fratricidal,
		Thy warm heart should be cold in clay.
		
		But my trust is strong in God, Who made us brothers,
		That He will not suffer their right hands,
		Which thou hast joined in holier rites than wedlock
		To draw opposing brands.
		Oh, many a tuneful tongue that thou madest vocal
		Would lie cold and silent then;
		And songless long once more, should often-widowed Erin
		Mourn the loss of her brave young men.
		
		Oh, brave young men, my love, my pride, my promise,
		’Tis on you my hopes are set,
		In manliness, in kindliness, in justice,
		To make Erin a nation yet;
		Self-respecting, self-relying, self-advancing--
		In union or in severance, free and strong--
		And if God grant this, then, under God, to Thomas Davis
		Let the greater praise belong.


	2. THE FAIRY THORN

		“GET up, our Anna dear, from the weary spinning wheel
		For your father’s on the hill, and your mother is asleep; 
		Come up above the crags, and we’ll dance a highland reel 
		Around the fairy thorn on the steep.” 
		
		At Anna Grace’s door’t was thus the maidens cried,
		Three merry maidens fair in kirtles of the green; 
		And Anna laid the sock and the weary wheel aside, 
		The fairest of the four, I ween. 
		
		They’re glancing through the glimmer of the quiet eve, 
		Away in milky wavings of neck and ankle bare;
		The heavy-sliding stream in its sleeply song they leave, 
		And the crags in the ghostly air; 
		
		And linking hand in hand, and singing as they go, 
		The maids along the hill-side have ta’en their fearless way, 
		Till they come to where the rowan trees in lovely beauty grow
		Beside the Fairy Hawthorn gray. 
		
		The hawthorn stands between the ashes tall and slim, 
		Like matron with her twin grand-daughters at her knee; 
		The rowan berries cluster o’er her low head gray and dim 
		In ruddy kisses sweet to see.
		
		The merry maidens four have ranged them in a row, 
		Between each lovely couple a stately rowan stem, 
		And away in mazes wavy like skimming birds they go,--
		Oh, never caroll’d bird like them! 
		
		But solemn is the silence of the silvery haze
		That drinks away their voices in echoless repose, 
		And dreamily the evening has still’d the haunted braes, 
		And dreamier the gloaming grows. 
		
		And sinking one by one, like lark-notes from the sky 
		When the falcon’s shadow saileth across the open shaw,
		Are hush’d the maidens’ voices, as cowering down they lie 
		In the flutter of their sudden awe. 
		
		For, from the air above and the grassy ground beneath, 
		And from the mountain-ashes and the old white thorn between, 
		A power of faint enchantment doth through their beings breathe,
		And they sink down together on the green. 
		
		They sink together silent, and, stealing side by side, 
		They fling their lovely arms o’er their drooping necks so fair, 
		Then vainly strive again their naked arms to hide, 
		For their shrinking necks again are bare.
		
		Thus clasp’d and prostrate all, with their heads together bow’d, 
		Soft o’er their bosoms beating—the only human sound--
		They hear the silky footsteps of the silent fairy crowd, 
		Like a river in the air, gliding round. 
		
		Nor scream can any raise, nor prayer can any say,
		But wild, wild, the terror of the speechless three, 
		For they feel fair Anna Grace drawn silently away, 
		By whom they dare not look to see. 
		
		They feel their tresses twine with her parting locks of gold, 
		And the curls elastic falling, as her head withdraws;
		They feel her sliding arms from their tranced arms unfold, 
		But they dare not look to see the cause: 
		
		For heavy on their senses the faint enchantment lies 
		Through all that night of anguish and perilous amaze; 
		And neither fear nor wonder can ope their quivering eyes,
		Or their limbs from the cold ground raise, 
		
		Till out of night the earth has roll’d her dewy side, 
		With every haunted mountain and streamy vale below; 
		When, as the mist dissolves in the yellow morning-tide, 
		The maidens’ trance dissolveth so.
		
		Then fly the ghastly three as swiftly as they may, 
		And tell their tale of sorrow to anxious friends in vain: 
		They pin’d away and died within the year and day, 
		And ne’er was Anna Grace seen again.


*** Robert Fitzgerald (1910 - 1985)

	1. CHARLES RIVER NOCTURNE

		Reflecting remote swords, chilled in the calm
		And liquid darkness, lights on the esplanade
		Prolong the night’s edge downward all night long
		
		To those whose nostrils ache with the strong darkness,
		
		Those who in hunger press against the waters
		
		Those without birth or death, to whom the cold
		Ocean long laboring in her regal womb
		Whispers a word of foam.
		
		                            The lavish cars
		Move westward in an eddy and dance of shadow
		Under the dazed lamps on the lifeless shore.


	2. COBB WOULD HAVE CAUGHT IT

		In sunburnt parks where Sundays lie, 
		Or the wide wastes beyond the cities, 
		Teams in grey deploy through sunlight. 
		
		Talk it up, boys, a little practice. 
		
		Coming in stubby and fast, the baseman 
		Gathers a grounder in fat green grass, 
		Picks it stinging and clipped as wit 
		Into th eleather: a swinging step 
		Wings it deadeye down to first. 
		Smack. Oh, attaboy, attyoldboy. 
		
		Catcher reverses his cap, pulls down 
		Sweaty casque, and squats in the dust: 
		Pitcher rubs new ball on his pants, 
		Chewing, puts a jet behind him; 
		Nods past batter, taking his time. 
		Batter settles, tugs at his cap: 
		A spinning ball: step and swing to it, 
		Caught like a cheek before it ducks 
		By shivery hickory: socko, baby: 
		Cleats dig into dust. Outfielder, 
		On his way, looking over shoulder, 
		Makes it a triple. A long peg home. 
		
		Innings and afternoons. Fly lost in sunset. 
		Throwing arm gone bad. There’s your old ball game. 
		Cool reek of the field. Reek of companions.


	3. FOR THE OTHERS

		They will come to my house, to the street’s end
		In the tedious season,
		Naming the dry leaf, and the wind at morning
		Bearing death.
		
		From the tastefully cut helms, the craftsmen’s speech,
		I shall turn clearly
		To grip in daylight time’s still edge
		Finding my body, sight, touch, hearing, strange
		Identity then with what mind in what place
		Of all that make the story?
		
		                                  Birds
		Sing in the dark trees at the world’s end
		In the evening of time. The bearded men
		Stand there among the horses. The lutes play.
		And there are valleys in the mountains
		And women cutting the hay, and carrying it
		In under the hot rain.
		
		                          These we know.
		
		O father, father,
		These many days and many harvests
		We have endured, and the grey sea under mists,
		The agony of our daughters, and
		Old men dying in candlelight
		At the summer’s passage--
		
		                              remembering
		
		Landfalls, delay of autumn, grief among dreams.


	4. METAPHYSICAL

		_In festo Christi Regis_
		
		The level slope of colored sea
		Rises degree upon degree
		To hide the brazen ball of sun.
		Ponderous is the planet side,
		And nothing here but heart can slide,
		And nothing but the day is done.
		
		Glory the heavens here declare
		Heavens in gloom deny elsewhere.
		The jackal and the gaping shark
		Possess the shambles of the night.
		As upward eyries take the light
		The downward longitudes are dark.
		
		Eyes on the telluric rim
		In tangent angles peering dim
		Find shape and hour dark or down.
		But centered lordship knows the art
		Of bearing so toward every part
		The studded sphere becomes his crown.
		
		Rays of his mercy are besought
		To magnetize my speck of thought.
		Elated let the evening fall,
		Abysmal be the golden day;
		The ravaged carcass far away
		Be supple in the life of all.


	5. MIDSUMMER

		The adolescent night, breath of the town,
		Porch-swings and whispers, maple leaves unseen
		Deploying moonlight quieter than a man dead
		After the locusts’ song. These homes were mine
		And are not now forever, these on the steps
		Children I think removed to many places,
		Lost among hushed years, and so strangely known.
		
		This business is well ended. If in the dark
		The firefly made his gleam and sank therefrom
		Yet someone’s hand would have him, the wet grass
		Bed him no more . . . From corners of the lawn
		The dusk-white dresses flutter and are past . . .
		Before our bed-time there were things to say
		Remembering tree-bark, crickets, and the first star.
		
		After, and as the sullenness of time
		Went on from summer, here in a land alien
		Made I my perfect fears and flower of thought.
		Sleep being no longer swift in the arms of pain,
		Revisitations are convenient with a cough
		And there is something I would say again
		If I had not forever, if there were time.


	6. NIGHT IMAGES

		Late in the cold night wakened, and heard wind, 
		And lay with eyes closed and silent, knowing 
		These words how bodiless they are, this darkness 
		Empty under my roof and the panes rattling 
		Roughed by wind. And so lay and imagined 
		Somewhere far off black seas heavy-shouldered 
		Plunging on sand and the ebb off-streaming and 
		Thunder forever. So lying bethought me, friend, 
		What traffic ghouls have, or this be legend, 
		In low inland hollows of the earth, under 
		Shade of moon, the night moaning, and bitter frost; 
		And feared the riches of my bones, long given 
		Into this earth, should tumble to their hands. 
		No girl or ghost beside me, and I lonely, 
		Remembering gardens, lilac scent, or twilight 
		Descending late in summer on that town, 
		I lay and found my years departed from me, 
		And feared the cold bed and the wind, absurdly 
		Alone with silence and the trick of tears.


	7. NIGHT PRAYER

		Anguish and delight are now
		Coiled in darkness on the bough,
		And iron time deflowers spring,
		Secretly, the secret thing.
		Mind and body, as they must,
		Invent a terminus to lust,
		Preserving the despair they make
		Pray the Lord my soul to take.
		
		When this incontinent despair
		Turns sick with love in sunless air
		A firmer bed than bed of stone
		Take up my cast of flesh and bone,
		A sharper song than rue or willow
		Weep me dead upon my pillow.
		I who strangled life with sleep
		Pray the Lord my soul to keep.


	8. SYMPATHY OF PEOPLES

		No but come closer. Come a little   
		Closer. Let the wall-eyed hornyhanded   
		Panhandler hit you for a dime
		Sir and shiver. Snow like this
		Drives its pelting shadows over Bremen,   
		Over sad Louvain and the eastern   
		Marshes, the black wold. It sighs
		Into the cold sea of the north,
		That vast contemptuous revery between   
		Antiquity and you. Turn up your collar,   
		Pull your hatbrim down. Commune   
		Briefly with your ignorant heart
		For those bewildered raging children   
		Europe surrenders her old gentry to.
		
		All their eyes turn in the night from   
		Your fretfulness and forgetfulness,   
		Your talk; they turn away, friend.
		Their eyes dilated with dreams of power   
		Fix on the image of the mob wet   
		With blood scaling the gates of order.   
		Anarchist and incendiary
		Caesar bind that brotherhood
		To use and crush the civil guard,   
		Debauch the debauché, level
		Tenement and court with soaring   
		Sideslipping squadrons and hard regiments,   
		Stripped for the smoking levée of the   
		Howitzer, thunderstruck under the net.
		
		The great mouth of hunger closes
		On swineherd and princess, on the air   
		Of jongleur and forest bell; Grendel   
		Swims from the foul deep again.   
		Deputy, cartelist, academician
		Question in haste any plumeless captain   
		Before the peremptory descent   
		Of mankind, flattered and proud.   
		With whitening morning on the waste   
		You may discern through binoculars   
		A long line of the shawled and frozen,   
		Moving yet motionless, as if those   
		Were populations whom the sun failed   
		And the malicious moon enchanted   
		To wander and be still forever   
		The prey of wolves and bestial mazes.


	9. THE SHORE OF LIFE

		I. 
		
		I came then to the city of my brethren.   
		Not Carthage, not Alexandria, not London.
		
		The wide blue river cutting through the stone   
		Arrowy and cool lay down beside her,   
		And the hazy and shining sea lay in the offing.
		
		Ferries, pouring the foam before them, sliding   
		Into her groaning timbers, rang and rang;   
		And the chains tumbled taut in the winches.
		
		Upstream the matted tugs in the heavy water,   
		Their soiling smoke unwrapped by the salt wind,   
		Footed with snowy trampling and snowy sound.
		
		On tethers, pointing the way of the tide,
		The crusted freighters swung with their sides gushing.
		
		On evening’s ship pointing northward,   
		A golden sailor at sunset stood at the bow,   
		As aloft in the strands a tramcar with tiny clanging
		Slowly soared over, far upward and humming still.
		
		
		II. 
		
		Not Athens, Alexandria, Vienna or London.
		
		And evening vast and clean above the city   
		Washed the high storeys with sea-light, with a silken
		Sky-tint on the planes and the embrasures:
		The clump of crags and glitter sinking eastward   
		With the slow world, the shadow-lipping shores,   
		Pale after-conflagration of the air.
		
		On terraces, by windows of tiredness,
		The eyes dropped from that glow to the dusk atremble,
		Alive with its moving atomic monotone:
		
		There the hot taxis at the pounding corner   
		Fitted their glossy flanks and shifted, waiting,   
		And the girls went by with wavering tall walking,
		Their combed heads nodding in the evening:
		
		The hour of shops closing, the cocktail hour,   
		Lighting desire and cigarettes and lighting   
		The strange lamps on the streaming avenue.


	10. WINTER NIGHT

		The grey day left the dusk in doubt.
		Now it is dark.
		Nightfall, and no stars are out,
		But this black wind will set its mark
		Like anger on the souls that stir
		From chimney-side or sepulchre.
		From hill to pasture moans the snow.
		The farms hug tight
		Their shaking ribs against the blow.
		
		There is no mercy in this night,
		Nor scruple to its wrath. The dead
		Sleep light with this wind overhead.


*** John Gould Fletcher (1886 - 1950)

	1. 1946

		Over the scattered trees, over the sunbrowned meadow,
		The bells wove their rhythm of delicate, proud, airborne music;
		Fragments of lacework through the far-air falling,
		Trails of tone going outward, loops and loud curves of sound 
		The bells threw a sabbath of peace against the shadow
		Of a mid-century torn with war, with lust, with famine; 
		Borne from their Belgian coast, they shaped the
		 enclosing magic; 
		Sky blessing spread upon a wide Pacific ground. 
		
		Here as in days gone by, through centuries forgotten, 
		They sang through the sky to man, they wove the secret
		Will of eternity, that passes to peace through strife.
		Quivering from plain to peak, they shaped the heavenly
		 garments,
		And, as in older lands, they moved; angelic footfalls
		Going, but none knew how, apart from death to life.


	2. BLAKE

		Blake saw 
		Angels in a London street; 
		God the Father on a hill, 
		Christ before a tavern door. 
		Blake saw 
		All these shapes, and more. 
		
		Blake knew 
		Other men saw not as he; 
		So he tried to give his sight 
		To that beggarman, the world. 
		“You are mad,” 
		Was all the blind world said. 
		
		Blake died 
		Singing songs of praise to God. 
		“They are not mine,” he told his wife, 
		“I may praise them, they are not mine.” 
		Then he died. And the world called Blake divine.


	3. LINCOLN

		I
		
		Like a gaunt, scraggly pine   
		Which lifts its head above the mournful sandhills;   
		And patiently, through dull years of bitter silence,   
		Untended and uncared for, begins to grow.   
		 
		Ungainly, labouring, huge,           
		The wind of the north has twisted and gnarled its branches;   
		Yet in the heat of midsummer days, when thunder-clouds ring the horizon,   
		A nation of men shall rest beneath its shade.   
		 
		And it shall protect them all,   
		Hold everyone safe there, watching aloof in silence;    
		Until at last one mad stray bolt from the zenith   
		Shall strike it in an instant down to earth.   
		 
		
		II
		
		There was a darkness in this man; an immense and hollow darkness,   
		Of which we may not speak, nor share with him, nor enter;   
		A darkness through which strong roots stretched downwards into the earth    
		Towards old things;   
		Towards the herdman-kings who walked the earth and spoke with God,   
		Towards the wanderers who sought for they knew not what, and found their goal at last;   
		Towards the men who waited, only waited patiently when all seemed lost,   
		Many bitter winters of defeat;    
		Down to the granite of patience   
		These roots swept, knotted fibrous roots, prying, piercing, seeking,   
		And drew from the living rock and the living waters about it   
		The red sap to carry upwards to the sun.   
		 
		Not proud, but humble,    
		Only to serve and pass on, to endure to the end through service;   
		For the ax is laid at the root of the trees, and all that bring not forth good fruit   
		Shall be cut down on the day to come and cast into the fire.   
		 
		
		III
		
		There is silence abroad in the land to-day,   
		And in the hearts of men, a deep and anxious silence;    
		And, because we are still at last, those bronze lips slowly open,   
		Those hollow and weary eyes take on a gleam of light.   
		 
		Slowly a patient, firm-syllabled voice cuts through the endless silence   
		Like labouring oxen that drag a plow through the chaos of rude clay-fields:   
		“I went forward as the light goes forward in early spring,    
		But there were also many things which I left behind.   
		 
		“Tombs that were quiet;   
		One, of a mother, whose brief light went out in the darkness,   
		One, of a loved one, the snow on whose grave is long falling,   
		One, only of a child, but it was mine.    
		 
		Have you forgot your graves? Go, question them in anguish,   
		Listen long to their unstirred lips. From your hostages to silence,   
		Learn there is no life without death, no dawn without sun-setting,   
		No victory but to Him who has given all.”   
		 
		
		IV
		
		The clamour of cannon dies down, the furnace-mouth of the battle is silent.    
		The midwinter sun dips and descends, the earth takes on afresh its bright colours.   
		But he whom we mocked and obeyed not, he whom we scorned and mistrusted,   
		He has descended, like a god, to his rest.   
		 
		Over the uproar of cities,   
		Over the million intricate threads of life wavering and crossing,    
		In the midst of problems we know not, tangling, perplexing, ensnaring,   
		Rises one white tomb alone.   
		 
		Beam over it, stars.   
		Wrap it round, stripes—stripes red for the pain that he bore for you—   
		Enfold it forever, O flag, rent, soiled, but repaired through your anguish;    
		Long as you keep him there safe, the nations shall bow to your law.  
		 
		Strew over him flowers;   
		Blue forget-me-nots from the north, and the bright pink arbutus   
		From the east, and from the west rich orange blossoms,   
		But from the heart of the land take the passion-flower.    
		 
		Rayed, violet, dim,   
		With the nails that pierced, the cross that he bore and the circlet,   
		And beside it there, lay also one lonely snow-white magnolia,   
		Bitter for remembrance of the healing which has passed.


	4. MEMORIAL FOR 1940

		If we could but silence the gongs in thousands of cities,
		Throttle the sirens, quench the low roar of the motors,
		Muffle the click of the tickers, slow down the traffic,
		Drown out all mechanical noise and suddenly create silence,
		We might come to know at last the meaning of this world;
		Which is as a wave come from the dark, a sudden, unexpected
			movement,
		Always arrested, never completed, made vital by half-realized
			beauty;
		And which--though unfinished--flings this final generation
		Like all those lost in the past, drowned in war, to die, gasping on
			the shore.
		
		Driven and driven and driven,
		Living despite of dying, dying because of living,
		Is life’s last terrible giving;
		Poured out, overflowing, overwhelming, foaming away on the
			pavement,
		Froth of life, must of death, spilled deep upon the stones.
		We cannot halt it since we are part of it,
		We cannot hold it, since it holds us as this offering.
		Our doing is part of its dream, our darkness is all of its triumph.
		It is given and it abides, whether we will or no.
		
		But now, since the silence will not rise and surround us,
		Leaving us wondering about ourselves, looking each to the other,
		Sketching the gesture that will finish with consummation
		We shall not know what meaning was held by that dream.
		Not men, but a man; not life but be led; not triumph but brutal
			obedience--
		And laws graven deep in cold blood for the free play of instinct
			and wisdom.
		Since we have neither clear thoughts of ourselves nor the quiet of
			heaven--
		Which is made out of fire and dark even as we, only wider and
			greater--
		No joy shall be ours without horror, no peace without clamor.
		With guns, tanks, aeroplanes, ships of iron, lies, bullyings, threats,
		propaganda,
			We shall go forward to a far alien land, and we shall there bury
		This light that burned flickeringly, under mountains of dead men,
			tumuli of faith unremembered;
		To burst forth as volcanic fire to the future, and blaze across the
			world


	5. NEW YORK

			Out of the black granite she is rising surprising as sunrise 
		over the head of the Sphinx, glittering towers coated in
		linked scales that seem as if they might melt away-they are
		so pale--but that day pours multitudes about them to smile
		and to threaten, to sin and to ‘scape the reckoning, to coagulate 
		in iron knots against fate, to blot out life’s misery with
		rejoicing, to clamor and to pray.
			Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant
		skies.
		
			Beneath, the earth is propped and caverned; monstrous
		halls drop with vaulted echoing roofs dripping and sorrowful 
		far below; the bells toll and the trains start slowly,
		clanging, shaking the earth and the sad towers above them
		as they go banging their cargo of lost ones towards the secret
		gates of the sea; falling, falling with thunder and flame
		roaring and crawling, shooting and dying away.
			Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant
		skies.
		
			Aloft, red girders of riveted steel hang motionless over the
		abyss. Down below the traffic slides, and from precipitous
		sides unroll golden threads, like spiders contriving, carrying
		their freight. Men with hammers are striving to hack new
		projections on. the edifice: and from the last impenetrable
		overhanging beam, a man is dangling on his belly guiding
		the weight. The clouds explode in hissing ripples of snow
		about him; the skies are dim and the stream of life falls
		through them sighing, like wheat that crashes into the hopper.
		But the last pinnacles eat into the clouds and from their
		bronze sides pours down the day, sweeping away the sordid
		flood of men in streams of weeping glory.
			Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant
		skies.
		
			Screaming and flickering, like loosened floods of blue
		flame, the streets run together amid the houses that huddle
		and leap and lower over them. The houses quiver with rage
		and heat from heads to feet; the façades seem wavering,
		toppling, tearing with their weight: the glaring panes bulge
		outwards, and the bent red girders ooze away beneath them.
		But above it all, above all the chaos, the struggle and the
		loss, the clouds part. Ivory and gold, heart of light petrified,
		bold and immortally beautiful, lifts a tower like a full lily
		stalk, with crammed pollen-coated petals, flame calyx, fretted
		and carven. White phoenix that beats its wings in the light,
		shrill ecstasy of leaping lines poised in flight, partaker of joy
		in the skies, mate of the sun.
			Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant
		skies.


	6. NIGHT SONG

		Ask me no more but love, 
		--See, the west is all roses!-- 
		Darkness comes down from above; 
		No more--the hour closes; 
		
		Ask me no more but love, 
		I have no other might. 
		Sun of my dusk, dream of my dawn, I come to you 
		Sure as the stars to-night!


	7. RAINS IN THE DESERT

		The huge red-buttressed mesa over yonder  
		Is merely a far-off temple where the sleepy sun is burning  
		Its altar fires of pinyon and toyon for the day.  
		 
		The old priests sleep, white-shrouded;  
		Their pottery whistles lie beside them, the prayer-sticks closely feathered.          
		On every mummied face there glows a smile.  
		 
		The sun is rolling slowly  
		Beneath the sluggish folds of the sky-serpents,  
		Coiling, uncoiling, blue black, sparked with fires.  
		 
		The old dead priests          
		Feel in the thin dried earth that is heaped about them,  
		Above the smell of scorching, oozing pinyon,  
		The acrid smell of rain.  
		 
		And now the showers  
		Surround the mesa like a troop of silver dancers:          
		Shaking their rattles, stamping, chanting, roaring,  
		Whirling, extinguishing the last red wisp of light.  


	8. SONNETS AT SUNSET

		I
		
		Except when unexpected, death is still
		Something that we must build for, every day;
		The skull that watches the untroubled way:
		Guest at the banquet, brightness of hour unfulfilled.
		Descending curtain to the time-quickened play
		Which has no audience, but the past. The shrill
		Scream of the knife, stab of the fire that spilled
		Another hope like ours, a stay that would not stay.
		
		We are the victims death has not yet taken
		Away from our task of serving life. This world
		Is never too much with us, when we know
		That all which is given must be soon forsaken,
		The crown cast off, the task laid down. Now whirled
		Beyond the world’s verge, death stands here, aglow.
		
		
		II
		
		Strange that this inner fire which was the soul,
		Fixed in the breastbone, running to the head,
		Closer than hands or feet, should be thus cold.
		All is most motionless if one man be dead.
		But yet this body, fit for nothing good,
		Is scarred and marked by that long battle made
		With spirit, which the soul forced forth. The flood
		Of flesh formed by the soul knew not one battle stayed.
		
		One sees the joy that spirit brought. One sees
		The shattering impact of soul’s fire. One finds
		Before the dead, life made both many and one:
		
		Defeat and victory, agony and ease
		All in one helpless shape. The many kinds
		Of being merge to a breath before the sun.
		
		
		III
		
		This is the shape that young Gotama saw,
		When with his charioteer he rode abroad;
		The body of one dead laid by the road,
		Eyes staring sightless, and thrust-open jaw.
		And yet there is still pity here and awe
		In this cold rigid face. Death has bestowed
		A final touch of beauty. Lighted is man’s load.
		Amid the horror, glory stands without flaw.
		
		Memory that fades, and moan that makes alike,
		Death brings to man nothing and everything:--
		God poised amid the ruin God has made,
		The light that mocked us, moving to a shade:
		A transitory glow time cannot strike,
		And the cold hair stroked by an angel’s wing.


	9. SONNETS OF LIFE

		I
		
		At one time I had faith; now that is gone.
		At one time I had hope; that is gone, too.
		At one time love, like a broad burning sun
		Lit up my path and made my old life new.
		But that time now is past; bowed with the years
		Before I am old, and broken with the weight
		Of too much knowledge, drained of useless tears,
		For the last moment of life I idly wait.
		Who can live long with a cold empty heart?
		Should I live long or little, this I know:
		That when to darkness I at last depart,
		I shall have given all I could bestow;
		I shall take with me nothing in my death,
		Having cast on mankind my love, hope, faith.
		
		
		II
		
		Joy taught me grief and grief has brought me laughter;
		Life gives me death; shall death not offer life?
		From so much toil must nothing follow after,
		Is there no prize for pain, no crown for strife?
		Who knows, who knows? From what far shore is blown
		Silence we hear though it speak naught to us?
		From what dark sphere pours the great night that, sown
		With stars and sleet, by quickening shall renew us?
		Is there a mockery in the light of day,
		And in dark night a secret well of sorrow,
		That through the sunlight’s power we pass away
		But in dumb sleep join yesterday to tomorrow?--
		Shaping the web of time that, red or green,
		Falls like a blanket quenching truth unseen.
		
		
		III
		
		Now were I free to choose my way of going
		What would I soonest take for my reward?
		No mighty victory to the dumb sky glowing,
		No golden city by the midnight starred.
		This, only this--more strength to bear the weight
		Of a day’s burden that--my back knows well--
		Holds all the past packed dense; to share the fate
		Of life about me, mingling heaven and hell;
		Some souls to love, nor crave love in return;
		Some friends to keep, nor doubt their loyalties;
		Bread broken oft in tears--so let me burn
		A lost spark, voiceless in the raging seas!
		Till at the last, in slackening dark release,
		Grant me, O Life, the cold eternal peace.
		
		
		IV
		
		Immeasurably the empty vault of heaven
		Cold, dark and naked looms above, unlighted;
		An ocean without bounds whereto, fate-driven,
		The soul of man must go, when time is plighted.
		A thousand prayers into this void are hurled,
		But none are answered, none could ever be;
		Within its depths how many a ruined world
		Reflects some broken gleam of majesty!
		Man is the tragic afterthought of time,
		Peering into the gulf, he there discovers
		The long march, slowly rising from the slime,
		To the last summit he must share with others--
		Spirits unseen. Quick as life’s cup is made,
		Death fills it up with hemlock and nightshade.
		
		
		V
		
		The setting sun drifts slowly over the world;
		The light breeze rises, moving steadily on ;
		Through pinnacles of dewy leaves unfurled
		Soon will sweet sleep and darkness bring the dawn.
		So many thousand years have shaped this clay,
		So old this world was ere I came to be;
		Life seems a midge’s dance within a ray,
		And death the sky’s unanswering vacancy.
		So must all perish, every living spark
		Sink to the final void from whence it rose,
		And the warm earth roll horror-stricken, dark
		Beneath the weight of equatorial snows.
		No matter, since great deeds, once pure and bold,
		Today grow idle dreams, a tale long told.
		
		
		VI
		
		Each morning I cried out, “Where is the Christ?”
		Lifting my empty hands to the dumb heaven;
		And every nightfall weariness sufficed
		To make my soul forget how it had striven.
		The world still bowed before the Lords of Hell--
		Odin, Priapus, Mammon--every day
		Ten million Tudases strove their Lord to sell,
		And heaven was dumb and had no word to say.
		Then weary, hopeless, beaten by the lies
		Of life I wandered on a city street:
		And there a starving man with piteous eyes
		Stopped me and asked me for a bite to eat:
		I who had called on Christ in my mad pride,
		Like Caiaphas now idly turned aside.
		
		
		VII
		
		Less than a grain of sand is man, far less;
		Less than the wind the utterance of his heart;
		Less than the rain his power to damn or bless,
		Less than the dust the temples of his art.
		He is a feeble force, a flickering flame
		Upon the summit of a mountain; high
		Across the night he strives to scrawl his name:
		But soon he fades; too soon has power to die.
		And there is lesser effort in his thought
		Than in the atom’s whirling drift of spheres;
		Though he has learned through cunning dearly bought
		To count the stars, he cannot count his tears.
		O outcast heir of dumb eternity,
		What is there left for you to do but die?
		
		
		VIII
		
		Not in the night, for night has need of men;
		Not in the noon, for noon is sick of power;
		But in the dusk of early dawning, then
		Over the hillslopes let it come, mine hour.
		As the earth wakens, let me see the Word
		Blaze through the eastern gates, and be outspread
		In orient glory, by mankind unheard,
		A shadowless ring of light, about earth’s head.
		So even death will be daunted, and the grave
		Will be consumed in a mounting crown of rays
		Up to the zenith rising, wave on wave;
		To mark for me the last of earthly days.
		As the world wakens to its work again,
		Let me slip out, a ship, athwart the tides of men.


	10. SPRING

		At the first hour, it was as if one said, “Arise.”
		At the second hour, it was as if one said, “Go forth.”
		And the winter constellations that are like patient ox-eyes
		Sank below the white horizon at the north.
		
		At the third hour, it was as if one said, “I thirst”;
		At the fourth hour, all the earth was still:
		Then the clouds suddenly swung over, stooped, and burst;
		And the rain flooded valley, plain and hill.
		
		At the fifth hour, darkness took the throne;
		At the sixth hour, the earth shook and the wind cried;
		At the seventh hour, the hidden seed was sown;
		At the eighth hour, it gave up the ghost and died.
		
		At the ninth hour, they sealed up the tomb;
		And the earth was then silent for the space of three hours.
		But at the twelfth hour, a single lily from the gloom
		Shot forth, and was followed by a whole host of flowers.


	11. THE BLACK ROCK

		I
		
		Off the long headland, threshed about by round-backed breakers,
		There is a black rock, standing high at the full tide;
		Off the headland there is emptiness,
		And the moaning of the ocean,
		And the black rock standing alone.
		
		In the orange wake of sunset,
		When the gulls have fallen silent,
		And the winds slip out and meet together from the edges of the sea,
		Settled down in the dark water,
		Fragment of the earth abandoned,
		Ragged and huge the black rock stands.
		
		It is as if it listened,
		Stood and listened very intently
		To the everlasting swish and boom and hiss of spray,
		Listened to the creeping-on of night;
		While afar off, to the westward,
		Dark clouds silently are packed together,
		With a dull red glow between.
		
		It is listening, it is lonely;
		For the sunlight
		Showed it houses near the headland,
		Trees and flowers;
		For the sunlight caused to grow upon it scanty blades of grass,
		For the crannies of the rock,
		Here and there; 
		For the sunlight brought it back remembrance of a world.
		Long rejected
		
		And long lost;
		Showed it white sails near the coast,
		Children paddling in the bay,
		Signs of life and kinship with mankind
		Long forgot.
		Now the sunset leaves it there,
		Bare, rejected, a black scrap of rock,
		Battered by the tides,
		Wallowing in the sea.
		
		Bleak, adrift,
		Shattered like a monstrous ship of stone,
		Left aground
		By the waters, on its voyage;
		With no foot to touch its deck,
		With no hand to lift its sails,
		There it stands.
		
		
		II
		
		Gulls wheel near it in the sunlight,
		White backs flash;
		Gray wings eddy, curl, are lifted, swept away,
		On a wave;
		Gulls pass rapidly in the sunlight
		Round about it.
		
		Gulls pass, screaming harshly to the wave-thrusts,
		Laughing in uncanny voices;
		Lonely flocks of great white birds,
		Like to ghosts;
		
		But the black rock does not welcome them,
		Knows by heart already all their cries;
		Hears, repeated, for the millionth millionth time
		All the bitterness of ocean
		Howling through their voices.
		
		It still dreams of other things,
		Of the cities and the fields,
		And the lands near to the coast
		Where the lonely grassy valleys
		Full of dun herds deeply browsing,
		Sweep in wide curves to the sea;
		
		It still holds the memory
		Of the wild bees booming, murmuring,
		In the fields of thyme and clover,
		And the shadows of broad trees
		Towards noon:
		
		It still lifts its huge scarred sides
		Vainly to the burning glare of sun,
		With the memory of doom
		Thick upon them;
		And the hope that by some fate
		It may come once more to be
		Part of all the earth it had;
		
		Freed from clamor of the waves,
		From the broken planks and wreckage
		Drifting aimless here and there,
		With the tides;
		Freed to share its life with earth,
		And to be a dwelling-place
		For the outcast tribes of men,
		Once again.
		
		
		III
		
		In the morning,
		When the dark clouds whirl swift over,
		From the southeast, dragging with them
		Heavy curtains of gray rain,
		
		The black rock rejoices.
		All its little gullies drip with cool refreshing showers.
		All the crannies, all the steeps,
		All the meagre sheltered places
		Fill with drip and tinkle of the rain.
		
		But when the afternoon between the clouds
		Leaves adrift cool patches of the sea,
		Between floes of polar snow;
		Then the rock is all aflame;
		Diamond, emeralds, topazes,
		Burn and shatter, and it seems
		Like a garden filled with flowers.
		
		Like a garden where the rapid wheeling lights
		And black shadows lift and sway and fall;
		Spring and summer and red autumn chase each other
		Moment after moment, on its face,
		
		So, till sunset
		Lifts once more its lonely crimson torch,
		Menacing and mournful, far away;
		Then an altar left abandoned, it stands facing all the horizon
		Where the light departs.
		
		Massive black and crimson towers,
		Cities carven by the wind from out the clouds of sunset look at it;
		It has dreamed them, it has made this sacrifice,
		Now it sees their rapid passing,
		Soon it will be bleak and all alone.
		
		
		IV
		
		Abrupt and broken rock,
		Black rock, awash in the midst of the waters,
		Lonely, aloof, deserted,
		Impotent to change;
		
		Storm-clouds lift off,
		The dawn strikes the hills far inland.
		But you are forever tragic and apart,
		Forever battling with the sea;
		
		Till the waves have ground you to dust--
		Till the ages are all accomplished,
		Till you have relinquished the last reluctant fragment
		To the gnawing teeth of the wave;
		
		I know the force of your patience,
		I have shared your grim silent struggle,
		The mad dream you have, and will not abandon,
		To cover your strength with gay flowers;
		
		Keel of the world, apart,
		I have lived like you.
		
		Some men are soil of the earth;
		Their lives are broad harvest fields
		Green in the spring, and gold in their season,
		Then barren and mown;
		
		But those whom my soul has loved
		Are bare rocks standing off headlands;
		Cherishing, perhaps, a few bitter wild flowers,
		That bloom in the granite, year after year.


	12. THE EVERLASTING CONTRADICTION

		Yesterday I borrowed thirty silver pence
		From Judas: he gave them with a grin.
		Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.
		
		Yesterday the Magdalen came to me and said,
		“I am starving.”
		I answered, “First, to bed.”
		Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.
		
		Yesterday the Virgin passed sorrowing in the street.
		I fung a brick at her. Then, as was meet,
		I bore her to the house of Caiphas.
		Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.
		
		Yesterday Pilate asked me for water: I must go.
		He beat me, for the ewer trembled so.
		Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.
		
		Yesterday, today, tomorrow, I am vile:
		You hang there motionless and dead long while--
		In your eyes, nothing; on your lips, a smile.
		The world is rotten : would ‘twould crash and pile
		Upon me kneeling yet before your cross!


	13. THE SILENCE

		There is a silence which I carry about with me always--
		A silence perpetual, for it is self-created:
		A silence of heat, of water, of unchecked fruitfulness,
		Through which each year the heavy harvests bloom, and
			burst, and fall.
		
		Deep, matted green silence of my South,
		Often, within the push and the scorn of great cities,
		I have seen that mile-wide waste of water swaying out
			to you,
		And on its current glimmering I am going to the sea.
		
		There is a silence I have achieved--I have walked beyond
			its threshold.
		I know it is without horizons, boundless, fathomless, per-
			fect.
		And some day maybe, far away,
		I shall curl up in it at last and sleep an endless sleep.


	14. THE SKATERS

		Black swallows swooping or gliding   
		In a flurry of entangled loops and curves;   
		The skaters skim over the frozen river.   
		And the grinding click of their skates as they impinge upon the surface,   
		Is like the brushing together of thin wing-tips of silver. 


	15. TO THE UNKNOWN GOD

		I
		
		YOU, who are life entwined with death in fiery bonds of
			longing,
		Dazzling flame in the night, black cloud across the noon-
			days
		You are eternal; transient because eternal:
		You are all things on-circling into one.
		Force of the darkened moment
		Fresh-pulsing through my being,
		Madly caressing my naked heart, I hold you.
		Sprung from the dust of earth, I meet you face to face.
		
		You who have carved the foreheads of the mountains,
		Darted the billion spears of the rain down-pouring,
		Crashed in the fall of the torrent, roared in the glittering
			river,
		Murmured and whistled and hummed in the uprisen sea:
		
		You gardener of the earth! Ten million blossoms
		Bloom heedlessly and die for you each moment;
		Forests cast down their leaves, renew in spring-like
			splendor,
		On hills and plains great herds heed your wild voice.
		
		Dancer amid the hurricanes of heaven,
		Breath of the black typhoon, shaper of sudden earthquake,
		Lord of the tidal wave, king of the fire and the tempest,
		To you be praise eternal!
		
		You who have buried the universe in darkness,
		Have fashioned countless suns to wheel apart in darkness,
		Have fashioned man to bear the torch of soul athwart the
			darkness,
		You, hid in the pulse of atoms through the darkness:
		
		Since we are lost in boundless night, and never
		May we find out the light of truth that conquers every
			shadow:
		Since what is locked away in our own hearts eludes us,
		To you be praise forever!
		
		Praise for each moment of life that is in vain;
		Praise for each idle breath, red praise from dawn to sunset,
		Dark praise in seas of sleep, praise for awakening sorrow,
		Praise, endless praise unspoken!
		
		Praise above all for every sin and failure;
		Praise for all here that stumbles, falls, and struggles.
		Since error is burning life and death is black perfection,
		Praise that no life is perfect!
		
		Praise for each bitter moment of helpless courage,
		Praise for each grinding care, each dragging sorrow,
		Praise for despair that counsels us to perish,
		Praise for both hell and heaven!
		
		Praise because naught abides; praise because all is ever
		The seed that is born and dies, renews itself to alter,
		Hurrying from shape to shape the soul new-formed, un-
			measured,
		By time or space or life or love or death.
		
		Out of a thousand million living voices,
		Out of a thousand billion burning planets,
		Out of the boundless infinite, past and present, summed up
			in this moment,
		Praise without end, and glory!
		
		
		II
		
		Have mercy, O God, upon all mankind here upon earth,
		Because we have nothing left to offer you:
		Nothing but our broken bodies,
		Nothing but our broken hearts,
		Nothing but our broken lives,
		Our labors which are endless,
		Our sorrows which are useless,
		Our infamy which is perfect.
		Because of this, O God,
		Have mercy now upon us!
		
		Have mercy upon us because we were born to sorrow;
		Because the first thing that we feel is pain,
		And the second, hunger;
		Because the winter makes us shiver and the summer pant
			for breath;
		Because in heat or cold, in day or night we labor
		Labor, struggle, suffer, fight with time and hunger
		Only to win strength for a further struggle;
		Cheating ourselves of ease and sleep because we dare not
			take them,
		Worrying, quarrelling, oppressing the sickly and the weak,
		Lying, stealing, defrauding, and laughing at those we
			defraud;
		Judging each other in hypocrisy, and applauding our-
			selves for our judgments;
		Because the beginning and the end of life are alike injustice
			and sorrow,
		Have mercy now upon us!
		Have mercy upon us, O God, because the end is darkness;
		Because faithless, hopeless, loveless, we yet cry out to you;
		Though you deafen your ears for eternity, and will never
			make us an answer,
		Though we have nothing left but to cry out and to pass on
			into darkness,
		Because we are madmen mouthing before the eternal
			silence!
		From the depths of our degradation, from the bottom of
			our broken hearts,
		From the night of our hopeless lives, from the despairs of
			our failing strength,
		From the shame of our lying lips, from the pollution of our
			impure minds,
		From the sloth of our sordid souls, from our greed, from
			our need, from our anger,
		From our madness, from our horror, from the stark staring
			night of our hell,
		But for one little instant, because we cry out without
			cause,
		Without reason, without excuse, merely because we dare
			cry out,
		Have mercy now upon us!
		
		
		III
		
		With your outlaws, O God, let me stand up at the judg-
			ment:
		With those who blasphemed you because they sought you
			always;
		With those who denied you because you denied yourself
			to them,
		With those who were broken on the great terrible wheel of
			this earth,
		With those who hated themselves because they loved you,
		With those who labored against themselves because you
			cursed their labor,
		With those to whom life was vain struggle and time was
			worth nothing but for a glimpse of your face,
		With your outlaws, O God, I claim at last a place.
		Grant me, O God,
		Not to know bodies only but also the souls behind them:
		Not the green garment of grass the earth wears, but the
			fire of her naked flesh,
		Not the blue cloud-ridden sky but the song of the lark as
			it soars
		Like a young bridegroom, joyous, through the mystery of
			those spaces.
		Let me long desperately after the flesh but still more
			desperately after the spirit,
		Let me be never satisfied, let me pass on through life still
			seeking,
		Let me look at the stars aloof and love them, immoral and
			lawless:
		Let me look upon men and women and love them, even
			though you warn me not to love them.
		Since all the temples made by hands fall soon to dust and
			ruin,
		Since this song too is useless, a vain cry uncomprehended,
		Since I, at bottom, am lawless and you have promised and
			said
		That the Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence and the
			violent shall take it by storm,
		Place me now among the violent, among those who admit
			of no gods,
		Class me among the outcasts, the broken and weary, the
			followers of every lost cause upon earth:
		Make me now one of them, fill me with their fury, let me,
			as they, seek you face to face,
		Beyond the last illusion, where amid the shouting stars
		Throned upon fire, in garments sealed with endless
			sacrifice,
		Sacred and glorious, flesh and spirit fused and merged in
			one,
		You turn the great wheel of the world under your bleeding
			feet.
		
		
		IV
		
		Stony and grey, and agelessly old and chill,
		He sits who craves no part in human will:
		
		Unspeaking and unwearied, stirring not,
		The single living force time has forgot.
		
		About him rage ten billion suns. Their eyes
		Blaze on him, but he looks without surprise;
		
		Watching their shapes before him shift and run,
		And caring not what is undone or done.
		
		For weary, idle, very old and stale
		To him is now creation’s endless tale.
		
		And naught within it all can he now see,
		Its infinite naught but vacuity.
		
		All is but shapeless dust his feet have trod,
		In vain upstirring it. Not any God
		
		As equal to himself he found; again
		He has sought here and there, but all in vain.
		
		Vain, idle, useless; neither in heaven nor hell
		Nor in mankind’s dumb longing can he dwell:
		
		Only within the void. Withdrawn behind
		The veil of time can he rest now resigned.
		
		Sometimes the fall of a lost star through night
		He sees, but does not alter his fixed sight.
		
		Sometimes a world explodes, and people shriek
		As they are torn to bits. He does not speak.
		
		Sometimes a new star-cluster swift expands
		Out of dead dust dark whirled. He does not move his
			hands.
		Only from age to age across that face,
		Vast, stony, lifeless, without any trace
		
		Of hope or struggle, slowly falls a tear
		And slides down cheek and chin till it drops clear
		
		Into the abyss of nothingness. And no spot
		Of space receives it. ‘Tis as if it were not.
		
		And still he does not move. And still he sees,
		Out of the darkness crawling, new eternities
		
		Which ebb and flow, though still his dark heart dreams
		That all those tears, which have fallen down in streams
		
		From his eyes since the birth of time, have grown
		An endless ocean, serene, still, alone,
		
		Whose brackish waters quench the failing power
		Of the far stars; and rising, hour by hour,
		
		Will conquer worlds of ice and flame and men,
		And when the last has sunken, then, oh then,
		
		Brooding on that still ocean will he be
		Alone at last to all eternity.
		
		
		V
		
		We have no power of life that is not shared;
		We have no past that is not ours; today
		Each burning moment that we live is filled
		With deep incredible meanings, born in song.
		
		We are the bearers of the word unheard.
		The sharers of the flame unseen. We know
		That love and death are one, yet in between,
		Life, like a point of steel, plucks at our strings anew.
		
		We have no force to lift a little finger
		Without awaking, in the harp of unimagined power,
		Some tune that travels on.
		We are the players in your symphony,
		
		O God, and when strings break,
		And the faint frozen fingers cannot strike
		Aught but the shuddering rattle of death upon them,
		On far, far, distant strings the song of life is waking:
		
		Waking and rising and calling
		To the dumb sleepers under earth,
		Stirring the dust of long-forgotten planets
		On million-miled horizons yet unseen.
		
		Play on, play on and strike
		The red strings of the will until they quiver.
		Through fire, whirlwind, death, despair, and darkness
		Like a great wave sounds high the symphony;
		We are, O God, one broken immortal music:
		
		And we will play on still,
		Though earth respond not, nor the skies make echo,
		Till dust of man on dust of earth is scattered,
		And the last sunset’s wave of flame enfolds us.


*** Ford Madox Ford (1873 - 1939)

	1. ANTWERP

		I
		
		GLOOM! 
		An October like November; 
		August a hundred thousand hours, 
		And all September, 
		A hundred thousand, dragging sunlit days, 
		And half October like a thousand years . . . 
		And doom! 
		That then was Antwerp . . . 
		                             In the name of God, 
		How could they do it? 
		Those souls that usually dived 
		Into the dirty caverns of mines; 
		Who usually hived 
		In whitened hovels; under ragged poplars; 
		Who dragged muddy shovels, over the grassy mud, 
		Lumbering to work over the greasy sods. . . 
		Those men there, with the appearance of clods 
		Were the bravest men that a usually listless priest of God 
		Ever shrived. . . 
		And it is not for us to make them an anthem. 
		If we found words there would come no wind that would fan them 
		To a tune that the trumpets might blow it, 
		Shrill through the heaven that’s ours or yet Allah’s, 
		Or the wide halls of any Valhallas. 
		We can make no such anthem. So that all that is ours 
		For inditing in sonnets, pantoums, elegiacs, or lays 
		Is this: 
		“In the name of God, how could they do it?” 
		
		
		II
		
		For there is no new thing under the sun, 
		Only this uncomely man with a smoking gun 
		In the gloom . . . 
		What the devil will he gain by it? 
		Digging a hole in the mud and standing all day in the rain by it 
		Waiting his doom; 
		The sharp blow, the swift outpouring of the blood, 
		Till the trench of gray mud 
		Is turned to a brown purple drain by it. 
		Well, there have been scars 
		Won in many wars . . .
		Punic, 
		Lacedæmonian, wars of Napoleon, wars for faith, wars for honour, for love, for possession, 
		But this Belgian man in his ugly tunic, 
		His ugly round cap, shooting on, in a sort of obsession, 
		Overspreading his miserable land, 
		Standing with his wet gun in his hand . . . 
		Doom! 
		He finds that in a sudden scrimmage, 
		And lies, an unsightly lump on the sodden grass . . . 
		An image that shall take long to pass! 
		
		
		III
		
		For the white-limbed heroes of Hellas ride by upon their horses 
		Forever through our brains. 
		The heroes of Cressy ride by upon their stallions; 
		And battalions and battalions and battalions-- . . . 
		The Old Guard, the Young Guard, the men of Minden and of Waterloo, 
		Pass, for ever staunch, 
		Stand, for ever true; 
		And the small man with the large paunch, 
		And the gray coat, and the large hat, and the hands behind the back, 
		Watches them pass 
		In our minds for ever . . . 
		But that clutter of sodden corses 
		On the sodden Belgian grass-- 
		That is a strange new beauty. 
		
		
		IV
		
		With no especial legends of marchings or triumphs or duty, 
		Assuredly that is the way of it, 
		The way of beauty . . . 
		And that is the highest word you can find to say of it. 
		For you cannot praise it with words 
		Compounded of lyres and swords, 
		But the thought of the gloom and the rain 
		And the ugly coated figure, standing beside a drain, 
		Shall eat itself into your brain: 
		And you will say of all heroes, “They fought like the Belgians!” 
		And you will say: “He wrought like a Belgian his fate out of gloom.” 
		And you will say: “He bought like a Belgian his doom.” 
		And that shall be an honourable name; 
		“Belgian” shall be an honourable word; 
		As honourable as the fame of the sword, 
		As honourable as the mention of the many-chorded lyre, 
		And his old coat shall seem as beautiful as the fabrics woven in Tyre. 
		
		
		V
		
		And what in the world did they bear it for? 
		I don’t know. 
		And what in the world did they dare it for? 
		Perhaps that is not for the likes of me to understand. 
		They could very well have watched a hundred legions go 
		Over their fields and between their cities 
		Down into more southerly regions. 
		They could very well have let the legions pass through their woods, 
		And have kept their lives and their wives and their children and cattle and goods. 
		I don’t understand. 
		Was it just love of their land? 
		Oh, poor dears! 
		Can any man so love his land? 
		Give them a thousand thousand pities 
		And rivers and rivers of tears 
		To wash off the blood from the cities of Flanders. 
		
		
		VI
		
		This is Charing Cross; 
		It is midnight; 
		There is a great crowd 
		And no light. 
		A great crowd, all black that hardly whispers aloud. 
		Surely, that is a dead woman--a dead mother! 
		She has a dead face; 
		She is dressed all in black; 
		She wanders to the bookstall and back, 
		At the back of the crowd; 
		And back again and again back, 
		She sways and wanders. 
		
		This is Charing Cross; 
		It is one o’clock. 
		There is still a great cloud, and very little light; 
		Immense shafts of shadows over the black crowd 
		That hardly whispers aloud. . . 
		And now! . . That is another dead mother, 
		And there is another and another and another . . . 
		And little children, all in black, 
		All with dead faces, waiting in all the waiting-places, 
		Wandering from the doors of the waiting-room 
		In the dim gloom. 
		These are the women of Flanders.
		They await the lost. 
		They await the lost that shall never leave the dock; 
		They await the lost that shall never again come by the train 
		To the embraces of all these women with dead faces; 
		They await the lost who lie dead in trench and barrier and foss, 
		In the dark of the night. 
		This is Charing Cross; it is past one of the clock; 
		There is very little light. 
		
		There is so much pain. 
		
		
		_L’Envoi_
		
		And it was for this that they endured this gloom; 
		This October like November, 
		That August like a hundred thousand hours, 
		And that September, 
		A hundred thousand dragging sunlit days, 
		And half October like a thousand years . . . 
		Oh, poor dears!


	2. IN TENEBRIS

		All within is warm, 
		Here without it’s very cold, 
		Now the year is grown so old 
		And the dead leaves swarm. 
		
		In your heart is light, 
		Here without it’s very dark, 
		When shall I hear the lark? 
		When see aright? 
		
		Oh, for a moment’s space! 
		Draw the clinging curtains wide 
		Whilst I wait and yearn outside 
		Let the light fall on my face.


	3. ON HEAVEN

		I
		
		That day the sunlight lay on the farms; 
		On the morrow the bitter frost that there was! 
		That night my young love lay in my arms, 
		The morrow how bitter it was! 
		
		And because she is very tall and quaint 
		And golden, like a quattrocento saint, 
		I desire to write about Heaven; 
		To tell you the shape and the ways of it, 
		And the joys and the toil in the maze of it, 
		For these there must be in Heaven, 
		Even in Heaven! 
		
		For God is a good man, God is a kind man, 
		And God’s a good brother, and God is no blind man, 
		And God is our father. 
		
		I will tell you how this thing began: 
		How I waited in a little town near Lyons for many years, 
		And yet knew nothing of passing time, or of her tears, 
		But, for nine slow years, lounged away at my table in the shadowy sunlit square 
		Where the small cafes are. 
		
		The Place is small and shaded by great planes, 
		Over a rather human monument 
		Set up to Louis Dixhuit in the year 
		Eighteen fourteen, a funnny thing with dolphins 
		About a pyramid of green-dripped, sordid stone. 
		But the enormous, monumental planes 
		Shade it all in, and in the flecks of sun 
		Sit market women. There’s a paper shop 
		Painted all blue, a shipping agency, 
		Three or four cafes; dank, dark colonnades 
		Of an eighteen-forty Mairie. i’d no wish 
		To wait for her where it was picturesque, 
		Or ancient or historic, or to love 
		Over well any place in the land before she came 
		And loved it too. I didn’t even go 
		To Lyons for the opera, Arles for the bulls, 
		Or Avignon for glimpses of the Rhone. 
		Not even to Beaucaire! I sat about 
		And played long games of dominoes with the maire, 
		Or passing commis-voyageurs. And so 
		I sat and watched the trains come in, and read 
		The Libre Parole and sipped the thin, fresh wine 
		They call Piquette, and got to know the people, 
		The kindly, southern people . . . 
		
		Until, when the years were over, she came in her swift red car, 
		Shooting out past a pram; and she slowed and stopped and lighted absently down, 
		A little dazed, in the heart of the town; 
		And nodded imperceptibly, 
		With a sideways look at me. 
		
		So our days here began. 
		
		And the wrinkled old woman who keeps the cafe, 
		And the man 
		Who sells the Libre Parole, 
		And the sleepy gendarme, 
		And the fat facteur who delivers letters only in the shady, 
		Pleasanter kind of streets; 
		And the boy I often gave a penny, 
		And the maire himself, and the little girl who loves toffee 
		And me because I have given her many sweets; 
		And the one-eyed droll 
		Bookseller of the rue Grand de Provence,-- 
		Chancing to be going home to bed, 
		Smiled with their kindly, fresh benevolence, 
		Because they knew I had waited for a lady 
		Who should come in a swift, red, English car, 
		To the square where the little cafes are. 
		And the old, old woman touched me on the wrist 
		With a wrinkled finger, 
		And said: ‘Why do you linger?-- 
		Too many kisses can never be kissed! 
		And comfort her--nobody here will think harm--
		Take her instantly to your arm! 
		it is a little strange, you know, to your dear, 
		To be dead! 
		
		But one is English, 
		Though one be never so much of a ghost; 
		And if most of your life has been spent in the craze to relinquish 
		What you want most, 
		You will go on relinquishing, 
		You will go on vanquishing 
		Human longings, even 
		in Heaven. 
		
		God! You will have forgotten what the rest of the world is on fire for--
		The madness of desire for the long and quiet embrace, 
		The coming nearer of a tear-wet face; 
		Forgotten the desire to slake 
		The thirst, and the long, slow ache, 
		And to interlace 
		Lash with lash, lip with lip, limb with limb, and the fingers of the hand 
		with the hand 
		And . . . 
		
		You will have forgotten . . . 
		But they will all awake; 
		Aye, all of them shall awaken 
		in this dear place. 
		And all that then we took 
		Of all that we might have taken, 
		Was that one embracing look, 
		Coursing over features, over limbs, between eyes, a making sure, and a 
		long sigh, 
		Having the tranquility 
		Of trees unshaken, 
		And the softness of sweet tears, 
		And the dearness of the dear brook 
		To wash away past years 
		(For that too is the quality of Heaven, 
		That you are conscious always of great pain 
		Only when it is over 
		And shall not come again. 
		Thank God, thank God, it shall not come again, 
		Though your eyes be never so wet with the tears 
		Of many years!) 
		
		
		II
		
		And so she stood a moment by the door 
		Of the long, red car. Royally she stepped down, 
		Settling one long foot and leaning back 
		Amongst her russet fires. And she looked round . . . 
		Of course it must be strange to come from England 
		Straight into Heaven. You must take it in, 
		Slowly, for a long instant, with some fear . . . 
		Now that affiche, in orange, on the kiosque: 
		‘Six Spanish bulls will fight on Sunday next 
		At Arles, in the arena’ . . . Well, it’s strange 
		Till you get used to our ways. And, on the Mairie, 
		The untidy poster telling of the concours 
		De vers de soie, of silkworms. The cocoons 
		Pile, yellow, all across the little Places 
		of ninety townships in the environs 
		Of Lyons, the city famous for her silks. 
		What if she’s pale? it must be more than strange, 
		After these years, to come out here from England 
		To a strange place, to the stretched-out arms of me, 
		A man never fully known, only divined, 
		Loved, guessed at, pledged to, in your Sussex mud, 
		Amongst the frost-bound farms by the yeasty sea. 
		Oh, the long look; the long, long searching look! 
		And how my heart beat! 
		Well, you see, in England 
		She had a husband. And four families--
		His, hers, mine, and another woman’s too--
		Would have gone crazy. And, with all the rest, 
		Eight parents, and the children, seven aunts 
		And sixteen uncles and a grandmother. 
		There were, besides, our names, a few real friends, 
		And the decencies of life. A monstrous heap! 
		They made a monstrous heap. i’ve lain awake 
		Whole aching nights to tot the figures up! 
		Heap after heaps, of complications, griefs, 
		Worries, tongue-clackings, nonsenses and shame 
		For not making good. You see the coil there was! 
		And the poor strained fibres of our tortured brains, 
		And the voice that called from depth in her to depth 
		in me . . . my God, in the dreadful nights, 
		Through the roar of the great black winds, through the sound of the sea! 
		Oh agony! Agony! From out my breast 
		it called whilst the dark house slept, and stairheads creaked; 
		From within my breast it screamed and made no sound; 
		And wailed . . . And made no sound. 
		And howled like the damned . . . No sound! No sound! 
		Only the roar of the wind, the sound of the sea, 
		The tick of the clock . . . 
		And our two voices, noiseless through the dark. 
		Oh God! Oh God! 
		
		(That night my young love lay in my arms . . . 
		
		There was a bitter frost lay on the farms 
		in England, by the shiver 
		And the crawling of the tide; 
		By the broken silver of the English Channel, 
		Beneath the aged moon that watched alone--
		Poor, dreary, lonely old moon to have to watch alone, 
		Over the dreary beaches mangled with ancient foam 
		Like shrunken flannel; 
		The moon, an intent, pale face, looking down 
		Over the English Channel. 
		
		But soft and warm She lay in the crook of my arm. 
		And came to no harm since we had come quietly home 
		Even to Heaven: 
		Which is situate in a little old town 
		Not very far from the side of the Rhone, 
		That mighty river 
		That is, just there by the Crau, in the lower reaches, 
		Far wider than the Channel.) 
		
		But, in the market place of the other little town, 
		Where the Rhone is a narrower, greener affair, 
		When she had looked at me, she beckoned with her long white hand, 
		A little languidly, since it is a strain, if a blessed strain, to have just 
		died, 
		And going back again, 
		into the long, red, English racing-car, 
		Made room for me amongst the furs at her side. 
		And we moved away from the kind looks of the kindly people 
		into the wine of the hurrying air. 
		And very soon even the tall grey steeple 
		of Lyons cathedral behind us grew little and far 
		And was no more there . . . 
		And, thank God, we had nothing any more to think of, 
		And, thank God, we had nothing any more to talk of, 
		Unless, as it chanced, the flashing silver stalk of the pampas 
		Growing down to the brink of the Rhone, 
		On the lawn of a little chateau, giving onto the river. 
		And we were alone, alone, alone . . . 
		At last alone . . . 
		
		The poplars on the hill-crests go marching rank on rank, 
		And far away to the left, like a pyramid, marches the ghost of Mont Blanc. 
		There are vines and vines and vines, all down to the river bank. 
		There will be a castle here, 
		And an abbey there; 
		And huge quarries and a long white farm, 
		With long thatched barns and a long wine shed, 
		As we ran alone, all down to the Rhone. 
		
		And that day there was no puncturing of the tyres to fear; 
		And no trouble at all with the engine and gear; 
		Smoothly and softly we ran between the great poplar alley 
		All down the valley of the Rhone. 
		For the dear, good God knew how we needed rest and to be alone. 
		But, on other days, just as you must have perfect shadows to make perfect 
		Rembrandts, 
		He shall affect us with little lets and hindrances of His own 
		Devising--just to let us be glad that we are dead . . . 
		Just for remembrance. 
		
		
		III
		
		Hard by the castle of God in the Alpilles, 
		in the eternal stone of Alpilles, 
		There’s this little old town, walled round by the old, grey gardens . . . 
		There were never such olives as grew in the gardens of God, 
		The green-grey trees, the wardens of agony 
		And failure of gods, 
		Of hatred and faith, of truth, of treachery 
		They whisper; they whisper that none of the living prevail; 
		They whirl in the great mistral over the white, dry sods, 
		Like hair blown back from white foreheads in the enormous gale 
		Up to the castle walls of God . . . 
		
		But in the town that’s our home, 
		Once you are past the wall, 
		Amongst the trunks of the planes, 
		Though they roar never so mightily overhead in the day, 
		All this tumult is quieted down, and all 
		The windows stand open because of the heat of the night 
		That shall come. 
		And, from each little window, shines in the twilight a light, 
		And, beneath t the eternal planes 
		With the huge, gnarled trunks that were aged and grey 
		At the creation of Time. 
		The Chinese lanthorns, hung out at the doors of hotels, 
		Shimmering in the dusk, here on an orange tree, there on a sweet-scented 
		lime, 
		There on a golden inscription: ‘Hotel of the Three Holy Bells, ’ 
		Or ‘Hotel Sublime, ’ or ‘inn of the Real Good Will’. 
		And yes, it is very warm and still, 
		And all the world is afoot after the heat of the day, 
		in the cool of the even in Heaven. 
		And it is here that I have brought my dear to pay h er all that I owed her, 
		Amidst thus crowd, with the soft voices, the soft footfalls, the rejoicing 
		laughter. 
		And after the twilight there falls such a warm, soft darkness, 
		And still there will come stealing under the planes a drowsy odour, 
		Compounded of all cyclamen, of oranges, or rosemary and bay, 
		To take the remembrance of the toil of the day away. 
		
		So we sat at a little table, under an immense plane, 
		And we remembered again 
		The blisters and foments 
		And terrible harassments of the tired brain, 
		The cold and the frost and the pain, 
		As if we were looking at a picture and saying: ‘This is true! 
		Why this is a truly painted 
		Rendering of that street where--you remember?--I fainted.’ 
		And we remembered again 
		Tranquilly, our poor few tranquil moments, 
		The falling of the sunlight through the panes, 
		The flutter for ever in the chimney of the quiet flame, 
		The mutter of our two poor tortured voices, always a-whisper. 
		And the endless nights when I would cry out, running through all 
		the gamut of misery, even to a lisp, her name; 
		And we remembered our kisses, nine, maybe, or eleven--
		if you count two that I gave and she did not give again. 
		
		And always the crowd drifted by in the cool of the even, 
		And we saw the faces of friends, 
		And the faces of those to who one day we must make amends, 
		Smiling in welcome. 
		And I said: ‘On another day--
		And such a day may well come soon--
		We will play dominoes with Dick and Evelyn and Frances 
		For a while afternoon. 
		And, in the time to come, Genee 
		Shall dance for us, fluttering over the ground as the sunlight dances.’ 
		And Arlesiennes with the beautiful faces went by us, 
		And gipsies and Spanish shepherds, noiseless in sandals of straw, sauntered 
		night us, 
		Wearing slouch hats and old sheep-skins, and casting admiring glances 
		From dark, foreign eyes at my dear . . . 
		(And ah, it is Heaven alone, to have her alone and so near!) 
		So all this world rejoices 
		in the cool of the even 
		in Heaven . . . 
		And, when the cool of the even was fully there, 
		Came a great ha-ha of voices. 
		Many children run together, and all laugh and rejoice and call, 
		Hurrying with little arms flying, and little feet flying, and little 
		hurrying haunches, 
		From the door of a stable, 
		Where, in an olla podrida, they had been playing at the corrida 
		With the black Spanish bull, whose nature 
		is patience with children. And so, through the gaps of the branches 
		Of Jasmine on our screen beneath the planes, 
		We saw, coming down from the road that leads to the olives and Alpilles, 
		A man of great stature, 
		in a great cloak, 
		With a great stride, 
		And a little joke 
		For all and sundry, coming down with a hound at his side. 
		And he stood at the cross-roads, passing the time of day 
		in a great, kind voice, the voice of a man-and-a-half!--
		With a great laugh, and a great clap on the back, 
		For a fellow in black--a priest I should say, 
		Or may be a lover, 
		Wearing black for his mistress’s mood. 
		‘A little toothache, ’ we could hear him say; ‘but that’s so good 
		When it gives over.’ So he passed from sight 
		in the soft twilight, into the soft night, 
		in the soft riot and tumult of the crowd. 
		
		And a magpie flew down, laughing, holding up his beak to us, 
		And I said: ‘That was God! Presently, when he has walked through the town 
		And the night has settled down, 
		So that you may not be afraid, 
		in the darkness, he will come to our table and speak to us.’ 
		And past us many saints went walking in a company--
		The kindly, thoughtful saints, devising and laughing and talking, 
		And smiling at us with their pleasant solicitude. 
		And because the thick of the crowd followed to the one side God, 
		Or to the other the saints, we sat in solitude 
		in the distance the saints went singing all in chorus, 
		And our Lord went on the other side of the street, 
		Holding a little boy. 
		Taking him to pick the musk-roses that open at dusk, 
		For wreathing the statue of Jove, 
		Left on the Alpilles above 
		By the Romans; since Jove, 
		Even Jove, 
		Must not want for his quota of honour and love; 
		But round about him there must be, 
		With all its tender jollity, 
		The laughter of children in Heaven, 
		Making merry with roses in Heaven. 
		
		Yet never he looked at us, knowing that that would be such joy 
		As must be over-great for hearts that needed quiet; 
		Such a riot and tumult of joy as quiet hearts are not able 
		To taste to the full . . . 
		
		. . . And my dear one sat in the shadows; very softly she wept:--
		Such joy is in Heaven, 
		in the cool of the even, 
		After the burden and toil of the days, 
		After the heat and haze 
		in the vine-hills; or in the shady 
		Whispering groves in high passes up in the Alpilles, 
		Guarding the castle of God. 
		
		And I went on talking towards her unseen face: 
		‘So it is, so it goes, in this beloved place, 
		There shall be never a grief but passes; no, not any; 
		There shall be such bright light and no blindness; 
		There shall be so little awe and so much loving-kindness; 
		There shall be a little longing and enough care, 
		There shall be a little labor and enough of toil 
		To bring back the lost flavour of our human coil; 
		Not enough to taint it; 
		And all that we desire shall prove as fair as we can paint it.’ 
		For, though that may be the very hardest trick of all 
		God set Himself, who fashioned this goodly hall. 
		Thus has He made Heaven; 
		Even Heaven. 
		
		For God is a very clever mechanician; 
		And if He made this proud and goodly ship of the world, 
		From the maintop to the hull, 
		Do you think He could not finish it to the full, 
		With a flag and all, 
		And make it sail, tall and brave, 
		On the waters, beyond the grave? 
		it should cost but very little rhetoric 
		To explain for you that last, fine, conjuring trick; 
		To give to each man after his heart 
		Who knows very well what each man has in his heart: 
		To let you pass your life in a night-club where they dance, 
		if that is your idea of heaven; if you will, in the South of France; 
		if you will, on the turbulent sea; if you will, in the peace of the night; 
		Where you will; how you will; 
		Or in the long death of a kiss, that may never pall; 
		He would be a very little God if He could not do all this, 
		And He is still 
		The great God of all. 
		
		For God is a good man; God is a kind man; 
		in the darkness He came walking to our table beneath the planes, And spoke 
		So kindly to my dear, 
		With a little joke, 
		Giving himself some pains 
		To take away her fear 
		Of His stature, 
		So as not to abash her, 
		in no way at all to dash her new pleasure beneath the planes, 
		in the cool of the even 
		in Heaven. 
		
		That, that is God’s nature, 
		For God’s a good brother, and God is no blind man, 
		And God’s a good mother and loves sons who’re rovers, 
		And God is our father and loves all good lovers. 
		He has a kindly smile for many a poor sinner; 
		He takes note to make it up to poor wayfarers on sodden roads; 
		Such as bear heavy loads 
		He takes note of, and of all that toil on bitter seas and frosty lands, 
		He takes care that they shall have good at His hands; 
		Well He takes note of a poor old cook, 
		Cooking your dinner; 
		And much He loves sweet joys in such as ever took 
		Sweet joy on earth. He has a kindly smile for a kiss 
		Given in a shady nook. 
		And in the golden book 
		Where the accounts of His estate are kept, 
		All the round, golden sovereigns of bliss, 
		Known by poor lovers, married or never yet married, 
		While the green world waked, or the black world quietly slept; 
		All joy, all sweetness, each sweet sight that’s sighed-- 
		Their accounts are kept, 
		And carried 
		By the love of God to His own credit’s side. 
		So that is why He came to our table to welcome my dear, dear bride, 
		in the cool of the even 
		in front of a cafe in Heaven.


	4. THAT EXPLOIT OF YOURS

		I meet with two soldiers sometimes here in Hell 
		The one, with a tear on the seat of hi red pantaloons 
		Was stuck by a pitchfork, 
		Climbing a wall to steal apples. 
		
		The second has a seeming silver helmet, 
		Having died from a fall from his horse on some tram-lines 
		In Dortmund. 
		
		These two 
		Meeting in the vaulted and vaporous caverns of Hell 
		Exclaim always in identical tones: 
		‘I at least have done my duty to Society and the Fatherland!’ 
		It is strange how the cliché` prevails . . .
		For I will bet my hat that you sent me here to Hell 
		Are saying the selfsame words at this very moment 
		Concerning that exploit of yours.


	5. THERE SHALL BE MORE JOY

		The little angels of Heaven 
		Each wear a long white dress, 
		And in the tall arcadings 
		Play ball and play at chess; 
		
		With never a soil on their garments, 
		Not a sigh the whole day long, 
		Not a bitter note in their pleasure, 
		Not a bitter note in their song. 
		
		But they shall know keener pleasure, 
		And they shall know joy more rare--
		Keener, keener pleasure 
		When you, my dear, come there. 
		
		The little angels of Heaven 
		Each wear a long white gown, 
		And they lean over the ramparts 
		Waiting and looking down.


	6. WHAT THE ORDERLY DOG SAW

		I
		
		   The seven white peacocks against the castle wall
		In the high trees and the dusk are like tapestry;
		The sky being orange, the high wall a purple barrier,
		The canal dead silver in the dusk:
		And you are far away.
		
		Yet I see infinite miles of mountains,
		Little lights shining in rows in the dark of them--
		Infinite miles of marshes;
		Thin wisps of mist, shimmering like blue webs
		Over the dusk of them.
		
		Great curves and horns of sea,
		And dusk and dusk, and the little village;
				And you, sitting in the firelight.
		
		
		II
		
		   Around me are the two hundred and forty men of B Com-
			pany,
		Mud-colored;
		Going about their avocations,
		Resting between their practice of the art
		Of killing men;
		As I too rest between my practice
		Of the art of killing men.
		Their pipes glow over the mud and their mud-color, moving
			like fireflies beneath the trees--
		I too being mud-colored--
		Beneath the trees and the peacocks.
		When they come up to me in the dusk
		They start, stiffen and salute, almost invisibly.
		And the forty-two prisoners from the battalion guard-room
		Crouch over the tea-cans in the shadow of the wall.
		And the bread hunks glimmer, beneath the peacocks--
				And you are far away.
		
		
		III
		
		   Presently I shall go in
		I shall write down the names of the forty-two
		Prisoners in the battalion guard-room
		On fair white foolscap:
		Their names, rank and regimental numbers;
		Corps, Companies, Punishments and Offences,
		Remarks, and By whom confined.
		Yet in spite of all I shall see only
		The infinite miles of dark mountain,
		The infinite miles of dark marshland,
		Great curves and horns of sea;
		The little village;
		And you,
		Sitting in the firelight.


*** Robert Frost (1874 - 1963)

	1. A HUNDRED COLLARS

		Lancaster bore him--such a little town
		Such a great man. It doesn’t see him often
		Of late years though he keeps the old homestead
		And sends the children down there with their mother
		To run wild in the summer--a little wild.
		Sometimes he joins them for a day or two
		And sees old friends he somehow can’t get near.
		They meet him in the general store at night
		Preoccupied with formidable mail
		Rifling a printed letter as he talks.
		They seem afraid. He wouldn’t have it so:
		Though a great scholar he’s a democrat
		If not at heart at least on principle.
		Lately when coming up to Lancaster
		His train being late he missed another train
		And had four hours to wait at Woodsville Junction
		After eleven o’clock at night. Too tired
		To think of sitting such an ordeal out
		He turned to the hotel to find a bed.
		
		“No room“ the night clerk said. “Unless----”
		Woodsville’s a place of shrieks and wandering lamps
		And cars that shock and rattle--and _one_ hotel.
		
		“You say ‘unless.‘”
		
		“Unless you wouldn’t mind
		Sharing a room with someone else.”
		
		“Who is it?”
		
		“A man.
		
		“So I should hope. What kind of man?”
		
		“I know him: he’s all right. A man’s a man.
		Separate beds of course you understand.”
		
		The night clerk blinked his eyes and dared him on.
		“Who’s that man sleeping in the office chair?
		Has he had the refusal of my chance?”
		
		“He was afraid of being robbed or murdered.
		What do you say?”
		
		“I’ll have to have a bed.”
		
		The night clerk led him up three flights of stairs
		And down a narrow passage full of doors
		At the last one of which he knocked and entered
		“Lafe here’s a fellow wants to share your
		room.”
		
		“Show him this way. I’m not afraid of him
		I’m not so drunk I can’t take care of myself.”
		The night clerk clapped a bedstead on the foot.
		“This will be yours. Good-night“ he said and
		went.
		
		“Lafe was the name I think?”
		
		“Yes _Lay_fayette.
		You got it the first time. And yours?”
		
		“Magoon.
		
		Doctor Magoon.”
		
		“A Doctor?”
		
		“Well a teacher.”
		
		“Professor Square-the-circle-till-you’re-tired?
		Hold on there’s something I don’t think of now
		That I had on my mind to ask the first
		Man that knew anything I happened in with.
		I’ll ask you later--don’t let me forget it.”
		The Doctor looked at Lafe and looked away.
		A man? A brute. Naked above the waist
		He sat there creased and shining in the light
		Fumbling the buttons in a well-starched shirt.
		“I’m moving into a size-larger shirt.
		I’ve felt mean lately; mean’s no name for it.
		I just found what the matter was to-night:
		I’ve been a-choking like a nursery tree
		When it outgrows the wide band of its name tag.
		I blamed it on the hot spell we’ve been having.
		‘Twas nothing but my foolish hanging back
		Not liking to own up I’d grown a size.
		Number eighteen this is. What size do you wear?”
		
		The Doctor caught his throat convulsively.
		“Oh--ah--fourteen--fourteen.”
		
		“Fourteen! You say so!
		I can remember when I wore fourteen.
		And come to think I must have back at home
		More than a hundred collars size fourteen.
		Too bad to waste them all. You ought to have them.
		They’re yours and welcome; let me send them to
		you.
		What makes you stand there on one leg like that?
		You’re not much furtherer than where Kike left you
		You act as if you wished you hadn’t come.
		Sit down or lie down friend; you make me nervous.”
		
		The Doctor made a subdued dash for it
		And propped himself at bay against a pillow.
		
		“Not that way with your shoes on Kike’s white
		bed.
		You can’t rest that way. Let me pull your shoes
		off.”
		
		“Don’t touch me please--I say don’t touch me
		please.
		I’ll not be put to bed by you my man.”
		
		“Just as you say. Have it your own way then.
		‘My man’ is it? You talk like a professor.
		Speaking of who’s afraid of who however
		I’m thinking I have more to lose than you
		If anything should happen to be wrong.
		Who wants to cut your number fourteen throat!
		Let’s have a show down as an evidence
		Of good faith. There is ninety dollars.
		Come if you’re not afraid.”
		
		“_I_‘m not afraid.
		There’s five: that’s all I carry.”
		
		“I can search you?
		Where are you moving over to? Stay still.
		
		You’d better tuck your money under you
		And sleep on it the way I always do
		When I’m with people I don’t trust at night.”
		
		“Will you believe me if I put it there
		Right on the counterpane--that I do trust you?”
		
		“You’d say so Mister Man.--I’m a collector.
		My ninety isn’t mine--you won’t think that.
		I pick it up a dollar at a time
		All round the country for the _Weekly News_
		Published in Bow. You know the _Weekly News?_”
		
		“Known it since I was young.”
		
		“Then you know me.
		Now we are getting on together--talking.
		I’m sort of Something for it at the front.
		My business is to find what people want:
		They pay for it and so they ought to have it.
		Fairbanks he says to me--he’s editor--
		Feel out the public sentiment--he says.
		A good deal comes on me when all is said.
		The only trouble is we disagree
		In politics: I’m Vermont Democrat--
		You know what that is sort of double-dyed;
		The _News_ has always been Republican.
		Fairbanks he says to me ‘Help us this year’
		Meaning by us their ticket. ‘No’ I says
		‘I can’t and won’t. You’ve been in long enough:
		It’s time you turned around and boosted us.
		You’ll have to pay me more than ten a week
		If I’m expected to elect Bill Taft.
		I doubt if I could do it anyway.‘”
		
		“You seem to shape the paper’s policy.”
		
		“You see I’m in with everybody know ‘em all.
		I almost know their farms as well as they do.”
		
		“You drive around? It must be pleasant work.”
		
		“It’s business but I can’t say it’s not fun.
		What I like best’s the lay of different farms
		Coming out on them from a stretch of woods
		Or over a hill or round a sudden corner.
		I like to find folks getting out in spring
		Raking the dooryard working near the house.
		Later they get out further in the fields.
		Everything’s shut sometimes except the barn;
		The family’s all away in some back meadow.
		There’s a hay load a-coming--when it comes.
		And later still they all get driven in:
		The fields are stripped to lawn the garden patches
		Stripped to bare ground the apple trees
		To whips and poles. There’s nobody about.
		The chimney though keeps up a good brisk
		smoking.
		And I lie back and ride. I take the reins
		Only when someone’s coming and the mare
		Stops when she likes: I tell her when to go.
		I’ve spoiled Jemima in more ways than one.
		She’s got so she turns in at every house
		As if she had some sort of curvature
		No matter if I have no errand there.
		She thinks I’m sociable. I maybe am.
		It’s seldom I get down except for meals though.
		Folks entertain me from the kitchen doorstep
		All in a family row down to the youngest.”
		
		“One would suppose they might not be as glad
		To see you as you are to see them.”
		
		“Oh
		Because I want their dollar. I don’t want
		Anything they’ve not got. I never dun.
		I’m there and they can pay me if they like.
		I go nowhere on purpose: I happen by.
		Sorry there is no cup to give you a drink.
		I drink out of the bottle--not your style.
		Mayn’t I offer you----?”
		
		“No no no thank you.
		
		“Just as you say. Here’s looking at you then.--
		And now I’m leaving you a little while.
		
		You’ll rest easier when I’m gone perhaps--
		Lie down--let yourself go and get some sleep.
		But first--let’s see--what was I going to ask you?
		Those collars--who shall I address them to
		Suppose you aren’t awake when I come back?”
		
		“Really friend I can’t let you. You--may need
		them.”
		
		“Not till I shrink when they’ll be out of style.”
		
		“But really--I have so many collars.”
		
		“I don’t know who I rather would have have them.
		They’re only turning yellow where they are.
		But you’re the doctor as the saying is.
		I’ll put the light out. Don’t you wait for me:
		I’ve just begun the night. You get some sleep.
		I’ll knock so-fashion and peep round the door
		When I come back so you’ll know who it is.
		There’s nothing I’m afraid of like scared people.
		I don’t want you should shoot me in the head.
		What am I doing carrying off this bottle?
		There now you get some sleep.”
		
		He shut the door
		The Doctor slid a little down the pillow.


	2. A SERVANT TO SERVANTS

		I didn’t make you know how glad I was
		To have you come and camp here on our land.
		I promised myself to get down some day
		And see the way you lived but I don’t know!
		With a houseful of hungry men to feed
		I guess you’d find. ... It seems to me
		I can’t express my feelings any more
		Than I can raise my voice or want to lift
		My hand (oh I can lift it when I have to).
		Did ever you feel so? I hope you never.
		It’s got so I don’t even know for sure
		Whether I _am_ glad sorry or anything.
		There’s nothing but a voice-like left inside
		That seems to tell me how I ought to feel
		And would feel if I wasn’t all gone wrong.
		You take the lake. I look and look at it.
		I see it’s a fair pretty sheet of water.
		I stand and make myself repeat out loud
		The advantages it has so long and narrow
		Like a deep piece of some old running river
		Cut short off at both ends. It lies five miles
		Straight away through the mountain notch
		From the sink window where I wash the plates
		And all our storms come up toward the house
		Drawing the slow waves whiter and whiter and
		whiter.
		It took my mind off doughnuts and soda biscuit
		To step outdoors and take the water dazzle
		A sunny morning or take the rising wind
		About my face and body and through my wrapper
		When a storm threatened from the Dragon’s Den
		And a cold chill shivered across the lake.
		I see it’s a fair pretty sheet of water
		Our Willoughby! How did you hear of it?
		I expect though everyone’s heard of it.
		In a book about ferns? Listen to that!
		You let things more like feathers regulate
		Your going and coming. And you like it here?
		I can see how you might. But I don’t know!
		It would be different if more people came
		For then there would be business. As it is
		The cottages Len built sometimes we rent them
		Sometimes we don’t. We’ve a good piece of shore
		That ought to be worth something and may yet.
		But I don’t count on it as much as Len.
		He looks on the bright side of everything
		Including me. He thinks I’ll be all right
		With doctoring. But it’s not medicine--
		Lowe is the only doctor’s dared to say so--
		It’s rest I want--there I have said it out--
		From cooking meals for hungry hired men
		And washing dishes after them--from doing
		Things over and over that just won’t stay done.
		By good rights I ought not to have so much
		Put on me but there seems no other way.
		Len says one steady pull more ought to do it.
		He says the best way out is always through.
		And I agree to that or in so far
		As that I can see no way out but through--
		Leastways for me--and then they’ll be convinced.
		It’s not that Len don’t want the best for me.
		It was his plan our moving over in
		Beside the lake from where that day I showed you
		We used to live--ten miles from anywhere
		We didn’t change without some sacrifice
		But Len went at it to make up the loss.
		His work’s a man’s of course from sun to sun
		But he works when he works as hard as I do--
		Though there’s small profit in comparisons.
		(Women and men will make them all the same.)
		But work ain’t all. Len undertakes too much.
		He’s into everything in town. This year
		It’s highways and he’s got too many men
		Around him to look after that make waste.
		They take advantage of him shamefully
		And proud too of themselves for doing so.
		We have four here to board great good-for-nothings
		Sprawling about the kitchen with their talk
		While I fry their bacon. Much they care!
		No more put out in what they do or say
		Than if I wasn’t in the room at all.
		Coming and going all the time they are:
		I don’t learn what their names are let alone
		Their characters or whether they are safe
		To have inside the house with doors unlocked.
		I’m not afraid of them though if they’re not
		Afraid of me. There’s two can play at that.
		I have my fancies: it runs in the family.
		My father’s brother wasn’t right. They kept him
		Locked up for years back there at the old farm.
		I’ve been away once--yes I’ve been away.
		The State Asylum. I was prejudiced;
		I wouldn’t have sent anyone of mine there;
		You know the old idea--the only asylum
		Was the poorhouse and those who could afford
		Rather than send their folks to such a place
		Kept them at home; and it does seem more human.
		But it’s not so: the place is the asylum.
		There they have every means proper to do with
		And you aren’t darkening other people’s lives--
		Worse than no good to them and they no good
		To you in your condition; you can’t know
		Affection or the want of it in that state.
		I’ve heard too much of the old-fashioned way.
		My father’s brother he went mad quite young.
		Some thought he had been bitten by a dog
		Because his violence took on the form
		Of carrying his pillow in his teeth;
		But it’s more likely he was crossed in love
		Or so the story goes. It was some girl.
		Anyway all he talked about was love.
		They soon saw he would do someone a mischief
		If he wa’n't kept strict watch of and it ended
		In father’s building him a sort of cage
		Or room within a room of hickory poles
		Like stanchions in the barn from floor to ceiling--
		A narrow passage all the way around.
		Anything they put in for furniture
		He’d tear to pieces even a bed to lie on.
		So they made the place comfortable with straw
		Like a beast’s stall to ease their consciences.
		Of course they had to feed him without dishes.
		They tried to keep him clothed but he paraded
		With his clothes on his arm--all of his clothes.
		Cruel--it sounds. I s’pose they did the best
		They knew. And just when he was at the height
		Father and mother married and mother came
		A bride to help take care of such a creature
		And accommodate her young life to his.
		That was what marrying father meant to her.
		She had to lie and hear love things made dreadful
		By his shouts in the night. He’d shout and shout
		Until the strength was shouted out of him
		And his voice died down slowly from exhaustion.
		He’d pull his bars apart like bow and bow-string
		And let them go and make them twang until
		His hands had worn them smooth as any ox-bow.
		And then he’d crow as if he thought that child’s
		play--
		The only fun he had. I’ve heard them say though
		They found a way to put a stop to it.
		He was before my time--I never saw him;
		But the pen stayed exactly as it was
		There in the upper chamber in the ell
		A sort of catch-all full of attic clutter.
		I often think of the smooth hickory bars.
		It got so I would say--you know half fooling--
		“It’s time I took my turn upstairs in jail“--
		Just as you will till it becomes a habit.
		No wonder I was glad to get away.
		Mind you I waited till Len said the word.
		I didn’t want the blame if things went wrong.
		I was glad though no end when we moved out
		And I looked to be happy and I was
		As I said for a while--but I don’t know!
		Somehow the change wore out like a prescription.
		And there’s more to it than just window-views
		And living by a lake. I’m past such help--
		Unless Len took the notion which he won’t
		And I won’t ask him--it’s not sure enough.
		I ‘spose I’ve got to go the road I’m going:
		Other folks have to and why shouldn’t I?
		I almost think if I could do like you
		Drop everything and live out on the ground--
		But it might be come night I shouldn’t like it
		Or a long rain. I should soon get enough
		And be glad of a good roof overhead.
		I’ve lain awake thinking of you I’ll warrant
		More than you have yourself some of these nights.
		The wonder was the tents weren’t snatched away
		From over you as you lay in your beds.
		I haven’t courage for a risk like that.
		Bless you of course you’re keeping me from work
		But the thing of it is I need to _be_ kept.
		There’s work enough to do--there’s always that;
		But behind’s behind. The worst that you can do
		Is set me back a little more behind.
		I shan’t catch up in this world anyway.
		I’d rather you’d not go unless you must.


	3. A TIME TO TALK

		When a friend calls to me from the road
		And slows his horse to a meaning walk
		I don’t stand still and look around
		On all the hills I haven’t hoed
		And shout from where I am What is it?
		No not as there is a time to talk.
		I thrust my hoe in the mellow ground
		Blade-end up and five feet tall
		And plod: I go up to the stone wall
		For a friendly visit.


	4. A VANTAGE POINT

		If tired of trees I seek again mankind
		Well I know where to hie me--in the dawn
		To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn.
		There amid lolling juniper reclined
		Myself unseen I see in white defined
		Far off the homes of men and farther still
		The graves of men on an opposing hill
		Living or dead whichever are most to mind.
		
		And if by noon I have too much of these
		I have but to turn on my arm and lo
		The sun-burned hillside sets my face aglow
		My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze
		I smell the earth I smell the bruised plant
		I look into the crater of the ant.


	5. AFTER APPLE-PICKING

		My long two-pointed ladder’s sticking through a tree
		Toward heaven still
		And there’s a barrel that I didn’t fill
		Beside it and there may be two or three
		Apples I didn’t pick upon some bough.
		But I am done with apple-picking now.
		Essence of winter sleep is on the night
		The scent of apples: I am drowsing off.
		I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight
		I got from looking through a pane of glass
		I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough
		And held against the world of hoary grass.
		It melted and I let it fall and break.
		But I was well
		Upon my way to sleep before it fell
		And I could tell
		What form my dreaming was about to take.
		Magnified apples appear and disappear
		Stem end and blossom end
		And every fleck of russet showing clear.
		My instep arch not only keeps the ache
		It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round.
		I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend.
		And I keep hearing from the cellar bin
		The rumbling sound
		Of load on load of apples coming in.
		For I have had too much
		Of apple-picking: I am overtired
		Of the great harvest I myself desired.
		There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch
		Cherish in hand lift down and not let fall.
		For all
		That struck the earth
		No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble
		Went surely to the cider-apple heap
		As of no worth.
		One can see what will trouble
		This sleep of mine whatever sleep it is.
		Were he not gone
		The woodchuck could say whether it’s like his
		Long sleep as I describe its coming on
		Or just some human sleep.


	6. AN ENCOUNTER

		Once on the kind of day called “weather breeder”
		When the heat slowly hazes and the sun
		By its own power seems to be undone
		I was half boring through half climbing through
		A swamp of cedar. Choked with oil of cedar
		And scurf of plants and weary and over-heated
		And sorry I ever left the road I knew
		I paused and rested on a sort of hook
		That had me by the coat as good as seated
		And since there was no other way to look
		Looked up toward heaven and there against the
		blue
		Stood over me a resurrected tree
		A tree that had been down and raised again--
		A barkless spectre. He had halted too
		As if for fear of treading upon me.
		I saw the strange position of his hands--
		Up at his shoulders dragging yellow strands
		Of wire with something in it from men to men.
		“You here?“ I said. “Where aren’t you nowadays?
		And what’s the news you carry--if you know?
		And tell me where you’re off for--Montreal?
		Me? I’m not off for anywhere at all.
		Sometimes I wander out of beaten ways
		Half looking for the orchid Calypso.”


	7. AN OLD MAN’S WINTER NIGHT

		All out of doors looked darkly in at him
		Through the thin frost almost in separate stars
		That gathers on the pane in empty rooms.
		What kept his eyes from giving back the gaze
		Was the lamp tilted near them in his hand.
		What kept him from remembering what it was
		That brought him to that creaking room was age.
		He stood with barrels round him--at a loss.
		And having scared the cellar under him
		In clomping there he scared it once again
		In clomping off;--and scared the outer night
		Which has its sounds familiar like the roar
		Of trees and crack of branches common things
		But nothing so like beating on a box.
		A light he was to no one but himself
		Where now he sat concerned with he knew what
		A quiet light and then not even that.
		He consigned to the moon such as she was
		So late-arising to the broken moon
		As better than the sun in any case
		For such a charge his snow upon the roof
		His icicles along the wall to keep;
		And slept. The log that shifted with a jolt
		Once in the stove disturbed him and he shifted
		And eased his heavy breathing but still slept.
		One aged man--one man--can’t keep a house
		A farm a countryside or if he can
		It’s thus he does it of a winter night.


	8. BIRCHES

		When I see birches bend to left and right
		Across the lines of straighter darker trees
		I like to think some boy’s been swinging them.
		But swinging doesn’t bend them down to stay.
		Ice-storms do that. Often you must have seen them
		Loaded with ice a sunny winter morning
		After a rain. They click upon themselves
		As the breeze rises and turn many-coloured
		As the stir cracks and crazes their enamel.
		Soon the sun’s warmth makes them shed crystal
		shells
		Shattering and avalanching on the snow-crust--
		Such heaps of broken glass to sweep away
		You’d think the inner dome of heaven had fallen.
		They are dragged to the withered bracken by the
		load
		And they seem not to break; though once they are
		bowed
		So low for long they never right themselves:
		You may see their trunks arching in the woods
		Years afterwards trailing their leaves on the ground
		Like girls on hands and knees that throw their hair
		Before them over their heads to dry in the sun.
		But I was going to say when Truth broke in
		With all her matter-of-fact about the ice-storm
		I should prefer to have some boy bend them
		As he went out and in to fetch the cows--
		Some boy too far from town to learn baseball
		Whose only play was what he found himself
		Summer or winter and could play alone.
		One by one he subdued his father’s trees
		By riding them down over and over again
		Until he took the stiffness out of them
		And not one but hung limp not one was left
		For him to conquer. He learned all there was
		To learn about not launching out too soon
		And so not carrying the tree away
		Clear to the ground. He always kept his poise
		To the top branches climbing carefully
		With the same pains you use to fill a cup
		Up to the brim and even above the brim.
		Then he flung outward feet first with a swish
		Kicking his way down through the air to the ground.
		So was I once myself a swinger of birches.
		And so I dream of going back to be.
		It’s when I’m weary of considerations
		And life is too much like a pathless wood
		Where your face burns and tickles with the cobwebs
		Broken across it and one eye is weeping
		From a twig’s having lashed across it open.
		I’d like to get away from earth awhile
		And then come back to it and begin over.
		May no fate wilfully misunderstand me
		And half grant what I wish and snatch me away
		Not to return. Earth’s the right place for love:
		I don’t know where it’s likely to go better.
		I’d like to go by climbing a birch tree
		And climb black branches up a snow-white trunk
		_Toward_ heaven till the tree could bear no more
		But dipped its top and set me down again.
		That would be good both going and coming back.
		One could do worse than be a swinger of birches.


	9. BLUEBERRIES

		“You ought to have seen what I saw on my way
		To the village through Mortenson’s pasture to-day:
		Blueberries as big as the end of your thumb
		Real sky-blue and heavy and ready to drum
		In the cavernous pail of the first one to come!
		And all ripe together not some of them green
		And some of them ripe! You ought to have seen!”
		
		“I don’t know what part of the pasture you mean.”
		
		“You know where they cut off the woods--let me
		see--
		It was two years ago--or no!--can it be
		No longer than that?--and the following fall
		The fire ran and burned it all up but the wall.”
		
		“Why there hasn’t been time for the bushes to
		grow.
		That’s always the way with the blueberries though:
		There may not have been the ghost of a sign
		Of them anywhere under the shade of the pine
		But get the pine out of the way you may burn
		The pasture all over until not a fern
		Or grass-blade is left not to mention a stick
		And presto they’re up all around you as thick
		And hard to explain as a conjurer’s trick.”
		
		“It must be on charcoal they fatten their fruit.
		I taste in them sometimes the flavour of soot.
		
		And after all really they’re ebony skinned:
		The blue’s but a mist from the breath of the wind
		A tarnish that goes at a touch of the hand
		And less than the tan with which pickers are
		tanned.”
		
		“Does Mortenson know what he has do you
		think?”
		
		“He may and not care and so leave the chewink
		To gather them for him--you know what he is.
		He won’t make the fact that they’re rightfully his
		An excuse for keeping us other folk out.”
		
		“I wonder you didn’t see Loren about.”
		
		“The best of it was that I did. Do you know
		I was just getting through what the field had to show
		And over the wall and into the road
		When who should come by with a democrat-load
		Of all the young chattering Lorens alive
		But Loren the fatherly out for a drive.”
		
		“He saw you then? What did he do? Did he
		frown?”
		
		“He just kept nodding his head up and down.
		You know how politely he always goes by.
		But he thought a big thought--I could tell by his
		eye--
		Which being expressed might be this in effect:
		‘I have left those there berries I shrewdly suspect
		To ripen too long. I am greatly to blame.‘”
		
		“He’s a thriftier person than some I could name.”
		
		“He seems to be thrifty; and hasn’t he need
		With the mouths of all those young Lorens to feed?
		He has brought them all up on wild berries they
		say
		Like birds. They store a great many away.
		They eat them the year round and those they
		don’t eat
		They sell in the store and buy shoes for their feet.”
		
		“Who cares what they say? It’s a nice way to live
		Just taking what Nature is willing to give
		Not forcing her hand with harrow and plow.”
		
		“I wish you had seen his perpetual bow--
		And the air of the youngsters! Not one of them
		turned
		And they looked so solemn-absurdly concerned.”
		
		“I wish I knew half what the flock of them know
		Of where all the berries and other things grow
		Cranberries in bogs and raspberries on top
		Of the boulder-strewn mountain and when they
		will crop.
		I met them one day and each had a flower
		Stuck into his berries as fresh as a shower;
		Some strange kind--they told me it hadn’t a name.”
		
		“I’ve told you how once not long after we came
		I almost provoked poor Loren to mirth
		By going to him of all people on earth
		To ask if he knew any fruit to be had
		For the picking. The rascal he said he’d be glad
		To tell if he knew. But the year had been bad.
		There _had_ been some berries--but those were all
		gone.
		He didn’t say where they had been. He went on:
		‘I’m sure--I’m sure’--as polite as could be.
		He spoke to his wife in the door ‘Let me see
		Marne _we_ don’t know any good berrying place?’
		It was all he could do to keep a straight face.”
		
		“If he thinks all the fruit that grows wild is for him
		He’ll find he’s mistaken. See here for a whim
		We’ll pick in the Mortensons’ pasture this year.
		We’ll go in the morning that is if it’s clear
		And the sun shines out warm: the vines must be
		wet.
		It’s so long since I picked I almost forget
		How we used to pick berries: we took one look
		round
		Then sank out of sight like trolls underground
		And saw nothing more of each other or heard
		Unless when you said I was keeping a bird
		Away from its nest and I said it was you.
		‘Well one of us is.‘ For complaining it flew
		Around and around us. And then for a while
		We picked till I feared you had wandered a mile
		And I thought I had lost you. I lifted a shout
		Too loud for the distance you were it turned out
		For when you made answer your voice was as low
		As talking--you stood up beside me you know.”
		
		“We shan’t have the place to ourselves to enjoy--
		Not likely when all the young Lorens deploy.
		They’ll be there to-morrow or even to-night.
		They won’t be too friendly--they may be polite--
		To people they look on as having no right
		To pick where they’re picking. But we won’t
		complain.
		You ought to have seen how it looked in the rain
		The fruit mixed with water in layers of leaves
		Like two kinds of jewels a vision for thieves.”


	10. BOND AND FREE

		Love has earth to which she clings
		With hills and circling arms about--
		Wall within wall to shut fear out.
		But Thought has need of no such things
		For Thought has a pair of dauntless wings.
		
		On snow and sand and turf I see
		Where Love has left a printed trace
		With straining in the world’s embrace.
		And such is Love and glad to be.
		But thought has shaken his ankles free.
		
		Thought cleaves the interstellar gloom
		And sits in Sirius’ disc all night
		Till day makes him retrace his flight
		With smell of burning on every plume
		Back past the sun to an earthly room.
		
		His gains in heaven are what they are.
		Yet some say Love by being thrall
		And simply staying possesses all
		In several beauty that Thought fares far
		To find fused in another star.


	11. BROWN’S DESCENT

		Brown lived at such a lofty farm
		That everyone for miles could see
		His lantern when he did his chores
		In winter after half-past three.
		
		And many must have seen him make
		His wild descent from there one night
		‘Cross lots ‘cross walls ‘cross everything
		Describing rings of lantern light.
		
		Between the house and barn the gale
		Got him by something he had on
		And blew him out on the icy crust
		That cased the world and he was gone!
		
		Walls were all buried trees were few:
		He saw no stay unless he stove
		A hole in somewhere with his heel.
		But though repeatedly he strove
		
		And stamped and said things to himself
		And sometimes something seemed to yield
		He gained no foothold but pursued
		His journey down from field to field.
		
		Sometimes he came with arms outspread
		Like wings revolving in the scene
		Upon his longer axis and
		With no small dignity of mien.
		
		Faster or slower as he chanced
		Sitting or standing as he chose
		According as he feared to risk
		His neck or thought to spare his clothes
		
		He never let the lantern drop.
		And some exclaimed who saw afar
		The figures he described with it
		“I wonder what those signals are
		
		Brown makes at such an hour of night!
		He’s celebrating something strange.
		I wonder if he’s sold his farm
		Or been made Master of the Grange.”
		
		He reeled he lurched he bobbed he checked;
		He fell and made the lantern rattle
		(But saved the light from going out).
		So half-way down he fought the battle
		
		Incredulous of his own bad luck.
		And then becoming reconciled
		To everything he gave it up
		And came down like a coasting child.
		
		“Well--I--be----“ that was all he said
		As standing in the river road
		He looked back up the slippery slope
		(Two miles it was) to his abode.
		
		Sometimes as an authority
		On motor-cars I’m asked if I
		Should say our stock was petered out
		And this is my sincere reply:
		
		Yankees are what they always were.
		Don’t think Brown ever gave up hope
		Of getting home again because
		He couldn’t climb that slippery slope;
		
		Or even thought of standing there
		Until the January thaw
		Should take the polish off the crust.
		He bowed with grace to natural law
		
		And then went round it on his feet
		After the manner of our stock;
		Not much concerned for those to whom
		At that particular time o’clock
		
		It must have looked as if the course
		He steered was really straight away
		From that which he was headed for--
		Not much concerned for them I say.
		
		But now he snapped his eyes three times;
		Then shook his lantern saying “Ile’s
		‘Bout out!“ and took the long way home
		By road a matter of several miles.


	12. FLOWER-GATHERING

		I left you in the morning
		And in the morning glow
		You walked a way beside me
		To make me sad to go.
		Do you know me in the gloaming
		Gaunt and dusty grey with roaming?
		Are you dumb because you know me not
		Or dumb because you know?
		
		All for me? And not a question
		For the faded flowers gay
		That could take me from beside you
		For the ages of a day?
		They are yours and be the measure
		Of their worth for you to treasure
		The measure of the little while
		That I’ve been long away.


	13. GOING FOR WATER

		The well was dry beside the door
		And so we went with pail and can
		Across the fields behind the house
		To seek the brook if still it ran;
		
		Not loth to have excuse to go
		Because the autumn eve was fair
		(Though chill) because the fields were ours
		And by the brook our woods were there.
		
		We ran as if to meet the moon
		That slowly dawned behind the trees
		The barren boughs without the leaves
		Without the birds without the breeze.
		
		But once within the wood we paused
		Like gnomes that hid us from the moon
		Ready to run to hiding new
		With laughter when she found us soon.
		
		Each laid on other a staying hand
		To listen ere we dared to look
		And in the hush we joined to make
		We heard we knew we heard the brook.
		
		A note as from a single place
		A slender tinkling fall that made
		Now drops that floated on the pool
		Like pearls and now a silver blade.


	14. HOME BURIAL

		He saw her from the bottom of the stairs
		Before she saw him. She was starting down
		Looking back over her shoulder at some fear.
		She took a doubtful step and then undid it
		To raise herself and look again. He spoke
		Advancing toward her: “What is it you see
		From up there always--for I want to know.”
		She turned and sank upon her skirts at that
		And her face changed from terrified to dull.
		He said to gain time: “What is it you see?”
		Mounting until she cowered under him.
		“I will find out now--you must tell me dear.”
		She in her place refused him any help
		With the least stiffening of her neck and silence.
		She let him look sure that he wouldn’t see
		Blind creature; and a while he didn’t see.
		But at last he murmured “Oh“ and again “Oh.”
		
		“What is it--what?“ she said.
		“Just that I see.”
		
		“You don’t“ she challenged. “Tell me what it is.”
		
		“The wonder is I didn’t see at once.
		I never noticed it from here before.
		I must be wonted to it--that’s the reason.
		The little graveyard where my people are!
		So small the window frames the whole of it.
		Not so much larger than a bedroom is it?
		There are three stones of slate and one of marble
		Broad-shouldered little slabs there in the sunlight
		On the sidehill. We haven’t to mind _those._
		But I understand: it is not the stones
		But the child’s mound----”
		
		Don’t don’t don’t don’t“ she cried.
		
		She withdrew shrinking from beneath his arm
		That rested on the banister and slid downstairs;
		And turned on him with such a daunting look
		He said twice over before he knew himself:
		“Can’t a man speak of his own child he’s lost?”
		
		“Not you! Oh where’s my hat? Oh I don’t
		need it!
		I must get out of here. I must get air.
		I don’t know rightly whether any man can.”
		
		“Amy! Don’t go to someone else this time.
		Listen to me. I won’t come down the stairs.”
		He sat and fixed his chin between his fists.
		“There’s something I should like to ask you dear.”
		
		“You don’t know how to ask it.”
		
		“Help me then.”
		
		Her fingers moved the latch for all reply.
		
		“My words are nearly always an offence.
		I don’t know how to speak of anything
		So as to please you. But I might be taught
		I should suppose. I can’t say I see how.
		A man must partly give up being a man
		With women-folk. We could have some
		arrangement
		By which I’d bind myself to keep hands off
		Anything special you’re a-mind to name.
		Though I don’t like such things ‘twixt those that
		love.
		Two that don’t love can’t live together without
		them.
		But two that do can’t live together with them.”
		She moved the latch a little. “Don’t--don’t go.
		Don’t carry it to someone else this time.
		Tell me about it if it’s something human.
		Let me into your grief. I’m not so much
		Unlike other folks as your standing there
		Apart would make me out. Give me my chance.
		I do think though you overdo it a little.
		What was it brought you up to think it the thing
		To take your mother-loss of a first child
		So inconsolably--in the face of love.
		You’d think his memory might be satisfied----”
		
		“There you go sneering now!”
		
		“I’m not I’m not!
		You make me angry. I’ll come down to you.
		God what a woman! And it’s come to this
		A man can’t speak of his own child that’s dead.”
		“You can’t because you don’t know how.
		If you had any feelings you that dug
		With your own hand--how could you?--his little
		grave;
		I saw you from that very window there
		Making the gravel leap and leap in air
		Leap up like that like that and land so lightly
		And roll back down the mound beside the hole.
		I thought Who is that man? I didn’t know you.
		And I crept down the stairs and up the stairs
		To look again and still your spade kept lifting.
		Then you came in. I heard your rumbling voice
		Out in the kitchen and I don’t know why
		But I went near to see with my own eyes.
		You could sit there with the stains on your shoes
		Of the fresh earth from your own baby’s grave
		And talk about your everyday concerns.
		You had stood the spade up against the wall
		Outside there in the entry for I saw it.”
		
		“I shall laugh the worst laugh I ever laughed.
		I’m cursed. God if I don’t believe I’m cursed.”
		“I can repeat the very words you were saying.
		
		‘Three foggy mornings and one rainy day
		Will rot the best birch fence a man can build.’
		Think of it talk like that at such a time!
		What had how long it takes a birch to rot
		To do with what was in the darkened parlour?
		You _couldn’t_ care! The nearest friends can go
		With anyone to death comes so far short
		They might as well not try to go at all.
		No from the time when one is sick to death
		One is alone and he dies more alone.
		Friends make pretence of following to the grave
		But before one is in it their minds are turned
		And making the best of their way back to life
		And living people and things they understand.
		But the world’s evil. I won’t have grief so
		If I can change it. Oh I won’t I won’t!”
		
		“There you have said it all and you feel better.
		You won’t go now. You’re crying. Close the door.
		The heart’s gone out of it: why keep it up?
		Amy! There’s someone coming down the road!”
		
		“_You_--oh you think the talk is all. I must go--
		Somewhere out of this house. How can I make
		you----”
		
		“If--you--do!“ She was opening the door wider.
		“Where do you mean to go? First tell me that.
		I’ll follow and bring you back by force. I _will!_--”


	15. HOUSE FEAR

		Always--I tell you this they learned--
		Always at night when they returned
		To the lonely house from far away
		To lamps unlighted and fire gone gray
		They learned to rattle the lock and key
		To give whatever might chance to be
		Warning and time to be off in flight:
		And preferring the out- to the in-door night
		They learned to leave the house-door wide
		Until they had lit the lamp inside.


	16. HYLA BROOK

		By June our brook’s run out of song and speed.
		Sought for much after that it will be found
		Either to have gone groping underground
		(And taken with it all the Hyla breed
		That shouted in the mist a month ago
		Like ghost of sleigh-bells in a ghost of snow)--
		Or flourished and come up in jewel-weed
		Weak foliage that is blown upon and bent
		Even against the way its waters went.
		Its bed is left a faded paper sheet
		Of dead leaves stuck together by the heat--
		A brook to none but who remember long.
		This as it will be seen is other far
		Than with brooks taken otherwhere in song.
		We love the things we love for what they are.


	17. INTO MY OWN

		One of my wishes is that those dark trees
		So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze
		Were not as ‘twere the merest mask of gloom
		But stretched away unto the edge of doom.
		
		I should not be withheld but that some day
		Into their vastness I should steal away
		Fearless of ever finding open land
		Or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand.
		
		I do not see why I should e’er turn back
		Or those should not set forth upon my track
		To overtake me who should miss me here
		And long to know if still I held them dear.
		
		They would not find me changed from him they
		knew--
		Only more sure of all I thought was true.


	18. MENDING WALL

		Something there is that doesn’t love a wall
		That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it
		And spills the upper boulders in the sun;
		And makes gaps even two can pass abreast.
		The work of hunters is another thing:
		I have come after them and made repair
		Where they have left not one stone on a stone
		But they would have the rabbit out of hiding
		To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean
		No one has seen them made or heard them made
		But at spring mending-time we find them there.
		I let my neighbour know beyond the hill;
		And on a day we meet to walk the line
		And set the wall between us once again.
		We keep the wall between us as we go.
		To each the boulders that have fallen to each.
		And some are loaves and some so nearly balls
		We have to use a spell to make them balance:
		“Stay where you are until our backs are turned!”
		We wear our fingers rough with handling them.
		Oh just another kind of out-door game
		One on a side. It comes to little more:
		There where it is we do not need the wall:
		He is all pine and I am apple orchard.
		My apple trees will never get across
		And eat the cones under his pines I tell him.
		He only says “Good fences make good neighbours.”
		Spring is the mischief in me and I wonder
		If I could put a notion in his head:
		“_Why_ do they make good neighbours? Isn’t it
		Where there are cows? But here there are no cows.
		Before I built a wall I’d ask to know
		What I was walling in or walling out
		And to whom I was like to give offence.
		Something there is that doesn’t love a wall
		That wants it down.“ I could say “Elves“ to him
		But it’s not elves exactly and I’d rather
		He said it for himself. I see him there
		Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top
		In each hand like an old-stone savage armed.
		He moves in darkness as it seems to me
		Not of woods only and the shade of trees.
		He will not go behind his father’s saying
		And he likes having thought of it so well
		He says again “Good fences make good
		neighbours.”


	19. MOWING

		There was never a sound beside the wood but one
		And that was my long scythe whispering to the
		ground.
		What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself;
		Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun
		Something perhaps about the lack of sound--
		And that was why it whispered and did not speak.
		It was no dream of the gift of idle hours
		Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf:
		Anything more than the truth would have seemed
		too weak
		To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows
		Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers
		(Pale orchises) and scared a bright green snake.
		The fact is the sweetest dream that labour knows.
		My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make.


	20. MY NOVEMBER GUEST

		My Sorrow when she’s here with me
		Thinks these dark days of autumn rain
		Are beautiful as days can be;
		She loves the bare the withered tree;
		She walks the sodden pasture lane.
		
		Her pleasure will not let me stay.
		She talks and I am fain to list:
		She’s glad the birds are gone away
		She’s glad her simple worsted grey
		Is silver now with clinging mist.
		
		The desolate deserted trees
		The faded earth the heavy sky
		The beauties she so truly sees
		She thinks I have no eye for these
		And vexes me for reason why.
		
		Not yesterday I learned to know
		The love of bare November days
		Before the coming of the snow
		But it were vain to tell her so
		And they are better for her praise.


	21. NOTHING GOLD CAN STAY

		Nature’s first green is gold,
		Her hardest hue to hold.
		Her early leaf’s a flower;
		But only so an hour.
		Then leaf subsides to leaf.
		So Eden sank to grief,
		So dawn goes down to day.
		Nothing gold can stay.


	22. OCTOBER

		O hushed October morning mild
		Thy leaves have ripened to the fall;
		To-morrow’s wind if it be wild
		Should waste them all.
		The crows above the forest call;
		To-morrow they may form and go.
		O hushed October morning mild
		Begin the hours of this day slow
		Make the day seem to us less brief.
		Hearts not averse to being beguiled
		Beguile us in the way you know;
		Release one leaf at break of day;
		At noon release another leaf;
		One from our trees one far away;
		Retard the sun with gentle mist;
		Enchant the land with amethyst.
		Slow slow!
		For the grapes’ sake if they were all
		Whose leaves already are burnt with frost
		Whose clustered fruit must else be lost--
		For the grapes’ sake along the wall.


	23. OUT OUT

		The buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yard
		And made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of
		wood
		Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.
		And from there those that lifted eyes could count
		Five mountain ranges one behind the other
		Under the sunset far into Vermont.
		And the saw snarled and rattled snarled and rattled
		As it ran light or had to bear a load.
		And nothing happened: day was all but done.
		Call it a day I wish they might have said
		To please the boy by giving him the half hour
		That a boy counts so much when saved from work.
		His sister stood beside them in her apron
		To tell them “Supper.“ At the word the saw
		As if to prove saws knew what supper meant
		Leaped out at the boy’s hand or seemed to leap--
		He must have given the hand. However it was
		Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!
		The boy’s first outcry was a rueful laugh.
		As he swung toward them holding up the hand
		Half in appeal but half as if to keep
		The life from spilling. Then the boy saw all--
		Since he was old enough to know big boy
		Doing a man’s work though a child at heart--
		He saw all spoiled. “Don’t let him cut my hand off--
		The doctor when he comes. Don’t let him sister!”
		So. But the hand was gone already.
		The doctor put him in the dark of ether.
		He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.
		And then--the watcher at his pulse took fright.
		No one believed. They listened at his heart.
		Little--less--nothing!--and that ended it.
		No more to build on there. And they since they
		Were not the one dead turned to their affairs.


	24. PUTTING IN THE SEED

		You come to fetch me from my work to-night
		When supper’s on the table and we’ll see
		If I can leave off burying the white
		Soft petals fallen from the apple tree
		(Soft petals yes but not so barren quite
		Mingled with these smooth bean and wrinkled
		pea);
		And go along with you ere you lose sight
		Of what you came for and become like me
		Slave to a springtime passion for the earth.
		How Love bums through the Putting in the Seed
		On through the watching for that early birth
		When just as the soil tarnishes with weed
		The sturdy seedling with arched body comes
		Shouldering its way and shedding the earth crumbs.


	25. RANGE-FINDING

		The battle rent a cobweb diamond-strung
		And cut a flower beside a ground bird’s nest
		Before it stained a single human breast.
		The stricken flower bent double and so hung.
		And still the bird revisited her young.
		A butterfly its fall had dispossessed
		A moment sought in air his flower of rest
		Then lightly stooped to it and fluttering clung.
		
		On the bare upland pasture there had spread
		O’ernight ‘twixt mullein stalks a wheel of thread
		And straining cables wet with silver dew.
		A sudden passing bullet shook it dry.
		The indwelling spider ran to greet the fly
		But finding nothing sullenly withdrew.


	26. RELUCTANCE

		Out through the fields and the woods
		And over the walls I have wended;
		I have climbed the hills of view
		And looked at the world and descended;
		I have come by the highway home
		And lo it is ended.
		
		The leaves are all dead on the ground
		Save those that the oak is keeping
		To ravel them one by one
		And let them go scraping and creeping
		Out over the crusted snow
		When others are sleeping.
		
		And the dead leaves lie huddled and still
		No longer blown hither and thither;
		The last lone aster is gone;
		The flowers of the witch-hazel wither;
		The heart is still aching to seek
		But the feet question “Whither?”
		
		Ah when to the heart of man
		Was it ever less than a treason
		To go with the drift of things
		To yield with a grace to reason
		And bow and accept the end
		Of a love or a season?


	27. REVELATION

		We make ourselves a place apart
		Behind light words that tease and flout
		But oh the agitated heart
		Till someone really find us out.
		
		A pity if the case require
		(Or so we say) that in the end
		We speak the literal to inspire
		The understanding of a friend.
		
		But so with all from babes that play
		At hide-and-seek to God afar
		So all who hide too well away
		Must speak and tell us where they are.


	28. STORM-FEAR

		When the wind works against us in the dark
		And pelts with snow
		The lower chamber window on the east
		And whispers with a sort of stifled bark
		The beast
		“Come out! Come out!“--
		It costs no inward struggle not to go
		Ah do!
		I count our strength
		Two and a child
		Those of us not asleep subdued to mark
		How the cold creeps as the fire dies at length--
		How drifts are piled
		Dooryard and road ungraded
		Till even the comforting barn grows far away
		And my heart owns a doubt
		Whether ‘tis in us to arise with day
		And save ourselves unaided.


	29. THE CODE

		There were three in the meadow by the brook
		Gathering up windrows piling cocks of hay
		With an eye always lifted toward the west
		Where an irregular sun-bordered cloud
		Darkly advanced with a perpetual dagger
		Flickering across its bosom. Suddenly
		One helper thrusting pitchfork in the ground
		Marched himself off the field and home. One stayed.
		The town-bred farmer failed to understand.
		
		“What was there wrong?”
		
		“Something you just now said.”
		
		“What did I say?”
		
		“About our taking pains.
		
		“To cock the hay?--because it’s going to shower?
		I said that more than half an hour ago.
		I said it to myself as much as you.”
		
		“You didn’t know. But James is one big fool.
		He thought you meant to find fault with his work.
		That’s what the average farmer would have meant.
		James would take time of course to chew it over
		Before he acted: he’s just got round to act.”
		
		“He is a fool if that’s the way he takes me.”
		
		“Don’t let it bother you. You’ve found out
		something.
		The hand that knows his business won’t be told
		To do work better or faster--those two things.
		I’m as particular as anyone:
		Most likely I’d have served you just the same.
		But I know you don’t understand our ways.
		You were just talking what was in your mind
		What was in all our minds and you weren’t hinting.
		
		Tell you a story of what happened once:
		I was up here in Salem at a man’s
		Named Sanders with a gang of four or five
		Doing the haying. No one liked the boss.
		He was one of the kind sports call a spider
		All wiry arms and legs that spread out wavy
		From a humped body nigh as big’s a biscuit.
		But work! that man could work especially
		If by so doing he could get more work
		Out of his hired help. I’m not denying
		He was hard on himself. I couldn’t find
		That he kept any hours--not for himself.
		Daylight and lantern-light were one to him:
		I’ve heard him pounding in the barn all night.
		But what he liked was someone to encourage.
		Them that he couldn’t lead he’d get behind
		And drive the way you can you know in mowing--
		Keep at their heels and threaten to mow their legs
		off.
		I’d seen about enough of his bulling tricks
		(We call that bulling). I’d been watching him.
		So when he paired off with me in the hayfield
		To load the load thinks I Look out for trouble.
		I built the load and topped it off; old Sanders
		Combed it down with a rake and says ‘O. K.’
		Everything went well till we reached the barn
		With a big jag to empty in a bay.
		You understand that meant the easy job
		For the man up on top of throwing _down_
		The hay and rolling it off wholesale
		Where on a mow it would have been slow lifting.
		You wouldn’t think a fellow’d need much urging
		Under those circumstances would you now?
		But the old fool seizes his fork in both hands
		And looking up bewhiskered out of the pit
		Shouts like an army captain ‘Let her come!
		Thinks I D’ye mean it? ‘What was that you
		said?’
		I asked out loud so’s there’d be no mistake
		‘Did you say Let her come?‘ ‘Yes let her come.’
		He said it over but he said it softer.
		Never you say a thing like that to a man
		Not if he values what he is. God I’d as soon
		Murdered him as left out his middle name.
		I’d built the load and knew right where to find it.
		Two or three forkfuls I picked lightly round for
		Like meditating and then I just dug in
		And dumped the rackful on him in ten lots
		I looked over the side once in the dust
		And caught sight of him treading-water-like
		Keeping his head above. ‘Damn ye’ I says
		‘That gets ye!‘ He squeaked like a squeezed rat.
		That was the last I saw or heard of him.
		I cleaned the rack and drove out to cool off.
		As I sat mopping hayseed from my neck
		And sort of waiting to be asked about it
		One of the boys sings out ‘Where’s the old man?’
		‘I left him in the barn under the hay.
		If ye want him ye can go and dig him out.’
		They realised from the way I swobbed my neck
		More than was needed something must be up.
		They headed for the barn; I stayed where I was.
		They told me afterward. First they forked hay
		A lot of it out into the barn floor.
		Nothing! They listened for him. Not a rustle.
		I guess they thought I’d spiked him in the temple
		Before I buried him or I couldn’t have managed.
		They excavated more. ‘Go keep his wife
		Out of the barn.‘ Someone looked in a window
		And curse me if he wasn’t in the kitchen
		Slumped way down in a chair with both his feet
		Stuck in the oven the hottest day that summer.
		He looked so clean disgusted from behind
		There was no one that dared to stir him up
		Or let him know that he was being looked at.
		Apparently I hadn’t buried him
		(I may have knocked him down); but my just
		trying
		To bury him had hurt his dignity.
		He had gone to the house so’s not to meet me.
		He kept away from us all afternoon.
		We tended to his hay. We saw him out
		After a while picking peas in his garden:
		He couldn’t keep away from doing something.”
		
		“Weren’t you relieved to find he wasn’t dead?”
		
		“No! and yet I don’t know--it’s hard to say.
		I went about to kill him fair enough.”
		
		“You took an awkward way. Did he discharge
		you?”
		“Discharge me? No! He knew I did just right.”


	30. THE COW IN APPLE-TIME

		Something inspires the only cow of late
		To make no more of a wall than an open gate
		And think no more of wall-builders than fools.
		Her face is flecked with pomace and she drools
		A cider syrup. Having tasted fruit
		She scorns a pasture withering to the root.
		She runs from tree to tree where lie and sweeten
		The windfalls spiked with stubble and worm-eaten.
		She leaves them bitten when she has to fly.
		She bellows on a knoll against the sky.
		Her udder shrivels and the milk goes dry.


	31. THE DEATH OF THE HIRED MAN

		Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table
		Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step
		She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage
		To meet him in the doorway with the news
		And put him on his guard. “Silas is back.”
		
		She pushed him outward with her through the door
		And shut it after her. “Be kind“ she said.
		She took the market things from Warren’s arms
		And set them on the porch then drew him down
		To sit beside her on the wooden steps.
		
		“When was I ever anything but kind to him?
		But I’ll not have the fellow back“ he said.
		“I told him so last haying didn’t I?
		‘If he left then’ I said ‘that ended it.’
		What good is he? Who else will harbour him
		At his age for the little he can do?
		What help he is there’s no depending on.
		Off he goes always when I need him most.
		
		‘He thinks he ought to earn a little pay
		Enough at least to buy tobacco with
		So he won’t have to beg and be beholden.’
		‘All right’ I say ‘I can’t afford to pay
		Any fixed wages though I wish I could.’
		‘Someone else can.‘ ‘Then someone else will have
		to.’
		I shouldn’t mind his bettering himself
		If that was what it was. You can be certain
		When he begins like that there’s someone at him
		Trying to coax him off with pocket-money--
		In haying time when any help is scarce.
		In winter he comes back to us. I’m done.”
		
		“Sh! not so loud: he’ll hear you“ Mary said.
		
		“I want him to: he’ll have to soon or late.”
		
		“He’s worn out. He’s asleep beside the stove.
		When I came up from Rowe’s I found him here
		Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep
		A miserable sight and frightening too--
		You needn’t smile--I didn’t recognise him--
		I wasn’t looking for him--and he’s changed.
		Wait till you see.”
		
		“Where did you say he’d been?”
		
		“He didn’t say. I dragged him to the house
		And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke.
		I tried to make him talk about his travels.
		Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off.”
		
		“What did he say? Did he say anything?”
		
		“But little.”
		
		“Anything? Mary confess
		He said he’d come to ditch the meadow for me.”
		
		“Warren!”
		
		“But did he? I just want to know.”
		
		“Of course he did. What would you have him say?
		Surely you wouldn’t grudge the poor old man
		Some humble way to save his self-respect.
		He added if you really care to know
		He meant to clear the upper pasture too.
		That sounds like something you have heard before?
		Warren I wish you could have heard the way
		He jumbled everything. I stopped to look
		Two or three times--he made me feel so queer--
		To see if he was talking in his sleep.
		He ran on Harold Wilson--you remember--
		The boy you had in haying four years since.
		He’s finished school and teaching in his college.
		Silas declares you’ll have to get him back.
		He says they two will make a team for work:
		Between them they will lay this farm as smooth!
		The way he mixed that in with other things.
		He thinks young Wilson a likely lad though daft
		On education--you know how they fought
		All through July under the blazing sun
		Silas up on the cart to build the load
		Harold along beside to pitch it on.”
		
		“Yes I took care to keep well out of earshot.”
		
		“Well those days trouble Silas like a dream.
		You wouldn’t think they would. How some things
		linger!
		Harold’s young college boy’s assurance piqued him.
		After so many years he still keeps finding
		Good arguments he sees he might have used.
		I sympathise. I know just how it feels
		To think of the right thing to say too late.
		Harold’s associated in his mind with Latin.
		He asked me what I thought of Harold’s saying
		He studied Latin like the violin
		Because he liked it--that an argument!
		He said he couldn’t make the boy believe
		He could find water with a hazel prong--
		Which showed how much good school had ever done
		him.
		He wanted to go over that. But most of all
		He thinks if he could have another chance
		To teach him how to build a load of hay----”
		
		“I know that’s Silas’ one accomplishment.
		He bundles every forkful in its place
		And tags and numbers it for future reference
		So he can find and easily dislodge it
		In the unloading. Silas does that well.
		He takes it out in bunches like big birds’ nests.
		You never see him standing on the hay
		He’s trying to lift straining to lift himself.”
		
		“He thinks if he could teach him that he’d be
		Some good perhaps to someone in the world.
		He hates to see a boy the fool of books.
		Poor Silas so concerned for other folk
		And nothing to look backward to with pride
		And nothing to look forward to with hope
		So now and never any different.”
		
		Part of a moon was falling down the west
		Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills.
		Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw
		And spread her apron to it. She put out her hand
		Among the harp-like morning-glory strings
		Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves
		As if she played unheard the tenderness
		That wrought on him beside her in the night.
		“Warren“ she said “he has come home to die:
		You needn’t be afraid he’ll leave you this time.”
		
		“Home“ he mocked gently.
		
		“Yes what else but home?
		
		It all depends on what you mean by home.
		Of course he’s nothing to us any more
		Than was the hound that came a stranger to us
		Out of the woods worn out upon the trail.”
		
		“Home is the place where when you have to go
		there
		They have to take you in.”
		
		“I should have called it
		Something you somehow haven’t to deserve.”
		
		Warren leaned out and took a step or two
		Picked up a little stick and brought it back
		And broke it in his hand and tossed it by.
		“Silas has better claim on us you think
		Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles
		As the road winds would bring him to his door.
		Silas has walked that far no doubt to-day.
		Why didn’t he go there? His brother’s rich
		A somebody--director in the bank.”
		
		“He never told us that.”
		
		“We know it though.”
		
		“I think his brother ought to help of course.
		I’ll see to that if there is need. He ought of right
		To take him in and might be willing to--
		He may be better than appearances.
		But have some pity on Silas. Do you think
		If he’d had any pride in claiming kin
		Or anything he looked for from his brother
		He’d keep so still about him all this time?”
		
		“I wonder what’s between them.”
		
		“I can tell you.
		Silas is what he is--we wouldn’t mind him--
		But just the kind that kinsfolk can’t abide.
		He never did a thing so very bad.
		He don’t know why he isn’t quite as good
		As anyone. He won’t be made ashamed
		To please his brother worthless though he is.”
		
		“_I_ can’t think Si ever hurt anyone.”
		
		“No but he hurt my heart the way he lay
		And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged
		chair-back.
		He wouldn’t let me put him on the lounge.
		You must go in and see what you can do.
		I made the bed up for him there to-night.
		You’ll be surprised at him--how much he’s broken.
		His working days are done; I’m sure of it.”
		
		“I’d not be in a hurry to say that.”
		
		“I haven’t been. Go look see for yourself.
		But Warren please remember how it is:
		He’s come to help you ditch the meadow.
		He has a plan. You mustn’t laugh at him.
		He may not speak of it and then he may.
		I’ll sit and see if that small sailing cloud
		Will hit or miss the moon.”
		
		It hit the moon.
		Then there were three there making a dim row
		The moon the little silver cloud and she.
		
		Warren returned--too soon it seemed to her
		Slipped to her side caught up her hand and waited.
		
		“Warren“ she questioned.
		
		“Dead“ was all he answered.


	32. THE GUM-GATHERER

		There overtook me and drew me in
		To his down-hill early-morning stride
		And set me five miles on my road
		Better than if he had had me ride
		A man with a swinging bag for load
		And half the bag wound round his hand.
		We talked like barking above the din
		Of water we walked along beside.
		And for my telling him where I’d been
		And where I lived in mountain land
		To be coming home the way I was
		He told me a little about himself.
		He came from higher up in the pass
		Where the grist of the new-beginning brooks
		Is blocks split off the mountain mass--
		And hopeless grist enough it looks
		Ever to grind to soil for grass.
		(The way it is will do for moss.)
		There he had built his stolen shack.
		It had to be a stolen shack
		Because of the fears of fire and loss
		That trouble the sleep of lumber folk:
		Visions of half the world burned black
		And the sun shrunken yellow in smoke.
		We know who when they come to town
		Bring berries under the wagon seat
		Or a basket of eggs between their feet;
		What this man brought in a cotton sack
		Was gum the gum of the mountain spruce.
		He showed me lumps of the scented stuff
		Like uncut jewels dull and rough.
		It comes to market golden brown;
		But turns to pink between the teeth.
		
		I told him this is a pleasant life
		To set your breast to the bark of trees
		That all your days are dim beneath
		And reaching up with a little knife
		To loose the resin and take it down
		And bring it to market when you please.


	33. THE HILL WIFE

		Loneliness (_Her Word_)
		
		One ought not to have to care
		So much as you and I
		Care when the birds come round the house
		To seem to say good-bye;
		
		Or care so much when they come back
		With whatever it is they sing;
		The truth being we are as much
		Too glad for the one thing
		
		As we are too sad for the other here--
		With birds that fill their breasts
		But with each other and themselves
		And their built or driven nests.


	34. THE IMPULSE

		It was too lonely for her there
		And too wild
		And since there were but two of them
		And no child
		
		And work was little in the house
		She was free
		And followed where he furrowed field
		Or felled tree.
		
		She rested on a log and tossed
		The fresh chips
		With a song only to herself
		On her lips.
		
		And once she went to break a bough
		Of black alder.
		She strayed so far she scarcely heard
		When he called her--
		
		And didn’t answer--didn’t speak--
		Or return.
		She stood and then she ran and hid
		In the fern.
		
		He never found her though he looked
		Everywhere
		And he asked at her mother’s house
		Was she there.
		
		Sudden and swift and light as that
		The ties gave
		And he learned of finalities
		Besides the grave.


	35. THE MOUNTAIN

		The mountain held the town as in a shadow.
		I saw so much before I slept there once:
		I noticed that I missed stars in the west
		Where its black body cut into the sky.
		Near me it seemed: I felt it like a wall
		Behind which I was sheltered from a wind.
		And yet between the town and it I found
		When I walked forth at dawn to see new things
		Were fields a river and beyond more fields.
		The river at the time was fallen away
		And made a widespread brawl on cobble-stones;
		But the signs showed what it had done in spring;
		Good grass-land gullied out and in the grass
		Ridges of sand and driftwood stripped of bark.
		I crossed the river and swung round the mountain.
		And there I met a man who moved so slow
		With white-faced oxen in a heavy cart
		It seemed no harm to stop him altogether.
		
		“What town is this?“ I asked.
		
		“This? Lunenburg.”
		Then I was wrong: the town of my sojourn
		Beyond the bridge was not that of the mountain
		But only felt at night its shadowy presence.
		“Where is your village? Very far from here?”
		
		“There is no village--only scattered farms.
		We were but sixty voters last election.
		We can’t in nature grow to many more:
		That thing takes all the room!“ He moved his goad.
		The mountain stood there to be pointed at.
		Pasture ran up the side a little way
		And then there was a wall of trees with trunks:
		After that only tops of trees and cliffs
		Imperfectly concealed among the leaves.
		A dry ravine emerged from under boughs
		Into the pasture.
		
		“That looks like a path.
		Is that the way to reach the top from here?--
		Not for this morning but some other time:
		I must be getting back to breakfast now.”
		
		“I don’t advise your trying from this side.
		There is no proper path but those that _have_
		Been up I understand have climbed from Ladd’s.
		That’s five miles back. You can’t mistake the place:
		They logged it there last winter some way up.
		I’d take you but I’m bound the other way.”
		
		“You’ve never climbed it?”
		
		“I’ve been on the sides
		Deer-hunting and trout-fishing. There’s a brook
		That starts up on it somewhere--I’ve heard say
		Right on the top tip-top--a curious thing.
		But what would interest you about the brook
		It’s always cold in summer warm in winter.
		One of the great sights going is to see
		It steam in winter like an ox’s breath.
		Until the bushes all along its banks
		Are inch-deep with the frosty spines and bristles--
		You know the kind. Then let the sun shine on it!”
		
		“There ought to be a view around the world
		From such a mountain--if it isn’t wooded
		Clear to the top.“ I saw through leafy screens
		Great granite terraces in sun and shadow
		Shelves one could rest a knee on getting up--
		With depths behind him sheer a hundred feet;
		Or turn and sit on and look out and down
		With little ferns in crevices at his elbow.
		
		“As to that I can’t say. But there’s the spring
		Right on the summit almost like a fountain.
		That ought to be worth seeing.”
		
		“If it’s there.
		You never saw it?”
		
		I guess there’s no doubt
		About its being there. I never saw it.
		It may not be right on the very top:
		It wouldn’t have to be a long way down
		To have some head of water from above
		And a _good distance_ down might not be noticed
		By anyone who’d come a long way up.
		One time I asked a fellow climbing it
		To look and tell me later how it was.”
		
		“What did he say?”
		
		“He said there was a lake
		Somewhere in Ireland on a mountain top.”
		
		“But a lake’s different. What about the spring?”
		
		“He never got up high enough to see.
		That’s why I don’t advise your trying this side.
		He tried this side. I’ve always meant to go
		And look myself but you know how it is:
		It doesn’t seem so much to climb a mountain
		You’ve worked around the foot of all your life.
		What would I do? Go in my overalls
		With a big stick the same as when the cows
		Haven’t come down to the bars at milking time?
		Or with a shotgun for a stray black bear?
		‘Twouldn’t seem real to climb for climbing it.”
		
		“I shouldn’t climb it if I didn’t want to--
		Not for the sake of climbing. What’s its name?”
		
		“We call it Hor: I don’t know if that’s right.”
		
		“Can one walk round it? Would it be too far?”
		
		“You can drive round and keep in Lunenburg
		But it’s as much as ever you can do
		The boundary lines keep in so close to it.
		Hor is the township and the township’s Hor--
		_And_ a few houses sprinkled round the foot
		Like boulders broken off the upper cliff
		Rolled out a little farther than the rest.”
		
		“Warm in December cold in June you say?”
		
		“I don’t suppose the waters changed at all.
		You and I know enough to know it’s warm
		Compared with cold and cold compared with warm.
		But all the fun’s in how you say a thing.”
		
		“You’ve lived here all your life?”
		
		“Ever since Hor
		
		Was no bigger than a----“ What I did not hear.
		He drew the oxen toward him with light touches
		Of his slim goad on nose and offside flank
		Gave them their marching orders and was moving.


	36. THE OFT-REPEATED DREAM

		She had no saying dark enough
		For the dark pine that kept
		Forever trying the window-latch
		Of the room where they slept.
		
		The tireless but ineffectual hands
		That with every futile pass
		Made the great tree seem as a little bird
		Before the mystery of glass!
		
		It never had been inside the room
		And only one of the two
		Was afraid in an oft-repeated dream
		Of what the tree might do.


	37. THE OVEN BIRD

		There is a singer everyone has heard
		Loud a mid-summer and a mid-wood bird
		Who makes the solid tree trunks sound again.
		He says that leaves are old and that for flowers
		Mid-summer is to spring as one to ten.
		He says the early petal-fall is past
		When pear and cherry bloom went down in showers
		On sunny days a moment overcast;
		And comes that other fall we name the fall.
		He says the highway dust is over all.
		The bird would cease and be as other birds
		But that he knows in singing not to sing.
		The question that he frames in all but words
		Is what to make of a diminished thing.


	38. THE PASTURE

		I’m going out to clean the pasture spring;
		I’ll only stop to rake the leaves away
		(And wait to watch the water clear I may):
		I shan’t be gone long.--You come too.
		
		I’m going out to fetch the little calf
		That’s standing by the mother. It’s so young
		It totters when she licks it with her tongue.
		I shan’t be gone long.--You come too.


	39. THE ROAD NOT TAKEN

		Two roads diverged in a yellow wood
		And sorry I could not travel both
		And be one traveller long I stood
		And looked down one as far as I could
		To where it bent in the undergrowth;
		
		Then took the other as just as fair
		And having perhaps the better claim
		Because it was grassy and wanted wear;
		Though as for that the passing there
		Had worn them really about the same
		
		And both that morning equally lay
		In leaves no step had trodden black.
		Oh I kept the first for another day!
		Yet knowing how way leads on to way
		I doubted if I should ever come back.
		
		I shall be telling this with a sigh
		Somewhere ages and ages hence:
		Two roads diverged in a wood and I--
		I took the one less travelled by
		And that has made all the difference.


	40. THE RUNAWAY

		Once when the snow of the year was beginning to
		fall
		We stopped by a mountain pasture to say “Whose
		colt?”
		A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall
		The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head
		And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt.
		We heard the miniature thunder where he fled
		And we saw him or thought we saw him dim and
		grey
		Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes.
		“I think the little fellow’s afraid of the snow.
		He isn’t winter-broken. It isn’t play
		With the little fellow at all. He’s running away.
		I doubt if even his mother could tell him ‘Sakes
		It’s only weather.‘ He’d think she didn’t know!
		Where is his mother? He can’t be out alone.”
		And now he comes again with a clatter of stone
		And mounts the wall again with whited eyes
		And all his tail that isn’t hair up straight.
		He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies.
		“Whoever it is that leaves him out so late
		When other creatures have gone to stall and bin
		Ought to be told to come and take him in.”


	41. THE SMILE

		(_Her Word_)
		
		I didn’t like the way he went away.
		That smile! It never came of being gay.
		Still he smiled--did you see him?--I was sure!
		Perhaps because we gave him only bread
		And the wretch knew from that that we were poor.
		Perhaps because he let us give instead
		Of seizing from us as he might have seized.
		Perhaps he mocked at us for being wed
		Or being very young (and he was pleased
		To have a vision of us old and dead).
		I wonder how far down the road he’s got.
		He’s watching from the woods as like as not.


	42. THE SOUND OF TREES

		I wonder about the trees.
		Why do we wish to bear
		Forever the noise of these
		More than another noise
		So close to our dwelling place?
		We suffer them by the day
		Till we lose all measure of pace
		And fixity in our joys
		And acquire a listening air.
		They are that that talks of going
		But never gets away;
		And that talks no less for knowing
		As it grows wiser and older
		That now it means to stay.
		My feet tug at the floor
		And my head sways to my shoulder
		Sometimes when I watch trees sway
		From the window or the door.
		I shall set forth for somewhere
		I shall make the reckless choice
		Some day when they are in voice
		And tossing so as to scare
		The white clouds over them on.
		I shall have less to say
		But I shall be gone.


	43. THE TUFT OF FLOWERS

		I went to turn the grass once after one
		Who mowed it in the dew before the sun.
		
		The dew was gone that made his blade so keen
		Before I came to view the levelled scene.
		
		I looked for him behind an isle of trees;
		I listened for his whetstone on the breeze.
		
		But he had gone his way the grass all mown
		And I must be as he had been--alone
		
		“As all must be“ I said within my heart
		“Whether they work together or apart.”
		
		But as I said it swift there passed me by
		On noiseless wing a bewildered butterfly
		
		Seeking with memories grown dim o’er night
		Some resting flower of yesterday’s delight.
		
		And once I marked his flight go round and round
		As where some flower lay withering on the ground.
		
		And then he flew as far as eye could see
		And then on tremulous wing came back to me.
		
		I thought of questions that have no reply
		And would have turned to toss the grass to dry;
		
		But he turned first and led my eye to look
		At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook
		
		A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared
		Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared.
		
		I left my place to know them by their name
		Finding them butterfly weed when I came.
		
		The mower in the dew had loved them thus
		By leaving them to flourish not for us
		
		Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him.
		But from sheer morning gladness at the brim.
		
		The butterfly and I had lit upon
		Nevertheless a message from the dawn.
		
		That made me hear the wakening birds around
		And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground
		
		And feel a spirit kindred to my own;
		So that henceforth I worked no more alone;
		
		But glad with him I worked as with his aid
		And weary sought at noon with him the shade;
		
		And dreaming as it were held brotherly speech
		With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach.
		
		“Men work together“ I told him from the heart
		“Whether they work together or apart.”


	44. THE WOOD-PILE

		Out walking in the frozen swamp one gray day
		I paused and said “I will turn back from here.
		No I will go on farther--and we shall see.”
		The hard snow held me save where now and then
		One foot went through. The view was all in lines
		Straight up and down of tall slim trees
		Too much alike to mark or name a place by
		So as to say for certain I was here
		Or somewhere else: I was just far from home.
		A small bird flew before me. He was careful
		To put a tree between us when he lighted
		And say no word to tell me who he was
		Who was so foolish as to think what _he_ thought.
		He thought that I was after him for a feather--
		The white one in his tail; like one who takes
		Everything said as personal to himself.
		One flight out sideways would have undeceived him.
		And then there was a pile of wood for which
		I forgot him and let his little fear
		Carry him off the way I might have gone
		Without so much as wishing him good-night.
		He went behind it to make his last stand.
		It was a cord of maple cut and split
		And piled--and measured four by four by eight.
		And not another like it could I see.
		No runner tracks in this year’s snow looped near it.
		And it was older sure than this year’s cutting
		Or even last year’s or the year’s before.
		The wood was gray and the bark warping off it
		And the pile somewhat sunken. Clematis
		Had wound strings round and round it like a bundle.
		What held it though on one side was a tree
		Still growing and on one a stake and prop
		These latter about to fall. I thought that only
		Someone who lived in turning to fresh tasks
		Could so forget his handiwork on which
		He spent himself the labour of his axe
		And leave it there far from a useful fireplace
		To warm the frozen swamp as best it could
		With the slow smokeless burning of decay.


	45. TO THE THAWING WIND

		Come with rain O loud Southwester!
		Bring the singer bring the nester;
		Give the buried flower a dream;
		Make the settled snow-bank steam;
		Find the brown beneath the white;
		But whate’er you do to-night
		Bathe my window make it flow
		Melt it as the ice will go;
		Melt the glass and leave the sticks
		Like a hermit’s crucifix;
		Burst into my narrow stall;
		Swing the picture on the wall;
		Run the rattling pages o’er;
		Scatter poems on the floor;
		Turn the poet out of door.


*** Théophile Gautier (1811 - 1872)

	1. SEA GLOOM

		The sea-gulls restless gleam and glance,
		The mad white coursers cleave the length
		Of ocean as they rear and prance
		And toss their manes in stormy strength.
		
		The day is ending. Raindrops choke
		The sunset furnaces. The gloom
		Brings the great steamboat spitting smoke,
		And beating down its long black plume.
		
		And I, more wan than heaven wide,
		For land of soot and fog am bound,
		For land of smoke and suicide--
		And right good weather have I found!
		
		How eagerly I now would pierce
		The gulf that groweth wild and hoar!
		The vessel rocks. The waves are fierce.
		The salt wind freshens more and more.
		
		Ah! bitter is my soul’s unrest.
		The very ocean sighing heaves
		In pity its unhopeful breast,
		Like some good friend that knows and grieves.
		
		Let be--lost love’s despair supreme!
		Let be--illusions fair that rose
		And fell from pedestals of dream!
		One leap! The dark wet ridges close.
		
		Away! ye sufferings gone by,
		That evermore returning brood,
		And press the wounds that sleeping lie,
		To make them weep afresh their blood.
		
		Away! regret, whose crimson heart
		Hath seven swords. Yea, One, maybe,
		Doth know the anguish and the smart--
		Mother of Seven Sorrows, She!
		
		Each ghostly grief sinks down the vast,
		And struggles with the waves that throb
		To close about it, and at last
		Drown it forever with a sob.
		
		Soul’s ballast, treasures of life’s hand,
		Sink! and we’ll wreck together down.
		Pale on the pillow of the sand
		I’ll rest me well at evening brown.
		
		But, now, a woman, as I gaze,
		Sits in the bridge’s darker nook,
		A woman, who doth sweetly raise
		Her eyes to mine in one long look.
		
		‘T is Sympathy with outstretched arms,
		Who smileth to me through the gray
		Of dusk with all her thousand charms.
		Hail, azure eyes! Green sea, away!
		
		The sea-gulls restless gleam and glance.
		The mad white coursers cleave the length
		Of Ocean as they rear and prance
		And toss their manes in stormy strength.


	2. SMOKE

		Beneath yon tree sits humble
		A squalid, hunchbacked house,
		With roof precipitous,
		And mossy walls that crumble.
		
		Bolted and barred the shanty.
		But from its must and mould,
		Like breath of lips in cold,
		Comes respiration scanty.
		
		A vapour upward welling,
		A slender, silver streak,
		To God bears tidings meek
		Of the soul in the little dwelling.


	3. SPRING’S FIRST SMILE

		While up and down the earth men pant and plod,
		March, laughing at the showers and days unsteady,
		And whispering secret orders to the sod,
		For Spring makes ready.
		
		And slyly when the world is sleeping yet,
		He smooths out collars for the Easter daisies,
		And fashions golden buttercups to set
		In woodland mazes.
		
		Coif-maker fine, he worketh well his plan.
		Orchard and vineyard for his touch are prouder.
		From a white swan he hath a down to fan
		The trees with powder.
		
		While Nature still upon her couch doth lean,
		Stealthily hies he to the garden closes,
		And laces in their bodices of green
		Pale buds of roses.
		
		Composing his solfeggios in the shade,
		He whistles them to blackbirds as he treadeth,
		And violets in the wood, and in the glade
		Snowdrops, he spreadeth.
		
		Where for the restless stag the fountain wells,
		His hidden hand glides soft amid the cresses,
		And scatters lily-of-the-valley bells,
		In silver dresses.
		
		He sinks the sweet, vermilion strawberries
		Deep in the grasses for thy roving fingers,
		And garlands leaflets for thy forehead’s ease,
		When sunshine lingers.
		
		When, labour done, he must away, turns he
		On April’s threshold from his fair creating,
		And calleth unto Spring: “Come, Spring--for see,
		The woods are waiting!”


	4. THE SUPPER OF ARMOR

		Bjorn, a strange cœnobite,
		On the plateau of a bare rock,
		Inhabits, out of the world and time,
		The tower of a fortress demolished.
		
		At his door the modern spirit
		In vain lifts up the weighty knocker.
		Bjorn bolts his postern shut
		And his castle keeps tight-locked.
		
		When every eye is toward the dawn
		Bjorn, perched upon his dungeon,
		Gazes still the horizon upon
		At the place of the setting sun.
		
		Retrospective soul, he lodges
		In his fortress in the past,
		The pendulum of his grandfather clock
		Some centuries ago worked last.
		
		Underneath his ogives feudal
		He wanders, waking up the echoes,
		And his steps, the flagstones moot all,
		Seem to be followed by even steps.
		
		He sees no laymen nor any presters,
		Nor gentlemen, nor men of town,
		But the portraits of his ancestors
		Talk with him again and now.
		
		And certain nights, to lend him spice,
		Finding dinner alone a bore there,
		Bjorn, a funerary caprice,
		Asks to supper all his forebears.
		
		The phantoms, when tolls the midnight bell,
		Arrive in armor pie-a-cap,
		Bjorn, who shivers in spite of himself,
		Salutes by lifting high his hanap. 
		
		To seat itself, each panoply
		With its kneejoint makes an angle,
		Whose articulation yields
		Grating like an old doorbolt.
		
		And all of a piece, the suit of armor,
		Gauche casket of a body not there,
		Making a dull and hollow murmur,
		Falls twixt the arms of an easy chair.
		
		Landgraves, rhinegraves, also burgraves,
		Come from heaven or from hell,
		They are all there, silent and grave,
		Stiff convives of hardened steel!
		
		In the dark, a wild beam plays
		On a monster, wyvern, two-necked eagle,
		From the heraldic bestiary
		Upon their crests by many blows mangled.
		
		From the snout of beats deformed
		Raising up their nails arrogant,
		Spring forth varied plumes enormous,
		Lambrequins extravagant,
		
		But the open helmets are void
		As the timbre on coats of arms;
		Only two flames that are livid
		Gleam within like strange alarms.
		
		Every bit of scrap iron sits
		In the hall of the old manor,
		And, on the wall, a shadow flits
		Giving each guest a page of honor.
		
		The liquors in the fire of candles
		Are purplish with a tint that’s suspect,
		Each course within its red sauce spangled
		Takes on a singularmost aspect.
		
		Now and again a corslet sparkles,
		A morion shines for just a moment,
		A piece that’s come unhinged quite tumbles
		Down upon the tablecloth groaning.
		
		One listens to the beating wings
		Of bats that are invisible,
		And along the wainscoting
		Flags of infidel nations tremble.
		
		With the most fantastical movements
		Curling their phalanges of bronze
		Gauntlets pour into the helmets
		Glassfuls of the Rhineland’s wines,
		
		Or with a dagger’s edge, they cut
		On golden plates a wild boar...
		While vague noises pass from out
		The organs of the corridor.
		
		With a voice that still is hoarse
		From the dampness of the tomb,
		Max hums, playful drunkenness,
		A lied, in thirteen hundred, new.
		
		Albrecht, having wine that’s fierce,
		Quarrels with his quondam cousins,
		Whom he pounds on, humped and beastly,
		As he did the Saracens.
		
		Overheated, Fritz unhelms,
		Where no skull was ever sunk,
		Never thinking his unmasked self
		Looks just like a headless trunk.
		
		Quickly now they roll pell-mell
		Beneath the table, among the crocks,
		Head below, showing the sole
		Of their shoes curvate with hooks.
		
		It’s a hideous battlefield
		Where an armet hits a pot,
		Where the dead by each cut yield
		No blood but each course in a vomit.
		
		--
		
		And Bjorn, his fist upon his thigh,
		Contemplates them, drawn and haggard,
		Whileas, through the Swiss stained glass,
		Sunup casts its blue regard.
		
		The troupe, whom a sunbeam crosses,
		Grows pale like a torch at noon,
		And the drunkenmost back tosses
		The stirrup cup before the tomb.
		
		The cock crows, the specters fly
		And with a lofty air replete,
		On the marble pillow lay
		Their heads still aching from the feast!


*** Khalil Gibran (1883 - 1931)

	1. AND WHEN MY SORROW WAS BORN

		And when my Joy was born, I held it in my arms and stood on the
		house-top shouting, “Come ye, my neighbours, come and see, for Joy
		this day is born unto me.  Come and behold this gladsome thing that
		laugheth in the sun.”
		
		But none of my neighbours came to look upon my Joy, and great was
		my astonishment.
		
		And every day for seven moons I proclaimed my Joy from the
		house-top--and yet no one heeded me.  And my Joy and I were alone,
		unsought and unvisited.
		
		Then my Joy grew pale and weary because no other heart but mine
		held its loveliness and no other lips kissed its lips.
		
		Then my Joy died of isolation.
		
		And now I only remember my dead Joy in remembering my dead Sorrow.
		But memory is an autumn leaf that murmurs a while in the wind and
		then is heard no more.


	2. DEFEAT

		Defeat, my Defeat, my solitude and my aloofness;
		You are dearer to me than a thousand triumphs,
		And sweeter to my heart than all world-glory.
		
		Defeat, my Defeat, my self-knowledge and my defiance,
		Through you I know that I am yet young and swift of foot
		And not to be trapped by withering laurels.
		And in you I have found aloneness
		And the joy of being shunned and scorned.
		
		Defeat, my Defeat, my shining sword and shield,
		In your eyes I have read
		That to be enthroned is to be enslaved,
		And to be understood is to be leveled down,
		And to be grasped is but to reach one’s fullness
		And like a ripe fruit to fall and be consumed.
		
		Defeat, my Defeat, my bold companion,
		You shall hear my songs and my cries and my silences,
		And none but you shall speak to me of the beating of wings,
		And urging of seas,
		And of mountains that burn in the night,
		And you alone shall climb my steep and rocky soul.
		
		Defeat, my Defeat, my deathless courage,
		You and I shall laugh together with the storm,
		And together we shall dig graves for all that die in us,
		And we shall stand in the sun with a will,
		And we shall be dangerous.


	3. DO NOT LOVE HALF LOVERS

		Do not love half lovers
		Do not entertain half friends
		Do not indulge in works of the half talented
		Do not live half a life and do not die a half death
		If you choose silence, then be silent
		When you speak, do so until you are finished
		Do not silence yourself to say something
		And do not speak to be silent
		If you accept, then express it bluntly
		Do not mask it
		If you refuse then be clear about it
		for an ambiguous refusal
		is but a weak acceptance
		Do not accept half a solution
		Do not believe half truths
		Do not dream half a dream
		Do not fantasize about half hopes
		Half a drink will not quench your thirst
		Half a meal will not satiate your hunger
		Half the way will get you no where
		Half an idea will bear you no results
		Your other half is not the one you love
		It is you in another time yet in the same space
		It is you when you are not
		Half a life is a life you didn’t live,
		A word you have not said
		A smile you postponed
		A love you have not had
		A friendship you did not know
		To reach and not arrive
		Work and not work
		Attend only to be absent
		What makes you a stranger to them closest to you
		and they strangers to you
		The half is a mere moment of inability
		but you are able for you are not half a being
		You are a whole that exists
		to live a life not half a life


	4. GOD

		In the ancient days, when the first quiver of speech came to my lips,
		I ascended the holy mountain and spoke unto God, saying, “Master,
		I am thy slave.  Thy hidden will is my law and I shall obey thee
		for ever more.”
		
		But God made no answer, and like a mighty tempest passed away.
		
		And after a thousand years I ascended the holy mountain and again
		spoke unto God, saying, “Creator, I am thy creation.  Out of clay
		hast thou fashioned me and to thee I owe mine all.”
		
		And God made no answer, but like a thousand swift wings passed
		away.
		
		And after a thousand years I climbed the holy mountain and spoke
		unto God again, saying, “Father, I am thy son.  In pity and love
		thou hast given me birth, and through love and worship I shall
		inherit thy kingdom.”
		
		And God made no answer, and like the mist that veils the distant
		hills he passed away.
		
		And after a thousand years I climbed the sacred mountain and again
		spoke unto God, saying, “My God, my aim and my fulfillment; I am
		thy yesterday and thou are my tomorrow.  I am thy root in the earth
		and thou art my flower in the sky, and together we grow before the
		face of the sun.”
		
		Then God leaned over me, and in my ears whispered words of sweetness,
		and even as the sea that enfoldeth a brook that runneth down to
		her, he enfolded me.
		
		And when I descended to the valleys and the plains God was there
		also.


	5. ON BEAUTY

		And a poet said, Speak to us of Beauty.
		    And he answered:
		    Where shall you seek beauty, and how
		shall you find her unless she herself be your
		way and your guide?
		    And how shall you speak of her except
		she be the weaver of your speech?
		
		    The aggrieved and the injured say,
		“Beauty is kind and gentle.
		    Like a young mother half-shy of her
		own glory she walks among us.”
		    And the passionate say, “Nay, beauty is
		a thing of might and dread.
		    Like the tempest she shakes the earth
		beneath us and the sky above us.”
		
		    The tired and the weary say, “Beauty is
		of soft whisperings. She speaks in our spirit.
		    Her voice yields to our silences like a faint
		light that quivers in fear of the shadow.”
		    But the restless say, “We have heard her
		shouting among the mountains,
		    And with her cries came the sound of
		hoofs, and the beating of wings and
		the roaring of lions.”
		
		    At night the watchmen of the city say,
		“Beauty shall rise with the dawn from the
		east.”
		    And at noontide the toilers and the way-
		farers say, “We have seen her leaning over
		the earth from the windows of the sunset.”
		
		    In winter say the snow-bound, “She shall
		come with the spring leaping upon the hills.”
		    And in the summer heat the reapers say,
		“We have seen her dancing with the autumn
		leaves, and we saw a drift of snow in her
		hair.”
		    All these things have you said of beauty,
		    Yet in truth you spoke not of her but of
		needs unsatisfied,
		    And beauty is not a need but an ecstasy.
		    It is not a mouth thirsting nor an empty
		hand stretched forth,
		    But rather a heart enflamed and a soul en-
		chanted.
		    It is not the image you would see nor the
		song you would hear,
		    But rather an image you see though you
		close your eyes and a song you hear though
		you shut your ears.
		    It is not the sap within the furrowed bark,
		nor a wing attached to a claw,
		    But rather a garden for ever in bloom and
		a flock of angels for ever in flight.
		
		    People of Orphalese, beauty is life when
		life unveils her holy face.
		    But you are life and you are the veil.
		    Beauty is eternity gazing at itself in a mirror.
		    But you are eternity and you are the mirror.


	6. ON FREEDOM

		And an orator said, Speak to us of Freedom.
		   And he answered:
		   At the city gate and by your fireside I
		have seen you prostrate yourself and worship
		your own freedom,
		   Even as slaves humble themselves before
		a tyrant and praise him though he slays
		them.
		   Ay, in the grove of the temple and in
		the shadow of the citadel I have seen the
		freest among you wear their freedom as a
		yoke and a handcuff.
		   And my heart bled within me; for you
		can only be free when even the desire of
		seeking freedom becomes a harness to you,
		and when you cease to speak of freedom
		as a goal and a fulfilment.
		
		   You shall be free indeed when your days
		are not without a care nor your nights without 
		a want and a grief,
		   But rather when these things girdle your
		life and yet you rise above them naked and
		unbound.
		
		   And how shall you rise beyond your
		days and nights unless you break the chains
		which you at the dawn of your understanding 
		have fastened around your noon
		hour?
		   In truth that which you call freedom is
		the strongest of these chains, though its
		links glitter in the sun and dazzle your eyes.
		
		   And what is it but fragments of your own
		self you would discard that you may become
		free?
		   If it is an unjust law you would abolish,
		that law was written with your own hand
		upon your own forehead.
		   You cannot erase it by burning your law
		books nor by washing the foreheads of your
		judges, though you pour the sea upon them.
		   And if it is a despot you would dethrone,
		see first that his throne erected within you is
		destroyed.
		   For how can a tyrant rule the free and
		the proud, but for a tyranny in their own
		freedom and a shame in their own pride?
		   And if it is a care you would cast off, that
		care has been chosen by you rather than
		imposed upon you.
		   And if it is a fear you would dispel, the
		seat of that fear is in your heart and not in
		the hand of the feared.
		
		   Verily all things move within your being
		in constant half embrace, the desired and
		the dreaded, the repugnant and the cherished,
		the pursued and that which you would
		escape.
		   These things move within you as lights
		and shadows in pairs that cling.
		   And when the shadow fades and is no
		more, the light that lingers becomes a
		shadow to another light.
		   And thus your freedom when it loses its
		fetters becomes itself the fetter of a greater
		freedom.


	7. ON LAWS

		Then a lawyer said, But what of our Laws,
		master?
		   And he answered:
		   You delight in laying down laws,
		   Yet you delight more in breaking them.
		   Like children playing by the ocean who
		build sand-towers with constancy and then
		destroy them with laughter.
		   But while you build your sand-towers the
		ocean brings more sand to the shore,
		   And when you destroy them the ocean
		laughs with you.
		   Verily the ocean laughs always with the
		innocent.
		
		   But what of those to whom life is not an
		ocean, and man-made laws are not sand-towers,
		   But to whom life is a rock, and the law
		a chisel with which they would carve it in
		their own likeness?
		   What of the cripple who hates dancers?
		   What of the ox who loves his yoke and
		deems the elk and deer of the forest
		stray and vagrant things?
		   What of the old serpent who cannot
		shed his skin, and calls all others naked
		and shameless?
		   And of him who comes early to the
		wedding-feast, and when over-fed and tired
		goes his way saying that all feasts are
		violation and all feasters lawbreakers?
		
		   What shall I say of these save that they
		too stand in the sunlight, but with their
		backs to the sun?
		   They see only their shadows, and their
		shadows are their laws.
		   And what is the sun to them but a caster
		of shadows?
		   And what is it to acknowledge the laws
		but to stoop down and trace their shadows
		upon the earth?
		   But you who walk facing the sun, what
		images drawn on the earth can hold you?
		   You who travel with the wind, what
		weather-vane shall direct your course?
		   What man’s law shall bind you if you
		break your yoke but upon no man’s prison
		door?
		   What laws shall you fear if you dance
		but stumble against no man’s iron chains?
		   And who is he that shall bring you to
		judgment if you tear off your garment yet
		leave it in no man’s path?
		
		   People of Orphalese, you can muffle the
		drum, and you can loosen the strings of the
		lyre, but who shall command the skylark
		not to sing?


	8. ON LOVE

		Then said Almitra, Speak to us of Love.
		    And he raised his head and looked upon
		the people, and there fell a stillness upon
		them. And with a great voice he said:
		    When love beckons to you, follow him,
		    Though his ways are hard and steep.
		    And when his wings enfold you yield to
		him,
		    Though the sword hidden among his
		pinions may wound you.
		    And when he speaks to you believe in
		him,
		    Though his voice may shatter your dreams
		as the north wind lays waste the garden.
		
		    For even as love crowns you so shall he
		crucify you. Even as he is for your growth
		so is he for your pruning.
		    Even as he ascends to your height and
		caresses your tenderest branches that quiver
		in the sun,
		    So shall he descend to your roots and
		shake them in their clinging to the earth.
		                                      
		    Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto
		himself.
		    He threshes you to make you naked.
		    He sifts you to free you from your husks.
		    He grinds you to whiteness.
		    He kneads you until you are pliant;
		    And then he assigns you to his sacred
		fire, that you may become sacred bread for
		God’s sacred feast.
		
		    All these things shall love do unto you
		that you may know the secrets of your
		heart, and in that knowledge become a
		fragment of Life’s heart.
		
		    But if in your fear you would seek only
		love’s peace and love’s pleasure,
		    Then it is better for you that you cover
		your nakedness and pass out of love’s
		threshing-floor,
		    Into the seasonless world where you
		shall laugh, but not all of your laughter,
		and weep, but not all of your tears.
		                                     
		    Love gives naught but itself and takes
		naught but from itself.
		    Love possesses not nor would it be
		possessed;
		    For love is sufficient unto love.
		
		    When you love you should not say,
		“God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am
		in the heart of God.”
		    And think not you can direct the course
		of love, for love, if it finds you worthy,
		directs your course.
		
		    Love has no other desire but to fulfil
		itself.
		    But if you love and must needs have
		desires, let these be your desires:
		    To melt and be like a running brook
		that sings its melody to the night.
		    To know the pain of too much tenderness.
		    To be wounded by your own under-
		standing of love;
		    And to bleed willingly and joyfully.
		    To wake at dawn with a winged heart
		and give thanks for another day of loving;
		    To rest at the noon hour and meditate
		love’s ecstasy;
		    To return home at eventide with grati-
		tude;
		    And then to sleep with a prayer for the
		beloved in your heart and a song of praise
		upon your lips.


	9. ON PLEASURE

		Then a hermit, who visited the city once
		a year, came forth and said, Speak to us of
		Pleasure.
		   And he answered, saying:
		   Pleasure is a freedom-song,
		   But it is not freedom.
		   It is the blossoming of your desires,
		   But it is not their fruit.
		   It is a depth calling unto a height,
		   But it is not the deep nor the high.
		   It is the caged taking wing,
		   But it is not space encompassed.
		   Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a freedom-song.
		   And I fain would have you sing it with
		fullness of heart; yet I would not have you
		lose your hearts in the singing.
		
		   Some of your youth seek pleasure as if it
		were all, and they are judged and rebuked.
		   I would not judge nor rebuke them. I
		would have them seek.
		   For they shall find pleasure, but not her
		alone;
		   Seven are her sisters, and the least of them
		is more beautiful than pleasure.
		   Have you not heard of the man who was
		digging in the earth for roots and found a
		treasure?
		
		   And some of your elders remember
		pleasures with regret like wrongs committed in drunkenness.
		   But regret is the beclouding of the mind
		and not its chastisement.
		   They should remember their pleasures with
		gratitude, as they would the harvest of a
		summer.
		   Yet if it comforts them to regret, let them
		be comforted.
		
		   And there are among you those who are
		neither young to seek nor old to remember;
		   And in their fear of seeking and remembering 
		they shun all pleasures, lest they
		neglect the spirit or offend against it.
		   But even in their foregoing is their
		pleasure.
		   And thus they too find a treasure though
		they dig for roots with quivering hands.
		   But tell me, who is he that can offend the
		spirit?
		   Shall the nightingale offend the stillness of
		the night, or the firefly the stars?
		   And shall your flame or your smoke
		burden the wind?
		   Think you the spirit is a still pool which
		you can trouble with a staff?
		
		   Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure
		you do but store the desire in the recesses
		of your being.
		   Who knows but that which seems omitted
		today, waits for tomorrow?
		   Even your body knows its heritage and
		its rightful need and will not be deceived.
		   And your body is the harp of your soul,
		   And it is yours to bring forth sweet
		music from it or confused sounds.
		
		    And now you ask in your heart, “How
		shall we distinguish that which is good in
		pleasure from that which is not good?”
		    Go to your fields and your gardens, and
		you shall learn that it is the pleasure of
		the bee to gather honey of the flower,
		    But it is also the pleasure of the flower
		to yield its honey to the bee.
		    For to the bee a flower is a fountain of
		life,
		    And to the flower a bee is a messenger of
		love,
		    And to both, bee and flower, the giving
		and the receiving of pleasure is a need and
		an ecstasy.
		
		    People of Orphalese, be in your pleasures 
		like the flowers and the bees.


	10. ON TEACHING

		Then said a teacher, Speak to us of Teaching.
		   And he said:
		   No man can reveal to you aught but that
		which already lies half asleep in the dawning 
		of your knowledge.
		   The teacher who walks in the shadow of
		the temple, among his followers, gives not
		of his wisdom but rather of his faith and
		his lovingness.
		   If he is indeed wise he does not bid you
		enter the house of his wisdom, but rather
		leads you to the threshold of your own
		mind.
		  The astronomer may speak to you of his
		understanding of space, but he cannot give
		you his understanding.
		  The musician may sing to you of the
		rhythm which is in all space, but he cannot
		give you the ear which arrests the rhythm
		nor the voice that echoes it.
		  And he who is versed in the science of
		numbers can tell of the regions of weight
		and measure, but he cannot conduct you
		thither.
		  For the vision of one man lends not its
		wings to another man.
		  And even as each one of you stands alone
		in God’s knowledge, so must each one of
		you be alone in his knowledge of God and
		in his understanding of the earth.


	11. THE GREAT LONGING

		Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea.
		
		We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together
		is deep and strong and strange.  Nay, it is deeper than my sister’s
		depth and stronger than my brother’s strength, and stranger than
		the strangeness of my madness.
		
		Aeons upon aeons have passed since the first grey dawn made us
		visible to one another; and though we have seen the birth and the
		fullness and the death of many worlds, we are still eager and young.
		
		We are young and eager and yet we are mateless and unvisited, and
		though we lie in unbroken half embrace, we are uncomforted.  And
		what comfort is there for controlled desire and unspent passion?
		Whence shall come the flaming god to warm my sister’s bed?  And
		what she-torrent shall quench my brother’s fire?  And who is the
		woman that shall command my heart?
		
		In the stillness of the night my sister murmurs in her sleep the
		fire-god’s unknown name, and my brother calls afar upon the cool
		and distant goddess.  But upon whom I call in my sleep I know not.
		
		Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea.
		We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together
		is deep and strong and strange.


	12. THE POMEGRANATE

		Once when I was living in the heart of a pomegranate, I heard a seed
		saying, “Someday I shall become a tree, and the wind will sing in
		my branches, and the sun will dance on my leaves, and I shall be
		strong and beautiful through all the seasons.”
		
		Then another seed spoke and said, “When I was as young as you, I
		too held such views; but now that I can weigh and measure things,
		I see that my hopes were vain.”
		
		And a third seed spoke also, “I see in us nothing that promises so
		great a future.”
		
		And a fourth said, “But what a mockery our life would be, without
		a greater future!”
		
		Said a fifth, “Why dispute what we shall be, when we know not even
		what we are.”
		
		But a sixth replied, “Whatever we are, that we shall continue to
		be.”
		
		And a seventh said, “I have such a clear idea how everything will
		be, but I cannot put it into words.”
		
		Then an eight spoke--and a ninth--and a tenth--and then many--until
		all were speaking, and I could distinguish nothing for the many
		voices.
		
		And so I moved that very day into the heart of a quince, where the
		seeds are few and almost silent.


*** Dana Gioia (1950 - )

	1. CALIFORNIA HILLS IN AUGUST

		I can imagine someone who found
		these fields unbearable, who climbed
		the hillside in the heat, cursing the dust,
		cracking the brittle weeds underfoot,
		wishing a few more trees for shade.
		
		An Easterner especially, who would scorn
		the meagerness of summer, the dry
		twisted shapes of black elm,
		scrub oak, and chaparral, a landscape
		August has already drained of green.
		
		One who would hurry over the clinging
		thistle, foxtail, golden poppy,
		knowing everything was just a weed,
		unable to conceive that these trees
		and sparse brown bushes were alive.
		
		And hate the bright stillness of the noon
		without wind, without motion,
		the only other living thing
		a hawk, hungry for prey, suspended
		in the blinding, sunlit blue.
		
		And yet how gentle it seems to someone
		raised in a landscape short of rain--
		the skyline of a hill broken by no more
		trees than one can count, the grass,
		the empty sky, the wish for water.


	2. CUCKOOS

		I heard them only once. Climbing in the mountains,
		I stopped to rest a moment on a ledge
		and listen to the river distantly below--
		when suddenly they began to call each other
		back and forth from trees across the valley,
		invisible in pinetops but bright and clear
		like the ring of crystal against crystal.
		I didn’t move but lay there wondering
		what they were like, amazed that folklore
		had made their cry the omen of betrayal.
		
		So now, reading how the Chinese took their call
		to mean _Pu ju kuei, pu ju kuei_--
		_Come home again, you must come home again_--
		I understand at last what they were telling me
		not then, back in that high, green valley,
		but here this evening in the memory of it
		returned by these birds that I have never seen


	3. FINDING A BOX OF FAMILY LETTERS

		The dead say little in their letters
		they haven’t said before.
		We find no secrets, and yet
		how different every sentence sounds
		heard across the years.
		          
		My father breaks my heart
		simply by being so young and handsome.
		He’s half my age, with jet-black hair.
		Look at him in his navy uniform
		grinning beside his dive-bomber.
		
		_Come back, Dad!_ I want to shout.
		He says he misses all of us
		(though I haven’t yet been born).
		He writes from places I never knew he saw,
		and everyone he mentions now is dead.
		
		There is a large, long photograph
		curled like a diploma--a banquet sixty years ago.
		My parents sit uncomfortably
		among tables of dark-suited strangers.
		The mildewed paper reeks of regret.
		
		I wonder what song the band was playing,
		just out of frame, as the photographer
		arranged your smiles. A waltz? A foxtrot?
		_Get out there on the floor and dance! 
		You don’t have forever._
		
		What does it cost to send a postcard
		to the underworld? I’ll buy
		a penny stamp from World War II
		and mail it downtown at the old post office
		just as the courthouse clock strikes twelve.
		
		Surely the ghost of some postal worker
		still makes his nightly rounds, his routine
		too tedious for him to notice when it ended.
		He works so slowly he moves back in time
		carrying our dead letters to their lost addresses.
		
		It’s silly to get sentimental.
		The dead have moved on. So should we.
		But isn’t it equally simple-minded to miss
		the special expertise of the departed
		in clarifying our long-term plans?
		
		They never let us forget that the line
		between them and us is only temporary.
		_Get out there and dance!_ the letters shout
		adding, Love always. _Can’t wait to get home!_
		And soon we will be. _See you there._


	4. IN CHANDLER COUNTRY

		California night. The Devil’s wind,   
		the Santa Ana, blows in from the east,   
		raging through the canyon like a drunk   
		screaming in a bar.
		                           The air tastes like
		a stubbed-out cigarette. But why complain?   
		The weather’s fine as long as you don’t breathe.   
		Just lean back on the sweat-stained furniture,   
		lights turned out, windows shut against the storm,   
		and count your blessings.
		                                    Another sleepless night,
		when every wrinkle in the bedsheet scratches   
		like a dry razor on a sunburned cheek,   
		when even ten-year whiskey tastes like sand,   
		and quiet women in the kitchen run   
		their fingers on the edges of a knife
		and eye their husbands’ necks. I wish them luck.
		
		Tonight it seems that if I took the coins
		out of my pocket and tossed them in the air   
		they’d stay a moment glistening like a net   
		slowly falling through dark water.
		                                                  I remember
		the headlights of the cars parked on the beach,   
		the narrow beams dissolving on the dark   
		surface of the lake, voices arguing
		about the forms, the crackling radio,   
		the sheeted body lying on the sand,
		the trawling net still damp beside it. No,
		she wasn’t beautiful--but at that age
		when youth itself becomes a kind of beauty--
		“Taking good care of your clients, Marlowe?”
		
		Relentlessly the wind blows on. Next door   
		catching a scent, the dogs begin to howl.   
		Lean, furious, raw-eyed from the storm,   
		packs of coyotes come down from the hills   
		where there is nothing left to hunt.


	5. NIGHT WATCH

		I think of you standing on the sloping deck
		as the freighter pulls away from the coast of China,
		the last lights of Asia disappearing in the fog,
		and the engine’s drone dissolving in the old
		monotony of waves slapping up against the hull.
		
		Leaning on the rails, looking eastward to America
		across the empty weeks of ocean,
		how carefully you must have planned your life,
		so much of it already wasted on the sea.
		the vast country of your homelessness.
		
		Macao. Vladivostak. Singapore.
		Dante read by shiplamp on the bridge.
		The names of fellow seamen lost in war.
		These memories will die with you,
		but tonight they rise up burning in your mind
		
		interweaving like gulls crying in the wake,
		like currents on a chart, like gulfweed
		swirling in a star-soaked sea, and interchangeable
		as all the words for night--_la notte, noche, Nacht, nuit,_
		each sound half-foreign, half-familiar, like America.
		
		For now you know that mainland best from dreams.
		Your dead mother turning toward you slowly,
		always on the edge of words, yet always
		silent as the suffering madonna of a shrine.
		Or your father pounding his fist against the wall.
		
		There are so many ways to waste a life.
		Why choose between these icons of unhappiness,
		when there is the undisguised illusion of the sea,
		the comfort of old books and solitude to fill
		the long night watch, the endless argument of waves?
		
		Breathe in that dark and tangible air, for in a few weeks
		you will be dead, burned beyond recognition,
		left as a headstone in the unfamiliar earth
		with no one to ask, neither wife nor children,
		why your thin ashes have been buried here
		
		and not scattered on the shifting grey Pacific.


	6. PLANTING A SEQUOIA

		All afternoon my brothers and I have worked in the orchard,
		Digging this hole, laying you into it, carefully packing the soil.
		Rain blackened the horizon, but cold winds kept it over the Pacific,
		And the sky above us stayed the dull gray
		Of an old year coming to an end.
		
		In Sicily a father plants a tree to celebrate his first son’s birth--
		An olive or a fig tree--a sign that the earth has one more life to bear.
		I would have done the same, proudly laying new stock into my father’s orchard,
		A green sapling rising among the twisted apple boughs,
		A promise of new fruit in other autumns.
		
		But today we kneel in the cold planting you, our native giant,
		Defying the practical custom of our fathers,
		Wrapping in your roots a lock of hair, a piece of an infant’s birth cord,
		All that remains above earth of a first-born son,
		A few stray atoms brought back to the elements.
		
		We will give you what we can--our labor and our soil,
		Water drawn from the earth when the skies fail,
		Nights scented with the ocean fog, days softened by the circuit of bees.
		We plant you in the corner of the grove, bathed in western light,
		A slender shoot against the sunset.
		
		And when our family is no more, all of his unborn brothers dead,
		Every niece and nephew scattered, the house torn down,
		His mother’s beauty ashes in the air,
		I want you to stand among strangers, all young and ephemeral to you,
		Silently keeping the secret of your birth.


	7. ROUGH COUNTRY

		Give me a landscape made of obstacles,
		of steep hills and jutting glacial rock,
		where the low-running streams are quick to flood
		the grassy fields and bottomlands.
		A place
		no engineers can master--where the roads
		must twist like tendrils up the mountainside
		on narrow cliffs where boulders block the way.
		Where tall black trunks of lightning-scalded pine
		push through the tangled woods to make a roost 
		for hawks and swarming crows.
		And sharp inclines
		where twisting through the thorn-thick underbrush,
		scratched and exhausted, one turns suddenly
		to find an unexpected waterfall,
		not half a mile from the nearest road,
		a spot so hard to reach that no one comes--
		a hiding place, a shrine for dragonflies
		and nesting jays, a sign that there is still
		one piece of property that won’t be owned.


	8. SPEAKING OF LOVE

		Speaking of love was difficult at first.
		We groped for those lost, untarnished words
		That parents never traded casually at home,
		The radio had not devalued.
		How little there seemed left to us.
		
		So, speaking of love, we chose
		The harsh and level language of denial
		Knowing only what we did not wish to say,
		Choosing silence in our terror of a lie.
		For surely love existed before words.
		
		But silence can become its own cliché,
		And bodies lie as skillfully as words,
		So one by one we spoke the easy lines
		The other had resisted but desired,
		Trusting that love renewed their innocence.
		
		Was it then that words become unstuck?
		That _star_ no longer seemed enough for star?
		Our borrowed speech demanded love so pure
		And so beyond our power that we saw
		How words were only forms of our regret.
		
		And so at last we speak again of love,
		Now that there is nothing left unsaid,
		Surrendering our voices to the past,
		Which has betrayed us. Each of us alone,
		Obsessed by memory, befriended by desire,
		
		With no words left to summon back our love.


	9. SPECIAL TREATMENTS WARD

		I
		
		So this is where the children come to die,
		hidden on the hospital’s highest floor.
		They wear their bandages like uniforms
		and pull their iv rigs along the hall 
		with slow and careful steps. Or bald and pale,
		they lie in bright pajamas on their beds,
		watching another world on a screen.
		
		The mothers spend their nights inside the ward,
		sleeping on chairs that fold out into beds,
		too small to lie in comfort. Soon they slip
		beside their children, as if they might mesh
		those small bruised bodies back into their flesh.
		Instinctively they feel that love so strong
		protects a child. Each morning proves them wrong.
		
		No one chooses to be here. We play the parts
		that we are given--horrible as they are.
		We try to play them well, whatever that means.
		We need to talk, though talking breaks our hearts.
		The doctors come and go like oracles,
		their manner cool, omniscient, and oblique.
		There is a word that no one ever speaks.
		
		
		II
		
		I put this poem aside twelve years ago
		because I could not bear remembering 
		the faces it evoked, and every line
		seemed--still seems--so inadequate and grim.
		
		What right had I, whose son had walked away, 
		to speak for those who died? And I’ll admit
		I wanted to forget. I’d lost one child
		and couldn’t bear to watch another die.
		
		Not just the silent boy who shared our room,
		but even the bird-thin figures dimly glimpsed
		shuffling deliberately, disjointedly
		like ancient soldiers after a parade.
		
		Whatever strength the task required I lacked. 
		No well-stitched words could suture shut these wounds. 
		And so I stopped . . .
		But there are poems we do not choose to write.
		
		
		III
		
		The children visit me, not just in dream,
		appearing suddenly, silently--
		insistent, unprovoked, unwelcome.
		
		They’ve taken off their milky bandages
		to show the raw, red lesions they still bear.
		Risen they are healed but not made whole.
		
		A few I recognize, untouched by years.
		I cannot name them--their faces pale and gray
		like ashes fallen from a distant fire.
		
		What use am I to them, almost a stranger?
		I cannot wake them from their satin beds.
		Why do they seek me? They never speak.
		
		And vagrant sorrow cannot bless the dead.


	10. THE ANGEL WITH THE BROKEN WING

		I am the Angel with the Broken Wing,
		The one large statue in this quiet room.
		The staff finds me too fierce, and so they shut
		Faith’s ardor in this air-conditioned tomb.
		
		The docents praise my elegant design
		Above the chatter of the gallery.
		Perhaps I am a masterpiece of sorts--
		The perfect emblem of futility.
		
		Mendoza carved me for a country church.
		(His name’s forgotten now except by me.)
		I stood beside a gilded altar where
		The hopeless offered God their misery.
		
		I heard their women whispering at my feet--
		Prayers for the lost, the dying, and the dead.
		Their candles stretched my shadow up the wall,
		And I became the hunger that they fed.
		
		I broke my left wing in the Revolution
		(Even a saint can savor irony)
		When troops were sent to vandalize the chapel.
		They hit me once--almost apologetically.
		
		For even the godless feel something in a church,
		A twinge of hope, fear? Who knows what it is?
		A trembling unaccounted by their laws,
		An ancient memory they can’t dismiss.
		
		There are so many things I must tell God!
		The howling of the dammed can’t reach so high.
		But I stand like a dead thing nailed to a perch,
		A crippled saint against a painted sky.


	11. THE END OF THE WORLD

		“We’re going,” they said, “to the end of the world.”   
		So they stopped the car where the river curled,   
		And we scrambled down beneath the bridge   
		On the gravel track of a narrow ridge.
		
		We tramped for miles on a wooded walk
		Where dog-hobble grew on its twisted stalk.
		Then we stopped to rest on the pine-needle floor   
		While two ospreys watched from an oak by the shore.
		
		We came to a bend, where the river grew wide   
		And green mountains rose on the opposite side.   
		My guides moved back. I stood alone,
		As the current streaked over smooth flat stone.
		
		Shelf by stone shelf the river fell.
		The white water goosetailed with eddying swell.   
		Faster and louder the current dropped
		Till it reached a cliff, and the trail stopped.
		
		I stood at the edge where the mist ascended,   
		My journey done where the world ended.
		I looked downstream. There was nothing but sky,   
		The sound of the water, and the water’s reply.


	12. THE LOST GARDEN

		If ever we see those gardens again,
		The summer will be gone--at least our summer.
		Some other mockingbird will concertize
		Among the mulberries, and other vines
		Will climb the high brick wall to disappear.
		
		How many footpaths crossed the old estate--
		The gracious acreage of a grander age--
		So many trees to kiss or argue under,
		And greenery enough for any mood.
		What pleasure to be sad in such surroundings.
		
		At least in retrospect. For even sorrow
		Seems bearable when studied at a distance,
		And if we speak of private suffering,
		The pain becomes part of a well-turned tale
		Describing someone else who shares our name.
		
		Still, thinking of you, I sometimes play a game.
		What if we had walked a different path one day,
		Would some small incident have nudged us elsewhere 
		The way a pebble tossed into a brook
		Might change the course a hundred miles downstream?
		
		The trick is making memory a blessing,
		To learn by loss the cool subtraction of desire,
		Of wanting nothing more than what has been,
		To know the past forever lost, yet seeing
		Behind the wall a garden still in blossom.


	13. THE SUNDAY NEWS

		Looking for something in the Sunday paper,
		I flipped by accident through _Local Weddings_,
		Yet missed the photograph until I saw
		Your name among the headings.
		
		And there you were, looking almost unchanged,
		Your hair still long, though now long out of style,
		And you still wore that stiff and serious look
		You called a smile.
		
		I felt as though we sat there face to face.
		My stomach tightened. I read the item through.
		It said too much about both families,
		Too little about you.
		
		Finished at last, I threw the paper down,
		Stung by jealousy, my mind aflame,
		Hating this man, this stranger whom you loved,
		This printed name.
		
		And yet I clipped it out to put away
		Inside a book like something I might use,
		A scrap I knew I wouldn’t read again
		Yet couldn’t bear to lose.


*** Louise Glück (1943 - )

	1. MARCH

		The light stays longer in the sky, but it’s a cold light,
		it brings no relief from winter.
		
		My neighbor stares out the window,
		talking to her dog. He’s sniffing the garden,
		trying to reach a decision about the dead flowers.
		
		It’s a little early for all this.
		Everything’s still very bare--
		nevertheless, something’s different today from yesterday.
		
		We can see the mountain: the peak’s glittering where the ice catches the light.
		But on the sides the snow’s melted, exposing bare rock.
		
		My neighbor’s calling the dog, making her unconvincing doglike sounds.
		The dog’s polite; he raises his head when she calls,
		but he doesn’t move. So she goes on calling,
		her failed bark slowly deteriorating into a human voice.
		
		All her life she dreamed of living by the sea
		but fate didn’t put her there.
		It laughed at her dreams;
		it locked her up in the hills, where no one escapes.
		
		The sun beats down on the earth, the earth flourishes.
		And every winter, it’s as though the rock underneath the earth rises
		higher and higher and the earth becomes rock, cold and rejecting.
		
		She says hope killed her parents, it killed her grandparents.
		It rose up each spring with the wheat
		and died between the heat of summer and the raw cold.
		In the end, they told her to live near the sea,
		as though that would make a difference.
		By late spring she’ll be garrulous, but now she’s down to two words,
		_never_ and _only_, to express this sense that life’s cheated her.
		
		Never the cries of gulls, only, in summer, the crickets, the cicadas.
		Only the smell of the field, when all she wanted
		was the smell of the sea, of disappearance.
		
		The sky above the fields has turned a sort of grayish pink
		as the sun sinks. The clouds are silk yarn, magenta and crimson.
		
		And everywhere the earth is rustling, not lying still.
		And the dog senses this stirring; his ears twitch.
		
		He walks back and forth, vaguely remembering
		from other years this elation. The season of discoveries
		is beginning. Always the same discoveries, but to the dog,
		intoxicating and new, not duplicitous.
		
		I tell my neighbor we’ll be like this
		when we lose our memories. I ask her if she’s ever seen the sea
		and she says, once, in a movie.
		It was a sad story, nothing worked out at all.
		
		The lovers part. The sea hammers the shore, the mark each wave leaves
		wiped out by the wave that follows.
		Never accumulation, never one wave trying to build on another,
		never the promise of shelter--
		
		The sea doesn’t change as the earth changes;
		it doesn’t lie.
		You ask the sea, what can you promise me
		and it speaks the truth; it says _erasure._
		
		Finally the dog goes in.
		We watch the crescent moon,
		very faint at first, then clearer and clearer
		as the sky grows dark.
		Soon it will be the sky of early spring, stretching above the stubborn ferns 
		   and violets.
		
		Nothing can be forced to live.
		The earth is like a drug now, like a voice from far away,
		a lover or master. In the end, you do what the voice tells you.
		It says forget, you forget.
		It says begin again, you begin again.


	2. PARABLE OF THE DOVE

		A dove lived in a village.
		When it opened its mouth
		sweetness came out, sound
		like a silver light around
		the cherry bough. But
		the dove wasn’t satisfied.
		
		It saw the villagers
		gathered to listen under
		the blossoming tree.
		It didn’t think: I
		am higher than they are.
		It wanted to walk among them,
		to experience the violence of human feeling,
		in part for its song’s sake.
		
		So it became human.
		It found passion, it found violence,
		first conflated, then
		as separate emotions
		and these were not
		contained by music. Thus
		its song changed,
		the sweet notes of its longing to be human
		soured and flattened. Then
		
		the world drew back; the mutant
		fell from love
		as from the cherry branch,
		it fell stained with the bloody
		fruit of the tree.
		
		So it is true after all, not merely
		a rule of art:
		change your form and you change your nature.
		And time does this to us.


	3. WINTER MORNING

		1
		
		Today, when I woke up, I asked myself 
		why did Christ die? Who knows 
		the meaning of such questions?
		
		It was a winter morning, unbelievably cold. 
		So the thoughts went on, 
		from each question came 
		another question, like a twig from a branch, 
		like a branch from a black trunk.
		
		
		2
		
		At a time like this 
		a young woman traveled through the desert settlements 
		looking neither forward nor backward, 
		sitting in perfect composure on the tired animal 
		as the child stirred, still sealed in its profound attachment--
		The husband walked slightly ahead, older, out of place; 
		increasingly, the mule stumbled, the path becoming 
		difficult in darkness, though they persisted 
		in a world like our world, not ruled 
		by man but by a statue in heaven--
		
		
		3
		
		Above the crowds representing 
		humankind, the lost 
		citizens of a remote time,
		
		the insulted body 
		raised on a cross like a criminal 
		to die publicly 
		above Jerusalem, the shimmering city
		
		while in great flocks 
		birds circled the body, not partial 
		to this form over the others
		
		since men were all alike,
		defeated by the air,
		
		whereas in air
		the body of a bird becomes a banner:
		
		But the lesson that was needed
		was another lesson.


*** Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749 - 1832)

	1. IN SUMMER

		How plain and height
		With dewdrops are bright!
		How pearls have crown’d
		The plants all around!
		How sighs the breeze
		Thro’ thicket and trees!
		How loudly in the sun’s clear rays
		The sweet birds carol forth their lays!
		
		But, ah! above,
		Where saw I my love,
		Within her room,
		Small, mantled in gloom,
		Enclosed around,
		Where sunlight was drown’d,
		How little there was earth to me,
		With all its beauteous majesty!


	2. IT IS GOOD

		IN Paradise while moonbeams played,
		Jehovah found, in slumber deep,
		Adam fast sunk; He gently laid
		Eve near him -- she, too, fell asleep.
		There lay they now, on earth’s fair shrine,
		God’s two most beauteous thoughts divine--
		When this He saw, He cried: ‘Tis good!
		And scarce could move from where He stood.
		
		No wonder, that our joy’s complete
		While eye and eye responsive meet,
		When this blest thought of rapture moves us--
		That we’re with Him who truly loves us,
		And if He cries -- Good, let it be!
		‘Tis so for both, it seems to me.
		Thou’rt clasped within these arms of mine,
		Dearest of all God’s thoughts divine!


	3. JUNE

		SHE behind yon mountain lives,
		Who my love’s sweet guerdon gives.
		Tell me, mount, how this can be!
		Very glass thou seem’st to me,
		And I seem to be close by,
		For I see her drawing nigh;
		Now, because I’m absent, sad,
		Now, because she sees me, glad!
		
		Soon between us rise to sight
		Valleys cool, with bushes light,
		Streams and meadows; next appear
		
		Mills and wheels, the surest token
		That a level spot is near,
		
		Plains far-stretching and unbroken.
		And so onwards, onwards roam,
		To my garden and my home!
		
		But how comes it then to pass?
		All this gives no joy, alas!--
		I was ravish’d by her sight,
		By her eyes so fair and bright,
		By her footstep soft and light.
		How her peerless charms I praised,
		When from head to foot I gazed!
		I am here, she’s far away,--
		I am gone, with her to stay.
		
		If on rugged hills she wander,
		
		If she haste the vale along,
		Pinions seem to flutter yonder,
		
		And the air is fill’d with song;
		With the glow of youth still playing,
		
		Joyous vigour in each limb,
		One in silence is delaying,
		
		She alone ‘tis blesses him.
		
		Love, thou art too fair, I ween!
		Fairer I have never seen!
		From the heart full easily
		Blooming flowers are cull’d by thee.
		If I think: “Oh, were it so,”
		Bone and marrow seen to glow!
		If rewarded by her love,
		Can I greater rapture prove?
		
		And still fairer is the bride,
		When in me she will confide,
		When she speaks and lets me know
		All her tale of joy and woe.
		All her lifetime’s history
		Now is fully known to me.
		Who in child or woman e’er
		Soul and body found so fair?


	4. MARCH

		THE snow-flakes fall in showers,
		
		The time is absent still,
		When all Spring’s beauteous flowers,
		When all Spring’s beauteous flowers
		
		Our hearts with joy shall fill.
		
		With lustre false and fleeting
		
		The sun’s bright rays are thrown;
		The swallow’s self is cheating:
		The swallow’s self is cheating,
		
		And why? He comes alone!
		
		Can I e’er feel delighted
		
		Alone, though Spring is near?
		Yet when we are united,
		Yet when we are united,
		
		The Summer will be here.


	5. NOVEMBER SONG

		To the great archer--not to him
		
		To meet whom flies the sun,
		And who is wont his features dim
		
		With clouds to overrun--
		
		But to the boy be vow’d these rhymes,
		
		Who ‘mongst the roses plays,
		Who hear us, and at proper times
		
		To pierce fair hearts essays.
		
		Through him the gloomy winter night,
		
		Of yore so cold and drear,
		Brings many a loved friend to our sight,
		
		And many a woman dear.
		
		Henceforward shall his image fair
		
		Stand in yon starry skies,
		And, ever mild and gracious there,
		
		Alternate set and rise.


	6. PROCEMION

		IN His blest name, who was His own creation,
		Who from all time makes making his vocation;
		The name of Him who makes our faith so bright,
		Love, confidence, activity, and might;
		In that One’s name, who, named though oft He be,
		Unknown is ever in Reality:
		As far as ear can reach, or eyesight dim,
		Thou findest but the known resembling Him;
		How high so’er thy fiery spirit hovers,
		Its simile and type it straight discovers
		Onward thou’rt drawn, with feelings light and gay,
		Where’er thou goest, smiling is the way;
		No more thou numbrest, reckonest no time,
		Each step is infinite, each step sublime.
		
		WHAT God would outwardly alone control,
		And on his finger whirl the mighty Whole?
		He loves the inner world to move, to view
		Nature in Him, Himself in Nature too,
		So that what in Him works, and is, and lives,
		The measure of His strength, His spirit gives.
		
		WITHIN us all a universe doth dwell;
		And hence each people’s usage laudable,
		That ev’ry one the Best that meets his eyes
		As God, yea e’en his God, doth recognise;
		To Him both earth and heaven surrenders he,
		Fears Him, and loves Him too, if that may be.


	7. THE ERL-KING

		WHO rides there so late through the night dark and drear?
		The father it is, with his infant so dear;
		He holdeth the boy tightly clasp’d in his arm,
		He holdeth him safely, he keepeth him warm.
		
		“My son, wherefore seek’st thou thy face thus to hide?”
		“Look, father, the Erl-King is close by our side!
		Dost see not the Erl-King, with crown and with train?”
		“My son, ‘tis the mist rising over the plain.”
		
		“Oh, come, thou dear infant! oh come thou with me!
		Full many a game I will play there with thee;
		On my strand, lovely flowers their blossoms unfold,
		My mother shall grace thee with garments of gold.”
		
		“My father, my father, and dost thou not hear
		The words that the Erl-King now breathes in mine ear?”
		“Be calm, dearest child, ‘tis thy fancy deceives;
		‘Tis the sad wind that sighs through the withering leaves.”
		
		“Wilt go, then, dear infant, wilt go with me there?
		My daughters shall tend thee with sisterly care
		My daughters by night their glad festival keep,
		They’ll dance thee, and rock thee, and sing thee to sleep.”
		
		“My father, my father, and dost thou not see,
		How the Erl-King his daughters has brought here for me?”
		“My darling, my darling, I see it aright,
		‘Tis the aged grey willows deceiving thy sight.”
		
		“I love thee, I’m charm’d by thy beauty, dear boy!
		And if thou’rt unwilling, then force I’ll employ.”
		“My father, my father, he seizes me fast,
		Full sorely the Erl-King has hurt me at last.”
		
		The father now gallops, with terror half wild,
		He grasps in his arms the poor shuddering child;
		He reaches his courtyard with toil and with dread,--
		The child in his arms finds he motionless, dead.


	8. THE FISHERMAN

		HE water rushed, the water swelled,
		A fisherman sat by,
		And gazed upon his dancing float
		With tranquil-dreaming eye.
		And as he sits, and as he looks,
		The gurgling waves arise;
		A maid, all bright with water drops,
		Stands straight before his eyes.
		
		She sang to him, she spake to him:
		“My fish why dost thou snare,
		With human wit and human guile,
		Into the killing air?
		Couldst see how happy fishes live
		Under the stream so clear,
		Thyself would plunge into the stream,
		And live for ever there.
		
		“Bathe not the lovely sun and moon
		Within the cool, deep sea,
		And with wave-breathing faces rise
		In twofold witchery?
		Lure not the misty heaven-deeps,
		So beautiful and blue?
		Lures not thine image, mirrored in
		The Fresh eternal dew?
		
		The water rushed, the water swelled,
		It clasped his feet, I wis’
		A thrill went through his yearning heart,
		As when two lovers kiss!
		She spake to him, she sang to him:
		Resistless was her strain;
		Half drew him in, half lured him in;
		He ne’er was seen again.


	9. THE METAMORPHOSIS OF PLANTS

		THOU art confused, my beloved, at, seeing the thousandfold 
		union
		
		Shown in this flowery troop, over the garden dispers’d;
		any a name dost thou hear assign’d; one after another
		
		Falls on thy list’ning ear, with a barbarian sound.
		None resembleth another, yet all their forms have a likeness;
		
		Therefore, a mystical law is by the chorus proclaim’d;
		Yes, a sacred enigma! Oh, dearest friend, could I only
		
		Happily teach thee the word, which may the mystery 
		solve!
		Closely observe how the plant, by little and little progressing,
		
		Step by step guided on, changeth to blossom and 
		fruit!
		First from the seed it unravels itself, as soon as the silent
		
		Fruit-bearing womb of the earth kindly allows Its 
		escape,
		And to the charms of the light, the holy, the ever-in-motion,
		
		Trusteth the delicate leaves, feebly beginning 
		to shoot.
		Simply slumber’d the force in the seed; a germ of the future,
		
		Peacefully lock’d in itself, ‘neath the integument 
		lay,
		Leaf and root, and bud, still void of colour, and shapeless;
		
		Thus doth the kernel, while dry, cover that motionless 
		life.
		Upward then strives it to swell, in gentle moisture confiding,
		
		And, from the night where it dwelt, straightway 
		ascendeth to light.
		Yet still simple remaineth its figure, when first it appeareth;
		
		And ‘tis a token like this, points out the child 
		‘mid the plants.
		Soon a shoot, succeeding it, riseth on high, and reneweth,
		
		Piling-up node upon node, ever the primitive form;
		Yet not ever alike: for the following leaf, as thou seest,
		
		Ever produceth itself, fashioned in manifold ways.
		Longer, more indented, in points and in parts more divided,
		
		Which. all-deform’d until now, slept in the organ 
		below,
		So at length it attaineth the noble and destined perfection,
		
		Which, in full many a tribe, fills thee with wondering 
		awe.
		Many ribb’d and tooth’d, on a surface juicy and swelling,
		
		Free and unending the shoot seemeth in fullness 
		to be;
		Yet here Nature restraineth, with powerful hands, the formation,
		
		And to a perfecter end, guideth with softness its 
		growth,
		Less abundantly yielding the sap, contracting the vessels,
		
		So that the figure ere long gentler effects doth 
		disclose.
		Soon and in silence is check’d the growth of the vigorous branches,
		
		And the rib of the stalk fuller becometh in form.
		Leafless, however, and quick the tenderer stem then up-springeth,
		
		And a miraculous sight doth the observer enchant.
		Ranged in a circle, in numbers that now are small, and now countless,
		
		Gather the smaller-sized leaves, close by the side 
		of their like.
		Round the axis compress’d the sheltering calyx unfoldeth,
		
		And, as the perfectest type, brilliant-hued coronals 
		forms.
		Thus doth Nature bloom, in glory still nobler and fuller,
		
		Showing, in order arranged, member on member uprear’d.
		Wonderment fresh dost thou feel, as soon as the stem rears the flower
		
		Over the scaffolding frail of the alternating leaves.
		But this glory is only the new creation’s foreteller,
		
		Yes, the leaf with its hues feeleth the hand all 
		divine,
		And on a sudden contracteth itself; the tenderest figures
		
		Twofold as yet, hasten on, destined to blend into 
		one.
		Lovingly now the beauteous pairs are standing together,
		
		Gather’d in countless array, there where the altar 
		is raised.
		Hymen hovereth o’er them, and scents delicious and mighty
		
		Stream forth their fragrance so sweet, all things 
		enliv’ning around.
		Presently, parcell’d out, unnumber’d germs are seen swelling,
		
		Sweetly conceald in the womb, where is made perfect 
		the fruit.
		Here doth Nature close the ring of her forces eternal;
		
		Yet doth a new one, at once, cling to the one gone 
		before,
		So that the chain be prolonged for ever through all generations,
		
		And that the whole may have life, e’en as enjoy’d 
		by each part.
		Now, my beloved one, turn thy gaze on the many-hued thousands
		
		Which, confusing no more, gladden the mind as they 
		wave.
		Every plant unto thee proclaimeth the laws everlasting,
		
		Every flowered speaks louder and louder to thee;
		But if thou here canst decipher the mystic words of the goddess,
		
		Everywhere will they be seen, e’en though the features 
		are changed.
		Creeping insects may linger, the eager butterfly hasten,--
		
		Plastic and forming, may man change e’en the figure 
		decreed!
		Oh, then, bethink thee, as well, how out of the germ of acquaintance,
		
		Kindly intercourse sprang, slowly unfolding its 
		leaves;
		Soon how friendship with might unveil’d itself in our bosoms,
		
		And how Amor, at length, brought forth blossom 
		and fruit
		Think of the manifold ways wherein Nature hath lent to our feelings,
		
		Silently giving them birth, either the first or 
		the last!
		Yes, and rejoice in the present day! For love that is holy
		
		Seeketh the noblest of fruits,--that where the 
		thoughts are the same,
		Where the opinions agree,--that the pair may, in rapt contemplation,
		
		Lovingly blend into one,--find the more excellent 
		world.


	10. THE REUNION

		CAN it be! of stars the star,
		Do I press thee to my heart?
		In the night of distance far,
		What deep gulf, what bitter smart!
		Yes, ‘tis thou, indeed at last,
		Of my joys the partner dear!
		Mindful, though, of sorrows past,
		I the present needs must fear.
		
		When the still unfashioned earth
		Lay on God’s eternal breast,
		He ordained its hour of birth,
		With creative joy possessed.
		Then a heavy sigh arose,
		When He spake the sentence: -- “Be!”
		And the All, with mighty throes,
		Burst into reality.
		
		And when thus was born the light,
		Darkness near it feared to stay,
		And the elements with might
		Fled on every side away;
		Each on some far-distant trace,
		Each with visions wild employed,
		Numb, in boundless realms of space,
		Harmony and feeling-void.
		
		Dumb was all, all still and dead,
		For the first time, God alone!
		Then He formed the morning-red,
		Which soon made its kindness known:
		It unravelled from the waste
		Bright and glowing harmony,
		And once more with love was graced
		What contended formerly.
		
		And with earnest, noble strife,
		Each its own peculiar sought;
		Back to full, unbounded life,
		Sight and feeling soon were brought.
		Wherefore, if ‘tis done, explore
		_How?_ why give the manner, name?
		Allah need create no more,
		We his world ourselves can frame.
		
		So, with morning pinions brought,
		To thy mouth was I impelled;
		Stamped with thousand seals by night,
		Star-clear is the bond fast held.
		Paragons on earth are we
		Both of grief and joy sublime,
		And a second sentence: -- “Be!”
		Parts us not a second time.


	11. TO THE DISTANT ONE

		AND have I lost thee evermore,
		Hast thou, oh, fair one, from me flown?
		Still in mine ear sounds, as of yore,
		Thine every word, thine every tone.
		
		As when at morn the wanderer’s eye
		Attempts to pierce the air in vain,
		When, hidden in the azure sky,
		The lark high o’er him chants his strain:
		
		So do I cast my troubled gaze
		Through bush, through forest, o’er the lea;
		Thou art invoked by all my lays;
		Oh, come then, loved one, back to me!


*** Robert Graves (1895 - 1985)

	1. A CHILD’S NIGHTMARE

		Through long nursery nights he stood
		By my bed unwearying,
		Loomed gigantic, formless, queer,
		Purring in my haunted ear
		That same hideous nightmare thing,
		Talking, as he lapped my blood,
		In a voice cruel and flat,
		Saying for ever, “Cat! . . . Cat! . . . Cat! . . .”
		
		That one word was all he said,
		That one word through all my sleep,
		In monotonous mock despair.
		Nonsense may be light as air,
		But there’s Nonsense that can keep
		Horror bristling round the head,
		When a voice cruel and flat
		Says for ever, “Cat! . . . Cat! . . . Cat! . . .”
		
		He had faded, he was gone
		Years ago with Nursery Land,
		When he leapt on me again
		From the clank of a night train,
		Overpowered me foot and head,
		Lapped my blood, while on and on
		The old voice cruel and flat
		Says for ever, “Cat! . . . Cat! . . . Cat! . . .”
		
		Morphia drowsed, again I lay
		In a crater by High Wood:
		He was there with straddling legs,
		Staring eyes as big as eggs,
		Purring as he lapped my blood,
		His black bulk darkening the day,
		With a voice cruel and flat,
		“Cat! . . . Cat! . . . Cat! . . . Cat! . . .” he said, “Cat! . . . Cat! . . .”
		
		When I’m shot through heart and head,
		And there’s no choice but to die,
		The last word I’ll hear, no doubt,
		Won’t be “Charge!” or “Bomb them out!”
		Nor the stretcher-bearer’s cry,
		“Let that body be, he’s dead!”
		But a voice cruel and flat
		Saying for ever, “Cat! . . . Cat! . . . Cat!”


	2. A LOVER SINCE CHILDHOOD

		Tangled in thought am I,
		Stumble in speech do I?
		Do I blunder and blush for the reason why?
		Wander aloof do I,
		Lean over gates and sigh,
		Making friends with the bee and the butterfly?
		
		If thus and thus I do,
		Dazed by the thought of you,
		Walking my sorrowful way in the early dew,
		My heart cut through and through
		In this despair of you,
		Starved for a word or a look will my hope renew:
		
		give then a thought for me
		Walking so miserably,
		Wanting relief in the friendship of flower or tree;
		Do but remember, we
		Once could in love agree,
		Swallow your pride, let us be as we used to be.


	3. ADVICE TO LOVERS

		I knew an old man at a Fair
		Who made it his twice-yearly task
		To clamber on a cider cask
		And cry to all the yokels there:--
		
		“Lovers to-day and for all time
		Preserve the meaning of my rhyme:
		Love is not kindly nor yet grim
		But does to you as you to him.
		
		“Whistle, and Love will come to you,
		Hiss, and he fades without a word,
		Do wrong, and he great wrong will do,
		Speak, he retells what he has heard.
		
		“Then all you lovers have good heed
		Vex not young Love in word or deed:
		Love never leaves an unpaid debt,
		He will not pardon nor forget.”
		
		The old man’s voice was sweet yet loud
		And this shows what a man was he,
		He’d scatter apples to the crowd
		And give great draughts of cider, free.


*** Thomas Hardy (1840 - 1928)

	1. A BROKEN APPOINTMENT

		You did not come, 
		And marching Time drew on, and wore me numb,--
		Yet less for loss of your dear presence there 
		Than that I thus found lacking in your make 
		That high compassion which can overbear 
		Reluctance for pure lovingkindness’ sake 
		Grieved I, when, as the hope-hour stroked its sum, 
		You did not come. 
		
		You love not me, 
		And love alone can lend you loyalty; 
		--I know and knew it. But, unto the store 
		Of human deeds divine in all but name, 
		Was it not worth a little hour or more 
		To add yet this: Once you, a woman, came 
		To soothe a time-torn man; even though it be 
		You love not me? 


	2. A NEW YEAR’S EVE IN WAR TIME

		                         I
		
		           Phantasmal fears, 
		           And the flap of the flame, 
		           And the throb of the clock, 
		           And a loosened slate, 
		           And the blind night’s drone, 
		Which tiredly the spectral pines intone! 
		
		
		                         II
		
		           And the blood in my ears 
		           Strumming always the same, 
		           And the gable-cock 
		           With its fitful grate, 
		           And myself, alone.
		
		
		                        III
		
		           The twelfth hour nears 
		           Hand-hid, as in shame; 
		           I undo the lock, 
		           And listen, and wait 
		           For the Young Unknown. 
		
		
		                        IV
		
		           In the dark there careers--
		           As if Death astride came 
		           To numb all with his knock-- 
		           A horse at mad rate 
		           Over rut and stone. 
		
		
		                        V
		
		           No figure appears, 
		           No call of my name, 
		           No sound but ‘Tic-toc’ 
		           Without check. Past the gate 
		           It clatters--is gone. 
		
		
		                        VI
		
		           What rider it bears 
		           There is none to proclaim; 
		           And the Old Year has struck,
		           And, scarce animate, 
		           The New makes moan. 
		
		
		                        VII.
		
		           Maybe that ‘More Tears!-- 
		           More Famine and Flame-- 
		           More Severance and Shock!‘ 
		           Is the order from Fate 
		           That the Rider speeds on 
		To pale Europe; and tiredly the pines intone.


	3. AFTER A JOURNEY

		Hereto I come to view a voiceless ghost;
		Whither, O whither will its whim now draw me?
		Up the cliff, down, till I’m lonely, lost,
		And the unseen waters’ ejaculations awe me.
		Where you will next be there’s no knowing,
		Facing round about me everywhere,
		With your nut-coloured hair,
		And gray eyes, and rose-flush coming and going.
		
		Yes: I have re-entered your olden haunts at last;
		Through the years, through the dead scenes I have tracked you;
		What have you now found to say of our past--
		Viewed across the dark space wherein I have lacked you?
		Summer gave us sweets, but autumn wrought division?
		Things were not lastly as firstly well
		With us twain, you tell?
		But all’s closed now, despite Time’s derision.
		
		I see what you are doing: you are leading me on
		To the spots we knew when we haunted here together,
		The waterfall, above which the mist-bow shone
		At the then fair hour in the then fair weather,
		And the cave just under, with a voice still so hollow
		That it seems to call out to me from forty years ago,
		When you were all aglow,
		And not the thin ghost that I now frailly follow!
		
		Ignorant of what there is flitting here to see,
		The waked birds preen and the seals flop lazily,
		Soon you will have, Dear, to vanish from me,
		For the stars close their shutters and the dawn whitens hazily.
		Trust me, I mind not, though Life lours,
		The bringing me here; nay, bring me here again!
		I am just the same as when
		Our days were a joy, and our paths through flowers.


	4. AND THERE WAS A GREAT CALM

		I
		
		There had been years of Passion—scorching, cold,
		And much Despair, and Anger heaving high,
		Care whitely watching, Sorrows manifold,
		Among the young, among the weak and old,
		And the pensive Spirit of Pity whispered, “Why?”
		
		
		II
		
		Men had not paused to answer. Foes distraught
		Pierced the thinned peoples in a brute-like blindness,
		Philosophies that sages long had taught,
		And Selflessness, were as an unknown thought,
		And “Hell!” and “Shell!” were yapped at Lovingkindness.
		
		
		III
		
		The feeble folk at home had grown full-used
		To ‘dug-outs’, ‘snipers’, ‘Huns’, from the war-adept
		In the mornings heard, and at evetides perused;
		To day-dreamt men in millions, when they mused--
		To nightmare-men in millions when they slept.
		
		
		IV
		
		Waking to wish existence timeless, null,
		Sirius they watched above where armies fell;
		He seemed to check his flapping when, in the lull
		Of night a boom came thencewise, like the dull
		Plunge of a stone dropped into some deep well.
		
		
		V
		
		So, when old hopes that earth was bettering slowly
		Were dead and damned, there sounded ‘War is done!’
		One morrow. Said the bereft, and meek, and lowly,
		‘Will men some day be given to grace? yea, wholly,
		And in good sooth, as our dreams used to run?’
		
		
		VI
		
		Breathless they paused. Out there men raised their glance
		To where had stood those poplars lank and lopped,
		As they had raised it through the four years’ dance
		Of Death in the now familiar flats of France;
		And murmured, ‘Strange, this! How? All firing stopped?’
		
		
		VII
		
		Aye; all was hushed. The about-to-fire fired not,
		The aimed-at moved away in trance-lipped song.
		One checkless regiment slung a clinching shot
		And turned. The Spirit of Irony smirked out, ‘What?
		Spoil peradventures woven of Rage and Wrong?’
		
		
		VIII
		
		Thenceforth no flying fires inflamed the gray,
		No hurtlings shook the dewdrop from the thorn,
		No moan perplexed the mute bird on the spray;
		Worn horses mused: ‘We are not whipped to-day;’
		No weft-winged engines blurred the moon’s thin horn.
		
		
		IX
		
		Calm fell. From Heaven distilled a clemency;
		There was peace on earth, and silence in the sky;
		Some could, some could not, shake off misery:
		The Sinister Spirit sneered: ‘It had to be!’
		And again the Spirit of Pity whispered, ‘Why?’


	5. BEFORE MARCHING AND AFTER

		      Orion swung southward aslant
		      Where the starved Egdon pine-trees had thinned,
		      The Pleiads aloft seemed to pant
		      With the heather that twitched in the wind;
		But he looked on indifferent to sights such as these,
		Unswayed by love, friendship, home joy or home sorrow,
		And wondered to what he would march on the morrow.
		
		      The crazed household-clock with its whirr
		      Rang midnight within as he stood,
		      He heard the low sighing of her
		      Who had striven from his birth for his good;
		But he still only asked the spring starlight, the breeze,
		What great thing or small thing his history would borrow
		From that Game with Death he would play on the morrow.
		
		      When the heath wore the robe of late summer,
		      And the fuchsia-bells, hot in the sun,
		      Hung red by the door, a quick comer
		      Brought tidings that marching was done
		For him who had joined in that game overseas
		Where Death stood to win, though his name was to borrow
		A brightness therefrom not to fade on the morrow.


	6. IN TENEBRIS

		_“Percussus sum sicut foenum, et aruit cor meum.”_ -—Ps. _ci._
		
		Wintertime nighs; 
		But my bereavement-pain 
		It cannot bring again: 
		Twice no one dies. 
		
		Flower-petals flee; 
		But, since it once hath been, 
		No more that severing scene 
		Can harrow me. 
		
		Birds faint in dread: 
		I shall not lose old strength 
		In the lone frost’s black length: 
		Strength long since fled! 
		
		Leaves freeze to dun; 
		But friends can not turn cold 
		This season as of old 
		For him with none. 
		
		Tempests may scath; 
		But love can not make smart 
		Again this year his heart 
		Who no heart hath. 
		
		Black is night’s cope; 
		But death will not appal 
		One who, past doubtings all, 
		Waits in unhope. 


	7. MEN WHO MARCH AWAY

		What of the faith and fire within us
		Men who march away
		Ere the barn-cocks say
		Night is growing gray,
		Leaving all that here can win us;
		What of the faith and fire within us
		Men who march away?
		
		Is it a purblind prank, O think you,
		Friend with the musing eye,
		Who watch us stepping by
		With doubt and dolorous sigh?
		Can much pondering so hoodwink you!
		Is it a purblind prank, O think you,
		Friend with the musing eye?
		
		Nay. We well see what we are doing,
		Though some may not see--
		Dalliers as they be--
		England’s need are we;
		Her distress would leave us rueing:
		Nay. We well see what we are doing,
		Though some may not see!
		
		In our heart of hearts believing
		Victory crowns the just,
		And that braggarts must
		Surely bite the dust,
		Press we to the field ungrieving,
		In our heart of hearts believing
		Victory crowns the just.
		
		Hence the faith and fire within us
		Men who march away
		Ere the barn-cocks say
		Night is growing gray,
		Leaving all that here can win us;
		Hence the faith and fire within us
		Men who march away.


	8. RAIN ON A GRAVE

		Clouds spout upon her 
		Their waters amain 
		In ruthless disdain,-- 
		Her who but lately 
		Had shivered with pain 
		As at touch of dishonour 
		If there had lit on her 
		So coldly, so straightly 
		Such arrows of rain: 
		
		One who to shelter 
		Her delicate head 
		Would quicken and quicken 
		Each tentative tread 
		If drops chanced to pelt her 
		That summertime spills 
		In dust-paven rills 
		When thunder-clouds thicken 
		And birds close their bills. 
		
		Would that I lay there 
		And she were housed here! 
		Or better, together 
		Were folded away there 
		Exposed to one weather 
		We both,--who would stray there 
		When sunny the day there, 
		Or evening was clear 
		At the prime of the year. 
		
		Soon will be growing 
		Green blades from her mound, 
		And daisies be showing 
		Like stars on the ground, 
		Till she form part of them-- 
		Ay--the sweet heart of them, 
		Loved beyond measure 
		With a child’s pleasure 
		All her life’s round. 


	9. THE LAST PERFORMANCE

		“I am playing my oldest tunes,” declared she,
		     “All the old tunes I know,--
		Those I learnt ever so long ago.”
		--Why she should think just then she’d play them
		      Silence cloaks like snow.
		
		When I returned from the town at nightfall
		     Notes continued to pour
		As when I had left two hours before:
		“It’s the very last time,” she said in closing;
		      “From now I play no more.”
		
		A few morns onward found her fading,
		     And, as her life outflew,
		I thought of her playing her tunes right through;
		And I felt she had known of what was coming,
		     And wondered how she knew.


	10. THE OXEN

		Christmas Eve, and twelve of the clock.
		“Now they are all on their knees,”
		An elder said as we sat in a flock
		By the embers in hearthside ease.
		
		We pictured the meek mild creatures where
		They dwelt in their strawy pen,
		Nor did it occur to one of us there
		To doubt they were kneeling then.
		
		So fair a fancy few would weave
		In these years! Yet, I feel,
		If someone said on Christmas Eve,
		“Come; see the oxen kneel,
		
		“In the lonely barton by yonder coomb
		Our childhood used to know,”
		I should go with him in the gloom,
		Hoping it might be so.


	11. THE SELF-UNSEEING

		Here is the ancient floor, 
		Footworn and hollowed and thin, 
		Here was the former door 
		Where the dead feet walked in. 
		
		She sat here in her chair, 
		Smiling into the fire; 
		He who played stood there, 
		Bowing it higher and higher. 
		
		Childlike, I danced in a dream; 
		Blessings emblazoned that day; 
		Everything glowed with a gleam; 
		Yet we were looking away! 


	12. THE TO-BE-FORGOTTEN

		I
		
		I heard a small sad sound, 
		And stood awhile among the tombs around: 
		“Wherefore, old friends,“ said I, “are you distrest, 
		Now, screened from life’s unrest?“ 
		
		
		II
		
		--“O not at being here; 
		But that our future second death is near; 
		When, with the living, memory of us numbs, 
		And blank oblivion comes! 
		
		
		III
		
		“These, our sped ancestry, 
		Lie here embraced by deeper death than we; 
		Nor shape nor thought of theirs can you descry 
		With keenest backward eye. 
		
		
		IV
		
		“They count as quite forgot; 
		They are as men who have existed not; 
		Theirs is a loss past loss of fitful breath; 
		It is the second death. 
		
		
		V
		
		“We here, as yet, each day 
		Are blest with dear recall; as yet, can say 
		We hold in some soul loved continuance 
		Of shape and voice and glance. 
		
		
		VI
		
		“But what has been will be--
		First memory, then oblivion’s swallowing sea; 
		Like men foregone, shall we merge into those 
		Whose story no one knows. 
		
		
		VII
		
		“For which of us could hope 
		To show in life that world-awakening scope 
		Granted the few whose memory none lets die, 
		But all men magnify? 
		
		
		VIII
		
		“We were but Fortune’s sport; 
		Things true, things lovely, things of good report 
		We neither shunned nor sought . . . We see our bourne, 
		And seeing it we mourn.“ 


	13. THE VOICE

		Woman much missed, how you call to me, call to me, 
		Saying that now you are not as you were 
		When you had changed from the one who was all to me, 
		But as at first, when our day was fair. 
		
		Can it be you that I hear? Let me view you, then, 
		Standing as when I drew near to the town 
		Where you would wait for me: yes, as I knew you then, 
		Even to the original air-blue gown! 
		
		Or is it only the breeze, in its listlessness 
		Travelling across the wet mead to me here, 
		You being ever dissolved to wan wistlessness, 
		Heard no more again far or near? 
		
		Thus I; faltering forward, 
		Leaves around me falling, 
		Wind oozing thin through the thorn from norward, 
		And the woman calling.


*** Robert Hayden (1913 - 1980)

	1. THE PRISONERS

		Steel doors--guillotine gates--
		of the doorless house closed massively.
		We were locked in with loss.
		
		Guards frisked us, marked our wrists,
		then let us into the drab Rec Hall--
		splotched green walls, high windows barred--
		
		where the dispossessed awaited us.
		Hands intimate with knife and pistol,
		hands that had cruelly grasped and throttled
		
		clasped ours in welcome. I sensed the plea
		of men denied: Believe us human
		like yourselves, who but for Grace . . .
		
		We shared reprieving Hidden Words
		revealed by the Godlike imprisoned
		One, whose crime was truth.
		
		And I read poems I hoped were true.
		It’s like you been there, brother, been there,
		the scarred young lifer said.


	2. THOSE WINTER SUNDAYS

		Sundays too my father got up early
		And put his clothes on in the blueback cold,
		then with cracked hands that ached
		from labor in the weekday weather made
		banked fires blaze. No one ever thanked him.
		
		I’d wake and hear the cold splintering, breaking.
		When the rooms were warm, he’d call,
		and slowly I would rise and dress,
		fearing the chronic angers of that house,
		
		Speaking indifferently to him,
		who had driven out the cold
		and polished my good shoes as well.
		What did I know, what did I know
		of love’s austere and lonely offices?


*** Seamus Heaney (1939 - 2013)

	1. BLACKBERRY-PICKING

		Late August, given heavy rain and sun
		For a full week, the blackberries would ripen.
		At first, just one, a glossy purple clot
		Among others, red, green, hard as a knot.
		You ate that first one and its flesh was sweet
		Like thickened wine: summer’s blood was in it
		Leaving stains upon the tongue and lust for
		Picking. Then red ones inked up and that hunger
		Sent us out with milk cans, pea tins, jam-pots
		Where briars scratched and wet grass bleached our boots.
		Round hayfields, cornfields and potato-drills
		We trekked and picked until the cans were full,
		Until the tinkling bottom had been covered
		With green ones, and on top big dark blobs burned
		Like a plate of eyes. Our hands were peppered
		With thorn pricks, our palms sticky as Bluebeard’s.
		
		We hoarded the fresh berries in the byre.
		But when the bath was filled we found a fur,
		A rat-grey fungus, glutting on our cache.
		The juice was stinking too. Once off the bush
		The fruit fermented, the sweet flesh would turn sour.
		I always felt like crying. It wasn’t fair
		That all the lovely canfuls smelt of rot.
		Each year I hoped they’d keep, knew they would not.


	2. CASUALTY

		I   
		
		He would drink by himself   
		And raise a weathered thumb   
		Towards the high shelf,   
		Calling another rum   
		And blackcurrant, without   
		Having to raise his voice,   
		Or order a quick stout   
		By a lifting of the eyes   
		And a discreet dumb-show   
		Of pulling off the top;   
		At closing time would go   
		In waders and peaked cap   
		Into the showery dark,   
		A dole-kept breadwinner   
		But a natural for work.   
		I loved his whole manner,   
		Sure-footed but too sly,   
		His deadpan sidling tact,   
		His fisherman’s quick eye   
		And turned observant back.   
		
		Incomprehensible   
		To him, my other life.   
		Sometimes, on the high stool,   
		Too busy with his knife   
		At a tobacco plug   
		And not meeting my eye,   
		In the pause after a slug   
		He mentioned poetry.   
		We would be on our own   
		And, always politic   
		And shy of condescension,   
		I would manage by some trick   
		To switch the talk to eels   
		Or lore of the horse and cart   
		Or the Provisionals.   
		
		But my tentative art   
		His turned back watches too:   
		He was blown to bits   
		Out drinking in a curfew   
		Others obeyed, three nights   
		After they shot dead   
		The thirteen men in Derry.   
		PARAS THIRTEEN, the walls said,   
		BOGSIDE NIL. That Wednesday   
		Everyone held   
		His breath and trembled.   
		
		
		II   
		
		It was a day of cold   
		Raw silence, wind-blown   
		surplice and soutane:   
		Rained-on, flower-laden   
		Coffin after coffin   
		Seemed to float from the door   
		Of the packed cathedral   
		Like blossoms on slow water.   
		The common funeral   
		Unrolled its swaddling band,   
		Lapping, tightening   
		Till we were braced and bound   
		Like brothers in a ring.   
		
		But he would not be held   
		At home by his own crowd   
		Whatever threats were phoned,   
		Whatever black flags waved.   
		I see him as he turned   
		In that bombed offending place,   
		Remorse fused with terror   
		In his still knowable face,   
		His cornered outfaced stare   
		Blinding in the flash.   
		
		He had gone miles away   
		For he drank like a fish   
		Nightly, naturally   
		Swimming towards the lure   
		Of warm lit-up places,   
		The blurred mesh and murmur   
		Drifting among glasses   
		In the gregarious smoke.   
		How culpable was he   
		That last night when he broke   
		Our tribe’s complicity?   
		‘Now, you’re supposed to be   
		An educated man,’   
		I hear him say. ‘Puzzle me   
		The right answer to that one.’
		
		
		III   
		
		I missed his funeral,   
		Those quiet walkers   
		And sideways talkers   
		Shoaling out of his lane   
		To the respectable   
		Purring of the hearse . . .
		They move in equal pace   
		With the habitual   
		Slow consolation   
		Of a dawdling engine,   
		The line lifted, hand   
		Over fist, cold sunshine   
		On the water, the land   
		Banked under fog: that morning   
		I was taken in his boat,   
		The Screw purling, turning   
		Indolent fathoms white,   
		I tasted freedom with him.   
		To get out early, haul   
		Steadily off the bottom,   
		Dispraise the catch, and smile   
		As you find a rhythm   
		Working you, slow mile by mile,   
		Into your proper haunt   
		Somewhere, well out, beyond . . .
		
		Dawn-sniffing revenant,   
		Plodder through midnight rain,   
		Question me again.


	3. CLEARANCES

		_She taught me what her uncle once taught her:
		How easily the biggest coal block split
		If you got the grain and hammer angled right.
		
		The sound of that relaxed alluring blow, 
		Its co-opted and obliterated echo,
		Taught me to hit, taught me to loosen,
		
		Taught me between the hammer and the block
		To face the music. Teach me now to listen,
		To strike it rich behind the linear black._
		
		
		1
		
		A cobble thrown a hundred years ago
		Keeps coming at me, the first stone
		Aimed at a great-grandmother’s turncoat brow.
		The pony jerks and the riot’s on.
		She’s crouched low in the trap
		Running the gauntlet that first Sunday
		Down the brae to Mass at a panicked gallop.
		He whips on through the town to cries of ‘Lundy!’
		
		Call her ‘The Convert’. ‘The Exogamous Bride’.
		Anyhow, it is a genre piece
		Inherited on my mother’s side
		And mine to dispose with now she’s gone.
		Instead of silver and Victorian lace,
		The exonerating, exonerated stone.
		
		
		2
		
		Polished linoleum shone there. Brass taps shone.
		The china cups were very white and big—
		An unchipped set with sugar bowl and jug.
		The kettle whistled. Sandwich and tea scone
		Were present and correct. In case it run,
		The butter must be kept out of the sun.
		And don’t be dropping crumbs. Don’t tilt your chair.
		Don’t reach. Don’t point. Don’t make noise when you stir.
		
		It is Number 5, New Row, Land of the Dead,
		Where grandfather is rising from his place
		With spectacles pushed back on a clean bald head
		To welcome a bewildered homing daughter
		Before she even knocks. ‘What’s this? What’s this?’
		And they sit down in the shining room together.
		
		
		3
		
		When all the others were away at Mass
		I was all hers as we peeled potatoes.
		They broke the silence, let fall one by one
		Like solder weeping off the soldering iron:
		Cold comforts set between us, things to share
		Gleaming in a bucket of clean water.
		And again let fall. Little pleasant splashes
		From each other’s work would bring us to our senses.
		
		So while the parish priest at her bedside
		Went hammer and tongs at the prayers for the dying
		And some were responding and some crying
		I remembered her head bent towards my head,
		Her breath in mine, our fluent dipping knives—
		Never closer the whole rest of our lives.
		
		
		4
		
		Fear of affectation made her affect
		Inadequacy whenever it came to
		Pronouncing words ‘beyond her’. Bertold Brek.
		She’d manage something hampered and askew
		Every time, as if she might betray
		The hampered and inadequate by too
		Well-adjusted a vocabulary.
		With more challenge than pride, she’d tell me, ‘You
		Know all them things.’ So I governed my tongue
		In front of her, a genuinely well-
		Adjusted adequate betrayal
		Of what I knew better. I’d naw and aye
		And decently relapse into the wrong
		Grammar which kept us allied and at bay.
		
		
		5
		
		The cool that came off sheets just off the line
		Made me think the damp must still be in them
		But when I took my corners of the linen
		And pulled against her, first straight down the hem
		And then diagonally, then flapped and shook
		The fabric like a sail in a cross-wind,
		They made a dried-out undulating thwack.
		So we’d stretch and fold and end up hand to hand
		For a split second as if nothing had happened
		For nothing had that had not always happened
		Beforehand, day by day, just touch and go,
		Coming close again by holding back
		In moves where I was x and she was o
		Inscribed in sheets she’d sewn from ripped-out flour sacks.
		
		
		6
		
		In the first flush of the Easter holidays
		The ceremonies during Holy Week
		Were highpoints of our Sons and Lovers phase.
		The midnight fire. The paschal candlestick.
		Elbow to elbow, glad to be kneeling next
		To each other up there near the front
		Of the packed church, we would follow the text
		And rubrics for the blessing of the font.
		As the hind longs for the streams, so my soul. . .
		Dippings. Towellings. The water breathed on.
		The water mixed with chrism and with oil.
		Cruet tinkle. Formal incensation
		And the psalmist’s outcry taken up with pride:
		Day and night my tears have been my bread.
		
		
		7
		
		In the last minutes he said more to her
		Almost than in all their life together.
		‘You’ll be in New Row on Monday night
		And I’ll come up for you and you’ll be glad
		When I walk in the door . . . Isn’t that right?’
		His head was bent down to her propped-up head.
		She could not hear but we were overjoyed.
		He called her good and girl. Then she was dead,
		The searching for a pulsebeat was abandoned
		And we all knew one thing by being there.
		The space we stood around had been emptied
		Into us to keep, it penetrated
		Clearances that suddenly stood open.
		High cries were felled and a pure change happened.
		
		
		8
		
		I thought of walking round and round a space
		Utterly empty, utterly a source
		Where the decked chestnut tree had lost its place
		In our front hedge above the wallflowers.
		The white chips jumped and jumped and skited high.
		I heard the hatchet’s differentiated
		Accurate cut, the crack, the sigh
		And collapse of what luxuriated
		Through the shocked tips and wreckage of it all.
		Deep-planted and long gone, my coeval
		Chestnut from a jam jar in a hole,
		Its heft and hush become a bright nowhere,
		A soul ramifying and forever
		Silent, beyond silence listened for.


	4. DEATH OF A NATURALIST

		All year the flax-dam festered in the heart
		Of the townland; green and heavy headed
		Flax had rotted there, weighted down by huge sods.
		Daily it sweltered in the punishing sun.
		Bubbles gargled delicately, bluebottles
		Wove a strong gauze of sound around the smell.
		There were dragon-flies, spotted butterflies,
		But best of all was the warm thick slobber
		Of frogspawn that grew like clotted water
		In the shade of the banks. Here, every spring
		I would fill jampotfuls of the jellied
		Specks to range on window-sills at home,
		On shelves at school, and wait and watch until
		The fattening dots burst into nimble--
		Swimming tadpoles. Miss Walls would tell us how
		The daddy frog was called a bullfrog
		And how he croaked and how the mammy frog
		Laid hundreds of little eggs and this was
		Frogspawn. You could tell the weather by frogs too
		For they were yellow in the sun and brown
		In rain.
		Then one hot day when fields were rank
		With cowdung in the grass the angry frogs
		Invaded the flax-dam; I ducked through hedges
		To a coarse croaking that I had not heard
		Before. The air was thick with a bass chorus.
		Right down the dam gross-bellied frogs were cocked
		On sods; their loose necks pulsed like sails. Some hopped:
		The slap and plop were obscene threats. Some sat
		Poised like mud grenades, their blunt heads farting.
		I sickened, turned, and ran. The great slime kings
		Were gathered there for vengeance and I knew
		That if I dipped my hand the spawn would clutch it.


	5. FOLLOWER

		My father worked with a horse-plough,
		His shoulders globed like a full sail strung
		Between the shafts and the furrow.
		The horses strained at his clicking tongue.
		
		An expert. He would set the wing
		And fit the bright steel-pointed sock.
		The sod rolled over without breaking.
		At the headrig, with a single pluck
		
		Of reins, the sweating team turned round
		And back into the land. His eye
		Narrowed and angled at the ground,
		Mapping the furrow exactly.
		
		I stumbled in his hobnailed wake,
		Fell sometimes on the polished sod;
		Sometimes he rode me on his back
		Dipping and rising to his plod.
		
		I wanted to grow up and plough,
		To close one eye, stiffen my arm.
		All I ever did was follow
		In his broad shadow round the farm.
		
		I was a nuisance, tripping, falling,
		Yapping always. But today
		It is my father who keeps stumbling
		Behind me, and will not go away.


	6. MAY

		When I looked down from the bridge
		Trout were flipping the sky
		Into smithereens, the stones
		Of the wall warmed me.
		
		Wading green stems, lugs of leaf
		That untangle and bruise
		(Their tiny gushers of juice)
		My toecaps sparkle now
		
		Over the soft fontanel
		Of Ireland. I should wear
		Hide shoes, the hair next my skin,
		For walking this ground:
		
		Wasn’t there a spa-well,
		Its coping grassy, pendent?
		And then the spring issuing
		Right across the tarmac.
		
		I’m out to find that village,
		Its low sills fragrant
		With lady’s-smock and celandine,
		Marshlights in the summer dark.


	7. MID-TERM BREAK

		I sat all morning in the college sick bay
		Counting bells knelling classes to a close.
		At two o’clock our neighbours drove me home.
		
		In the porch I met my father crying—
		He had always taken funerals in his stride—
		And Big Jim Evans saying it was a hard blow.
		
		The baby cooed and laughed and rocked the pram
		When I came in, and I was embarrassed
		By old men standing up to shake my hand
		
		And tell me they were ‘sorry for my trouble’.
		Whispers informed strangers I was the eldest,
		Away at school, as my mother held my hand
		
		In hers and coughed out angry tearless sighs.
		At ten o’clock the ambulance arrived
		With the corpse, stanched and bandaged by the nurses.
		
		Next morning I went up into the room. Snowdrops
		And candles soothed the bedside; I saw him
		For the first time in six weeks. Paler now,
		
		Wearing a poppy bruise on his left temple,
		He lay in the four-foot box as in his cot.
		No gaudy scars, the bumper knocked him clear.
		
		A four-foot box, a foot for every year.


	8. NORTH

		I returned to a long strand,
		the hammered curve of a bay,   
		and found only the secular
		powers of the Atlantic thundering.
		
		I faced the unmagical
		invitations of Iceland,
		the pathetic colonies
		of Greenland, and suddenly
		
		those fabulous raiders,
		those lying in Orkney and Dublin   
		measured against
		their long swords rusting,
		
		those in the solid
		belly of stone ships,
		those hacked and glinting
		in the gravel of thawed streams
		
		were ocean-deafened voices
		warning me, lifted again
		in violence and epiphany.
		The longship’s swimming tongue
		
		was buoyant with hindsight—
		it said Thor’s hammer swung
		to geography and trade,
		thick-witted couplings and revenges,
		
		the hatreds and behind-backs
		of the althing, lies and women,   
		exhaustions nominated peace,   
		memory incubating the spilled blood.
		
		It said, ‘Lie down
		in the word-hoard, burrow   
		the coil and gleam
		of your furrowed brain.
		
		Compose in darkness.   
		Expect aurora borealis   
		in the long foray
		but no cascade of light.
		
		Keep your eye clear
		as the bleb of the icicle,
		trust the feel of what nubbed treasure   
		your hands have known.’


	9. STRANGE FRUIT

		Here is the girl’s head like an exhumed gourd.
		Oval-faced, prune-skinned, prune-stones for teeth.
		
		They unswaddled the wet fern of her hair
		And made an exhibition of its coil,
		Let the air at her leathery beauty.
		Pash of tallow, perishable treasure:
		Her broken nose is dark as a turf clod,
		Her eyeholes blank as pools in the old workings.
		Diodorus Siculus confessed
		His gradual ease with the likes of this:
		Murdered, forgotten, nameless, terrible
		Beheaded girl, outstaring axe
		And beatification, outstaring
		What had begun to feel like reverence.


	10. THE GRAUBALLE MAN

		As if he had been poured
		in tar, he lies
		on a pillow of turf
		and seems to weep
		
		the black river of himself.
		The grain of his wrists
		is like bog oak,
		the ball of his heel
		
		like a basalt egg.
		His instep has shrunk
		cold as a swan’s foot
		or a wet swamp root.
		
		His hips are the ridge
		and purse of a mussel,
		his spine an eel arrested
		under a glisten of mud.
		
		The head lifts,
		the chin is a visor
		raised above the vent
		of his slashed throat
		
		that has tanned and toughened.
		The cured wound
		opens inwards to a dark
		elderberry place.
		
		Who will say ‘corpse’
		to his vivid cast?
		Who will say ‘body’
		to his opaque repose?
		
		And his rusted hair,
		a mat unlikely
		as a foetus’s.
		I first saw his twisted face
		
		in a photograph,
		a head and shoulder
		out of the peat,
		bruised like a forceps baby,
		
		but now he lies
		perfected in my memory,
		down to the red horn
		of his nails,
		
		hung in the scales
		with beauty and atrocity:
		with the Dying Gaul
		too strictly compassed
		
		on his shield,
		with the actual weight
		of each hooded victim,
		slashed and dumped.


*** Anthony Hecht (1923 - 2004)

	1. A HILL

		In Italy, where this sort of thing can occur,
		I had a vision once; though you understand
		It was nothing at all like Dante’s, or the visions of saints,
		And perhaps not a vision at all. I was with some friends,
		Picking my way through a warm sunlit piazza
		In the early morning. A clear fretwork of shadows
		From huge umbrellas littered the pavement and made
		A sort of lucent shallows in which was moored
		A small navy of carts. Books, coins, old maps,
		Cheap landscapes and ugly religious prints
		Were all on sale. The colors and noise
		Like the flying hands were gestures of exultation,
		So that even the bargaining
		Rose to the ear like a voluble godliness.
		And then, where it happened, the noises suddenly stopped,
		And it got darker; pushcarts and people dissolved
		And even the great Farnese Palace itself
		Was gone, for all its marble; in its place
		Was a hill, mole-colored and bare. It was very cold,
		Close to freezing, with a promise of snow.
		The trees were like old ironwork gathered for scrap
		Outside a factory wall. There was no wind,
		And the only sound for a while was the little click
		Of ice as it broke in the mud under my feet.
		I saw a piece of ribbon snagged on a hedge,
		But no other sign of life. And then I heard
		What seemed the crack of a rifle. A hunter, I guessed;
		At least I was not alone. But just after that
		Came the soft and papery crash
		Of a great branch somewhere unseen falling to earth.
		And that was all, except for the cold and silence
		That promised to last forever, like the hill.
		Then prices came through, and fingers, and I was restored
		To the sunlight and my friends. But for more than a week
		I was scared by the plain bitterness of what I had seen.
		All this happened about ten years ago,
		And it hasn’t troubled me since, but at last, today,
		I remembered that hill; it lies just to the left
		Of the road north of Poughkeepsie; and as a boy
		I stood before it for hours in wintertime.


	2. A LETTER

		I have been wondering
		What you are thinking about, and by now suppose
		It is certainly not me.
		But the crocus is up, and the lark, and the blundering
		Blood knows what it knows.
		It talks to itself all night, like a sliding moonlit sea.
		Of course, it is talking of you.
		At dawn, where the ocean has netted its catch of lights,
		The sun plants one lithe foot
		On that spill of mirrors, but the blood goes worming through
		Its warm Arabian nights,
		Naming your pounding name again in the dark heart-root.
		Who shall, of course, be nameless.
		Anyway, I should want you to know I have done my best,
		As I’m sure you have, too.
		Others are bound to us, the gentle and blameless
		Whose names are not confessed
		In the ceaseless palaver. My dearest, the clear unquaried blue
		
		Of those depths is all but blinding.
		You may remember that once you brought my boys
		Two little woolly birds.
		Yesterday the older one asked for you upon finding
		Your thrush among his toys.
		And the tides welled about me, and I could find no words.
		There is not much else to tell.
		One tries one’s best to continue as before,
		Doing some little good.
		But I would have you know that all is not well
		With a man dead set to ignore
		The endless repetitions of his own murmurous blood.


	3. AFTER THE RAIN

		The barbed-wire fences rust
		As their cedar uprights blacken
		After a night of rain.
		Some early, innocent lust
		Gets me outdoors to smell
		The teasle, the pelted bracken,
		The cold, mossed-over well,
		Rank with its iron chain,
		And takes me off for a stroll.
		Wetness has taken over.
		From drain and creeper twine
		It’s runnelled and trenched and edged
		A pebbled serpentine
		Secretly, as though pledged
		To attain a difficult goal
		And join some important river.
		The air is a smear of ashes
		With a cool taste of coins.
		Stiff among misty washes,
		The trees are as black as wicks,
		Silent, detached and old.
		A pallor undermines
		Some damp and swollen sticks.
		The woods are rich with mould.
		How even and pure this light!
		All things stand on their own,
		Equal and shadowless,
		In a world gone pale and neuter,
		Yet riddled with fresh delight.
		The heart of every stone
		Conceals a toad, and the grass
		Shines with a douse of pewter.
		Somewhere a branch rustles
		With the life of squirrels or birds,
		Some life that is quick and right.
		This queer, delicious bareness,
		This plain, uniform light,
		In which both elms and thistles,
		Grass, boulders, even words,
		Speak for a Spartan fairness,
		Might, as I think it over,
		Speak in a form of signs,
		If only one could know
		All of its hidden tricks,
		Saying that I must go
		With a cool taste of coins
		To join some important river,
		Some damp and swollen Styx.
		Yet what puzzles me the most
		Is my unwavering taste
		For these dim, weathery ghosts,
		And how, from the very first,
		An early, innocent lust
		Delighted in such wastes,
		Sought with a reckless thirst
		A light so pure and just.


	4. APPLICATION FOR A GRANT

		Noble executors of the munificent testament
		Of the late John Simon Guggenheim, distinguished bunch
		Of benefactors, there are certain kinds of men
		Who set their hearts on being bartenders,
		For whom a life upon duck-boards, among fifths,
		Tapped kegs and lemon twists, crowded with lushes
		Who can master neither their bladders nor consonants,
		Is the only life, greatly to be desired.
		There’s the man who yearns for the White House, there to compose
		Rhythmical lists of enemies, while someone else
		Wants to be known to the Tour d’Argent’s head waiter.
		As the Sibyl of Cumae said: It takes all kinds.
		Nothing could bribe your Timon, your charter member
		Of the Fraternal Order of Grizzly Bears to love
		His fellow, whereas it’s just the opposite
		With interior decorators; that’s what makes horse races.
		One man may have a sharp nose for tax shelters,
		Screwing the IRS with mirth and profit;
		Another devote himself to his shell collection,
		Deaf to his offspring, indifferent to the feast
		With which his wife hopes to attract his notice.
		Some at the Health Club sweating under bar bells
		Labor away like grunting troglodytes,
		Smelly and thick and inarticulate,
		Their brains squeezed out through their pores by sheer exertion.
		As for me, the prize for poets, the simple gift
		For amphybrachs strewn by a kind Euterpe,
		With perhaps a laurel crown of the evergreen
		Imperishable of your fine endowment
		Would supply my modest wants, who dream of nothing
		But a pad on Eighth Street and your approbation.


	5. BIRDWATCHERS OF AMERICA

		It’s all very well to dream of a dove that saves,
		Picasso’s or the Pope’s,
		The one that annually coos in Our Lady’s ear
		Half the world’s hopes,
		And the other one that shall cunningly engineer
		The retirement of all businessmen to their graves,
		And when this is brought about
		Make us the loving brothers of every lout-
		But in our part of the country a false dusk
		Lingers for hours; it steams
		From the soaked hay, wades in the cloudy woods,
		Engendering other dreams.
		Formless and soft beyond the fence it broods
		Or rises as a faint and rotten musk
		Out of a broken stalk.
		There are some things of which we seldom talk;
		For instance, the woman next door, whom we hear at night,
		Claims that when she was small
		She found a man stone dead near the cedar trees
		After the first snowfall.
		The air was clear. He seemed in ultimate peace
		Except that he had no eyes. Rigid and bright
		Upon the forehead, furred
		With a light frost, crouched an outrageous bird.


	6. ECLOGUE OF THE SHEPHERD AND THE TOWNIE

		_Shepherd:_
		
		Not the blue-fountained Florida hotel,
		Bell-capped, bellevued, straight-jacketed and decked
		With chromium palms and a fromage of moon,
		Not goodnight chocolates, nor the soothing slide
		Of huîtres and sentinel straight-up martinis,
		Neither the yacht heraldic nor the stretch
		Limos and pants, Swiss banks or Alpine stocks
		Shall solace you, or quiet the long pain
		Of cold ancestral disinheritance,
		Severing your friendly commerce with the beasts,
		Gone, lapsed, and cancelled, rendered obsolete
		As the gonfalon of Bessarabia,
		The shawm, the jitney, the equestrian order,
		The dark daguerreotypes of Paradise.
		
		
		_Townie:_
		
		No humble folding cot, no steaming sty
		Or sheep-dipped meadow now shall dignify
		Your brute and sordid commerce with the beasts,
		Scotch your flea-bitten bitterness or down
		The voice that keeps repeating, “Up your Ars
		Poetica, your earliest diapered dream
		Of the long-gone Odd Fellows amity
		Of bunny and scorpion, the entente cordiale
		Of lamb and lion, the old nursery fraud
		And droll Aesopic zoo in which the chatter
		Of chimp and chaffinch, manticore and mouse,
		Diverts us from all thought of entrecôtes,
		Prime ribs and rashers, filets mignonnettes,
		Provided for the paired pythons and jackals,
		Off to their catered second honeymoons
		On Noah’s forty-day excursion cruise.”
		
		
		_Shepherd:_
		
		Call it. if this should please you, but a dream,
		A bald, long-standing lie and mockery,
		Yet it deserves better than your contempt.
		Think also of that interstellar darkness,
		Silence and desolation from which the Tempter,
		Like a space capsule exiled into orbit,
		Looks down on our green cabinet of peace,
		A place classless and weaponless, without
		Envy or fossil fuel or architecture.
		Think of him as at dawn he views a snail
		Traveling with blind caution up the spine
		Of a frond asway with its little inching weight
		In windless nods that deepen with assent
		Till the ambler at last comes back to earth,
		Leaving his route, as on the boughs of heaven,
		Traced with a silver scrawl. The morning mist
		Haunts all about that action till the sun
		Makes of it a small glory, and the dew
		Holds the whole scale of rainbow, the accord
		Of stars and waters, luminously viewed
		At the same time by water-walking spiders
		That dimple a surface with their passages.
		In the lewd Viennese catalogue of dreams
		It’s one of the few to speak of without shame.
		
		
		_Townie:_
		
		It is the dream of a shepherd king or child,
		And is without all blemish except one:
		That it supposes all virtue to stem
		From pure simplicity. But many cures
		Of body and of spirit are the fruit
		Of cultivated thought. Kindness itself
		Depends on what we call consideration.
		Your fear of corruption is a fear of thought,
		Therefore you would be thoughtless. Think again.
		Consider the perfect hexagrams of snow,
		Those broadcast emblems of divinity,
		That prove in their unduplicable shapes
		Insights of Thales and Pythagoras.
		If you must dream, dream of the ratio
		Of Nine to Six to Four Palladio used
		To shape those rooms and chapels where the soul
		Imagines itself blessed, and finds its peace
		Even in chambers of the Malcontenta,
		Those just proportions we hypostatize
		Not as flat prairies but the City of God.


	7. LOT’S WIFE

		How simple the pleasures of those childhood days,
		Simple but filled with exquisite satisfactions.
		The iridescent labyrinth of the spider,
		Its tethered tensor nest of polygons
		Puffed by the breeze to a little bellying sail --
		Merely observing this gave infinite pleasure.
		The sound of rain. The gentle graphite veil
		Of rain that makes of the world a steel engraving,
		Full of soft fadings and faint distances.
		The self-congratulations of a fly,
		Rubbing its hands. The brown bicameral brain
		Of a walnut. The smell of wax. The feel
		Of sugar to the tongue: a delicious sand.
		One understands immediately how Proust
		Might cherish all such postage-stamp details.
		Who can resist the charms of retrospection?


	8. MORE LIGHT! MORE LIGHT!

		_for Heinrich Blücher and Hannah Arendt_
		
		Composed in the Tower before his execution
		These moving verses, and being brought at that time   
		Painfully to the stake, submitted, declaring thus:
		“I implore my God to witness that I have made no crime.”
		
		Nor was he forsaken of courage, but the death was horrible,   
		The sack of gunpowder failing to ignite.
		His legs were blistered sticks on which the black sap   
		Bubbled and burst as he howled for the Kindly Light.
		
		And that was but one, and by no means one of the worst;   
		Permitted at least his pitiful dignity;
		And such as were by made prayers in the name of Christ,   
		That shall judge all men, for his soul’s tranquillity.
		
		We move now to outside a German wood.   
		Three men are there commanded to dig a hole   
		In which the two Jews are ordered to lie down   
		And be buried alive by the third, who is a Pole.
		
		Not light from the shrine at Weimar beyond the hill   
		Nor light from heaven appeared. But he did refuse.   
		A Lüger settled back deeply in its glove.
		He was ordered to change places with the Jews.
		
		Much casual death had drained away their souls.   
		The thick dirt mounted toward the quivering chin.   
		When only the head was exposed the order came   
		To dig him out again and to get back in.
		
		No light, no light in the blue Polish eye.
		When he finished a riding boot packed down the earth.   
		The Lüger hovered lightly in its glove.
		He was shot in the belly and in three hours bled to death.
		
		No prayers or incense rose up in those hours
		Which grew to be years, and every day came mute   
		Ghosts from the ovens, sifting through crisp air,   
		And settled upon his eyes in a black soot.


	9. PROSPECTS

		We have set out from here for the sublime
		Pastures of summer shade and mountain stream;
		I have no doubt we shall arrive on time.
		Is all the green of that enameled prime
		A snapshot recollection or a dream?
		We have set out from here for the sublime
		Without provisions, without one thin dime,
		And yet, for all our clumsiness, I deem
		It certain that we shall arrive on time.
		No guidebook tells you if you’ll have to climb
		Or swim. However foolish we may seem,
		We have set out from here for the sublime
		And must get past the scene of an old crime
		Before we falter and run out of steam,
		Riddled by doubt that we’ll arrive on time.
		Yet even in winter a pale paradigm
		Of birdsong utters its obsessive theme.
		We have set out from here for the sublime;
		I have no doubt we shall arrive on time.


	10. THE END OF THE WEEKEND

		A dying firelight slides along the quirt
		Of the cast iron cowboy where he leans
		Against my father’s books. The lariat
		Whirls into darkness. My girl in skin tight jeans
		Fingers a page of Captain Marriat
		Inviting insolent shadows to her shirt.
		We rise together to the second floor.
		Outside, across the lake, an endless wind
		Whips against the headstones of the dead and wails
		In the trees for all who have and have not sinned.
		She rubs against me and I feel her nails.
		Although we are alone, I lock the door.
		The eventual shapes of all our formless prayers:
		This dark, this cabin of loose imaginings,
		Wind, lip, lake, everything awaits
		The slow unloosening of her underthings
		And then the noise. Something is dropped. It grates
		against the attic beams. I climb the stairs
		Armed with a belt.
		A long magnesium shaft
		Of moonlight from the dormer cuts a path
		Among the shattered skeletons of mice.
		A great black presence beats its wings in wrath.
		Above the boneyard burn its golden eyes.
		Some small grey fur is pulsing in its grip.


	11. THE TRANSPARENT MAN

		I’m mighty glad to see you, Mrs. Curtis,
		And thank you very kindly for this visit--
		Especially now when all the others here
		Are having holiday visitors, and I feel
		A little conspicuous and in the way.
		It’s mainly because of Thanksgiving. All these mothers
		And wives and husbands gaze at me soulfully
		And feel they should break up their box of chocolates
		For a donation, or hand me a chunk of fruitcake.
		What they don’t understand and never guess
		Is that it’s better for me without a family;
		It’s a great blessing. Though I mean no harm.
		And as for visitors, why, I have you,
		All cheerful, brisk and punctual every Sunday,
		Like church, even if the aisles smell of phenol.
		And you always bring even better gifts than any
		On your book-trolley. Though they mean only good,
		Families can become a sort of burden.
		I’ve only got my father, and he won’t come,
		Poor man, because it would be too much for him.
		And for me, too, so it’s best the way it is.
		He knows, you see, that I will predecease him,
		Which is hard enough. It would take a callous man
		To come and stand around and watch me failing.
		(Now don’t you fuss; we both know the plain facts.)
		But for him it’s even harder. He loved my mother.
		They say she looked like me; I suppose she may have.
		Or rather, as I grew older I came to look
		More and more like she must one time have looked,
		And so the prospect for my father now
		Of losing me is like having to lose her twice.
		I know he frets about me. Dr. Frazer
		Tells me he phones in every single day,
		Hoping that things will take a turn for the better.
		But with leukemia things don’t improve.
		It’s like a sort of blizzard in the bloodstream,
		A deep, severe, unseasonable winter,
		Burying everything. The white blood cells
		Multiply crazily and storm around,
		Out of control. The chemotherapy
		Hasn’t helped much, and it makes my hair fall out.
		I know I look a sight, but I don’t care.
		I care about fewer things; I’m more selective.
		It’s got so I can’t even bring myself
		To read through any of your books these days.
		It’s partly weariness, and partly the fact
		That I seem not to care much about the endings,
		How things work out, or whether they even do.
		What I do instead is sit here by this window
		And look out at the trees across the way.
		You wouldn’t think that was much, but let me tell you,
		It keeps me quite intent and occupied.
		Now all the leaves are down, you can see the spare,
		Delicate structures of the sycamores,
		The fine articulation of the beeches.
		I have sat here for days studying them,
		And I have only just begun to see
		What it is that they resemble. One by one,
		They stand there like magnificent enlargements
		Of the vascular system of the human brain.
		I see them there like huge discarnate minds,
		Lost in their meditative silences.
		The trunks, branches and twigs compose the vessels
		That feed and nourish vast immortal thoughts.
		So I’ve assigned them names. There, near the path,
		Is the great brain of Beethoven, and Kepler
		Haunts the wide spaces of that mountain ash.
		This view, you see, has become my Hall of Fame,
		It came to me one day when I remembered
		Mary Beth Finley who used to play with me
		When we were girls. One year her parents gave her
		A birthday toy called “The Transparent Man.”
		It was made of plastic, with different colored organs,
		And the circulatory system all mapped out
		In rivers of red and blue. She’d ask me over
		And the two of us would sit and study him
		Together, and do a powerful lot of giggling.
		I figure he’s most likely the only man
		Either of us would ever get to know
		Intimately, because Mary Beth became
		A Sister of Mercy when she was old enough.
		She must be thirty-one; she was a year
		Older than I, and about four inches taller.
		I used to envy both those advantages
		Back in those days. Anyway, I was struck
		Right from the start by the sea-weed intricacy,
		The fine-haired, silken-threaded filiations
		That wove, like Belgian lace, throughout the head.
		But this last week it seems I have found myself
		Looking beyond, or through, individual trees
		At the dense, clustered woodland just behind them,
		Where those great, nameless crowds patiently stand.
		It’s become a sort of complex, ultimate puzzle
		And keeps me fascinated. My eyes are twenty-twenty,
		Or used to be, but of course I can’t unravel
		The tousled snarl of intersecting limbs,
		That mackled, cinder grayness. It’s a riddle
		Beyond the eye’s solution. Impenetrable.
		If there is order in all that anarchy
		Of granite mezzotint, that wilderness,
		It takes a better eye than mine to see it.
		It set me on to wondering how to deal
		With such a thickness of particulars,
		Deal with it faithfully, you understand,
		Without blurring the issue. Of course I know
		That within a month the sleeving snows will come
		With cold, selective emphases, with massings
		And arbitrary contrasts, rendering things
		Deceptively simple, thickening the twigs
		To frosty veins, bestowing epaulets
		And decorations on every birch and aspen.
		And the eye, self-satisfied, will be misled,
		Thinking the puzzle solved, supposing at last
		It can look forth and comprehend the world.
		That’s when you have to really watch yourself.
		So I hope that you won’t think me plain ungrateful
		For not selecting one of your fine books,
		And I take it very kindly that you came
		And sat here and let me rattle on this way.


*** Heinrich Heine (1797 - 1856)

	1. DECLARATION

		Onward glimmering came the evening,
		Wilder tossèd the flood,
		And I sat on the strand, regarding
		The snowy dance of the billows,
		And soon my bosom swell’d like the sea;
		A deep home-sickness yearningly seized me
		For thee, thou darling form,
		Who everywhere surround’st me,
		And everywhere call’st me,
		Everywhere, everywhere,
		In the moan of the wind, in the roar of the ocean,
		In the sigh within my own breast.
		
		With brittle reed I wrote on the sand:
		“Agnes, I love thee!”
		But wicked billows soon pour’d themselves
		Over the blissful confession,
		Effacing it all.
		
		Ah too fragile reed, all fast-scatter’d sand,
		Ah fugitive billows, I’ll trust you no more!
		The heavens grow darker, my heart grows wilder
		And with vigorous hand from the forests of Norway
		Tear I the highest fir-tree,
		And plunge it deep
		In Etna’s glowing abyss, and thereafter
		With fire-imbued giant-pen
		I write on the dark veil of heaven:
		“Agnes, I love thee!”
		Every night gleams thenceforward
		On high that eternal fiery writing,
		And all generations of farthest descendants
		Read gladly the heavenly sentence:
		“Agnes, I love thee!”


	2. IN THE CABIN AT NIGHT

		   The sea its pearls possesseth,
		   And heaven its stars containeth,
		   But, O my heart, my heart,
		   My heart its love hath also.
		
		   Vast is the sea and the heavens,
		   Yet vaster is my heart,
		   And fairer than pearls or the stars
		   Glitt’reth and beameth my love.
		
		   Thou little youthful maiden,
		   Come to my heart so vast;
		   My heart and the sea and the heavens
		   For very love are dying.
		
		   --
		
		   ’Gainst the azure veil of heaven,
		   Where the beauteous stars are twinkling,
		   Fain I’d press my lips with ardour,
		   Press them wildly, madly weeping.
		
		   Yonder stars the very eyes are
		   Of my loved one, thousand-changing
		   Glimmer they and greet me kindly
		   From the azure veil of heaven.
		
		   Tow’rd the azure veil of heaven,
		   Tow’rd the eyes of my beloved one,
		   Lift I up my arms in worship,
		   And I pray, and thus beseech them:
		
		   Beauteous eyes, ye lights of mercy,
		   O make happy my poor spirit,
		   Let me die, and as my guerdon,
		   Win both you and all your heaven!
		
		   --
		
		   From those heavenly eyes above me
		   Light and trembling sparks are falling
		   Through the night, and then my spirit
		   Loving-wide and wider stretcheth.
		
		   O ye heavenly eyes above me!
		   Weep yourselves into my spirit,
		   That my spirit may run over
		   With those tears so sweet and starry!
		
		   --
		
		   Cradled by the ocean billows,
		   And by thoughts that seem like visions,
		   Silent lie I in the cabin,
		   In the dark bed in the corner.
		
		   Through the open hatchway see I
		   There on high the stars all-radiant,
		   Those sweet eyes so dearly cherish’d
		   Of my sweet and dearly loved one.
		
		   Those sweet eyes so dearly cherish’d
		   Far above my head are watching,
		   And they tinkle and they beckon
		   From the azure veil of heaven.
		
		   Tow’rd the azure veil of heaven
		   Gaze I many an hour with rapture,
		   Till a white and misty curtain
		   From me hides those eyes so cherish’d.
		
		   ’Gainst the boarded side of the ship,
		   Where my dreaming head is lying,
		   Rave the billows, the furious billows.
		   They roar and they murmur
		   Thus soft in my ear:
		
			“O foolish young fellow!
			“Thine arm is short, and the heavens are wide,
			“And yonder stars are firmly nailed there;
			“In vain is thy yearning, in vain is thy sighing,
			“The best thou can’st do is to sleep!”
		
		   --
		
			I dreamt, and dreaming saw a spacious heath,
			Far overspread with white, with whitest snow,
			And ’neath that white snow buried I was lying,
			And slept the lonesome, chilly sleep of death.
		
			Yet from on high, from out the darkling heavens,
			Look’d down upon my grave those eyes all-starry,
			Those eyes so sweet! In triumph they were gleaming
			In calm and radiant but excessive love.


	3. MEETING AGAIN

		One summer eve, in the woodbine bower
		 We sat once more at the window lonely;
		The moon arose with life-giving power,
		 But we appear’d two spectres only.
		
		Twelve years had pass’d since the last occasion
		 When we on this spot had sat together;
		Each tender glow, each loving persuasion
		 Had meanwhile been quench’d in life’s rough weather.
		
		I silently sat. The woman, however,
		 Just like her sex, amongst love’s ashes
		Must needs be raking, but vain her endeavour
		 To kindle again its long-quench’d flashes.
		
		And she recounted how she had contended
		 With evil thoughts, the story disclosing
		How hardly she once her virtue defended,--
		 I stupidly listened to all her prosing.
		
		When homeward I rode, the trees beside me
		 Like spirits beneath the moon’s rays flitted;
		Sad voices call’d, but onward I hied me,
		 Yes, I and the dead, who my side ne’er quitted.


	4. QUESTIONS

		By the sea, by the desert night-cover’d sea
		Standeth a youth,
		His breast full of sadness, his head full of doubtings,
		And with gloomy lips he asks of the billows:
		
		“O answer me life’s hidden riddle,
		“The riddle primeval and painful,
		“Over which many a head has been poring,
		“Heads in hieroglyphical nightcaps,
		“Heads in turbans and swarthy bonnets,
		“Heads in perukes, and a thousand other
		“Poor and perspiring heads of us mortals--
		“Tell me what signifies man?
		“From whence doth he come? And where doth he go?
		“Who dwelleth amongst the golden stars yonder?”
		
		The billows are murm’ring their murmur eternal,
		The wind is blowing, the clouds are flying,
		The stars are twinkling, all listless and cold,
		And a fool is awaiting an answer.


	5. SEA SALUTATION

		Thalatta! Thalatta!
		Hail to thee, O thou Ocean eterne!
		Hail to thee ten thousand times
		From hearts all exulting,
		As formerly hail’d thee
		Ten thousand Grecian hearts,
		Misfortune-contending, homeward-aspiring,
		World-renown’d Grecian hearts.
		
		The billows were heaving,
		They heaved and they bluster’d,
		The sun shed hastily downwards
		His light so sportive and rosy-hued;
		The sudden-startled flocks of sea-mews
		Flutter’d along, loud screaming,
		The horses were stamping, the bucklers were ringing,
		And afar there resounded triumphantly:
		Thalatta! Thalatta!
		Hail to thee, O thou Ocean eterne!
		Like voices of home thy waters are rushing,
		Like visions of childhood saw I a glimmering
		Over thy heaving billowy-realm,
		And olden remembrance again tells me stories
		Of all the darling, beautiful playthings,
		Of all the glittering Christmas presents,
		Of all the ruddy coral branches,
		The gold fish, pearls and colour’d shells
		Which thou mysteriously dost keep
		Down yonder in bright crystal house.
		
		O how have I languish’d in drear foreign lands!
		Like to a wither’d flower
		In the tin case of a botanist,
		Lay in my bosom my heart;
		Methought whole winters long I sat
		An invalid, in darksome sick-room,
		And now I suddenly leave it,
		And with dazzling rays am I greeted
		By emerald springtime, the sunny-awaken’d,
		And the snowy blossoming trees are all rustling,
		And the youthful flowers upon me gaze
		With eyes all chequer’d and fragrant;
		There’s a perfume and humming and breathing and laughing,
		And the birds in the azure heavens are singing--
		Thalatta! Thalatta!
		
		Thou valiant retreating heart!
		How oft, how bitter-oft, wast thou
		Hard press’d by the Northern barbarian women
		From large victorious eyes
		Shot they their burning arrows;
		With words both crooked and polish’d
		They threatened to cleave my breast,
		With cuniform billets-doux harass’d they
		My poor distracted brain--
		In vain I held my shield to resist them,
		The arrows whizz’d and the blows crash’d heavily,
		And by the Northern barbarian women
		Back to the sea was I driven,
		And freely breathing I hailèd the sea,
		The darling life-saving sea,
		Thalatta! Thalatta!


	6. SUNSET

		The beauteous sun
		Hath calmly descended down to the sea;
		The heaving waters already are dyed
		By dusky night;
		Nought but the evening’s red
		With golden light still spreadeth o’er them,
		And the rushing force of the flood
		’Gainst the shore presseth the snowy billows
		Which merrily, hastily skip,
		Like wool-cover’d flocks of lambkins
		Whom the singing sheep-boy at even
		Homeward doth drive.
		
		“How fair is the sun!”--
		So spake, after long silence, my friend,
		Who with me wander’d along the strand,
		And half in sport and half in sad earnest
		Assured he me that the sun was only
		A lovely woman, whom the old sea-god
		Out of convenience married;
		All the day long she joyously wander’d
		In the high heavens, deck’d out with purple,
		And glitt’ring with diamonds,
		And all-beloved and all-admired
		By every mortal creature,
		And every mortal creature rejoicing
		With her sweet glances’ light and warmth;
		But in the evening, impell’d all-disconsolate.
		Once more returneth she home
		To the moist house and desert arms
		Of her grey-headed spouse.
		
		“Believe me”--here added my friend,
		With laughter and sighing and laughter again:
		“They’re living below in the tenderest union!
		“Either they’re sleeping or quarrelling fiercely,
		“So that up here e’en the ocean is roaring,
		“And the fisherman hears in the rush of the waves
		“How the old man’s abusing his wife:
		“‘Thou round wench of the universe!
		“Beaming coquettish one!
		“‘All the day long thou art glowing for others,
		“‘At night for me thou art frosty and tired.’
		“After this curtain lecture
		“As a matter of course the proud sun
		“Bursts into tears, lamenting her misery,
		“And cries so sadly and long, that the sea-god
		“Suddenly springs from his bed all distracted,
		“And hastily swims to the surface of ocean,
		“To recover his breath and his senses.
		“I saw him myself, in the night just past,
		“Rising out of the sea as high as his bosom;
		“A jacket of yellow flannel he wore,
		“And a lily-white nightcap,
		“And a face all wither’d and dry.”


	7. THE NIGHT ON THE STRAND

		Starless and cold is the night,
		The ocean boils;
		And over the sea, flat on its belly,
		Lies the misshapen Northwind;
		With groaning and stifled mysterious voice,
		A sullen grumbler, good-humour’d for once,
		Prates he away to the waves,
		Telling many a wild tradition,
		Giant-legends, murderous-humorous,
		Primeval Sagas from Norway,
		And the while, far echoing, laughs he and howls he
		Exorcists’ songs of the Edda,
		Grey old Runic proverbs,
		So darkly-daring, and magic-forcible,
		That the white sons of Ocean
		Spring up on high, all exulting,
		In madden’d excitement.
		
		Meanwhile, along the flat shore,
		Over the flood-moisten’d sand,
		Paces a stranger, whose heart within him
		Is wilder far than wind and waters;
		There where he walks
		Sparks fly out, and shells are crackling,
		And he veils himself in his dark-grey mantle,
		And quickly moves on through the blustering night;--
		Guided in safety by yon little light,
		That sweetly, invitingly glimmers,
		From the lone fisherman’s cottage.
		
		Father and brother are out on the sea,
		And all all alone is staying
		Within the hut the fisherman’s daughter,
		The wondrously lovely fisherman’s daughter.
		By the hearth she’s sitting,
		And lists to the water-kettle’s
		Homely, sweet foreboding humming,
		And shakes in the fire the crackling brushwood
		And on it blows,
		So that the lights, all ruddy and flickering,
		Magic-sweetly are reflected
		On her fair blooming features,
		On her tender, snowy shoulder,
		Which, moving gently, peeps
		From out her coarse grey smock,
		And on her little, anxious hand,
		Which fastens firmer her under-garment,
		Over her graceful hip.
		
		But sudden, the door bursts open,
		The nightly stranger entereth in;
		Love-secure, his eye reposes
		On the snowy, slender maiden,
		Who, trembling, near him stands,
		Like to a startled lily;
		And he throws his mantle to earth,
		And laughs and speaks:
		
		“See now, my child, I’ve kept my word,
		“And I come, and with me hath come
		“The olden time, when the gods from the heavens
		“Came down to earth, to the daughters of mortals,
		“And the daughters of mortals embraced they,
		“And from them there issued
		“Sceptre-bearing races of monarchs,
		“And heroes, wonders of earth.
		
		“But start not, my child, any longer
		“Because of my godhead,
		“And I pray thee give me some tea mix’d with rum
		“For ’tis cold out of doors,
		“And amid such night breezes
		“Freeze even we, we godheads immortal,
		“And easily catch the divinest of colds,
		“And a cough that proves quite eternal.”


	8. THE PHOENIX

		There comes a bird who hath flown from the westward,
		He flies tow’rd the east,
		Tow’rd the eastern garden-home,
		Where the spices so fragrant are growing,
		And palms are waving and wells are cooling--
		And, flying, the wondrous bird thus singeth
		She loves him, she loves him!
		His image she bears in her little bosom,
		And bears it sweetly and secretly hidden,
		Nor knows it herself!
		But in her vision, before her he stands,
		She prays, and she weeps, and she kisses his hands,
		And calls on his name,
		And calling awakes she and lieth all-startled,
		And rubbeth her beauteous eyes in amazement--
		She loves him! she loves him!


	9. THE WHIMS OF THE AMOROUS

		Upon the hedge the beetle sits sadly,
		He has fallen in love with a lady-fly madly.
		
		O fly of my soul, ’tis thou alone
		Art the wife I have chosen to be my own.
		
		O marry me, and be not cold,
		For I have a belly of glistening gold.
		
		My back is a mass of glory and show,
		There rubies glitter, there emeralds glow--
		
		O would that I were a fool just now!
		I’d never marry a beetle, I vow.
		
		I care not for emeralds, rubies, or gold,
		I know that no happiness riches enfold.
		
		’Tis tow’rd the ideal my thought soars high,
		For I am in truth a haughty fly.--
		
		The beetle flew off, with a heart like to break,
		The fly went away, a bath to take.
		
		O what has become of my maid, the bee,
		That she when I’m washing may wait on me,
		
		That she may stroke my soft hair outside,
		For I am now a beetle’s bride.
		
		In truth, a splendid party I’ll give,
		For handsomer beetle never did live.
		
		His back is a mass of glory and show,
		There rubies glitter, there emeralds glow.
		
		His belly is golden, and noble each feature;
		With envy will burst full many a creature.
		
		Make haste, Miss Bee, and dress my hair,
		And lace my waist, use perfumes rare.
		
		With otto of roses rub me o’er,
		And lavender oil on my feet then pour,
		
		That I mayn’t stink or nastily smell,
		When I in my bridegroom’s arms shall dwell.
		
		Already are flitting the dragonflies blue,
		As maids of honour to wait on me too.
		
		Into my bridal garland they’ll twine
		The blossoms white of the orange so fine.
		
		Full many musicians are asked to the place,
		And singers as well, of the grasshopper race.
		
		The bittern, drone, hornet, and gadfly all come,
		To blow on the trumpet, and beat the drum.
		
		They’re all to strike up for the glad wedding feast--
		The gay-wingèd guests, from greatest to least,
		
		Are coming in families dapper and brisk,
		The commoner insects amongst them frisk.
		
		The grasshoppers, wasps, and the aunts, and the cousins
		Are coming, whilst trumpets are blowing by dozens.
		
		The pastor, the mole, in black dignified state,
		Has also arrived, and the hour grows late.
		
		The bells are all sounding ding-dong, ding-a-dong--
		But where’s my dear bridegroom ling’ring so long?
		
		Ding dong, ding-a-dong, sound the bells all the day,
		The bridegroom however has flown far away.
		
		The bells are all sounding ding-dong, ding-a-dong--
		But where’s my dear bridegroom ling’ring so long?
		
		The bridegroom has meanwhile taken his seat
		On a distant dunghill, enjoying the heat.
		
		Seven years there sits he, until his forgotten
		Poor bride has long been dead and rotten.


	10. THUNDERSTORM

		Heavily lies on the ocean the storm,
		And through the darksome wall of clouds
		Quivers the forkèd lightning flash,
		Suddenly gleaming and suddenly vanishing,
		Like a thought from the head of Cronion.
		Over the desert, far-heaving water
		Afar the thunders are rolling,
		The snowy billowy horses are springing,
		Which Boreas’ self did engender
		Out of the beautiful mares of Erichton,
		And the seafowl are mournfully fluttering,
		Like shadowy corpses by Styx,
		By Charon repulsed from his desolate bark.
		
		Poor, but merry little ship,
		Yonder dancing the strangest dance!
		Æolus sends it his briskest attendants,
		Who wildly strike up for the frolicsome dance;
		The one is piping, another is blowing,
		The third is beating the hollow double-bass--
		And the staggering sailor stands at the rudder,
		And on the compass is steadily looking,
		That trembling soul of the vessel,
		And raises his hands in entreaty to heaven;
		“O rescue me, Castor, thou hero gigantic,
		And thou, knight of the ring, Polydeuces!”


*** Felicia Hemans (1793 - 1835)

	1. CASABIANCA

		The boy stood on the burning deck
		Whence all but he had fled;
		The flame that lit the battle’s wreck
		Shone round him o’er the dead.
		Yet beautiful and bright he stood,
		As born to rule the storm;
		A creature of heroic blood,
		A proud, though childlike form.
		
		The flames roll’d on . . . he would not go
		Without his father’s word;
		That father, faint in death below,
		His voice no longer heard.
		
		He call’d aloud . . . “Say, father, say
		If yet my task is done!”
		He knew not that the chieftain lay
		Unconscious of his son.
		
		“Speak, father!” once again he cried
		“If I may yet be gone!”
		And but the booming shots replied,
		And fast the flames roll’d on.
		
		Upon his brow he felt their breath,
		And in his waving hair,
		And looked from that lone post of death,
		In still yet brave despair;
		
		And shouted but one more aloud,
		“My father, must I stay?”
		While o’er him fast, through sail and shroud
		The wreathing fires made way,
		
		They wrapt the ship in splendour wild,
		They caught the flag on high,
		And stream’d above the gallant child,
		Like banners in the sky.
		
		There came a burst of thunder sound . . . 
		The boy--oh! where was he?
		Ask of the winds that far around
		With fragments strewed the sea.
		
		With mast, and helm, and pennon fair,
		That well had borne their part;
		But the noblest thing which perished there
		Was that young faithful heart.


	2. FLIGHT OF THE SPIRIT

		Whither, oh! whither wilt thou wing thy way?
		What solemn region first upon thy sight
		Shall break, unveiled for terror or delight?
		What hosts, magnificent in dread array,
		My spirit! when thy prison-house of clay
		After long strife is rent? Fond, fruitless quest!
		The unfledged bird, within his narrow nest,
		Sees but a few green branches oer him play,
		And through their parting leaves, by fits revealed,
		A glimpse of summer sky; nor knows the field
		Wherein his dormant powers must yet be tried.
		Thou art that bird!--of what beyond thee lies
		Far in the untracked immeasurable skies
		Knowing but this--that thou shalt find thy guide!


	3. SABBATH SONNET

		How many blessed groups this hour are bending,
		Through England’s primrose meadow-paths, their way
		Towards spire and tower, ‘midst shadowy elms ascending,
		Whence the sweet chimes proclaim the hallowed day!
		The halls from old heroic ages gray
		Pour their fair children forth; and hamlets low,
		With those thick orchard-blooms the soft winds play,
		Send out their inmates in a happy flow,
		Like a freed vernal stream. I may not tread
		With them those pathways, to the feverish bed
		Of sickness bound; yet, O my God! I bless
		Thy mercy, that with Sabbath peace hath filled
		My chastened heart, and all its throbbings stilled
		To one deep calm of lowliest thankfulness.


*** Ernest Hemingway (1899 - 1961)

	1. ALONG WITH YOUTH

		A porcupine skin,
		Stiff with bad tanning,
		It must have ended somewhere.
		Stuffed horned owl
		Pompous
		Yellow eyed;
		Chuck-wills-widow on a biassed twig
		Sooted with dust.
		Piles of old magazines,
		Drawers of boy’s letters
		And the line of love
		They must have ended somewhere.
		Yesterday’s Tribune is gone
		Along with youth
		And the canoe that went to pieces on the beach
		The year of the big storm
		When the hotel burned down
		At Seney, Michigan.


	2. CHAPTER HEADING

		For we have thought the longer thoughts
		       And gone the shorter way.
		And we have danced to devils’ tunes,
		       Shivering home to pray;
		To serve one master in the night,
		       Another in the day.


	3. MONTPARNASSE

		There are never any suicides in the quarter among people one knows
		No successful suicides.
		A Chinese boy kills himself and is dead.
		(they continue to place his mail in the letter rack at the Dome)
		A Norwegian boy kills himself and is dead.
		(no one knows where the other Norwegian boy has gone)
		They find a model dead
		alone in bed and very dead.
		(it made almost unbearable trouble for the concierge)
		Sweet oil, the white of eggs, mustard and water, soap suds
		and stomach pumps rescue the people one knows.
		Every afternoon the people one knows can be found at the café.


	4. OKLAHOMA

		All of the Indians are dead
		(a good Indian is a dead Indian)
		Or riding in motor cars--
		(the oil lands, you know, they’re all rich)
		Smoke smarts my eyes,
		Cottonwood twigs and buffalo dung
		Smoke grey in the teepee--
		(or is it myopic trachoma)
		
		The prairies are long,
		The moon rises,
		Ponies
		Drag at their pickets.
		The grass has gone brown in the summer--
		(or is it the hay crop failing)
		
		Pull an arrow out:
		If you break it
		The wound closes.
		Salt is good too
		And wood ashes.
		Pounding it throbs in the night--
		(or is it the gonorrhea)


*** William Ernest Henley (1849 - 1903)

	1. A WINK FROM HESPER

		A wink from Hesper, falling
		Fast in the wintry sky,
		Comes through the even blue,
		Dear, like a word from you…
		Is it good-bye?
		
		Across the miles between us
		I send you sigh for sigh.
		Good-Night, sweet friend, good-night:
		Till life and all take flight,
		Never good-bye.


	2. FILL A GLASS

		Fill a glass with golden wine,
		And the while your lips are wet
		Set your perfume unto mine,
		And forget.
		Every kiss we take and give
		Leaves us less of life to live.
		
		Yet again! Your whim and mine
		In a happy while have met.
		All your sweets to me resign,
		Nor regret
		That we press with every breath,
		Sighed or singing, nearer death.


	3. INVICTUS

		Out of the night that covers me,
		     Black as the pit from pole to pole,
		I thank whatever gods may be
		     For my unconquerable soul.
		
		In the fell clutch of circumstance
		     I have not winced nor cried aloud.
		Under the bludgeonings of chance
		     My head is bloody, but unbowed.
		
		Beyond this place of wrath and tears
		     Looms but the Horror of the shade,
		And yet the menace of the years
		     Finds and shall find me unafraid.
		
		It matters not how strait the gate,
		     How charged with punishments the scroll,
		I am the master of my fate,
		     I am the captain of my soul.


	4. LONGING

		Between the dusk of a summer night
		And the dawn of a summer day,
		We caught at a mood as it passed in flight,
		And we bade it stoop and stay.
		And what with the dawn of night began
		With the dusk of day was done;
		For that is the way of woman and man,
		When a hazard has made them one.
		Arc upon arc, from shade to shine,
		The World went thundering free;
		And what was his errand but hers and mine--
		The lords of him, I and she?
		O, it’s die we must, but it’s live we can,
		And the marvel of earth and sun
		Is all for the joy of woman and man
		And the longing that makes them one.


	5. ON THE NOTHINGNESS OF THINGS

		The big teetotum twirls,
		And epochs wax and wane
		As chance subsides or swirls;
		But of the loss and gain
		The sum is always plain.
		Read on the mighty pall,
		The weed of funeral
		That covers praise and blame,
		The -isms and the -anities,
		Magnificence and shame:--
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_
		
		The Fates are subtile girls!
		They give us chaff for grain.
		And Time, the Thunderer, hurls,
		Like bolted death, disdain
		At all thaTheart and brain
		Conceive, or great or small,
		Upon this earthly ball.
		Would you be knight and dame?
		Or woo the sweet humanities?
		Or illustrate a name?
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_
		
		We sound the sea for pearls,
		Or drown them in a drain;
		We flute it with the merles,
		Or tug and sweat and strain;
		We grovel, or we reign;
		We saunter, or we brawl;
		We answer, or we call;
		We search the stars for Fame,
		Or sink her subterranities;
		The legend’s still the same:--
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_
		
		Here at the wine one birls,
		There some one clanks a chain.
		The flag that this man furls
		That man to float is fain.
		Pleasure gives place to pain:
		These in the kennel crawl,
		While others take the wall.
		She has a glorious aim,
		He lives for the inanities.
		What comes of every claim?
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_
		
		Alike are clods and earls.
		For sot, and seer, and swain,
		For emperors and for churls,
		For antidote and bane,
		There is but one refrain:
		But one for king and thrall,
		For David and for Saul,
		For fleet of foot and lame,
		For pieties and profanities,
		The picture and the frame:--
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_
		
		Life is a smoke that curls--
		Curls in a flickering skein,
		That winds and whisks and whirls,
		A figment thin and vain,
		Into the vast Inane.
		One end for hut and hall!
		One end for cell and stall!
		Burned in one common flame
		Are wisdoms and insanities.
		For this alone we came:--
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_
		
		
		_Envoy_
		
		Prince, pride must have a fall.
		What is the worth of all
		Your state’s supreme urbanities?
		Bad at the best ‘s the game.
		Well might the Sage exclaim:--
		_O Vanity of Vanities!_


	6. SUICIDE

		Staring corpselike at the ceiling,
		See his harsh, unrazored features,
		Ghastly brown against the pillow,
		And his throat--so strangely bandaged!
		
		Lack of work and lack of victuals,
		A debauch of smuggled whisky,
		And his children in the workhouse
		Made the world so black a riddle
		
		That he plunged for a solution;
		And, although his knife was edgeless,
		He was sinking fast towards one,
		When they came, and found, and saved him.
		
		Stupid now with shame and sorrow,
		In the night I hear him sobbing.
		But sometimes he talks a little.
		He has told me all his troubles.
		
		In his broad face, tanned and bloodless,
		White and wild his eyeballs glisten;
		And his smile, occult and tragic,
		Yet so slavish, makes you shudder!


*** George Herbert (1593 - 1633)

	1. DEATH

		Death, thou wast once an uncouth hideous thing,
		                          Nothing but bones,
		     The sad effect of sadder groans:
		Thy mouth was open, but thou couldst not sing.
		
		For we considered thee as at some six
		                          Or ten years hence,
		     After the loss of life and sense,
		Flesh being turned to dust, and bones to sticks.
		
		We looked on this side of thee, shooting short;
		                        Where we did find
		     The shells of fledge souls left behind,
		Dry dust, which sheds no tears, but may extort.
		
		But since our Savior’s death did put some blood
		                          Into thy face,
		     Thou art grown fair and full of grace,
		Much in request, much sought for as a good.
		
		For we do now behold thee gay and glad,
		                          As at Doomsday;
		     When souls shall wear their new array,
		And all thy bones with beauty shall be clad.
		
		Therefore we can go die as sleep, and trust
		                          Half that we have
		     Unto an honest faithful grave;
		Making our pillows either down, or dust.


	2. DISCIPLINE

		Throw away thy rod,
		Throw away thy wrath:
		                 O my God,
		Take the gentle path.
		
		For my heart’s desire
		Unto thine is bent:
		                 I aspire
		To a full consent.
		
		Not a word or look
		I affect to own,
		                 But by book,
		And thy book alone.
		
		Though I fail, I weep:
		Though I halt in pace,
		                 Yet I creep
		To the throne of grace.
		
		Then let wrath remove;
		Love will do the deed:
		                 For with love
		Stony hearts will bleed.
		
		Love is swift of foot;
		Love’s a man of war,
		                 And can shoot,
		And can hit from far.
		
		Who can ’scape his bow?
		That which wrought on thee,
		                 Brought thee low,
		Needs must work on me.
		
		Throw away thy rod;
		Though man frailties hath,
		        Thou art God:
		Throw away thy wrath.


	3. LIFE

		I made a posy, while the day ran by:
		“Here will I smell my remnant out, and tie
		                          My life within this band.”
		But Time did beckon to the flowers, and they
		By noon most cunningly did steal away,
		                          And withered in my hand.
		
		My hand was next to them, and then my heart;
		I took, without more thinking, in good part
		                          Time’s gentle admonition;
		Who did so sweetly death’s sad taste convey,
		Making my mind to smell my fatal day,
		                          Yet, sug’ring the suspicion.
		
		Farewell dear flowers, sweetly your time ye spent,
		Fit, while ye lived, for smell or ornament,
		                          And after death for cures.
		I follow straight without complaints or grief,
		Since, if my scent be good, I care not if
		                          It be as short as yours.


	4. THE AFFLICTION

		When first thou didst entice to thee my heart,
		I thought the service brave;
		So many joys I writ down for my part,
		Besides what I might have
		Out of my stock of natural delights,
		Augmented with thy gracious benefits.
		
		I looked on thy furniture so fine,
		And made it fine to me;
		Thy glorious household-stuff did me entwine,
		And ‘tice me unto thee.
		Such stars I counted mine: both heav’n and earth;
		Paid me my wages in a world of mirth.
		
		What pleasures could I want, whose King I serv’d,
		Where joys my fellows were?
		Thus argu’d into hopes, my thoughts reserv’d
		No place for grief or fear.
		Therefore my sudden soul caught at the place,
		And made her youth and fierceness seek thy face.
		
		At first thou gav’st me milk and sweetnesses;
		I had my wish and way;
		My days were straw’d with flow’rs and happiness;
		There was no month but May.
		But with my years sorrow did twist and grow,
		And made a party unawares for woe.
		
		My flesh began unto my soul in pain,
		“Sicknesses cleave my bones;
		Consuming agues dwell in ev’ry vein,
		And tune my breath to groans.”
		Sorrow was all my soul; I scarce believ’d,
		Till grief did tell me roundly, that I liv’d.
		
		When I got health, thou took’st away my life,
		And more, for my friends die;
		My mirth and edge was lost, a blunted knife
		Was of more use than I.
		Thus thin and lean without a fence or friend,
		I was blown through with ev’ry storm and wind.
		
		Whereas my birth and spirit rather took
		The way that takes the town;
		Thou didst betray me to a ling’ring book,
		And wrap me in a gown.
		I was entangled in the world of strife,
		Before I had the power to change my life.
		
		Yet, for I threaten’d oft the siege to raise,
		Not simp’ring all mine age,
		Thou often didst with academic praise
		Melt and dissolve my rage.
		I took thy sweet’ned pill, till I came where
		I could not go away, nor persevere.
		
		Yet lest perchance I should too happy be
		In my unhappiness,
		Turning my purge to food, thou throwest me
		Into more sicknesses.
		Thus doth thy power cross-bias me, not making
		Thine own gift good, yet me from my ways taking.
		
		Now I am here, what thou wilt do with me
		None of my books will show;
		I read, and sigh, and wish I were a tree,
		For sure then I should grow
		To fruit or shade: at least some bird would trust
		Her household to me, and I should be just.
		
		Yet, though thou troublest me, I must be meek;
		In weakness must be stout;
		Well, I will change the service, and go seek
		Some other master out.
		Ah my dear God! though I am clean forgot,
		Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.


	5. THE FLOWER

		How fresh, oh Lord, how sweet and clean
		Are thy returns! even as the flowers in spring;
		        To which, besides their own demean,
		The late-past frosts tributes of pleasure bring.
		                     Grief melts away
		                     Like snow in May,
		        As if there were no such cold thing.
		
		        Who would have thought my shriveled heart
		Could have recovered greenness? It was gone
		        Quite underground; as flowers depart
		To see their mother-root, when they have blown,
		                     Where they together
		                     All the hard weather,
		        Dead to the world, keep house unknown.
		
		        These are thy wonders, Lord of power,
		Killing and quickening, bringing down to hell
		        And up to heaven in an hour;
		Making a chiming of a passing-bell.
		                     We say amiss
		                     This or that is:
		        Thy word is all, if we could spell.
		
		        Oh that I once past changing were,
		Fast in thy Paradise, where no flower can wither!
		        Many a spring I shoot up fair,
		Offering at heaven, growing and groaning thither;
		                     Nor doth my flower
		                     Want a spring shower,
		        My sins and I joining together.
		
		        But while I grow in a straight line,
		Still upwards bent, as if heaven were mine own,
		        Thy anger comes, and I decline:
		What frost to that? what pole is not the zone
		                     Where all things burn,
		                     When thou dost turn,
		        And the least frown of thine is shown?
		
		        And now in age I bud again,
		After so many deaths I live and write;
		        I once more smell the dew and rain,
		And relish versing. Oh, my only light,
		                     It cannot be
		                     That I am he
		        On whom thy tempests fell all night.
		
		        These are thy wonders, Lord of love,
		To make us see we are but flowers that glide;
		        Which when we once can find and prove,
		Thou hast a garden for us where to bide;
		                     Who would be more,
		                     Swelling through store,
		        Forfeit their Paradise by their pride.


	6. THE QUIP

		The merry World did on a day
		With his train-bands and mates agree
		To meet together where I lay,
		And all in sport to jeer at me.
		
		First Beauty crept into a rose,
		Which when I pluck’d not, “Sir,“ said she,
		“Tell me, I pray, whose hands are those?”
		But Thou shalt answer, Lord, for me.
		
		Then Money came, and chinking still,
		“What tune is this, poor man?“ said he;
		“I heard in music you had skill:”
		But Thou shalt answer, Lord, for me.
		
		Then came brave Glory puffing by
		In silks that whistled, who but he?
		He scarce allow’d me half an eye:
		But Thou shalt answer, Lord, for me.
		
		Then came quick Wit and Conversation,
		And he would needs a comfort be,
		And, to be short, make an oration:
		But Thou shalt answer, Lord, for me.
		
		Yet when the hour of Thy design
		To answer these fine things shall come,
		Speak not at large, say, I am Thine;
		And then they have their answer home.


	7. THE WINDOWS

		Lord, how can man preach thy eternal word?
		   He is a brittle crazy glass;
		Yet in thy temple thou dost him afford
		   This glorious and transcendent place,
		   To be a window, through thy grace.
		
		But when thou dost anneal in glass thy story,
		   Making thy life to shine within
		The holy preachers, then the light and glory
		   More reverend grows, and more doth win;
		   Which else shows waterish, bleak, and thin.
		
		Doctrine and life, colors and light, in one
		   When they combine and mingle, bring
		A strong regard and awe; but speech alone
		   Doth vanish like a flaring thing,
		   And in the ear, not conscience, ring.


	8. VIRTUE

		Sweet day, so cool, so calm, so bright,
		The bridal of the earth and sky:
		The dew shall weep thy fall to-night;
		   For thou must die.
		
		Sweet rose, whose hue angry and brave
		Bids the rash gazer wipe his eye:
		Thy root is ever in its grave,
		   And thou must die.
		
		Sweet spring, full of sweet days and roses,
		A box where sweets compacted lie;
		My music shows ye have your closes,
		   And all must die.
		
		Only a sweet and virtuous soul,
		Like season’d timber, never gives;
		But though the whole world turn to coal,
		   Then chiefly lives.


*** Hermann Hesse (1877 - 1962)

	1. I KNOW, YOU WALK

		I walk so often, late, along the streets,
		Lower my gaze, and hurry, full of dread,
		Suddenly, silently, you still might rise
		And I would have to gaze on all your grief
		With my own eyes,
		While you demand your happiness, that’s dead.
		I know, you walk beyond me, every night,
		With a coy footfall, in a wretched dress
		And walk for money, looking miserable!
		Your shoes gather God knows what ugly mess,
		The wind plays in your hair with lewd delight--
		You walk, and walk, and find no home at all.


	2. LYING IN GRASS

		Is this everything now, the quick delusions of flowers,
		And the down colors of the bright summer meadow,
		The soft blue spread of heaven, the bees’ song,
		Is this everything only a god’s
		Groaning dream,
		The cry of unconscious powers for deliverance?
		The distant line of the mountain,
		That beautifully and courageously rests in the blue,
		Is this too only a convulsion,
		Only the wild strain of fermenting nature,
		Only grief, only agony, only meaningless fumbling,
		Never resting, never a blessed movement?
		No! Leave me alone, you impure dream
		Of the world in suffering!
		The dance of tiny insects cradles you in an evening radiance,
		The bird’s cry cradles you,
		A breath of wind cools my forehead
		With consolation.
		Leave me alone, you unendurably old human grief!
		Let it all be pain.
		Let it all be suffering, let it be wretched--
		But not this one sweet hour in the summer,
		And not the fragrance of the red clover,
		And not the deep tender pleasure
		In my soul.


	3. ON A JOURNEY

		Don’t be downcast, soon the night will come,
		When we can see the cool moon laughing in secret
		Over the faint countryside,
		And we rest, hand in hand.
		
		Don’t be downcast, the time will soon come
		When we can have rest. Our small crosses will stand
		On the bright edge of the road together,
		And rain fall, and snow fall,
		And the winds come and go.


	4. THINKING OF A FRIEND AT NIGHT

		In this evil year, autumn comes early . . .
		I walk by night in the field, alone, the rain clatters,
		The wind on my hat . . . And you? And you, my friend?
		
		You are standing--maybe--and seeing the sickle moon
		Move in a small arc over the forests
		And bivouac fire, red in the black valley.
		You are lying--maybe--in a straw field and sleeping
		And dew falls cold on your forehead and battle jacket.
		
		It’s possible tonight you’re on horseback,
		The farthest outpost, peering along, with a gun in your fist,
		Smiling, whispering, to your exhausted horse.
		Maybe--I keep imagining--you are spending the night
		As a guest in a strange castle with a park
		And writing a letter by candlelight, and tapping
		On the piano keys by the window,
		Groping for a sound . . .
		
		--And maybe
		You are already silent, already dead, and the day
		Will shine no longer into your beloved
		Serious eyes, and your beloved brown hand hangs wilted,
		And your white forehead split open--Oh, if only,
		If only, just once, that last day, I had shown you, told you
		Something of my love, that was too timid to speak!
		
		But you know me, you know . . . and, smiling, you nod
		Tonight in front of your strange castle,
		And you nod to your horse in the drenched forest,
		And you nod to your sleep to your harsh clutter of straw,
		And think about me, and smile.
		And maybe,
		Maybe some day you will come back from the war,
		and take a walk with me some evening,
		And somebody will talk about Longwy, Luttich, Dammerkirch,
		And smile gravely, and everything will be as before,
		And no one will speak a word of his worry,
		Of his worry and tenderness by night in the field,
		Of his love. And with a single joke
		You will frighten away the worry, the war, the uneasy nights,
		The summer lightning of shy human friendship,
		Into the cool past that will never come back.


	5. WITHOUT YOU

		My Pillow gazes upon me at night
		Empty as a gravestone;
		I never thought it would be so bitter
		To be alone,
		Not to lie down asleep in your hair.
		
		I lie alone in a silent house,
		The hanging lamp darkened,
		And gently stretch out my hands
		To gather in yours,
		And softly press my warm mouth
		Toward you, and kiss myself, exhausted and weak--
		Then suddenly I’m awake
		And all around me the cold night grows still.
		The star in the window shines clearly--
		Where is your blond hair,
		Where your sweet mouth?
		
		Now I drink pain in every delight
		And poison in every wine;
		I never knew it would be so bitter
		To be alone,
		Alone, without you.


*** Geoffrey Hill (1932 - 2016)

	1. IN MEMORY OF JANE FRASER

		When snow like sheep lay in the fold
		And winds went begging at each door,
		And the far hills were blue with cold,
		And a cold shroud lay on the moor,
		
		She kept the siege. And every day
		We watched her brooding over death
		Like a strong bird above its prey.
		The room filled with the kettle’s breath.
		
		Damp curtains glued against the pane
		Sealed time away. Her body froze
		As if to freeze us all, and chain
		Creation to a stunned repose.
		
		She died before the world could stir.
		In March the ice unloosed the brook
		And water ruffled the sun’s hair.
		Dead cones upon the alder shook.


	2. OVID IN THE THIRD REICH

		non peccat, quaecumque potest peccasse negare, 
		solaque famosam culpa professa facit. 
		
		_Amores, III, xiv_
		
		I love my work and my children. God 
		Is distant, difficult. Things happen. 
		Too near the ancient troughs of blood 
		Innocence is no earthly weapon.
		
		I have learned one thing: not to look down
		So much upon the damned. They, in their sphere, 
		Harmonize strangely with the divine
		Love. I, in mine, celebrate the love-choir.


	3. REQUIEM FOR THE PLANTAGENET KINGS

		For whom the possessed sea littered, on both shores,
		Ruinous arms; being fired, and for good,
		To sound the constitution of just wars,
		Men, in their eloquent fashion, understood.
		
		Relieved of soul, the dropping-back of dust,
		Their usage, pride, admitted within doors;
		At home, under caved chantries, set in trust,
		With well-dressed alabaster and proved spurs
		They lie; they lie; secure in the decay
		Of blood, blood-marks, crowns hacked and coveted,
		Before the scouring fires of trial-day
		Alight on men; before sleeked groin, gored head,
		Budge through the clay and gravel, and the sea
		Across daubed rock evacuates its dead.


	4. SEPTEMBER SONG

		_born 19.6.32 deported 24.9.42_
		
		Undesirable you may have been, untouchable
		you were not. Not forgotten
		or passed over at the proper time.
		
		As estimated, you died. Things marched,
		sufficient, to that end.
		Just so much Zyklon and leather, patented
		terror, so many routine cries.
		
		(I have made
		an elegy for myself it
		is true)
		
		September fattens on vines. Roses
		flake from the wall. The smoke
		of harmless fires drifts to my eyes.
		
		This is plenty. This is more than enough.


*** Robert Hillyer (1895 - 1961)

	1. HOW SHOULD I THINK OF THEE

		How should I think of thee but with delight?
		How should I greet thy face but with a smile?
		And yet dark tears within my heart defile
		The dreams of thee that I would have so bright.
		If thou shouldst come and end this lonely while,
		These leaden hours of the sleepless night,
		Still should I fear to show thee what I write,
		Lest I repent in vain, and thou revile.
		
		Yet couldst thou read these scriptures of my heart,
		Graven in passion with no base control,
		For one brief moment, then, they might impart
		Some almost worthy offering from my soul.
		I write for thee, and cannot let thee read,
		Thus love denies itself its utmost need.


	2. HOW STRANGE

		How strange it is that thine ethereal grace
		Should make me sorry by its loveliness,
		For surely beauty is designed to bless
		Those hours of youth that have so short a race,
		And yet the memory of some old distress
		Shadows me over when I see thy face,
		And yearning ever for one swift embrace
		Has tinged my joy in thee with bitterness.
		
		The young smiles flashing brightly free and fair,
		The laughing stars that in thy deep eyes shine,--
		It is not love for me that lights them there,
		I see their beauty, but they are not mine.
		Thy loveliness is joy poisoned with pain;
		Rapture to love, torment to love in vain.


	3. THOU WERT MY ONLY HOPE

		Thou only wert my hope, and thou art gone.
		Thou, the one star in monotones of sky,
		Art vanished like a meteor, and I,
		Lost in the night, have ceased to pray for dawn.
		I watched thee fade, I saw thee passing by
		And tried to call thee, but my lips were dumb;
		It had been better hadst thou never come,--
		Remembered riches mock my poverty.
		
		Blow from afar the little sounds of bells,
		Wood-smoke hangs thinly on the autumn air,
		The town’s unconscious hush is like a prayer,
		And night sleeps pleasantly among the dells;
		I only wander on, and know not where,
		Through the great dark, pursued by faint farewells.


	4. WHO FOLLOWS LOVE

		Who follows Love shall walk in outland places,
		Beyond the common cheer of hall and town,
		He shall forget all things, the friendly faces,
		The strife for wealth, the struggle for renown.
		A young crusader putting by his crown,
		A pilgrim following a holy vision,
		Heeding nor threat of king nor gibe of clown,
		The tyrant’s hatred nor the world’s derision,--
		
		Thus shall he wander; in no bright Elysian
		Meadows shall be his quest, but through the vast
		And midnight fears that shake his heart’s decision
		With staring madness, till he see at last
		Like Parsifal in ages long ago,
		Love’s flaming chalice out of darkness glow.


*** Daniel Hoffmann (1923 - 2013)

	1. STONE

		Ever since the first fires
		Cooled and colors went out of the air
		And on my fanks water sizzled and seethed
		And collected in warm pools in my pockets
		I have not changed. Cold came,
		Prying its levers of ice in my veins,
		Roots thrust into my pores and split them,
		The sun roared overhead streaming
		Its heat on my hard glazed skin
		Trying each summer all summer
		To roast me to ember. Rain
		Came again, and again and again
		Lacing and creasing my forehead with furrows
		And rivers. Later it came as snow
		Cracking and brittle, as though
		I would turn brittle and crack.
		Well, waves have broken me into pieces,
		Pounded my pieces against one another--
		Some of my flesh is pebbles, sand.
		I have been here since before the arrival
		Of the creatures who have come and are most of them
		gone now.
		But nothing can change me. Split me apart,
		Test me by fire, grind me down
		--I’m still what I was, with my heart of stone.


	2. THE CENTER OF ATTENTION

		As grit swirls in the wind the word spreads. 
		On pavements approaching the bridge a crowd 
		Springs up like mushrooms. 
		They are hushed at first, intently 
		
		Looking. At the top of the pylon 
		The target of their gaze leans toward them. 
		The sky sobs 
		With the sirens of disaster crews 
		
		Careening toward the crowd with nets, 
		Ladders, resuscitation gear, their First 
		Aid attendants antiseptic in white duck. 
		The police, strapped into their holsters, 
		
		Exert themselves in crowd-control.They can’t 
		Control the situation. 
		Atop the pylon there’s a man who threatens 
		Violence. He shouts, I’m gonna jump-- 
		
		And from the river of upturned faces 
		--Construction workers pausing in their construction work, 
		Shoppers diverted from their shopping, 
		The idlers relishing this diversion 
		
		In the vacuity of their day--arises 
		A chorus of cries--Jump! 
		Jump! and No-- 
		Come down! Come down!Maybe, if he can hear them, 
		
		They seem to be sayingJump down!The truth is, 
		The crowd cannot make up its mind. 
		This is a tough decision. The man beside me 
		Reaches into his lunchbox and lets him have it. 
		
		Jump! before he bites his sandwich, 
		While next to him a young blonde clutches 
		Her handbag to her breasts and moans 
		Don’t Don’t Don’t so very softly 
		
		You’d think she was afraid of being heard. 
		The will of the people is divided. 
		Up there he hasn’t made his mind up either. 
		He has climbed and climbed on spikes imbedded in the pylon 
		
		To get where he has arrived at. 
		Is he sure now that this is where he was going? 
		He looks down one way into the river. 
		He looks down the other way into the people. 
		
		He seems to be looking for something 
		Or for somebody in particular. 
		Is there anyone here who is that person 
		Or can give him what it is that he needs? 
		
		From the back of a firetruck a ladder teeters. 
		Inching along, up up up up up, a policeman 
		Holds on with one hand, sliding it on ahead of him. 
		In the other, outstretched, a pack of cigarettes. 
		
		Soon the man will decide between 
		The creature comfort of one more smoke 
		And surcease from being a creature. 
		Meanwhile the crowd calls Jump! and calls Come down! 
		
		Now, his cassock billowing in the bulges of Death’s black flag, 
		A priest creeps up the ladder too 
		What will the priest and the policeman together 
		Persuade the man to do? 
		
		He has turned his back to them. 
		He has turned away from everyone. 
		His solitariness is nearly complete. 
		He is alone with his decision. 
		
		No one on the ground or halfway into the sky can know 
		The hugeness of the emptiness that surrounds him. 
		All of his senses are orphans. 
		His ribs are cold andirons. 
		
		Does he regret his rejection of furtive pills, 
		Of closet noose or engine idling in closed garage? 
		A body will plummet through shrieking air, 
		The audience dumb with horror, the spattered street . . . 
		
		The world he has left is as small as toys at his feet. 
		Where he stands, though nearer the sun, the wind is chill. 
		He clutches his arms--a caress, or is he trying 
		Merely to warm himself with his arms? 
		
		The people below, their necks are beginning to ache. 
		They are getting impatient for this diversion 
		To come to some conclusion. The priest 
		Inches further narrowly up the ladder. 
		
		The center of everybody’s attention 
		For some reason has lit up a butt. He sits down. 
		He looks down on the people gathered, and sprinkles 
		Some of his ashes upon them. 
		
		Before he is halfway down 
		The crowd is half-dispersed. 
		It was his aloneness that clutched them together. 
		They were spellbound by his despair 
		
		And now each rung brings him nearer, 
		Nearer to their condition 
		Which is not sufficiently interesting 
		To detain them from business or idleness either, 
		
		Or is too close to a despair 
		They do not dare 
		Exhibit before a crowd 
		Or admit to themselves they share. 
		
		Now the police are taking notes 
		On clipboards, filling the forms. 
		He looks round as though searching for what he came down for. 
		Traffic flows over the bridge.


	3. YOURS

		I am yours as the summer air at evening is 
		Possessed by the scent of linden blossoms, 
		
		As the snowcap gleams with light 
		Lent it by the brimming moon. 
		
		Without you I’d be an unleafed tree 
		Blasted in a bleakness with no Spring. 
		
		Your love is the weather of my being. 
		What is an island without the sea?


*** Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809 - 1894)

	1. CONTENTMENT

		   _“Man wants but little here below”_
		
		Little I ask; my wants are few;
		I only wish a hut of stone,
		(A _very plain_ brown stone will do,)
		That I may call my own;--
		And close at hand is such a one,
		In yonder street that fronts the sun.
		
		Plain food is quite enough for me;
		Three courses are as good as ten;--
		If Nature can subsist on three,
		Thank Heaven for three. Amen!
		I always thought cold victual nice;--
		My _choice_ would be vanilla-ice.
		
		I care not much for gold or land;--
		Give me a mortgage here and there,--
		Some good bank-stock, some note of hand,
		Or trifling railroad share,--
		I only ask that Fortune send
		A _little_ more than I shall spend.
		
		Honors are silly toys, I know,
		And titles are but empty names;
		I would, _perhaps_, be Plenipo,--
		But only near St. James;
		I’m very sure I should not care
		To fill our Gubernator’s chair.
		
		Jewels are baubles; ’t is a sin
		To care for such unfruitful things;--
		One good-sized diamond in a pin,--
		Some, _not so large_, in rings,--
		A ruby, and a pearl, or so,
		Will do for me;--I laugh at show.
		
		My dame should dress in cheap attire;
		(Good, heavy silks are never dear;)--
		I own perhaps I _might_ desire
		Some shawls of true Cashmere,--
		Some marrowy crapes of China silk,
		Like wrinkled skins on scalded milk.
		
		I would not have the horse I drive
		So fast that folks must stop and stare;
		An easy gait--two forty-five--
		Suits me; I do not care;--
		Perhaps, for just a _single spurt_,
		Some seconds less would do no hurt.
		
		Of pictures, I should like to own
		Titians and Raphaels three or four,--
		I love so much their style and tone,
		One Turner, and no more,
		(A landscape,--foreground golden dirt,--
		The sunshine painted with a squirt.)
		
		Of books but few,--some fifty score
		For daily use, and bound for wear;
		The rest upon an upper floor;--
		Some _little_ luxury _there_
		Of red morocco’s gilded gleam
		And vellum rich as country cream.
		
		Busts, cameos, gems,--such things as these,
		Which others often show for pride,
		_I_ value for their power to please,
		And selfish churls deride;--
		_One_ Stradivarius, I confess,
		_Two_ Meerschaums, I would fain possess.
		
		Wealth’s wasteful tricks I will not learn,
		Nor ape the glittering upstart fool;--
		Shall not carved tables serve my turn,
		But _all_ must be of buhl?
		Give grasping pomp its double share,--
		I ask but _one_ recumbent chair.
		
		Thus humble let me live and die,
		Nor long for Midas’ golden touch;
		If Heaven more generous gifts deny,
		I shall not miss them _much_,--
		Too grateful for the blessing lent
		Of simple tastes and mind content!


	2. DAILY TRIALS BY A SENSITIVE MAN

		Oh, there are times
		When all this fret and tumult that we hear
		Do seem more stale than to the sexton’s ear
		His own dull chimes.
		
		Ding dong! ding dong!
		The world is in a simmer like a sea
		Over a pent volcano,--woe is me
		All the day long!
		
		From crib to shroud!
		Nurse o’er our cradles screameth lullaby,
		And friends in boots tramp round us as we die,
		Snuffling aloud.
		
		At morning’s call
		The small-voiced pug-dog welcomes in the sun,
		And flea-bit mongrels, wakening one by one,
		Give answer all.
		
		When evening dim
		Draws round us, then the lonely caterwaul,
		Tart solo, sour duet, and general squall,--
		These are our hymn.
		
		Women, with tongues
		Like polar needles, ever on the jar;
		Men, plugless word-spouts, whose deep fountains are
		Within their lungs.
		
		Children, with drums
		Strapped round them by the fond paternal ass;
		Peripatetics with a blade of grass
		Between their thumbs.
		
		Vagrants, whose arts
		Have caged some devil in their mad machine,
		Which grinding, squeaks, with husky groans between,
		Come out by starts.
		
		Cockneys that kill
		Thin horses of a Sunday,--men, with clams,
		Hoarse as young bisons roaring for their dams
		From hill to hill.
		
		Soldiers, with guns,
		Making a nuisance of the blessed air,
		Child-crying bellman, children in despair,
		Screeching for buns.
		
		Storms, thunders, waves!
		Howl, crash, and bellow till ye get your fill;
		Ye sometimes rest; men never can be still
		But in their graves.


	3. THE TWO STREAMS

		Behold the rocky wall
		That down its sloping sides
		Pours the swift rain-drops, blending, as they fall,
		In rushing river-tides!
		
		Yon stream, whose sources run
		Turned by a pebble’s edge,
		Is Athabasca, rolling toward the sun
		Through the cleft mountain-ledge.
		
		The slender rill had strayed,
		But for the slanting stone,
		To evening’s ocean, with the tangled braid
		Of foam-flecked Oregon.
		
		So from the heights of Will
		Life’s parting stream descends,
		And, as a moment turns its slender rill,
		Each widening torrent bends,--
		
		From the same cradle’s side,
		From the same mother’s knee,--
		One to long darkness and the frozen tide,
		One to the Peaceful Sea!


*** Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844 - 1889)

	1. A BROTHER AND SISTER

		O I admire and sorrow! The heart’s eye grieves
		Discovering you, dark tramplers, tyrant years.
		A juice rides rich through bluebells, in vine leaves,
		And beauty’s dearest veriest vein is tears.
		
		Happy the father, mother of these! Too fast:
		Not that, but thus far, all with frailty, blest
		In one fair fall; but, for time’s aftercast,
		Creatures all heft, hope, hazard, interest.
		
		And are they thus? The fine, the fingering beams
		Their young delightful hour do feature down
		That fleeted else like day-dissolvèd dreams
		Or ringlet-race on burling Barrow brown.
		
		She leans on him with such contentment fond
		As well the sister sits, would well the wife;
		His looks, the soul’s own letters, see beyond,
		Gaze on, and fall directly forth on life.
		
		But ah, bright forelock, cluster that you are
		Of favoured make and mind and health and youth,
		Where lies your landmark, seamark, or soul’s star?
		There’s none but truth can stead you. Christ is truth.
		
		There’s none but good can bé good, both for you
		And what sways with you, maybe this sweet maid;
		None good but God--a warning wavèd to
		One once that was found wanting when Good weighed.
		
		Man lives that list, that leaning in the will
		No wisdom can forecast by gauge or guess,
		The selfless self of self, most strange, most still,
		Fast furled and all foredrawn to No or Yes.
		
		Your feast of; that most in you earnest eye
		May but call on your banes to more carouse.
		Worst will the best. What worm was here, we cry,
		To have havoc-pocked so, see, the hung-heavenward
		    boughs?
		
		Enough: corruption was the world’s first woe.
		What need I strain my heart beyond my ken?
		O but I bear my burning witness though
		Against the wild and wanton work of men.


	2. ASHBOUGHS

		NOT of all my eyes see, wandering on the world,
		Is anything a milk to the mind so, so sighs deep
		Poetry to it, as a tree whose boughs break in the sky.
		Say it is ashboughs: whether on a December day and
		    furled
		Fast ór they in clammyish lashtender combs creep
		Apart wide and new-nestle at heaven most high.
		They touch heaven, tabour on it; how their talons sweep
		The smouldering enormous winter welkin! May
		Mells blue and snowwhite through them, a fringe and fray
		Of greenery: it is old earth’s groping towards the steep
		         Heaven whom she childs us by.


	3. BINSEY POPLARS

		MY aspens dear, whose airy cages quelled,
		Quelled or quenched in leaves the leaping sun,
		All felled, felled, are all felled;
		  Of a fresh and following folded rank
		              Not spared, not one
		              That dandled a sandalled
		         Shadow that swam or sank
		On meadow and river and wind-wandering weed-winding
		  bank.
		
		O if we but knew what we do
		     When we delve or hew--
		Hack and rack the growing green!
		     Since country is so tender
		To touch, her being só slender,
		That, like this sleek and seeing ball
		But a prick will make no eye at all,
		Where we, even where we mean
		         To mend her we end her,
		     When we hew or delve:
		After-comers cannot guess the beauty been.
		  Ten or twelve, only ten or twelve
		     Strokes of havoc únselve
		         The sweet especial scene,
		     Rural scene, a rural scene,
		     Sweet especial rural scene.


	4. CAGED SKYLARK

		As a dare-gale skylark scanted in a dull cage
		  Man’s mounting spirit in his bone-house, mean house,
		    dwells--
		  That bird beyond the remembering his free fells;
		This in drudgery, day-labouring-out life’s age.
		
		Though aloft on turf or perch or poor low stage,
		  Both sing sometimes the sweetest, sweetest spells,
		  Yet both droop deadly sometimes in their cells
		Or wring their barriers in bursts of fear or rage.
		
		Not that the sweet-fowl, song-fowl, needs no rest--
		Why, hear him, hear him babble and drop down to his nest,
		  But his own nest, wild nest, no prison.
		
		Man’s spirit will be flesh-bound when found at best,
		But uncumbered: meadow-down is not distressed
		  For a rainbow footing it nor he for his bónes rísen.


	5. CARRION COMFORT

		NOT, I’ll not, carrion comfort, Despair, not feast on thee;
		Not untwist--slack they may be--these last strands of man
		In me ór, most weary, cry _I can no more_. I can;
		Can something, hope, wish day come, not choose not to be.
		But ah, but O thou terrible, why wouldst thou rude on me
		Thy wring-world right foot rock? lay a lionlimb against
		    me? scan
		With darksome devouring eyes my bruisèd bones? and fan,
		O in turns of tempest, me heaped there; me frantic to
		    avoid thee and flee?
		
		Why? That my chaff might fly; my grain lie, sheer
		    and clear.
		Nay in all that toil, that coil, since (seems) I kissed the rod,
		Hand rather, my heart lo! lapped strength, stole joy,
		    would laugh, chéer.
		Cheer whom though? the hero whose heaven-handling
		    flung me, fóot tród
		Me? or me that fought him? O which one? is it each
		    one? That night, that year
		Of now done darkness I wretch lay wrestling with (my
		    God!) my God.


	6. EPITHALAMION

		HARK, hearer, hear what I do; lend a thought now, make believe
		We are leafwhelmed somewhere with the hood
		Of some branchy bunchy bushybowered wood,
		Southern dene or Lancashire clough or Devon cleave,
		That leans along the loins of hills, where a candycoloured, where
		    a gluegold-brown
		Marbled river, boisterously beautiful, between
		Roots and rocks is danced and dandled, all in froth and water-
		    blowballs, down.
		We are there, when we hear a shout
		That the hanging honeysuck, the dogeared hazels in the cover
		Makes dither, makes hover
		And the riot of a rout
		Of, it must be, boys from the town
		Bathing: it is summer’s sovereign good.
		
		By there comes a listless stranger: beckoned by the noise
		He drops towards the river: unseen
		Sees the bevy of them, how the boys
		With dare and with downdolphinry and bellbright bodies hud-
		    dling out,
		Are earthworld, airworld, waterworld thorough hurled, all by
		    turn and turn about.
		
		This garland of their gambols flashes in his breast
		Into such a sudden zest
		Of summertime joys
		That he hies to a pool neighbouring; sees it is the best
		There; sweetest, freshest, shadowiest;
		Fairyland; silk-beech, scrolled ash, packed sycamore, wild
		    wychelm, hornbeam fretty overstood
		By. Rafts and rafts of flake-leaves light, dealt so, painted on the air,
		Hang as still as hawk or hawkmoth, as the stars or as the angels
		    there,
		Like the thing that never knew the earth, never off roots
		Rose. Here he feasts: lovely all is! No more: off with--
		    down he dings
		His bleachèd both and woolwoven wear:
		Careless these in coloured wisp
		All lie tumbled-to; then with loop-locks
		Forward falling, forehead frowning, lips crisp
		Over finger-teasing task, his twiny boots
		Fast he opens, last he offwrings
		Till walk the world he can with bare his feet
		And come where lies a coffer, burly all of blocks
		Built of chancequarrièd, selfquainèd rocks
		And the water warbles over into, filleted with glassy grassy
		    quicksilvery shivès and shoots
		And with heavenfallen freshness down from moorland still brims,
		Dark or daylight on and on. Here he will then, here he will
		    the fleet
		Flinty kindcold element let break across his limbs
		Long. Where we leave him, froliclavish while he looks about
		    him, laughs, swims.
		
		Enough now; since the sacred matter that I mean
		I should be wronging longer leaving it to float
		Upon this only gambolling and echoing-of-earth note--
		What is ... the delightful dene?
		Wedlock. What the water? Spousal love.
		
		Father, mother, brothers, sisters, friends
		Into fairy trees, wild flowers, wood ferns
		Rankèd round the bower


	7. FOR A PICTURE OF ST. DOROTHEA

		I BEAR a basket lined with grass;
		I am so light, I am so fair,
		That men must wonder as I pass
		And at the basket that I bear,
		Where in a newly-drawn green litter
		Sweet flowers I carry,--sweets for bitter.
		
		Lilies I shew you, lilies none,
		None in Caesar’s gardens blow,--
		And a quince in hand,--not one
		Is set upon your boughs below;
		Not set, because their buds not spring;
		Spring not, ‘cause world is wintering.
		
		But these were found in the East and South
		Where Winter is the clime forgot.--
		The dewdrop on the larkspur’s mouth
		O should it then be quenchèd not?
		In starry water-meads they drew
		These drops: which be they? stars or dew?
		
		Had she a quince in hand? Yet gaze:
		Rather it is the sizing moon.
		Lo, linked heavens with milky ways!
		That was her larkspur row.--So soon?
		Sphered so fast, sweet soul?--We see
		Nor fruit, nor flowers, nor Dorothy.


	8. GOD’S GRANDEUR

		THE world is charged with the grandeur of God.
		  It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
		  It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
		Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
		Generations have trod, have trod, have trod;
		  And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with
		    toil;
		  And wears man’s smudge and shares man’s smell:
		    the soil
		Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.
		
		And for all this, nature is never spent;
		  There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
		And though the last lights off the black West went
		  Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs--
		Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
		  World broods with warm breast and with ah!
		    bright wings.


	9. HURRAHING IN HARVEST

		SUMMER ends now; now, barbarous in beauty, the
		    stooks rise
		  Around; up above, what wind-walks! what lovely
		    behaviour
		  Of silk-sack clouds! has wilder, wilful-wavier
		Meal-drift moulded ever and melted across skies?
		
		I walk, I lift up, I lift up heart, eyes,
		  Down all that glory in the heavens to glean our
		    Saviour;
		  And, éyes, heárt, what looks, what lips yet gave you a
		Rapturous love’s greeting of realer, of rounder replies?
		
		And the azurous hung hills are his world-wielding
		    shoulder
		  Majestic--as a stallion stalwart, very-violet-sweet!--
		These things, these things were here and but the
		    beholder
		  Wanting; which two when they once meet,
		The heart rears wings bold and bolder
		  And hurls for him, O half hurls earth for him off
		    under his feet.


	10. IN THE VALLEY OF THE ELWY

		I REMEMBER a house where all were good
		  To me, God knows, deserving no such thing:
		  Comforting smell breathed at very entering,
		Fetched fresh, as I suppose, off some sweet wood.
		That cordial air made those kind people a hood
		  All over, as a bevy of eggs the mothering wing
		  Will, or mild nights the new morsels of spring:
		Why, it seemed of course; seemed of right it should.
		
		Lovely the woods, waters, meadows, combes, vales,
		All the air things wear that build this world of Wales;
		  Only the inmate does not correspond:
		God, lover of souls, swaying considerate scales,
		Complete thy creature dear O where it fails,
		  Being mighty a master, being a father and fond.


	11. INVERSNAID

		THIS darksome burn, horseback brown,
		His rollrock highroad roaring down,
		In coop and in comb the fleece of his foam
		Flutes and low to the lake falls home.
		
		A windpuff-bonnet of fáawn-fróth
		Turns and twindles over the broth
		Of a pool so pitchblack, féll-frówning,
		It rounds and rounds Despair to drowning.
		
		Degged with dew, dappled with dew
		Are the groins of the braes that the brook treads through,
		Wiry heathpacks, flitches of fern,
		And the beadbonny ash that sits over the burn.
		
		What would the world be, once bereft
		Of wet and of wildness? Let them be left,
		O let them be left, wildness and wet;
		Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet.


	12. MOONRISE

		I AWOKE in the Midsummer not to call night, in the
		    white and the walk of the morning:
		The moon, dwindled and thinned to the fringe of a
		    finger-nail held to the candle,
		Or paring of paradisaïcal fruit, lovely in waning but
		    lustreless,
		Stepped from the stool, drew back from the barrow, of
		    dark Maenefa the mountain;
		A cusp still clasped him, a fluke yet fanged him, en-
		    tangled him, not quit utterly.
		This was the prized, the desirable sight, unsought, pre-
		    sented so easily,
		Parted me leaf and leaf, divided me, eyelid and eyelid of
		    slumber.


	13. MORNING MIDDAY AND EVENING SACRIFICE

		THE dappled die-away
		Cheek and wimpled lip,
		The gold-wisp, the airy-grey
		Eye, all in fellowship--
		This, all this beauty blooming,
		This, all this freshness fuming,
		Give God while worth consuming.
		
		Both thought and thew now bolder
		And told by Nature: Tower;
		Head, heart, hand, heel, and shoulder
		That beat and breathe in power--
		This pride of prime’s enjoyment
		Take as for tool, not toy meant
		And hold at Christ’s employment.
		
		The vault and scope and schooling
		And mastery in the mind,
		In silk-ash kept from cooling,
		And ripest under rind--
		What life half lifts the latch of,
		What hell stalks towards the snatch of,
		Your offering, with despatch, of!


	14. PEACE

		WHEN will you ever, Peace, wild wooddove, shy wings shut,
		Your round me roaming end, and under be my boughs?
		When, when, Peacè, will you, Peace? I’ll not play
		    hypocrite
		To own my heart: I yield you do come sometimes; but
		That piecemeal peace is poor peace. What pure peace
		    allows
		Alarms of wars, the daunting wars, the death of it?
		
		O surely, reaving Peace, my Lord should leave in lieu
		Some good! And so he does leave Patience exquisite,
		That plumes to Peace thereafter. And when Peace here
		    does house
		He comes with work to do, he does not come to coo,
		He comes to brood and sit.


	15. PIED BEAUTY

		GLORY be to God for dappled things--
		  For skies of couple-colour as a brinded cow;
		     For rose-moles all in stipple upon trout that swim:
		Fresh-firecoal chestnut-falls; finches’ wings;
		  Landscape plotted and pieced--fold, fallow, and
		     plough;
		    And àll tràdes, their gear and tackle and trim.
		
		All things counter, original, spare, strange;
		  Whatever is fickle, freckled (who knows how?)
		     With swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim;
		He fathers-forth whose beauty is past change:
		                 Praise him.


	16. RIBBLESDALE

		EARTH, sweet Earth, sweet landscape, with leavès throng
		And louchèd low grass, heaven that dost appeal
		To, with no tongue to plead, no heart to feel;
		That canst but only be, but dost that long--
		
		Thou canst but be, but that thou well dost; strong
		Thy plea with him who dealt, nay does now deal,
		Thy lovely dale down thus and thus bids reel
		Thy river, and o’er gives all to rack or wrong.
		
		  And what is Earth’s eye, tongue, or heart else, where
		Else, but in dear and dogged man?--Ah, the heir
		To his own selfbent so bound, so tied to his turn,
		To thriftless reave both our rich round world bare
		And none reck of world after, this bids wear
		Earth brows of such care, care and dear concern.


	17. SPRING

		NOTHING is so beautiful as spring--
		  When weeds, in wheels, shoot long and lovely and lush;
		  Thrush’s eggs look little low heavens, and thrush
		Through the echoing timber does so rinse and wring
		The ear, it strikes like lightnings to hear him sing;
		  The glassy peartree leaves and blooms, they brush
		  The descending blue; that blue is all in a rush
		With richness; the racing lambs too have fair their fling.
		
		What is all this juice and all this joy?
		  A strain of the earth’s sweet being in the beginning
		In Eden garden. Have, get, before it cloy,
		  Before it cloud, Christ, lord, and sour with sinning,
		Innocent mind and Mayday in girl and boy,
		  Most, O maid’s child, thy choice and worthy the
		    winning.


	18. THAT NATURE IS A HERACLITEAN FIRE

		CLOUD-PUFFBALL, torn tufts, tossed pillows flaunt forth, then
		    chevy on an air--
		built thoroughfare: heaven-roysterers, in gay-gangs they throng;
		    they glitter in marches.
		Down roughcast, down dazzling whitewash, wherever an elm
		  arches,
		Shivelights and shadowtackle in long lashes lace, lance, and pair.
		Delightfully the bright wind boisterous ropes, wrestles, beats
		  earth bare
		Of yestertempest’s creases; in pool and rut peel parches
		Squandering ooze to squeezed dough, crust, dust; stanches,
		  starches
		Squadroned masks and manmarks treadmire toil there
		Footfretted in it. Million-fuelèd, nature’s bonfire burns on.
		But quench her bonniest, dearest to her, her clearest-selvèd spark
		Man, how fast his firedint, his mark on mind, is gone!
		Both are in an unfathomable, all is in an enormous dark
		Drowned. O pity and indig nation! Manshape, that shone
		Sheer off, disseveral, a star, death blots black out; nor mark
		         Is any of him at all so stark
		But vastness blurs and time beats level. Enough! the Resur--
		    rection,
		A heart’s-clarion! Away grief’s gasping, joyless days, dejection.
		         Across my foundering deck shone
		A beacon, an eternal beam. Flesh fade, and mortal trash
		Fall to the residuary worm; world’s wildfire, leave but ash:
		         In a flash, at a trumpet crash,
		I am all at once what Christ is, since he was what I am, and
		This Jack, joke, poor potsherd, patch, matchwood, immortal
		    diamond,
		         Is immortal diamond.


	19. THE BLESSED VIRGIN COMPARED TO THE AIR WE BREATHE

		WILD air, world-mothering air,
		Nestling me everywhere,
		That each eyelash or hair
		Girdles; goes home betwixt
		The fleeciest, frailest-flixed
		Snowflake; that’s fairly mixed
		With, riddles, and is rife
		In every least thing’s life;
		This needful, never spent,
		And nursing element;             
		My more than meat and drink,
		My meal at every wink;
		This air, which, by life’s law,
		My lung must draw and draw
		Now but to breathe its praise,
		Minds me in many ways
		Of her who not only
		Gave God’s infinity
		Dwindled to infancy
		Welcome in womb and breast,      
		Birth, milk, and all the rest
		But mothers each new grace
		That does now reach our race--
		Mary Immaculate,
		Merely a woman, yet
		Whose presence, power is
		Great as no goddess’s
		Was deemèd, dreamèd; who
		This one work has to do--
		Let all God’s glory through,     
		God’s glory which would go
		Through her and from her flow
		Off, and no way but so.
		
		    I say that we are wound
		With mercy round and round
		As if with air: the same
		Is Mary, more by name.
		She, wild web, wondrous robe,
		Mantles the guilty globe,
		Since God has let dispense       
		Her prayers his providence:
		Nay, more than almoner,
		The sweet alms’ self is her
		And men are meant to share
		Her life as life does air.
		    If I have understood,
		She holds high motherhood
		Towards all our ghostly good
		And plays in grace her part
		About man’s beating heart,       
		Laying, like air’s fine flood,
		The deathdance in his blood;
		Yet no part but what will
		Be Christ our Saviour still.
		Of her flesh he took flesh:
		He does take fresh and fresh,
		Though much the mystery how,
		Not flesh but spirit now
		And makes, O marvellous!
		New Nazareths in us,             
		Where she shall yet conceive
		Him, morning, noon, and eve;
		New Bethlems, and he born
		There, evening, noon, and morn
		Bethlem or Nazareth,
		Men here may draw like breath
		More Christ and baffle death;
		Who, born so, comes to be
		New self and nobler me
		In each one and each one         
		More makes, when all is done,
		Both God’s and Mary’s Son.
		    Again, look overhead
		How air is azurèd;
		O how! nay do but stand
		Where you can lift your hand
		Skywards: rich, rich it laps
		Round the four fingergaps.
		Yet such a sapphire-shot,
		Charged, steepèd sky will not    
		Stain light. Yea, mark you this:
		It does no prejudice.
		The glass-blue days are those
		When every colour glows,
		Each shape and shadow shows.
		Blue be it: this blue heaven
		The seven or seven times seven
		Hued sunbeam will transmit
		Perfect, not alter it.
		Or if there does some soft,      
		On things aloof, aloft,
		Bloom breathe, that one breath more
		Earth is the fairer for.
		Whereas did air not make
		This bath of blue and slake
		His fire, the sun would shake,
		A blear and blinding ball
		With blackness bound, and all
		The thick stars round him roll
		Flashing like flecks of coal,   
		Quartz-fret, or sparks of salt,
		In grimy vasty vault.
		    So God was god of old:
		A mother came to mould
		Those limbs like ours which are
		What must make our daystar
		Much dearer to mankind;
		Whose glory bare would blind
		Or less would win man’s mind.
		Through her we may see him      
		Made sweeter, not made dim,
		And her hand leaves his light
		Sifted to suit our sight.
		    Be thou then, thou dear
		Mother, my atmosphere;
		My happier world, wherein
		To wend and meet no sin;
		Above me, round me lie
		Fronting my froward eye
		With sweet and scarless sky;    
		Stir in my ears, speak there
		Of God’s love, O live air,
		Of patience, penance, prayer:
		World-mothering air, air wild,
		Wound with thee, in thee isled,
		Fold home, fast fold thy child.


	20. THE CANDLE INDOORS

		SOME candle clear burns somewhere I come by.
		I muse at how its being puts blissful back
		With yellowy moisture mild night’s blear-all black,
		Or to-fro tender trambeams truckle at the eye.
		By that window what task what fingers ply,
		I plod wondering, a-wanting, just for lack
		Of answer the eagerer a-wanting Jessy or Jack
		There   God to aggrándise, God to glorify.--
		
		Come you indoors, come home; your fading fire
		Mend first and vital candle in close heart’s vault:
		You there are master, do your own desire;
		What hinders? Are you beam-blind, yet to a fault
		In a neighbour deft-handed? Are you that liar
		And cast by conscience out, spendsavour salt?


	21. THE HABIT OF PERFECTION

		ELECTED Silence, sing to me
		And beat upon my whorlèd ear,
		Pipe me to pastures still and be
		The music that I care to hear.
		
		Shape nothing, lips; be lovely-dumb:
		It is the shut, the curfew sent
		From there where all surrenders come
		Which only makes you eloquent.
		
		Be shellèd, eyes, with double dark
		And find the uncreated light:
		This ruck and reel which you remark
		Coils, keeps, and teases simple sight.
		
		Palate, the hutch of tasty lust,
		Desire not to be rinsed with wine:
		The can must be so sweet, the crust
		So fresh that come in fasts divine!
		
		Nostrils, your careless breath that spend
		Upon the stir and keep of pride,
		What relish shall the censers send
		Along the sanctuary side!
		
		O feel-of-primrose hands, O feet
		That want the yield of plushy sward,
		But you shall walk the golden street
		And you unhouse and house the Lord.
		
		And, Poverty, be thou the bride
		And now the marriage feast begun,
		And lily-coloured clothes provide
		Your spouse not laboured-at nor spun.


	22. THE HANDSOME HEART AT A GRACIOUS ANSWER

		‘BUT tell me, child, your choice; what shall I buy
		You?‘--‘Father, what you buy me I like best.’
		With the sweetest air that said, still plied and pressed,
		He swung to his first poised purport of reply.
		
		What the heart is! which, like carriers let fly--
		Doff darkness, homing nature knows the rest--
		To its own fine function, wild and self-instressed,
		Falls light as ten years long taught how to and why.
		
		Mannerly-hearted! more than handsome face--
		Beauty’s bearing or muse of mounting vein,
		All, in this case, bathed in high hallowing grace . . .
		
		Of heaven what boon to buy you, boy, or gain
		Not granted?--Only ... O on that path you pace
		Run all your race, O brace sterner that strain!


	23. THE LANTERN OUT OF DOORS

		SOMETIMES a lantern moves along the night,
		  That interests our eyes. And who goes there?
		  I think; where from and bound, I wonder, where,
		With, all down darkness wide, his wading light?
		
		Men go by me whom either beauty bright
		  In mould or mind or what not else makes rare:
		  They rain against our much-thick and marsh air
		Rich beams, till death or distance buys them quite.
		
		Death or distance soon consumes them: wind
		  What most I may eye after, be in at the end
		I cannot, and out of sight is out of mind.
		
		Christ minds: Christ’s interest, what to avow or amend
		  There, éyes them, heart wánts, care haúnts, foot
		    fóllows kínd,
		Their ránsom, théir rescue, ánd first, fást, last friénd.


	24. THE LEADEN ECHO AND THE GOLDEN ECHO

		_The Leaden Echo_
		
		How to keep--is there ány any, is there none such, nowhere
		    known some, bow or brooch or braid or brace, láce, latch
		    or catch or key to keep
		Back beauty, keep it, beauty, beauty, beauty, . . . from vanishing
		    away?
		
		Ó is there no frowning of these wrinkles, rankèd wrinkles deep,
		Dówn? no waving off of these most mournful messengers, still
		    messengers, sad and stealing messengers of grey?
		No there’s none, there’s none, O no there’s none,
		Nor can you long be, what you now are, called fair,
		Do what you may do, what, do what you may,
		And wisdom is early to despair:
		Be beginning; since, no, nothing can be done
		To keep at bay
		Age and age’s evils, hoar hair,
		Ruck and wrinkle, drooping, dying, death’s worst, winding
		    sheets, tombs and worms and tumbling to decay;
		So be beginning, be beginning to despair.
		O there’s none; no no no there’s none:
		Be beginning to despair, to despair,
		Despair, despair, despair, despair.
		
		
		_The Golden Echo_
		
		        Spare!
		There is one, yes I have one (Hush there!);
		Only not within seeing of the sun,
		Not within the singeing of the strong sun,
		Tall sun’s tingeing, or treacherous the tainting of the earth’s air.
		Somewhere elsewhere there is ah well where! one,
		Óne. Yes I can tell such a key, I do know such a place,
		Where whatever’s prized and passes of us, everything that’s
		    fresh and fast flying of us, seems to us sweet of us and
		    swiftly away with, done away with, undone,
		Undone, done with, soon done with, and yet dearly and
		    dangerously sweet
		Of us, the wimpled-water-dimpled, not-by-morning-matchèd face,
		The flower of beauty, fleece of beauty, too too apt to, ah! to fleet,
		Never fleets more, fastened with the tenderest truth
		To its own best being and its loveliness of youth: it is an ever-
		    lastingness of, O it is an all youth!
		Come then, your ways and airs and looks, locks, maiden gear,
		    gallantry and gaiety and grace,
		Winning ways, airs innocent, maiden manners, sweet looks,
		    loose locks, long locks, lovelocks, gaygear, going gallant,
		    girlgrace--
		Resign them, sign them, seal them, send them, motion them
		    with breath,
		And with sighs soaring, soaring síghs deliver
		Them; beauty-in-the-ghost, deliver it, early now, long before
		    death
		Give beauty back, beauty, beauty, beauty, back to God, beauty’s
		    self and beauty’s giver.
		See; not a hair is, not an eyelash, not the least lash lost; every hair
		Is, hair of the head, numbered.
		Nay, what we had lighthanded left in surly the mere mould
		Will have waked and have waxed and have walked with the wind
		    what while we slept,
		This side, that side hurling a heavyheaded hundredfold
		What while we, while we slumbered.
		O then, weary then whý should we tread? O why are we so
		    haggard at the heart, so care-coiled, care-killed, so fagged,
		    so fashed, so cogged, so cumbered,
		When the thing we freely fórfeit is kept with fonder a care,
		Fonder a care kept than we could have kept it, kept
		Far with fonder a care (and we, we should have lost it) finer, fonder
		A care kept. Where kept? Do but tell us where kept, where.--
		Yonder.--What high as that! We follow, now we follow.--
		    Yonder, yes yonder, yonder,
		Yonder.


	25. THE MAY MAGNIFICAT

		MAY is Mary’s month, and I
		Muse at that and wonder why:
		    Her feasts follow reason,
		    Dated due to season--
		
		Candlemas, Lady Day;
		But the Lady Month, May,
		    Why fasten that upon her,
		    With a feasting in her honour?
		
		Is it only its being brighter
		Than the most are must delight her?
		    Is it opportunest
		    And flowers finds soonest?
		
		Ask of her, the mighty mother:
		Her reply puts this other
		    Question: What is Spring?--
		    Growth in every thing--
		
		Flesh and fleece, fur and feather,
		Grass and green world all together;
		    Star-eyed strawberry-breasted
		    Throstle above her nested
		
		Cluster of bugle blue eggs thin
		Forms and warms the life within;
		    And bird and blossom swell
		    In sod or sheath or shell.
		
		All things rising, all things sizing
		Mary sees, sympathising
		    With that world of good,
		    Nature’s motherhood.
		
		Their magnifying of each its kind
		With delight calls to mind
		    How she did in her stored
		    Magnify the Lord.
		
		Well but there was more than this:
		Spring’s universal bliss
		    Much, had much to say
		    To offering Mary May.
		
		When drop-of-blood-and-foam-dapple
		Bloom lights the orchard-apple
		    And thicket and thorp are merry
		    With silver-surfèd cherry
		
		And azuring-over greybell makes
		Wood banks and brakes wash wet like lakes
		    And magic cuckoocall
		    Caps, clears, and clinches all--
		
		This ecstacy all through mothering earth
		Tells Mary her mirth till Christ’s birth
		    To remember and exultation
		    In God who was her salvation.


	26. THE SEA AND THE SKYLARK

		ON ear and ear two noises too old to end
		  Trench--right, the tide that ramps against the shore;
		  With a flood or a fall, low lull-off or all roar,
		Frequenting there while moon shall wear and wend.
		
		Left hand, off land, I hear the lark ascend,
		  His rash-fresh re-winded new-skeinèd score
		  In crisps of curl off wild winch whirl, and pour
		And pelt music, till none’s to spill nor spend.
		
		How these two shame this shallow and frail town!
		  How ring right out our sordid turbid time,
		Being pure! We, life’s pride and cared-for crown,
		
		  Have lost that cheer and charm of earth’s past prime:
		Our make and making break, are breaking, down
		   To man’s last dust, drain fast towards man’s first slime.


	27. THE SOLDIER

		YES. Whý do we áll, seeing of a soldier, bless him? bless
		Our redcoats, our tars? Both these being, the greater part,
		But frail clay, nay but foul clay. Here it is: the heart,
		Since, proud, it calls the calling manly, gives a guess
		That, hopes that, makesbelieve, the men must be no less;
		It fancies, feigns, deems, dears the artist after his art;
		And fain will find as sterling all as all is smart,
		And scarlet wear the spirit of wár thére express.
		
		Mark Christ our King. He knows war, served this soldiering
		    through;
		He of all can handle a rope best. There he bides in bliss
		Now, and séeing somewhére some mán do all that man can do,
		For love he leans forth, needs his neck must fall on, kiss,
		And cry ‘O Christ-done deed! So God-made-flesh does too:
		Were I come o’er again’ cries Christ ‘it should be this’.


	28. THE STARLIGHT NIGHT

		LOOK at the stars! look, look up at the skies!
		  O look at all the fire-folk sitting in the air!
		  The bright boroughs, the circle-citadels there!
		Down in dim woods the diamond delves! the elves’-eyes!
		The grey lawns cold where gold, where quickgold lies!
		  Wind-beat whitebeam! airy abeles set on a flare!
		  Flake-doves sent floating forth at a farmyard scare!--
		Ah well! it is all a purchase, all is a prize.
		
		Buy then! bid then!--What?--Prayer, patience, alms,
		    vows.
		Look, look: a May-mess, like on orchard boughs!
		  Look! March-bloom, like on mealed-with-yellow
		    sallows!
		These are indeed the barn; withindoors house
		The shocks. This piece-bright paling shuts the spouse
		  Christ home, Christ and his mother and all his hallows.


	29. THE WINDHOVER

		_To Christ our Lord_
		
		I CAUGHT this morning morning’s minion, king-
		    dom of daylight’s dauphin, dapple-dawn-drawn Fal-
		         con, in his riding
		Of the rolling level underneath him steady air, and
		    striding
		High there, how he rung upon the rein of a wimpling wing
		In his ecstacy! then off, off forth on swing,
		    As a skate’s heel sweeps smooth on a bow-bend:
		         the hurl and gliding
		    Rebuffed the big wind. My heart in hiding
		Stirred for a bird,--the achieve of, the mastery of the
		         thing!
		
		Brute beauty and valour and act, oh, air, pride, plume, here
		   Buckle! AND the fire that breaks from thee then, a
		         billion
		Times told lovelier, more dangerous, O my chevalier!
		
		    No wonder of it: shéer plód makes plough down
		         sillion
		Shine, and blue-bleak embers, ah my dear,
		  Fall, gall themselves, and gash gold-vermillion.


	30. THE WOODLARK

		_TEEVO cheetio cheevio chee:_
		O where, what can thát be?
		_Weedio-weedio:_ there again!
		So tiny a trickle of sóng-strain;
		And all round not to be found
		For brier, bough, furrow, or gréen ground
		Before or behind or far or at hand
		Either left either right
		Anywhere in the súnlight.
		Well, after all! Ah but hark--
		‘I am the little woodlark.
		
		To-day the sky is two and two
		With white strokes and strains of the blue
		
		Round a ring, around a ring
		And while I sail (must listen) I sing
		
		The skylark is my cousin and he
		Is known to men more than me
		
		              . . . when the cry within
		Says Go on then I go on
		Till the longing is less and the good gone
		
		But down drop, if it says Stop,
		To the all-a-leaf of the tréetop
		And after that off the bough
		
		I ám so véry, O só very glad
		That I dó thínk there is not to be had . . .
		
		The blue wheat-acre is underneath
		And the braided ear breaks out of the sheath,
		The ear in milk, lush the sash,
		And crush-silk poppies aflash,
		The blood-gush blade-gash
		Flame-rash rudred
		Bud shelling or broad-shed
		Tatter-tassel-tangled and dingle-a-dangled
		Dandy-hung dainty head.
		
		And down ... the furrow dry
		Sunspurge and oxeye
		And laced-leaved lovely
		Foam-tuft fumitory
		
		Through the velvety wind V-winged
		To the nest’s nook I balance and buoy
		With a sweet joy of a sweet joy,
		Sweet, of a sweet, of a sweet joy
		Of a sweet--a sweet--sweet--joy.


	31. TO HIS WATCH

		MORTAL my mate, bearing my rock-a-heart
		Warm beat with cold beat company, shall I
		Earlier or you fail at our force, and lie
		The ruins of, rifled, once a world of art?
		The telling time our task is; time’s some part,
		Not all, but we were framed to fail and die--
		One spell and well that one. There, ah thereby
		Is comfort’s carol of all or woe’s worst smart.
		
		Field-flown the departed day no morning brings
		Saying ‘This was yours’ with her, but new one, worse.
		And then that last and shortest . . .


	32. TO WHAT SERVES MORTAL BEAUTY?

		To what serves mortal beauty dangerous; does set danc-
		ing blood the O-seal-that-so feature, flung prouder form
		Than Purcell tune lets tread to? See: it does this: keeps warm
		Men’s wits to the things that are; what good means--where a glance
		Master more may than gaze, gaze out of countenance.
		Those lovely lads once, wet-fresh windfalls of war’s storm,
		How then should Gregory, a father, have gleanèd else from swarm-
		ed Rome? But God to a nation dealt that day’s dear chance.
		  To man, that needs would worship block or barren stone,
		Our law says: Love what are love’s worthiest, were all known;
		World’s loveliest--men’s selves. Self flashes off frame and face.
		What do then? how meet beauty? Merely meet it; own,
		Home at heart, heaven’s sweet gift; then leave, let that alone.
		Yea, wish that though, wish all, God’s better beauty, grace.


	33. UNTITLED _10_

		THE furl of fresh-leaved dogrose down
		His cheeks the forth-and-flaunting sun
		Had swarthed about with lion-brown
		    Before the Spring was done.
		
		His locks like all a ravel-rope’s-end,
		  With hempen strands in spray--
		Fallow, foam-fallow, hanks--fall’n off their ranks,
		  Swung down at a disarray.
		
		Or like a juicy and jostling shock
		  Of bluebells sheaved in May
		Or wind-long fleeces on the flock
		  A day off shearing day.
		
		Then over his turnèd temples--here--
		  Was a rose, or, failing that,
		Rough-Robin or five-lipped campion clear
		  For a beauty-bow to his hat,
		And the sunlight sidled, like dewdrops, like dandled
		    diamonds
		Through the sieve of the straw of the plait.


	34. UNTITLED _1_

		As kingfishers catch fire, dragonflies dráw fláme;
		As tumbled over rim in roundy wells
		Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell’s
		Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;
		Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
		Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
		Selves--goes itself; _myself_ it speaks and spells,
		Crying _Whát I do is me: for that I came._
		
		Í say móre: the just man justices;
		Kéeps grace: thát keeps all his goings graces;
		Acts in God’s eye what in God’s eye he is--
		Chríst--for Christ plays in ten thousand places,
		Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his
		To the Father through the features of men’s faces.


	35. UNTITLED _2_

		No worst, there is none. Pitched past pitch of grief,
		More pangs will, schooled at forepangs, wilder wring.
		Comforter, where, where is your comforting?
		Mary, mother of us, where is your relief?
		My cries heave, herds-long; huddle in a main, a chief
		Woe, world-sorrow; on an age-old anvil wince and sing--
		Then lull, then leave off. Fury had shrieked ‘No ling-
		ering! Let me be fell: force I must be brief’.
		
		  O the mind, mind has mountains; cliffs of fall
		Frightful, sheer, no-man-fathomed. Hold them cheap
		May who ne’er hung there. Nor does long our small
		Durance deal with that steep or deep. Here! creep,
		Wretch, under a comfort serves in a whirlwind: all
		Life death does end and each day dies with sleep.


	36. UNTITLED _3_

		To seem the stranger lies my lot, my life
		Among strangèrs. Father and mother dear,
		Brothers and sisters are in Christ not near
		And he my peace my parting, sword and strife.
		  England, whose honour O all my heart woos, wife
		To my creating thought, would neither hear
		Me, were I pleading, plead nor do I: I wear-
		y of idle a being but by where wars are rife.
		
		  I am in Ireland now; now I am at a thírd
		Remove. Not but in all removes I can
		Kind love both give and get. Only what word
		Wisest my heart breeds dark heaven’s baffling ban
		Bars or hell’s spell thwarts. This to hoard unheard,
		Heard unheeded, leaves me a lonely began.


	37. UNTITLED _4_

		I WAKE and feel the fell of dark, not day.
		What hours, O what black hoürs we have spent
		This night! what sights you, heart, saw; ways you went!
		And more must, in yet longer light’s delay.
		    With witness I speak this. But where I say
		Hours I mean years, mean life. And my lament
		Is cries countless, cries like dead letters sent
		To dearest him that lives alas! away.
		
		I am gall, I am heartburn. God’s most deep decree
		Bitter would have me taste: my taste was me;
		Bones built in me, flesh filled, blood brimmed the curse.
		    Selfyeast of spirit a dull dough sours. I see
		The lost are like this, and their scourge to be
		As I am mine, their sweating selves; but worse.


	38. UNTITLED _5_

		PATIENCE, hard thing! the hard thing but to pray,
		But bid for, Patience is! Patience who asks
		Wants war, wants wounds; weary his times, his tasks;
		To do without, take tosses, and obey.
		  Rare patience roots in these, and, these away,
		Nowhere. Natural heart’s ivy, Patience masks
		Our ruins of wrecked past purpose. There she basks
		Purple eyes and seas of liquid leaves all day.
		
		  We hear our hearts grate on themselves: it kills
		To bruise them dearer. Yet the rebellious wills
		Of us we do bid God bend to him even so.
		  And where is he who more and more distils
		Delicious kindness?--He is patient. Patience fills
		His crisp combs, and that comes those ways we know.


	39. UNTITLED _6_

		MY own heart let me have more pity on; let
		Me live to my sad self hereafter kind,
		Charitable; not live this tormented mind
		With this tormented mind tormenting yet.
		  I cast for comfort I can no more get
		By groping round my comfortless, than blind
		Eyes in their dark can day or thirst can find
		Thirst’s all-in-all in all a world of wet.
		
		Soul, self; come, poor Jackself, I do advise
		You, jaded, let be; call off thoughts awhile
		Elsewhere; leave comfort root-room; let joy size
		At God knows when to God knows what; whose smile
		‘s not wrung, see you; unforeseen times rather--as skies
		Between pie mountains--lights a lovely mile.


	40. UNTITLED _7_

		HOPE holds to Christ the mind’s own mirror out
		To take His lovely likeness more and more.
		It will not well, so she would bring about
		An ever brighter burnish than before
		And turns to wash it from her welling eyes
		And breathes the blots off all with sighs on sighs.
		Her glass is blest but she as good as blind
		Holds till hand aches and wonders what is there;
		Her glass drinks light, she darkles down behind,
		All of her glorious gainings unaware.
		
		I told you that she turned her mirror dim
		Betweenwhiles, but she sees herself not Him.


	41. UNTITLED _9_

		THE times are nightfall, look, their light grows less;
		The times are winter, watch, a world undone:
		They waste, they wither worse; they as they run
		Or bring more or more blazon man’s distress.
		And I not help. Nor word now of success:
		All is from wreck, here, there, to rescue one--
		Work which to see scarce so much as begun
		Makes welcome death, does dear forgetfulness.
		
		Or what is else? There is your world within.
		There rid the dragons, root out there the sin.
		Your will is law in that small commonweal . . .


*** A. E. Housman (1859 - 1936)

	1. ALONG THE FIELD

		ALONG the field as we came by 
		A year ago, my love and I, 
		The aspen over stile and stone 
		Was talking to itself alone. 
		‘Oh who are these that kiss and pass? 
		A country lover and his lass; 
		Two lovers looking to be wed; 
		And time shall put them both to bed, 
		But she shall lie with earth above, 
		And he beside another love.’ 
		
		And sure enough beneath the tree 
		There walks another love with me, 
		And overhead the aspen heaves 
		Its rainy-sounding silver leaves; 
		And I spell nothing in their stir, 
		But now perhaps they speak to her, 
		And plain for her to understand 
		They talk about a time at hand 
		When I shall sleep with clover clad, 
		And she beside another lad.


	2. BE STILL, MY SOUL

		Be still, my soul, be still; the arms you bear are brittle, 
		Earth and high heaven are fixt of old and founded strong. 
		Think rather,-- call to thought, if now you grieve a little, 
		The days when we had rest, O soul, for they were long. 
		
		Men loved unkindness then, but lightless in the quarry 
		I slept and saw not; tears fell down, I did not mourn; 
		Sweat ran and blood sprang out and I was never sorry: 
		Then it was well with me, in days ere I was born. 
		
		Now, and I muse for why and never find the reason, 
		I pace the earth, and drink the air, and feel the sun. 
		Be still, be still, my soul; it is but for a season: 
		Let us endure an hour and see injustice done. 
		
		Ay, look: high heaven and earth ail from the prime foundation; 
		All thoughts to rive the heart are here, and all are vain: 
		Horror and scorn and hate and fear and indignation-- 
		Oh why did I awake? when shall I sleep again?


	3. HERE DEAD WE LIE

		Here dead we lie 
		Because we did not choose 
		To live and shame the land 
		From which we sprung. 
		
		Life, to be sure, 
		Is nothing much to lose, 
		But young men think it is, 
		And we were young.


	4. INTO MY HEART

		Into my heart an air that kills 
		From yon far country blows: 
		What are those blue remembered hills, 
		What spires, what farms are those? 
		
		That is the land of lost content, 
		I see it shining plain, 
		The happy highways where I went 
		And cannot come again.


*** Ted Hughes (1930 - 1998)

	1. GOD’S GRANDEUR

		The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
		It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
		It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
		Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
		Generations have trod, have trod, have trod;
		And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with toil;
		And wears man’s smudge and shares man’s smell: the soil
		Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.
		And for all this, nature is never spent;
		There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
		And though the last lights off the black West went
		Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs--
		Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
		World broods with warm breast and with ah! bright wings.


	2. OLD AGE GETS UP

		Stirs its ashes and embers, its burnt sticks
		
		An eye powdered over, half melted and solid again
		Ponders
		Ideas that collapse
		At the first touch of attention
		
		The light at the window, so square and so same
		So full-strong as ever, the window frame
		A scaffold in space, for eyes to lean on
		
		Supporting the body, shaped to its old work
		Making small movements in gray air
		Numbed from the blurred accident
		Of having lived, the fatal, real injury
		Under the amnesia
		
		Something tries to save itself-searches
		For defenses-but words evade
		Like flies with their own notions
		
		Old age slowly gets dressed
		Heavily dosed with death’s night
		Sits on the bed’s edge
		
		Pulls its pieces together
		Loosely tucks in its shirt


	3. SEPTEMBER

		We sit late, watching the dark slowly unfold:
		No clock counts this.
		When kisses are repeated and the arms hold
		There is no telling where time is.
		
		It is midsummer: the leaves hang big and still:
		Behind the eye a star,
		Under the silk of the wrist a sea, tell
		Time is nowhere.
		
		We stand; leaves have not timed the summer.
		No clock now needs
		Tell we have only what we remember:
		Minutes uproaring with our heads
		
		Like an unfortunate King’s and his Queen’s
		When the senseless mob rules;
		And quietly the trees casting their crowns
		Into the pools.


	4. THE THOUGHT-FOX

		I imagine this midnight moment’s forest:
		Something else is alive
		Beside the clock’s loneliness
		And this blank page where my fingers move.
		
		Through the window I see no star:
		Something more near
		Though deeper within darkness
		Is entering the loneliness:
		
		Cold, delicately as the dark snow,
		A fox’s nose touches twig, leaf;
		Two eyes serve a movement, that now
		And again now, and now, and now
		
		Sets neat prints into the snow
		Between trees, and warily a lame
		Shadow lags by stump and in hollow
		Of a body that is bold to come
		
		Across clearings, an eye,
		A widening deepening greenness,
		Brilliantly, concentratedly,
		Coming about its own business
		
		Till, with sudden sharp hot stink of fox
		It enters the dark hole of the head.
		The window is starless still; the clock ticks,
		The page is printed.


	5. WIND

		This house has been far out at sea all night,
		The woods crashing through darkness, the booming hills,
		Winds stampeding the fields under the window
		Floundering black astride and blinding wet
		
		Till day rose; then under an orange sky
		The hills had new places, and wind wielded
		Blade-light, luminous black and emerald,
		Flexing like the lens of a mad eye.
		
		At noon I scaled along the house-side as far as
		The coal-house door. Once I looked up --
		Through the brunt wind that dented the balls of my eyes
		The tent of the hills drummed and strained its guyrope,
		
		The fields quivering, the skyline a grimace,
		At any second to bang and vanish with a flap;
		The wind flung a magpie away and a black--
		Back gull bent like an iron bar slowly. The house
		
		Rang like some fine green goblet in the note
		That any second would shatter it. Now deep
		In chairs, in front of the great fire, we grip
		Our hearts and cannot entertain book, thought,
		
		Or each other. We watch the fire blazing,
		And feel the roots of the house move, but sit on,
		Seeing the window tremble to come in,
		Hearing the stones cry out under the horizons.


	6. WORK AND PLAY

		The swallow of summer, she toils all the summer,
		A blue-dark knot of glittering voltage,
		A whiplash swimmer, a fish of the air.
		But the serpent of cars that crawls through the dust
		In shimmering exhaust
		Searching to slake
		Its fever in ocean
		Will play and be idle or else it will bust.
		
		The swallow of summer, the barbed harpoon,
		She flings from the furnace, a rainbow of purples,
		Dips her glow in the pond and is perfect.
		But the serpent of cars that collapsed on the beach
		Disgorges its organs
		A scamper of colours
		Which roll like tomatoes
		Nude as tomatoes
		With sand in their creases
		To cringe in the sparkle of rollers and screech.
		
		The swallow of summer, the seamstress of summer,
		She scissors the blue into shapes and she sews it,
		She draws a long thread and she knots it at the corners.
		But the holiday people
		Are laid out like wounded
		Flat as in ovens
		Roasting and basting
		With faces of torment as space burns them blue
		Their heads are transistors
		Their teeth grit on sand grains
		Their lost kids are squalling
		While man-eating flies
		Jab electric shock needles but what can they do?
		
		They can climb in their cars with raw bodies, raw faces
		And start up the serpent
		And headache it homeward
		A car full of squabbles
		And sobbing and stickiness
		With sand in their crannies
		Inhaling petroleum
		That pours from the foxgloves
		While the evening swallow
		The swallow of summer, cartwheeling through crimson,
		Touches the honey-slow river and turning
		Returns to the hand stretched from under the eaves ---
		A boomerang of rejoicing shadow.


*** Victor Hugo (1802 - 1885)

	1. A SUNSET

		I love the evenings, passionless and fair, I love the evens,
		Whether old manor-fronts their ray with golden fulgence leavens,
		In numerous leafage bosomed close;
		Whether the mist in reefs of fire extend its reaches sheer,
		Or a hundred sunbeams splinter in an azure atmosphere
		On cloudy archipelagos.
		
		Oh, gaze ye on the firmament! a hundred clouds in motion,
		Up-piled in the immense sublime beneath the winds’ commotion,
		Their unimagined shapes accord:
		Under their waves at intervals flame a pale levin through,
		As if some giant of the air amid the vapors drew
		A sudden elemental sword.
		
		The sun at bay with splendid thrusts still keeps the sullen fold;
		And momently at distance sets, as a cupola of gold,
		The thatched roof of a cot a-glance;
		Or on the blurred horizon joins his battle with the haze;
		Or pools the blooming fields about with inter-isolate blaze,
		Great moveless meres of radiance.
		
		Then mark you how there hangs athwart the firmament’s swept track,
		Yonder a mighty crocodile with vast irradiant back,
		A triple row of pointed teeth?
		Under its burnished belly slips a ray of eventide,
		The flickerings of a hundred glowing clouds in tenebrous side
		With scales of golden mail ensheathe.
		
		Then mounts a palace, then the air vibrates--the vision flees.
		Confounded to its base, the fearful cloudy edifice
		Ruins immense in mounded wrack;
		Afar the fragments strew the sky, and each envermeiled cone
		Hangeth, peak downward, overhead, like mountains overthrown
		When the earthquake heaves its hugy back.
		
		These vapors, with their leaden, golden, iron, bronzèd glows,
		Where the hurricane, the waterspout, thunder, and hell repose,
		Muttering hoarse dreams of destined harms,--
		‘Tis God who hangs their multitude amid the skiey deep,
		As a warrior that suspendeth from the roof-tree of his keep
		His dreadful and resounding arms!
		
		All vanishes! The Sun, from topmost heaven precipitated,
		Like a globe of iron which is tossed back fiery red
		Into the furnace stirred to fume,
		Shocking the cloudy surges, plashed from its impetuous ire,
		Even to the zenith spattereth in a flecking scud of fire
		The vaporous and inflamèd spaume.
		
		O contemplate the heavens! Whenas the vein-drawn day dies pale,
		In every season, every place, gaze through their every veil?
		With love that has not speech for need!
		Beneath their solemn beauty is a mystery infinite:
		If winter hue them like a pall, or if the summer night
		Fantasy them starre brede.


	2. MORE STRONG THAN TIME

		Since I have set my lips to your full cup, my sweet,
		Since I my pallid face between your hands have laid,
		Since I have known your soul, and all the bloom of it,
		And all the perfume rare, now buried in the shade;
		
		Since it was given to me to hear on happy while,
		The words wherein your heart spoke all its mysteries,
		Since I have seen you weep, and since I have seen you smile,
		Your lips upon my lips, and your eyes upon my eyes;
		
		Since I have known above my forehead glance and gleam,
		A ray, a single ray, of your star, veiled always,
		Since I have felt the fall, upon my lifetime’s stream,
		Of one rose petal plucked from the roses of your days;
		
		I now am bold to say to the swift changing hours,
		Pass, pass upon your way, for I grow never old,
		Fleet to the dark abysm with all your fading flowers,
		One rose that none may pluck, within my heart I hold.
		
		Your flying wings may smite, but they can never spill
		The cup fulfilled of love, from which my lips are wet;
		My heart has far more fire than you can frost to chill,
		My soul more love than you can make my soul forget.


	3. THE GRAVE SAID TO THE ROSE

		The grave said to the rose:
		“With the tears that dawn sprinkles upon you
		What do you make, flower of love?”
		The rose said to the tomb:
		“What do you make of those who fall
		In your ever-open abyss?”
		
		The rose said, “sombre tomb,
		From these tears I make in the shade
		A fragrance of amber and of honey.”
		The tomb said, “wistful flower,
		From each soul that arrives to me
		I make an angel in heaven.”


*** Aldous Huxley (1894 - 1963)

	1. A LITTLE MEMORY

		White in the moonlight
		Wet with dew
		We have known the languor
		Of being two.
		
		We have been weary
		As children are
		When over them radiant
		A stooping star
		
		Bends their Good-Night
		Kissed and smiled:--
		Each was mother
		Each was child.
		
		Child from your forehead
		I kissed the hair
		Gently ah gently:
		And you were
		
		Mistress and mother
		When on your breast
		I lay so safely
		And could rest.


	2. ANNIVERSARIES

		Once more the windless days are here
		Quiet of autumn when the year
		Halts and looks backward and draws breath
		Before it plunges into death.
		Silver of mist and gossamers
		Through-shine of noonday’s glassy gold
		Pale blue of skies where nothing stirs
		Save one blanched leaf weary and old
		That over and over slowly falls
		From the mute elm-trees hanging on air
		Like tattered flags along the walls
		Of chapels deep in sunlit prayer.
		Once more.... Within its flawless glass
		To-day reflects that other day
		When under the bracken on the grass
		We who were lovers happily lay
		And hardly spoke or framed a thought
		That was not one with the calm hills
		And crystal sky. Ourselves were nought
		Our gusty passions our burning wills
		Dissolved in boundlessness and we
		Were almost bodiless almost free.
		The wind has shattered silver and gold;
		Night after night of sparkling cold
		Orion lifts his tangled feet
		From where the tossing branches beat
		In a fine surf against the sky.
		So the trance ended and we grew
		Restless we knew not how or why;
		And there were sudden gusts that blew
		Our dreaming banners into storm;
		We wore the uncertain crumbling form
		Of a brown swirl of windy leaves
		A phantom shape that stirs and heaves
		Shuddering from earth to fall again
		With a dry whisper of withered rain.
		
		Last from the dead and shrunken days
		We conjured spring lighting the blaze
		Of burnished tulips in the dark;
		And from black frost we struck a spark
		Of blue delight and fragrance new
		A little world of flowers and dew.
		Winter for us was over and done:
		The drought of fluttering leaves had grown
		Emerald shining in the sun
		As light as glass as firm as stone.
		Real once more: for we had passed
		Through passion into thought again;
		Shaped our desires and made that fast
		Which was before a cloudy pain;
		Moulded the dimness fixed defined
		In a fair statue strong and free
		Twin bodies flaming into mind
		Poised on the brink of ecstasy.


	3. BOOKS AND THOUGHTS

		Old ghosts that death forgot to ferry
		Across the Lethe of the years--
		These are my friends and at their tears
		I weep and with their mirth am merry.
		On a high tower whose battlements
		Give me all heaven at a glance
		I lie long summer nights in trance
		Drowsed by the murmurs and the scents
		That rise from earth while the sky above me
		Merges its peace with my soul’s peace
		Deep meeting deep. No stir can move me
		Nought break the quiet of my release:
		 In vain the windy sunlight raves
		 At the hush and gloom of polar caves.


	4. BY THE FIRE

		We who are lovers sit by the fire
		Cradled warm ’twixt thought and will
		Sit and drowse like sleeping dogs
		In the equipoise of all desire
		Sit and listen to the still
		Small hiss and whisper of green logs
		That burn away that burn away
		With the sound of a far-off falling stream
		Of threaded water blown to steam
		Grey ghost in the mountain world of grey.
		Vapours blue as distance rise
		Between the hissing logs that show
		A glimpse of rosy heat below;
		And candles watch with tireless eyes
		While we sit drowsing here. I know
		Dimly that there exists a world
		That there is time perhaps and space
		Other and wider than this place
		Where at the fireside drowsily curled
		We hear the whisper and watch the flame
		Burn blinkless and inscrutable.
		And then I know those other names
		That through my brain from cell to cell
		Echo--reverberated shout
		Of waiters mournful along corridors:
		But nobody carries the orders out
		And the names (dear friends your name and yours)
		Evoke no sign. But here I sit
		On the wide hearth and there are you:
		That is enough and only true.
		The world and the friends that lived in it
		Are shadows: you alone remain
		Real in this drowsing room
		Full of the whispers of distant rain
		And candles staring into the gloom.


	5. ITALY

		There is a country in my mind
		Lovelier than a poet blind
		Could dream of who had never known
		This world of drought and dust and stone
		In all its ugliness: a place
		Full of an all but human grace;
		Whose dells retain the printed form
		Of heavenly sleep and seem yet warm
		From some pure body newly risen;
		Where matter is no more a prison
		But freedom for the soul to know
		Its native beauty. For things glow
		There with an inward truth and are
		All fire and colour like a star.
		And in that land are domes and towers
		That hang as light and bright as flowers
		Upon the sky and seem a birth
		Rather of air than solid earth.
		
		Sometimes I dream that walking there
		In the green shade all unaware
		At a new turn of the golden glade
		I shall see her and as though afraid
		Shall halt a moment and almost fall
		For passing faintness like a man
		Who feels the sudden spirit of Pan
		Brimming his narrow soul with all
		The illimitable world. And she
		Turning her head will let me see
		The first sharp dawn of her surprise
		Turning to welcome in her eyes.
		And I shall come and take my lover
		And looking on her re-discover
		All her beauty:--her dark hair
		And the little ears beneath it where
		Roses of lucid shadow sleep;
		Her brooding mouth and in the deep
		Wells of her eyes reflected stars.
		
		Oh the imperishable things
		That hands and lips as well as words
		Shall speak! Oh movement of white wings
		Oh wheeling galaxies of birds!


	6. MOLE

		Tunnelled in solid blackness creeps
		The old mole-soul and wakes or sleeps
		He knows not which but tunnels on
		Through ages of oblivion;
		Until at last the long constraint
		Of each hand-wall is lost and faint
		Comes daylight creeping from afar
		And mole-work grows crepuscular.
		Tunnel meets air and bursts; mole sees
		Men as strange as walking trees?
		And far horizons smoking blue
		And chasing clouds for ever new;
		Green hills like lighted lamps aglow
		Or quenched beneath the cloud-shadow;
		Quenching and blazing turn by turn
		Spring’s great green signals fitfully burn.
		Mole travels on but finds the steering
		A harder task of pioneering
		Than when he thridded through the strait
		Blind catacombs that ancient fate
		Had carved for him. Stupid and dumb
		And blind and touchless he had come
		A way without a turn; but here
		Under the sky the passenger
		Chooses his own best way; and mole
		Distracted wanders yet his hole
		Regrets not much wherein he crept
		But runs a joyous nympholept
		This way and that by all made mad--
		River nymph and oread
		Ocean’s daughters and Lorelei
		Combing the silken mystery
		The glaucous gold of her rivery tresses--
		Each haunts the traveller each possesses
		The drunken wavering soul awhile;
		Then with a phantom’s cock-crow smile
		Mocks craving with sheer vanishment.
		 Mole-eyes grow hawk’s: knowledge is lent
		In grudging driblets that pay high
		Unconscionable usury.
		To unrelenting life. Mole learns
		To travel more secure; the turns
		Of his long way less puzzling seem
		And all those magic forms that gleam
		In airy invitation cheat
		Less often than they did of old.
		 The earth slopes upward fold by fold
		Of quiet hills that meet the gold
		Serenity of western skies.
		Over the world’s edge with clear eyes
		Our mole transcendent sees his way
		Tunnelled in light: he must obey
		Necessity again and thrid
		Close catacombs as erst he did
		Fate’s tunnellings himself must bore
		Through the sunset’s inmost core.
		The guiding walls to each-hand shine
		Luminous and crystalline;
		And mole shall tunnel on and on
		Till night let fall oblivion.


	7. OUT OF THE WINDOW

		In the middle of countries far from hills and sea
		Are the little places one passes by in trains
		And never stops at; where the skies extend
		Uninterrupted and the level plains
		Stretch green and yellow and green without an end.
		And behind the glass of their Grand Express
		Folk yawn away a province through
		With nothing to think of nothing to do
		Nothing even to look at--never a “view”
		In this damned wilderness.
		But I look out of the window and find
		Much to satisfy the mind.
		Mark how the furrows formed and wheeled
		In a motion orderly and staid
		Sweep as we pass across the field
		Like a drilled army on parade.
		And here’s a market-garden barred
		With stripe on stripe of varied greens....
		Bright potatoes flower starred
		And the opacous colour of beans.
		Each line deliberately swings
		Towards me till I see a straight
		Green avenue to the heart of things
		The glimpse of a sudden opened gate
		Piercing the adverse walls of fate....
		A moment only and then fast fast
		The gate swings to the avenue closes;
		Fate laughs and once more interposes
		Its barriers.
		             The train has passed.


	8. PERILS OF THE SMALL HOURS

		When life burns low as the fire in the grate
		And all the evening’s books are read
		I sit alone save for the dead
		And the lovers I have grown to hate.
		
		But all at once the narrow gloom
		Of hatred and despair expands
		In tenderness: thought stretches hands
		To welcome to the midnight room
		
		Another presence:--a memory
		Of how last year in the sunlit field
		Laughing you suddenly revealed
		Beauty in immortality.
		
		For so it is; a gesture strips
		Life bare of all its make-believe.
		All unprepared we may receive
		Our casual apocalypse.
		
		Sheer beauty then you seemed to stir
		Unbodied soul; soul sleeps to night
		And love comes dimming spirit’s sight
		When body plays interpreter.


	9. PHILOCLEA IN THE FOREST

		I
		
		’Twas I that leaned to Amoret
		With: “What if the briars have tangled Time
		Till lost in the wood-ways he quite forget
		How plaintive in cities at midnight sounds the chime
		Of bells slow-dying from discord to the hush whence they rose and met?
		
		“And in the forest we shall live free
		Free from the bondage that Time has made
		To hedge our soul from its liberty;
		We shall not fear what is mighty and unafraid
		Shall look wide-eyed at beauty nor shrink from its majesty.”
		
		But Amoret answered me again:
		“We are lost in the forest you and I;
		Lost lost not free though no bonds restrain;
		For no spire rises for comfort no landmark in the sky
		And the long glades as they curve from sight are dark with a nameless pain.
		
		And Time creates what he devours--
		Music that sweetly dreams itself away
		Frail-swung leaves of autumn and the scent of flowers
		And the beauty of that poised moment when the day
		Hangs ’twixt the quiet of darkness and the mirth of the sunlit hours.”
		
		
		II
		
		Mottled and grey and brown they pass
		The wood-moths wheeling fluttering;
		And we chase and they vanish; and in the grass
		Are starry flowers and the birds sing
		Faint broken songs of the dying spring.
		 And on the beech-hole smooth and grey
		 Some lover of an older day
		Has carved in time-blurred lettering
		   One world only:--“Alas.”
		
		
		III
		
		Lutes I forbid you! You must never play
		 When shimmeringly glimpse by glimpse
		Seen through the leaves the silken figures sway
		In measured dance. Never at shut of day
		 When Time perversely loitering limps
		 Through endless twilights should your strings
		 Whisper of light remembered things
		That happened long ago and far away:
		Lutes I forbid you! You must never play....
		
		And you pale marble statues far descried
		 Where vistas open suddenly
		I bid you shew yourselves no more but hide
		Your loveliness lest too much glorified
		 By western radiance slantingly
		 Shot down the glade you turn from stone
		 To living gods immortal grown
		And ageless mock my beauty’s fleeting pride
		You pale relentless statues far descried....


	10. PHILOSOPHY

		“God needs no christening”
		 Pantheist mutters
		 “Love opens shutters
		On heaven’s glistening
		Flesh key-hole listening
		 Hear what God utters”....
		 Yes but God stutters.


	11. POEM

		Books and a coloured skein of thoughts were mine;
		And magic words lay ripening in my soul
		Till their much-whispered music turned a wine
		Whose subtlest power was all in my control.
		
		These things were mine and they were real for me
		As lips and darling eyes and a warm breast:
		For I could love a phrase a melody
		Like a fair woman worshipped and possessed.
		
		I scorned all fire that outward of the eyes
		Could kindle passion; scorned yet was afraid;
		Feared and yet envied those more deeply wise
		Who saw the bright earth beckon and obeyed.
		
		But a time came when turning full of hate
		And weariness from my remembered themes
		I wished my poet’s pipe could modulate
		Beauty more palpable than words and dreams.
		
		All loveliness with which an act informs
		The dim uncertain chaos of desire
		Is mine to day; it touches me it warms
		Body and spirit with its outward fire.
		
		I am mine no more: I have become a part
		Of that great earth that draws a breath and stirs
		To meet the spring. But I could wish my heart
		Were still a winter of frosty gossamers.


	12. RETURN TO AN OLD HOME

		In this wood--how the hazels have grown!--
		I left a treasure all my own
		Of childish kisses and laughter and pain;
		Left till I might come back again
		To take from the familiar earth
		My hoarded secret and count its worth.
		And all the spider-work of the years
		All the time-spun gossamers
		Dewed with each succeeding spring;
		And the piled up leaves the Autumns fling
		To the sweet corruption of death on death....
		At the sudden stir of my spirit’s breath
		All scattered. New and fair and bright
		As ever it was before my sight
		The treasure lay and nothing missed.
		So having handled all and kissed
		I put them back adding one new
		And precious memory of you.


	13. SCENES OF THE MIND

		I have run where festival was loud
		With drum and brass among the crowd
		Of panic revellers whose cries
		Affront the quiet of the skies;
		Whose dancing lights contract the deep
		Infinity of night and sleep
		To a narrow turmoil of troubled fire.
		And I have found my heart’s desire
		In beechen caverns that autumn fills
		With the blue shadowiness of distant hills;
		Whose luminous grey pillars bear
		The stooping sky: calm is the air
		Nor any sound is heard to mar
		That crystal silence--as from far
		Far off a man may see
		The busy world all utterly
		Hushed as an old memorial scene.
		Long evenings I have sat and been
		Strangely content while in my hands
		I held a wealth of coloured strands
		Shimmering plaits of silk and skeins
		Of soft bright wool. Each colour drains
		New life at the lamp’s round pool of gold;
		Each sinks again when I withhold
		The quickening radiance to a wan
		And shadowy oblivion
		Of what it was. And in my mind
		Beauty or sudden love has shined
		And wakened colour in what was dead
		And turned to gold the sullen lead
		Of mean desires and everyday’s
		Poor thoughts and customary ways.
		Sometimes in lands where mountains throw
		Their silent spell on all below
		Drawing a magic circle wide
		About their feet on every side
		Robbed of all speech and thought and act
		I have seen God in the cataract.
		In falling water and in flame
		Never at rest yet still the same
		God shows himself. And I have known
		The swift fire frozen into stone
		And water frozen changelessly
		Into the death of gems. And I
		Long sitting by the thunderous mill
		Have seen the headlong wheel made still
		And in the silence that ensued
		Have known the endless solitude
		Of being dead and utterly nought.
		Inhabitant of mine own thought
		I look abroad and all I see
		Is my creation made for me:
		Along my thread of life are pearled
		The moments that make up the world.


	14. SONG OF POPLARS

		Shepherd to yon tall poplars tune your flute:
		Let them pierce keenly subtly shrill
		The slow blue rumour of the hill;
		Let the grass cry with an anguish of evening gold
		And the great sky be mute.
		
		Then hearken how the poplar trees unfold
		Their buds yet close and gummed and blind
		In airy leafage of the mind
		Rustling in silvery whispers the twin-hued scales
		That fade not nor grow old.
		
		“Poplars and fountains and you cypress spires
		Springing in dark and rusty flame
		Seek you aught that hath a name?
		Or say say: Are you all an upward agony
		Of undefined desires?
		
		“Say are you happy in the golden march
		Of sunlight all across the day?
		Or do you watch the uncertain way
		That leads the withering moon on cloudy stairs
		Over the heaven’s wide arch?
		
		“Is it towards sorrow or towards joy you lift
		The sharpness of your trembling spears?
		Or do you seek through the grey tears
		That blur the sky in the heart of the triumphing blue
		A deeper calmer rift?”
		
		So; I have tuned my music to the trees
		And there were voices dim below
		Their shrillness voices swelling slow
		In the blue murmur of hills and a golden cry
		And then vast silences.


	15. STANZAS

		Thought is an unseen net wherein our mind
		Is taken and vainly struggles to be free:
		Words that should loose our spirit do but bind
		New fetters on our hoped-for liberty:
		And action bears us onward like a stream
		Past fabulous shores scarce seen in our swift course;
		Glorious--and yet its headlong currents seem
		But backwaters of some diviner force.
		
		There are slow curves more subtle far than thought
		That stoop to carry the grace of a girl’s breast;
		And hanging flowers so exquisitely wrought
		In airy metal that they seem possessed
		Of souls; and there are distant hills that lift
		The shoulder of a god towards the light;
		And arrowy trees sudden and sharp and swift
		Piercing the spirit deeply with delight.
		
		Would I might make these miracles my own!
		Like a pure angel thinking colour and form;
		Hardening to rage in a flame of chiselled stone;
		Spilling my love like sunlight golden and warm
		On noonday flowers; speaking the song of birds
		Among the branches; whispering the fall of rain;
		Beyond all thought past action and past words
		I would live in beauty free from self and pain.


	16. SUMMER STILLNESS

		The stars are golden instants in the deep
		Flawless expanse of night: the moon is set:
		The river sleeps entranced a smooth cool sleep
		Seeming so motionless that I forget
		The hollow booming bridges where it slides
		Dark with the sad looks that it bears along
		Towards a sea whose unreturning tides
		Ravish the sighted ships and the sailors’ song.


	17. THE ELMS

		Fine as the dust of plumy fountains blowing
		Across the lanterns of a revelling night
		The tiny leaves of April’s earliest growing
		Powder the trees--so vaporously light
		They seem to float billows of emerald foam
		Blown by the South on its bright airy tide
		Seeming less trees than things beatified
		Come from the world of thought which was their home.
		
		For a while only. Rooted strong and fast
		Soon will they lift towards the summer sky
		Their mountain-mass of clotted greenery.
		Their immaterial season quickly past
		They grow opaque and therefore needs must die
		Since every earth to earth returns at last.


	18. THE FLOWERS

		Day after day
		At spring’s return
		I watch my flowers how they burn
		Their lives away.
		
		The candle crocus
		And daffodil gold
		Drink fire of the sunshine--
		Quickly cold.
		
		And the proud tulip--
		How red he glows!--
		Is quenched ere summer
		Can kindle the rose.
		
		Purple as the innermost
		Core of a sinking flame
		Deep in the leaves the violets smoulder
		To the dust whence they came.
		
		Day after day
		At spring’s return
		I watch my flowers how they burn
		Their lives away
		Day after day....


	19. THE HIGHER SENSUALISM

		There’s a church by a lake in Italy
		Stands white on a hill against the sky;
		And a path of immemorial cobbles
		Leads up and up where the pilgrim hobbles
		Past a score or so of neat reposories
		Where you stop and breathe and tell your rosaries
		To the shrined terra-cotta mannikins
		That expound with the liveliest quirks and grins
		Known texts of Scripture. But no long stay
		Should the pilgrim make upon his way;
		But as means to the end these shrines stand here
		To guide to something holier
		The church on the hill top.
		
		                            Your heaven’s so
		With a path leading up to it past a row
		Of votary Priapulids;
		At each you pause and tell your beads
		Along the quintuple strings of sense:
		Then on to face Heaven’s eminence
		New stimulated new inspired.


	20. THE MIRROR

		Slow-moving moonlight once did pass
		Across the dreaming looking-glass
		Where sunk inviolably deep
		Old secrets unforgotten sleep
		Of beauties unforgettable.
		But dusty cobwebs are woven now
		Across that mirror which of old
		Saw fingers drawing back the gold
		From an untroubled brow;
		And the depths are blinded to the moon
		And their secrets forgotten for ever untold.


	21. THE REEF

		My green aquarium of phantom fish
		Goggling in on me through the misty panes;
		My rotting leaves and fields spongy with rains;
		My few clear quiet autumn days--I wish
		
		I could leave all clearness and mistiness;
		Sodden or goldenly crystal all too still.
		Yes and I too rot with the leaves that fill
		The hollows in the woods; I am grown less
		
		Than human listless aimless as the green
		Idiot fishes of my aquarium
		Who loiter down their dim tunnels and come
		And look at me and drift away nought seen
		
		Or understood but only glazedly
		Reflected. Upwards upwards through the shadows
		Through the lush sponginess of deep-sea meadows
		Where hare-lipped monsters batten let me ply
		
		Winged fins bursting this matrix dark to find
		Jewels and movement mintage of sunlight
		Scattered largely by the profuse wind
		And gulfs of blue brightness too deep for sight.
		
		Free newly born on roads of music and air
		Speeding and singing I shall seek the place
		Where all the shining threads of water race
		Drawn in green ropes and foamy meshes. There
		
		On the red fretted ramparts of a tower
		Of coral rooted in the depths shall break
		An endless sequence of joy and speed and power:
		Green shall shatter to foam; flake with white flake
		
		Shall create an instant’s shining constellation
		Upon the blue; and all the air shall be
		Full of a million wings that swift and free
		Laugh in the sun all power and strong elation.
		
		Yes I shall seek that reef which is beyond
		All isles however magically sleeping
		In tideless seas uncharted and unconned
		Save by blind eyes: beyond the laughter and weeping
		
		That brood like a cloud over the lands of men.
		Movement passion of colour and pure wings
		Curving to cut like knives--these are the things
		I search for:--passion beyond the ken
		Of our foiled violences and more swift
		Than any blow which man aims against time
		The invulnerable motion that shall rift
		All dimness with the lightning of a rhyme
		
		Or note or colour. And the body shall be
		Quick as the mind; and will shall find release
		From bondage to brute things; and joyously
		Soul will and body in the strength of triune peace
		
		Shall live the perfect grace of power unwasted.
		And love consummate marvellously blending
		Passion and reverence in a single spring
		Of quickening force till now never yet tasted
		
		But ever ceaselessly thirsted for shall crown
		The new life with its ageless starry fire.
		I go to seek that reef far down far down
		Below the edge of everyday’s desire
		
		Beyond the magical islands where of old
		I was content dreaming to give the lie
		To misery. They were all strong and bold
		That thither came; and shall I dare to try?


	22. TWO REALITIES

		A waggon passed with scarlet wheels
		 And a yellow body shining new.
		“Splendid!” said I. “How fine it feels
		To be alive when beauty peels
		 The grimy husk from life.” And you
		
		Said “Splendid!” and I thought you’d seen
		 That waggon blazing down the street;
		But I looked and saw that your gaze had been
		On a child that was kicking an obscene
		 Brown ordure with his feet.
		
		Our souls are elephants thought I
		 Remote behind a prisoning grill
		With trunks thrust out to peer and pry
		And pounce upon reality;
		 And each at his own sweet will
		
		Seizes the bun that he likes best
		And passes over all the rest.


	23. VALEDICTORY

		I had remarked--how sharply one observes
		When life is disappearing round the curves
		Of yet another corner out of sight!--
		I had remarked when it was “good luck” and “good night”
		And “a good journey to you” on her face
		Certain enigmas penned in the hieroglyphs
		Of that half frown and queer fixed smile and trace
		Of clouded thought in those brown eyes
		Always so happily clear of hows and ifs--
		My poor bleared mind!--and haunting whys.
		
		There I stood holding her farewell hand
		(Pressing my life and soul and all
		The world to one good-bye till small
		And smaller pressed why there I’d stand
		Dead when they vanished with the sight of her).
		And I saw that she had grown aware
		Queer puzzled face! of other things
		Beyond the present and her own young speed
		Of yesterday and what new days might breed
		Monstrously when the future brings
		A charger with your late-lamented head:
		Aware of other people’s lives and will
		Aware perhaps aware even of me....
		The joyous hope of it! But still
		I pitied her; for it was sad to see
		A goddess shorn of her divinity.
		In the midst of her speed she had made pause
		And doubts with all their threat of claws
		Outstripped till now by her unconsciousness
		Had seized on her; she was proved mortal now.
		“Live only live? For you were meant
		Never to know a thought’s distress
		But a long glad astonishment
		At the world’s beauty and your own.
		The pity of you goddess grown
		Perplexed and mortal!”
		                       Yet ... yet ... can it be
		That she is aware perhaps even of me?
		
		And life recedes recedes; the curve is bare
		My handkerchief flutters blankly in the air;
		And the question rumbles in the void:
		Was she aware was she after all aware?


	24. WAKING

		Darkness had stretched its colour
		Deep blue across the pane:
		No cloud to make night duller
		No moon with its tarnish stain;
		But only here and there a star
		One sharp point of frosty fire
		Hanging infinitely far
		In mockery of our life and death
		And all our small desire.
		
		Now in this hour of waking
		From under brows of stone
		A new pale day is breaking
		And the deep night is gone.
		Sordid now and mean and small
		The daylight world is seen again
		With only the veils of mist that fall
		Deaf and muffling over all
		To hide its ugliness and pain.
		
		But to-day this dawn of meanness
		Shines in my eyes as when
		The new world’s brightness and cleanness
		Broke on the first of men.
		For the light that shows the huddled things
		Of this close-pressing earth
		Shines also on your face and brings
		All its dear beauty back to me
		In a new miracle of birth.
		
		I see you asleep and unpassioned
		White-faced in the dusk of your hair--
		Your beauty so fleetingly fashioned
		That it filled me once with despair
		To look on its exquisite transience
		And think that our love and thought and laughter
		Puff out with the death of our flickering sense
		While we pass ever on and away
		Towards some blank hereafter.
		
		But now I am happy knowing
		That swift time is our friend
		And that our love’s passionate glowing
		Though it turn ash in the end
		Is a rose of fire that must blossom its way
		Through temporal stuff nor else could be
		More than a nothing. Into day
		The boundless spaces of night contract
		And in your opening eyes I see
		Night born in day in time eternity.


*** Randall Jarrell (1914 - 1965)

	1. 90 NORTH

		At home, in my flannel gown, like a bear to its floe,
		I clambered to bed; up the globe’s impossible sides
		I sailed all night—till at last, with my black beard,
		My furs and my dogs, I stood at the northern pole.
		
		There in the childish night my companions lay frozen,
		The stiff furs knocked at my starveling throat,
		And I gave my great sigh: the flakes came huddling,
		Were they really my end? In the darkness I turned to my rest.
		
		--Here, the flag snaps in the glare and silence
		Of the unbroken ice. I stand here,
		The dogs bark, my beard is black, and I stare
		At the North Pole . . .
		                                       And now what? Why, go back.
		
		Turn as I please, my step is to the south.
		The world--my world spins on this final point
		Of cold and wretchedness: all lines, all winds
		End in this whirlpool I at last discover.
		
		And it is meaningless. In the child’s bed
		After the night’s voyage, in that warm world
		Where people work and suffer for the end
		That crowns the pain--in that Cloud-Cuckoo-Land
		
		I reached my North and it had meaning.
		Here at the actual pole of my existence,
		Where all that I have done is meaningless,
		Where I die or live by accident alone--
		
		Where, living or dying, I am still alone;
		Here where North, the night, the berg of death
		Crowd me out of the ignorant darkness,
		I see at last that all the knowledge
		
		I wrung from the darkness--that the darkness flung me--
		Is worthless as ignorance: nothing comes from nothing,
		The darkness from the darkness. Pain comes from the darkness 
		And we call it wisdom. It is pain.


	2. A MAN MEETS A WOMAN IN THE STREET

		Under the separated leaves of shade
		Of the gingko, that old tree
		That has existed essentially unchanged
		Longer than any other living tree,
		I walk behind a woman. Her hair’s coarse gold
		Is spun from the sunlight that it rides upon.
		Women were paid to knit from sweet champagne
		Her second skin: it winds and unwinds, winds
		Up her long legs, delectable haunches,
		As she sways, in sunlight, up the gazing aisle.
		The shade of the tree that is called maidenhair,
		That is not positively known
		To exist in a wild state, spots her fair or almost fair
		Hair twisted in a French twist; tall or almost tall,
		She walks through the air the rain has washed, a clear thing
		Moving easily on its high heels, seeming to men
		Miraculous . . . Since I can call her, as Swann couldn’t
		A woman who is my type, I follow with the warmth
		Of familiarity, of novelty, this new
		Example of the type,
		Reminded of how Lorenz’s just-hatched goslings
		Shook off the last remnants of the egg
		And, looking at Lorenz, realized that Lorenz
		Was their mother. Quaking, his little family
		Followed him everywhere; and when they met a goose,
		Their mother, they ran to him afraid.
		
		Imprinted upon me
		Is the shape I run to, the sweet strange
		Breath-taking contours that breathe to me: “I am yours,   
		Be mine!”
		            Following this new
		Body, somehow familiar, this young shape, somehow old,
		For a moment I’m younger, the century is younger.
		The living Strauss, his moustache just getting gray,
		Is shouting to the players: “Louder!
		Louder! I can still hear Madame Schumann-Heink--”
		Or else, white, bald, the old man’s joyfully
		Telling conductors they must play _Elektra_
		Like _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_--like a fairy music;
		Proust, dying, is swallowing his iced beer
		And changing in proof the death of Bergotte
		According to his own experience; Garbo,
		A commissar in Paris, is listening attentively
		To the voice telling how McGillicuddy me McGillivray,
		And McGillivray said to McGillicuddy--no, McGillicuddy
		Said to McGillivray-that is, McGillivray . . . Garbo
		Says seriously: “I vish dey’d never met.”
		
		As I walk behind this woman I remember
		That before I flew here--waked in the forest
		At dawn, by the piece called _Birds Beginning Day_
		That, each day, birds play to begin the day--
		I wished as men wish: “May this day be different!”
		The birds were wishing, as birds wish-over and over,
		With a last firmness, intensity, reality--
		“May this day be the same!”
		                                       Ah, turn to me
		And look into my eyes, say: “I am yours,
		Be mine!”
		            My wish will have come true. And yet
		When your eyes meet my eyes, they’ll bring into
		The weightlessness of my pure wish the weight
		Of a human being: someone to help or hurt,
		Someone to be good to me, to be good to,
		Someone to cry when I am angry
		that she doesn’t like _Elektra_, someone to start on Proust with.
		A wish, come true, is life. I have my life.
		When you turn just slide your eyes across my eyes
		And show in a look flickering across your face
		As lightly as a leaf’s shade, a bird’s wing,
		That there is no one in the world quite like me,
		That if only . . . If only . . .
		                                   That will be enough.
		
		But I’ve pretended long enough: I walk faster
		And come close, touch with the tip of my finger
		The nape of her neck, just where the gold
		Hair stops, and the champagne-colored dress begins.
		My finger touches her as the gingko’s shadow
		Touches her.   
		               Because, after all, it is my wife
		In a new dress from Bergdorf’s, walking toward the park.
		She cries out, we kiss each other, and walk arm in arm
		Through the sunlight that’s much too good for New York,
		The sunlight of our own house in the forest.
		Still, though, the poor things need it . . . We’ve no need
		To start out on Proust, to ask each other about Strauss.
		We first helped each other, hurt each other, years ago.
		After so many changes made and joys repeated,
		Our first bewildered, transcending recognition
		Is pure acceptance.   We can’t tell our life
		From our wish. Really I began the day
		Not with a man’s wish: “May this day be different,”
		But with the birds’ wish: “May this day
		Be the same day, the day of my life.”


	3. NEXT DAY

		Moving from Cheer to Joy, from Joy to All,
		I take a box
		And add it to my wild rice, my Cornish game hens.
		The slacked or shorted, basketed, identical
		Food-gathering flocks
		Are selves I overlook. Wisdom, said William James,
		
		Is learning what to overlook. And I am wise
		If that is wisdom.
		Yet somehow, as I buy All from these shelves
		And the boy takes it to my station wagon,
		What I’ve become
		Troubles me even if I shut my eyes.
		
		When I was young and miserable and pretty
		And poor, I’d wish
		What all girls wish: to have a husband,
		A house and children. Now that I’m old, my wish
		Is womanish:
		That the boy putting groceries in my car
		
		See me. It bewilders me he doesn’t see me.
		For so many years
		I was good enough to eat: the world looked at me
		And its mouth watered. How often they have undressed me,
		The eyes of strangers!
		And, holding their flesh within my flesh, their vile
		
		Imaginings within my imagining,
		I too have taken
		The chance of life. Now the boy pats my dog
		And we start home. Now I am good.
		The last mistaken,
		Ecstatic, accidental bliss, the blind
		
		Happiness that, bursting, leaves upon the palm
		Some soap and water--
		It was so long ago, back in some Gay
		Twenties, Nineties, I don’t know . . . Today I miss
		My lovely daughter
		Away at school, my sons away at school,
		
		My husband away at work--I wish for them.
		The dog, the maid,
		And I go through the sure unvarying days
		At home in them. As I look at my life,
		I am afraid
		Only that it will change, as I am changing:
		
		I am afraid, this morning, of my face.
		It looks at me
		From the rear-view mirror, with the eyes I hate,
		The smile I hate. Its plain, lined look
		Of gray discovery
		Repeats to me: “You’re old.” That’s all, I’m old.
		
		And yet I’m afraid, as I was at the funeral
		I went to yesterday.
		My friend’s cold made-up face, granite among its flowers,
		Her undressed, operated-on, dressed body
		Were my face and body.
		As I think of her and I hear her telling me
		
		How young I seem; I am exceptional;
		I think of all I have.
		But really no one is exceptional,
		No one has anything, I’m anybody,
		I stand beside my grave
		Confused with my life, that is commonplace and solitary.


	4. THE DEATH OF THE BALL TURRETT GUNNER

		From my mother’s sleep I fell into the State,
		And I hunched in its belly till my wet fur froze.
		Six miles from earth, loosed from its dream of life,
		I woke to black flak and the nightmare fighters.
		When I died they washed me out of the turret with a hose.


	5. THE LOST WORLD

		I. _Children’s Arms_
		
		On my way home I pass a cameraman
		On a platform on the bumper of a car
		Inside which, rolling and plunging, a comedian
		Is working; on one white lot I see a star
		Stumble to her igloo through the howling gale
		Of the wind machines. On Melrose a dinosaur
		And pterodactyl, with their immense pale
		Papier-mâché smiles, look over the fence
		Of The Lost World.
		                                  Whispering to myself the tale
		These shout--done with my schoolwork, I commence
		My real life: my arsenal, my workshop
		Opens, and in impotent omnipotence
		I put on the helmet and the breastplate Pop
		Cut out and soldered for me. Here is the shield
		I sawed from beaver board and painted; here on top
		The bow that only Odysseus can wield
		And eleven vermilion-ringed, goose-feathered arrows.
		(The twelfth was broken on the battlefield
		When, searching among snap beans and potatoes,
		I stepped on it.) Some dry weeds, a dead cane
		Are my spears. The knife on the bureau’s
		My throwing-knife; the small unpainted biplane
		Without wheels--that so often, helped by human hands,
		Has taken off from, landed on, the counterpane--
		Is my Spad.
		                     O dead list, that misunderstands
		And laughs at and lies about the new live wild
		Loves it lists! that sets upright, in the sands
		Of age in which nothing grows, where all our friends are old,
		A few dried leaves marked THIS IS THE GREENWOOD--
		O arms that arm, for a child’s wars, the child!
		
		And yet they are good, if anything is good,
		Against his enemies . . . Across the seas
		At the bottom of the world, where Childhood
		Sits on its desert island with Achilles
		And Pitamakan, the White Blackfoot:
		In the black auditorium, my heart at ease,
		I watch the furred castaways (the seniors put
		A play on every spring) tame their wild beasts,
		Erect their tree house. Chatting over their fruit,
		Their coconuts, they relish their stately feasts.
		The family’s servant, their magnanimous
		Master now, rules them by right. Nature’s priests,
		They worship at Nature’s altar; when with decorous
		Affection the Admirable Crichton
		Kisses a girl like a big Wendy, all of us
		Squirm or sit up in our seats . . . Undone
		When an English sail is sighted, the prisoners
		Escape from their Eden to the world: the real one
		Where servants are servants, masters masters,
		And no one’s magnanimous. The lights go on
		And we go off, robbed of our fruit, our furs--
		The island that the children ran is gone.
		
		The island sang to me: Believe! Believe!
		And didn’t I know a lady with a lion?
		Each evening, as the sun sank, didn’t I grieve
		To leave my tree house for reality?
		There was nothing there for me to disbelieve.
		At peace among my weapons, I sit in my tree
		And feel: Friday night, then Saturday, then Sunday!
		
		I’m dreaming of a wolf, as Mama wakes me,
		And a tall girl who is–outside it’s gray,    
		I can’t remember, I jump up and dress.
		We eat in the lighted kitchen. And what is play
		For me, for them is habit. Happiness
		Is a quiet presence, breathless and familiar:
		My grandfather and I sit there in oneness
		As the Sunset bus, lit by the lavender
		And rose of sunrise, takes us to the dark
		Echoing cavern where Pop, a worker,
		Works for our living. As he rules a mark,
		A short square pencil in his short square hand,
		On a great sheet of copper, I make some remark
		He doesn’t hear. In that hard maze--in that land
		That grown men live in--in the world of work,
		He measures, shears, solders; and I stand
		Empty-handed, watching him. I wander into the murk
		The naked light bulbs pierce: the workmen, making something,
		Say something to the boy in his white shirt. I jerk
		As the sparks fly at me. The man hammering
		As acid hisses, and the solder turns to silver,
		Seems to me a dwarf hammering out the Ring
		In the world under the world. The hours blur;
		Bored and not bored, I bend things out of lead.
		I wash my smudged hands, as my grandfather
		Washes his black ones, with their gritty soap: ahead,
		Past their time clock, their pay window, is the blue
		And gold and white of noon. The sooty thread
		Up which the laborers feel their way into
		Their wives and houses, is money; the fact of life,
		The secret the grown-ups share, is what to do
		To make money. The husband Adam, Eve his wife
		Have learned how not to have to do without
		Till Santa Claus brings them their Boy Scout knife--
		Nor do they find things in dreams, carry a paper route,
		Sell Christmas seals . . .
		                                         Starting his Saturday, his Sunday,
		Pop tells me what I love to hear about,
		His boyhood in Shelbyville. I play
		What he plays, hunt what he hunts, remember
		What he remembers: it seems to me I could stay
		In that dark forest, lit by one fading ember
		Of his campfire, forever . . . But we’re home.
		I run in love to each familiar member
		Of this little state, clustered about the Dome
		Of St. Nicholas--this city in which my rabbit
		Depends on me, and I on everyone--this first Rome
		Of childhood, so absolute in every habit
		That when we hear the world our jailor say:
		“Tell me, art thou a Roman ?” the time we inhabit
		Drops from our shoulders, and we answer: “Yea.
		I stand at Caesar’s judgment seat, I appeal
		Unto Caesar.”
		                         I wash my hands, Pop gives his pay
		Envelope to Mama; we sit down to our meal.
		The phone rings: Mrs. Mercer wonders if I’d care
		To go to the library. That would be ideal,
		I say when Mama lets me. I comb my hair
		And find the four books I have out: The Food
		Of the Gods was best. Liking that world where
		The children eat, and grow giant and good,
		I swear as I’ve often sworn: “I’ll never forget
		What it’s like, when I’ve grown up.” A prelude
		By Chopin, hammered note by note, like alphabet
		Blocks, comes from next door. It’s played with real feeling,
		The feeling of being indoors practicing. “And yet
		It’s not as if--” a gray electric, stealing
		To the curb on silent wheels, has come; and I
		See on the back seat (sight more appealing
		Than any human sight!) my own friend Lucky,
		Half wolf, half police-dog. And he can play the piano--
		Play that he does, that is--and jump so high
		For a ball that he turns a somersault. “Hello,”
		I say to the lady, and hug Lucky . . . In my
		Talk with the world, in which it tells me what I know
		And I tell it, “I know--” how strange that I
		Know nothing, and yet it tells me what I know!--
		I appreciate the animals, who stand by
		Purring. Or else they sit and pant. It’s so--
		So agreeable. If only people purred and panted!
		So, now, Lucky and I sit in our row,
		Mrs. Mercer in hers. I take for granted
		The tiller by which she steers, the yellow roses
		In the bud vases, the whole enchanted
		Drawing room of our progress. The glass encloses
		As glass does, a womanish and childish
		And doggish universe. We press our noses
		To the glass and wish: the angel- and devilfish
		Floating by on Vine, on Sunset, shut their eyes
		And press their noses to their glass and wish.
		
		
		II. _A Night with Lions_
		
		When I was twelve we’d visit my aunt’s friend
		Who owned a lion, the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
		Lion. I’d play with him, and he’d pretend
		To play with me. I was the real player
		But he’d trot back and forth inside his cage
		Till he got bored. I put Tawny in the prayer
		I didn’t believe in, not at my age,
		But said still; just as I did everything in fours
		And gave to Something, on the average,
		One cookie out of three. And by my quartz, my ores,
		My wood with the bark on it, from the Petrified
		Forest, I put his dewclaw . . .
		                                                   Now the lion roars
		His slow comfortable roars; I lie beside
		My young, tall, brown aunt, out there in the past
		Or future, and I sleepily confide
		My dream-discovery: my breath comes fast
		Whenever I see someone with your skin,
		Hear someone with your voice. The lion’s steadfast
		Roar goes on in the darkness. I have been
		Asleep a while when I remember: you
		Are--you, and Tawny was the lion in--
		In Tarzan. In Tarzan! Just as we used to,
		I talk to you, you talk to me or pretend
		To talk to me as grown-up people do,
		Of Jurgen and Rupert Hughes, till in the end
		I think as a child thinks: “You’re my real friend.”
		
		
		III. _A Street off Sunset_
		
		Sometimes as I drive by the factory
		That manufactures, after so long, Vicks
		VapoRub Ointment, there rises over me
		A eucalyptus tree. I feel its stair-sticks
		Impressed on my palms, my insteps, as I climb
		To my tree house. The gray leaves make me mix
		My coughing chest, anointed at bedtime,
		With the smell of the sap trickling from the tan
		Trunk, where the nails go in.
		                                                   My lifetime
		Got rid of, I sit in a dark blue sedan
		Beside my great-grandmother, in Hollywood.
		We pass a windmill, a pink sphinx, an Allbran
		Billboard; thinking of Salâmmbo, Robin Hood,
		The old prospector with his flapjack in the air,
		I sit with my hands folded: I am good.
		
		That night as I lie crossways in an armchair
		Reading Amazing Stories (just as, long before,
		I’d lie by my rich uncle’s polar bear
		On his domed library’s reflecting floor
		In the last year of the first World War, and see
		A poor two-seater being attacked by four
		Triplanes, on the cover of the Literary
		Digest, and a Camel coming to its aid;
		I’d feel the bear’s fur warm and rough against me,
		The colors of the afternoon would fade,
		I’d reach into the bear’s mouth and hold tight
		To its front tooth and think, “I’m not afraid”)
		
		There off Sunset, in the lamplit starlight,
		A scientist is getting ready to destroy
		The world. “It’s time for you to say good night,”
		Mama tells me; I go on in breathless joy.
		“Remember, tomorrow is a school day,”
		Mama tells me; I go on in breathless joy.
		
		At last I go to Mama in her gray
		Silk, to Pop, to Dandeen in her black
		Silk. I put my arms around them, they
		Put their arms around me. Then I go back
		To my bedroom; I read as I undress.
		The scientist is ready to attack.
		Mama calls, “Is your light out?” I call back, “Yes,”
		And turn the light out. Forced out of life into
		Bed, for a moment I lie comfortless
		In the blank darkness; then as I always do,
		I put on the earphones of the crystal set--
		Each bed has its earphones--and the uneasy tissue
		Of their far-off star-sound, of the blue-violet
		Of space, surrounds the sweet voice from the Tabernacle
		Of the Four-Square Gospel. A vague marionette,
		Tall, auburn, holds her arms out, to unshackle
		The bonds of sin, of sleep--as, next instant, the sun
		Holds its arms out through the fig, the lemon tree,
		In the back yard the clucking hens all cackle
		As Mama brings their chicken feed. I see
		My magazine. My magazine! Dressing for school,
		I read how the good world wins its victory
		Over that bad man. Books; book strap; jump the footstool
		You made in Manual Training . . . Then we three
		Sit down, and one says grace; and then, by rule,
		By that habit that moves the stars, some coffee--
		One spoonful--is poured out into my milk
		And the milk, transubstantiated, is coffee.
		And Mama’s weekday wash-dress, Dandeen’s soft black silk
		Are ways that habit itself makes holy
		Just as, on Sunday mornings, Wednesday nights, His will
		Comes in their ways--of Church, of Prayer Meeting--to set free
		The spirit from the flesh it questions.
		                                                                   So,
		So unquestioned, my own habit moves me
		To and through and from school, like a domino,
		Till, home, I wake to find that I am playing
		Dominoes with Dandeen. Her old face is slow
		In pleasure, slow in doubt, as she sits weighing
		Strategies: patient, equable, and humble,
		She hears what this last child of hers is saying
		In pride or bewilderment; and she will grumble
		Like a child or animal when, indifferent
		To the reasons of my better self, I mumble:
		“I’d better stop now--the rabbit . . .”
		                                                                 I relent
		And play her one more game. It is miraculous
		To have a great-grandmother: I feel different
		From others as, between moves, we discuss
		The War Between the States. The cheerful troops
		Ride up to our farmhouse, steal from us
		The spoons, the horses--when their captain stoops
		To Dandeen and puts Dandeen on his horse,
		She cries . . . As I run by the chicken coops
		With lettuce for my rabbit, real remorse
		Hurts me, here, now: the little girl is crying
		Because I didn’t write. Because--
		                                                            of course,
		I was a child, I missed them so. But justifying
		Hurts too: if only I could play you one more game,
		See you all one more time! I think of you dying
		Forgiving me--or not, it is all the same
		To the forgiven . . . My rabbit’s glad to see me;
		He scrambles to me, gives me little tame
		Bites before he eats the lettuce. His furry
		Long warm soft floppy ears, his crinkling nose
		Are reassuring to a child. They guarantee,
		As so much here does, that the child knows
		Who takes care of him, whom he takes care of.
		
		Mama comes out and takes in the clothes
		From the clothesline. She looks with righteous love
		At all of us, her spare face half a girl’s.
		She enters a chicken coop, and the hens shove
		And flap and squawk, in fear; the whole flock whirls
		Into the farthest corner. She chooses one,
		Comes out, and wrings its neck. The body hurls
		Itself out--lunging, reeling, it begins to run
		Away from Something, to fly away from Something
		In great flopping circles. Mama stands like a nun
		In the center of each awful, anguished ring.
		The thudding and scrambling go on, go on--then they fade,
		I open my eyes, it’s over . . . Could such a thing
		Happen to anything ? It could to a rabbit, I’m afraid;
		It could to--
		                     “Mama, you won’t kill Reddy ever,
		You won’t ever, will you?” The farm woman tries to persuade
		The little boy, her grandson, that she’d never
		Kill the boy’s rabbit, never even think of it.
		He would like to believe her . . . And whenever
		I see her, there in that dark infinite,
		Standing like Judith, with the hen’s head in her hand,
		I explain it away, in vain--a hypocrite,
		Like all who love.
		                               Into the blue wonderland
		Of Hollywood, the sun sinks, past the eucalyptus,
		The sphinx, the windmill, and I watch and read and
		Hold my story tight. And when the bus
		Stops at the corner and Pop--Pop!--steps down
		And I run out to meet him, a blurred nimbus,
		Half-red, half-gold, enchants his sober brown
		Face, his stooped shoulders, into the All-Father’s.
		He tells me about the work he’s done downtown,
		We sit there on the steps. My universe
		Mended almost, I tell him about the scientist. I say,
		“He couldn’t really, could he, Pop ?” My comforter’s
		Eyes light up, and he laughs. “No, that’s just play,
		Just make-believe,” he says. The sky is gray,
		We sit there, at the end of our good day.


	6. THE WOMAN AT WASHINGTON ZOO

		The saris go by me from the embassies.
		
		Cloth from the moon. Cloth from another planet.   
		They look back at the leopard like the leopard.
		
		And I....
		              this print of mine, that has kept its color   
		Alive through so many cleanings; this dull null   
		Navy I wear to work, and wear from work, and so   
		To my bed, so to my grave, with no
		Complaints, no comment: neither from my chief,   
		The Deputy Chief Assistant, nor his chief--
		Only I complain.... this serviceable
		Body that no sunlight dyes, no hand suffuses
		But, dome-shadowed, withering among columns,   
		Wavy beneath fountains--small, far-off, shining   
		In the eyes of animals, these beings trapped   
		As I am trapped but not, themselves, the trap,   
		Aging, but without knowledge of their age,
		Kept safe here, knowing not of death, for death--
		Oh, bars of my own body, open, open!
		
		The world goes by my cage and never sees me.   
		And there come not to me, as come to these,
		The wild beasts, sparrows pecking the llamas’ grain,   
		Pigeons settling on the bears’ bread, buzzards   
		Tearing the meat the flies have clouded....
		                                                               Vulture,   
		When you come for the white rat that the foxes left,
		Take off the red helmet of your head, the black
		Wings that have shadowed me, and step to me as man:
		The wild brother at whose feet the white wolves fawn,
		To whose hand of power the great lioness
		Stalks, purring....
		                             You know what I was,
		You see what I am: change me, change me!


*** Robinson Jeffers (1887 - 1962)

	1. ASCENT TO THE SIERRAS

		Here at the foot of the pass
		The fierce clans of the mountain you’d think for
		thousands of years,
		Men with harsh mouths and eyes like the eagles’ hunger,
		Have gathered among these rocks at the dead hour
		Of the morning star and the stars waning
		To raid the plain and at moonrise returning driven
		Their scared booty to the highlands, the tossing horns
		And glazed eyes in the light of torches. The men have
		looked back
		Standing above these rock-heads to bark laughter
		At the burning granaries and the farms and the town
		That sow the dark flat land with terrible rubies...
		lighting the dead...
		It is not true: from this land
		The curse was lifted; the highlands have kept peace
		with the valleys; no
		blood in the sod; there is no old sword
		Keeping grim rust, no primal sorrow. The people are
		all one people, their
		homes never knew harrying;
		The tribes before them were acorn-eaters, harmless
		as deer. Oh, fortunate
		earth; you must find someone
		To make you bitter music; how else will you take bonds
		of the future,
		against the wolf in men’s hearts?


	2. AVE CAESAR

		No bitterness: our ancestors did it.
		They were only ignorant and hopeful, they wanted freedom but wealth too.
		Their children will learn to hope for a Caesar.
		Or rather--for we are not aquiline Romans but soft mixed colonists--
		Some kindly Sicilian tyrant who’ll keep
		Poverty and Carthage off until the Romans arrive,
		We are easy to manage, a gregarious people,
		Full of sentiment, clever at mechanics, and we love our luxuries.
		
		Beyond the great valley an odd instinctive rising
		Begins to possess the ground, the flatness gathers
		to little humps and
		barrows, low aimless ridges,
		A sudden violence of rock crowns them. The crowded
		orchards end, they
		have come to a stone knife;
		The farms are finished; the sudden foot of the
		slerra. Hill over hill,
		snow-ridge beyond mountain gather
		The blue air of their height about them.


	3. PRAISE LIFE

		This country least, but every inhabited country
		Is clotted with human anguish.
		Remember that at your feasts.
		
		And this is no new thing but from time out of mind,
		No transient thing, but exactly
		Conterminous with human life.
		
		Praise life, it deserves praise, but the praise of life
		That forgets the pain is a pebble
		Rattled in a dry gourd.


	4. ROCK AND HAWK

		Here is a symbol in which
		Many high tragic thoughts
		Watch their own eyes.
		
		This gray rock, standing tall
		On the headland, where the seawind
		Lets no tree grow,
		
		Earthquake-proved, and signatured
		By ages of storms: on its peak
		A falcon has perched.
		
		I think here is your emblem
		To hang in the future sky;
		Not the cross, not the hive,
		
		But this; bright power, dark peace;
		Fierce consciousness joined with final
		Disinterestedness;
		
		Life with calm death; the falcon’s
		Realist eyes and act
		Married to the massive
		
		Mysticism of stone,
		Which failure cannot cast down
		Nor success make proud.


	5. WE ARE THOSE PEOPLE

		I have abhorred the wars and despised the liars, laughed at the frightened
		And forecast victory; never one moment’s doubt.
		But now not far, over the backs of some crawling years, the next
		Great war’s column of dust and fire writhes
		Up the sides of the sky: it becomes clear that we too may suffer
		What others have, the brutal horror of defeat—
		Or if not in the next, then in the next—therefore watch Germany
		And read the future. We wish, of course, that our women
		Would die like biting rats in the cellars, our men like wolves on the mountain:
		It will not be so. Our men will curse, cringe, obey;
		Our women uncover themselves to the grinning victors for bits of chocolate.


*** Elizabeth Jennings (1926 - 2001)

	1. A CHORUS

		Over the surging tides and the mountain kingdoms,
		Over the pastoral valleys and the meadows,
		Over the cities with their factory darkness,
		Over the lands where peace is still a power,
		Over all these and all this planet carries
		A power broods, invisible monarch, a stranger
		To some, but by many trusted. Man’s a believer
		Until corrupted. This huge trusted power
		Is spirit. He moves in the muscle of the world,
		In continual creation. He burns the tides, he shines
		From the matchless skies. He is the day’s surrender.
		Recognize him in the eye of the angry tiger,
		In the sign of a child stepping at last into sleep,
		In whatever touches, graces and confesses,
		In hopes fulfilled or forgotten, in promises
		
		Kept, in the resignation of old men--
		This spirit, this power, this holder together of space
		Is about, is aware, is working in your breathing.
		But most he is the need that shows in hunger
		And in the tears shed in the lonely fastness.
		And in sorrow after anger.


	2. A PERFORMANCE OF HENRY V AT STRATFORD-UPON-AVON

		Nature teaches us our tongue again
		And the swift sentences came pat. I came
		Into cool night rescued from rainy dawn.
		And I seethed with language; Henry at
		Harfleur and Agincourt came apt for war
		In Ireland and the Middle East. Here was
		The riddling and right tongue, the feeling words
		Solid and dutiful. Aspiring hope
		Met purpose in “advantages” and “He
		That fights with me today shall be my brother.”
		Say this is patriotic, out of date.
		But you are wrong. It never is too late
		
		For nights of stars and feet that move to an
		Iambic measure; all who clapped were linked,
		The theatre is our treasury and too,
		Our study, school-room, house where mercy is
		
		Dispensed with justice. Shakespeare has the mood
		And draws the music from the dullest heart.
		This is our birthright, speeches for the dumb
		And unaccomplished. Henry has the words
		For grief and we learn how to tell of death
		With dignity. “All was as cold” she said
		“As any stone” and so, we who lacked scope
		For big or little deaths, increase, grow up
		To purposes and means to face events
		Of cruelty, stupidity. I walked
		Fast under stars. The Avon wandered on
		“Tomorrow and tomorrow.” Words aren’t worn
		Out in this place but can renew our tongue,
		Flesh out our feeling, make us apt for life.


	3. ABSENCE

		I visited the place where we last met.
		Nothing was changed, the gardens were well-tended,
		The fountains sprayed their usual steady jet;
		There was no sign that anything had ended
		And nothing to instruct me to forget.
		
		The thoughtless birds that shook out of the trees,
		Singing an ecstasy I could not share,
		Played cunning in my thoughts. Surely in these
		Pleasures there could not be a pain to bear
		Or any discord shake the level breeze.
		
		It was because the place was just the same
		That made your absence seem a savage force,
		For under all the gentleness there came
		An earthquake tremor: Fountain, birds and grass
		Were shaken by my thinking of your name.


	4. ACCEPTED

		You are no longer young,
		Nor are you very old.
		There are homes where those belong.
		You know you do not fit
		When you observe the cold
		Stares of those who sit
		
		In bath-chairs or the park
		(A stick, then, at their side)
		Or find yourself in the dark
		And see the lovers who,
		In love and in their stride,
		Don’t even notice you.
		
		This is a time to begin
		Your life. It could be new.
		The sheer not fitting in
		With the old who envy you
		And the young who want to win,
		Not knowing false from true,
		
		Means you have liberty
		Denied to their extremes.
		At last now you can be
		What the old cannot recall
		And the young long for in dreams,
		Yet still include them all.


	5. ANSWERS

		I keep my answers small and keep them near;
		Big questions bruised my mind but still I let
		Small answers be a bulwark to my fear.
		
		The huge abstractions I keep from the light;
		Small things I handled and caressed and loved.
		I let the stars assume the whole of night.
		
		But the big answers clamoured to be moved
		Into my life. Their great audacity
		Shouted to be acknowledged and believed.
		
		Even when all small answers build up to
		Protection of my spirit, I still hear
		Big answers striving for their overthrow
		
		And all the great conclusions coming near.


	6. DELAY

		The radiance of the star that leans on me
		Was shining years ago. The light that now
		Glitters up there my eyes may never see,
		And so the time lag teases me with how
		
		Love that loves now may not reach me until
		Its first desire is spent. The star’s impulse
		Must wait for eyes to claim it beautiful
		And love arrived may find us somewhere else.


	7. FRIDAY

		We nailed the hands long ago,
		Wove the thorns, took up the scourge and shouted
		For excitement’s sake, we stood at the dusty edge
		Of the pebbled path and watched the extreme of pain.
		
		But one or two prayed, one or two
		Were silent, shocked, stood back
		And remembered remnants of words, a new vision,
		The cross is up with its crying victim, the clouds
		Cover the sun, we learn a new way to lose
		What we did not know we had
		Until this bleak and sacrificial day,
		Until we turned from our bad
		Past and knelt and cried out our dismay,
		The dice still clicking, the voices dying away.


	8. FRIENDS

		I fear it’s very wrong of me,
		And yet I must admit,
		When someone offers friendship
		I want the whole of it.
		I don’t want everybody else
		To share my friends with me.
		At least, I want one special one,
		Who indisputably,
		
		Likes me much more than all the rest,
		Who’s always on my side,
		Who never cares what others say,
		Who lets me come and hide
		Within his shadow, in his house--
		It doesn’t matter where--
		Who lets me simply be myself,
		Who’s always, always there.


	9. IN A GARDEN

		When the gardener has gone this garden
		Looks wistful and seems waiting an event.
		It is so spruce, a metaphor of Eden
		And even more so since the gardener went,
		
		Quietly godlike, but of course, he had
		Not made me promise anything and I
		Had no one tempting me to make the bad
		Choice. Yet I still felt lost and wonder why.
		
		Even the beech tree from next door which shares
		Its shadow with me, seemed a kind of threat.
		Everything was too neat, and someone cares
		
		In the wrong way. I need not have stood long
		Mocked by the smell of a mown lawn, and yet
		I did. Sickness for Eden was so strong.


	10. IN MEMORY OF ANYONE UNKNOWN TO ME

		At this particular time I have no one
		Particular person to grieve for, though there must
		Be many, many unknown ones going to dust
		Slowly, not remembered for what they have done
		Or left undone. For these, then, I will grieve
		Being impartial, unable to deceive.
		
		How they lived, or died, is quite unknown,
		And, by that fact gives my grief purity--
		An important person quite apart from me
		Or one obscure who drifted down alone.
		Both or all I remember, have a place.
		For these I never encountered face to face.
		
		Sentiment will creep in. I cast it out
		Wishing to give these classical repose,
		No epitaph, no poppy and no rose
		From me, and certainly no wish to learn about
		The way they lived or died. In earth or fire
		They are gone. Simply because they were human, I admire.


	11. REMBRANDT’S LATE SELF-PORTRAITS

		You are confronted with yourself. Each year
		The pouches fill, the skin is uglier.
		You give it all unflinchingly. You stare
		Into yourself, beyond. Your brush’s care
		Runs with self-knowledge. Here
		
		Is a humility at one with craft.
		There is no arrogance. Pride is apart
		From this self-scrutiny. You make light drift
		The way you want. Your face is bruised and hurt
		But there is still love left.
		
		Love of the art and others. To the last
		Experiment went on. You stared beyond
		Your age, the times. You also plucked the past
		And tempered it. Self-portraits understand,
		And old age can divest,
		
		With truthful changes, us of fear of death.
		Look, a new anguish. There, the bloated nose,
		The sadness and the joy. To paint’s to breathe,
		And all the darknesses are dared. You chose
		What each must reckon with.


	12. THE ENEMIES

		Last night they came across the river and
		Entered the city. Women were awake
		With lights and food. They entertained the band,
		Not asking what the men had come to take
		Or what strange tongue they spoke
		Or why they came so suddenly through the land.
		
		Now in the morning all the town is filled
		With stories of the swift and dark invasion;
		The women say that not one stranger told
		A reason for his coming. The intrusion 
		Was not for devastation:
		Peace is apparent still on hearth and field.
		
		Yet all the city is a haunted place.
		Man meeting man speaks cautiously. Old friends
		Close up the candid looks upon their face.
		There is no warmth in hands accepting hands;
		Each ponders, ‘Better hide myself in case
		Those strangers have set up their homes in minds 
		I used to walk in. Better draw the blinds
		Even if the strangers haunt in my own house.’


*** Juan Ramón Jiménez (1881 - 1958)

	1. DAWN OUTSIDE THE CITY WALLS

		  You can see the face of everything, and it is white--
		plaster, nightmare, adobe, anemia, cold--
		turned to the east. Oh closeness to life!
		Hardness of life! Like something
		in the body that is animal—root, slag-ends--
		with the soul still not set well there--
		and mineral and vegetable!
		Sun standing stiffly against man,
		against the sow, the cabbages, the mud wall!
		--False joy, because you are merely
		in time, as they say, and not in the soul!
		
		  The entire sky taken up   
		by moist and steaming heaps,
		a horizon of dung piles.   
		Sour remains, here and ther e,   
		of the night. Slices
		of the green moon, half-eaten,
		crystal bits from false stars,
		plaster, the paper ripped off, still faintly
		sky-blue. The birds
		not really awake yet, in the raw moon,
		streetlight nearly out.   
		Mob of beings and things!
		--A true sadness, because you are really deep
		in the soul, as they say, not in time at all!


	2. I AM NOT I

		I am not I.
		                  I am this one
		walking beside me whom I do not see,
		whom at times I manage to visit,
		and whom at other times I forget;
		who remains calm and silent while I talk,
		and forgives, gently, when I hate,
		who walks where I am not,
		who will remain standing when I die.


	3. I SHALL NOT RETURN

		I shall not return. And night, mildly warm, serene and silent, 
		will lull the world, under beams of its solitary moon. 
		My body will not be there, and through the wide-open window, 
		a refreshing breeze will come inquiring for my soul. 
		I don’t know if any await the end of my double absence, 
		or who will kiss my memory amidst caresses and weeping. 
		But, there will be stars and flowers, there will be sighs and hopes, 
		and love in the avenues in the shadows of the trees. 
		And that piano will be playing as in this untroubled night, 
		and no one there to listen, pensive, by my window frame.


	4. RETURN FOR AN INSTANT

		What was it like, God of mine, what was it like?
		--Oh unfaithful heart, indecisive intelligence!
		Was it like the going by of the wind?
		Like the disappearance of the spring?
		
		As nimble, as changeable, as weightless
		as milkweed seeds in summer . . . Yes! Indefinite
		as a smile which is lost forever in a laugh . . .
		Arrogant in the air, just like a flag!
		
		  Flag, smile, milkweed pod, swift
		spring in June, clear wind! . . .
		Your celebration was so wild, so sad!
		
		  All of your changes ended up in nothing--
		remembrance, a blind bee of bitter things!--
		I don’t know what you were like, but you were!


*** Samuel Johnson (1709 - 1784)

	1. AUTUMN

		Alas! with swift and silent pace,
		Impatient time rolls on the year;
		The Seasons change, and Nature’s face
		Now sweetly smiles, now frowns severe.
		
		‘Twas Spring, ‘twas Summer, all was gay,
		Now Autumn bends a cloudy brow; 
		The flowers of Spring are swept away, 
		And Summer fruits desert the bough.
		
		The verdant leaves that play’d on high,
		And wanton’d on the western breeze,
		Now trod in dust neglected lie,
		As Boreas strips the bending trees.
		
		The fields that waved with golden grain,
		As russet heaths are wild and bare;
		Not moist with dew, but drench’d in rain,
		Nor health nor pleasure wanders there.
		
		No more, while through the midnight shade
		Beneath the moon’s pale orb I stray,
		Soft pleasing woes my heart invade,
		As Progne pours the melting lay.
		
		From this capricious clime she soars,
		O! would some god but wings supply!
		To where each morn the Spring restores,
		Companion of her flight I’d try.
		
		Vain wish! me fate compels to bear
		The downward season’s iron reign,
		Compels to breathe the polluted air,
		And shiver on a blasted plain.
		
		What bliss to life can Autumn yield,
		If glooms, and showers,and storms prevail;
		And Ceres flies the naked field,
		And flowers and fruits, and Phoebus fail.
		
		Oh! what remains, what lingers yet, 
		To cheer me in the darkening hour!
		The grape remains! the friend of wit,
		In love, and mirth, of mighty power.
		
		Haste--press the clusters, fill the bowl; 
		Apollo! shoot thy parting ray:
		This gives the sunshine of the soul,
		This god of health, and verse, and day.
		
		Still--still the jocund train shall flow,
		The pulse with vigorous rapture beat;
		My Stella with new charms shall glow,
		And every bliss in wine shall meet.


	2. EVENING ODE

		Evening now from purple wings
		Sheds the grateful gifts she brings;
		Brilliant drops bedeck the mead,
		Cooling breezes shake the reed;
		Shake the reed, and curl the stream
		Silver’d o’er with Cynthia’s beam;
		Near the chequer’d, lonely grove,
		Hears, and keeps thy secrets, love!
		Stella, thither let us stray,
		Lightly o’er the dewy way.
		Phoebus drives his burning car,
		Hence, my lovely Stella, far;
		In his stead, the queen of night
		Round us pours a lambent light:
		Light that seems but just to show
		Breasts that beat, and cheeks that glow;
		Let us now, in whisper’d joy,
		Evening’s silent hours employ,
		Silent best, and conscious shades,
		Please the hearts that love invades,
		Other pleasures give them pain,
		Lovers all but love disdain.


	3. FRIENDSHIP

		Friendship! peculiar boon of Heaven,
		The noble mind’s delight and pride,
		To men and angels only given,
		To all the lower world denied.
		
		While love, unknown among the bless’d,
		Parent of thousand wild desires,
		The savage and the human breast
		Torments alike with raging fires.
		
		With bright, but oft destructive gleam, 
		Alike o’er all his lightnings fly, 
		Thy lambent glories only beam
		Around the favourites of the sky. 
		
		Thy gentle flows of guiltless joys
		On fools and villains ne’er descend;
		In vain for thee the tyrant sighs,
		And hugs a flatterer for a friend.
		
		Directness of the brave and just,
		Oh guide us through life’s darksome way!
		And let the tortures of mistrust
		On selfish bosoms only prey.
		
		Nor shall thine ardours cease to glow,
		When souls to peaceful climes remove.
		What raised our virtue here below
		Shall aid our happiness above.


	4. FROM BOETHIUS

		O Thou! whose power o’er moving worlds presides,
		Whose voice created, and whose wisdom guides,
		On darkling man in pure effulgence shine,
		And cheer the clouded mind with light divine.
		‘Tis thine alone to calm the pious breast
		With silent confidence and holy rest;
		From thee, great God! we spring; to thee we bend;
		Path, motive, guide, original, and end.


	5. SPRING

		Stern Winter now, by Spring repress’d
		Forbears the long-continued strife;
		And Nature, on her naked breast,
		Delights to catch the gales of life.
		
		Now o’er the rural kingdom roves,
		Soft pleasures with her laughing train,
		Love warbles in the vocal groves,
		And vegetation plants the plain. 
		
		Unhappy! whom to beds of pain
		Arthritic tyranny consigns;
		Whom smiling Nature courts in vain,
		Though rapture sings and beauty shines.
		
		Yet though my limbs disease invades,
		Her wings imagination tries,
		And bears me to the peaceful shades,
		Where ----‘s humble turrets rise.
		
		Here let me through the vales pursue,
		A guide--a father--and a friend,
		Once more great Nature’s works renew,
		Once more on Wisdom’s voice attend.
		
		From false caresses, causeless strife,
		Wild hope, vain fear, alike removed;
		Here let me learn the use of life,
		When best enjoy’d--when most improved.
		
		Teach me, thou venerable bower,
		Cool meditation’s quiet seat,
		The generous scorn of venal power,
		The silent grandeur of retreat.
		
		When pride by guilt to greatness climbs,
		Or raging factions rush to war,
		Here let me learn to shun the crimes
		I can’t prevent and will not share.
		
		But lest I fall by subtler foes,
		Bright wisdom teach me Curio’s art,
		The swelling passions to compose,
		And quell the rebels of the heart.


	6. THE CITY OF GOD

		CITY of God, how broad and far 
		 Outspread thy walls sublime! 
		The true thy chartered freemen are, 
		 Of every age and clime. 
		
		One holy Church, one army strong,         
		 One steadfast high intent, 
		One working band, one harvest-song, 
		 One King Omnipotent. 
		
		How purely hath thy speech come down 
		 From man’s primeval youth;         
		How grandly hath thine empire grown 
		 Of Freedom, Love, and Truth! 
		
		How gleam thy watchfires through the night, 
		 With never fainting ray; 
		How rise thy towers, serene and bright,         
		 To meet the dawning day! 
		
		In vain the surge’s angry shock, 
		 In vain the drifting sands; 
		Unharmed, upon the Eternal Rock, 
		 The Eternal City stands.


	7. THE WINTER’S WALK

		Behold, my fair, where’er we rove,
		What dreary prospects round us rise,
		The naked hill, the leafless grove,
		The hoary ground, the frowning skies.
		
		Nor only through the wasted plain,
		Stern Winter is thy force confess’d;
		Still wider spreads thy horrid reign,
		I feel thy power usurp my breast.
		
		Enlivening hope, and fond desire,
		Resign the heart to spleen and care; 
		Scarce frighted love maintains her fire,
		And rapture saddens to despair.
		
		In groundless hope, and causeless fear,
		Unhappy man! behold thy doom;
		Still changing with the changeful year
		The slave of sunshine and of gloom.
		
		Tired with vain joys, the false alarms,
		With mental and corporeal strife,
		Snatch me, my Stella, to thy arms,
		And screen me from the ills of life.


*** James Joyce (1882 - 1941)

	1. ALONE

		The moon’s soft golden meshes make
		All night a veil;
		The shore-lamps in the sleeping lake
		Laburnum tendrils trail.
		
		The sly reeds whisper in the night
		A name--her name,
		And all my soul is a delight,
		A swoon or shame


	2. FLOOD

		Gold-brown upon the sated flood
		The rock-vine clusters lift and sway:
		Vast wings above the lambent waters brood
		Of sullen day.
		
		A waste of waters ruthlessly
		Sways and uplifts its weedy mane,
		Where brooding day stares down upon the sea
		In dull disdain.
		
		Uplift and sway, O golden vine,
		Thy clustered fruits to love’s full flood,
		Lambent and vast and ruthless as is thine
		Incertitude.


	3. NIGHT PIECE

		Gaunt in gloom
		The pale stars their torches,
		Enshrouded, wave.
		Ghost-fires from heaven’s far verges faint illume--
		Arches on soaring arches--
		Night’s sin-dark nave.
		
		Seraphim
		The lost hosts awaken
		To service, till
		In moonless gloom each lapses, muted, dim,
		Raised when she has and shaken
		Her thurible.
		
		And long and loud
		To night’s nave upsoaring,
		A star-knell tolls
		As the bleak incense surges, cloud on cloud,
		Voidward from the adoring
		Waste of souls.


	4. TUTTO È SCIOLTO

		A birdless heaven, sea-dusk and a star 
		Sad in the west; 
		And thou, poor heart, love’s image, fond and far, 
		Rememberest: 
		
		Her silent eyes and her soft foam-white brow 
		And fragrant hair, 
		Falling as in the silence falleth now 
		Dusk from the air. 
		
		Ah, why wilt thou remember these, or why, 
		Poor heart, repine, 
		If the sweet love she yielded with a sigh 
		Was never thine?


*** Donald Justice (1925 - 2004)

	1. ABSENCE

		It’s snowing this afternoon and there are no flowers.
		There is only this sound of falling, quiet and remote,
		Like the memory of scales descending the white keys
		Of a childhood piano--outside the window, palms!
		And the heavy head of the cereus, inclining,
		Soon to let down its white or yellow-white.
		
		Now, only these poor snow-flowers in a heap,
		Like the memory of a white dress cast down . . . 
		So much has fallen.
		              
		              And I, who have listened for a step
		All afternoon, hear it now, but already falling away,
		Already in memory.  And the terrible scales descending
		On the silent piano; the snow; and the absent flowers abounding.


	2. IN BERTRAM’S GARDEN

		Jane looks down at her organdy skirt
		As if it somehow were the thing disgraced,
		For being there, on the floor, in the dirt,
		And she catches it up about her waist,
		Smooths it out along one hip,
		And pulls it over the crumpled slip.
		
		On the porch, green-shuttered, cool,
		Asleep is Bertram that bronze boy,
		Who, having wound her around a spool,
		Sends her spinning like a toy
		Out to the garden, all alone,
		To sit and weep on a bench of stone.
		
		Soon the purple dark must bruise
		Lily and bleeding-heart and rose,
		And the little cupid lose
		Eyes and ears and chin and nose,
		And Jane lie down with others soon,
		Naked to the naked moon.


	3. SADNESS

		1 
		
		Dear ghosts, dear presences, O my dear parents, 
		Why were you so sad on porches, whispering? 
		What great melancholies were loosed among our swings! 
		As before a storm one hears the leaves whispering 
		And marks each small change in the atmosphere, 
		So was it then to overhear and to fear. 
		
		
		2
		
		But all things then were oracle and secret. 
		Remember the night when, lost, returning, we turned back 
		Confused, and our headlights singled out the fox? 
		Our thoughts went with it then, turning and turning back 
		With the same terror, into the deep thicket 
		Beside the highway, at home in the dark thicket. 
		
		
		3 
		
		I say the wood within is the dark wood, 
		Or wound no torn shirt can entirely bandage, 
		But the sad hand returns to it in secret 
		Repeatedly, encouraging the bandage 
		To speak of that other world we might have borne, 
		The lost world buried before it could be born. 
		
		
		4 
		
		Burchfield describes the pinched white souls of violets 
		Frothing the mouth of a derelict old mine 
		Just as an evil August night comes down, 
		All umber, but for one smudge of dusky carmine. 
		It is the sky of a peculiar sadness--
		The other side perhaps of some rare gladness. 
		
		
		5 
		
		What is it to be happy, after all? Think 
		Of the first small joys. Think of how our parents 
		Would whistle as they packed for the long summers, 
		Or, busy about the usual tasks of parents, 
		Smile down at us suddenly for some secret reason, 
		Or simply smile, not needing any reason. 
		
		
		6 
		
		But even in the summers we remember 
		The forest had its eyes, the sea its voices, 
		And there were roads no map would ever master, 
		Lost roads and moonless nights and ancient voices-- 
		And night crept down with an awful slowness toward the water; 
		And there were lanterns once, doubled in the water. 
		
		
		7 
		
		Sadness has its own beauty, of course. Toward dusk, 
		Let us say, the river darkens and look bruised, 
		And we stand looking out at it through rain. 
		It is as if life itself were somehow bruised 
		And tender at this hour; and a few tears commence. 
		Not that they are but that they feel immense.


	4. THE EVENING OF THE MIND

		Now comes the evening of the mind. 
		Here are the fireflies twitching in the blood; 
		Here is the shadow moving down the page 
		Where you sit reading by the garden wall. 
		Now the dwarf peach trees, nailed to their trellises, 
		Shudder and droop. Your know their voices now, 
		Faintly the martyred peaches crying out 
		Your name, the name nobody knows but you. 
		It is the aura and the coming on. 
		It is the thing descending, circling, here. 
		And now it puts a claw out and you take it. 
		Thankfully in your lap you take it, so. 
		
		You said you would not go away again, 
		You did not want to go away--and yet, 
		It is as if you stood out on the dock 
		Watching a little boat drift out 
		Beyond the sawgrass shallows, the dead fish . . .
		And you were in it, skimming past old snags, 
		Beyond, beyond, under a brazen sky 
		As soundless as a gong before it’s struck-- 
		Suspended how?--and now they strike it, now 
		The ether dream of five-years-old repeats, repeats, 
		And you must wake again to your own blood 
		And empty spaces in the throat.


	5. VILLANELLE AT SUNDOWN

		Turn your head. Look. The light is turning yellow. 
		The river seems enriched thereby, not to say deepened. 
		Why this is, I’ll never be able to tell you. 
		
		Or are Americans half in love with failure? 
		One used to say so, reading Fitzgerald, as it happened. 
		(That Viking Portable, all water spotted and yellow-- 
		
		remember?) Or does mere distance lend a value 
		to things? --false, it may be, but the view is hardly cheapened. 
		Why this is, I’ll never be able to tell you. 
		
		The smoke, those tiny cars, the whole urban milieu-- 
		One can like anything diminishment has sharpened. 
		Our painter friend, Lang, might show the whole thing yellow 
		
		and not be much off. It’s nuance that counts, not color-- 
		As in some late James novel, saved up for the long weekend 
		and vivid with all the Master simply won’t tell you. 
		
		How frail our generation has got, how sallow 
		and pinched with just surviving! We all go off the deep end 
		finally, gold beaten thinly out to yellow. 
		And why this is, I’ll never be able to tell you.


*** Erik Axel Karlfeldt (1864 - 1931)

	1. NOTHING IS LIKE WAITING TIMES

		Nothing is like waiting times,
		spring flood weeks, budding times,
		no may a days spread
		as the clarifying April.
		Get on the last slip of the trail,
		the forest gives its dull coolness
		and his deep whisper to it.
		I want to donate the lust of summer
		for the first straws, which glitter
		in a dark pine sink,
		and the drill of the first thrush.
		
		Nothing is like times of longing,
		waiting years, engagement times.
		No spring a shimmer spreads
		as a secret heartbeat.
		Rarely meet, divorce soon,
		dream of everything sweet and dangerous
		life in its womb bears!
		Golden fruit may shake others;
		I want to linger and give up,
		in my garden I want to watch,
		while the trees are budding there.


	2. VIRGIN MARY

		She comes down the meadows at Sjugareby.
		She’s a little hill with almond flower skin,
		yes, like almond blossoms and rose hips far away from the road and the village,
		where it never dusts and hikes.
		Which paths have you walked so that the sun did not burn you?
		What have you dreamed, Maria, in your young breast and felt,
		that your blood does not burn like the others?
		It shines so wonderfully from your bare hair,
		and thy forehead is as the bow of the moon,
		when over Bergsängsbackar he walks white and sloping
		and shines through the spring beats.
		
		Now the evening wind is cooling in the columbine’s trust,
		and yellow lily bells ring holiday and peace;
		barely gnaws the hem of the pasture, barely breaks the kid of the hem,
		it barely beeps in swallow nests and groves.
		Now Dalarna’s boys and girls go pair by pair:
		you are chosen above others, you are desired by one where,
		what do you go so alone and ponder?
		You are like a virgin, coming from her first communion table,
		who wants to stay awake on the quiet night of Pentecost
		with all the trembling of his heart and think of those words
		she felt and those under her got to taste.
		
		Turn around, turn around, Maria, now the evening is late.
		Your mother may mourn that you are wandering so alone.
		You are small and fragile like the crotch arrow branch,
		and in the forest goes the striking bear.
		Alas, the rose you hold is your sign and your care,
		it is brought by an angel from a blessed herb garden:
		you can step on snakes and thorns.
		Yes, that ray, which is so shining and long
		from the stronghold of the evening root over Lake Siljan--
		you could go to paradise tonight your wedding
		on the narrow and trembling tiljan.


	3. WINTER GREETING

		Do you meet the north wind, man,
		then you meet song and dizziness.
		Nordens Apoll among the pines father
		with snow on his lyre.
		
		Do you meet the north wind, man,
		then you encounter fire and flame.
		Nordic Cupid among the spruce father
		with lingonberry-wrapped bow.
		
		The weather blows without calm
		from the sixteen gates of heaven.
		Who can you trust and believe
		of all the wild winds?
		
		Do you meet the north wind, man,
		then you meet man and glory,
		funny and bold, with his eyes clear
		as the New Year’s moon.
		
		Glad I heard his cheerful appeal,
		when he drummed on the box.
		Sounded his signal through cracks and dampers,
		then I hid the hard-hearted conclusion.
		
		Glad I have followed so many miles
		his creaking, white roads,
		drank from the mountains’ freezing il
		his abundant health beaks.
		
		Come on, do you agree for the sake of the old man?
		The chilly evening is low,
		the sky is full of glistening strings
		to lyres and to arches.
		
		Chief, jerk on; I’m your husband,
		your husband under rare stars.
		Bitter fighters follow your team
		and smiling winter terns.
		
		Come and join for the sake of the boy,
		anyone who can smile and sing!
		The clouds go like flags of gold:
		forward, you combatively young!


*** Patrick Kavanagh (1904 - 1967)

	1. ADVENT

		We have tested and tasted too much, lover--
		Through a chink too wide there comes in no wonder.
		But here in the Advent-darkened room
		Where the dry black bread and the sugarless tea
		Of penance will charm back the luxury
		Of a child’s soul, we’ll return to Doom
		The knowledge we stole but could not use.
		
		And the newness that was in every stale thing
		When we looked at it as children: the spirit-shocking
		Wonder in a black slanting Ulster hill
		Or the prophetic astonishment in the tedious talking
		Of an old fool will awake for us and bring
		You and me to the yard gate to watch the whins
		And the bog-holes, cart-tracks, old stables where Time begins.
		
		O after Christmas we’ll have no need to go searching
		For the difference that sets an old phrase burning--
		We’ll hear it in the whispered argument of a churning
		Or in the streets where the village boys are lurching.
		And we’ll hear it among decent men too
		Who barrow dung in gardens under trees,
		Wherever life pours ordinary plenty.
		Won’t we be rich, my love and I, and
		God we shall not ask for reason’s payment,
		The why of heart-breaking strangeness in dreeping hedges
		Nor analyse God’s breath in common statement.
		We have thrown into the dust-bin the clay-minted wages
		Of pleasure, knowledge and the conscious hour--
		And Christ comes with a January flower.


	2. CANAL BANK WALK

		Leafy-with-love banks and the green waters of the canal
		Pouring redemption for me, that I do
		The will of God, wallow in the habitual, the banal,
		Grow with nature again as before I grew.
		The bright stick trapped, the breeze adding a third
		Party to the couple kissing on an old seat,
		And a bird gathering materials for the nest for the Word
		Eloquently new and abandoned to its delirious beat.
		O unworn world enrapture me, encapture me in a web
		Of fabulous grass and eternal voices by a beech,
		Feed the gaping need of my senses, give me ad lib
		To pray unselfconsciously with overflowing speech
		For this soul needs to be honoured with a new dress woven
		From green and blue things and arguments that cannot be proven.


	3. ON AN APPLE-RIPE SEPTEMBER MORNING

		On an apple-ripe September morning
		Through the mist-chill fields I went
		With a pitch-fork on my shoulder
		Less for use than for devilment.
		
		The threshing mill was set-up, I knew,
		In Cassidy’s haggard last night,
		And we owed them a day at the threshing
		Since last year. O it was delight
		
		To be paying bills of laughter
		And chaffy gossip in kind
		With work thrown in to ballast
		The fantasy-soaring mind.
		
		As I crossed the wooden bridge I wondered
		As I looked into the drain
		If ever a summer morning should find me
		Shovelling up eels again.
		
		And I thought of the wasps’ nest in the bank
		And how I got chased one day
		Leaving the drag and the scraw-knife behind,
		How I covered my face with hay.
		
		The wet leaves of the cocksfoot
		Polished my boots as I
		Went round by the glistening bog-holes
		Lost in unthinking joy.
		
		I’ll be carrying bags to-day, I mused,
		The best job at the mill
		With plenty of time to talk of our loves
		As we wait for the bags to fill.
		
		Maybe Mary might call round . . .
		And then I came to the haggard gate,
		And I knew as I entered that I had come
		Through fields that were part of no earthly estate.


	4. ON RAGLAN ROAD

		On Raglan Road on an autumn day I met her first and knew
		That her dark hair would weave a snare that I might one day rue;
		I saw the danger, yet I walked along the enchanted way,
		And I said, let grief be a fallen leaf at the dawning of the day.
		
		On Grafton Street in November we tripped lightly along the ledge
		Of the deep ravine where can be seen the worth of passion’s pledge,
		The Queen of Hearts still making tarts and I not making hay--
		O I loved too much and by such and such is happiness thrown away.
		
		I gave her gifts of the mind I gave her the secret sign that’s known
		To the artists who have known the true gods of sound and stone
		And word and tint. I did not stint for I gave her poems to say.
		With her own name there and her own dark hair like clouds over fields of May
		
		On a quiet street where old ghosts meet I see her walking now
		Away from me so hurriedly my reason must allow
		That I had wooed not as I should a creature made of clay--
		When the angel woos the clay he’d lose his wings at the dawn of day.


	5. PEACE

		And sometimes I am sorry when the grass
		Is growing over the stones in quiet hollows
		And the cocksfoot leans across the rutted cart-pass
		That I am not the voice of country fellows
		Who now are standing by some headland talking
		Of turnips and potatoes or young corn
		Of turf banks stripped for victory.
		Here Peace is still hawking
		His coloured combs and scarves and beads of horn.
		
		Upon a headland by a whinny hedge
		A hare sits looking down a leaf-lapped furrow
		There’s an old plough upside-down on a weedy ridge
		And someone is shouldering home a saddle-harrow.
		Out of that childhood country what fools climb
		To fight with tyrants Love and Life and Time?


	6. SHANCODUFF

		My black hills have never seen the sun rising,
		Eternally they look north towards Armagh.
		Lot’s wife would not be salt if she had been
		Incurious as my black hills that are happy
		When dawn whitens Glassdrummond chapel.
		
		My hills hoard the bright shillings of March
		While the sun searches in every pocket.
		They are my Alps and I have climbed the Matterhorn
		With a sheaf of hay for three perishing calves
		In the field under the Big Forth of Rocksavage.
		
		The sleety winds fondle the rushy beards of Shancoduff
		While the cattle-drovers sheltering in the Featherna Bush
		Look up and say: “Who owns them hungry hills
		That the water-hen and snipe must have forsaken?
		A poet? Then by heavens he must be poor.”
		I hear and is my heart not badly shaken?


	7. THE GREAT HUNGER

		I
		
		Clay is the word and clay is the flesh
		Where the potato-gatherers like mechanised scarecrows move
		Along the side-fall of the hill--Maguire and his men.
		If we watch them an hour is there anything we can prove
		Of life as it is broken-backed over the Book
		Of Death? Here crows gabble over worms and frogs
		And the gulls like old newspapers are blown clear of the hedges, luckily.
		Is there some light of imagination in these wet clods?
		Or why do we stand here shivering?
		Which of these men
		Loved the light and the queen
		Too long virgin? Yesterday was summer.  Who was it promised marriage to himself
		Before apples were hung from the ceilings for Hallowe’en?
		We will wait and watch the tragedy to the last curtain,
		Till the last soul passively like a bag of wet clay
		Rolls down the side of the hill, diverted by the angles
		Where the plough missed or a spade stands, straitening the way.
		A dog lying on a torn jacket under a heeled-up cart,
		A horse nosing along the posied headland, trailing
		A rusty plough. Three heads hanging between wide-apart legs.
		October playing a symphony on a slack wire paling.
		Maguire watches the drills flattened out
		And the flints that lit a candle for him on a June altar
		Flameless. The drills slipped by and the days slipped by
		And he trembled his head away and ran free from the world’s halter,
		And thought himself wiser than any man in the townland
		When he laughed over pints of porter
		Of how he came free from every net spread
		In the gaps of experience. He shook a knowing head
		And pretended to his soul
		That children are tedious in hurrying fields of April
		Where men are spanning across wide furrows.
		Lost in the passion that never needs a wife
		The pricks that pricked were the pointed pins of harrows.
		Children scream so loud that the crows could bring
		The seed of an acre away with crow-rude jeers.
		Patrick Maguire, he called his dog and he flung a stone in the air
		And hallooed the birds away that were the birds of the years.
		Turn over the weedy clods and tease out the tangled skeins.
		What is he looking for there?
		He thinks it is a potato, but we know better
		Than his mud-gloved fingers probe in this insensitive hair.
		‘Move forward the basket and balance it steady
		In this hollow. Pull down the shafts of that cart, Joe,
		And straddle the horse,’ Maguire calls.
		‘The wind’s over Brannagan’s, now that means rain.
		Graip up some withered stalks and see that no potato falls
		Over the tail-board going down the ruckety pass--
		And that’s a job we’ll have to do in December,
		Gravel it and build a kerb on the bog-side. Is that Cassidy’s ass
		Out in my clover? Curse o’ God
		Where is that dog?.
		Never where he’s wanted’ Maguire grunts and spits
		Through a clay-wattled moustache and stares about him from the height.
		His dream changes like the cloud-swung wind
		And he is not so sure now if his mother was right
		When she praised the man who made a field his bride.
		Watch him, watch him, that man on a hill whose spirit
		Is a wet sack flapping about the knees of time.
		He lives that his little fields may stay fertile when his own body
		Is spread in the bottom of a ditch under two coulters crossed in Christ’s Name.
		He was suspicious in his youth as a rat near strange bread,
		When girls laughed; when they screamed he knew that meant
		The cry of fillies in season. He could not walk
		The easy road to destiny. He dreamt
		The innocence of young brambles to hooked treachery.
		O the grip, O the grip of irregular fields! No man escapes.
		It could not be that back of the hills love was free
		And ditches straight.
		No monster hand lifted up children and put down apes
		As here.
		     ‘O God if I had been wiser!’
		That was his sigh like the brown breeze in the thistles.
		He looks, towards his house and haggard. ‘O God if I had been wiser!’
		But now a crumpled leaf from the whitethorn bushes
		Darts like a frightened robin, and the fence
		Shows the green of after-grass through a little window,
		And he knows that his own heart is calling his mother a liar
		God’s truth is life--even the grotesque shapes of his foulest fire.
		The horse lifts its head and cranes
		Through the whins and stones
		To lip late passion in the crawling clover.
		In the gap there’s a bush weighted with boulders like morality,
		The fools of life bleed if they climb over.
		The wind leans from Brady’s, and the coltsfoot leaves are holed with rust,
		Rain fills the cart-tracks and the sole-plate grooves;
		A yellow sun reflects in Donaghmoyne
		The poignant light in puddles shaped by hooves.
		Come with me, Imagination, into this iron house
		And we will watch from the doorway the years run back,
		And we will know what a peasant’s left hand wrote on the page.
		Be easy, October. No cackle hen, horse neigh, tree sough, duck quack.
		
		
		II
		
		Maguire was faithful to death:
		He stayed with his mother till she died
		At the age of ninety-one.
		She stayed too long,
		Wife and mother in one.
		When she died
		The knuckle-bones were cutting the skin of her son’s backside
		And he was sixty-five.
		O he loved his mother
		Above all others.
		O he loved his ploughs
		And he loved his  cows
		And his happiest dream
		Was to clean his arse
		With perennial grass
		On the bank of some summer stream;
		To smoke his pipe
		In a sheltered gripe
		In the middle of July.
		His face in a mist
		And two stones in his fist
		And an impotent worm on his thigh.
		But his passion became a plague
		For he grew feeble bringing the vague
		Women of his mind to lust nearness,
		Once a week at least flesh must make an appearance.
		So Maguire got tired
		Of the no-target gun fired
		And returned to his headland of carrots and cabbage
		To the fields once again
		Where eunuchs can be men
		And life is more lousy than savage.
		
		
		III
		
		Poor Paddy Maguire, a fourteen-hour day
		He worked for years. It was he that lit the fire
		And boiled the kettle and gave the cows their hay.
		His mother tall hard as a Protestant spire
		Came down the stairs barefoot at the kettle-call
		And talked to her son sharply:  ‘Did you let
		The hens out, you?’ She had a venomous drawl
		And a wizened face like moth-eaten leatherette.
		Two black cats peeped between the banisters
		And gloated over the bacon-fizzling pan.
		Outside the window showed tin canisters.
		The snipe of Dawn fell like a whirring stone
		And Patrick on a headland stood alone.
		The pull is on the traces, it is March
		And a cold black wind is blowing from Dundalk.
		The twisting sod rolls over on her back
		The virgin screams before the irresistible sock.
		No worry on Maguire’s mind this day
		Except that he forgot to bring his matches.
		‘Hop back there Polly, hoy back, woa, wae,
		From every second hill a neighbour watches
		With all the sharpened interest of rivalry.
		Yet sometimes when the sun comes through a gap
		These men know God the Father in a tree:
		The Holy Spirit is the rising sap,
		And Christ will be the green leaves that will come
		At Easter from the sealed and guarded tomb.
		Primroses and the unearthly start of ferns
		Among the blackthorn shadows in the ditch,
		A dead sparrow and an old waistcoat. Maguire learns
		As the horses turn slowly round the which is which
		Of love and fear and things half born to mind
		He stands between the plough-handles and he sees
		At the end of a long furrow his name signed
		Among the poets, prostitutes. With all miseries
		He is one. Here  with the unfortunate
		Who for half-moments of paradise
		Pay out good days and wait and wait
		For sunlight-woven cloaks. O to be wise
		As Respectability that knows the price of all things
		And marks God’s truth in pounds and pence and farthings.
		
		
		IV
		
		April, and no one able to calculate
		How far it is to harvest. They put down
		The seeds blindly with sensuous groping fingers
		And sensual dreams sleep dreams subtly underground.
		Tomorrow is Wednesday--who cares?
		‘Remember Eileen Farrelly? I was thinking
		A man might do a damned sight worse …’ That voice is blown
		Through a hole in a garden wall--
		And who was Eileen now cannot be known.
		The cattle are out on grass
		The corn is coming up evenly.
		The farm folk are hurrying to catch Mass:
		Christ will meet them at the end of the world, the slow and the speedier.
		But the fields say: only Time can bless.
		Maguire knelt beside a pillar where he could spit
		Without being seen. He turned an old prayer round:
		‘Jesus, Mary, Joseph pray for us
		Now and at the Hour.’ Heaven dazzled death.
		‘Wonder should I cross-plough that turnip-ground.’
		The tension broke. The congregation lifted it head
		As one man and coughed in unison.
		Five hundred hearts were hungry for life-
		Who lives in Christ shall never die the death.
		And the candle-lit Altar and the flowers
		And the pregnant Tabernacle lifted a moment to Prophecy
		Out of the clayey hours
		Maguire sprinkled his face with holy water
		As the congregation stood up for the Last Gospel.
		He rubbed the dust off his knees with his palm, and then
		Coughed the prayer phlegm up from his throat and sighed: Amen.
		Once one day in June when he was walking
		Among his cattle in the Yellow Meadow
		He met a girl carrying a basket
		And he was then a young and heated fellow.
		Too earnest, too earnest! He rushed beyond the thing
		To the unreal. And he saw Sin
		Written in letters larger than John Bunyan dreamt of.
		For the strangled impulse there is no redemption.
		And that girl was gone and he was counting
		The dangers in the fields where love ranted
		He was helpless. He saw his cattle
		And stroked their flanks in lieu of wife to handle.
		He would have changed the circle if he could,
		The circle that was the grass track where he ran.
		Twenty times a day he ran round the field
		And still there was no winning-post where the runner is cheered home.
		Desperately he broke the tune,
		But however he tried always the same melody lept up from the background,
		The dragging step of a ploughman going home through the guttery
		Headlands under an April-watery moon.
		Religion, the fields and the fear of the Lord
		And Ignorance giving him the coward’s blow,
		He dared not rise to pluck the fantasies
		From the fruited Tree of Life. He bowed his head
		And saw a wet weed twined about his toe.
		
		
		V
		
		Evening at the cross-roads--
		Heavy heads nodding out words as wise
		As the ruminations of cows after milking.
		From the ragged road surface a boy picks up
		A piece of gravel and stares at it-and then
		Tosses it across the elm tree on to the railway.
		He means nothing.
		Not a damn thing
		Somebody is coming over the metal railway bridge
		And his hobnailed boots on the arches sound like a gong
		Calling men awake. But the bridge is too narrow--
		The men lift their heads a moment. That was only John,
		So they dream on.
		Night in the elms, night in the grass.
		O we are too tired to go home yet. Two cyclists pass
		Talking loudly of Kitty and Molly?
		Horses or women? wisdom or folly?
		A door closes on an evicted dog
		Where prayers begin in Barney Meegan’s kitchen :
		Rosie curses the cat between her devotions;
		The daughter prays that she may have three wishes--
		Health and wealth and love--
		From the fairy who is  faith or hope or compounds of.
		At the cross-roads the crowd had thinned out:
		Last words were uttered. There is no to-morrow;
		No future but only time stretched for the mowing of the hay
		Or putting an axle in the turf-barrow.
		Patrick Maguire went home and made cocoa
		And broke a chunk off the loaf of wheaten bread;
		His mother called down to him to look again
		And make sure that the hen-house was locked. His sister grunted in bed
		The sound of a sow taking up a new position.
		Pat opened his trousers wide over the ashes
		And dreamt himself to lewd sleepiness.
		The clock ticked on. Time passes.
		
		
		VI
		
		Health and wealth and love he too dreamed of in May
		As he sat on the railway slope and watched the children of the place
		Picking up a primrose here and a daisy there--
		They were picking up life’s truth singly.
		But he dreamt of the Absolute envased bouquet--
		AIl or nothing. And it was nothing. For God is not all
		In one place, complete
		Till Hope comes in and takes it on his shoulder--
		O Christ, that is what you have done for us:
		In a crumb of bread the whole mystery is.
		He read the symbol too sharply and turned
		From the five simple doors of sense
		To the door whose combination lock has puzzled
		Philosopher and priest and common dunce.
		Men build their heavens as they build their circles
		Of friends. God is in the bits and pieces of Everyday--
		A kiss here and a laugh again, and sometimes tears,
		A pearl necklace round the neck of poverty.
		He sat on the railway slope and watched the evening,
		Too beautifully perfect to use,
		And his three wishes were three stones too sharp to sit on,
		Too hard to carve. Three frozen idols of a speechless muse.
		
		
		VII
		
		‘Now go to Mass and pray and confess your sins
		And you’ll have all the luck,’ his mother said.
		He listened to the lie that is a woman’s screen
		Around a conscience when soft thighs are spread.
		And all the while she was setting up the lie
		She trusted in Nature that never deceives.
		But her son took it as literal truth.
		Religion’s walls expand to the push of nature. Morality yields
		To sense--but not in little tillage fields.
		Life went on like that. One summer morning
		Again through a hay-field on her way to the shop--
		The grass was wet and over-leaned the path--
		And Agnes held her skirts sensationally up,
		And not because the grass was wet either.
		A man was watching her, Patrick Maguire.
		She was in love with passion and its weakness
		And the wet grass could never cool the fire
		That radiated from her unwanted womb in that metaphysical land
		Where flesh was thought more spiritual than music
		Among the stars--out of reach of the peasant’s hand.
		Ah, but the priest was one of the people too--
		A farmers son--and surely he knew
		The needs of a brother and sister.
		Religion could not be a counter-irritant like a blister,
		But the certain standard, measured and known
		By which man might re-make his soul though all walls were down
		And all earth’s pedestalled gods thrown.
		
		
		VIII
		
		Sitting on a wooden gate,
		Sitting on a wooden gate,
		Sitting on a wooden gate
		He didn’t care a damn.
		Said whatever came into his head,
		Said whatever came into his head,
		Said whatever came into his head
		And inconsequently sang.
		While his world withered away,
		He had a cigarette to smoke and a pound to spend
		On drink the next Saturday.
		His cattle were fat
		And his horses all that
		Midsummer grass could make them.
		The young women ran wild
		And dreamed of a child
		Joy dreams though the fathers might forsake them
		But no one would take them;
		No man could ever see
		That their skirts had loosed buttons,
		O the men were as blind as could be.
		And Patrick Maguire
		From his. purgatory fire
		Called the gods of the Christian to prove
		That this twisted skein
		Was the necessary pain
		And not the rope that was strangling true love.
		But sitting on a wooden gate
		Sometime in July
		When he was thirty-four or five
		He gloried in the lie:
		He made it read the way it should,
		He made life read the evil good
		While he cursed the ascetic brotherhood
		Without knowing why.
		Sitting on a wooden gate
		All, all alone
		He sang and laughed
		Like a man quite daft,
		Or like a man on a channel raft
		He fantasied forth his groan.
		Sitting on a wooden gate,
		Sitting on a wooden gate,
		Sitting on a wooden gate
		He rode in day-dream cars.
		He locked his body with his knees
		When the gate swung too much in the breeze.
		But while he caught high ecstasies
		Life slipped between the bars.
		
		
		IX
		
		He gave himself another year,
		Something was bound to happen before then--
		The circle would break down
		And he would carve the new one to his own will.
		A new rhythm is a new life
		And in it marriage is hung and money.
		He would be a new man walking through unbroken meadows
		Of dawn in the year of One.
		The poor peasant talking to himself in a stable door
		An ignorant peasant deep in dung.
		What can the passers-by think otherwise?
		Where is his silver bowl of knowledge hung?
		Why should men be asked to believe in a soul
		That is only the mark of a hoof in guttery gaps?
		A man is what is written on the label.
		And the passing world stares but no one stops
		To look closer. So back to the growing crops
		And the ridges he never loved.
		Nobody will ever know how much tortured poetry the pulled weeds on the ridge wrote
		Before they withered in the July sun,
		Nobody will ever read the wild, sprawling, scrawling mad woman’s signature,
		The hysteria and the boredom of the enclosed nun of his thought.
		Like the afterbirth of a cow stretched on a branch in the wind
		Life dried in the veins of these women and men:
		‘The grey and grief and unloved,
		The bones in the backs of their hands,
		And the chapel pressing its low ceiling over them.
		Sometimes they did laugh and see the sunlight,
		A narrow slice of divine instruction.
		Going along the river at the bend of Sunday
		The trout played in the pools encouragement
		To jump in love though death bait the hook.
		And there would be girls sitting on the grass banks of lanes.
		Stretch-legged and lingering staring--
		A man might take one of them if he had the courage.
		But ‘No’ was in every sentence of their story
		Except when the public-house came in and shouted its piece.
		The yellow buttercups and the bluebells among the whin bushes
		On rocks in the middle of ploughing
		Was a bright spoke in the wheel
		Of the peasant’s mill.
		The goldfinches on the railway paling were worth looking at--
		A man might imagine then
		Himself in Brazil and these birds the birds of paradise
		And the Amazon and the romance traced on the school map lived again.
		Talk in evening corners and under trees
		Was like an old book found in a king’s tomb.
		The children gathered round like students and listened
		And some of the saga defied the draught in the open tomb
		And was not blown.
		
		
		X
		
		Their intellectual life consisted in reading
		Reynolds News or the Sunday Dispatch,
		With sometimes an old almanac brought down from the ceiling
		Or a school reader brown with the droppings of thatch.
		The sporting results or the headlines of war
		Was a humbug profound as the highbrow’s Arcana.
		Pat tried to be wise to the abstraction of all that
		But its secret dribbled down his waistcoat like a drink from a strainer.
		He wagered a bob each way on the Derby,
		He got a straight tip from a man in a shop--
		A double from the Guineas it was and thought himself
		A master mathematician when one of them came up
		And he could explain how much he’d have drawn
		On the double if the second leg had followed the first.
		He was betting on form and breeding, he claimed,
		And the man that did that could never be burst.
		After that they went on to the war, and the generals
		On both sides were shown to be stupid as hell.
		If he’d taken that road, they remarked of a Marshal,
		He’d have … O they know their geography well
		This was their university. Maguire was an undergraduate
		Who dreamed from his lowly position of rising
		To a professorship like Larry McKenna or Duffy
		Or the pig-gelder Nallon whose knowledge was amazing.
		‘A treble, full multiple odds … That’s flat porter …
		Another one … No, you’re wrong about that thing I was telling you. .
		Did you part with your filly, Jack? I heard that you sold her.…’
		The students were all savants by the time of pub-close.
		
		
		XI
		
		A year passed and another hurried after it
		And Patrick Maguire was still six months behind life--
		His mother six months ahead of it;
		His sister straddle-legged across it:--
		One leg in hell and the other in heaven
		And between the purgatory of middle-aged virginity--
		She prayed for release to heaven or hell.
		His mother’s voice grew thinner like a rust-worn knife
		But it cut venomously as it thinned,
		It cut him up the middle till he became more woman than man,
		And it cut through to his mind before the end.
		Another field whitened in the April air
		And the harrows rattled over the seed.
		He gathered the loose stones off the ridges carefully
		And grumbled to his men to hurry. He looked like a man who could give advice
		To foolish young fellows. He was forty-seven,
		And there was depth in his jaw and his voice was the voice of a great cattle-dealer,
		A man with whom the fair-green gods break even.
		‘I think I ploughed that lea the proper depth,
		She ought to give a crop if any land gives …
		Drive slower with the foal-mare, Joe.’
		Joe, a young man of imagined wives,
		Smiles to himself and answered like a slave:
		‘You needn’t fear or fret.
		I’m taking her as easy, as easy as …
		Easy there Fanny, easy, pet.’
		They loaded the day-scoured implements on the cart
		As the shadows of poplars crookened the furrows.
		It was the evening, evening. Patrick was forgetting to be lonely
		As he used to be in Aprils long ago.
		It was the menopause, the misery-pause.
		The schoolgirls passed his house laughing every morning
		And sometimes they spoke to him familiarly--
		He had an idea. Schoolgirls of thirteen
		Would see no political intrigue in an old man’s friendship.
		Love
		The heifer waiting to be nosed by the old bull.
		That notion passed too--there was the danger of talk
		And jails are narrower than the five-sod ridge
		And colder than the black hills facing Armagh in February.
		He sinned over the warm ashes again and his crime
		The law’s long arm could not serve with time.
		His face set like an old judge’s pose:
		Respectability and righteousness,
		Stand for no nonsense.
		The priest from the altar called Patrick Maguire’s name
		To hold the collecting-box in the chapel door
		During all the Sundays of May.
		His neighbours envied him his holy rise,
		But he walked down from the church with affected indifference
		And took the measure of heaven angle-wise.
		He still could laugh and sing,
		But not the wild laugh or the abandoned harmony now
		That called the world to new silliness from the top of a wooden gate
		When thirty-five could take the sparrow’s bow.
		Let us be kind, let us be kind and sympathetic:
		Maybe life is not for joking or for finding happiness in--
		This tiny light in Oriental Darkness
		Looking out chance windows of poetry or prayer.
		And the grief and defeat of men like these peasants
		Is God’s way--maybe--and we must not want too much
		To see.
		The twisted thread is stronger than the wind-swept fleece.
		And in the end who shall rest in truth’s high peace?
		Or whose is the world now, even now?
		O let us kneel where the blind ploughman kneels
		And learn to live without despairing
		In a mud-walled space--
		Illiterate unknown and unknowing.
		Let us kneel where he kneels
		And feel what he feels.
		One day he saw a daisy and he thought it
		Reminded him of his childhood--
		He stopped his cart to look at it.
		Was there a fairy hiding behind it?
		He helped a poor woman whose cow
		Had died on her;
		He dragged home a drunken man on a winter’s night
		And one rare moment he heard the young people playing on the railway stile
		And he wished them happiness and whatever they most desired from life.
		He saw the sunlight and begrudged no man
		His share of what the miserly soil and soul
		Gives in a season to a ploughman.
		And he cried for his own loss one late night on the pillow
		And yet thanked the God who had arranged these things.
		Was he then a saint?
		A Matt Talbot of Monaghan?
		His sister Mary Anne spat poison at the children
		Who sometimes came to the door selling raffle tickets
		For holy funds.
		‘Get out, you little tramps!’ she would scream
		As she shook to the hens an armful of crumbs,
		But Patrick often put his hand deep down
		In his trouser-pocket and fingered out a penny
		Or maybe a tobacco-stained caramel.
		‘You’re soft,’ said the sister; ‘with other people’s money
		It’s not a bit funny.’
		The cards are shuffled and the deck
		Laid flat for cutting--Tom Malone
		Cut for trump. I think we’ll make
		This game, the last, a tanner one.
		Hearts. Right. I see you’re breaking
		Your two-year-old. Play quick, Maguire,
		The clock there says it’s half-past ten--
		Kate, throw another sod on that fire.
		One of the card-players laughs and spits
		Into the flame across a shoulder.
		Outside, a noise like a rat
		Among the hen-roosts.
		The cock crows over
		The frosted townland of the night.
		Eleven o’clock and still the game
		Goes on and the players seem to be
		Drunk in an Orient opium den.
		Midnight, one o’clock, two.
		Somebody’s leg has fallen asleep.
		What about home? Maguire, are you
		Using your double-tree this week?
		Why? do you want it? Play the ace.
		There’s it, and that’s the last card for me.
		A wonderful night, we had. Duffy’s place
		Is very convenient. Is that a ghost or a tree?
		And so they go home with dragging feet
		And their voices rumble like laden carts.
		And they are happy as the dead or sleeping …
		I should have led that ace of hearts.
		
		
		XII
		
		The fields were bleached white,
		The wooden tubs full of water
		Were white in the winds
		That blew through Brannagan’s Gap on their way from Siberia;
		The cows on the grassless heights .
		Followed the hay that had wings--
		The February fodder that hung itself on the black branches
		Of the hill-top hedge.
		A man stood beside a potato-pit
		And clapped his arms
		And pranced on the crisp roots
		And shouted to warm himself.
		Then he buck-leaped about the potatoes
		And scooped them into a basket.
		He looked like a bucking suck-calf
		Whose spine was being tickled.
		Sometimes he stared across the bogs
		And sometimes he straightened his back and vaguely whistled
		A tune that weakened his spirit
		And saddened his terrier dog’s.
		A neighbour passed with a spade on his shoulder
		And Patrick Maguire bent like a bridge
		Whistled-good morning under his oxter
		And the man the other side of the hedge
		Champed his spade on the road at his toes
		And talked an old sentimentality
		While the wind blew under his clothes.
		The mother sickened and stayed in bed all day,
		Her head hardly dented the pillow, so light and thin it had worn,
		But she still enquired after the household affairs.
		She held the strings of her children’s Punch and Judy, and when a mouth opened
		It was her truth that the dolls would have spoken
		If they hadn’t been made of wood and tin--
		‘Did you open the barn door, Pat, to let the young calves in?’
		The priest called to see her every Saturday
		And she told him her troubles and fears:
		‘If Mary Anne was settled I’d die in peace--
		I’m getting on in years.’
		‘You were a good woman,’ said the priest,
		‘And your children will miss you when you’re gone.
		The likes of you this parish never knew,
		I’m sure they’ll not forget the work you’ve done.’
		She reached five bony crooks under the tick--
		‘Five pounds for Masses--won’t you say them quick.’
		She died one morning in the beginning of May
		And a shower of sparrow-notes was the litany for her dying.
		The holy water was sprinkled on the bed-clothes
		And her children stood around the bed and cried because it was too late for crying.
		A mother dead! The tired sentiment:
		‘Mother, Mother’ was a shallow pool
		Where sorrow hardly could wash its feet …
		Mary Anne came away from the deathbed and boiled the calves their gruel.
		‘O what was I doing when the procession passed?
		Where was I looking? Young women and men
		And I might have joined them.
		Who bent the coin of my destiny
		That it stuck in the slot?
		I remember a night we walked
		Through the moon of Donaghmoyne,
		Four of us seeking adventure,
		It was midsummer forty years ago.
		Now I know
		The moment that gave the turn to my life.
		O Christ! I am locked in a stable with pigs and cows for ever.
		
		
		XIII
		
		The world looks on
		And talks of the peasant:
		The peasant has no worries;
		In his little lyrical fields He ploughs and sows;
		He eats fresh food,
		He loves fresh women, He is his own master
		As it was in the Beginning
		The simpleness of peasant life.
		The birds that sing for him are eternal choirs,
		Everywhere he walks there are flowers.
		His heart is pure, His mind is clear,
		He can talk to God as Moses and Isaiah talked
		The peasant who is only one remove from the beasts he drives.
		“The travellers stop their cars to gape over the green bank into his fields:--
		There is the source from which all cultures rise,
		And all religions,
		There is the pool in which the poet dips
		And the musician.
		Without the peasant base civilisation must die,
		Unless the clay is in the mouth the singer’s singing is useless.
		The travellers touch the roots of the grass and feel renewed
		When they grasp the steering wheels again.
		The peasant is the unspoiled child of Prophecy,
		The peasant is all virtues--let us salute him without irony
		The peasant ploughman who is half a vegetable--
		Who can react to sun and rain and sometimes even
		Regret that the Maker of Light had not touched him more intensely.
		Brought him up from the sub-soil to an existence
		Of conscious joy. He was not born blind.
		He is not always blind: sometimes the cataract yields
		To sudden stone-falling or the desire to breed.
		The girls pass along the roads
		And he can remember what man is,
		But there is nothing he can do.
		Is there nothing he can do?
		Is there no escape?
		No escape, no escape.
		The cows and horses breed,
		And the potato-seed
		Gives a bud and a root and rots
		In the good mother’s way with her sons;
		The fledged bird is thrown
		From the nest--on its own.
		But the peasant in his little acres is tied
		To a mother’s womb by the wind-toughened navel-cord
		Like a goat tethered to the stump of a tree--
		He circles around and around wondering why it should be.
		No crash, No drama.
		That was how his life happened.
		No mad hooves galloping in the sky,
		But the weak, washy way of true tragedy--
		A sick horse nosing around the meadow for a clean place to die.
		
		
		XIV
		
		We may come out in the October reality, Imagination,
		The sleety wind no longer slants to the black hill where Maguire
		And his men are now collecting the scattered harness and baskets.
		The dog sitting on a wisp of dry stalks
		Watches them through the shadows.
		‘Back in, back in.’ One talks to the horse as to a brother.
		Maguire himself is patting a potato-pit against the weather--
		An old man fondling a new-piled grave:
		‘Joe, I hope you didn’t forget to hide the spade.
		For there’s rogues in the townland.
		Hide it flat in a furrow.
		I think we ought to be finished by to-morrow.
		Their voices through the darkness sound like voices from a cave,
		A dull thudding far away, futile, feeble, far away,
		First cousins to the ghosts of the townland.
		A light stands in a window. Mary Anne
		Has the table set and the tea-pot waiting in the ashes.
		She goes to the door and listens and then she calls
		From the top of the haggard-wall :
		‘What’s keeping you
		And the cows to be milked and all the other work there’s to do?’
		‘All right, all right
		We’ll not stay here all night ’
		Applause, applause,
		The curtain falls.
		Applause, applause
		From the homing carts and the trees
		And the bawling cows at the gates.
		From the screeching water-hens
		And the mill-race heavy with the Lammas floods curving over the weir
		A train at the station blowing off steam
		And the hysterical laughter of the defeated everywhere.
		Night, and the futile cards are shuffled again.
		Maguire spreads his legs over the impotent cinders that wake no manhood now
		And he hardly looks to see which card is trump.
		His sister tightens her legs and her lips and frizzles up
		Like the wick of an oil-less lamp.
		The curtain falls--
		Applause, applause.
		Maguire is not afraid of death, the Church will light him a candle
		To see his way through the vaults and he’ll understand the
		Quality of the clay that dribbles over his coffin.
		He’ll know the names of the roots that climb down to tickle his feet.
		And he will feel no different than when he walked through Donaghmoyne.
		If he stretches out a hand--a wet clod,
		If he opens his nostrils--a dungy smell;
		If he opens his eyes once in a million years--
		Through a crack in the crust of the earth he may see a face nodding in
		Or a woman’s legs.
		Shut them again for that sight is sin.
		He will hardly remember that life happened to him--
		Something was brighter a moment. Somebody sang in the distance
		A procession passed down a mesmerized street.
		He remembers names like Easter and Christmas
		By colour his fields were.
		Maybe he will be born again, a bird of an angel’s conceit
		To sing the gospel of life
		To a music as flighty tangent
		As a tune on an oboe.
		And the serious look of his fields will have changed to the leer of a hobo.
		Swaggering celestially home to his three wishes granted.
		Will that be? will that be?
		Or is the earth right that laughs haw-haw
		And does not believe
		In an unearthly law.
		The earth that says:
		Patrick Maguire, the old peasant, can neither be damned nor glorified:
		The graveyard in which he will lie will be just a deep-drilled potato-field
		Where the seed gets no chance to come through
		To the fun of the sun.
		The tongue in his mouth is the root of a yew.
		Silence, silence. The story is done.
		He stands in the doorway of his house
		A ragged sculpture of the wind,
		October creaks the rotted mattress,
		The bedposts fall. No hope. No lust.
		The hungry fiend
		Screams the apocalypse of clay
		In every corner of this land.


	8. THE SELF-SLAVED

		Me, I will throw away,
		Me, sufficient for the day.
		The sticky self that clings adhesions on the wings to love and adventure.
		To go on the grand tour a man must be free from self-necessity.
		
		See over there, a created splendor made by one individual from things residual,
		With all the various qualities hilarious of what hitherto was not.
		
		Throw away thy sloth, self.
		Carry off my wrath with its self-righteous satirizing blotches.
		No self-exposure, the weakness of the prosa, but undefeatable by means of the beatable.
		
		I will have love.
		Have love from anything made of.
		And a life with a shapely form,
		With gaity and charm and capable of receiving with grace the grace of living.
		And wild moments, too, self, when freed from you.
		Prometheus calls me on.
		Prometheus calls me: Son, we’ll both go off together, in this delightful weather.


*** John Keats (1795 - 1821)

	1. FANCY

		Ever let the Fancy roam, 
		Pleasure never is at home: 
		At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth, 
		Like to bubbles when rain pelteth; 
		Then let winged Fancy wander 
		Through the thought still spread beyond her: 
		Open wide the mind’s cage-door, 
		She’ll dart forth, and cloudward soar. 
		O sweet Fancy! let her loose; 
		Summer’s joys are spoilt by use, 
		And the enjoying of the Spring 
		Fades as does its blossoming; 
		Autumn’s red-lipp’d fruitage too, 
		Blushing through the mist and dew, 
		Cloys with tasting: What do then? 
		Sit thee by the ingle, when 
		The sear faggot blazes bright, 
		Spirit of a winter’s night; 
		When the soundless earth is muffled, 
		And the caked snow is shuffled 
		From the ploughboy’s heavy shoon; 
		When the Night doth meet the Noon 
		In a dark conspiracy 
		To banish Even from her sky. 
		Sit thee there, and send abroad, 
		With a mind self-overaw’d, 
		Fancy, high-commission’d:--send her! 
		She has vassals to attend her: 
		She will bring, in spite of frost, 
		Beauties that the earth hath lost; 
		She will bring thee, all together, 
		All delights of summer weather; 
		All the buds and bells of May, 
		From dewy sward or thorny spray; 
		All the heaped Autumn’s wealth, 
		With a still, mysterious stealth: 
		She will mix these pleasures up 
		Like three fit wines in a cup, 
		And thou shalt quaff it:--thou shalt hear 
		Distant harvest-carols clear; 
		Rustle of the reaped corn; 
		Sweet birds antheming the morn: 
		And, in the same moment, hark! 
		‘Tis the early April lark, 
		Or the rooks, with busy caw, 
		Foraging for sticks and straw. 
		Thou shalt, at one glance, behold 
		The daisy and the marigold; 
		White-plum’d lillies, and the first 
		Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst; 
		Shaded hyacinth, alway 
		Sapphire queen of the mid-May; 
		And every leaf, and every flower 
		Pearled with the self-same shower. 
		Thou shalt see the field-mouse peep 
		Meagre from its celled sleep; 
		And the snake all winter-thin 
		Cast on sunny bank its skin; 
		Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see 
		Hatching in the hawthorn-tree, 
		When the hen-bird’s wing doth rest 
		Quiet on her mossy nest; 
		Then the hurry and alarm 
		When the bee-hive casts its swarm; 
		Acorns ripe down-pattering, 
		While the autumn breezes sing. 
		
		Oh, sweet Fancy! let her loose; 
		Every thing is spoilt by use: 
		Where’s the cheek that doth not fade, 
		Too much gaz’d at? Where’s the maid 
		Whose lip mature is ever new? 
		Where’s the eye, however blue, 
		Doth not weary? Where’s the face 
		One would meet in every place? 
		Where’s the voice, however soft, 
		One would hear so very oft? 
		At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth 
		Like to bubbles when rain pelteth. 
		Let, then, winged Fancy find 
		Thee a mistress to thy mind: 
		Dulcet-ey’d as Ceres’ daughter, 
		Ere the God of Torment taught her 
		How to frown and how to chide; 
		With a waist and with a side 
		White as Hebe’s, when her zone 
		Slipt its golden clasp, and down 
		Fell her kirtle to her feet, 
		While she held the goblet sweet 
		And Jove grew languid.--Break the mesh 
		Of the Fancy’s silken leash; 
		Quickly break her prison-string 
		And such joys as these she’ll bring.--
		Let the winged Fancy roam, 
		Pleasure never is at home. 


	2. ODE ON A GRECIAN URN

		Thou still unravish’d bride of quietness,
		      Thou foster-child of silence and slow time,
		Sylvan historian, who canst thus express
		      A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:
		What leaf-fring’d legend haunts about thy shape
		      Of deities or mortals, or of both,
		              In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?
		      What men or gods are these? What maidens loth?
		What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?
		              What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstasy?
		
		Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
		      Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;
		Not to the sensual ear, but, more endear’d,
		      Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:
		Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave
		      Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;
		              Bold Lover, never, never canst thou kiss,
		Though winning near the goal yet, do not grieve;
		      She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,
		              For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!
		
		Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed
		        Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu;
		And, happy melodist, unwearied,
		        For ever piping songs for ever new;
		More happy love! more happy, happy love!
		        For ever warm and still to be enjoy’d,
		               For ever panting, and for ever young;
		All breathing human passion far above,
		        That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloy’d,
		               A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.
		
		Who are these coming to the sacrifice?
		        To what green altar, O mysterious priest,
		Lead’st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,
		        And all her silken flanks with garlands drest?
		What little town by river or sea shore,
		        Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
		               Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?
		And, little town, thy streets for evermore
		        Will silent be; and not a soul to tell
		               Why thou art desolate, can e’er return.
		
		O Attic shape! Fair attitude! with brede
		        Of marble men and maidens overwrought,
		With forest branches and the trodden weed;
		        Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought
		As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!
		        When old age shall this generation waste,
		               Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe
		Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say’st,
		        “Beauty is truth, truth beauty,--that is all
		               Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.”


	3. TO AUTUMN

		Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness, 
		  Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun; 
		Conspiring with him how to load and bless 
		  With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eves run; 
		To bend with apples the moss’d cottage-trees, 
		  And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core; 
		     To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells 
		  With a sweet kernel; to set budding more, 
		And still more, later flowers for the bees, 
		Until they think warm days will never cease, 
		     For summer has o’er-brimm’d their clammy cells. 
		
		Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store? 
		  Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find 
		Thee sitting careless on a granary floor, 
		  Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind; 
		Or on a half-reap’d furrow sound asleep, 
		  Drows’d with the fume of poppies, while thy hook 
		     Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers: 
		And sometimes like a gleaner thou dost keep 
		  Steady thy laden head across a brook; 
		  Or by a cyder-press, with patient look, 
		     Thou watchest the last oozings hours by hours. 
		
		Where are the songs of spring? Ay, Where are they? 
		  Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,-- 
		While barred clouds bloom the soft-dying day, 
		  And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue; 
		Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn 
		  Among the river sallows, borne aloft 
		     Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies; 
		And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn; 
		  Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft 
		  The red-breast whistles from a garden-croft; 
		     And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.


*** Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy (1883 - 1929)

	1. EASTER

		There was rapture of spring in the morning
		When we told our love in the wood,
		For you were the spring in my heart, dear lad.
		And I vowed that my life was good.
		But there’s winter of war in the evening,
		And lowering clouds overhead,
		There’s wailing of wind in the chimney nook,
		And I vow that my life lies dead.
		For the sun may shine on the meadow lands
		And the dog rose bloom in the lanes,
		But I’ve only weeds in my garden, lad,
		Wild weeds that are rank with the rains.
		One solace there is for me, sweet but faint,
		As it floats on the wind of the years,
		A whisper that spring is the last true thing
		And that triumph is born of tears.
		It comes from a garden of other days,
		And an echoing voice that cries,
		Behold I am alive for evermore,
		And in Me shall the dead arise.


	2. INDIFFERENCE

		_Mt. 25:31-46_
		
		When Jesus came to Golgotha
		They hanged Him on a tree,
		They drove great nails through hands and feet,
		And made a Calvary.
		They crowned Him with a crown of thorns;
		Red were His wounds and deep,
		For those were crude and cruel days,
		And human flesh was cheap.
		
		When Jesus came to Birmingham,
		They simply passed Him by;
		They never hurt a hair of Him,
		They only let Him die.
		For men had grown more tender,
		And they would not give Him pain;
		They only just passed down the street,
		And left Him in the rain.
		
		Still Jesus cried, “Forgive them,
		For they know not what they do.”
		And still it rained the winter rain
		That drenched Him through and through.
		The crowds went home and left the streets
		Without a soul to see;
		And Jesus crouched against a wall
		And cried for Calvary.


	3. IT IS NOT FINISHED

		IT is not finished, Lord.
		There is not one thing done,
		There is no battle of my life,
		That I have really won.
		And now I come to tell Thee
		How I fought to fail,
		My human, all too human, tale
		Of weakness and futility.
		And yet there is a faith in me,
		That Thou wilt find in it
		One word that Thou canst take
		And make
		The centre of a sentence
		In Thy book of poetry.
		I cannot read this writing of the years,
		My eyes are full of tears,
		It gets all blurred, and won’t make sense
		It’s full of contradictions
		Like the scribblings of a child,
		Such wild, wild
		Hopes, and longing as intense
		As pain, which trivial deeds
		Make folly of--or worse:
		I can but hand it in, and hope
		That Thy great mind, which reads
		The writings of so many lives,
		Will understand this scrawl
		And what it strives
		To say--but leaves unsaid.
		
		I cannot write it over,
		The stars are coming out,
		My body needs its bed.
		I have no strength for more,
		So it must stand or fall--Dear Lord--
		     That’s all.


	4. JUDGMENT

		_There is mercy with Thee, therefore shalt Thou be feared._
		
		I SAW no thronged angelic court, I saw no great white throne,
		I saw no open judgment books, I seemed to stand alone.
		I seemed to stand alone beside a solemn sounding sea,
		While, at my feet upon the shore, broke waves of memory.
		Their murmuring music sobbed and sought a way into my soul,
		The perfect past was present there, and I could see it whole,
		Its beauty and its ugliness, its sorrow and its sin,
		Its splendour and its sordidness, as wave on wave rolled in.
		And ever deeper pierced the pain of all that I had lost,
		My dear dead dreams of perfect things, I saw them tempest-tossed.
		They fell like wreckage at my feet, and, as I turned them o’er,
		The solemn waves, in Memory’s caves, kept booming “Nevermore!”
		There came one dream, more dear than all, a corpse without a head,
		The flying spray hissed cowardice, and it was dead, cold dead.
		Then suddenly a shadow fell, and I was not alone,
		He stood with me beside the sea, and listened to its moan.
		I did not dare to raise my eyes, I feared what I might see,
		A cold sweat broke and bathed my brow, I longed to turn and flee,
		But could not; rooted there I stood, in shiv’ring shame and fear,
		The subtle shadow substance took, and nearer came, and near.
		O was it days or was it years, we stood beside that sea,
		Or was it aeons, timeless times? It seemed eternity.
		At last, compelled, I raised my eyes. Two eyes looked into mine,
		And shattered all my soul with shame, so sad and so divine.
		It palsied all my pride with pain, the terror of those tears,
		And wrought into my soul the woe of all my wasted years.
		“Depart from me,” I cried, “depart, I cannot stand with Thee
		And face the sorrow of those eyes, beside this cruel sea.
		Depart from me, I dare not tread the sands those feet have trod,
		Nor look into those eyes that tell the agony of God.
		Depart,” I cried, and He was gone. I stood there all alone,
		In silence save that Memory’s sea still made perpetual moan.
		Night shadowed all, and wandering winds came wailing from afar,
		But out across the darkening sea shone forth one single star.


	5. MAN’S SOUL

		THE Great God stooped to save my soul
		     And lift it up to Paradise;
		But something bound it still to earth,
		     A careless woman’s eyes.
		
		Then Satan came to damn my soul,
		     And drag it down to his own place;
		But something bound it still to earth,
		     Another woman’s face.


	6. MY PEACE I LEAVE WITH YOU

		THY Peace! Thou pale, despisèd Christ!
		     What Peace is there in Thee,
		Nailed to the Cross that crowns the world,
		           In agony?
		
		No Peace of home was Thine; no rest
		     When Thy day’s work was done.
		When darkness called the world to sleep
		           And veiled the sun,
		
		No children gathered round Thy knee,
		     No hand soothed care away
		Thou hadst not where to lay Thy head
		           At close of day.
		
		What Peace was Thine? Misunderstood,
		     Rejected by Thine own,
		Pacing Thy grim Gethsemane,
		           Outcast and lone.
		
		What Peace hast Thou to give the world?
		     There is enough of pain;
		Always upon my window beats
		           The sound of rain.
		
		The source of sorrow is not dried,
		     Nor stays the stream of tears,
		But winds on weeping to the sea,
		           All down the years.
		
		For millions come to Golgotha
		     To suffer and to die,
		Forsaken in their hour of need,
		           And asking, Why?
		
		Man’s Via Crucis never ends,
		     Earth’s Calvaries increase,
		The world is full of spears and nails,
		           But where is Peace?
		
		“Take up Thy Cross and follow Me,
		     I am the Way, my son,
		Via Crucis, Via Pacis,
		           Meet and are one.”


	7. NON ANGLI SED ANGELI

		“NOT Angles merely but of angel stock,
		These boys blue-eyed and shining from the sea,
		Which like a silver girdle belts their home.
		Not slaves, but souls, not tools to use for gain,
		But men to love and lead and save for God
		Who made them and for that great King who died
		The death of shame and glory on the Cross.”
		So spake the master Christian of the world
		Long years ago when, in the streets of Rome
		Imperial, he met the ancestors
		Of that yet greater Rome which was to be.
		So spake he, taught by Him to whose great soul
		There were no slaves, nor chattels in the world
		But only men and brothers, Sons of God,
		The last and greatest works of wondrous Love,
		From whose eternal, energy pain
		The greatest and the least of things is sprung.
		So spoke he, taught by Him who mirrored forth
		To men’s blind eyes that Love divine of God,
		Who, like a father, mourns, the one lost son,
		And, like a faithful shepherd, wanders wide
		Across the hills and calls through dawnless dark
		The one lost sheep that strays forth from the fold,
		Christ lived in him, and he had learned full well
		The first and chiefest lesson of His life,
		The value of a man to God, the price
		God puts, on human, souls, the price of blood
		And pain paid out in coin of Calvary.
		And in that blazing light of Love he saw
		The sin of slavery, the sin supreme,
		That slays, the world because it values life
		As death, and dares to use as mere machines,
		For pleasure, or for profit, living men.
		This blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
		Which, neither in this world nor in the next,
		Can find forgiveness in the heart of God,
		Who only knows the value of a man,
		He saw it with the eyes of Christ, and spoke
		In all unconscious prophecy, the doom
		Of slavery, which these same blue-eyed boys
		Would one day die to banish from the world.
		And I have seen them die in these last days:
		Yes, I have seen their bright blue eyes grow dim
		With agony, yet never lose their smile,
		The dauntless smile of Angles that reveals
		Their angel souls, and crowns them Kings by right,
		The destined saviours of the world from sin,
		And from the curse of tyranny which kills
		The souls of men, and turns them into slaves.
		Yes, I have seen them smile at death, and known,
		By instinct of sure prophecy, the Truth
		That seas of dead tyrannic force would break
		In vain against the rock of British hearts,
		Whereon the love of freedom sits enthroned.
		This have I known, and have with tears rejoiced,
		Until there shivered through me like the chill
		Of death, the fear lest gold be strong where steel
		Is weak; lest men whose pride no sword can slay
		May yet be bought and sold to slavery.
		The day of tyrant kings is dead, and thrones
		Shall nevermore dethrone men’s souls.
		But now A dull inhuman monster takes their place.
		The minotaur of Mammon tears the wings
		From new-fledged souls and flings them bleeding down
		To dogs of greed and lust. To him they are
		Dead hands, machines that make machines, and grind
		Out gold to swell the coffers of the rich.
		They have no right to fly, their wings are best
		Cut short, that so their hands may be more strong
		To work, make wealth, build up the State, and set
		The Commonwealth on sure foundations, made
		Of gold and silver and of precious stones.
		To him a man is of less value than
		A beast of burden, for the beast must needs
		Be bought for gold, and if he dies be bought
		Again, but men need not be bought; they are
		Machines for hire that can be scrapped at will,
		And new ones hired with no fresh cost at all,
		Because they die or weaken in their work.
		Supply is plentiful, and men are drugs
		Upon the crowded markets of the world.
		So Satan takes new forms, and when he finds
		The sword is weak, too weak to win brave hearts
		As slaves, creeps snakelike in, in time of Peace,
		To fetter free-born men with golden chains
		And lead them helpless captives down to hell.
		O England, when this wave of war is spent,
		And rolls back baffled from thy rocky breast,
		Wilt thou be strong to slay the Minotaur,
		And strangle that great golden snake that crept
		In time of Peace about thy home to kill,
		With venom of low greed and lust of wealth,
		The soul of Freedom and the heart of Love?
		Shall wealth still grow, and woe increase to breed
		In filthy slums the slaves of poverty?
		Shall senseless pride and vulgar luxury
		By gilding over evil make it good?
		Shall souls be only hands again, dead hands,
		That toil for wealth that makes none rich save those
		Who need it not? Shall men still seek in drink
		A refuge from the burden of their strife,
		And from that dull monotony of grey
		That shadows half our cities from the sun?
		Shall women still be bought and sold, like dogs
		Upon the streets, because the wage they earn
		By work will not keep bodies for their souls?
		Shall children come to birth, too weak to live,
		Not even hands of strength, but feeble hands,
		That clutch at life and die--just born to die
		And cry--cry shame upon the grimy world
		That murdered them? If this be what must come,
		Then blessed are the dead who die in war,
		Their bodies shattered, but their souls untouched
		By slime of sin, unpoisoned by the snake,
		For war is kinder than a Godless peace.
		O England, let this message from the past
		Ring down the ages like a trumpet call,
		Not Angles these but Angels, souls not slaves,
		Let not thy wealth be counted in base coin
		But in chaste mothers, comely maids, strong men
		With kindly eyes, in sound of children’s play,
		And in those happy aged ones who stand
		Between the seas of life, and, looking back
		And forwards, vow that human life is good.
		So must our land be reckoned rich or poor.


	8. PATIENCE

		SOMETIMES I wish that I might do
		     Just one grand deed and die,
		And by that one grand deed reach up
		     To meet God in the sky.
		But such is not Thy way, O God,
		     Not such is Thy decree,
		But deed by deed, and tear by tear,
		     Our souls must climb to Thee,
		As climbed the only Son of God
		     From manger unto Cross,
		Who learned, through tears and bloody sweat,
		     To count this world but loss;
		Who left the Virgin Mother’s Arms
		     To seek those arms of shame,
		Outstretched upon the lonely hill
		     To which the darkness came.
		As deed by deed, and tear by tear,
		     He climbed up to the height,
		Each deed a splendid deed, each tear
		     A jewel shining bright,
		So grant us, Lord, the patient heart,
		     To climb the upward way,
		Until we stand upon the height,
		     And see the perfect day.


	9. TEMPTATION

		PRAY! Have I prayed! When I’m worn with all my praying
		     When I’ve bored the blessed angels with my battery of prayer!
		It’s the proper thing to say--but it’s only saying, saying,
		     And I cannot get to Jesus for the glory of her hair.


	10. THE SOUL OF DOUBT

		THAT’S it. Doubt’s very soul of doubt
		Lies here. Is God just faith in God,
		Or can God work His will without
		Our human faith? Is flesh and blood
		Made by, or maker of, the mind
		That works upon the mass of things
		Inanimate? Has this wild wind
		A master, riding on its wings
		His chosen way, or is it free
		Of any but its own mad will
		To sweep in wanton liberty
		Over the patient earth, and spill
		Destruction, breaking hearts and homes,
		A drunken thing without a plan
		Or purpose anywhere? It comes
		To that at last. Is mortal man
		Fated to fight a senseless world
		Of blind material force alone,
		By its haphazard powers hurled
		This way and that, until his own
		Small wit in desperation finds
		A way to short uncertain Peace?
		Around this core of doubt thought winds
		Its endless coil, seeking release,
		And, finding none, for ever binds
		Its meshes tighter round the soul. 	 
		
		The preachers blame our. lack of faith
		For all our human ills, but why?
		Does God depend on man? “Thus saith
		The Lord omnipotent,” they cry.
		Aye, God for ever says, but we
		Must do, and how? We lack the power,
		And from the task’s immensity
		Reel back in fear, as hour by hour
		It grows, and frowning peak on peak
		The evil mountains rise ahead.
		We stumble on bewildered, weak,
		Half blind, trusting what we have read
		Of God, that legendary Love
		Urgent to help us, and redeem
		Our souls, a Love we cannot prove,
		But shut out aching eyes and dream
		It true. Could any God endure
		The sight unmoved and silent still?
		Would not a real God assure
		Our doubts, and work His mighty
		Will Without our faith? So many wrecks;
		Wrecked faith, wrecked hope, wrecked love, wrecked dreams;
		And still we bow our helpless necks
		To meet the storm. God’s silence seems
		Decisive. God is only faith
		In God, and when Faith dies, God dies,
		And Hope, a homeless weeping wraith,
		Beats on her shrivelled breasts, and cries,
		Refusing to be comforted,
		Because her little ones are dead,
		All dead.
		And yet--and yet--doubt may deceive,
		Joy may give truer thought than grief.
		It may be so, Lord, I believe,
		In mercy help mine unbelief.


	11. TREES

		ONCE glistering green,
		             With dewy sheen,
		And summer glory round them cast
		             Now black and bare,
		             The trees stand there,
		And mourn their beauty that is past.
		
		             Look, leaf by leaf,
		             Each leaf a grief,
		The hand of Autumn strips them bare.
		             No sound nor cry,
		             As they fall and die,
		Because they know that Life is there.
		
		             So stiff and strong,
		             The winter long,
		All uncomplaining stand the trees.
		             God make my life,
		             Through all its strife,
		As true to Spring as one of these.
		
		             So would I stand,
		             Serene and grand,
		While age strips off the joys of youth;
		             Because I know
		             That, as they go,
		My soul draws nearer to the Truth.
		
		             He is the Truth,
		             In very sooth,
		The Word made flesh, who dwelt with men,
		             And the world shall ring
		             With the song of Spring,
		When thy soul turns to its Lord again.
		
		             When God’s soft breath,
		             That men call death,
		Falls gently on thy closing eyes,
		             Thy youth, that goes
		             Like the red June rose,
		Shall burst to bloom in Paradise.


*** Jack Kerouac (1922 - 1969)

	1. 149TH CHORUS

		I keep falling in love
		 with my mother,
		I dont want to hurt her
		--Of all people to hurt.
		
		Every time I see her
		 she’s grown older
		But her uniform always
		 amazes me
		For its Dutch simplicity
		And the Doll she is,
		The doll-like way
		 she stands
		Bowlegged in my dreams,
		Waiting to serve me.
		
		     And I am only an Apache
		     Smoking Hashi
		     In old Cabashy
		     By the Lamp.


	2. BUS EAST

		Society has good intentions Bureaucracy is like a friend
		5 
		years ago--other furies other losses--
		
		America’s 
		trying to control the uncontrollable Forest fires, Vice
		
		The 
		essential smile In the essential sleep Of the children Of the essential mind
		
		I’m 
		all thru playing the American 
		Now I’m going to live a good quiet life
		
		The 
		world should be built for foot walkers
		
		Oily 
		rivers Of spiney Nevady
		
		I 
		am Jake Cake 
		Rake 
		Write like Blake
		
		The 
		horse is not pleased Sight of his
		gorgeous finery 
		in the dust Its silken 
		nostrils 
		did disgust
		
		Cats 
		arent kind Kiddies anent sweet
		
		April 
		in Nevada--Investigating Dismal Cheyenne Where the war parties 
		In fields 
		of straw 
		Aimed over oxen At Indian Chiefs 
		In wild headdress Pouring thru 
		the gap 
		In Wyoming plain 
		To make the settlers 
		Eat more dust than dust 
		was eaten In the States From East at Seacoast Where wagons made up To dreadful 
		Plains 
		Of clazer vup
		
		Saltry 
		settlers 
		Anxious to masturbate The Mongol Sea (I’m too tired in Cheyenne--
		No sleep in 4 nights now, & 2 to go)


	3. HOW TO MEDITATE

		--lights out--
		fall, hands a-clasped, into instantaneous 
		ecstasy like a shot of heroin or morphine, 
		the gland inside of my brain discharging 
		the good glad fluid (Holy Fluid) as 
		i hap-down and hold all my body parts 
		down to a deadstop trance-Healing 
		all my sicknesses-erasing all-not 
		even the shred of a ‘I-hope-you’ or a 
		Loony Balloon left in it, but the mind 
		blank, serene, thoughtless. When a thought 
		comes a-springing from afar with its held--
		forth figure of image, you spoof it out, 
		you spuff it off, you fake it, and 
		it fades, and thought never comes-and 
		with joy you realize for the first time 
		‘thinking’s just like not thinking--
		So I don’t have to think 
		any 
		more’


	4. IN VAIN

		The stars in the sky
		In vain
		The tragedy of Hamlet
		  In vain
		The key in the lock
		     In vain
		The sleeping mother
		     In vain
		The lamp in the corner
		        In vain
		The lamp in the corner unlit
		           In vain
		Abraham Lincoln
		                       In vain
		The Aztec empire
		                          In vain
		The writing hand: in vain
		(The shoetrees in the shoes
		        In vain
		The windowshade string upon
		           the hand bible
		  In vain--
		  The glitter of the greenglass
		        ashtray
		In vain
		The bear in the woods
		        In vain
		The Life of Buddha
		        In vain)


	5. NEBRASKA

		April doesnt hurt here
		Like it does in New England 
		The ground
		Vast and brown 
		Surrounds dry towns 
		Located in the dust 
		Of the coming locust
		Live for survival, not for “kicks”
		Be a bangtail describer, 
		like of shrouded traveler 
		in Textile tenement & the birds fighting in yr ears-like Burroughs exact to describe & gettin $
		The Angry Hunger
		(hunger is anger) 
		 who fears the 
		 hungry feareth 
		 the angry)
		And so I came home
		To Golden far away 
		Twas on the horizon 
		Every blessed day 
		As we rolled And we rolled
		From Donner tragic Pass 
		Thru April in Nevada And out Salt City Way Into the dry Nebraskas And sad Wyomings Where young girls And pretty lover boys 
		With Mickey Mantle eyes
		Wander under moons 
		Sawing in lost cradle 
		And Judge O Fasterc 
		Passes whiggling by To ask of young love: ,,Was it the same wind Of April Plains eve that ruffled the dress
		Of my lost love
		Louanna
		In the Western
		Far off night
		    Lost as the whistle
		    Of the passing Train
		    Everywhere West
		    Roams moaning
		 The deep basso
		--Vom! Vom!
		--Was it the same love 
		Notified my bones As mortify yrs now 
		Children of the soft 
		Wyoming April night?
		 Couldna been!
		 But was! But was!”
		And on the prairie 
		The wildflower blows 
		In the night For bees & birds And sleeping hidden Animals of life.
		The Chicago
		Spitters in the spotty street 
		Cheap beans, loop, Girls made eyes at me And I had 35 Cents in my jeans--
		Then Toledo 
		Springtime starry 
		Lover night Of hot rod boys And cool girls A wandering 
		A wandering
		In search of April pain A plash of rain 
		Will not dispel This fumigatin hell Of lover lane This park of roses Blue as bees
		In former airy poses 
		In aerial O Way hoses 
		No tamarand And figancine Can the musterand Be less kind
		    Sol--
		    Sol--
		Bring forth yr Ah Sunflower--Ah me Montana 
		Phosphorescent Rose 
		And bridge in
		    fairly land
		I’d understand it all--


	6. THE BOTTOMS OF MY SHOES

		The bottoms of my shoes 
		    are clean 
		From walking in the rain


*** Joyce Kilmer (1886 - 1918)

	1. ALARM CLOCKS

		When Dawn strides out to wake a dewy farm
		Across green fields and yellow hills of hay
		The little twittering birds laugh in his way
		And poise triumphant on his shining arm.
		He bears a sword of flame but not to harm
		The wakened life that feels his quickening sway
		And barnyard voices shrilling “It is day!”
		Take by his grace a new and alien charm.
		
		But in the city, like a wounded thing
		That limps to cover from the angry chase,
		He steals down streets where sickly arc-lights sing,
		And wanly mock his young and shameful face;
		And tiny gongs with cruel fervor ring
		In many a high and dreary sleeping place.


	2. AS WINDS THAT BLOW AGAINST A STAR

		Now by what whim of wanton chance
		Do radiant eyes know sombre days?
		And feet that shod in light should dance
		Walk weary and laborious ways?
		
		But rays from Heaven, white and whole,
		May penetrate the gloom of earth;
		And tears but nourish, in your soul,
		The glory of celestial mirth.
		
		The darts of toil and sorrow, sent
		Against your peaceful beauty, are
		As foolish and as impotent
		As winds that blow against a star.


	3. CITIZEN OF THE WORLD

		No longer of Him be it said
		“He hath no place to lay His head.”
		
		In every land a constant lamp
		Flames by His small and mighty camp.
		
		There is no strange and distant place
		That is not gladdened by His face.
		
		And every nation kneels to hail
		The Splendour shining through Its veil.
		
		Cloistered beside the shouting street,
		Silent, He calls me to His feet.
		
		Imprisoned for His love of me
		He makes my spirit greatly free.
		
		And through my lips that uttered sin
		The King of Glory enters in.


	4. DELICATESSEN

		Why is that wanton gossip Fame
		So dumb about this man’s affairs?
		Why do we titter at his name
		Who come to buy his curious wares?
		
		Here is a shop of wonderment.
		From every land has come a prize;
		Rich spices from the Orient,
		And fruit that knew Italian skies,
		
		And figs that ripened by the sea
		In Smyrna, nuts from hot Brazil,
		Strange pungent meats from Germany,
		And currants from a Grecian hill.
		
		He is the lord of goodly things
		That make the poor man’s table gay,
		Yet of his worth no minstrel sings
		And on his tomb there is no bay.
		
		Perhaps he lives and dies unpraised,
		This trafficker in humble sweets,
		Because his little shops are raised
		By thousands in the city streets.
		
		Yet stars in greater numbers shine,
		And violets in millions grow,
		And they in many a golden line
		Are sung, as every child must know.
		
		Perhaps Fame thinks his worried eyes,
		His wrinkled, shrewd, pathetic face,
		His shop, and all he sells and buys
		Are desperately commonplace.
		
		Well, it is true he has no sword
		To dangle at his booted knees.
		He leans across a slab of board,
		And draws his knife and slices cheese.
		
		He never heard of chivalry,
		He longs for no heroic times;
		He thinks of pickles, olives, tea,
		And dollars, nickles, cents and dimes.
		
		His world has narrow walls, it seems;
		By counters is his soul confined;
		His wares are all his hopes and dreams,
		They are the fabric of his mind.
		
		Yet--in a room above the store
		There is a woman--and a child
		Pattered just now across the floor;
		The shopman looked at him and smiled.
		
		For, once he thrilled with high romance
		And tuned to love his eager voice.
		Like any cavalier of France
		He wooed the maiden of his choice.
		
		And now deep in his weary heart
		Are sacred flames that whitely burn.
		He has of Heaven’s grace a part
		Who loves, who is beloved in turn.
		
		And when the long day’s work is done,
		(How slow the leaden minutes ran!)
		Home, with his wife and little son,
		He is no huckster, but a man!
		
		And there are those who grasp his hand,
		Who drink with him and wish him well.
		O in no drear and lonely land
		Shall he who honors friendship dwell.
		
		And in his little shop, who knows
		What bitter games of war are played?
		Why, daily on each corner grows
		A foe to rob him of his trade.
		
		He fights, and for his fireside’s sake;
		He fights for clothing and for bread:
		The lances of his foemen make
		A steely halo round his head.
		
		He decks his window artfully,
		He haggles over paltry sums.
		In this strange field his war must be
		And by such blows his triumph comes.
		
		What if no trumpet sounds to call
		His armed legions to his side?
		What if, to no ancestral hall
		He comes in all a victor’s pride?
		
		The scene shall never fit the deed.
		Grotesquely wonders come to pass.
		The fool shall mount an Arab steed
		And Jesus ride upon an ass.
		
		This man has home and child and wife
		And battle set for every day.
		This man has God and love and life;
		These stand, all else shall pass away.
		
		O Carpenter of Nazareth,
		Whose mother was a village maid,
		Shall we, Thy children, blow our breath
		In scorn on any humble trade?
		
		Have pity on our foolishness
		And give us eyes, that we may see
		Beneath the shopman’s clumsy dress
		The splendor of humanity!


	5. MOUNT HOUVENKOPF

		Serene he stands, with mist serenely crowned,
		And draws a cloak of trees about his breast.
		The thunder roars but cannot break his rest
		And from his rugged face the tempests bound.
		He does not heed the angry lightning’s wound,
		The raging blizzard is his harmless guest,
		And human life is but a passing jest
		To him who sees Time spin the years around.
		
		But fragile souls, in skyey reaches find
		High vantage-points and view him from afar.
		How low he seems to the ascended mind,
		How brief he seems where all things endless are;
		This little playmate of the mighty wind
		This young companion of an ancient star.


	6. PENNIES

		A few long-hoarded pennies in his hand
		Behold him stand;
		A kilted Hedonist, perplexed and sad.
		The joy that once he had,
		The first delight of ownership is fled.
		He bows his little head.
		Ah, cruel Time, to kill
		That splendid thrill!
		
		Then in his tear-dimmed eyes
		New lights arise.
		He drops his treasured pennies on the ground,
		They roll and bound
		And scattered, rest.
		Now with what zest
		He runs to find his errant wealth again!
		
		So unto men
		Doth God, depriving that He may bestow.
		Fame, health and money go,
		But that they may, new found, be newly sweet.
		Yea, at His feet
		Sit, waiting us, to their concealment bid,
		All they, our lovers, whom His Love hath hid.
		
		Lo, comfort blooms on pain, and peace on strife,
		And gain on loss.
		What is the key to Everlasting Life?
		A blood-stained Cross.


	7. SERVANT GIRL AND GROCER’S BOY

		Her lips’ remark was:  “Oh, you kid!”
		Her soul spoke thus (I know it did):
		
		“O king of realms of endless joy,
		My own, my golden grocer’s boy,
		
		I am a princess forced to dwell
		Within a lonely kitchen cell,
		
		While you go dashing through the land
		With loveliness on every hand.
		
		Your whistle strikes my eager ears
		Like music of the choiring spheres.
		
		The mighty earth grows faint and reels
		Beneath your thundering wagon wheels.
		
		How keenly, perilously sweet
		To cling upon that swaying seat!
		
		How happy she who by your side
		May share the splendors of that ride!
		
		Ah, if you will not take my hand
		And bear me off across the land,
		
		Then, traveller from Arcady,
		Remain awhile and comfort me.
		
		What other maiden can you find
		So young and delicate and kind?”
		
		Her lips’ remark was:  “Oh, you kid!”
		Her soul spoke thus (I know it did).


	8. ST. LAURENCE

		Within the broken Vatican
		The murdered Pope is lying dead.
		The soldiers of Valerian
		Their evil hands are wet and red.
		
		Unarmed, unmoved, St. Laurence waits,
		His cassock is his only mail.
		The troops of Hell have burst the gates,
		But Christ is Lord, He shall prevail.
		
		They have encompassed him with steel,
		They spit upon his gentle face,
		He smiles and bleeds, nor will reveal
		The Church’s hidden treasure-place.
		
		Ah, faithful steward, worthy knight,
		Well hast thou done.  Behold thy fee!
		Since thou hast fought the goodly fight
		A martyr’s death is fixed for thee.
		
		St. Laurence, pray for us to bear
		The faith which glorifies thy name.
		St. Laurence, pray for us to share
		The wounds of Love’s consuming flame.


	9. STARS

		Bright stars, yellow stars, flashing through the air,
		Are you errant strands of Lady Mary’s hair?
		As she slits the cloudy veil and bends down through,
		Do you fall across her cheeks and over heaven too?
		
		Gay stars, little stars, you are little eyes,
		Eyes of baby angels playing in the skies.
		Now and then a winged child turns his merry face
		Down toward the spinning world--what a funny place!
		
		Jesus Christ came from the Cross (Christ receive my soul!)
		In each perfect hand and foot there was a bloody hole.
		Four great iron spikes there were, red and never dry,
		Michael plucked them from the Cross and set them in the sky.
		
		Christ’s Troop, Mary’s Guard, God’s own men,
		Draw your swords and strike at Hell and strike again.
		Every steel-born spark that flies where God’s battles are,
		Flashes past the face of God, and is a star.


	10. THE FOURTH SHEPHERD

		 I.
		
		On nights like this the huddled sheep
		Are like white clouds upon the grass,
		And merry herdsmen guard their sleep
		And chat and watch the big stars pass.
		
		It is a pleasant thing to lie
		Upon the meadow on the hill
		With kindly fellowship near by
		Of sheep and men of gentle will.
		
		I lean upon my broken crook
		And dream of sheep and grass and men--
		O shameful eyes that cannot look
		On any honest thing again!
		
		On bloody feet I clambered down
		And fled the wages of my sin,
		I am the leavings of the town,
		And meanly serve its meanest inn.
		
		I tramp the courtyard stones in grief,
		While sleep takes man and beast to her.
		And every cloud is calling “Thief!”
		And every star calls “Murderer!”
		
		
		 II.
		
		The hand of God is sure and strong,
		Nor shall a man forever flee
		The bitter punishment of wrong.
		The wrath of God is over me!
		
		With ashen bread and wine of tears
		Shall I be solaced in my pain.
		I wear through black and endless years
		Upon my brow the mark of Cain.
		
		
		 III.
		
		Poor vagabond, so old and mild,
		Will they not keep him for a night?
		And She, a woman great with child,
		So frail and pitiful and white.
		
		Good people, since the tavern door
		Is shut to you, come here instead.
		See, I have cleansed my stable floor
		And piled fresh hay to make a bed.
		
		Here is some milk and oaten cake.
		Lie down and sleep and rest you fair,
		Nor fear, O simple folk, to take
		The bounty of a child of care.
		
		
		 IV.
		
		On nights like this the huddled sheep--
		I never saw a night so fair.
		How huge the sky is, and how deep!
		And how the planets flash and glare!
		
		At dawn beside my drowsy flock
		What winged music I have heard!
		But now the clouds with singing rock
		As if the sky were turning bird.
		
		O blinding Light, O blinding Light!
		Burn through my heart with sweetest pain.
		O flaming Song, most loudly bright,
		Consume away my deadly stain!
		
		
		 V.
		
		The stable glows against the sky,
		And who are these that throng the way?
		My three old comrades hasten by
		And shining angels kneel and pray.
		
		The door swings wide--I cannot go--
		I must and yet I dare not see.
		Lord, who am I that I should know--
		Lord, God, be merciful to me!
		
		
		 VI.
		
		O Whiteness, whiter than the fleece
		Of new-washed sheep on April sod!
		O Breath of Life, O Prince of Peace,
		O Lamb of God, O Lamb of God!


	11. THE HOUSE WITH NOBODY IN IT

		Whenever I walk to Suffern along the Erie track
		I go by a poor old farmhouse with its shingles broken and black.
		I suppose I’ve passed it a hundred times, but I always stop for a minute
		And look at the house, the tragic house, the house with nobody in it.
		
		I never have seen a haunted house, but I hear there are such things;
		That they hold the talk of spirits, their mirth and sorrowings.
		I know this house isn’t haunted, and I wish it were, I do;
		For it wouldn’t be so lonely if it had a ghost or two.
		
		This house on the road to Suffern needs a dozen panes of glass,
		And somebody ought to weed the walk and take a scythe to the grass.
		It needs new paint and shingles, and the vines should be trimmed and tied;
		But what it needs the most of all is some people living inside.
		
		If I had a lot of money and all my debts were paid
		I’d put a gang of men to work with brush and saw and spade.
		I’d buy that place and fix it up the way it used to be
		And I’d find some people who wanted a home and give it to them free.
		
		Now, a new house standing empty, with staring window and door,
		Looks idle, perhaps, and foolish, like a hat on its block in the store.
		But there’s nothing mournful about it; it cannot be sad and lone
		For the lack of something within it that it has never known.
		
		But a house that has done what a house should do,
		 a house that has sheltered life,
		That has put its loving wooden arms around a man and his wife,
		A house that has echoed a baby’s laugh and held up his stumbling feet,
		Is the saddest sight, when it’s left alone, that ever your eyes could meet.
		
		So whenever I go to Suffern along the Erie track
		I never go by the empty house without stopping and looking back,
		Yet it hurts me to look at the crumbling roof and the shutters fallen apart,
		For I can’t help thinking the poor old house is a house with a broken heart.


	12. THE ROSARY

		Not on the lute, nor harp of many strings
		Shall all men praise the Master of all song.
		Our life is brief, one saith, and art is long;
		And skilled must be the laureates of kings.
		Silent, O lips that utter foolish things!
		Rest, awkward fingers striking all notes wrong!
		How from your toil shall issue, white and strong,
		Music like that God’s chosen poet sings?
		
		There is one harp that any hand can play,
		And from its strings what harmonies arise!
		There is one song that any mouth can say,--
		A song that lingers when all singing dies.
		When on their beads our Mother’s children pray
		Immortal music charms the grateful skies.


	13. THE TWELVE-FORTY-FIVE

		Within the Jersey City shed
		The engine coughs and shakes its head,
		The smoke, a plume of red and white,
		Waves madly in the face of night.
		And now the grave incurious stars
		Gleam on the groaning hurrying cars.
		Against the kind and awful reign
		Of darkness, this our angry train,
		A noisy little rebel, pouts
		Its brief defiance, flames and shouts--
		And passes on, and leaves no trace.
		For darkness holds its ancient place,
		Serene and absolute, the king
		Unchanged, of every living thing.
		The houses lie obscure and still
		In Rutherford and Carlton Hill.
		Our lamps intensify the dark
		Of slumbering Passaic Park.
		And quiet holds the weary feet
		That daily tramp through Prospect Street.
		What though we clang and clank and roar
		Through all Passaic’s streets?  No door
		Will open, not an eye will see
		Who this loud vagabond may be.
		Upon my crimson cushioned seat,
		In manufactured light and heat,
		I feel unnatural and mean.
		Outside the towns are cool and clean;
		Curtained awhile from sound and sight
		They take God’s gracious gift of night.
		The stars are watchful over them.
		On Clifton as on Bethlehem
		The angels, leaning down the sky,
		Shed peace and gentle dreams.  And I--
		I ride, I blasphemously ride
		Through all the silent countryside.
		The engine’s shriek, the headlight’s glare,
		Pollute the still nocturnal air.
		The cottages of Lake View sigh
		And sleeping, frown as we pass by.
		Why, even strident Paterson
		Rests quietly as any nun.
		Her foolish warring children keep
		The grateful armistice of sleep.
		For what tremendous errand’s sake
		Are we so blatantly awake?
		What precious secret is our freight?
		What king must be abroad so late?
		Perhaps Death roams the hills to-night
		And we rush forth to give him fight.
		Or else, perhaps, we speed his way
		To some remote unthinking prey.
		Perhaps a woman writhes in pain
		And listens--listens for the train!
		The train, that like an angel sings,
		The train, with healing on its wings.
		Now “Hawthorne!“ the conductor cries.
		My neighbor starts and rubs his eyes.
		He hurries yawning through the car
		And steps out where the houses are.
		This is the reason of our quest!
		Not wantonly we break the rest
		Of town and village, nor do we
		Lightly profane night’s sanctity.
		What Love commands the train fulfills,
		And beautiful upon the hills
		Are these our feet of burnished steel.
		Subtly and certainly I feel
		That Glen Rock welcomes us to her
		And silent Ridgewood seems to stir
		And smile, because she knows the train
		Has brought her children back again.
		We carry people home--and so
		God speeds us, wheresoe’er we go.
		Hohokus, Waldwick, Allendale
		Lift sleepy heads to give us hail.
		In Ramsey, Mahwah, Suffern stand
		Houses that wistfully demand
		A father--son--some human thing
		That this, the midnight train, may bring.
		The trains that travel in the day
		They hurry folks to work or play.
		The midnight train is slow and old
		But of it let this thing be told,
		To its high honor be it said
		It carries people home to bed.
		My cottage lamp shines white and clear.
		God bless the train that brought me here.


	14. TO A BLACKBIRD AND HIS MATE WHO DIED IN THE SPRING

		An iron hand has stilled the throats
		That throbbed with loud and rhythmic glee
		And dammed the flood of silver notes
		That drenched the world in melody.
		The blosmy apple boughs are yearning
		For their wild choristers’ returning,
		But no swift wings flash through the tree.
		
		Ye that were glad and fleet and strong,
		Shall Silence take you in her net?
		And shall Death quell that radiant song
		Whose echo thrills the meadow yet?
		Burst the frail web about you clinging
		And charm Death’s cruel heart with singing
		Till with strange tears his eyes are wet.
		
		The scented morning of the year
		Is old and stale now ye are gone.
		No friendly songs the children hear
		Among the bushes on the lawn.
		When babies wander out a-Maying
		Will ye, their bards, afar be straying?
		Unhymned by you, what is the dawn?
		
		Nay, since ye loved ye cannot die.
		Above the stars is set your nest.
		Through Heaven’s fields ye sing and fly
		And in the trees of Heaven rest.
		And little children in their dreaming
		Shall see your soft black plumage gleaming
		And smile, by your clear music blest.


	15. TO A YOUNG POET WHO KILLED HIMSELF

		When you had played with life a space
		And made it drink and lust and sing,
		You flung it back into God’s face
		And thought you did a noble thing.
		“Lo, I have lived and loved,“ you said,
		“And sung to fools too dull to hear me.
		Now for a cool and grassy bed
		With violets in blossom near me.”
		
		Well, rest is good for weary feet,
		Although they ran for no great prize;
		And violets are very sweet,
		Although their roots are in your eyes.
		But hark to what the earthworms say
		Who share with you your muddy haven:
		“The fight was on--you ran away.
		You are a coward and a craven.
		
		“The rug is ruined where you bled;
		It was a dirty way to die!
		To put a bullet through your head
		And make a silly woman cry!
		You could not vex the merry stars
		Nor make them heed you, dead or living.
		Not all your puny anger mars
		God’s irresistible forgiving.
		
		“Yes, God forgives and men forget,
		And you’re forgiven and forgotten.
		You might be gaily sinning yet
		And quick and fresh instead of rotten.
		And when you think of love and fame
		And all that might have come to pass,
		Then don’t you feel a little shame?
		And don’t you think you were an ass?”


	16. TREES

		I think that I shall never see
		A poem lovely as a tree.
		
		A tree whose hungry mouth is prest
		Against the earth’s sweet flowing breast;
		
		A tree that looks at God all day,
		And lifts her leafy arms to pray;
		
		A tree that may in Summer wear
		A nest of robins in her hair;
		
		Upon whose bosom snow has lain;
		Who intimately lives with rain.
		
		Poems are made by fools like me,
		But only God can make a tree.


	17. VISION

		Homer, they tell us, was blind and could not see the beautiful faces
		Looking up into his own and reflecting the joy of his dream,
		Yet did he seem
		Gifted with eyes that could follow the gods to their holiest places.
		
		I have no vision of gods, not of Eros with love-arrows laden,
		Jupiter thundering death or of Juno his white-breasted queen,
		Yet have I seen
		All of the joy of the world in the innocent heart of a maiden.


	18. WARTIME CHRISTMAS

		Led by a star, a golden star,
		The youngest star, an olden star,
		Here the kings and the shepherds are,
		Akneeling on the ground.
		What did they come to the inn to see?
		God in the Highest, and this is He,
		A baby asleep on His mother’s knee
		And with her kisses crowned.
		
		Now is the earth a dreary place,
		A troubled place, a weary place.
		Peace has hidden her lovely face
		And turned in tears away.
		Yet the sun, through the war-cloud, sees
		Babies asleep on their mother’s knees.
		While there are love and home--and these--
		There shall be Christmas Day.


*** Rudyard Kipling (1865 - 1936)

	1. GUNGA DIN

		You may talk o’ gin and beer   
		When you’re quartered safe out ’ere,   
		An’ you’re sent to penny-fights an’ Aldershot it;
		But when it comes to slaughter   
		You will do your work on water,
		An’ you’ll lick the bloomin’ boots of ’im that’s got it.   
		Now in Injia’s sunny clime,   
		Where I used to spend my time   
		A-servin’ of ’Er Majesty the Queen,   
		Of all them blackfaced crew   
		The finest man I knew
		Was our regimental bhisti, Gunga Din,   
		     He was ‘Din! Din! Din!
		  ‘You limpin’ lump o’ brick-dust, Gunga Din!
		     ‘Hi! Slippy hitherao
		     ‘Water, get it! Panee lao,
		  ‘You squidgy-nosed old idol, Gunga Din.’
		
		The uniform ’e wore
		Was nothin’ much before,
		An’ rather less than ’arf o’ that be’ind,
		For a piece o’ twisty rag   
		An’ a goatskin water-bag
		Was all the field-equipment ’e could find.
		When the sweatin’ troop-train lay
		In a sidin’ through the day,
		Where the ’eat would make your bloomin’ eyebrows crawl,
		We shouted ‘Harry By!’
		Till our throats were bricky-dry,
		Then we wopped ’im ’cause ’e couldn’t serve us all.
		     It was ‘Din! Din! Din!
		  ‘You ’eathen, where the mischief ’ave you been?   
		     ‘You put some juldee in it
		     ‘Or I’ll marrow you this minute
		  ‘If you don’t fill up my helmet, Gunga Din!’
		
		’E would dot an’ carry one
		Till the longest day was done;
		An’ ’e didn’t seem to know the use o’ fear.
		If we charged or broke or cut,
		You could bet your bloomin’ nut,
		’E’d be waitin’ fifty paces right flank rear.   
		With ’is mussick on ’is back,
		’E would skip with our attack,
		An’ watch us till the bugles made ‘Retire,’   
		An’ for all ’is dirty ’ide
		’E was white, clear white, inside
		When ’e went to tend the wounded under fire!   
		     It was ‘Din! Din! Din!’
		  With the bullets kickin’ dust-spots on the green.   
		     When the cartridges ran out,
		     You could hear the front-ranks shout,   
		  ‘Hi! ammunition-mules an’ Gunga Din!’
		
		I shan’t forgit the night
		When I dropped be’ind the fight
		With a bullet where my belt-plate should ’a’ been.   
		I was chokin’ mad with thirst,
		An’ the man that spied me first
		Was our good old grinnin’, gruntin’ Gunga Din.   
		’E lifted up my ’ead,
		An’ he plugged me where I bled,
		An’ ’e guv me ’arf-a-pint o’ water green.
		It was crawlin’ and it stunk,
		But of all the drinks I’ve drunk,
		I’m gratefullest to one from Gunga Din.
		     It was ‘Din! Din! Din!
		  ‘’Ere’s a beggar with a bullet through ’is spleen;   
		  ‘’E’s chawin’ up the ground,
		     ‘An’ ’e’s kickin’ all around:
		  ‘For Gawd’s sake git the water, Gunga Din!’
		
		’E carried me away
		To where a dooli lay,
		An’ a bullet come an’ drilled the beggar clean.   
		’E put me safe inside,
		An’ just before ’e died,
		‘I ’ope you liked your drink,’ sez Gunga Din.   
		So I’ll meet ’im later on
		At the place where ’e is gone—
		Where it’s always double drill and no canteen.   
		’E’ll be squattin’ on the coals
		Givin’ drink to poor damned souls,
		An’ I’ll get a swig in hell from Gunga Din!   
		     Yes, Din! Din! Din!
		  You Lazarushian-leather Gunga Din!   
		  Though I’ve belted you and flayed you,   
		     By the livin’ Gawd that made you,
		  You’re a better man than I am, Gunga Din!


	2. IF

		If you can keep your head when all about you   
		   Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,   
		If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
		   But make allowance for their doubting too;   
		If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
		   Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
		Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
		   And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise:
		
		If you can dream--and not make dreams your master;   
		   If you can think--and not make thoughts your aim;   
		If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
		   And treat those two impostors just the same;   
		If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken
		   Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
		Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
		   And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools:
		
		If you can make one heap of all your winnings
		   And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
		And lose, and start again at your beginnings
		   And never breathe a word about your loss;
		If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
		   To serve your turn long after they are gone,   
		And so hold on when there is nothing in you
		   Except the Will which says to them: ‘Hold on!’
		
		If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,   
		   Or walk with Kings--nor lose the common touch,
		If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you,
		   If all men count with you, but none too much;
		If you can fill the unforgiving minute
		   With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,   
		Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,   
		   And--which is more--you’ll be a Man, my son!


	3. THE GLORY OF THE GARDEN

		Our England is a garden that is full of stately views,
		Of borders, beds and shrubberies and lawns and avenues,
		With statues on the terraces and peacocks strutting by;
		But the Glory of the Garden lies in more than meets the eye.
		
		For where the old thick laurels grow, along the thin red wall,
		You’ll find the tool- and potting-sheds which are the heart of all
		The cold-frames and the hot-houses, the dung-pits and the tanks,
		The rollers, carts, and drain-pipes, with the barrows and the planks.
		
		And there you’ll see the gardeners, the men and ‘prentice boys
		Told off to do as they are bid and do it without noise ;
		For, except when seeds are planted and we shout to scare the birds,
		The Glory of the Garden it abideth not in words.
		
		And some can pot begonias and some can bud a rose,
		And some are hardly fit to trust with anything that grows ;
		But they can roll and trim the lawns and sift the sand and loam,
		For the Glory of the Garden occupieth all who come.
		
		Our England is a garden, and such gardens are not made
		By singing:--‘Oh, how beautiful,’ and sitting in the shade
		While better men than we go out and start their working lives
		At grubbing weeds from gravel-paths with broken dinner-knives.
		
		There’s not a pair of legs so thin, there’s not a head so thick,
		There’s not a hand so weak and white, nor yet a heart so sick
		But it can find some needful job that’s crying to be done,
		For the Glory of the Garden glorifieth every one.
		
		Then seek your job with thankfulness and work till further orders,
		If it’s only netting strawberries or killing slugs on borders;
		And when your back stops aching and your hands begin to harden,
		You will find yourself a partner In the Glory of the Garden.
		
		Oh, Adam was a gardener, and God who made him sees
		That half a proper gardener’s work is done upon his knees,
		So when your work is finished, you can wash your hands and pray
		For the Glory of the Garden that it may not pass away!
		And the Glory of the Garden it shall never pass away!


	4. THE LONG TRAIL

		There’s a whisper down the field where the year has shot her yield,   
		  And the ricks stand grey to the sun,
		Singing: ‘Over then, come over, for the bee has quit the clover,
		  ‘And your English summer’s done.’   
		     You have heard the beat of the off-shore wind,   
		     And the thresh of the deep-sea rain;
		     You have heard the song--how long? how long?   
		     Pull out on the trail again!
		Ha’ done with the Tents of Shem, dear lass,   
		We’ve seen the seasons through,
		And it’s time to turn on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		Pull out, pull out, on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new!
		
		It’s North you may run to the rime-ringed sun
		  Or South to the blind Horn’s hate;
		Or East all the way into Mississippi Bay,
		  Or West to the Golden Gate--
		     Where the blindest bluffs hold good, dear lass,   
		     And the wildest tales are true,
		     And the men bulk big on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		     And life runs large on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
		
		The days are sick and cold, and the skies are grey and old,   
		  And the twice-breathed airs blow damp;
		And I’d sell my tired soul for the bucking beam-sea roll   
		  Of a black Bilbao tramp,
		     With her load-line over her hatch, dear lass,   
		     And a drunken Dago crew,
		     And her nose held down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail
		     From Cadiz south on the Long Trail—the trail that is always new.
		
		There be triple ways to take, of the eagle or the snake,   
		  Or the way of a man with a maid;
		But the sweetest way to me is a ship’s upon the sea   
		  In the heel of the North-East Trade.
		     Can you hear the crash on her bows, dear lass,   
		     And the drum of the racing screw,
		     As she ships it green on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		     As she lifts and ’scends on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new?
		
		See the shaking funnels roar, with the Peter at the fore,
		  And the fenders grind and heave,
		And the derricks clack and grate, as the tackle hooks the crate,
		  And the fall-rope whines through the sheave;
		     It’s ‘Gang-plank up and in,’ dear lass,
		     It’s ‘Hawsers warp her through!’
		     And it’s ‘All clear aft’ on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		     We’re backing down on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
		
		O the mutter overside, when the port-fog holds us tied,
		  And the sirens hoot their dread,
		When foot by foot we creep o’er the hueless, viewless deep
		  To the sob of the questing lead!
		     It’s down by the Lower Hope, dear lass,
		     With the Gunfleet Sands in view,
		     Till the Mouse swings green on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		     And the Gull Light lifts on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
		
		O the blazing tropic night, when the wake’s a welt of light
		  That holds the hot sky tame,
		And the steady fore-foot snores through the planet-powdered floors
		  Where the scared whale flukes in flame!
		     Her plates are flaked by the sun, dear lass,   
		     And her ropes are taut with the dew,
		     For we’re booming down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		     We’re sagging south on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
		
		Then home, get her home, where the drunken rollers comb,   
		  And the shouting seas drive by,
		And the engines stamp and ring, and the wet bows reel and swing,
		  And the Southern Cross rides high!
		     Yes, the old lost stars wheel back, dear lass,   
		     That blaze in the velvet blue.
		     They’re all old friends on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		     They’re God’s own guides on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
		
		Fly forward, O my heart, from the Foreland to the Start--
		  We’re steaming all too slow,
		And it’s twenty thousand mile to our little lazy isle   
		  Where the trumpet-orchids blow!
		     You have heard the call of the off-shore wind   
		     And the voice of the deep-sea rain;
		     You have heard the song--how long? how long?   
		     Pull out on the trail again!
		
		The Lord knows what we may find, dear lass,
		  And The Deuce knows what we may do--
		But we’re back once more on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
		  We’re down, hull-down, on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new!


	5. THE WAY THROUGH THE WOODS

		They shut the road through the woods
		Seventy years ago.
		Weather and rain have undone it again,
		And now you would never know
		There was once a road through the woods
		Before they planted the trees. 
		It is underneath the coppice and heath,
		And the thin anemones.
		Only the keeper sees
		That, where the ring-dove broods,
		And the badgers roll at ease,
		There was once a road through the woods.
		
		Yet, if you enter the woods
		Of a summer evening late,
		When the night-air cools on the trout-ringed pools
		Where the otter whistles his mate,
		(They fear not men in the woods,
		Because they see so few.)
		You will hear the beat of a horse’s feet, 
		And the swish of a skirt in the dew,
		Steadily cantering through
		The misty solitudes,
		As though they perfectly knew
		The old lost road through the woods.
		But there is no road through the woods.


*** Kenneth Koch (1925 - 2002)

	1. MOUNTAIN

		Nothing’s moving I don’t see anybody
		And I know that it’s not a trick
		There really is nothing moving there
		And there aren’t any people. It is the very utmost top
		Where, as is not unusual,
		There is snow, lying like the hair on a white-haired person’s head
		Combed sideways and backward and forward to cover as much of the top
		As possible, for the snow is thinning, it’s September
		Although a few months from now there will be a new crop
		Probably, though this no one KNOWS (so neither do we)
		But every other year it has happened by November
		Except for one year that’s known about, nineteen twenty-three
		When the top was more and more uncovered until December fifteenth
		When finally it snowed and snowed
		I love seeing this mountain like a mouse
		Attached to the tail of another mouse, and to another and to another
		In total mountain silence
		There is no way to get up there, and no means to stay.
		It is uninhabitable. No roads and no possibility
		Of roads. You don’t have a history
		Do you, mountain top? This doesn’t make you either a mystery
		Or a dull person and you’re certainly not a truck stop.
		No industry can exploit you
		No developer can divide you into estates or lots
		No dazzling disquieting woman can tie your heart in knots.
		I could never lead my life on one of those spots
		You leave uncovered up there. No way to be there
		But I’m moved.


	2. PREGNANCY

		Inside the pomegranate is the blue sky.
		
		We have been living out the year in Wisconsin.
		Sometimes it rains there--tremendous green drops!
		
		We smiled up at the snow--how tremulously! Still . . .
		
		Death is better . . .
		
		The hog leafed through the almanac.
		
		If there is a difference between fortune and misfortune
		Which you do not catch immediately, just remember
		The house of the orange and yellow squirrels, or the
		   three pigs,
		Any house which has easily distinguishable animals
		   in it,
		And remember that all animals are unfortunate.
		“Yet every animal is fortunate,” spoffed the mineral
		   water
		From its light green bottle on the Western tea leaves
		store shelf,
		A bossy cow came and stood in the door;
		Her hide was mangy. And then we saw the fire ex-
		   tinguisher. Man is unhappy!
		A Western boy came and took the bossy cow away.
		The Western boy was dressed in leather knickers, and
		   his lean face was brown;
		A smile played there as he looked at the sissy flowers
		And led the bossy cow away to the range. In the
		cow’s mind, pastures of green
		Were replacing the brown architecture of the store.
		
		
		Under the archways I could see the yellow pulverization
		Of all you had meant to put into Paris--
		--but they were
		   a failure,
		Your statues! your stores! and your triumphal arches!
		You should have put in mere little shops selling dry
		   goods and trumpets,
		With here and there a tree and a necktie, the arch of
		    someone’s foot
		Who turns out not to be beautiful, but extremely
		    civilized, and a showerbath, which turns red
		On certain nights, showering the green busses of my
		    favorite city with cold blood! Oh ask me again
		What you should do, and I will tell you differently!
		    Ask me!
		
		Shall any laundry be put out to dry
		With so many yellow and orange sequins falling
		   through the air?
		
		Yes, the donkey has become very corpulent.
		
		Will the blue carpet be sufficiently big to cover the
		   tennis court?
		
		Down the street walked a midget. “She’s a good looker,
		   hey?”
		
		
		He said to a passerby. O tremulous stomach!
		
		We’ve been spending the winter in Paris . . .
		
		It rains on the sweater . . .
		
		I’ve a dog in my stomach!
		
		
		The dogs moved delicately
		On the yellow squares,
		And if they sat down to play cards
		Weren’t they happier than we are?
		
		I am at present owner
		Of a great chain of dog-supply stores,
		So naturally I hope that your child is a dog . . .
		
		O son! or daughter!
		Will you ever forgive
		Your maddened daddy
		For imagining a doggie
		In place of a baby?
		
		Out on the range
		The blue sky is changing
		To black, and the baby
		Cows are rehearsing
		Their lives by eating.
		
		Near a blaze of straw
		Sit the drooping cowhands;
		One has on a red hat,
		The other has a blue one.
		They look at the babies and mothers.
		
		Do you not think they are thinking
		Thoughts like mine? O Paris,
		France! with the coffee of your
		Cafés, I feel life has arrived
		For me! Where are you, city?
		
		It rains on the dachshund
		And the collie;
		On the beach the red, green, and orange
		Crustaceans are moved . . .
		Tell me, sons of Atlantis, what will happen next?


	3. THE BOILING WATER

		A serious moment for the water is
		when it boils
		And though one usually regards it
		merely as a convenience
		To have the boiling water
		available for bath or table
		Occasionally there is someone
		around who understands
		The importance of this moment
		for the water--maybe a saint,
		Maybe a poet, maybe a crazy
		man, or just someone
		temporarily disturbed
		With his mind “floating"in a
		sense, away from his deepest
		Personal concerns to more
		“unreal” things . . .
		
		A serious moment for the island
		is when its trees
		Begin to give it shade, and
		another is when the ocean
		washes
		Big heavy things against its side.
		One walks around and looks at
		the island
		But not really at it, at what is on
		it, and one thinks,
		It must be serious, even, to be this
		island, at all, here.
		Since it is lying here exposed to
		the whole sea. All its
		Moments might be serious. It is
		serious, in such windy weather,
		to be a sail
		Or an open window, or a feather
		flying in the street . . .
		
		Seriousness, how often I have
		thought of seriousness
		And how little I have understood
		it, except this: serious is urgent
		And it has to do with change. You
		say to the water,
		It’s not necessary to boil now,
		and you turn it off. It stops
		Fidgeting. And starts to cool. You
		put your hand in it
		And say, The water isn’t serious
		any more. It has the potential,
		However—that urgency to give
		off bubbles, to
		Change itself to steam. And the
		wind,
		When it becomes part of a
		hurricane, blowing up the
		beach
		And the sand dunes can’t keep it
		away.
		Fainting is one sign of
		seriousness, crying is another.
		Shuddering all over is another
		one.
		
		A serious moment for the
		telephone is when it rings.
		And a person answers, it is
		Angelica, or is it you.
		
		A serious moment for the fly is
		when its wings
		Are moving, and a serious
		moment for the duck
		Is when it swims, when it first
		touches water, then spreads
		Its smile upon the water . . .
		
		A serious moment for the match
		is when it burst into flame . . .
		
		Serious for me that I met you, and
		serious for you
		That you met me, and that we do
		not know
		If we will ever be close to anyone
		again. Serious the recognition
		of the probability
		That we will, although time
		stretches terribly in
		between . . .


	4. TO TESTOSTERONE

		You took me to the Spanish Steps
		Then we walked up to the top of them and looked
		down.
		Having looked down from there, we walked down
		To about the middle of the curving Spanish Steps
		And, for a moment, sat down.
		But there was nothing doing.
		Some cigarette packages lay on the nearby steptops.
		The sides were a beige white, running up and down.
		No woman in sight
		And no one getting in our way, either
		To rouse you from your sleep
		Of twenty centuries, the one you always fall into,
		And nothing to wake me up, either,
		Although I was completely awake in the banal sense
		Of knowing where the postoffice was and the Piazza di
		Spagna
		That was just below. Not far, the Piazza del Popolo
		Held the possibility of people, but, I thought,
		Less promisingly than where we were might do.
		We stayed on the Spanish Steps till almost ten--
		I talked to a few people, you slept--and then went
		sadly home.
		The next day however you were very lively
		You got up before I did and bought the railroad tickets
		That would take us to Naples.
		“Come on, let’s go!”
		you said
		But I was barely awake.
		Be calm! But only to act or to sleep is my nature, you
		say. Let’s
		Use the tickets, take the train, forget
		This random tune, and get something done!
		Now leading me to the station--a ravishing Roman
		girl! “Let’s stay here,”
		You murmur when my foot is already on the first step
		Of the entrance to the stazione centrale. All right, I
		agree
		But my hand is full of tickets and my mind of dismay,
		Confusion and dismay. You have started to make me angry
		By the way you’re making me anxious, which is another
		thing you do.
		Stop it, I say. You stop. You appreciate travel the way I
		appreciate eating lunch.
		I do remember Barbara, in Parma.
		Exhilaration, riding on your horns, is never far away.


	5. TO YOU

		I love you as a sheriff searches for a walnut
		That will solve a murder case unsolved for years
		Because the murderer left it in the snow beside a window
		Through which he saw her head, connecting with
		Her shoulders by a neck, and laid a red
		Roof in her heart. For this we live a thousand years;
		For this we love, and we live because we love, we are not
		Inside a bottle, thank goodness! I love you as a
		Kid searches for a goat; I am crazier than shirttails
		In the wind, when you’re near, a wind that blows from
		The big blue sea, so shiny so deep and so unlike us;
		I think I am bicycling across an Africa of green and white fields
		Always, to be near you, even in my heart
		When I’m awake, which swims, and also I believe that you
		Are trustworthy as the sidewalk which leads me to
		The place where I again think of you, a new
		Harmony of thoughts! I love you as the sunlight leads the prow
		Of a ship which sails
		From Hartford to Miami, and I love you
		Best at dawn, when even before I am awake the sun
		Receives me in the questions which you always pose.


*** Stanley Kunitz (1905 - 2006)

	1. FATHER AND SON

		Now in the suburbs and the falling light
		I followed him, and now down sandy road
		Whitter than bone-dust, through the sweet
		Curdle of fields, where the plums
		Dropped with their load of ripeness, one by one.
		Mile after mile I followed, with skimming feet,
		After the secret master of my blood,
		Him, steeped in the odor of ponds, whose indomitable love
		Kept me in chains. Strode years; stretched into bird;
		Raced through the sleeping country where I was young,
		The silence unrolling before me as I came,
		The night nailed like an orange to my brow.
		
		How should I tell him my fable and the fears,
		How bridge the chasm in a casual tone,
		Saying, “The house, the stucco one you built,
		We lost. Sister married and went from home,
		And nothing comes back, it’s strange, from where she goes.
		I lived on a hill that had too many rooms;
		Light we could make, but not enough of warmth,
		And when the light failed, I climbed under the hill.
		The papers are delivered every day;
		I am alone and never shed a tear.”
		
		At the water’s edge, where the smothering ferns lifted
		Their arms, “Father!“ I cried, “Return! You know
		The way. I’ll wipe the mudstains from your clothes;
		No trace, I promise, will remain. Instruct
		You son, whirling between two wars,
		In the Gemara of your gentleness,
		For I would be a child to those who mourn
		And brother to the foundlings of the field
		And friend of innocence and all bright eyes.
		0 teach me how to work and keep me kind.”
		
		Among the turtles and the lilies he turned to me
		The white ignorant hollow of his face.


	2. KING OF THE RIVER

		If the water were clear enough,
		if the water were still,
		but the water is not clear,
		the water is not still,
		you would see yourself,
		slipped out of your skin,
		nosing upstream,
		slapping, thrashing,
		tumbling
		over the rocks
		till you paint them
		with your belly’s blood:
		Finned Ego,
		yard of muscle that coils,
		uncoils.
		If the knowledge were given you,
		but it is not given,
		for the membrane is clouded
		with self-deceptions
		and the iridescent image swims
		through a mirror that flows,
		you would surprise yourself
		in that other flesh
		heavy with milt,
		bruised, battering toward the dam
		that lips the orgiastic pool.
		
		Come. Bathe in these waters.
		Increase and die.
		
		If the power were granted you
		to break out of your cells,
		but the imagination fails
		and the doors of the senses close
		on the child within,
		you would dare to be changed,
		as you are changing now,
		into the shape you dread
		beyond the merely human.
		A dry fire eats you.
		Fat drips from your bones.
		The flutes of your gills discolor.
		You have become a ship for parasites.
		The great clock of your life
		is slowing down,
		and the small clocks run wild.
		For this you were born.
		You have cried to the wind
		and heard the wind’s reply:
		“I did not choose the way,
		the way chose me.”
		You have tasted the fire on your tongue
		till it is swollen black
		with a prophetic joy:
		“Burn with me!
		The only music is time,
		the only dance is love.”
		
		If the heart were pure enough,
		but it is not pure,
		you would admit
		that nothing compels you
		any more, nothing
		at all abides,
		but nostalgia and desire,
		the two-way ladder
		between heaven and hell.
		On the threshold
		of the last mystery,
		at the brute absolute hour,
		you have looked into the eyes
		of your creature self,
		which are glazed with madness,
		and you say
		he is not broken but endures,
		limber and firm
		in the state of his shining,
		forever inheriting his salt kingdom,
		from which he is banished
		forever.


	3. MASTER AND MISTRESS

		As if I were composed of dust and air,
		The shape confronting me upon the stair
		(Athlete of shadow, lighted by a stain
		On its disjunctive breast--I saw it plain--)
		Moved through my middle flesh. I turned around,
		Shaken and it was marching without sound
		Beyond the door; and when my hand was taken
		
		From my mouth to beat the standing heart, I cried
		My distant name, thinking myself had died.
		One moment I was entered; one moment then
		I knew a total century of pain
		Between the twinkling of two thoughts. The ghost
		Knocked on my ribs, demanding, “Host! Host!
		I am diseased with motion. Give me bread
		Before I quickly go. Shall I be fed?”
		Yielding, I begged of him: “Partake of me.
		Whatever runneth from the artery,
		This body and its unfamiliar wine,
		Stored in whatever dark of love, are thine.”
		But he denied me, saying, “Every part
		of thee is given, yea, thy flesh, thy heart.”


	4. PASSING THROUGH

		Nobody in the widow’s household
		ever celebrated anniversaries.
		In the secrecy of my room
		I would not admit I cared
		that my friends were given parties.
		Before I left town for school
		my birthday went up in smoke
		in a fire at City Hall that gutted
		the Department of Vital Statistics.
		If it weren’t for a census report
		of a five-year-old White Male
		sharing my mother’s address
		at the Green Street tenement in Worcester
		I’d have no documentary proof
		that I exist. You are the first,
		my dear, to bully me
		into these festive occasions.
		
		Sometimes, you say, I wear
		an abstracted look that drives you
		up the wall, as though it signified
		distress or disaffection.
		Don’t take it so to heart.
		Maybe I enjoy not-being as much
		as being who I am. Maybe
		it’s time for me to practice
		growing old. The way I look
		at it, I’m passing through a phase:
		gradually I’m changing to a word.
		Whatever you choose to claim
		of me is always yours:
		nothing is truly mine
		except my name. I only
		borrowed this dust.


	5. RIVER ROAD

		That year of the cloud, when my marriage failed,
		I slept in a chair, by the flagstone hearth,
		fighting my sleep,
		and one night saw a Hessian soldier
		stand at attention there in full
		regalia, till his head broke into flames.
		My only other callers were the FBI
		sent to investigate me as a Russian spy
		by patriotic neighbors on the river road;
		and flying squirrels parachuting from the elms
		who squeaked in rodent heat between the walls
		and upstairs rumbled at their nutty games.
		I never dared open the attic door.
		Even my nervous Leghorns joined the act,
		indulging their taste for chicken from behind.
		A glazed look swam into the survivors’ eyes;
		they caught a sort of dancing-sickness,
		a variation of the blind staggers,
		that hunched their narrow backs and struck
		a stiffened wing akimbo,
		as round and round the poultry yard
		they flapped and dropped and flapped again.
		The county agent shook his head:
		not one of them was spared the cyanide.
		
		That year of the cloud, when my marriage failed,
		I paced up and down the bottom-fields,
		tamping the mud-puddled nurslings in
		with a sharp blow of the heel
		timed to the chop-chop of the hoe:
		red pine and white, larch, balsam fir,
		one stride apart, two hundred to the row,
		until I heard from Rossiter’s woods
		the downward spiral of a veery’s song
		unwinding on the eve of war.
		
		Lord! Lord! who has lived so long?
		Count it ten thousand trees ago,
		five houses and ten thousand trees,
		since the swallows exploded from Bowman Tower
		over the place where the hermit sang,
		while I held a fantail of squirming roots
		that kissed the palm of my dirty hand,
		as if in reply to a bird.
		The stranger who hammers No Trespass signs
		to the staghorn sumac along the road
		must think he owns this property.
		I park my car below the curve
		and climbing over the tumbled stones
		where the wild foxgrape perseveres,
		I walk into the woods I made,
		my dark and resinous, blistered land,
		through the deep litter of the years.


	6. THE LAYERS

		I have walked through many lives,
		some of them my own,
		and I am not who I was,
		though some principle of being
		abides, from which I struggle
		not to stray.
		When I look behind,
		as I am compelled to look
		before I can gather strength
		to proceed on my journey,
		I see the milestones dwindling
		toward the horizon
		and the slow fires trailing
		from the abandoned camp-sites,
		over which scavenger angels
		wheel on heavy wings.
		Oh, I have made myself a tribe
		out of my true affections,
		and my tribe is scattered!
		How shall the heart be reconciled
		to its feast of losses?
		In a rising wind
		the manic dust of my friends,
		those who fell along the way,
		bitterly stings my face.
		Yet I turn, I turn,
		exulting somewhat,
		with my will intact to go
		wherever I need to go,
		and every stone on the road
		precious to me.
		In my darkest night,
		when the moon was covered
		and I roamed through wreckage,
		a nimbus-clouded voice
		directed me:
		“Live in the layers,
		not on the litter.”
		Though I lack the art
		to decipher it,
		no doubt the next chapter
		in my book of transformations
		is already written.
		I am not done with my changes.


	7. THE ROUND

		Light splashed this morning
		on the shell-pink anemones
		swaying on their tall stems;
		down blue-spiked veronica
		light flowed in rivulets
		over the humps of the honeybees;
		this morning I saw light kiss
		the silk of the roses
		in their second flowering,
		my late bloomers
		flushed with their brandy.
		A curious gladness shook me.
		So I have shut the doors of my house,
		so I have trudged downstairs to my cell,
		so I am sitting in semi-dark
		hunched over my desk
		with nothing for a view
		to tempt me
		but a bloated compost heap,
		steamy old stinkpile,
		under my window;
		and I pick my notebook up
		and I start to read aloud
		the still-wet words I scribbled
		on the blotted page:
		“Light splashed . . .”
		
		I can scarcely wait till tomorrow
		when a new life begins for me,
		as it does each day,
		as it does each day.


	8. THE SNAKES OF SEPTEMBER

		All summer I heard them
		rustling in the shrubbery,
		outracing me from tier
		to tier in my garden,
		a whisper among the viburnums,
		a signal flashed from the hedgerow,
		a shadow pulsing
		in the barberry thicket.
		Now that the nights are chill
		and the annuals spent,
		I should have thought them gone,
		in a torpor of blood
		slipped to the nether world
		before the sickle frost.
		Not so. In the deceptive balm
		of noon, as if defiant of the curse
		that spoiled another garden,
		these two appear on show
		through a narrow slit
		in the dense green brocade
		of a north-country spruce,
		dangling head-down, entwined
		in a brazen love-knot.
		I put out my hand and stroke
		the fine, dry grit of their skins.
		After all,
		we are partners in this land,
		co-signers of a covenant.
		At my touch the wild
		braid of creation
		trembles.


	9. THE TESTING-TREE

		I
		
		On my way home from school
		up tribal Providence Hill
		past the Academy ballpark
		where I could never hope to play
		I scuffed in the drainage ditch
		among the sodden seethe of leaves
		hunting for perfect stones
		rolled out of glacial time
		into my pitcher’s hand;
		then sprinted lickety-
		split on my magic Keds
		from a crouching start,
		scarcely touching the ground
		with my flying skin
		as I poured it on
		for the prize of the mastery
		over that stretch of road,
		with no one no where to deny
		when I flung myself down
		that on the given course
		I was the world’s fastest human.
		
		
		II
		
		Around the bend
		that tried to loop me home
		dawdling came natural
		across a nettled field
		riddled with rabbit-life
		where the bees sank sugar-wells
		in the trunks of the maples
		and a stringy old lilac
		more than two stories tall
		blazing with mildew
		remembered a door in the
		long teeth of the woods.
		All of it happened slow:
		brushing the stickseed off,
		wading through jewelweed
		strangled by angel’s hair,
		spotting the print of the deer
		and the red fox’s scats.
		Once I owned the key
		to an umbrageous trail
		thickened with mosses
		where flickering presences
		gave me right of passage
		as I followed in the steps
		of straight-backed Massassoit
		soundlessly heel-and-toe
		practicing my Indian walk.
		
		
		III
		
		Past the abandoned quarry
		where the pale sun bobbed
		in the sump of the granite,
		past copperhead ledge,
		where the ferns gave foothold,
		I walked, deliberate,
		on to the clearing,
		with the stones in my pocket
		changing to oracles
		and my coiled ear tuned
		to the slightest leaf-stir.
		I had kept my appointment.
		There I stood int he shadow,
		at fifty measured paces,
		of the inexhaustible oak,
		tyrant and target,
		Jehovah of acorns,
		watchtower of the thunders,
		that locked King Philip’s War
		in its annulated core
		under the cut of my name.
		Father wherever you are
		I have only three throws
		bless my good right arm.
		In the haze of afternoon,
		while the air flowed saffron,
		I played my game for keeps--
		for love, for poetry,
		and for eternal life--
		after the trials of summer.
		
		
		IV
		
		In the recurring dream
		my mother stands
		in her bridal gown
		under the burning lilac,
		with Bernard Shaw and Bertie
		Russell kissing her hands;
		the house behind her is in ruins;
		she is wearing an owl’s face
		and makes barking noises.
		Her minatory finger points.
		I pass through the cardboard doorway
		askew in the field
		and peer down a well
		where an albino walrus huffs.
		He has the gentlest eyes.
		If the dirt keeps sifting in,
		staining the water yellow,
		why should I be blamed?
		Never try to explain.
		That single Model A
		sputtering up the grade
		unfurled a highway behind
		where the tanks maneuver,
		revolving their turrets.
		In a murderous time
		the heart breaks and breaks
		and lives by breaking.
		It is necessary to go
		through dark and deeper dark
		and not to turn.
		I am looking for the trail.
		Where is my testing-tree?
		Give me back my stones!


*** Pär Lagerkvist (1891 - 1974)

	1. ANGUISH

		Anguish, anguish is my heritage,
		the wound of my throat,
		the cry of my heart in the world.
		Now the lathered sky congeals
		in the coarse hand of night;
		now the forests
		and the rigid heights
		rise barrenly against
		the dwarfed vault of the sky.
		How hard everything is,
		how stiffened, black and silent!
		
		I grope about this darkened room,
		I feel the sharp edge of the cliff against my finger.
		I tear my sore and aching hands
		on the hills and darkened woods,
		on the black iron of sky
		and on the cold earth!
		
		Anguish, anguish is my heritage,
		the wound of my throat,
		the cry of my heart in the world.


	2. I WANTED TO KNOW

		I wanted to know
		but was only allowed to ask,
		I wanted light
		but was only allowed to burn.
		I demanded the ineffable
		but was only allowed to live.
		
		I complained,
		but nobody understood what I meant.


*** Charles Lamb (1775 - 1834)

	1. A FAREWELL TO TOBACCO

		May the Babylonish curse,
		Strait confound my stammering verse,
		If I can a passage see
		In this word-perplexity,
		Or a fit expression find,
		Or a language to my mind,
		(Still the phrase is wide or scant)
		To take leave of thee, GREAT PLANT!
		Or in any terms relate
		Half my love, or half my hate:
		For I hate, yet love, thee so,
		That, whichever thing I shew,
		The plain truth will seem to be
		A constrained hyperbole,
		And the passion to proceed
		More from a mistress than a weed.
		Sooty retainer to the vine,
		Bacchus’ black servant, negro fine;
		Sorcerer, that mak’st us dote upon
		Thy begrimed complexion,
		And, for thy pernicious sake,
		More and greater oaths to break
		Than reclaimed lovers take
		‘Gainst women: thou thy siege dost lay
		Much too in the female way,
		While thou suck’st the laboring breath
		Faster than kisses or than death.
		Thou in such a cloud dost bind us,
		That our worst foes cannot find us,
		And ill fortune, that would thwart us,
		Shoots at rovers, shooting at us;
		While each man, thro’ thy heightening steam,
		Does like a smoking Etna seem,
		And all about us does express
		(Fancy and wit in richest dress)
		A Sicilian fruitfulness.
		Thou through such a mist dost shew us,
		That our best friends do not know us,
		And, for those allowed features,
		Due to reasonable creatures,
		Liken’st us to fell Chimeras,
		Monsters that, who see us, fear us
		Worse than Cerberus or Geryon,
		Or, who first lov’d a cloud, Ixion.
		Bacchus we know, and we allow
		His tipsy rites. But what art thou,
		That but by reflex can’st shew
		What his deity can do,
		As the false Egyptian spell
		Aped the true Hebrew miracle?
		Some few vapours thou may’st raise,
		The weak brain may serve to amaze,
		But to the reigns and nobler heart
		Can’st nor life nor heat impart.
		Brother of Bacchus, later born,
		The old world was sure forlorn,
		Wanting thee, that aidest more
		The god’s victories than before
		All his panthers, and the brawls
		Of his piping Bacchanals.
		These, as stale, we disallow,
		Or judge of thee meant--only thou
		His true Indian conquest art
		And, for ivy round his dart,
		The reformed god now weaves
		A finer thyrsus of thy leaves.
		Scent to match thy rich perfume
		Chemic art did ne’er presume
		Through her quaint alembic strain,
		None so sov’reign to the brain.
		Nature, that did in thee excel,
		Fram’d again no second smell.
		Roses, violets, but toys
		For the smaller sort of boys,
		Or for greener damsels meant;
		Thou art the only manly scent.
		Stinking’st of the stinking kind,
		Filth of the mouth and fog of the mind,
		Africa, that brags her foyson,
		Breeds no such prodigious poison,
		Henbane, nightshade, both together,
		Hemlock, aconite--
		Nay, rather, Plant divine, of rarest virtue;
		Blisters on the tongue would hurt you.
		‘Twas but in a sort I blam’d thee;
		None e’er prosper’d who defam’d thee;
		Irony all, and feign’d abuse,
		Such as perplext lovers use,
		At a need, when, in despair
		To paint forth their fairest fair,
		Or in part but to express
		That exceeding comeliness
		Which their fancies doth so strike,
		They borrow language of dislike;
		And, instead of Dearest Miss,
		Jewel, Honey, Sweetheart, Bliss,
		And those forms of old admiring,
		Call her Cockatrice and Siren,
		Basilisk, and all that’s evil,
		Witch, Hyena, Mermaid, Devil,
		Ethiop, Wench, and Blackamoor,
		Monkey, Ape, and twenty more;
		Friendly Trait’ress, loving Foe,--
		Not that she is truly so,
		But no other way they know
		A contentment to express,
		Borders so upon excess,
		That they do not rightly wot
		Whether it be pain or not.
		Or, as men, constrained to part
		With what’s nearest to their heart,
		While their sorrow’s at the height,
		Lose discrimination quite,
		And their hasty wrath let fall,
		To appease their frantic gall,
		On the darling thing whatever
		Whence they feel it death to sever,
		Though it be, as they, perforce,
		Guiltless of the sad divorce.
		For I must (nor let it grieve thee,
		Friendliest of plants, that I must) leave the.
		For thy sake, TOBACCO, I
		Would do any thing but die,
		And but seek to extend my days
		Long enough to sing thy praise.
		But, as she, who once hath been
		A king’s consort, is a queen
		Ever after, nor will bate
		Any tittle of her state,
		Though a widow, or divorced,
		So I, from thy converse forced,
		The old name and style retain,
		A right Katherine of Spain;
		And a seat, too, ‘mongst the joys
		Of the blest Tobacco Boys;
		Where, though I, by sour physician,
		Am debarr’d the full fruition
		Of thy favours, I may catch
		Some collateral sweets, and snatch
		Sidelong odours, that give life
		Like glances from a neighbour’s wife;
		And still live in the by-places
		And the suburbs of thy graces;
		And in thy borders take delight,
		An unconquer’d Canaanite.


	2. ON AN INFANT DYING AS SOON AS BORN

		I saw where in the shroud did lurk
		A curious frame of Nature’s work.
		A flow’ret crushed in the bud,
		A nameless piece of Babyhood,
		Was in a cradle-coffin lying;
		Extinct, with scarce the sense of dying;
		So soon to exchange the imprisoning womb
		For darker closets of the tomb!
		She did but ope an eye, and put
		A clear beam forth, then strait up shut
		For the long dark: ne’er more to see
		Through glasses of mortality.
		Riddle of destiny, who can show
		What thy short visit meant, or know
		What thy errand here below?
		Shall we say, that Nature blind
		Check’d her hand, and changed her mind,
		Just when she had exactly wrought
		A finish’d pattern without fault?
		Could she flag, or could she tire,
		Or lack’d she the Promethean fire
		(With her nine moons’ long workings sicken’d)
		That should thy little limbs have quicken’d?
		Limbs so firm, they seem’d to assure
		Life of health, and days mature:
		Woman’s self in miniature!
		Limbs so fair, they might supply
		(Themselves now but cold imagery)
		The sculptor to make Beauty by.
		Or did the stern-eyed Fate descry,
		That babe, or mother, one must die;
		So in mercy left the stock,
		And cut the branch; to save the shock
		Of young years widow’d; and the pain,
		When Single State comes back again
		To the lone man who, ‘reft of wife,
		Thenceforward drags a maimed life?
		The economy of Heaven is dark;
		And wisest clerks have miss’d the mark,
		Why Human Buds, like this, should fall,
		More brief than fly ephemeral,
		That has his day; while shrivel’d crones
		Stiffen with age to stocks and stones;
		And crabbed use the conscience sears
		In sinners of an hundred years.
		Mother’s prattle, mother’s kiss,
		Baby fond, thou ne’er wilt miss.
		Rites, which custom does impose,
		Silver bells and baby clothes;
		Coral redder than those lips,
		Which pale death did late eclipse;
		Music framed for infants’ glee,
		Whistle never tuned for thee;
		Though thou want’st not, thou shalt have them,
		Loving hearts were they which gave them.
		Let not one be missing; nurse,
		See them laid upon the hearse
		Of infant slain by doom perverse.
		Why should kings and nobles have
		Pictured trophies to their grave;
		And we, churls, to thee deny
		Thy pretty toys with thee to lie,
		A more harmless vanity?


	3. THE OLD FAMILIAR FACES

		Where are they gone, the old familiar faces?
		I had a mother, but she died, and left me,
		Died prematurely in a day of horrors--
		All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.
		
		I have had playmates, I have had companions,
		In my days of childhood, in my joyful school days--
		All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.
		
		I have been laughing, I have been carousing,
		Drinking late, sitting late, with my bosom cronies--
		All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.
		
		I lov’d a love once, fairest among women;
		Clos’d are her doors on me, I must not see her--
		All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.
		
		I have a friend, a kinder friend has no man.
		Like an ingrate, I left my friend abruptly;
		Left him, to muse on the old familiar faces.
		
		Ghost-like, I pac’d round the haunts of my childhood.
		Earth seem’d a desert I was bound to traverse,
		Seeking to find the old familiar faces.
		
		Friend of my bosom, thou more than a brother!
		Why were not thou born in my father’s dwelling?
		So might we talk of the old familiar faces.
		
		For some they have died, and some they have left me,
		_And some are taken from me_; all are departed;
		All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.


	4. THOUGHTLESS CRUELTY

		There, Robert, you have kill’d that fly--,
		And should you thousand ages try
		The life you’ve taken to supply,
		You could not do it.
		
		You surely must have been devoid
		Of thought and sense, to have destroy’d
		A thing which no way you annoy’d--
		You’ll one day rue it.
		
		Twas but a fly perhaps you’ll say,
		That’s born in April, dies in May;
		That does but just learn to display
		His wings one minute,
		
		And in the next is vanish’d quite.
		A bird devours it in his flight--
		Or come a cold blast in the night,
		There’s no breath in it.
		
		The bird but seeks his proper food--
		And Providence, whose power endu’d
		That fly with life, when it thinks good,
		May justly take it.
		
		But you have no excuses for’t--
		A life by Nature made so short,
		Less reason is that you for sport
		Should shorter make it.
		
		A fly a little thing you rate--
		But, Robert do not estimate
		A creature’s pain by small or great;
		The greatest being
		
		Can have but fibres, nerves, and flesh,
		And these the smallest ones possess,
		Although their frame and structure less
		Escape our seeing.


*** Walter Savage Landor (1775 - 1864)

	1. ABSENCE

		HERE, ever since you went abroad, 
		  If there be change no change I see: 
		I only walk our wonted road, 
		  The road is only walk’d by me. 
		
		Yes; I forgot; a change there is-- 
		  Was it of that you bade me tell? 
		I catch at times, at times I miss 
		  The sight, the tone, I know so well. 
		
		Only two months since you stood here? 
		  Two shortest months? Then tell me why 
		Voices are harsher than they were, 
		  And tears are longer ere they dry.


	2. IANTHE’S QUESTION

		‘Do you remember me? or are you proud?’
		Lightly advancing thro’ her star-trimm’d crowd,
		Ianthe said, and look’d into my eyes.
		‘A yes, a yes to both: for Memory
		Where you but once have been must ever be,
		And at your voice Pride from his throne must rise.’


	3. ROSE AYLMER

		Ah, what avails the sceptred race,
		Ah, what the form divine!
		What every virtue, every grace!
		Rose Aylmer, all were thine.
		Rose Aylmer, whom these wakeful eyes
		May weep, but never see,
		A night of memories and of sighs
		I consecrate to thee.


	4. THE MAID’S LAMENT

		I loved him not; and yet now he is gone
		       I feel I am alone.
		I check’d him while he spoke; yet could he speak,
		       Alas! I would not check.
		For reasons not to love him once I sought,
		       And wearied all my thought
		To vex myself and him: I now would give
		       My love, could he but live
		Who lately lived for me, and when he found
		       ‘Twas vain, in holy ground
		He hid his face amid the shades of death.
		       I waste for him my breath
		Who wasted his for me: but mine returns,
		       And this lorn bosom burns
		With stifling heat, heaving it up in sleep,
		       And waking me to weep
		Tears that had melted his soft heart: for years
		       Wept he as bitter tears.
		_Merciful God!_ such was his latest prayer,
		       _These may she never share!_
		Quieter is his breath, his breast more cold,
		       Than daisies in the mould,
		Where children spell, athwart the churchyard gate,
		       His name and life’s brief date.
		Pray for him, gentle souls, whoe’er you be,
		       And oh! pray too for me!


*** Philip Larkin (1922 - 1985)

	1. AUBADE

		I work all day, and get half-drunk at night.   
		Waking at four to soundless dark, I stare.   
		In time the curtain-edges will grow light.   
		Till then I see what’s really always there:   
		Unresting death, a whole day nearer now,   
		Making all thought impossible but how   
		And where and when I shall myself die.   
		Arid interrogation: yet the dread
		Of dying, and being dead,
		Flashes afresh to hold and horrify.
		
		The mind blanks at the glare. Not in remorse   
		--The good not done, the love not given, time   
		Torn off unused--nor wretchedly because   
		An only life can take so long to climb
		Clear of its wrong beginnings, and may never;   
		But at the total emptiness for ever,
		The sure extinction that we travel to
		And shall be lost in always. Not to be here,   
		Not to be anywhere,
		And soon; nothing more terrible, nothing more true.
		
		This is a special way of being afraid
		No trick dispels. Religion used to try,
		That vast moth-eaten musical brocade
		Created to pretend we never die,
		And specious stuff that says No rational being
		Can fear a thing it will not feel, not seeing
		That this is what we fear--no sight, no sound,   
		No touch or taste or smell, nothing to think with,   
		Nothing to love or link with,
		The anaesthetic from which none come round.
		
		And so it stays just on the edge of vision,   
		A small unfocused blur, a standing chill   
		That slows each impulse down to indecision.   
		Most things may never happen: this one will,   
		And realisation of it rages out
		In furnace-fear when we are caught without   
		People or drink. Courage is no good:
		It means not scaring others. Being brave   
		Lets no one off the grave.
		Death is no different whined at than withstood.
		
		Slowly light strengthens, and the room takes shape.   
		It stands plain as a wardrobe, what we know,   
		Have always known, know that we can’t escape,   
		Yet can’t accept. One side will have to go.
		Meanwhile telephones crouch, getting ready to ring   
		In locked-up offices, and all the uncaring
		Intricate rented world begins to rouse.
		The sky is white as clay, with no sun.
		Work has to be done.
		Postmen like doctors go from house to house.


	2. FAITH HEALING

		Slowly the women file to where he stands   
		Upright in rimless glasses, silver hair,
		Dark suit, white collar. Stewards tirelessly   
		Persuade them onwards to his voice and hands,   
		Within whose warm spring rain of loving care   
		Each dwells some twenty seconds. _Now, dear child,
		What’s wrong,_ the deep American voice demands,   
		And, scarcely pausing, goes into a prayer   
		Directing God about this eye, that knee.   
		Their heads are clasped abruptly; then, exiled
		
		Like losing thoughts, they go in silence; some   
		Sheepishly stray, not back into their lives
		Just yet; but some stay stiff, twitching and loud   
		With deep hoarse tears, as if a kind of dumb   
		And idiot child within them still survives   
		To re-awake at kindness, thinking a voice   
		At last calls them alone, that hands have come   
		To lift and lighten; and such joy arrives
		Their thick tongues blort, their eyes squeeze grief, a crowd   
		Of huge unheard answers jam and rejoice--
		
		What’s wrong! Moustached in flowered frocks they shake:   
		By now, all’s wrong. In everyone there sleeps   
		A sense of life lived according to love.
		To some it means the difference they could make   
		By loving others, but across most it sweeps
		As all they might have done had they been loved.   
		That nothing cures. An immense slackening ache,   
		As when, thawing, the rigid landscape weeps,
		Spreads slowly through them--that, and the voice above   
		Saying _Dear child,_ and all time has disproved.


	3. MCMXIV

		Those long uneven lines
		Standing as patiently
		As if they were stretched outside
		The Oval or Villa Park,
		The crowns of hats, the sun
		On moustached archaic faces
		Grinning as if it were all
		An August Bank Holiday lark;
		And the shut shops, the bleached
		Established names on the sunblinds,
		The farthings and sovereigns,
		And dark-clothed children at play
		Called after kings and queens,
		The tin advertisements
		For cocoa and twist, and the pubs
		Wide open all day;
		And the countryside not caring
		The place-names all hazed over
		With flowering grasses, and fields
		Shadowing Domesday lines
		Under wheats’ restless silence;
		The differently-dressed servants
		With tiny rooms in huge houses,
		The dust behind limousines;
		Never such innocence,
		Never before or since,
		As changed itself to past
		Without a word--the men
		Leaving the gardens tidy,
		The thousands of marriages
		Lasting a little while longer:
		Never such innocence again.


	4. MONEY

		Quarterly, is it, money reproaches me:
		   ‘Why do you let me lie here wastefully?
		I am all you never had of goods and sex.
		   You could get them still by writing a few cheques.’
		
		So I look at others, what they do with theirs:   
		   They certainly don’t keep it upstairs.
		By now they’ve a second house and car and wife:
		   Clearly money has something to do with life
		
		--In fact, they’ve a lot in common, if you enquire:
		   You can’t put off being young until you retire,
		And however you bank your screw, the money you save
		   Won’t in the end buy you more than a shave.
		
		I listen to money singing. It’s like looking down
		   From long french windows at a provincial town,   
		The slums, the canal, the churches ornate and mad
		   In the evening sun. It is intensely sad.


	5. SAD STEPS

		Groping back to bed after a piss
		I part thick curtains, and am startled by   
		The rapid clouds, the moon’s cleanliness.
		
		Four o’clock: wedge-shadowed gardens lie   
		Under a cavernous, a wind-picked sky.   
		There’s something laughable about this,
		
		The way the moon dashes through clouds that blow   
		Loosely as cannon-smoke to stand apart   
		(Stone-coloured light sharpening the roofs below)
		
		High and preposterous and separate--   
		Lozenge of love! Medallion of art!
		O wolves of memory! Immensements! No,
		
		One shivers slightly, looking up there.
		The hardness and the brightness and the plain   
		Far-reaching singleness of that wide stare
		
		Is a reminder of the strength and pain   
		Of being young; that it can’t come again,   
		But is for others undiminished somewhere.


	6. SUNNY PRESTATYN

		_Come To Sunny Prestatyn_
		Laughed the girl on the poster,
		Kneeling up on the sand   
		In tautened white satin.   
		Behind her, a hunk of coast, a
		Hotel with palms
		Seemed to expand from her thighs and   
		Spread breast-lifting arms.
		
		She was slapped up one day in March.   
		A couple of weeks, and her face
		Was snaggle-toothed and boss-eyed;   
		Huge tits and a fissured crotch
		Were scored well in, and the space   
		Between her legs held scrawls
		That set her fairly astride
		A tuberous cock and balls.
		
		Autographed _Titch Thomas,_ while   
		Someone had used a knife
		Or something to stab right through   
		The moustached lips of her smile.   
		She was too good for this life.   
		Very soon, a great transverse tear   
		Left only a hand and some blue.   
		Now _Fight Cancer_ is there.


	7. WILD OATS

		About twenty years ago
		Two girls came in where I worked--
		A bosomy English rose
		And her friend in specs I could talk to.   
		Faces in those days sparked
		The whole shooting-match off, and I doubt   
		If ever one had like hers:
		But it was the friend I took out,
		
		And in seven years after that   
		Wrote over four hundred letters,   
		Gave a ten-guinea ring
		I got back in the end, and met   
		At numerous cathedral cities   
		Unknown to the clergy. I believe
		I met beautiful twice. She was trying   
		Both times (so I thought) not to laugh.
		
		Parting, after about five
		Rehearsals, was an agreement   
		That I was too selfish, withdrawn,   
		And easily bored to love.
		Well, useful to get that learnt.   
		In my wallet are still two snaps
		Of bosomy rose with fur gloves on.   
		Unlucky charms, perhaps.


*** D. H. Lawrence (1885 - 1930)

	1. AUTUMN SUNSHINE

		THE sun sets out the autumn crocuses
		 And fills them up a pouring measure
		 Of death-producing wine till treasure
		Runs waste down their chalices.
		
		All all Persephone’s pale cups of mould
		 Are on the board are over-filled;
		 The portion to the gods is spilled;
		Now mortals all take hold!
		
		The time is now the wine-cup full and full
		 Of lambent heaven a pledging-cup;
		 Let now all mortal men take up
		The drink and a long strong pull.
		
		Out of the hell-queen’s cup the heaven’s pale wine--
		 Drink then invisible heroes drink.
		 Lips to the vessels never shrink
		Throats to the heavens incline.
		
		And take within the wine the god’s great oath
		 By heaven and earth and hellish stream
		 To break this sick and nauseous dream
		We writhe and lust in both.
		
		Swear in the pale wine poured from the cups of the
		      queen
		 Of hell to wake and be free
		 From this nightmare we writhe in
		Break out of this foul has-been.


	2. BITTERNESS OF DEATH

		I
		
		AH stern cold man
		How can you lie so relentless hard
		While I wash you with weeping water!
		Do you set your face against the daughter
		Of life? Can you never discard
		Your curt pride’s ban?
		
		You masquerader!
		How can you shame to act this part
		Of unswerving indifference to me?
		You want at last ah me!
		To break my heart
		Evader!
		
		You know your mouth
		Was always sooner to soften
		Even than your eyes.
		Now shut it lies
		Relentless however often
		I kiss it in drouth.
		
		It has no breath
		Nor any relaxing. Where
		Where are you what have you done?
		What is this mouth of stone?
		How did you dare
		Take cover in death!
		
		II
		
		Once you could see
		The white moon show like a breast revealed
		By the slipping shawl of stars.
		Could see the small stars tremble
		As the heart beneath did wield
		Systole diastole.
		
		All the lovely macrocosm
		Was woman once to you
		Bride to your groom.
		No tree in bloom
		But it leaned you a new
		White bosom.
		
		And always and ever
		Soft as a summering tree
		Unfolds from the sky for your good
		Unfolded womanhood;
		Shedding you down as a tree
		Sheds its flowers on a river.
		
		I saw your brows
		Set like rocks beside a sea of gloom
		And I shed my very soul down into your
		  thought;
		Like flowers I fell to be caught
		On the comforted pool like bloom
		That leaves the boughs.
		
		III
		
		Oh masquerader
		With a hard face white-enamelled
		What are you now?
		Do you care no longer how
		My heart is trammelled
		Evader?
		
		Is this you after all
		Metallic obdurate
		With bowels of steel?
		Did you _never_ feel?--
		Cold insensate
		Mechanical!
		
		Ah no!--you multiform
		You that I loved you wonderful
		You who darkened and shone
		You were many men in one;
		But never this null
		This never-warm!
		
		Is this the sum of you?
		Is it all nought?
		Cold metal-cold?
		Are you all told
		Here iron-wrought?
		Is _this_ what’s become of you?


	3. DEBACLE

		THE trees in trouble because of autumn
		 And scarlet berries falling from the bush
		And all the myriad houseless seeds
		 Loosing hold in the wind’s insistent push
		
		Moan softly with autumnal parturition
		 Poor obscure fruits extruded out of light
		Into the world of shadow carried down
		 Between the bitter knees of the after-night.
		
		Bushed in an uncouth ardour coiled at core
		 With a knot of life that only bliss can unravel
		Fall all the fruits most bitterly into earth
		 Bitterly into corrosion bitterly travel.
		
		What is it internecine that is locked
		 By very fierceness into a quiescence
		Within the rage? We shall not know till it burst
		 Out of corrosion into new florescence.
		
		Nay but how tortured is the frightful seed
		 The spark intense within it all without
		Mordant corrosion gnashing and champing hard
		 For ruin on the naked small redoubt.
		
		Bitter to fold the issue and make no sally;
		 To have the mystery but not go forth;
		To bear but retaliate nothing given to save
		 The spark in storms of corrosion as seeds from
		    the north.
		
		The sharper more horrid the pressure the harder
		    the heart
		 That saves the blue grain of eternal fire
		Within its quick committed to hold and wait
		 And suffer unheeding only forbidden to expire.


	4. FLAPPER

		LOVE has crept out of her sealéd heart
		 As a field-bee black and amber
		 Breaks from the winter-cell to clamber
		Up the warm grass where the sunbeams start.
		
		Mischief has come in her dawning eyes
		 And a glint of coloured iris brings
		 Such as lies along the folded wings
		Of the bee before he flies.
		
		Who with a ruffling careful breath
		 Has opened the wings of the wild young sprite?
		 Has fluttered her spirit to stumbling flight
		In her eyes as a young bee stumbleth?
		
		Love makes the burden of her voice.
		 The hum of his heavy staggering wings
		 Sets quivering with wisdom the common
		     things
		That she says and her words rejoice.


	5. FROM A COLLEGE WINDOW

		THE glimmer of the limes sun-heavy sleeping
		  Goes trembling past me up the College wall.
		Below the lawn in soft blue shade is keeping
		  The daisy-froth quiescent softly in thrall.
		
		Beyond the leaves that overhang the street
		 Along the flagged clean pavement summer-white
		Passes the world with shadows at their feet
		  Going left and right.
		
		Remote although I hear the beggar’s cough
		  See the woman’s twinkling fingers tend him a
		     coin
		I sit absolved assured I am better off
		  Beyond a world I never want to join.


	6. HEIMWEH

		FAR-OFF the lily-statues stand white-ranked in the
		   garden at home.
		Would God they were shattered quickly the cattle
		   would tread them out in the loam.
		I wish the elder trees in flower could suddenly heave
		   and burst
		The walls of the house and nettles puff out from
		   the hearth at which I was nursed.
		
		It stands so still in the hush composed of trees and
		   inviolate peace
		The home of my fathers the place that is mine my
		   fate and my old increase.
		And now that the skies are falling the world is
		   spouting in fountains of dirt
		I would give my soul for the homestead to fall with
		   me go with me both in one hurt.


	7. INTIME

		RETURNING I find her just the same
		At just the same old delicate game.
		
		Still she says: “Nay loose no flame
		To lick me up and do me harm!
		Be all yourself!--for oh the charm
		Of your heart of fire in which I look!
		Oh better there than in any book
		Glow and enact the dramas and dreams
		I love for ever!--there it seems
		You are lovelier than life itself till desire
		Comes licking through the bars of your lips
		And over my face the stray fire slips
		Leaving a burn and an ugly smart
		That will have the oil of illusion. Oh heart
		Of fire and beauty loose no more
		Your reptile flames of lust; ah store
		Your passion in the basket of your soul
		Be all yourself one bonny burning coal
		That stays with steady joy of its own fire.
		But do not seek to take me by desire.
		Oh do not seek to thrust on me your fire!
		For in the firing all my porcelain
		Of flesh does crackle and shiver and break in pain
		My ivory and marble black with stain
		My veil of sensitive mystery rent in twain
		My altars sullied I bereft remain
		A priestess execrable taken in vain--”
		
		                        So the refrain
		Sings itself over and so the game
		Re-starts itself wherein I am kept
		Like a glowing brazier faintly blue of flame
		So that the delicate love-adept
		Can warm her hands and invite her soul
		Sprinkling incense and salt of words
		And kisses pale and sipping the toll
		Of incense-smoke that rises like birds.
		
		Yet I’ve forgotten in playing this game
		Things I have known that shall have no name;
		Forgetting the place from which I came
		I watch her ward away the flame
		Yet warm herself at the fire--then blame
		Me that I flicker in the basket;
		Me that I glow not with content
		To have my substance so subtly spent;
		Me that I interrupt her game.
		I ought to be proud that she should ask it
		Of me to be her fire-opal--.
		
		                        It is well
		Since I am here for so short a spell
		Not to interrupt her?--Why should I
		Break in by making any reply!


	8. LOVE STORM

		MANY roses in the wind
		Are tapping at the window-sash.
		A hawk is in the sky; his wings
		Slowly begin to plash.
		
		The roses with the west wind rapping
		Are torn away and a splash
		Of red goes down the billowing air.
		
		Still hangs the hawk with the whole sky moving
		Past him--only a wing-beat proving
		The will that holds him there.
		
		The daisies in the grass are bending
		The hawk has dropped the wind is spending
		All the roses and unending
		Rustle of leaves washes out the rending
		Cry of a bird.
		
		A red rose goes on the wind.--Ascending
		The hawk his wind-swept way is wending
		Easily down the sky. The daisies sending
		Strange white signals seem intending
		To show the place whence the scream was heard.
		
		But oh my heart what birds are piping!
		A silver wind is hastily wiping
		The face of the youngest rose.
		
		And oh my heart cease apprehending!
		The hawk is gone a rose is tapping
		The window-sash as the west-wind blows.
		
		Knock knock ‘tis no more than a red rose rapping
		And fear is a plash of wings.
		What then if a scarlet rose goes flapping
		Down the bright-grey ruin of things!


	9. NARCISSUS

		WHERE the minnows trace
		A glinting web quick hid in the gloom of the brook
		When I think of the place
		And remember the small lad lying intent to look
		Through the shadowy face
		At the little fish thread-threading the watery nook--
		
		It seems to me
		The woman you are should be nixie there is a pool
		Where we ought to be.
		You undine-clear and pearly soullessly cool
		And waterly
		The pool for my limbs to fathom my soul’s last
		   school.
		
		Narcissus
		Ventured so long ago in the deeps of reflection.
		Illyssus
		Broke the bounds and beyond!--Dim recollection
		Of fishes
		Soundlessly moving in heaven’s other direction!
		
		Be
		Undine towards the waters moving back;
		For me
		A pool! Put off the soul you’ve got oh lack
		Your human self immortal; take the watery track.


	10. ON A GREY EVENING IN MARCH

		THE clouds are pushing in grey reluctance slowly
		    northward to you
		While north of them all at the farthest ends
		    stands one bright-bosomed aglance
		With fire as it guards the wild north cloud-coasts
		    red-fire seas running through
		The rocks where ravens flying to windward melt
		    as a well-shot lance.
		
		You should be out by the orchard where violets
		    secretly darken the earth
		Or there in the woods of the twilight with
		    northern wind-flowers shaken astir.
		Think of me here in the library trying and trying
		    a song that is worth
		Tears and swords to my heart arrows no armour
		    will turn or deter.
		
		You tell me the lambs have come they lie like
		    daisies white in the grass
		Of the dark-green hills; new calves in shed;
		    peewits turn after the plough--
		It is well for you. For me the navvies work in the
		    road where I pass
		And I want to smite in anger the barren rock of
		    each waterless brow.
		
		Like the sough of a wind that is caught up high in
		    the mesh of the budding trees
		A sudden car goes sweeping past and I strain my
		    soul to hear
		The voice of the furtive triumphant engine as it
		    rushes past like a breeze
		To hear on its mocking triumphance unwitting
		    the after-echo of fear.


	11. ON THAT DAY

		  ON that day
		I shall put roses on roses and cover your grave
		With multitude of white roses: and since you were
		     brave
		  One bright red ray.
		
		  So people passing under
		The ash-trees of the valley-road will raise
		Their eyes and look at the grave on the hill in
		     wonder
		  Wondering mount and put the flowers asunder
		
		  To see whose praise
		Is blazoned here so white and so bloodily red.
		Then they will say: “‘Tis long since she is dead
		  Who has remembered her after many days?”
		
		  And standing there
		They will consider how you went your ways
		Unnoticed among them a still queen lost in the
		     maze
		  Of this earthly affair.
		
		  A queen they’ll say
		Has slept unnoticed on a forgotten hill.
		Sleeps on unknown unnoticed there until
		  Dawns my insurgent day.


	12. PENTACOSTAL

		Shall I tell you then how it is?
		
		There came a cloven gleam
		Like a tongue of darkened flame
		To burn in me.
		
		And so I seem
		To have you still the same
		In one world with me.
		
		In the flicker of a flower
		In a worm that is blind yet strives
		In the mouse that pauses to listen
		
		Glimmers our
		Shadow as well and deprives
		Them none of their glisten.
		
		In each shaken morsel
		Our shadow trembles
		As if it rippled from out of us hand in hand.
		
		We are part and parcel
		In shadow nothing dissembles
		Our darkened universe. You understand?
		
		For I have told you plainly how it is.


	13. READING A LETTER

		SHE sits on the recreation ground
		 Under an oak whose yellow buds dot the pale
		    blue sky.
		The young grass twinkles in the wind and the sound
		 Of the wind in the knotted buds in a canopy.
		
		So sitting under the knotted canopy
		 Of the wind she is lifted and carried away as in
		   a balloon
		Across the insensible void till she stoops to see
		 The sandy desert beneath her the dreary platoon.
		
		She knows the waste all dry beneath her in one
		    place
		 Stirring with earth-coloured life ever turning and
		    stirring.
		But never the motion has a human face
		 Nor sound save intermittent machinery whirring.
		
		And so again on the recreation ground
		 She alights a stranger wondering unused to the
		    scene;
		Suffering at sight of the children playing around
		 Hurt at the chalk-coloured tulips and the even-
		    ing-green.


	14. SEVEN SEALS

		SINCE this is the last night I keep you home
		Come I will consecrate you for the journey.
		
		Rather I had you would not go. Nay come
		I will not again reproach you. Lie back
		And let me love you a long time ere you go.
		For you are sullen-hearted still and lack
		The will to love me. But even so
		I will set a seal upon you from my lip
		Will set a guard of honour at each door
		Seal up each channel out of which might slip
		Your love for me.
		
		                I kiss your mouth. Ah love
		Could I but seal its ruddy shining spring
		Of passion parch it up destroy remove
		Its softly-stirring crimson welling-up
		Of kisses! Oh help me God! Here at the source
		I’d lie for ever drinking and drawing in
		Your fountains as heaven drinks from out their
		   course
		The floods.
		
		                I close your ears with kisses
		And seal your nostrils; and round your neck you’ll
		   wear--
		Nay let me work--a delicate chain of kisses.
		Like beads they go around and not one misses
		To touch its fellow on either side.
		
		                And there
		Full mid-between the champaign of your breast
		I place a great and burning seal of love
		Like a dark rose a mystery of rest
		On the slow bubbling of your rhythmic heart.
		
		Nay I persist and very faith shall keep
		You integral to me. Each door each mystic port
		Of egress from you I will seal and steep
		In perfect chrism.
		         Now it is done. The mort
		Will sound in heaven before it is undone.
		
		But let me finish what I have begun
		And shirt you now invulnerable in the mail
		Of iron kisses kisses linked like steel.
		Put greaves upon your thighs and knees and frail
		Webbing of steel on your feet. So you shall feel
		Ensheathed invulnerable with me with seven
		Great seals upon your outgoings and woven
		Chain of my mystic will wrapped perfectly
		Upon you wrapped in indomitable me.


	15. SIGH NO MORE

		THE cuckoo and the coo-dove’s ceaseless calling
		              Calling
		Of a meaningless monotony is palling
		All my morning’s pleasure in the sun-fleck-scattered
		    wood.
		May-blossom and blue bird’s-eye flowers falling
		              Falling
		In a litter through the elm-tree shade are scrawling
		Messages of true-love down the dust of the high-
		    road.
		I do not like to hear the gentle grieving
		              Grieving
		Of the she-dove in the blossom still believing
		Love will yet again return to her and make all good.
		
		When I know that there must ever be deceiving
		              Deceiving
		Of the mournful constant heart that while she’s
		    weaving
		Her woes her lover woos and sings within another
		    wood.
		
		Oh boisterous the cuckoo shouts forestalling
		              Stalling
		A progress down the intricate enthralling
		By-paths where the wanton-headed flowers doff
		    their hood.
		
		And like a laughter leads me onward heaving
		              Heaving
		A sigh among the shadows thus retrieving
		A decent short regret for that which once was very
		    good.


	16. THE ALMOND TREE

		YOU promised to send me some violets. Did you
		    forget?
		 White ones and blue ones from under the orchard
		    hedge?
		 Sweet dark purple and white ones mixed for a
		    pledge
		Of our early love that hardly has opened yet.
		
		Here there’s an almond tree--you have never seen
		 Such a one in the north--it flowers on the street
		    and I stand
		 Every day by the fence to look up for the flowers
		    that expand
		At rest in the blue and wonder at what they mean.
		
		Under the almond tree the happy lands
		 Provence Japan and Italy repose
		 And passing feet are chatter and clapping of
		    those
		Who play around us country girls clapping their
		    hands.
		
		You my love the foremost in a flowered gown
		 All your unbearable tenderness you with the
		    laughter
		 Startled upon your eyes now so wide with here-
		    after
		You with loose hands of abandonment hanging
		    down.


	17. THE NORTH COUNTRY

		IN another country black poplars shake them-
		   selves over a pond
		And rooks and the rising smoke-waves scatter and
		   wheel from the works beyond;
		The air is dark with north and with sulphur the
		   grass is a darker green
		And people darkly invested with purple move
		  palpable through the scene.
		
		Soundlessly down across the counties out of the
		   resonant gloom
		That wraps the north in stupor and purple travels
		   the deep slow boom
		Of the man-life north-imprisoned shut in the hum
		   of the purpled steel
		As it spins to sleep on its motion drugged dense in
		   the sleep of the wheel.
		
		Out of the sleep from the gloom of motion sound-
		   lessly somnambule
		Moans and booms the soul of a people imprisoned
		   asleep in the rule
		Of the strong machine that runs mesmeric booming
		   the spell of its word
		Upon them and moving them helpless mechanic
		   their will to its will deferred.
		
		Yet all the while comes the droning inaudible out
		   of the violet air
		The moaning of sleep-bound beings in travail that
		   toil and are will-less there
		In the spell-bound north convulsive now with a
		   dream near morning strong
		With violent achings heaving to burst the sleep
		   that is now not long.


	18. TWENTY YEARS AGO

		ROUND the house were lilacs and strawberries
		 And foal-foots spangling the paths
		And far away on the sand-hills dewberries
		 Caught dust from the sea’s long swaths.
		
		Up the wolds the woods were walking
		 And nuts fell out of their hair.
		At the gate the nets hung balking
		 The star-lit rush of a hare.
		
		In the autumn fields the stubble
		 Tinkled the music of gleaning.
		At a mother’s knees the trouble
		 Lost all its meaning.
		
		Yea what good beginnings
		 To this sad end!
		Have we had our innings?
		 God forfend!


	19. UNDER THE OAK

		You if you were sensible
		When I tell you the stars flash signals each one
		  dreadful
		You would not turn and answer me
		“The night is wonderful.”
		
		Even you if you knew
		How this darkness soaks me through and through
		  and infuses
		Unholy fear in my vapour you would pause to dis-
		  tinguish
		What hurts from what amuses.
		
		For I tell you
		Beneath this powerful tree my whole soul’s fluid
		Oozes away from me as a sacrifice steam
		At the knife of a Druid.
		
		Again I tell you I bleed I am bound with withies
		My life runs out.
		I tell you my blood runs out on the floor of this oak
		Gout upon gout.
		
		Above me springs the blood-born mistletoe
		In the shady smoke.
		But who are you twittering to and fro
		Beneath the oak?
		
		What thing better are you what worse?
		What have you to do with the mysteries
		Of this ancient place of my ancient curse?
		What place have you in my histories?


	20. WINTER IN THE BOULEVARD

		THE frost has settled down upon the trees
		And ruthlessly strangled off the fantasies
		Of leaves that have gone unnoticed swept like old
		Romantic stories now no more to be told.
		
		The trees down the boulevard stand naked in
		   thought
		Their abundant summery wordage silenced caught
		In the grim undertow; naked the trees confront
		Implacable winter’s long cross-questioning brunt.
		
		Has some hand balanced more leaves in the depths
		   of the twigs?
		Some dim little efforts placed in the threads of the
		   birch?--
		It is only the sparrows like dead black leaves on
		   the sprigs
		Sitting huddled against the cerulean one flesh with
		   their perch.
		
		The clear cold sky coldly bethinks itself.
		Like vivid thought the air spins bright and all
		Trees birds and earth arrested in the after-thought
		Awaiting the sentence out from the welkin brought.


*** Emma Lazarus (1849 - 1887)

	1. LONG ISLAND SOUND

		I see it as it looked one afternoon 
		In August,--by a fresh soft breeze o’erblown. 
		The swiftness of the tide, the light thereon, 
		A far-off sail, white as a crescent moon. 
		The shining waters with pale currents strewn, 
		The quiet fishing-smacks, the Eastern cove, 
		The semi-circle of its dark, green grove. 
		The luminous grasses, and the merry sun 
		In the grave sky; the sparkle far and wide, 
		Laughter of unseen children, cheerful chirp 
		Of crickets, and low lisp of rippling tide, 
		Light summer clouds fantastical as sleep 
		Changing unnoted while I gazed thereon. 
		All these fair sounds and sights I made my own.


	2. THE NEW COLOSSUS

		Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame,
		With conquering limbs astride from land to land;
		Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand
		A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame
		Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name
		Mother of Exiles. From her beacon-hand
		Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command
		The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame.
		“Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!” cries she
		With silent lips. “Give me your tired, your poor,
		Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
		The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
		Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
		I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”


	3. THE SOUTH

		Night, and beneath star-blazoned summer skies 
		Behold the Spirit of the musky South, 
		A creole with still-burning, languid eyes, 
		Voluptuous limbs and incense-breathing mouth: 
		Swathed in spun gauze is she, 
		From fibres of her own anana tree. 
		
		Within these sumptuous woods she lies at ease, 
		By rich night-breezes, dewy cool, caressed: 
		’Twixt cypresses and slim palmetto trees, 
		Like to the golden oriole’s hanging nest, 
		Her airy hammock swings, 
		And through the dark her mocking-bird yet sings. 
		
		How beautiful she is! A tulip-wreath 
		Twines round her shadowy, free-floating hair: 
		Young, weary, passionate, and sad as death, 
		Dark visions haunt for her the vacant air, 
		While noiselessly she lies 
		With lithe, lax, folded hands and heavy eyes. 
		
		Full well knows she how wide and fair extend 
		Her groves bright flowered, her tangled everglades, 
		Majestic streams that indolently wend 
		Through lush savanna or dense forest shades, 
		Where the brown buzzard flies 
		To broad bayous ’neath hazy-golden skies. 
		
		Hers is the savage splendor of the swamp, 
		With pomp of scarlet and of purple bloom, 
		Where blow warm, furtive breezes faint and damp, 
		Strange insects whir, and stalking bitterns boom--
		Where from stale waters dead 
		Oft looms the great jawed alligator’s head. 
		
		Her wealth, her beauty, and the blight on these,--
		Of all she is aware: luxuriant woods, 
		Fresh, living, sunlit, in her dream she sees; 
		And ever midst those verdant solitudes 
		The soldier’s wooden cross, 
		O’ergrown by creeping tendrils and rank moss. 
		
		Was hers a dream of empire? was it sin? 
		And is it well that all was borne in vain? 
		She knows no more than one who slow doth win, 
		After fierce fever, conscious life again, 
		Too tired, too weak, too sad, 
		By the new light to be or stirred or glad. 
		
		From rich sea-islands fringing her green shore, 
		From broad plantations where swart freemen bend 
		Bronzed backs in willing labor, from her store 
		Of golden fruit, from stream, from town, ascend 
		Life-currents of pure health: 
		Her aims shall be subserved with boundless wealth. 
		
		Yet now how listless and how still she lies, 
		Like some half-savage, dusky Indian queen, 
		Rocked in her hammock ’neath her native skies, 
		With the pathetic, passive, broken mien 
		Of one who, sorely proved, 
		Great-souled, hath suffered much and much hath loved! 
		
		But look! along the wide-branched, dewy glade 
		Glimmers the dawn: the light palmetto trees 
		And cypresses reissue from the shade, 
		And she hath wakened. Through clear air she sees 
		The pledge, the brightening ray, 
		And leaps from dreams to hail the coming day.


*** Edward Lear (1812 - 1888)

	1. THE JUMBLIES

		I
		
		They went to sea in a sieve, they did;
		    In a sieve they went to sea:
		In spite of all their friends could say,
		On a winter’s morn, on a stormy day,
		    In a sieve they went to sea.
		And when the sieve turned round and round,
		And every one cried, “You’ll all be drowned!”
		They called aloud, “Our sieve ain’t big;
		But we don’t care a button, we don’t care a fig:
		    In a sieve we’ll go to sea!”
		         Far and few, far and few,
		    Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
		         Their heads are green, and their hands are blue
		    And they went to sea in a sieve.
		
		
		II
		
		They sailed away in a sieve, they did,
		    In a sieve they sailed so fast,
		With only a beautiful pea-green veil
		Tied with a ribbon, by way of a sail,
		    To a small tobacco-pipe mast.
		And every one said who saw them go,
		“Oh! won’t they be soon upset, you know?
		For the sky is dark, and the voyage is long;
		And, happen what may, it’s extremely wrong
		    In a sieve to sail so fast.”
		        Far and few, far and few,
		    Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
		        Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
		    And they went to sea in a sieve.
		
		
		III
		
		The water it soon came in, it did;
		    The water it soon came in:
		So, to keep them dry, they wrapped their feet
		    In a pinky paper all folded neat;
		And they fastened it down with a pin.
		And they passed the night in a crockery-jar;
		And each of them said, “How wise we are!
		Though the sky be dark, and the voyage be long,
		Yet we never can think we were rash or wrong,
		    While round in our sieve we spin.”
		        Far and few, far and few,
		    Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
		        Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
		    And they went to sea in a sieve.
		
		
		IV
		
		And all night long they sailed away;
		    And when the sun went down,
		They whistled and warbled a moony song
		    To the echoing sound of a coppery gong,
		In the shade of the mountains brown.
		“O Timballoo! How happy we are
		When we live in a sieve and a crockery-jar!
		And all night long, in the moonlight pale,
		We sail away with a pea-green sail
		    In the shade of the mountains brown.”
		        Far and few, far and few,
		    Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
		        Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
		    And they went to sea in a sieve.
		
		
		V
		
		They sailed to the Western Sea, they did,--
		    To a land all covered with trees:
		And they bought an owl, and a useful cart,
		    And a pound of rice, and a cranberry-tart,
		And a hive of silvery bees;
		And they bought a pig, and some green jackdaws,
		And a lovely monkey with lollipop paws,
		And forty bottles of ring-bo-ree,
		    And no end of Stilton cheese.
		        Far and few, far and few,
		    Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
		        Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
		    And they went to sea in a sieve.
		
		
		VI
		
		And in twenty years they all came back,--
		    In twenty years or more;
		And every one said, “How tall they’ve grown!
		    For they’ve been to the Lakes, and the Torrible Zone,
		And the hills of the Chankly Bore.”
		And they drank their health, and gave them a feast
		Of dumplings made of beautiful yeast;
		And every one said, “If we only live,
		We, too, will go to sea in a sieve,
		    To the hills of the Chankly Bore.”
		        Far and few, far and few,
		    Are the lands where the Jumblies live:
		        Their heads are green, and their hands are blue;
		    And they went to sea in a sieve.


	2. THE OWL AND THE PUSSY-CAT

		I
		
		The Owl and the Pussy-cat went to sea 
		  In a beautiful pea-green boat, 
		They took some honey, and plenty of money, 
		  Wrapped up in a five-pound note. 
		The Owl looked up to the stars above, 
		  And sang to a small guitar, 
		“O lovely Pussy! O Pussy, my love, 
		   What a beautiful Pussy you are, 
		        You are, 
		        You are! 
		What a beautiful Pussy you are!” 
		
		
		II
		
		Pussy said to the Owl, “You elegant fowl! 
		  How charmingly sweet you sing! 
		O let us be married! too long we have tarried: 
		  But what shall we do for a ring?” 
		They sailed away, for a year and a day, 
		  To the land where the Bong-Tree grows 
		And there in a wood a Piggy-wig stood 
		  With a ring at the end of his nose, 
		            His nose, 
		            His nose, 
		  With a ring at the end of his nose. 
		
		
		III
		
		“Dear Pig, are you willing to sell for one shilling 
		  Your ring?” Said the Piggy, “I will.” 
		So they took it away, and were married next day 
		  By the Turkey who lives on the hill. 
		They dined on mince, and slices of quince, 
		  Which they ate with a runcible spoon; 
		And hand in hand, on the edge of the sand, 
		  They danced by the light of the moon, 
		            The moon, 
		            The moon, 
		They danced by the light of the moon.


*** Luis de León (1527 - 1591)

	1. THE LIFE REMOVED

		    How tranquil is the life
		Of him who, shunning the vain world’s uproar,
		May follow, free from strife,
		The hidden path, of yore
		Chosen by the few who conned true wisdom’s lore!
		
		    For he, with thoughts aloof,
		By proud men’s great estate is not oppressed.
		Nor marvels at the roof
		Of gold, built to attest
		The Moor’s skill, that on jasper pillars rests.
		
		    He heeds not though fame raise
		His name afar on wings of rumour flung,
		He cares not for the praise
		Of cunning flatterer’s tongue,
		Nor for what truth sincere would leave unsung.
		
		    What boots it my content
		That the vain voice of fame should favour me,
		If in its service spent
		I find myself to be
		Vexed by dull care and gnawing misery?
		
		    O hill, O stream, O field,
		O solitary refuge of delight,
		Since my bark now must yield
		To storm, your solace bright
		I seek and flee this sea’s tempestuous might.
		
		    Sleep broken by no fear
		Be mine, and a day clear, serene, and free,
		Shunning the look severe,
		Lofty exceedingly,
		Of him whom gold exalts or ancestry.
		
		    Me may the birds awake
		With their sweet, unpremeditated song,
		And those dark cares forsake
		That e’er to him belong
		Who lives not in his independence strong!
		
		    I to myself would live,
		To enjoy the blessings that to Heaven I owe,
		Alone, contemplative,
		And freely love forgo,
		Nor hope, fear, hatred, jealousy e’er know.
		
		    Upon the bare hillside
		An orchard I have made with my own hand,
		That in the sweet Springtide
		All in fair flower doth stand
		And promise sure of fruit shows through the land.
		
		    And, as though swift it strove
		To see and to increase that loveliness,
		From the clear ridge above
		A stream pure, weariless
		Hurrying to reach that ground doth onward press;
		
		    And straightway in repose
		Its course it winds there tree and tree between,
		And ever as it goes
		The earth decks with new green
		And with gay wealth of flowers spreads the scene.
		
		    The air in gentle breeze
		A myriad scents for my delight distils,
		It moves among the trees
		With a soft sound that fills
		The mind, and thought of gold or scepter kills.
		
		    Treasure and gold be theirs
		Who to a frail bark would entrust their life:
		I envy not the cares
		Of those whose fears are rife
		When the north wind with south wind is at strife.
		
		    In the storm’s strain the mast
		Groans, and clear day is turned to eyeless night,
		While to the skies aghast
		Rise wild cries of affright
		And they enrich the sea in their despite.
		
		    But me may still suffice,
		Rich only in meek peace, a humble fare;
		And the wrought artifice
		Be his of gold plate rare
		Who dreads not o’er the raging sea to fare.
		
		    And while in misery
		Others are pledged to fierce ambition’s throng,
		Afire insatiably
		For power that stays not long,
		May I in pleasant shade recite my song;
		
		    Yea, lying in the shade,
		My brow with bay and ivy immortal crowned,
		My ear attentive made
		To the soft, tuneful sound
		Of zither touched by fingers’ skill profound.


*** Giacomo Leopardi (1798 - 1837)

	1. CALM AFTER STORM

		e storm hath passed;
		I hear the birds rejoice; the hen,
		Returned into the road again,
		Her cheerful notes repeats. The sky serene
		Is, in the west, upon the mountain seen:
		The country smiles; bright runs the silver stream.
		Each heart is cheered; on every side revive
		The sounds, the labors of the busy hive.
		The workman gazes at the watery sky,
		As standing at the door he sings,
		His work in hand; the little wife goes forth,
		And in her pail the gathered rain-drops brings;
		The vendor of his wares, from lane to lane,
		Begins his daily cry again.
		The sun returns, and with his smile illumes
		The villas on the neighboring hills;
		Through open terraces and balconies,
		The genial light pervades the cheerful rooms;
		And, on the highway, from afar are heard
		The tinkling of the bells, the creaking wheels
		Of waggoner, his journey who resumes.
		
		Cheered is each heart.
		Whene’er, as now, doth life appear
		A thing so pleasant and so dear?
		When, with such love,
		Does man unto his books or work return?
		Or on himself new tasks impose?
		When is he less regardful of his woes?
		O pleasure, born of pain!
		O idle joy, and vain,
		Fruit of the fear just passed, which shook
		The wretch who life abhorred, yet dreaded death!
		With which each neighbor held his breath,
		Silent, and cold, and wan,
		Affrighted sore to see
		The lightnings, clouds, and winds arrayed,
		To do us injury!
		
		O Nature courteous!
		These are thy boons to us,
		These the delights to mortals given!
		Escape from pain, best gift of heaven!
		Thou scatterest sorrows with a bounteous hand;
		Grief springs spontaneous;
		If, by some monstrous growth, miraculous,
		Pleasure at times is born of pain,
		It is a precious gain!
		O human race, unto the gods so dear!
		Too happy, in a respite brief
		From any grief!
		Then only blessed,
		When Death releases thee unto thy rest!


	2. THE EVENING OF THE HOLIDAY

		The night is mild and clear, and without wind, 
		And o’er the roofs, and o’er the gardens round 
		The moon shines soft, and from afar reveals 
		Each mountain-peak serene. O lady, mine, 
		Hushed now is every path, and few and dim 
		The lamps that glimmer through the balconies. 
		Thou sleepest! in thy quiet rooms, how light 
		And easy is thy sleep! No care thy heart 
		Consumes; and little dost thou know or think, 
		How deep a wound thou in my heart hast made. 
		Thou sleepest; I to yonder heaven turn, 
		That seems to greet me with a loving smile, 
		And to that Nature old, omnipotent, 
		That doomed me still to suffer. ‘I to thee 
		All hope deny,’ she said, ‘e’en hope; nor may 
		Those eyes of thine e’er shine, save through their tears.’ 
		
		This was a holiday; its pleasures o’er, 
		Thou seek’st repose; and happy in thy dreams 
		Recallest those whom thou hast pleased to-day, 
		And those who have pleased thee: not I, indeed,-- 
		I hoped it not,--unto thy thoughts occur. 
		Meanwhile, I ask, how much of life remains 
		To me; and on the earth I cast myself, 
		And cry, and groan. How wretched are my days, 
		And still so young! Hark, on the road I hear, 
		Not far away, the solitary song 
		Of workman, who returns at this late hour, 
		In merry mood, unto his humble home; 
		And in my heart a cruel pang I feel, 
		At thought, how all things earthly pass away, 
		And leave no trace behind. This festal day 
		Hath fled; a working-day now follows it, 
		And all, alike, are swept away by Time. 
		Where is the glory of the antique nations now? 
		Where now the fame of our great ancestors? 
		The empire vast of Rome, the clash of arms? 
		Now all is peace and silence, all the world 
		At rest; their very names are heard no more. 
		E’en from my earliest years, when we 
		Expect so eagerly a holiday, 
		The moment it was past, I sought my couch, 
		Wakeful and sad; and at the midnight hour, 
		When I the song heard of some passer-by, 
		That slowly in the distance died away, 
		The same deep anguish felt I in my heart.


	3. THE INFINITE

		This solitary hill has always been dear to me 
		And this hedge, which prevents me from seeing most of 
		The endless horizon. 
		But when I sit and gaze, I imagine, in my thoughts 
		Endless spaces beyond the hedge, 
		An all encompassing silence and a deeply profound quiet, 
		To the point that my heart is almost overwhelmed. 
		And when I hear the wind rustling through the trees 
		I compare its voice to the infinite silence. 
		And eternity occurs to me, and all the ages past, 
		And the present time, and its sound. 
		Amidst this immensity my thought drowns: 
		And to founder in this sea is sweet to me. 


	4. THE VILLAGE SATURDAY NIGHT

		The damsel from the field returns, 
		The sun is sinking in the west; 
		Her bundle on her head she sets, 
		And in her hand she bears 
		A bunch of roses and of violets. 
		To-morrow is a holiday, 
		And she, as usual, must them wear 
		Upon her bodice, in her hair. 
		The old crone sits among her mates, 
		Upon the stairs, and spins; 
		And, looking at the fading light, 
		Of good old-fashioned times she prates, 
		When she, too, dressed for holidays, 
		And with light heart, and limb as light, 
		Would dance at night 
		With the companions of her merry days. 
		The twilight shades around us close, 
		The sky to deepest blue is turned; 
		From hills and roofs the shadows fall, 
		And the new moon her face of silver shows. 
		And now the cheerful bell 
		Proclaims the coming festival. 
		By its familiar voice 
		How every heart is cheered! 
		The children all in troops, 
		Around the little square 
		Go, leaping here and there, 
		And make a joyful sound. 
		Meanwhile the ploughman, whistling, returns 
		Unto his humble nest, 
		And thinks with pleasure of his day of rest. 
		
		Then, when all other lights are out, 
		And all is silent round, 
		The hammer’s stroke we hear, 
		We hear the saw of carpenter, 
		Who with closed doors his vigil keeps, 
		Toils o’er his lamp and strives so hard, 
		His work to finish ere the dawn appear. 
		
		The dearest day of all the week 
		Is this, of hope and joy so full; 
		To-morrow, sad and dull, 
		The hours will bring, for each must in his thought 
		His customary task-work seek. 
		
		Thou little, sportive boy, 
		This blooming age of thine 
		Is like to-day, so full of joy; 
		And is the day, indeed, 
		That must the sabbath of thy life precede. 
		
		Enjoy, it, then, my darling child, 
		Nor speed the flying hours! 
		I say to thee no more: 
		Alas, in this sad world of ours, 
		How far exceeds the holiday, 
		The day that goes before!


	5. TO SYLVIA

		O Sylvia, dost thou remember still 
		That period of thy mortal life, 
		When beauty so bewildering 
		Shone in thy laughing, glancing eyes, 
		As thou, so merry, yet so wise, 
		Youth’s threshold then wast entering? 
		
		How did the quiet rooms, 
		And all the paths around, 
		With thy perpetual song resound, 
		As thou didst sit, on woman’s work intent, 
		Abundantly content 
		With the vague future, floating on thy mind! 
		Thy custom thus to spend the day 
		In that sweet time of youth and May! 
		
		How could I, then, at times, 
		In those fair days of youth, 
		The only happy days I ever knew, 
		My hard tasks dropping, or my careless rhymes, 
		My station take, on father’s balcony, 
		And listen to thy voice’s melody, 
		And watch thy hands, as they would deftly fly 
		O’er thy embroidery! 
		I gazed upon the heaven serene, 
		The sun-lit paths, the orchards green, 
		The distant mountain here, 
		And there, the far-off sea. 
		Ah, mortal tongue cannot express 
		What then I felt of happiness! 
		
		What gentle thoughts, what hopes divine, 
		What loving hearts, O Sylvia mine! 
		In what bright colors then portrayed 
		Were human life and fate! 
		Oh, when I think of such fond hopes betrayed, 
		A feeling seizes me 
		Of bitterness and misery, 
		And tenfold is my grief renewed! 
		O Nature, why this treachery? 
		Why thus, with broken promises, 
		Thy children’s hearts delude? 
		
		Thou, ere the grass was touched with winter’s frost, 
		By fell disease attacked and overcome, 
		O tender plant, didst die! 
		The flower of thy days thou ne’er didst see; 
		Nor did thy soft heart move 
		Now of thy raven locks the tender praise, 
		Now of thy eyes, so loving and so shy; 
		Nor with thee, on the holidays, 
		Did thy companions talk of love. 
		
		So perished, too, erelong, 
		My own sweet hope; 
		So too, unto my years 
		Did Fate their youth deny. 
		Alas, alas the day, 
		Lamented hope, companion dear, 
		How hast thou passed away! 
		Is _this_ that world? These the delights, 
		The love, the labors, the events, 
		Of which we once so fondly spoke? 
		And must _all_ mortals wear this weary yoke? 
		Ah, when the truth appeared, 
		It better seemed to die! 
		Cold death, the barren tomb, didst thou prefer 
		To harsh reality.


*** Mikhail Lermontov (1814 - 1841)

	1. ALONE I SET OUT ON THE ROAD

		Alone I set out on the road; 
		The flinty path is sparkling in the mist; 
		The night is still. The desert harks to God, 
		And star with star converses. 
		
		The vault is overwhelmed with solemn wonder 
		The earth in cobalt aura sleeps . . . 
		Why do I feel so pained and troubled? 
		What do I harbor: hope, regrets? 
		
		I see no hope in years to come, 
		Have no regrets for things gone by. 
		All that I seek is peace and freedom! 
		To lose myself and sleep! 
		
		But not the frozen slumber of the grave . . .
		I’d like eternal sleep to leave 
		My life force dozing in my breast 
		Gently with my breath to rise and fall; 
		
		By night and day, my hearing would be soothed 
		By voices sweet, singing to me of love. 
		And over me, forever green, 
		A dark oak tree would bend and rustle.


	2. BORED AND SAD

		And boring and sad, and none to be given a hand
		When a minute of suffering comes                  
		Desires! . . . what’s the use of desiring vainly without a stand? . . .
		While the years slip by--the best ones!          
		
		To love . . . whom again? . . . for a while--it is worth no pains,
		But to love for eternity no one could.
		Shall you look in yourself?--of the past no vestige remains:
		There all has been nothing, every joy, every wound . . .
		
		What passions?--After all sooner or later their pleasant disease 
		Shall vanish, if you reason it out at rest
		And life, if you look it all over with icy attention--it is
		Such an empty and foolish jest . . .


	3. MEDITATION

		With sadness I survey our present generation!
		Their future seems so empty, dark, and cold,
		Weighed down beneath a load of knowing hesitation,
		In idleness stagnating, growing old.
		We have received, when barely finished weaning,
		The errors of our sires, their tardiness of mind,
		And life oppresses us, a flat road without meaning, 
		An alien feast where we have dined.
		Toward good and evil shamefully uncaring
		We wilt without a fight when starting on life’s race;
		When danger threatens us--ignoble want of daring,
		Before those set on high--despicable and base. 
		A wizened fruit grown ripe before its hour,
		No pleasure to the eye and no delight to taste, 
		An orphan stranger there, he hangs beside the flower--
		The time of its full bloom is his to fall and waste.
		
		For we have dried our brains with fruitless speculations,
		Withholding enviously from friends and those about 
		The ringing voice of lofty aspirations
		And noble passions, undermined by doubt. 
		Our lips have barely brushed the cup of delectation,
		But youthful strength we did not thus retain; 
		From every joy we found, in fear of saturation,
		We took the best and never came again.
		The dreams of poesy, pure art, and its creation
		With its sweet ecstasy our senses never move;
		We greedily retain the remnants of sensation--
		Dug deep and miserly, a useless treasure trove.
		And we both love and hate by chance, without conviction,
		We make no sacrifice for malice, or for good, 
		There reigns within our souls a kind of chill constriction,
		Whenever the flame ignites the blood.
		The pastimes of our sires we think a boring story,
		Their guileless, boyish dissipations unrefined;
		We hurry to our graves, unhappy, without glory,
		With one last sneering glance behind.
		
		A gloomy throng are we, condemned and soon forgotten,
		We pass across the world in silence, without trace, 
		No thoughts that might bear fruit for ages unbegotten, 
		No work of genius to inspire the race.
		Our ashes will receive a harsh and just portrayal, 
		Posterity will sneer with skilled and scornful verse, 
		A curse of bitterness from sons at their betrayal 
		By their own father’s spendthrift purse.


	4. SAIL

		A lonely sail is flashing white
		Amdist the blue mist of the sea!
		What does it seek in foreign lands?
		What did it leave behind at home?
		
		Waves heave, wind whistles,
		The mast, it bends and creaks . . .
		Alas, it seeks not happiness
		Nor happiness does it escape!
		
		Below, a current azure bright,
		Above, a golden ray of sun . . .
		Rebellious, it seeks out a storm
		As if in storms it could find peace!


	5. THE ANGEL

		At midnight an angel was crossing the sky,
		And quietly he sang;
		The moon and the stars and the concourse of clouds
		Paid heed to his heavenly song.
		
		He sang of the bliss of the innocent souls
		In heavenly gardens above;
		Of almighty God he sang out, and his praise
		Was pure and sincere.
		
		He bore in his arms a young soul
		To our valley of sorrow and tears;
		The young soul remembered the heavenly song 
		So vivid and yet without words.
		
		And long did it struggle on earth,
		With wondrous desire imbued;
		But none of the tedious songs of our earth
		Could rival celestial song.


*** Denise Levertov (1923 - 1997)

	1. EVERYTHING THAT ACTS IS ACTUAL

		From the tawny light
		from the rainy nights
		from the imagination finding
		itself and more than itself
		alone and more than alone
		at the bottom of the well where the moon lives,   
		can you pull me
		
		into December? a lowland
		of space, perception of space
		towering of shadows of clouds blown upon
		clouds over
		                 new ground, new made
		under heavy December footsteps? the only
		way to live?
		
		The flawed moon
		acts on the truth, and makes   
		an autumn of tentative
		silences.
		You lived, but somewhere else,
		your presence touched others, ring upon ring,
		and changed. Did you think   
		I would not change?
		
		                             The black moon
		turns away, its work done. A tenderness,
		unspoken autumn.   
		We are faithful
		only to the imagination. What the
		imagination
		            seizes
		as beauty must be truth. What holds you
		to what you see of me is
		that grasp alone.


	2. FEBRUARY EVENING IN NEW YORK

		As the stores close, a winter light
		   opens air to iris blue,
		   glint of frost through the smoke
		   grains of mica, salt of the sidewalk.
		As the buildings close, released autonomous   
		   feet pattern the streets
		   in hurry and stroll; balloon heads
		   drift and dive above them; the bodies   
		   aren’t really there.
		As the lights brighten, as the sky darkens,
		   a woman with crooked heels says to another woman   
		   while they step along at a fair pace,
		   “You know, I’m telling you, what I love best   
		   is life. I love life! Even if I ever get
		   to be old and wheezy—or limp! You know?   
		   Limping along?—I’d still ... ” Out of hearing.   
		To the multiple disordered tones
		   of gears changing, a dance
		   to the compass points, out, four-way river.   
		   Prospect of sky
		   wedged into avenues, left at the ends of streets,   
		   west sky, east sky: more life tonight! A range   
		   of open time at winter’s outskirts.


	3. IN CALIFORNIA: MORNING, EVENING, LATE JANUARY

		Pale, then enkindled,
		light
		advancing,
		emblazoning
		summits of palm and pine,
		
		the dew
		lingering,
		scripture of
		scintillas.
		
		Soon the roar
		of mowers
		cropping the already short
		grass of lawns,
		
		men with long-nozzled
		cylinders of pesticide
		poking at weeds,
		at moss in cracks of cement,
		
		and louder roar
		of helicopters off to spray
		vineyards where braceros try
		to hold their breath,
		
		and in the distance, bulldozers, excavators,
		babel of destructive construction.
		
		Banded by deep
		oakshadow, airy
		shadow of eucalyptus,
		
		miner’s lettuce,
		tender, untasted,
		and other grass, unmown,
		luxuriant,
		no green more brilliant.
		
		Fragile paradise.
		
		        .   .   .   .
		
		At day’s end the whole sky,
		vast, unstinting, flooded with transparent
		mauve,
		tint of wisteria,
		cloudless
		over the malls, the industrial parks,
		the homes with the lights going on,
		the homeless arranging their bundles.
		
		        .   .   .   .
		
		Who can utter
		the poignance of all that is constantly
		threatened, invaded, expended
		
		and constantly
		nevertheless
		persists in beauty,
		
		tranquil as this young moon
		just risen and slowly
		drinking light   
		from the vanished sun.
		
		Who can utter
		the praise of such generosity
		or the shame?


	4. MATINS

		i 
		
		The authentic! Shadows of it 
		sweep past in dreams, one could say imprecisely, 
		evoking the almost-silent 
		ripping apart of giant 
		sheets of cellophane. No. 
		It thrusts up close. Exactly in dreams 
		it has you off-guard, you 
		recognize it before you have time. 
		For a second before waking 
		the alarm bell is a red conical hat, it 
		takes form. 
		
		
		ii 
		
		The authentic! I said 
		rising from the toilet seat. 
		The radiator in rhythmic knockings 
		spoke of the rising steam. 
		The authentic, I said 
		breaking the handle of my hairbrush as I 
		brushed my hair in 
		rhythmic strokes: That’s it, 
		that’s joy, it’s always 
		a recognition, the known 
		appearing fully itself, and 
		more itself than one knew. 
		
		
		iii 
		
		The new day rises 
		as heat rises, 
		knocking in the pipes 
		with rhythms it seizes for its own 
		to speak of its invention— 
		the real, the new-laid 
		egg whose speckled shell 
		the poet fondles and must break 
		if he will be nourished. 
		
		
		iv 
		
		A shadow painted where 
		yes, a shadow must fall. 
		The cow’s breath 
		not forgotten in the mist, in the 
		words. Yes, 
		verisimilitude draws up 
		heat in us, zest 
		to follow through, 
		follow through, 
		follow 
		transformations of day 
		in its turning, in its becoming. 
		
		
		v 
		
		Stir the holy grains, set 
		the bowls on the table and 
		call the child to eat. 
		
		While we eat we think, 
		as we think an undercurrent 
		of dream runs through us 
		faster than thought 
		towards recognition. 
		
		Call the child to eat, 
		send him off, his mouth 
		tasting of toothpaste, to go down 
		into the ground, into a roaring train 
		and to school. 
		
		His cheeks are pink 
		his black eyes hold his dreams, he has left 
		forgetting his glasses. 
		
		Follow down the stairs at a clatter 
		to give them to him and save 
		his clear sight. 
		
		Cold air 
		comes in at the street door. 
		
		
		vi
		
		The authentic! It rolls 
		just out of reach, beyond 
		running feet and 
		stretching fingers, down 
		the green slope and into 
		the black waves of the sea. 
		Speak to me, little horse, beloved, 
		tell me 
		how to follow the iron ball, 
		how to follow through to the country 
		beneath the waves 
		to the place where I must kill you and you step out 
		of your bones and flystrewn meat 
		tall, smiling, renewed, 
		formed in your own likeness. 
		
		
		vii 
		
		Marvelous Truth, confront us 
		at every turn, 
		in every guise, iron ball, 
		egg, dark horse, shadow, 
		cloud 
		of breath on the air, 
		
		dwell 
		in our crowded hearts 
		our steaming bathrooms, kitchens full of 
		things to be done, the 
		ordinary streets. 
		
		Thrust close your smile 
		that we know you, terrible joy.


	5. SEEMS LIKE WE MUST BE SOMEWHERE ELSE

		Sweet procession, rose-blue,
		and all them bells.
		Bandstand red, the eyes
		at treetop level seeing it.
		“Are we
		what we think we are or are we
		what befalls us?”
		The people from an open window
		the eyes
		seeing it!
		Daytime! Or twilight!
		If we’re here let’s be here now
		Sweet procession, rose-blue.
		If we’re here let’s be here now.
		And the train whistle? who
		invented that? Lonesome man, wanted the trains
		to speak for him.


	6. TO LIVE IN THE MERCY OF GOD

		To lie back under the tallest
		oldest trees. How far the stems
		rise, rise
		              before ribs of shelter
		                                          open!
		
		To live in the mercy of God. The complete
		sentence too adequate, has no give.
		Awe, not comfort. Stone, elbows of
		stony wood beneath lenient
		moss bed.
		
		And awe suddenly
		passing beyond itself. Becomes
		a form of comfort.
		                     Becomes the steady
		air you glide on, arms
		stretched like the wings of flying foxes.
		To hear the multiple silence
		of trees, the rainy
		forest depths of their listening.
		
		To float, upheld,
		               as salt water
		               would hold you,
		                                       once you dared.
		        
		                 .
		
		To live in the mercy of God.
		
		To feel vibrate the enraptured
		
		waterfall flinging itself
		unabating down and down
		                             to clenched fists of rock.
		Swiftness of plunge,
		hour after year after century,
		                                                  O or Ah
		uninterrupted, voice
		many-stranded.
		                             To breathe
		spray. The smoke of it.
		                             Arcs
		of steelwhite foam, glissades
		of fugitive jade barely perceptible. Such passion—
		rage or joy?
		                             Thus, not mild, not temperate,
		God’s love for the world. Vast
		flood of mercy
		                     flung on resistance.


*** Philip Levine (1928 - 2015)

	1. AN ABANDONED FACTORY, DETROIT

		The gates are chained, the barbed-wire fencing stands, 
		An iron authority against the snow, 
		And this grey monument to common sense 
		Resists the weather. Fears of idle hands, 
		Of protest, men in league, and of the slow 
		Corrosion of their minds, still charge this fence. 
		
		Beyond, through broken windows one can see 
		Where the great presses paused between their strokes 
		And thus remain, in air suspended, caught 
		In the sure margin of eternity. 
		The cast-iron wheels have stopped; one counts the spokes 
		Which movement blurred, the struts inertia fought, 
		
		And estimates the loss of human power, 
		Experienced and slow, the loss of years, 
		The gradual decay of dignity. 
		Men lived within these foundries, hour by hour; 
		Nothing they forged outlived the rusted gears 
		Which might have served to grind their eulogy.


	2. AN ENDING

		Early March. 
		The cold beach deserted. My kids 
		home in a bare house, bundled up 
		and listening to rock music 
		pirated from England. My wife 
		waiting for me in a bar, alone 
		for an hour over her sherry, and none 
		of us knows why I have to pace 
		back and forth on this flat 
		and birdless stretch of gleaming sand 
		while the violent air shouts 
		out its rags of speech. I recall 
		the calm warm sea of Florida 
		30 years ago, and my brother 
		and I staring out in the hope 
		that someone known and loved 
		would return out of air and water 
		and no more, a miracle a kid 
		could half-believe, could see 
		as something everyday and possible. 
		Later I slept alone and dreamed 
		of the home I never had and wakened 
		in the dark. A silver light sprayed 
		across the bed, and the little 
		rented room ticked toward dawn. 
		I did not rise. I did not go 
		to the window and address 
		the moon. I did not cry 
		or cry out against the hour 
		or the loneliness that still 
		was mine, for I had grown 
		into the man I am, and I 
		knew better. A sudden voice 
		calls out my name or a name 
		I think is mine. I turn. 
		The waves have darkened; the sky’s 
		descending all around me. I read 
		once that the sea would come 
		to be the color of heaven. 
		They would be two seas tied 
		together, and between the two 
		a third, the sea of my own heart. 
		I read and believed nothing. 
		This little beach at the end 
		of the world is anywhere, and I 
		stand in a stillness that will last 
		forever or until the first light 
		breaks beyond these waters. Don’t 
		be scared, the book said, don’t flee 
		as wave after wave the breakers rise 
		in darkness toward their ghostly crests, 
		for he has set a limit to the sea 
		and he is at your side. The sea 
		and I breathe in and out as one. 
		Maybe this is done at last 
		or for now, this search for what 
		is never here. Maybe all that 
		ancient namesake sang is true. 
		The voice I hear now is 
		my own night voice, going out 
		and coming back in an old chant 
		that calms me, that calms 
		--for all I know--the waves 
		still lost out there.


	3. BELLE ISLE

		We stripped in the first warm spring night
		and ran down into the Detroit River
		to baptize ourselves in the brine
		of car parts, dead fish, stolen bicycles,
		melted snow. I remember going under
		hand in hand with a Polish highschool girl
		I’d never seen before, and the cries
		our breath made caught at the same time
		on the cold, and rising through the layers
		of darkness into the final moonless atmosphere
		that was this world, the girl breaking
		the surface after me and swimming out
		on the starless waters towards the lights
		of Jefferson Ave. and the stacks
		of the old stove factory unwinking.
		Turning at last to see no island at all
		but a perfect calm dark as far
		as there was sight, and then a light
		and another riding low out ahead
		to bring us home, ore boats maybe, or smokers
		walking alone. Back panting
		to the gray coarse beach we didn’t dare
		fall on, the damp piles of clothes,
		and dressing side by side in silence
		to go back where we came from.


	4. BITTERNESS

		Here in February, the fine 
		dark branches of the almond 
		begin to sprout tiny clusters 
		of leaves, sticky to the touch. 
		Not far off, about the length 
		of my morning shadow, the grass 
		is littered with the petals 
		of the plum that less than 
		a week ago blazed, a living 
		candle in the hand of earth. 
		I was living far off two years 
		ago, fifteen floors above 
		119th Street when I heard 
		a love of my young manhood 
		had died mysteriously in 
		a public ward. I did not 
		go out into the streets to 
		walk among the cold, sullen 
		poor of Harlem, I did not 
		turn toward the filthy window 
		to question a distant pale sky. 
		I did not do anything. 
		The grass is coming back, some 
		patches already bright, though 
		at this hour still silvered 
		with dew. By noon I can stand 
		sweating in the free air, spading 
		the difficult clay for the bare 
		roots of a pear or apple that 
		will give flower and fruit longer 
		than I care to think about.


	5. DURING THE WAR

		When my brother came home from war
		he carried his left arm in a black sling
		but assured us most of it was still there.
		Spring was late, the trees forgot to leaf out.
		
		I stood in a long line waiting for bread.
		The woman behind me said it was shameless,
		someone as strong as I still home, still intact
		while her Michael was burning to death.
		
		Yes, she could feel the fire, could smell
		his pain all the way from Tarawa--
		or was it Midway?--and he so young,
		younger than I, who was only fourteen,
		
		taller, more handsome in his white uniform
		turning slowly gray the way unprimed wood
		grays slowly in the grate when the flames
		sputter and die. “I think I’m going mad,”
		
		she said when I turned to face her. She placed
		both hands on my shoulders, kissed each eyelid,
		hugged me to her breasts and whispered wetly
		in my bad ear words I’d never heard before.
		
		When I got home my brother ate the bread
		carefully one slice at a time until
		nothing was left but a blank plate. “Did you see her,”
		he asked, “the woman in hell, Michael’s wife?”
		
		That afternoon I walked the crowded streets
		looking for something I couldn’t name,
		something familiar, a face or a voice or less,
		but not these shards of ash that fell from heaven.


	6. SUMMER

		At Ox Bow beach, the August sun a rake
		That ground the skull. Fouled in the mud and reeds
		I dug oars for the center of the lake,
		Whipping away the strangling spawn of weeds.
		I found a ten foot hole and dove to where
		The squashed-in beer cans played with fire. The sun
		Was hunting even here. Heavy for air,
		I saw the trumpet yellow lily run
		Between the junk and rocks, too soft for hands.
		Surfaced. The old man in the prow awake.
		Beneath his parasol he growled commands
		And damned me and that hot and rotten lake.
		
		Toward dusk, out from the gray and falling dock
		I cast without a hook, scribbling the scum
		That jelled above my line. As mute as rock
		The sky was closing round the reel’s thin scream.
		Behind the cottage back and forth he swung
		As back and forth I pushed the infant’s swing
		Hung many years ago with his own care
		From what was now an old and broken oak
		Back and then forth. I thought the tree would tear.
		It moaned so loud that even he awoke.
		
		Later beneath a bare electric light
		We were contenders circled by defeat--
		With beer and rummy quarreling toward the night.
		In order not to win I had to cheat
		And still I won and it was he who paid,
		Fingering through the wallet stuffed and frayed
		With trust, to name and separate the bills
		And slap them on the table with a curse
		For all they cost. After the yellow pills
		The red--then sleep, a more than patient nurse.
		
		And it was I who couldn’t sleep, who heard
		The sound of something sucking up the lake,
		A human laugh that couldn’t be a bird
		But was, and had to see if I could wake
		Him from his sleep and did and lost my head
		From fear of what he nuzzled toward in bed.
		I could have pushed the rowboat from the dock
		And pulled away and left him there awake.
		I stayed, though not because I had some share
		In what I knew would come. Out on the lake
		Whatever had been stirring settled back
		And waited for the sun to fix its stare.


	7. THE GARDEN

		Wherever she turns her garden 
		is alive and growing. The thin 
		spears of wild asparagus, shaft 
		of tulip and flag, green stain 
		of berry buds along the vines, 
		even in the eaten leaf of 
		pepper plants and clipped stalk 
		of snap bean. Mid-afternoon 
		and already the grass is dry 
		under the low sun. Bluejay 
		and dark capped juncos hidden 
		in dense foliage waiting 
		the sun’s early fall, when she 
		returns alone to hear them 
		call and call back, and finally 
		in the long shadows settle 
		down to rest and to silence 
		in the sudden rising chill.


	8. THEY FEED THEY LION

		Out of burlap sacks, out of bearing butter,
		Out of black bean and wet slate bread,
		Out of the acids of rage, the candor of tar,
		Out of creosote, gasoline, drive shafts, wooden dollies,
		They Lion grow.
		                              Out of the gray hills
		Of industrial barns, out of rain, out of bus ride,
		West Virginia to Kiss My Ass, out of buried aunties,
		Mothers hardening like pounded stumps, out of stumps,
		Out of the bones’ need to sharpen and the muscles’ to stretch,   
		They Lion grow.
		                             Earth is eating trees, fence posts,
		Gutted cars, earth is calling in her little ones,
		“Come home, Come home!” From pig balls,
		From the ferocity of pig driven to holiness,
		From the furred ear and the full jowl come
		The repose of the hung belly, from the purpose
		They Lion grow.
		                             From the sweet glues of the trotters
		Come the sweet kinks of the fist, from the full flower
		Of the hams the thorax of caves,
		From “Bow Down” come “Rise Up,”
		Come they Lion from the reeds of shovels,
		The grained arm that pulls the hands,
		They Lion grow.
		                              From my five arms and all my hands,
		From all my white sins forgiven, they feed,
		From my car passing under the stars,
		They Lion, from my children inherit,
		From the oak turned to a wall, they Lion,
		From they sack and they belly opened
		And all that was hidden burning on the oil-stained earth
		They feed they Lion and he comes.


	9. WHAT WORK IS

		We stand in the rain in a long line
		waiting at Ford Highland Park. For work.
		You know what work is--if you’re
		old enough to read this you know what
		work is, although you may not do it.
		Forget you. This is about waiting,
		shifting from one foot to another.
		Feeling the light rain falling like mist
		into your hair, blurring your vision
		until you think you see your own brother
		ahead of you, maybe ten places.
		You rub your glasses with your fingers,
		and of course it’s someone else’s brother,
		narrower across the shoulders than
		yours but with the same sad slouch, the grin
		that does not hide the stubbornness,
		the sad refusal to give in to
		rain, to the hours of wasted waiting,
		to the knowledge that somewhere ahead
		a man is waiting who will say, “No,
		we’re not hiring today,” for any
		reason he wants. You love your brother,
		now suddenly you can hardly stand
		the love flooding you for your brother,
		who’s not beside you or behind or
		ahead because he’s home trying to   
		sleep off a miserable night shift
		at Cadillac so he can get up
		before noon to study his German.
		Works eight hours a night so he can sing
		Wagner, the opera you hate most,
		the worst music ever invented.
		How long has it been since you told him
		you loved him, held his wide shoulders,
		opened your eyes wide and said those words,
		and maybe kissed his cheek? You’ve never
		done something so simple, so obvious,
		not because you’re too young or too dumb,
		not because you’re jealous or even mean
		or incapable of crying in
		the presence of another man, no,   
		just because you don’t know what work is.


*** C. S. Lewis (1898 - 1963)

	1. A PRELUDE TO SPACE

		_An Epithaliamium_
		
		So Man, grown vigorous now,
		Holds himself ripe to breed,
		Daily devises how
		To ejaculate his seed
		And boldly fertilize
		The black womb of the unconsenting skies.
		
		Some now alive expect
		(I am told) to see the large,
		Steel member grow erect,
		Turgid with the fierce charge
		Of our whole planet’s skill,
		Courage, wealth, knowledge, concentrated will,
		
		Straining with lust to stamp
		Our likeness on the abyss--
		Bombs, gallows, Belsen camp,
		Pox, polio, Thais’ kiss
		Or Judas, Moloch’s fires
		And Torquemada’s (sons resemble sires).
		
		Shall we, when the grim shape
		Roars upward, dance and sing?
		Yes: if we honour rape,
		If we take pride to Ring
		So bountifully on space
		The sperm of our long woes, our large disgrace.


	2. AFTER PRAYERS

		Arise my body, my small body, we have striven
		Enough, and He is merciful; we are forgiven.
		Arise small body, puppet-like and pale, and go,
		White as the bed-clothes into bed, and cold as snow,
		Undress with small, cold fingers and put out the light,
		And be alone, hush’d mortal, in the sacred night,
		--A meadow whipt flat with the rain, a cup
		Emptied and clean, a garment washed and folded up,
		Faded in colour, thinned almost to raggedness
		By dirt and by the washing of that dirtiness.
		Be not too quickly warm again. Lie cold; consent
		To weariness’ and pardon’s watery element.
		Drink up the bitter water, breathe the chilly death;
		Soon enough comes the riot of our blood and breath.


	3. ALEXANDRINES

		There is a house that most of all on earth I hate.
		Though I have passed through many sorrows and have been
		In bloody fields, sad seas, and countries desolate,
		Yet most I fear that empty house where the grasses green
		Grow in the silent court the gaping flags between,
		And down the moss-grown paths and terrace no man treads
		Where the old, old weeds rise deep on the waste garden beds.
		Like eyes of one long dead the empty windows stare
		And I fear to cross the garden, I fear to linger there,
		For in that house I know a little, silent room
		Where Someone’s always waiting, waiting in the gloom
		To draw me with an evil eye, and hold me fast--
		Yet thither doom will drive me and He will win at last.


	4. AN AUTUMN MORNING

		See! the pale autumn dawn
		Is faint, upon the lawn
		 That lies in powdered white
		     Of hoar-frost dight
		
		And now from tree to tree
		The ghostly mist we see
		 Hung like a silver pall
		     To hallow all.
		
		It wreathes the burdened air
		So strangely everywhere
		 That I could almost fear
		     This silence drear
		
		Where no one song-bird sings
		And dream that wizard things
		 Mighty for hate or love
		     Were close above.
		
		White as the fog and fair
		Drifting through the middle air
		 In magic dances dread
		     Over my head.
		
		Yet these should know me too
		Lover and bondman true,
		 One that has honoured well
		     The mystic spell
		
		Of earth’s most solemn hours
		Wherein the ancient powers
		 Of dryad, elf, or faun
		     Or leprechaun
		
		Oft have their faces shown
		To me that walked alone
		 Seashore or haunted fen
		     Or mountain glen
		
		Wherefore I will not fear
		To walk the woodlands sere
		 Into this autumn day
		     Far, far away.


	5. APOLOGY

		If men should ask, Despoina, why I tell
		Of nothing glad nor noble in my verse
		To lighten hearts beneath this present curse
		And build a heaven of dreams in real hell,
		Go you to them and speak among them thus:
		“There were no greater grief than to recall,
		Down in the rotting grave where the lithe worms crawl,
		Green fields above that smiled so sweet to us.”
		Is it good to tell old tales of Troynovant
		Or praises of dead heroes, tried and sage,
		Or sing the queens of unforgotten age,
		Brynhild and Maeve and virgin Bradamant?
		How should I sing of them? Can it be good
		To think of glory now, when all is done,
		And all our labour underneath the sun
		Has brought us this-and not the thing we would?
		All these were rosy visions of the night,
		The loveliness and wisdom feigned of old.
		But now we wake. The East is pale and cold,
		No hope is in the dawn, and no delight.


	6. AS THE RUIN FALLS

		All this is flashy rhetoric about loving you.
		I never had a selfless thought since I was born.
		I am mercenary and self-seeking through and through:
		I want God, you, all friends, merely to serve my turn.
		
		Peace, re-assurance, pleasure, are the goals I seek,
		I cannot crawl one inch outside my proper skin:
		I talk of love—a scholar’s parrot may talk Greek—
		But, self-imprisoned, always end where I begin.
		
		Only that now you have taught me (but how late) my lack.
		I see the chasm. And everything you are was making
		My heart into a bridge by which I might get back
		From exile, and grow man. And now the bridge is breaking.
		
		For this I bless you as the ruin falls. The pains
		You give me are more precious than all other gains.


	7. CLICHE CAME OUT OF ITS CAGE

		I
		
		You said ‘The world is going back to Paganism’.
		Oh bright Vision! I saw our dynasty in the bar of the House
		Spill from their tumblers a libation to the Erinyes,
		And Leavis with Lord Russell wreathed in flowers, heralded with flutes,
		Leading white bulls to the cathedral of the solemn Muses
		To pay where due the glory of their latest theorem.
		Hestia’s fire in every flat, rekindled, burned before
		The Lardergods. Unmarried daughters with obedient hands
		Tended it By the hearth the white-armd venerable mother
		Domum servabat, lanam faciebat. at the hour
		Of sacrifice their brothers came, silent, corrected, grave
		Before their elders; on their downy cheeks easily the blush
		Arose (it is the mark of freemen’s children) as they trooped,
		Gleaming with oil, demurely home from the palaestra or the dance.
		Walk carefully, do not wake the envy of the happy gods,
		Shun Hubris. The middle of the road, the middle sort of men,
		Are best. Aidos surpasses gold. Reverence for the aged
		Is wholesome as seasonable rain, and for a man to die
		Defending the city in battle is a harmonious thing.
		Thus with magistral hand the Puritan Sophrosune
		Cooled and schooled and tempered our uneasy motions;
		Heathendom came again, the circumspection and the holy fears . . .
		You said it. Did you mean it? Oh inordinate liar, stop.
		
		
		II
		
		Or did you mean another kind of heathenry?
		Think, then, that under heaven-roof the little disc of the earth,
		Fortified Midgard, lies encircled by the ravening Worm.
		Over its icy bastions faces of giant and troll
		Look in, ready to invade it. The Wolf, admittedly, is bound;
		But the bond wil1 break, the Beast run free. The weary gods,
		Scarred with old wounds the one-eyed Odin, Tyr who has lost a hand,
		Will limp to their stations for the Last defence. Make it your hope
		To be counted worthy on that day to stand beside them;
		For the end of man is to partake of their defeat and die
		His second, final death in good company. The stupid, strong
		Unteachable monsters are certain to be victorious at last,
		And every man of decent blood is on the losing side.
		Take as your model the tall women with yellow hair in plaits
		Who walked back into burning houses to die with men,
		Or him who as the death spear entered into his vitals
		Made critical comments on its workmanship and aim.
		Are these the Pagans you spoke of? Know your betters and crouch, dogs;
		You that have Vichy water in your veins and worship the event
		Your goddess History (whom your fathers called the strumpet Fortune).


	8. DE PROFUNDIS

		Come let us curse our Master ere we die,
		For all our hopes in endless ruin lie.
		The good is dead. Let us curse God most High.
		
		Four thousand years of toil and hope and thought
		Wherein man laboured upward and still wrought
		New worlds and better, Thou hast made as naught.
		
		We built us joyful cities, strong and fair,
		Knowledge we sought and gathered wisdom rare.
		And all this time you laughed upon our care,
		
		And suddenly the earth grew black with wrong,
		Our hope was crushed and silenced was our song,
		The heaven grew loud with weeping. Thou art strong.
		
		Come then and curse the Lord. Over the earth
		Gross darkness falls, and evil was our birth
		And our few happy days of little worth.
		
		Even if it be not all a dream in vain
		—The ancient hope that still will rise again—
		Of a just God that cares for earthly pain,
		
		Yet far away beyond our labouring night,
		He wanders in the depths of endless light,
		Singing alone his musics of delight;
		
		Only the far, spent echo of his song
		Our dungeons and deep cells can smite along,
		And Thou art nearer. Thou art very strong.
		
		O universal strength, I know it well,
		It is but froth of folly to rebel;
		For thou art Lord and hast the keys of Hell.
		
		Yet I will not bow down to thee nor love thee,
		For looking in my own heart I can prove thee,
		And know this frail, bruised being is above thee.
		
		Our love, our hope, our thirsting for the right,
		Our mercy and long seeking of the light,
		Shall we change these for thy relentless might?
		
		Laugh then and slay. Shatter all things of worth,
		Heap torment still on torment for thy mirth—
		Thou art not Lord while there are Men on earth.


	9. DEATH IN BATTLE

		Open the gates for me,
		Open the gates of the peaceful castle, rosy in the West,
		In the sweet dim Isle of Apples over the wide sea’s breast,
		Open the gates for me!
		Sorely pressed have I been
		And driven and hurt beyond bearing this summer day,
		But the heat and the pain together suddenly fall away,
		All’s cool and green.
		But a moment agone,
		Among men cursing in fight and toiling, blinded I fought,
		But the labour passed on a sudden even as a passing thought,
		And now-alone!
		Ah, to be ever alone,
		In flowery valleys among the mountains and silent wastes untrod,
		In the dewy upland places, in the garden of God,
		This would atone!
		I shall not see
		The brutal, crowded faces around me, that in their toil have grown
		Into the faces of devils--yea, even as my own--
		When I find thee,
		O Country of Dreams!
		Beyond the tide of the ocean, hidden and sunk away,
		Out of the sound of battles, near to the end of day,
		Full of dim woods and streams.


	10. DUNGEON GRATES

		So piteously the lonely soul of man
		Shudders before this universal plan,
		So grievous is the burden and the pain,
		So heavy weighs the long, material chain
		From cause to cause, too merciless for hate,
		The nightmare march of unrelenting fate,
		I think that he must die thereof unless
		Ever and again across the dreariness
		There came a sudden glimpse of spirit faces,
		A fragrant breath to tell of flowery places
		And wider oceans, breaking on the shore
		From which the hearts of men are always sore.
		It lies beyond endeavour; neither prayer
		Nor fasting, nor much wisdom winneth there,
		Seeing how many prophets and wise men
		Have sought for it and still returned again
		With hope undone. But only the strange power
		Of unsought Beauty in some casual hour
		Can build a bridge of light or sound or form
		To lead you out of all this strife and storm;
		When of some beauty we are grown a part
		Till from its very glory’s midmost heart
		Out leaps a sudden beam of larger light
		Into our souls. All things are seen aright
		Amid the blinding pillar of its gold,
		Seven times more true than what for truth we hold
		In vulgar hours. The miracle is done
		And for one little moment we are one
		With the eternal stream of loveliness
		That flows so calm, aloft from all distress
		Yet leaps and lives around us as a fire
		Making us faint with overstrong desire
		To sport and swim for ever in its deep--
		Only a moment.
		
		O! but we shall keep
		Our vision still. One moment was enough,
		We know we are not made of mortal stuff.
		And we can bear all trials that come after,
		The hate of men and the fool’s loud bestial laughter
		And Nature’s rule and cruelties unclean,
		For we have seen the Glory--we have seen.


	11. EVOLUTIONARY HYMN

		Lead us, Evolution, lead us
		Up the future’s endless stair;
		Chop us, change us, prod us, weed us.
		For stagnation is despair:
		Groping, guessing, yet progressing,
		Lead us nobody knows where.
		
		Wrong or justice, joy or sorrow,
		In the present what are they
		while there’s always jam-tomorrow,
		While we tread the onward way?
		Never knowing where we’re going,
		We can never go astray.
		
		To whatever variation
		Our posterity may turn
		Hairy, squashy, or crustacean,
		Bulbous-eyed or square of stern,
		Tusked or toothless, mild or ruthless,
		Towards that unknown god we yearn.
		
		Ask not if it’s god or devil,
		Brethren, lest your words imply
		Static norms of good and evil
		(As in Plato) throned on high;
		Such scholastic, inelastic,
		Abstract yardsticks we deny.
		
		Far too long have sages vainly
		Glossed great Nature’s simple text;
		He who runs can read it plainly,
		‘Goodness = what comes next.’
		By evolving, Life is solving
		All the questions we perplexed.
		
		Oh then! Value means survival--
		Value. If our progeny
		Spreads and spawns and licks each rival,
		That will prove its deity
		(Far from pleasant, by our present,
		Standards, though it may well be).


	12. HESPERUS

		Through the starry hollow
		Of the summer night
		I would follow, follow
		Hesperus the bright,
		To seek beyond the western wave
		His garden of delight.
		Hesperus the fairest
		Of all gods that are,
		Peace and dreams thou bearest
		In thy shadowy car,
		And often in my evening walks
		I’ve blessed thee from afar.
		Stars without number,
		Dust the noon of night,
		Thou the early slumber
		And the still delight
		Of the gentle twilit hours
		Rulest in thy right.
		When the pale skies shiver,
		Seeing night is done,
		Past the ocean-river,
		Lightly thou dost run,
		To look for pleasant, sleepy lands,
		That never fear the sun.
		Where, beyond the waters
		Of the outer sea,
		Thy triple crown of daughters
		That guards the golden tree
		Sing out across the lonely tide
		A welcome home to thee.
		And while the old, old dragon
		For joy lifts up his head,
		They bring thee forth a flagon
		Of nectar foaming red,
		And underneath the drowsy trees
		Of poppies strew thy bed.
		Ah! that I could follow
		In thy footsteps bright,
		Through the starry hollow
		Of the summer night,
		Sloping down the western ways
		To find my heart’s delight!


	13. HOW HE SAW ANGUS THE GOD

		I heard the swallow sing in the eaves and rose
		All in a strange delight while others slept,
		And down the creaking stair, alone, tip-toes,
		 So carefully I crept.
		
		The house was dark with silly blinds yet drawn,
		But outside the clean air was filled with light,
		And underneath my feet the cold, wet lawn
		 With dew was twinkling bright.
		
		The cobwebs hung from every branch and spray
		Gleaming with pearly strands of laden thread,
		And long and still the morning shadows lay
		 Across the meadows spread.
		
		At that pure hour when yet no sound of man,
		Stirs in the whiteness of the wakening earth,
		Alone through innocent solitudes I ran
		 Singing aloud for mirth.
		
		Till I had found the open mountain heath
		Yellow with gorse, and rested there and stood
		To gaze upon the misty sea beneath,
		 Or on the neighbouring wood,
		
		—That little wood of hazel and tall pine
		And youngling fir, where oft we have loved to see
		The level beams of early morning shine
		 Freshly from tree to tree.
		
		Through the denser wood there’s many a pool
		Of deep and night-born shadow lingers yet
		Where the new-wakened flowers are damp and cool
		 And the long grass is wet.
		
		In the sweet heather long I rested there
		Looking upon the dappled, early sky,
		When suddenly, from out the shining air
		 A god came flashing by.
		
		Swift, naked, eager, pitilessly fair,
		With a live crown of birds about his head,
		Singing and fluttering, and his fiery hair,
		 Far out behind him spread,
		
		Streamed like a rippling torch upon the breeze
		Of his own glorious swiftness: in the grass
		He bruised no feathery stalk, and through the trees
		 I saw his whiteness pass.
		
		But when I followed him beyond the wood,
		Lo! He was changed into a solemn bull
		That there upon the open pasture stood
		 And browsed his lazy full.


	14. IN PRAISE OF SOLID PEOPLE

		Thank God that there are solid folk
		Who water flowers and roll the lawn,
		And sit and sew and talk and smoke,
		And snore all through the summer dawn.
		
		Who pass untroubled nights and days
		Full-fed and sleepily content,
		Rejoicing in each other’s praise,
		Respectable and innocent.
		
		Who feel the things that all men feel,
		And think in well-worn grooves of thought,
		Whose honest spirits never reel
		Before man’s mystery, overwrought.
		
		Yet not unfaithful nor unkind,
		With work-day virtues surely staid,
		Theirs is the sane and humble mind,
		And dull affections undismayed.
		
		O happy people! I have seen
		No verse yet written in your praise,
		And, truth to tell, the time has been
		I would have scorned your easy ways.
		
		But now thro’ weariness and strife
		I learn your worthiness indeed,
		The world is better for such life
		As stout suburban people lead.
		
		Too often have I sat alone
		When the wet night falls heavily,
		And fretting winds around me moan,
		And homeless longing vexes me
		
		For lore that I shall never know,
		And visions none can hope to see,
		Till brooding works upon me so
		A childish fear steals over me.
		
		I look around the empty room,
		The clock still ticking in its place,
		And all else silent as the tomb,
		Till suddenly, I think, a face
		
		Grows from the darkness just beside.
		I turn, and lo! it fades away,
		And soon another phantom tide
		Of shifting dreams begins to play,
		
		And dusky galleys past me sail,
		Full freighted on a faerie sea;
		I hear the silken merchants hail
		Across the ringing waves to me
		
		—Then suddenly, again, the room,
		Familiar books about me piled,
		And I alone amid the gloom,
		By one more mocking dream beguiled.
		
		And still no nearer to the Light,
		And still no further from myself,
		Alone and lost in clinging night
		—(The clock’s still ticking on the shelf).
		
		Then do I envy solid folk
		Who sit of evenings by the fire,
		After their work and doze and smoke,
		And are not fretted by desire.


	15. IN PRISON

		I cried out for the pain of man,
		I cried out for my bitter wrath
		Against the hopeless life that ran
		For ever in a circling path
		From death to death since all began;
		Till on a summer night
		I lost my way in the pale starlight
		And saw our planet, far and small,
		Through endless depths of nothing fall
		A lonely pin-prick spark of light,
		Upon the wide, enfolding night,
		With leagues on leagues of stars above it,
		And powdered dust of stars below--
		Dead things that neither hate nor love it
		Not even their own loveliness can know,
		Being but cosmic dust and dead.
		And if some tears be shed,
		Some evil God have power,
		Some crown of sorrow sit
		Upon a little world for a little hour--
		Who shall remember? Who shall care for it?


	16. MILTON READ AGAIN

		Three golden months while summer on us stole
		I have read your joyful tale another time,
		Breathing more freely in that larger clime
		And learning wiselier to deserve the whole.
		
		Your Spirit, Master, has been close at hand
		And guided me, still pointing treasures rare,
		Thick-sown where I before saw nothing fair
		And finding waters in the barren land,
		
		Barren once thought because my eyes were dim.
		Like one I am grown to whom the common field
		And often-wandered copse one morning yield
		New pleasures suddenly; for over him
		
		Falls the weird spirit of unexplained delight,
		New mystery in every shady place,
		In every whispering tree a nameless grace,
		New rapture on the windy seaward height.
		
		So may she come to me, teaching me well
		To savour all these sweets that lie to hand
		In wood and lane about this pleasant land
		Though it be not the land where I would dwell.


	17. NIGHT

		After the fret and failure of this day,
		And weariness of thought, O Mother Night,
		Come with soft kiss to soothe our care away
		And all our little tumults set to right;
		Most pitiful of all death's kindred fair,
		Riding above us through the curtained air
		On thy dusk car, thou scatterest to the earth
		Sweet dreams and drowsy charms of tender might
		And lovers' dear delight before to-morrow's birth.
		Thus art thou wont thy quiet lands to leave
		And pillared courts beyond the Milky Way,
		Wherein thou tarriest all our solar day
		While unsubstantial dreams before thee weave
		A foamy dance, and fluttering fancies play
		About thy palace in the silver ray
		Of some far, moony globe. But when the hour,
		The long-expected comes, the ivory gates
		Open on noiseless hinge before thy bower
		Unbidden, and the jewelled chariot waits
		With magic steeds. Thou from the fronting rim
		Bending to urge them, whilst thy sea-dark hair
		Falls in ambrosial ripples o'er each limb,
		With beautiful pale arms, untrammelled, bare
		For horsemanship, to those twin chargers fleet
		Dost give full rein across the fires that glow
		In the wide floor of heaven, from off their feet
		Scattering the powdery star-dust as they go.
		Come swiftly down the sky, O Lady Night,
		Fall through the shadow-country, O most kind,
		Shake out thy strands of gentle dreams and light
		For chains, wherewith thou still art used to bind
		With tenderest love of careful leeches' art
		The bruised and weary heart
		In slumber blind.


	18. NOON

		Noon! and in the garden bower
		The hot air quivers o’er the grass,
		The little lake is smooth as glass
		And still so heavily the hour
		Drags, that scarce the proudest flower
		Pressed upon its burning bed
		Has strength to lift a languid head:
		--Rose and fainting violet
		By the water’s margin set
		Swoon and sink as they were dead
		Though their weary leaves be fed
		With the foam-drops of the pool
		Where it trembles dark and cool
		Wrinkled by the fountain spraying
		O’er it. And the honey-bee
		Hums his drowsy melody
		And wanders in his course a-straying
		Through the sweet and tangled glade
		With his golden mead o’erladen,
		Where beneath the pleasant shade
		Of the darkling boughs a maiden
		--Milky limb and fiery tress,
		All at sweetest random laid--
		Slumbers, drunken with the excess
		Of the noontide’s loveliness.


	19. ODE FOR NEW YEAR’S DAY

		Woe unto you, ye sons of pain that are this day in earth,
		Now cry for all your torment: now curse your hour of birth
		And the fathers who begat you to a portion nothing worth.
		And Thou, my own beloved, for as brave as ere thou art,
		Bow down thine head, Despoina, clasp thy pale arms over it,
		Lie low with fast-closed eyelids, clenched teeth, enduring heart,
		For sorrow on sorrow is coming wherein all flesh has part.
		The sky above is sickening, the clouds of God’s hate cover it,
		Body and soul shall suffer beyond all word or thought,
		Till the pain and noisy terror that these first years have wrought
		Seem but the soft arising and prelude of the storm
		That fiercer still and heavier with sharper lightnings fraught
		Shall pour red wrath upon us over a world deform.
		Thrice happy, O Despoina, were the men who were alive
		In the great age and the golden age when still the cycle ran
		On upward curve and easily, for them both maid and man
		And beast and tree and spirit in the green earth could thrive.
		But now one age is ending, and God calls home the stars
		And looses the wheel of the ages and sends it spinning back
		Amid the death of nations, and points a downward track,
		And madness is come over us and great and little wars.
		He has not left one valley, one isle of fresh and green
		Where old friends could forgather amid the howling wreck.
		It’s vainly we are praying. We cannot, cannot check
		The Power who slays and puts aside the beauty that has been.
		It’s truth they tell, Despoina, none hears the heart’s complaining
		For Nature will not pity, nor the red God lend an ear,
		Yet I too have been mad in the hour of bitter paining
		And lifted up my voice to God, thinking that he could hear
		The curse wherewith I cursed Him because the Good was dead.
		But lo! I am grown wiser, knowing that our own hearts
		Have made a phantom called the Good, while a few years have sped
		Over a little planet. And what should the great Lord know of it
		Who tosses the dust of chaos and gives the suns their parts?
		Hither and thither he moves them; for an hour we see the show of it:
		Only a little hour, and the life of the race is done.
		And here he builds a nebula, and there he slays a sun
		And works his own fierce pleasure. All things he shall fulfill,
		And O, my poor Despoina, do you think he ever hears
		The wail of hearts he has broken, the sound of human ill?
		He cares not for our virtues, our little hopes and fears,
		And how could it all go on, love, if he knew of laughter and tears?
		Ah, sweet, if a man could cheat him! If you could flee away
		Into some other country beyond the rosy West,
		To hide in the deep forests and be for ever at rest
		From the rankling hate of God and the outworn world’s decay!


	20. ON A VULGAR ERROR

		No. It’s an impudent falsehood. Men did not
		Invariably think the newer way Prosaic
		mad, inelegant, or what not.
		
		Was the first pointed arch esteemed a blot
		Upon the church? Did anybody say How
		modern and how ugly? They did not.
		
		Plate-armour, or windows glazed, or verse fire-hot
		With rhymes from France, or spices from Cathay,
		Were these at first a horror? They were not.
		
		If, then, our present arts, laws, houses, food
		All set us hankering after yesterday,
		Need this be only an archaising mood?
		
		Why, any man whose purse has been let blood
		By sharpers, when he finds all drained away
		Must compare how he stands with how he stood.
		
		If a quack doctor’s breezy ineptitude
		Has cost me a leg, must I forget straightway
		All that I can’t do now, all that I could?
		
		So, when our guides unanimously decry
		The backward glance, I think we can guess why.


	21. ON BEING HUMAN

		Angelic minds, they say, by simple intelligence
		Behold the Forms of nature. They discern
		Unerringly the Archtypes, all the verities
		Which mortals lack or indirectly learn.
		Transparent in primordial truth, unvarying,
		Pure Earthness and right Stonehood from their clear,
		High eminence are seen; unveiled, the seminal
		Huge Principles appear.
		
		The Tree-ness of the tree they know-the meaning of
		Arboreal life, how from earth’s salty lap
		The solar beam uplifts it; all the holiness
		Enacted by leaves’ fall and rising sap;
		
		But never an angel knows the knife-edged severance
		Of sun from shadow where the trees begin,
		The blessed cool at every pore caressing us
		--An angel has no skin.
		
		They see the Form of Air; but mortals breathing it
		Drink the whole summer down into the breast.
		The lavish pinks, the field new-mown, the ravishing
		Sea-smells, the wood-fire smoke that whispers Rest.
		The tremor on the rippled pool of memory
		That from each smell in widening circles goes,
		The pleasure and the pang--can angels measure it?
		--An angel has no nose.
		
		The nourishing of life, and how it flourishes
		On death, and why, they utterly know; but not
		The hill-born, earthy spring, the dark cold bilberries.
		The ripe peach from the southern wall still hot
		Full-bellied tankards foamy-topped, the delicate
		Half-lyric lamb, a new loaf’s billowy curves,
		Nor porridge, nor the tingling taste of oranges.
		--An angel has no nerves.
		
		Far richer they! I know the senses’ witchery
		Guards us like air, from heavens too big to see;
		Imminent death to man that barb’d sublimity
		And dazzling edge of beauty unsheathed would be.
		Yet here, within this tiny, charmed interior,
		This parlour of the brain, their Maker shares
		With living men some secrets in a privacy
		Forever ours, not theirs.


	22. OUR DAILY BREAD

		We need no barbarous words nor solemn spell
		To raise the unknown. It lies before our feet;
		There have been men who sank down into Hell
		 In some suburban street,
		
		And some there are that in their daily walks
		Have met archangels fresh from sight of God,
		Or watched how in their beans and cabbage-stalks
		 Long files of faerie trod.
		
		Often me too the Living voices call
		In many a vulgar and habitual place,
		I catch a sight of lands beyond the wall,
		 I see a strange god’s face.
		
		And some day this work will work upon me so
		I shall arise and leave both friends and home
		And over many lands a pilgrim go
		 Through alien woods and foam,
		
		Seeking the last steep edges of the earth
		Whence I may leap into that gulf of light
		Wherein, before my narrowing Self had birth,
		 Part of me lived aright.


	23. SATAN SPEAKS

		I am the Lord your God: even he that made
		Material things, and all these signs arrayed
		Above you and have set beneath the race
		Of mankind, who forget their Father’s face
		And even while they drink my light of day
		Dream of some other gods and disobey
		My warnings, and despise my holy laws,
		Even tho’ their sin shall slay them. For which cause,
		Dreams dreamed in vain, a never-filled desire
		And in close flesh a spiritual fire,
		A thirst for good their kind shall not attain,
		A backward cleaving to the beast again.
		A loathing for the life that I have given,
		A haunted, twisted soul for ever riven
		Between their will and mine—such lot I give
		White still in my despite the vermin live.
		They hate my world! Then let that other God
		Come from the outer spaces glory-shod,
		And from this castle I have built on Night
		Steal forth my own thought’s children into light,
		If such an one there be. But far away
		He walks the airy fields of endless day,
		And my rebellious sons have called Him long
		And vainly called. My order still is strong
		And like to me nor second none I know.
		Whither the mammoth went this creature too shall go.


	24. SONNET

		The stars come out; the fragrant shadows fall
		About a dreaming garden still and sweet,
		I hear the unseen bats above me bleat
		Among the ghostly moths their hunting call,
		And twinkling glow-worms all about me crawl.
		Now for a chamber dim, a pillow meet
		For slumbers deep as death, a faultless sheet,
		Cool, white and smooth. So may I reach the hall
		With poppies strewn where sleep that is so dear
		With magic sponge can wipe away an hour
		Or twelve and make them naught. Why not a year,
		Why could a man not loiter in that bower
		Until a thousand painless cycles wore,
		And then—what if it held him evermore?


	25. SPOOKS

		Last night I dreamed that I was come again
		Unto the house where my beloved dwells
		After long years of wandering and pain.
		And I stood out beneath the drenching rain
		And all the street was bare, and black with night,
		But in my true love's house was warmth and light.
		Yet I could not draw near nor enter in,
		And long I wondered if some secret sin
		Or old, unhappy anger held me fast;
		Till suddenly it came into my head
		That I was killed long since and lying dead--
		Only a homeless wraith that way had passed.
		So thus I found my true love's house again
		And stood unseen amid the winter night
		And the lamp burned within, a rosy light,
		And the wet street was shining in the rain.


	26. THE ASS

		I woke and rose and slipt away
		To the heathery hills in the morning grey.
		In a field where the dew lay cold and deep
		I met an ass, new-roused from sleep.
		I stroked his nose and I tickled his ears,
		And spoke soft words to quiet his fears.
		His eyes stared into the eyes of me
		And he kissed my hands of his courtesy.
		"O big, brown brother out of the waste,
		How do thistles for breakfast taste?
		"And do you rejoice in the dawn divine
		With a heart that is glad no less than mine?
		"For, brother, the depth of your gentle eyes
		Is strange and mystic as the skies:
		"What are the thoughts that grope behind,
		Down in the mist of a donkey mind?
		"Can it be true, as the wise men tell,
		That you are a mask of God as well,
		"And, as in us, so in you no less
		Speaks the eternal Loveliness,
		"And words of the lips that all things know
		Among the thoughts of a donkey go?
		"However it be, O four-foot brother,
		Fair to-day is the earth, our mother.
		"God send you peace and delight thereof,
		And all green meat of the waste you love,
		"And guard you well from violent men
		Who'd put you back in the shafts again."
		But the ass had far too wise a head
		To answer one of the things I said,
		So he twitched his fair ears up and down
		And turned to nuzzle his shoulder brown.


	27. THE COUNTRY OF THE BLIND

		Hard light bathed them-a whole nation of eyeless men,
		Dark bipeds not aware how they were maimed. A long
		Process, clearly, a slow curse,
		Drained through centuries, left them thus.
		
		At some transitional stage, then, a luckless few,
		No doubt, must have had eyes after the up-to-date,
		Normal type had achieved snug
		Darkness, safe from the guns of heaven;
		
		Whose blind mouths would abuse words that belonged to their
		Great-grandsires, unabashed, talking of light in some
		Eunuch’d, etiolated,
		Fungoid sense, as a symbol of
		
		Abstract thoughts. If a man, one that had eyes, a poor
		Misfit, spoke of the grey dawn or the stars or green--
		Sloped sea waves, or admired how
		Warm tints change in a lady’s cheek,
		
		None complained he had used words from an alien tongue,
		None question’d. It was worse. All would agree ‘Of course,’
		Came their answer. “We’ve all felt
		Just like that.“ They were wrong. And he
		
		Knew too much to be clear, could not explain. The words--
		Sold, raped flung to the dogs--now could avail no more;
		Hence silence. But the mouldwarps,
		With glib confidence, easily
		
		Showed how tricks of the phrase, sheer metaphors could set
		Fools concocting a myth, taking the worlds for things.
		Do you think this a far-fetched
		Picture? Go then about among
		
		Men now famous; attempt speech on the truths that once,
		Opaque, carved in divine forms, irremovable,
		Dear but dear as a mountain--
		Mass, stood plain to the inward eye.


	28. THE METEORITE

		Among the hills a meteorite
		Lies huge; and moss has overgrown,
		And wind and rain with touches light
		Made soft, the contours of the stone.
		
		Thus easily can Earth digest
		A cinder of sidereal fire,
		And make her translunary guest
		The native of an English shire.
		
		Nor is it strange these wanderers
		Find in her lap their fitting place,
		For every particle that’s hers
		Came at the first from outer space.
		
		All that is Earth has once been sky;
		Down from the sun of old she came,
		Or from some star that travelled by
		Too close to his entangling flame.
		
		Hence, if belated drops yet fall
		From heaven, on these her plastic power
		Still works as once it worked on all
		The glad rush of the golden shower.


	29. THE OCEAN STRAND

		O leave the labouring roadways of the town,
		The shifting faces and the changeful hue
		Of markets, and broad echoing streets that drown
		The heart’s own silent music. Though they too
		Sing in their proper rhythm, and still delight
		The friendly ear that loves warm human kind,
		Yet it is good to leave them all behind,
		Now when from lily dawn to purple night
		Summer is queen,
		Summer is queen in all the happy land.
		Far, far away among the valleys green
		Let us go forth and wander hand in hand
		Beyond those solemn hills that we have seen
		So often welcome home the falling sun
		Into their cloudy peaks when day was done—
		Beyond them till we find the ocean strand
		And hear the great waves run,
		With the waste song whose melodies I’d follow
		And weary not for many a summer day,
		Born of the vaulted breakers arching hollow
		Before they flash and scatter into spray,
		On, if we should be weary of their play
		Then I would lead you further into land
		Where, with their ragged walls, the stately rocks
		Shunt in smooth courts and paved with quiet sand
		To silence dedicate. The sea-god’s flocks
		Have rested here, and mortal eyes have seen
		By great adventure at the dead of noon
		A lonely nereid drowsing half a-swoon
		Buried beneath her dark and dripping locks.


	30. THE ROADS

		I stand on the windy uplands among the hills of Down
		With all the world spread out beneath, meadow and sea and town,
		And ploughlands on the far-off hills that glow with friendly brown.
		
		And ever across the rolling land to the far horizon line,
		Where the blue hills border the misty west, I see the white roads twine,
		The rare roads and the fair roads that call this heart of mine.
		
		I see them dip in the valleys and vanish and rise and bend
		From shadowy dell to windswept fell, and still to the West they wend,
		And over the cold blue ridge at last to the great world’s uttermost end.
		
		And the call of the roads is upon me, a desire in my spirit has grown
		To wander forth in the highways, ‘twixt earth and sky alone,
		And seek for the lands no foot has trod and the seas no sail has known:
		
		For the lands to the west of the evening and east of the morning’s birth,
		Where the gods unseen in their valleys green are glad at the ends of the earth
		And fear no morrow to bring them sorrow, nor night to quench their mirth.


	31. THE SATYR

		When the flowery hands of spring
		Forth their woodland riches fling,
		 Through the meadows, through the valleys
		Goes the satyr carolling.
		
		From the mountain and the moor,
		Forest green and ocean shore
		 All the faerie kin he rallies
		Making music evermore.
		
		See! the shaggy pelt doth grow
		On his twisted shanks below,
		 And his dreadful feet are cloven
		Though his brow be white as snow--
		
		Though his brow be clear and white
		And beneath it fancies bright,
		 Wisdom and high thoughts are woven
		And the musics of delight,
		
		Though his temples too be fair
		Yet two horns are growing there
		 Bursting forth to part asunder
		All the riches of his hair.
		
		Faerie maidens he may meet
		Fly the horns and cloven feet,
		 But, his sad brown eyes with wonder
		Seeing-stay from their retreat.


	32. THE STAR BATH

		A place uplifted towards the midnight sky
		Far, far away among the mountains old,
		A treeless waste of rocks and freezing cold,
		Where the dead, cheerless moon rode neighbouring by--
		And in the midst a silent tarn there lay,
		A narrow pool, cold as the tide that flows
		Where monstrous bergs beyond Varanger stray,
		Rising from sunless depths that no man knows;
		Thither as clustering fireflies have I seen
		At fixed seasons all the stars come down
		To wash in that cold wave their brightness clean
		And win the special fire wherewith they crown
		The wintry heavens in frost. Even as a flock
		Of falling birds, down to the pool they came.
		I saw them and I heard the icy shock
		Of stars engulfed with hissing of faint flame
		--Ages ago before the birth of men
		Or earliest beast. Yet I was still the same
		That now remember, knowing not where or when.


	33. WORLD’S DESIRE

		Love, there is a castle built in a country desolate,
		On a rock above a forest where the trees are grim and great,
		Blasted with the lightning sharp—giant boulders strewn between,
		And the mountains rise above, and the cold ravine
		Echoes to the crushing roar and thunder of a mighty river
		Raging down a cataract. Very tower and forest quiver
		And the grey wolves are afraid and the call of birds is drowned,
		And the thought and speech of man in the boiling water’s sound.
		But upon the further side of the barren, sharp ravine
		With the sunlight on its turrets is the castle seen,
		Calm and very wonderful, white above the green
		Of the wet and waving forest, slanted all away,
		Because the driving Northern wind will not rest by night or day.
		Yet the towers are sure above, very mighty is the stead,
		The gates are made of ivory, the roofs of copper red.
		
		Round and round the warders grave walk upon the walls for ever
		And the wakeful dragons couch in the ports of ivory,
		Nothing is can trouble it, hate of the gods nor man’s endeavour,
		And it shall be a resting-place, dear heart, for you and me.
		
		Through the wet and waving forest with an age-old sorrow laden
		Singing of the world’s regret wanders wild the faerie maiden,
		Through the thistle and the brier, through the tangles of the thorn,
		Till her eyes be dim with weeping and her homeless feet are torn.
		
		Often to the castle gate up she looks with vain endeavour,
		For her soulless loveliness to the castle winneth never.
		
		But within the sacred court, hidden high upon the mountain,
		Wandering in the castle gardens lovely folk enough there be,
		Breathing in another air, drinking of a purer fountain
		And among that folk, beloved, there’s a place for you and me.


*** Vachel Lindsay (1879 - 1931)

	1. AN INDIAN SUMMER DAY

		_In the Beginning_
		
		The sun is a huntress young, 
		The sun is a red, red joy, 
		The sun is an indian girl, 
		Of the tribe of the Illinois.
		
		
		_Mid-Morning_
		
		The sun is a smouldering fire, 
		That creeps through the high gray plain, 
		And leaves not a bush of cloud 
		To blossom with flowers of rain.
		
		
		_Noon_
		
		The sun is a wounded deer, 
		That treads pale grass in the skies, 
		Shaking his golden horns, 
		Flashing his baleful eyes.
		
		
		_Sunset_
		
		The sun is an eagle old, 
		There in the windless west. 
		Atop of the spirit-cliffs 
		He builds him a crimson nest.


	2. LINCOLN WALKS AT MIDNIGHT

		It is portentous, and a thing of state
		That here at midnight, in our little town
		A mourning figure walks, and will not rest,
		Near the old court-house pacing up and down.
		
		Or by his homestead, or in shadowed yards
		He lingers where his children used to play,
		Or through the market, on the well-worn stones
		He stalks until the dawn-stars burn away.
		
		A bronzed, lank man! His suit of ancient black,
		A famous high top-hat and plain worn shawl
		Make him the quaint great figure that men love,
		The prairie-lawyer, master of us all.
		
		He cannot sleep upon his hillside now.
		He is among us:--as in times before!
		And we who toss and lie awake for long
		Breathe deep, and start, to see him pass the door.
		
		His head is bowed. He thinks on men and kings.
		Yea, when the sick world cries, how can he sleep?
		Too many peasants fight, they know not why,
		Too many homesteads in black terror weep.
		
		The sins of all the war-lords burn his heart.
		He sees the dreadnaughts scouring every main.
		He carries on his shawl-wrapped shoulders now
		The bitterness, the folly and the pain.
		
		He cannot rest until a spirit-dawn
		Shall come;--the shining hope of Europe free;
		The league of sober folk, the Workers’ Earth,
		Bringing long peace to Cornwall, Alp and Sea.
		
		It breaks his heart that kings must murder still,
		That all his hours of travail here for men
		Seem yet in vain.  And who will bring white peace
		That he may sleep upon his hill again?


	3. THE LEADEN-EYED

		Let not young souls be smothered out before
		They do quaint deeds and fully flaunt their pride.
		It is the world’s one crime its babes grow dull,
		Its poor are ox-like, limp and leaden-eyed.
		Not that they starve; but starve so dreamlessly,
		Not that they sow, but that they seldom reap,
		Not that they serve, but have no gods to serve,
		Not that they die, but that they die like sheep.


*** Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807 - 1882)

	1. A PSALM OF LIFE

		Tell me not, in mournful numbers,
		 Life is but an empty dream!
		For the soul is dead that slumbers,
		 And things are not what they seem.
		
		Life is real! Life is earnest!
		 And the grave is not its goal;
		Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
		 Was not spoken of the soul.
		
		Not enjoyment, and not sorrow,
		 Is our destined end or way;
		But to act, that each to-morrow
		 Find us farther than to-day.
		
		Art is long, and Time is fleeting,
		 And our hearts, though stout and brave,
		Still, like muffled drums, are beating
		 Funeral marches to the grave.
		
		In the world’s broad field of battle,
		 In the bivouac of Life,
		Be not like dumb, driven cattle!
		 Be a hero in the strife!
		
		Trust no Future, howe’er pleasant!
		 Let the dead Past bury its dead!
		Act,—act in the living Present!
		 Heart within, and God o’erhead!
		
		Lives of great men all remind us
		 We can make our lives sublime,
		And, departing, leave behind us
		 Footprints on the sands of time;
		
		Footprints, that perhaps another,
		 Sailing o’er life’s solemn main,
		A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
		 Seeing, shall take heart again.
		
		Let us, then, be up and doing,
		 With a heart for any fate;
		Still achieving, still pursuing,
		 Learn to labor and to wait.


	2. THE DAY IS DONE

		The day is done, and the darkness
		__Falls from the wings of Night,
		As a feather is wafted downward
		__From an eagle in his flight.
		I see the lights of the village
		__Gleam through the rain and the mist,
		And a feeling of sadness comes o’er me
		__That my soul cannot resist:
		A feeling of sadness and longing,
		__That is not akin to pain,
		And resembles sorrow only
		__As the mist resembles the rain.
		Come, read to me some poem,
		__Some simple and heartfelt lay,
		That shall soothe this restless feeling,
		__And banish the thoughts of day.
		Not from the grand old masters,
		__Not from the bards sublime,
		Whose distant footsteps echo
		__Through the corridors of Time.
		For, like strains of martial music,
		__Their mighty thoughts suggest
		Life’s endless toil and endeavor;
		__And to-night I long for rest.
		Read from some humbler poet,
		__Whose songs gushed from his heart,
		As showers from the clouds of summer,
		__Or tears from the eyelids start;
		Who, through long days of labor,
		__And nights devoid of ease,
		Still heard in his soul the music
		__Of wonderful melodies.
		Such songs have power to quiet
		__The restless pulse of care,
		And come like the benediction
		__That follows after prayer.
		Then read from the treasured volume
		__The poem of thy choice,
		And lend to the rhyme of the poet
		__The beauty of thy voice.
		And the night shall be filled with music
		__And the cares, that infest the day,
		Shall fold their tents, like the Arabs,
		__And as silently steal away.


	3. THE LADDER OF ST. AUGUSTINE

		Saint Augustine! well hast thou said,
		__That of our vices we can frame
		A ladder, if we will but tread
		__Beneath our feet each deed of shame!
		All common things, each day’s events,
		__That with the hour begin and end,
		Our pleasures and our discontents,
		__Are rounds by which we may ascend.
		The low desire, the base design,
		__That makes another’s virtues less;
		The revel of the ruddy wine,
		__And all occasions of excess;
		The longing for ignoble things;
		__The strife for triumph more than truth;
		The hardening of the heart, that brings
		__Irreverence for the dreams of youth;
		All thoughts of ill; all evil deeds,
		__That have their root in thoughts of ill;
		Whatever hinders or impedes
		__The action of the nobler will;—
		All these must first be trampled down
		__Beneath our feet, if we would gain
		In the bright fields of fair renown
		__The right of eminent domain.
		We have not wings, we cannot soar;
		__But we have feet to scale and climb
		By slow degrees, by more and more,
		__The cloudy summits of our time.
		The mighty pyramids of stone
		__That wedge-like cleave the desert airs,
		When nearer seen, and better known,
		__Are but gigantic flights of stairs.
		The distant mountains, that uprear
		__Their solid bastions to the skies,
		Are crossed by pathways, that appear
		__As we to higher levels rise.
		The heights by great men reached and kept
		__Were not attained by sudden flight,
		But they, while their companions slept,
		__Were toiling upward in the night.
		Standing on what too long we bore
		__With shoulders bent and downcast eyes,
		We may discern—unseen before—
		__A path to higher destinies.
		Nor deem the irrevocable Past,
		__As wholly wasted, wholly vain,
		If, rising on its wrecks, at last
		__To something nobler we attain.


	4. THE RAINY DAY

		The day is cold, and dark, and dreary;
		It rains, and the wind is never weary;
		The vine still clings to the mouldering wall,
		But at every gust the dead leaves fall,
		And the day is dark and dreary.
		
		My life is cold, and dark, and dreary;
		It rains, and the wind is never weary;
		My thoughts still cling to the mouldering Past,
		But the hopes of youth fall thick in the blast,
		And the days are dark and dreary.
		
		Be still, sad heart! and cease repining;
		Behind the clouds is the sun still shining;
		Thy fate is the common fate of all,
		Into each life some rain must fall,
		Some days must be dark and dreary.


	5. THE REAPER AND THE FLOWERS

		There is a Reaper, whose name is Death,
		__And, with his sickle keen,
		He reaps the bearded grain at a breath,
		__And the flowers that grow between.
		
		“Shall I have naught that is fair?” saith he;
		__“Have naught but the bearded grain?
		Though the breath of these flowers is sweet to me,
		__I will give them all back again.”
		
		He gazed at the flowers with tearful eyes,
		__He kissed their drooping leaves;
		It was for the Lord of Paradise
		__He bound them in his sheaves.
		
		“My Lord has need of these flowerets gay,”
		__The Reaper said, and smiled;
		“Dear tokens of the earth are they,
		__Where He was once a child.
		
		“They shall all bloom in fields of light,
		__Transplanted by my care,
		And saints, upon their garments white,
		__These sacred blossoms wear.”
		
		And the mother gave, in tears and pain,
		__The flowers she most did love;
		She knew she should find them all again
		__In the fields of light above.
		
		Oh, not in cruelty, not in wrath,
		__The Reaper came that day;
		‘T was an angel visited the green earth,
		__And took the flowers away.


*** Federico García Lorca (1898 - 1936)

	1. THE CITY THAT DOES NOT SLEEP

		In the sky there is nobody asleep. Nobody, nobody.
		Nobody is asleep.
		The creatures of the moon sniff and prowl about their cabins.
		The living iguanas will come and bite the men who do not dream,
		and the man who rushes out with his spirit broken will meet on the
		street corner
		the unbelievable alligator quiet beneath the tender protest of the
		stars.
		
		Nobody is asleep on earth. Nobody, nobody.
		Nobody is asleep.
		In a graveyard far off there is a corpse
		who has moaned for three years
		because of a dry countryside on his knee;
		and that boy they buried this morning cried so much
		it was necessary to call out the dogs to keep him quiet.
		
		Life is not a dream. Careful! Careful! Careful!
		We fall down the stairs in order to eat the moist earth
		or we climb to the knife edge of the snow with the voices of the dead
		dahlias.
		But forgetfulness does not exist, dreams do not exist;
		flesh exists. Kisses tie our mouths
		in a thicket of new veins,
		and whoever his pain pains will feel that pain forever
		and whoever is afraid of death will carry it on his shoulders.
		
		One day
		the horses will live in the saloons
		and the enraged ants
		will throw themselves on the yellow skies that take refuge in the
		eyes of cows.
		
		Another day
		we will watch the preserved butterflies rise from the dead
		and still walking through a country of gray sponges and silent boats
		we will watch our ring flash and roses spring from our tongue.
		Careful! Be careful! Be careful!
		The men who still have marks of the claw and the thunderstorm,
		and that boy who cries because he has never heard of the invention
		of the bridge,
		or that dead man who possesses now only his head and a shoe,
		we must carry them to the wall where the iguanas and the snakes
		are waiting,
		where the bear’s teeth are waiting,
		where the mummified hand of the boy is waiting,
		and the hair of the camel stands on end with a violent blue shudder.
		
		Nobody is sleeping in the sky. Nobody, nobody.
		Nobody is sleeping.
		If someone does close his eyes,
		a whip, boys, a whip!
		Let there be a landscape of open eyes
		and bitter wounds on fire.
		No one is sleeping in this world. No one, no one.
		I have said it before.
		
		No one is sleeping.
		But if someone grows too much moss on his temples during the
		night,
		open the stage trapdoors so he can see in the moonlight
		the lying goblets, and the poison, and the skull of the theaters.


	2. THE FAITHLESS WIFE

		So I took her to the river
		believing she was a maiden,
		but she already had a husband.
		It was on St. James night
		and almost as if I was obliged to.
		The lanterns went out
		and the crickets lighted up.
		In the farthest street corners
		I touched her sleeping breasts
		and they opened to me suddenly
		like spikes of hyacinth.
		The starch of her petticoat
		sounded in my ears
		like a piece of silk
		rent by ten knives.
		Without silver light on their foliage
		the trees had grown larger
		and a horizon of dogs
		barked very far from the river.
		
		Past the blackberries,
		the reeds and the hawthorne
		underneath her cluster of hair
		I made a hollow in the earth
		I took off my tie,
		she too off her dress.
		I, my belt with the revolver,
		She, her four bodices.
		Nor nard nor mother-o’-pearl
		have skin so fine,
		nor does glass with silver
		shine with such brilliance.
		Her thighs slipped away from me
		like startled fish,
		half full of fire,
		half full of cold.
		That night I ran
		on the best of roads
		mounted on a nacre mare
		without bridle stirrups.
		
		As a man, I won’t repeat
		the things she said to me.
		The light of understanding
		has made me more discreet.
		Smeared with sand and kisses
		I took her away from the river.
		The swords of the lilies
		battled with the air.
		
		I behaved like what I am,
		like a proper gypsy.
		I gave her a large sewing basket,
		of straw-colored satin,
		but I did not fall in love
		for although she had a husband
		she told me she was a maiden
		when I took her to the river.


*** Robert Lowell (1917 - 1977)

	1. AFTER THE SURPRISING CONVERSIONS

		September twenty-second, Sir: today 
		I answer. In the latter part of May, 
		Hard on our Lord’s Ascension, it began 
		To be more sensible. A gentleman 
		Of more than common understanding, strict 
		In morals, pious in behavior, kicked 
		Against our goad. A man of some renown, 
		An useful, honored person in the town, 
		He came of melancholy parents; prone 
		To secret spells, for years they kept alone-- 
		His uncle, I believe, was killed of it: 
		Good people, but of too much or little wit. 
		I preached one Sabbath on a text from Kings; 
		He showed concernment for his soul. Some things 
		In his experience were hopeful. He 
		Would sit and watch the wind knocking a tree 
		And praise this countryside our Lord has made. 
		Once when a poor man’s heifer died, he laid 
		A shilling on the doorsill; though a thirst 
		For loving shook him like a snake, he durst 
		Not entertain much hope of his estate 
		In heaven. Once we saw him sitting late 
		Behind his attic window by a light 
		That guttered on his Bible; through that night 
		He meditated terror, and he seemed 
		Beyond advice or reason, for he dreamed 
		That he was called to trumpet Judgment Day 
		To Concord. In the latter part of May 
		He cut his throat. And though the coroner 
		Judged him delirious, soon a noisome stir 
		Palsied our village. At Jehovah’s nod 
		Satan seemed more let loose amongst us: God 
		Abandoned us to Satan, and he pressed 
		Us hard, until we thought we could not rest 
		Till we had done with life. Content was gone. 
		All the good work was quashed. We were undone. 
		The breath of God had carried out a planned 
		And sensible withdrawal from this land; 
		The multitude, once unconcerned with doubt, 
		Once neither callous, curious nor devout, 
		Jumped at broad noon, as though some peddler groaned 
		At it in its familiar twang: “My friend, 
		Cut your own throat. Cut your own throat. Now! Now!” 
		September twenty-second, Sir, the bough 
		Cracks with the unpicked apples, and at dawn 
		The small-mouth bass breaks water, gorged with spawn.


	2. CHILDREN OF LIGHT

		Our fathers wrung their bread from stocks and stones
		And fenced their gardens with the Redmen’s bones;
		Embarking from the Nether Land of Holland,
		Pilgrims unhouseled by Geneva’s night,
		They planted here the Serpent’s seeds of light;
		And here the pivoting searchlights probe to shock
		The riotous glass houses built on rock,
		And candles gutter by an empty altar,
		And light is where the landless blood of Cain
		Is burning, burning the unburied grain.


	3. EPILOGUE

		Those blessèd structures, plot and rhyme--
		why are they no help to me now
		I want to make
		something imagined, not recalled?
		I hear the noise of my own voice:
		_The painter’s vision is not a lens,
		it trembles to caress the light._
		But sometimes everything I write   
		with the threadbare art of my eye
		seems a snapshot,
		lurid, rapid, garish, grouped,
		heightened from life,
		yet paralyzed by fact.
		All’s misalliance.
		Yet why not say what happened?
		Pray for the grace of accuracy
		Vermeer gave to the sun’s illumination
		stealing like the tide across a map
		to his girl solid with yearning.
		We are poor passing facts,
		warned by that to give
		each figure in the photograph
		his living name.


	4. HISTORY

		History has to live with what was here, 
		clutching and close to fumbling all we had-- 
		it is so dull and gruesome how we die, 
		unlike writing, life never finishes. 
		Abel was finished; death is not remote, 
		a flash-in-the-pan electrifies the skeptic, 
		his cows crowding like skulls against high-voltage wire, 
		his baby crying all night like a new machine. 
		As in our Bibles, white-faced, predatory, 
		the beautiful, mist-drunken hunter’s moon ascends-- 
		a child could give it a face: two holes, two holes, 
		my eyes, my mouth, between them a skull’s no-nose-- 
		O there’s a terrifying innocence in my face 
		drenched with the silver salvage of the mornfrost.


	5. HOMECOMING

		What was is . . . since 1930;
		the boys in my old gang
		are senior partners.  They start up
		bald like baby birds
		to embrace retirement.
		
		At the altar of surrender,
		I met you
		in the hour of credulity.
		How your misfortune came out clearly
		to us at twenty.
		
		At the gingerbread casino,
		how innocent the nights we made it
		on our Vesuvio martinis
		with no vermouth but vodka
		to sweeten the dry gin--
		
		the lash across my face
		that night we adored . . .
		soon every night and all,
		when your sweet, amorous 
		repetition changed.


	6. SKUNK HOUR

		Nautilus Island’s hermit
		heiress still lives through winter in her Spartan cottage;
		her sheep still graze above the sea.
		Her son’s a bishop. Her farmer
		is first selectman in our village;
		she’s in her dotage.
		
		Thirsting for
		the hierarchic privacy
		of Queen Victoria’s century,
		she buys up all
		the eyesores facing her shore,
		and lets them fall.
		
		The season’s ill--
		we’ve lost our summer millionaire,
		who seemed to leap from an L. L. Bean
		catalogue. His nine-knot yawl
		was auctioned off to lobstermen.
		A red fox stain covers Blue Hill.
		
		And now our fairy
		decorator brightens his shop for fall;
		his fishnet’s filled with orange cork,
		orange, his cobbler’s bench and awl;
		there is no money in his work,
		he’d rather marry.
		
		One dark night,
		my Tudor Ford climbed the hill’s skull;
		I watched for love-cars. Lights turned down,
		they lay together, hull to hull,
		where the graveyard shelves on the town . . .
		My mind’s not right.
		
		A car radio bleats,
		“Love, O careless Love . . .” I hear
		my ill-spirit sob in each blood cell,
		as if my hand were at its throat . . .
		I myself am hell;
		nobody’s here--
		
		only skunks, that search
		in the moonlight for a bite to eat.
		They march on their soles up Main Street:
		white stripes, moonstruck eyes’ red fire
		under the chalk-dry and spar spire
		of the Trinitarian Church.
		
		I stand on top
		of our back steps and breathe the rich air--
		a mother skunk with her column of kittens swills the garbage pail
		She jabs her wedge-head in a cup
		of sour cream, drops her ostrich tail,
		and will not scare.


	7. THE DRUNKEN FISHERMAN

		Wallowing in this bloody sty,
		I cast for fish that pleased my eye
		(Truly Jehovah’s bow suspends
		No pots of gold to weight its ends);
		Only the blood-mouthed rainbow trout
		Rose to my bait.  They flopped about
		My canvas creel until the moth
		Corrupted its unstable cloth.
		
		A calendar to tell the day;
		A handkerchief to wave away
		The gnats; a couch unstuffed with storm
		Pouching a bottle in one arm;
		A whiskey bottle full of worms;
		And bedroom slacks: are these fit terms
		To mete the worm whose molten rage
		Boils in the belly of old age?
		
		Once fishing was a rabbit’s foot--
		O wind blow cold, O wind blow hot,
		Let suns stay in or suns step out:
		Life danced a jig on the sperm-whale’s spout--
		The fisher’s fluent and obscene
		Catches kept his conscience clean.
		Children, the raging memory drools
		Over the glory of past pools.
		
		Now the hot river, ebbing, hauls
		Its bloody waters into holes;
		A grain of sand inside my shoe
		Mimics the moon that might undo
		Man and Creation too; remorse,
		Stinking, has puddled up its source;
		Here tantrums thrash to a whale’s rage.
		This is the pot-hole of old age.
		
		Is there no way to cast my hook
		Out of this dynamited brook?
		The Fisher’s sons must cast about
		When shallow waters peter out.
		I will catch Christ with a greased worm,
		And when the Prince of Darkness stalks
		My bloodstream to its Stygian term...
		On water the Man-Fisher walks.


	8. TO SPEAK OF WOE THAT IS IN MARRIAGE

		_“It is the future generation that presses into being by means of
		these exuberant feelings and supersensible soap bubbles of ours.”_
			--Schopenhauer
		
		The hot night makes us keep our bedroom windows open.
		Our magnolia blossoms.  Life begins to happen.
		My hopped up husband drops his home disputes,
		and hits the streets to cruise for prostitutes,
		free-lancing out along the razor’s edge.
		This screwball might kill his wife, then take the pledge.
		Oh the monotonous meanness of his lust . . .
		It’s the injustice . . . he is so unjust--
		whiskey-blind, swaggering home at five.
		My only thought is how to keep alive.
		What makes him tick?  Each night now I tie
		ten dollars and his car key to my thigh . . .
		Gored by the climacteric of his want,
		he stalls above me like an elephant.


	9. WAKING IN THE BLUE

		The night attendant, a B.U. sophomore,
		rouses from the mare’s-nest of his drowsy head
		propped on The Meaning of Meaning.
		He catwalks down our corridor.
		Azure day
		makes my agonized blue window bleaker.
		Crows maunder on the petrified fairway.
		Absence! My hearts grows tense
		as though a harpoon were sparring for the kill.
		(This is the house for the “mentally ill.“)
		
		What use is my sense of humour?
		I grin at Stanley, now sunk in his sixties,
		once a Harvard all-American fullback,
		(if such were possible!)
		still hoarding the build of a boy in his twenties,
		as he soaks, a ramrod
		with a muscle of a seal
		in his long tub,
		vaguely urinous from the Victorian plumbing.
		A kingly granite profile in a crimson gold-cap,
		worn all day, all night, 
		he thinks only of his figure,
		of slimming on sherbert and ginger ale--
		more cut off from words than a seal.
		This is the way day breaks in Bowditch Hall at McLean’s;
		the hooded night lights bring out “Bobbie,”
		Porcellian ‘29,
		a replica of Louis XVI
		without the wig--
		redolent and roly-poly as a sperm whale,
		as he swashbuckles about in his birthday suit
		and horses at chairs.
		
		These victorious figures of bravado ossified young.
		
		In between the limits of day,
		hours and hours go by under the crew haircuts
		and slightly too little nonsensical bachelor twinkle
		of the Roman Catholic attendants.
		(There are no Mayflower
		screwballs in the Catholic Church.)
		
		After a hearty New England breakfast,
		I weigh two hundred pounds
		this morning. Cock of the walk,
		I strut in my turtle-necked French sailor’s jersey
		before the metal shaving mirrors,
		and see the shaky future grow familiar
		in the pinched, indigenous faces
		of these thoroughbred mental cases,
		twice my age and half my weight.
		We are all old-timers,
		each of us holds a locked razor.


	10. WATER

		It was a Maine lobster town--
		each morning boatloads of hands
		pushed off for granite
		quarries on the islands,
		
		and left dozens of bleak 
		white frame houses stuck
		like oyster shells
		on a hill of rock,
		
		and below us, the sea lapped
		the raw little match-stick 
		mazes of a weir,
		where the fish for bait were trapped.
		
		Remember? We sat on a slab of rock.
		From this distance in time
		it seems the color
		of iris, rotting and turning purpler,
		
		but it was only 
		the usual gray rock
		turning the usual green
		when drenched by the sea.
		
		The sea drenched the rock
		at our feet all day,
		and kept tearing away 
		flake after flake.
		
		One night you dreamed
		you were a mermaid clinging to a wharf-pile,
		and trying to pull
		off the barnacles with your hands.
		
		We wished our two souls 
		might return like gulls
		to the rock. In the end, 
		the water was too cold for us.


*** Malcolm Lowry (1909 - 1957)

	1. QUARTERMASTER AT THE WHEEL

		The Harkness light! Another hour spelled out, 
		Struck by myself with unction but with doubt. 
		A man is killed but does not hear the shot 
		Which kills him; four bells kills me.
		Lucky to hear it if I killed myself,--
		Whose age haunts calendars upon the screen;
		The heroine horn in nineteen eighteen,
		Who yesterday was born in nineteen eight.
		A pile of magazines assess dead love
		On shore, where one light burns no love will wait. 
		--Past years are volcanoes beyond the wake,
		Tomorrow is the sea and then the sea,
		To both least faithless when we most forsake,
		The one unsealed, the other vomitless
		Of Jonah to his gourd or Nineveh . . .
		It is a straw to tickle bloodshot eyes
		Of quartermasters soldered to darkness,
		The stiff wheel and the remembrance of the drowned, 
		For sinking men to suck at or to claw,
		The thought that what we saw we often hear
		Too late or not at all, or cannot bear
		To know resounding eardrums register . . .
		Our siren now! What ugliest ship has not
		Borne heart from heart with that deep plangency, 
		Sadder than masthead’s light, a soul
		In mourning whose voice is grief gone by.
		Roll on, you witless, dark brown ocean, roll,
		And light light years and grey ones let us live 
		Within that gracious nexus of reprieve
		Between the fated sight and fatal sound
		--Now leave the world to Harkness and to me.


	2. THIS BITTEREST COAST

		This is the end but since it is the end,
		You are happy at least in this one certainty,
		As you were in the eternity
		Of childhood’s blue summer with seagull and yacht for friend,
		When God was good; love, true; sea, sea; land, land. 
		Yet dare not to base immunity
		From baseness on this triviality!
		The murdered once gathered sea poppies with a hand 
		To be scarleter, to be pressed to the blacker
		And less amorous heart of death . . . Oh, Christ,
		Wash up some bone-clear memory on this bitterest coast
		Where is no wreck, dead beak nor feather
		Though none venture here without disaster. Give at the last
		One half-passionate tryst with the past;
		Some little joy to gather to my salt grey breast
		Though children were betrayed, and money was kissed first.


	3. THIS DEAD LETTER

		When I am in the purgatory of the unread,
		Of the backward, of those with wandering attention, 
		What survives must go back to Pier Head
		To mingle with the bereaved, with those who weep 
		As freighters bear their hearts out with the tide.
		It will not be a spirit worthy of mention,
		Not one to recommend the down-and-out sailor:
		Nor will it be a ghost to help my father
		Struggling in the gale with his poor newspaper
		.Or flying behind his bowler hat to work,
		As once before to race his new school cap.
		I shall not be looking for anyone to help; 
		The salt grey prop looks after itself.
		I shall not stir a metaphor in a poet’s head 
		Grown greyer than my book on his top shelf: 
		I spoke too much of wounds that never mend, 
		Of ships sailing in rain that never come back. 
		Still I shall watch them sail, but turn my back 
		To Saigon, the equator or Port Said.
		I lived with sadness: I shall be stern
		As this dead letter, I shall never send.


	4. WHIRLPOOL

		Resurgent sorrow is a sea in the cave
		Of the mind--just as in the poem
		It gluts it--though no nymphs will quire a hymn; 
		Abandon it! . . . Take a trip to the upper shore. 
		Lave Yourself in sand; gather poppies; brave
		The fringe of things, denying that inner chasm.
		Why, the hush of the sea’s in the seashell; in the limb
		Of the smashed ship, its tempest; and your grave
		The sand itself if you’d have it so. Yet glare
		Through a sky of love all day, still must you receive
		In that cave the special anguish of your life;
		With the skull of the seagull and the wreck you may fare 
		Well enough, but will not escape that other surf, 
		Remorse, your host, who haunts the whirlpool where
		The past’s not washed up dead and black and dry
		But whirls in its gulf forever, to no relief.


*** George MacDonald (1824 - 1905)

	1. A PRAYER FOR THE PAST

		 All sights and sounds of every year
		All groups and forms each leaf and gem
		Are thine O God nor need I fear
		To speak to Thee of them.
		
		 Too great thy heart is to despise;
		Thy day girds centuries about;
		From things which we count small thine eyes
		See great things looking out.
		
		 Therefore this prayerful song I sing
		May come to Thee in ordered words;
		Therefore its sweet sounds need not cling
		In terror to their chords.
		
		      *       *       *       *       *
		
		 I know that nothing made is lost;
		That not a moon hath ever shone
		That not a cloud my eyes hath crost
		But to my soul hath gone.
		
		 That all the dead years garnered lie
		In this gem-casket my dim soul;
		And that thy hand may once apply
		The key that opes the whole.
		
		 But what lies dead in me yet lives
		In Thee whose Parable is--Time
		And Worlds and Forms and Sound that gives
		Words and the music-chime.
		
		 And after my next coming birth
		The new child’s prayer will rise to Thee:
		To hear again the sounds of Earth
		Its sights again to see.
		
		 With child’s glad eyes to see once more
		The visioned glories of the gloom
		With climbing suns and starry store
		Ceiling my little room.
		
		 O call again the moons that glide
		Behind old vapours sailing slow;
		Lost sights of solemn skies that slide
		O’er eyelids sunken low.
		
		 Show me the tides of dawning swell
		And lift the world’s dim eastern eye
		And the dark tears that all night fell
		With radiance glorify.
		
		 First I would see oh sore bereft!
		My father’s house my childhood’s home;
		Where the wild snow-storms raved and left
		White mounds of frozen foam.
		
		 Till going out one dewy morn
		A man was turning up the mould;
		And in our hearts the spring was born
		Crept hither through the cold.
		
		 And with the glad year I would go
		The troops of daisies round my feet;
		Flying the kite or in the glow
		Of arching summer heat
		
		 Outstretched in fear upon the bank
		Lest gazing up on awful space
		I should fall down into the blank
		From off the round world’s face.
		
		 And let my brothers be with me
		To play our old games yet again;
		And all should go as lovingly
		As now that we are men.
		
		 If over Earth the shade of Death
		Passed like a cloud’s wide noiseless wing
		We’d tell a secret in low breath:
		“Mind ‘tis a _dream_ of Spring.
		
		 “And in this dream our brother’s gone
		Upstairs; he heard our father call;
		For one by one we go alone
		Till he has gathered all.”
		
		 Father in joy our knees we bow;
		This earth is not a place of tombs:
		We are but in the nursery now;
		They in the upper rooms.
		
		 For are we not at home in Thee
		And all this world a visioned show;
		That knowing what _Abroad_ is we
		What _Home_ is too may know?
		
		 And at thy feet I sit O Lord
		As years ago in moonlight pale
		I sat and heard my father’s word
		Reading a lofty tale.
		
		 So in this vision I would go
		Still onward through the gliding years
		Reaping great Noontide’s joyous glow
		Still Eve’s refreshing tears.
		
		 One afternoon sit pondering
		In that old chair in that old room
		Where passing pigeon’s sudden wing
		Flashed lightning through the gloom.
		
		 There try once more with effort vain
		To mould in one perplexed things;
		And find the solace yet again
		Faith in the Father brings.
		
		 Or on my horse go wandering round
		Mid desert moors and mountains high;
		While storm-clouds darkly brooding found
		In me another sky.
		
		 For so thy Visible grew mine
		Though half its power I could not know;
		And in me wrought a work divine
		Which Thou hadst ordered so;
		
		 Filling my brain with form and word
		From thy full utterance unto men;
		Shapes that might ancient Truth afford
		And find it words again.
		
		 Till Spring in after years of youth
		Wove its dear form with every form;
		Now a glad bursting into Truth
		Now a low sighing storm.
		
		 But in this vision of the Past
		Spring-world to summer leading in
		Whose joys but not whose sorrows last
		I have left out the sin.
		
		 I picture but development
		Green leaves unfolding to their fruits
		Expanding flowers aspiring scent
		But not the writhing roots.
		
		 Then follow English sunsets o’er
		A warm rich land outspread below;
		A green sea from a level shore
		Bright boats that come and go.
		
		 And one beside me in whose eyes
		Old Nature found a welcome home
		A treasury of changeful skies
		Beneath a changeless dome.
		
		 But will it still be thus O God?
		And shall I always wish to see
		And trace again the hilly road
		By which I went to Thee?
		
		 We bend above a joy new given
		That gives new feelings gladsome birth;
		A living gift from one in heaven
		To two upon the earth.
		
		 Are no days creeping softly on
		Which I should tremble to renew?
		I thank thee Lord for what is gone--
		Thine is the future too.
		
		 And are we not at home in Thee
		And all this world a visioned show;
		That knowing what _Abroad_ is we
		What _Home_ is too may know?


	2. A THANKSGIVING

		I Thank Thee boundless Giver
		 That the thoughts Thou givest flow
		In sounds that like a river
		 All through the darkness go.
		And though few should swell the pleasure
		 By sharing this my wine
		My heart will clasp its treasure
		 This secret gift of Thine.
		
		My heart the joy inherits
		 And will oft be sung to rest;
		And some wandering hoping spirits
		 May listen and be blest.
		For the sound may break the hours
		 In a dark and gloomy mood
		As the wind breaks up the bowers
		 Of the brooding sunless wood.
		
		For every sound of gladness
		 Is a prophet-wind that tells
		Of a summer without sadness
		 And a love without farewells;
		And a heart that hath no ailing
		 And an eye that is not dim
		And a faith that without failing
		 Shall be complete in Him.
		
		And when my heart is mourning
		 The songs it lately gave
		Back to their fount returning
		 Make sweet the bitter wave;
		And forth a new stream floweth
		 In sunshine winding fair;
		And through the dark wood goeth
		 Glad laughter on the air.
		
		For the heart of man that waketh
		 Yet hath not ceased to dream
		Is the only fount that maketh
		 The sweet and bitter stream.
		But the sweet will still be flowing
		 When the bitter stream is dry
		And glad music only going
		 On the breezes of the sky.
		
		I thank Thee boundless Giver
		 That the thoughts Thou givest flow
		In sounds that like a river
		 All through the darkness go.
		And though few should swell the pleasure
		 By sharing this my wine
		My heart will clasp its treasure
		 This secret gift of Thine.


	3. HOPE DEFERRED

		Summer is come again. The sun is bright
		And the soft wind is breathing. We will joy;
		And seeing in each other’s eyes the light
		Of the same joy smile hopeful. Our employ
		Shall like the birds’ be airy castles things
		Built by gay hopes and fond imaginings
		Peopling the land within us. We will tell
		Of the green hills and of the silent sea
		And of all summer things that calmly dwell
		A waiting Paradise for you and me.
		And if our thoughts should wander upon sorrow
		Yet hope will wait upon the far-off morrow.
		
		Look on those leaves. It was not Summer’s mouth
		That breathed that hue upon them. And look there--
		On that thin tree. See through its branches bare
		How low the sun is in the mid-day South!
		This day is but a gleam of gladness flown
		Back from the past to tell us what is gone.
		For the dead leaves are falling; and our heart
		Which with the world is ever changing so
		Gives back in echoes sad and low
		The rustling sigh wherewith dead leaves depart:
		A sound not murmuring but faint and wild;
		A sorrow for the Past that hath no child--
		No sweet-voiced child with the bright name of Hope.
		
		We are like you poor leaves! but have more scope
		For sorrow; for our summers pass away
		With a slow year-long overshadowing decay.
		Yea Spring’s first blossom disappears
		Slain by the shadow of the coming years.
		
		Come round me my beloved. We will hold
		All of us compassed thus: a winter day
		Is drawing nigh us. We are growing old;
		And if we be not as a ring enchanted
		About each other’s heart to keep us gay
		The young who claim that joy which haunted
		Our visions once will push us far away
		Into the desolate regions dim and grey
		Where the sea hath no moaning and the cloud
		No rain of tears but apathy doth shroud
		All being and all time. But if we keep
		Together thus the tide of youth will sweep
		Round us with thousand joyous waves
		As round some palmy island of the deep;
		And our youth hover round us like the breath
		Of one that sleeps and sleepeth not to death.
		
		Thus onward hand in hand to parted graves
		The sundered doors into one palace home
		Through age’s thickets faltering we will go
		If He who leads us wills it so
		Believing in our youth and in the Past;
		Within us tending to the last
		Love’s radiant lamp which burns in cave or dome;
		And like the lamps that ages long have glowed
		In blessed graves when once the weary load
		Of tomb-built years is heaved up and cast
		For youth and immortality away
		Will flash abroad in open day
		Clear as a star in heaven’s blue-vaulted night;
		Shining till then through every wrinkled fold
		With the Transfiguration’s conquering might;
		That Youth our faces wondering shall behold
		And shall be glad not fearing to be old.


	4. LONGING

		Away from the city’s herds!
		 Away from the noisy street!
		Away from the storm of words
		 Where hateful and hating meet!
		
		Away from the vapour grey
		 That like a boding of ill
		Is blotting the morning gay
		 And gathers and darkens still!
		
		Away from the stupid book!
		 For like the fog’s weary rest
		With anger dull it fills each nook
		 Of my aching and misty breast.
		
		Over some shining shore
		 There hangeth a space of blue;
		A parting ‘mid thin clouds hoar
		 Where the sunlight is falling through.
		
		The glad waves are kissing the shore
		 Rejoice and tell it for ever;
		The boat glides on while its oar
		 Is flashing out of the river.
		
		Oh to be there with thee!
		 Thou and I only my love!
		The sparkling sands and the sea!
		 And the sunshine of God above!


	5. MARY MAGDALENE

		With eyes aglow and aimless zeal
		 Throughout the land she goes;
		Her tones her motions all reveal
		 A mind without repose.
		
		She climbs the hills she haunts the sea
		 By madness tortured driven;
		One hour’s forgetfulness would be
		 A gift from very heaven.
		
		The night brings sleep the sleep distress;
		 The torture of the day
		Returns as free in darker dress
		 In more secure dismay.
		
		No soft-caressing soothing palm
		 Her confidence can raise;
		No eye hath loving force to calm
		 And draw her answering gaze.
		
		He comes. He speaks. A light divine
		 Dawns gracious in thy soul;
		Thou seest love and order shine--
		 His health will make thee whole.
		
		One wrench of pain one pang of death
		 And in a faint delight
		Thou liest waiting for new breath
		 For morning out of night.
		
		Thou risest up: the earth is fair
		 The wind is cool and free;
		As when a dream of mad despair
		 Dissolves in ecstasy.
		
		And pledge of life and future high
		 Thou seest the Master stand;
		The life of love is in his eye
		 Its power is in his hand.
		
		What matter that the coming time
		 Will stain thy virgin name;
		Attribute thy distress to crime
		 The worst for woman-fame;
		
		Yea call that woman Magdalen
		 Whom slow-reviving grace
		Turneth at last from evil men
		 To seek the Father’s face.
		
		What matters it? The night is gone;
		 Right joyous shines the sun;
		The same clear sun that always shone
		 Ere sorrow had begun.
		
		Oh! any name may come and bide
		If he be well content
		To see not seldom by his side
		 Thy head serenely bent.
		
		Thou sharing in the awful doom
		 Wilt help thy Lord to die;
		And mourning o’er his empty tomb
		 First share his victory.


	6. MY HEART

		I heard in darkness on my bed
		 The beating of my heart
		To servant feet and regnant head
		 A common life impart
		By the liquid cords in every thread
		 Unbroken as they start.
		
		Night with its power to silence day
		 Filled up my lonely room;
		All motion quenching save what lay
		 Beyond its passing doom
		Where in his shed the workman gay
		 Went on despite the gloom.
		
		I listened and I knew the sound
		 And the trade that he was plying;
		For backwards forwards bound and bound
		 ‘Twas a shuttle flying flying;
		Weaving ever life’s garment round
		 Till the weft go out with sighing.
		
		I said O mystic thing thou goest
		 On working in the dark;
		In space’s shoreless sea thou rowest
		 Concealed within thy bark;
		All wondrous things thou wonder showest
		 Yet dost not any mark.
		
		For all the world is woven by thee
		 Besides this fleshly dress;
		With earth and sky thou clothest me
		 Form distance loftiness;
		A globe of glory spouting free
		 Around the visionless.
		
		For when thy busy efforts fail
		 And thy shuttle moveless lies
		They will fall from me like a veil
		 From before a lady’s eyes;
		As a night-perused just-finished tale
		 In the new daylight dies.
		
		But not alone dost thou unroll
		 The mountains fields and seas
		A mighty wonder-painted scroll
		 Like the Patmos mysteries;
		Thou mediator ‘twixt my soul
		 And higher things than these.
		
		In holy ephod clothing me
		 Thou makest me a seer;
		In all the lovely things I see
		 The inner truths appear;
		And the deaf spirit without thee
		 No spirit-word could hear.
		
		Yet though so high thy mission is
		 And thought to spirit brings
		Thy web is but the chrysalis
		 Where lie the future wings
		Now growing into perfectness
		 By thy inwoven things.
		
		Then thou God’s pulse wilt cease to beat;
		 But His heart will still beat on
		Weaving another garment meet
		 If needful for his son;
		And sights more glorious to complete
		 The web thou hast begun.


	7. OH THOU OF LITTLE FAITH!

		Sad-hearted be at peace: the snowdrop lies
		 Under the cold sad earth-clods and the snow;
		But spring is floating up the southern skies
		 And the pale snowdrop silent waits below.
		
		O loved if known! in dull December’s day
		 One scarce believes there is a month of June;
		But up the stairs of April and of May
		 The dear sun climbeth to the summer’s noon.
		
		Dear mourner! I love God and so I rest;
		 O better! God loves thee and so rest thou:
		He is our spring-time our dim-visioned Best
		 And He will help thee--do not fear the _How._


	8. REST

		I
		
		When round the earth the Father’s hands
		 Have gently drawn the dark;
		Sent off the sun to fresher lands
		 And curtained in the lark;
		‘Tis sweet all tired with glowing day
		 To fade with faded light;
		To lie once more the old weary way
		 Upfolded in the night.
		
		A mother o’er the couch may bend
		 And rose-leaf kisses heap:
		In soothing dreams with sleep they blend
		 Till even in dreams we sleep.
		And if we wake while night is dumb
		 ‘Tis sweet to turn and say
		It is an hour ere dawning come
		 And I will sleep till day.
		
		
		II
		
		There is a dearer warmer bed
		 Where one all day may lie
		Earth’s bosom pillowing the head
		 And let the world go by.
		Instead of mother’s love-lit eyes
		 The church’s storied pane
		All blank beneath cold starry skies
		 Or sounding in the rain.
		
		The great world shouting forward fares:
		 This chamber hid from none
		Hides safe from all for no one cares
		 For those whose work is done.
		Cheer thee my heart though tired and slow
		 An unknown grassy place
		Somewhere on earth is waiting now
		 To rest thee from thy race.
		
		
		III
		
		There is a calmer than all calms
		 A quiet more deep than death:
		A folding in the Father’s palms
		 A breathing in his breath;
		A rest made deeper by alarms
		 And stormy sounds combined:
		The child within its mother’s arms
		 Sleeps sounder for the wind.
		
		There needs no curtained bed to hide
		 The world with all its wars
		Nor grassy cover to divide
		 From sun and moon and stars
		A window open to the skies
		 A sense of changeless life
		With oft returning still surprise
		 Repels the sounds of strife.
		
		
		IV
		
		As one bestrides a wild scared horse
		 Beneath a stormy moon
		And still his heart with quiet force
		 Beats on its own calm tune;
		So if my heart with trouble now
		 Be throbbing in my breast
		Thou art my deeper heart and Thou
		 O God dost ever rest.
		
		When mighty sea-winds madly blow
		 And tear the scattered waves;
		As still as summer woods below
		 Lie darkling ocean caves:
		The wind of words may toss my heart
		 But what is that to me!
		‘Tis but a surface storm--Thou art
		 My deep still resting sea.


	9. THE DEATH OF THE OLD YEAR

		The weary Old Year is dead at last;
		His corpse ‘mid the ruins of Time is cast
		Where the mouldering wrecks of lost Thought lie
		And the rich-hued blossoms of Passion die
		To a withering grass that droops o’er his grave
		The shadowy Titan’s refuge cave.
		Strange lights from pale moony Memory lie
		On the weedy columns beneath its eye;
		And strange is the sound of the ghostlike breeze
		In the lingering leaves on the skeleton trees;
		And strange is the sound of the falling shower
		When the clouds of dead pain o’er the spirit lower;
		Unheard in the home he inhabiteth
		The land where all lost things are gathered by Death.
		
		Alone I reclined in the closing year;
		Voice nor breathing nor step was near;
		And I said in the weariness of my breast:
		Weary Old Year thou art going to rest;
		O weary Old Year I would I might be
		One hour alone in thy dying with thee!
		Would thou wert a spirit whose low lament
		Might mix with the sighs from my spirit sent;
		For I am weary of man and life;
		Weary of restless unchanging strife;
		Weary of change that is ever changing;
		Weary of thought that is ever ranging
		Ever falling in efforts vain
		Fluttering upspringing from earth again
		Struggling once more through the darkness to wing
		That hangs o’er the birthplace of everything
		And choked yet again in the vapour’s breast
		Sinking once more to a helpless rest.
		I am weary of tears that scarce are dry
		Ere their founts are filled as the cloud goes by;
		Weary of feelings where each in the throng
		Mocks at the rest as they crowd along;
		Where Pride over all like a god on high
		Sits enshrined in his self-complacency;
		Where Selfishness crawls the snake-demon of ill
		The least suspected where busiest still;
		Where all things evil and painful entwine
		And all in their hate and their sorrow are mine:
		O weary Old Year I would I might be
		One hour by thy dying to weep with thee!
		
		Peace the soul’s slumber was round me shed;
		The sleep where thought lives but its pain is dead;
		And my musings led me a spirit-band
		Through the wide realms of their native land;
		Till I stood by the couch of the mighty dying
		A lonely shore in the midnight lying.
		He lay as if he had laid him to sleep
		And the stars above him their watch did keep;
		And the mournful wind with the dreamy sigh
		The homeless wanderer of the sky
		Was the only attendant whose gentle breath
		Soothed him yet on the couch of death;
		And the dying waves of the heedless sea
		Fell at his feet most listlessly.
		
		But he lay in peace with his solemn eye
		Looking far through the mists of futurity.
		A smile gleamed over the death-dew that lay
		On his withered cheek as life ebbed away.
		A darkness lay on his forehead vast;
		But the light of expectancy o’er it was cast--
		A light that shone from the coming day
		Travelling unseen to the East away.
		In his cloudy robes that lay shadowing wide
		I stretched myself motionless by his side;
		And his eyes with their calm unimpassioned power
		Soothing my heart like an evening shower
		Led in a spectral far-billowing train
		The hours of the Past through my spirit again.
		
		There were fears of evil whose stony eyes
		Froze joy in its gushing melodies.
		Some floated afar on thy tranquil wave
		And the heart looked up from its search for a grave;
		While others as guests to the bosom came
		And left its wild children more sorrow less shame;
		For the death-look parts from their chilling brow
		And they bless the heads that before them bow;
		And floating away in the far-off gloom.
		Thankfulness follows them to their tomb.
		There were Hopes that found not a place to rest
		Their foot ‘mid the rush of all-ocean’s breast;
		And home to the sickening heart flew back
		But changed into sorrows upon their track;
		And through the moan of the darkening sea
		Bearing no leaf from the olive-tree.
		There were joys that looked forth with their maiden eyes
		And smiled and were gone with a sad surprise;
		And the Love of the Earthly whose beauteous form
		Beckoned me on through sunshine and storm;
		But when the bounding heart sprang high
		Meeting her smile with a speechless sigh
		The arms sunk home with a painful start
		Clasping a vacancy to the heart.
		
		And the voice of the dying I seem to hear
		But whether his breathing is in mine ear
		Or the sounds of the breaking billows roll
		The lingering accents upon my soul
		I know not; but thus they seem to bear
		Reproof to my soul for its faint despair:--
		Blame not life it is scarce begun;
		Blame not mankind thyself art one.
		And change is holy oh! blame it never;
		Thy soul shall live by its changing ever;
		Not the bubbling change of a stagnant pool
		But the change of a river flowing and full;
		Where all that is noble and good will grow
		Mightier still as the full tides flow;
		Till it joins the hidden the boundless sea
		Rolling through depths of Eternity.
		Blame not thy thought that it cannot reach
		That which the Infinite must teach;
		Bless thy God that the Word came nigh
		To guide thee home to thy native sky
		Where all things are homely and glorious too
		And the children are wondering and glad and true.
		
		And he pointed away to an Eastern star
		That gleamed through his robes o’er the ocean afar;
		And I knew that a star had looked o’er the rim
		Of my world that lay all dreary and dim;
		And was slowly dissolving the darkness deep
		Which like evil nurse had soothed me to sleep;
		And rising higher and shining clearer
		Would draw the day-spring ever nearer
		Till the sunshine of God burst full on the morn
		And every hill and valley would start
		With the joy of light and new gratitude born
		To Him who had led me home to His heart;
		And all things that lived in my world within
		With the gladness of tears to His feet come in;
		And the false Self be banished with fiends to dwell
		In the gloomiest haunts of his native hell;
		And Pride that ruled like a god above
		Be trod ‘neath the feet of triumphant Love.
		
		And again he pointed across the sea
		And another vision arose in me:
		And I knew I walked an ocean of fear
		Yet of safety too for the Master was near;
		And every wave of sorrow or dread
		O’er which strong faith should upraise my head
		Would show from the height of its troubled crest
		Still nearer and nearer the Land of Rest.
		And when the storm-spray on the wind should arise
		And with tears unbidden should blind mine eyes
		And hide from my vision the Home of Love
		I knew I must look to the star above
		And the mists of Passion would quickly flee
		And the storm would faint to serenity.
		
		And again it seemed as if words found scope
		The sorrowing words of a farewell Hope:
		“I will meet thee again in that deathless land
		Whenever thy foot shall imprint the strand;
		And the loveliest things that have here been mine
		Shall there in eternal beauty shine;
		For there I shall live and never die
		Part of a glorious Eternity;
		For the death of Time is _To be forgot_
		And I go where oblivion entereth not.”
		
		He was dead. He had gone to the rest of his race
		With a sad smile frozen upon his face.
		Deadness clouded his eyes. And his death-bell rung
		And my sorrowing thoughts his low requiem sung;
		And with trembling steps his worn body cast
		In the wide charnel-house of the dreary Past.
		Thus met the noble Old Year his end:
		Rest him in peace for he was my friend.
		
		As my thoughts returned from their wandering
		A voice in my spirit was lingering;
		And its sounds were like Spring’s first breeze’s hum
		When the oak-leaves fall and the young leaves come:
		
		Time dieth ever is ever born:
		On the footsteps of night so treadeth the morn;
		Shadow and brightness death and birth
		Chasing each other o’er the round earth.
		But the spirit of Time from his tomb is springing
		The dust of decay from his pinions flinging;
		Ever renewing his glorious youth
		Scattering around him the dew of Truth.
		Oh let it raise in the desert heart
		Fountains and flowers that shall never depart!
		This spirit will fill us with thought sublime;
		For the _End of God_ is the spirit of Time.


	10. THE HILLS

		Behind my father’s house there lies
		 A little grassy brae
		Whose face my childhood’s busy feet
		 Ran often up in play
		Whence on the chimneys I looked down
		 In wonderment alway.
		
		Around the house where’er I turned
		 Great hills closed up the view;
		The town ‘midst their converging roots
		 Was clasped by rivers two;
		From one hill to another sprang
		 The sky’s great arch of blue.
		
		Oh! how I loved to climb their sides
		 And in the heather lie;
		The bridle on my arm did hold
		 The pony feeding by;
		Beneath the silvery streams; above
		 The white clouds in the sky.
		
		And now in wandering about
		 Whene’er I see a hill
		A childish feeling of delight
		 Springs in my bosom still;
		And longings for the high unknown
		 Follow and flow and fill.
		
		For I am always climbing hills
		 And ever passing on
		Hoping on some high mountain peak
		 To find my Father’s throne;
		For hitherto I’ve only found
		 His footsteps in the stone.
		
		And in my wanderings I have met
		 A spirit child like me
		Who laid a trusting hand in mine
		 So fearlessly and free
		That so together we have gone
		 Climbing continually.
		
		Upfolded in a spirit bud
		 The child appeared in space
		Not born amid the silent hills
		 But in a busy place;
		And yet in every hill we see
		 A strange familiar face.
		
		For they are near our common home;
		 And so in trust we go
		Climbing and climbing on and on
		 Whither we do not know;
		Not waiting for the mournful dark
		 But for the dawning slow.
		
		Clasp my hand closer yet my child--
		 A long way we have come!
		Clasp my hand closer yet my child--
		 For we have far to roam
		Climbing and climbing till we reach
		 Our Heavenly Father’s home.


	11. THE JOURNEY

		I
		
		Hark the rain is on my roof!
		Every sound drops through the dark
		On my soul with dull reproof
		Like a half-extinguished spark.
		I! alas how am I here
		In the midnight and alone?
		Caught within a net of fear!
		All my dreams of beauty gone!
		
		I will rise: I must go forth.
		Better face the hideous night
		Better dare the unseen north
		Than be still without the light!
		Black wind rushing round my brow
		Sown with stinging points of rain!
		Place or time I know not now--
		I am here and so is pain!
		
		I will leave the sleeping street
		Hie me forth on darker roads.
		Ah! I cannot stay my feet
		Onward onward something goads.
		I will take the mountain path
		Beard the storm within its den
		Know the worst of this dim wrath
		Vexing thus the souls of men.
		
		Chasm ‘neath chasm! rock piled on rock:
		Roots and crumbling earth and stones!
		Hark the torrent’s thundering shock!
		Hark the swaying pine tree’s groans!
		Ah I faint I fall I die!
		Sink to nothingness away!--
		Lo a streak upon the sky!
		Lo the opening eye of day!
		
		
		II
		
		Mountain heights that lift their snows
		O’er a valley green and low;
		And a winding path that goes
		Guided by the river’s flow;
		And a music rising ever
		As of peace and low content
		From the pebble-paven river
		As an odour upward sent.
		
		And a sighing of the storm
		Far away amid the hills
		Like the humming of a swarm
		That the summer forest fills;
		And a frequent fall of rain
		From a cloud with ragged weft;
		And a burst of wind amain
		From the mountain’s sudden cleft.
		
		Then a night that hath a moon
		Staining all the cloudy white;
		Sinking with a soundless tune
		Deep into the spirit’s night.
		Then a morning clear and soft
		Amber on the purple hills;
		Warm high day of summer oft
		Cooled by wandering windy rills.
		
		Joy to travel thus along
		With the universe around!
		I the centre of the throng;
		Every sight and every sound
		Speeding with its burden laden
		Speeding homewards to my soul!
		Mine the eye the stars are made in!
		I the heart of all this whole!
		
		
		III
		
		Hills retreat on either hand
		Sinking down into the plain;
		Slowly through the level land
		Glides the river to the main.
		What is that before me white
		Gleaming through the dusky air?
		Dimmer in the gathering night;
		Still beheld I know not where?
		
		Is it but a chalky ridge
		Bared by many a trodden mark?
		Or a river-spanning bridge
		Miles away into the dark?
		Or the foremost leaping waves
		Of the everlasting sea
		Where the Undivided laves
		Time with its eternity?
		
		No tis but an eye-made sight
		In my brain a fancied gleam;
		Or a thousand things as white
		Set in darkness well might seem.
		There it wavers shines is gone;
		What it is I cannot tell;
		When the morning star hath shone
		I shall see and know it well.
		
		Onward onward through the night!
		Matters it I cannot see?
		I am moving in a might
		Dwelling in the dark and me.
		Up or down or here or there
		I can never be alone;
		My own being tells me where
		God is as the Father known.
		
		
		IV
		
		Joy! O joy! the Eastern sea
		Answers to the Eastern sky;
		Wide and featured gloriously
		With swift billows bursting high.
		Nearer nearer oh! the sheen
		On a thousand waves at once!
		Oh! the changing crowding green!
		Oh my beating heart’s response!
		
		Down rejoicing to the strand
		Where the sea-waves shore-ward lean
		Curve their graceful heads and stand
		Gleaming with ethereal green
		Then in foam fall heavily--
		This is what I saw at night!
		Lo a boat! I’ll forth on thee
		Dancing-floor for my delight.
		
		From the bay wind-winged we glance;
		Sea-winds seize me by the hair!
		What a terrible expanse!
		How the ocean tumbles there!
		I am helpless here afloat
		For the wild waves know not me;
		Gladly would I change my boat
		For the snow wings of the sea!
		
		Look below. Each watery whirl
		Cast in beauty’s living mould!
		Look above! Each feathery curl
		Faintly tinged with morning gold!--
		Oh I tremble with the gush
		Of an everlasting youth!
		Love and fear together rush:
		I am free in God the Truth!


	12. THE TREE’S PRAYER

		Alas! ‘tis cold and dark;
		The wind all night has sung a wintry tune;
		Hail from black clouds that swallowed up the moon
		Has beat against my bark.
		
		Oh! when will it be spring?
		The sap moves not within my withered veins;
		Through all my frozen roots creep numbing pains
		That they can hardly cling.
		
		The sun shone out last morn;
		I felt the warmth through every fibre float;
		I thought I heard a thrush’s piping note
		Of hope and sadness born.
		
		Then came the sea-cloud driven;
		The tempest hissed through all my outstretched boughs
		Hither and thither tossed me in its snows
		Beneath the joyless heaven.
		
		O for the sunny leaves!
		Almost I have forgot the breath of June!
		Forgot the feathery light-flakes from the moon!
		The praying summer-eves!
		
		O for the joyous birds
		Which are the tongues of us mute longing trees!
		O for the billowy odours and the bees
		Abroad in scattered herds!
		
		The blessing of cool showers!
		The gratefulness that thrills through every shoot!
		The children playing round my deep-sunk root
		Shadowed in hot noon hours!
		
		Alas! the cold clear dawn
		Through the bare lattice-work of twigs around!
		Another weary day of moaning sound
		On the thin-shadowed lawn!
		
		Yet winter’s noon is past:
		I’ll stretch my arms all night into the wind
		Endure all day the chill air and unkind;
		My leaves _will_ come at last.


	13. THE WOMAN THAT CRIED IN THE CROWD

		She says within: “It is a man
		 A man of mother born;
		She is a woman--I am one
		 Alive this holy morn.”
		
		Filled with his words that flow in light
		 Her heart will break or cry:
		A woman’s cry bursts forth in might
		 Of loving agony.
		
		“Blessed the womb Thee Lord that bore!
		 The breast where Thou hast fed!”
		Storm-like those words the silence tore
		 Though words the silence bred.
		
		He ceases listens to the cry
		 And knows from whence it springs;
		A woman’s heart that glad would die
		 For this her best of things.
		
		Yet there is better than the birth
		 Of such a mighty son;
		Better than know of all the earth
		 Thyself the chosen one.
		
		“Yea rather blessed they that hear
		 And keep the word of God.”
		The voice was gentle not severe:
		 No answer came abroad.


	14. THE WOMAN THAT WAS A SINNER

		She washes them with sorrow sweet
		 She wipes them with her hair;
		Her kisses soothe the weary feet
		 To all her kisses bare.
		
		The best of woman beauty’s crown
		 She spends upon his feet;
		Her eyes her lips her hair flung down
		 In one devotion meet.
		
		His face his words her heart had woke.
		 She judged Him well in sooth:
		Believing Him her bonds she broke
		 And fled to Him for truth.
		
		His holy manhood’s perfect worth
		 Redeems the woman’s ill:
		Her thanks intense to Him burn forth
		 Who owns her woman still.
		
		And so in kisses ointment tears
		 And outspread lavish hair
		An earnest of the coming years
		 Ascends her thankful prayer.
		
		If Mary too her hair did wind
		 The holy feet around;
		Such tears no virgin eyes could find
		 As this sad woman found.
		
		And if indeed his wayworn feet
		 With love she healed from pain;
		This woman found the homage meet
		 And taught it her again.
		
		The first in grief ah I let her be
		 And love that springs from woe;
		Woe soothed by Him more tenderly
		 That sin doth make it flow.
		
		Simon such kisses will not soil;
		 Her tears are pure as rain;
		Her hair--‘tis Love unwinds the coil
		 Love and her sister Pain.
		
		If He be kind for life she cares;
		 A light lights up the day;
		She to herself a value bears
		 Not yet a castaway.
		
		And evermore her heart arose
		 And ever sank away;
		For something crowned Him o’er her woes
		 More than her best could say.
		
		Rejoice sweet sisters holy pure
		 Who hardly know her case:
		There is no sin but has its cure
		 But finds its answering grace.
		
		Her heart although it sinned and sank
		 Rose other hearts above:
		Bless her dear sisters bless and thank
		 For teaching how to love.
		
		He from his own had welcome sad--
		 “Away with him“ said they;
		Yet never lord or poet had
		 Such homage in his day.
		
		Ah Lord! in whose forgiveness sweet
		 Our life becomes intense!
		We brothers sisters crowd thy feet--
		 Ah! make no difference.


*** Archibald MacLeish (1892 - 1982)

	1. AN ETERNITY

		There is no dusk to be,
		There is no dawn that was,
		Only there’s now, and now,
		And the wind in the grass.
		
		Days I remember of
		Now in my heart, are now;
		Days that I dream will bloom
		White the peach bough.
		
		Dying shall never be
		Now in the windy grass;
		Now under shooken leaves
		Death never was.


	2. BEFORE MARCH

		THE gull’s image and the gull
		Meet upon the water
		All day I have thought of her
		There is nothing left of that year
		(There is sere-grass
		Salt colored)
		We have annulled it with
		Salt
		We have galled it clean to the clay with that one autumn
		The hedge-rows keep the rubbish and the leaves
		There is nothing left of that year in our lives but the leaves of it
		As though it had not been at all
		As though the love the love and the life altered
		Even ourselves are as strangers in these thoughts
		Why should I weep for this?
		What have I brought her?
		Of sorrow of sorrow of sorrow her heart full
		The gull
		Meets with his image on the winter water.


	3. EPISTLE TO BE LEFT IN THE EARTH

		. . . It is colder now
		there are many stars
		we are drifting
		North by the Great Bear
		the leaves are falling
		The water is stone in the scooped rock
		to southward
		Red sun grey air
		the crows are
		Slow on their crooked wings
		the jays have left us
		Long since we passed the flares of Orion
		Each man believes in his heart he will die
		Many have written last thoughts and last letters
		None know if our deaths are now or forever
		None know if this wandering earth will be found
		
		We lie down and the snow covers our garments
		I pray you
		you (if any open this writing)
		Make in your mouths the words that were our names
		I will tell you all we have learned
		I will tell you everything
		The earth is round
		there are springs under the orchards
		The loam cuts with a blunt knife
		beware of
		Elms in thunder
		the lights in the sky are stars
		We think they do not see
		we think also
		The trees do not know nor the leaves of the grasses hear us
		The birds too are ignorant
		do not listen
		Do not stand at dark in the open windows
		We before you have heard this
		they are voices
		They are not words at all but the wind rising
		Also no one among us has seen God
		(. . . We have thought often
		the flaws of sun in the late and driving weather
		pointed to one tree but it was not so.)
		As for the nights I warn you the nights are dangerous
		The wind changes at night and the dreams come
		
		It is very cold
		there are strange stars near Arcturus
		Voices are crying an unknown name in the sky


	4. IMMORTAL AUTUMN

		I speak this poem now with grave and level voice
		In praise of autumn, of the far-horn-winding fall.
		
		I praise the flower-barren fields, the clouds, the tall
		Unanswering branches where the wind makes sullen noise.
		
		I praise the fall: it is the human season.
		Now
		No more the foreign sun does meddle at our earth,
		Enforce the green and bring the fallow land to birth,
		Nor winter yet weigh all with silence the pine bough,
		
		But now in autumn with the black and outcast crows
		Share we the spacious world: the whispering year is gone:
		There is more room to live now: the once secret dawn
		Comes late by daylight and the dark unguarded goes.
		
		Between the mutinous brave burning of the leaves
		And winter’s covering of our hearts with his deep snow
		We are alone: there are no evening birds: we know
		The naked moon: the tame stars circle at our eaves.
		
		It is the human season. On this sterile air
		Do words outcarry breath: the sound goes on and on.
		I hear a dead man’s cry from autumn long since gone.
		I cry to you beyond upon this bitter air.


	5. THE END OF THE WORLD

		Quite unexpectedly as Vasserot
		The armless ambidextrian was lighting
		A match between his great and second toe,
		And Ralph the lion was engaged in biting
		The neck of Madame Sossman while the drum
		Pointed, and Teeny was about to cough
		In waltz-time swinging Jocko by the thumb--
		Quite unexpectedly the top blew off:
		
		And there, there overhead, there, there hung over
		Those thousands of white faces, those dazed eyes,
		There in the starless dark the poise, the hover,
		There with vast wings across the canceled skies,
		There in the sudden blackness the black pall
		Of nothing, nothing, nothing--nothing at all.


	6. TWO POEMS FROM THE WAR

		Oh, not the loss of the accomplished thing!
		Not dumb farewells, nor long relinquishment
		Of beauty had, and golden summer spent,
		And savage glory of the fluttering
		Torn banners of the rain, and frosty ring
		Of moon-white winters, and the imminent
		Long-lunging seas, and glowing students bent
		To race on some smooth beach the gull’s wing:
		
		Not these, nor all we’ve been, nor all we’ve loved,
		The pitiful familiar names, had moved
		Our hearts to weep for them; but oh, the star
		The future is! Eternity’s too wan
		To give again that undefeated, far,
		All-possible irradiance of dawn.
		
		Like moon-dark, like brown water you escape,
		O laughing mouth, O sweet uplifted lips.
		Within the peering brain old ghosts take shape;
		You flame and wither as the white foam slips
		Back from the broken wave: sometimes a start,
		A gesture of the hands, a way you own
		Of bending that smooth head above your heart,--
		Then these are varied, then the dream is gone.
		
		Oh, you are too much mine and flesh of me
		To seal upon the brain, who in the blood
		Are so intense a pulse, so swift a flood
		Of beauty, such unceasing instancy.
		Dear unimagined brow, unvisioned face,
		All beauty has become your dwelling place.


*** Louis MacNeice (1907 - 1963)

	1. HOUSE ON A CLIFF

		Indoors the tang of a tiny oil lamp. Outdoors
		The winking signal on the waste of sea.
		Indoors the sound of the wind. Outdoors the wind.
		Indoors the locked heart and the lost key.
		
		Outdoors the chill, the void, the siren. Indoors
		The strong man pained to find his red blood cools,
		While the blind clock grows louder, faster. Outdoors
		The silent moon, the garrulous tides she rules.
		
		Indoors ancestral curse-cum-blessing. Outdoors
		The empty bowl of heaven, the empty deep.
		Indoors a purposeful man who talks at cross
		Purposes, to himself, in a broken sleep.


	2. LONDON RAIN

		The rain of London pimples 
		The ebony street with white 
		And the neon lamps of London 
		Stain the canals of night 
		And the park becomes a jungle 
		In the alchemy of night. 
		
		My wishes turn to violent 
		Horses black as coal--
		The randy mares of fancy, 
		The stallions of the soul--
		Eager to take the fences 
		That fence about my soul. 
		
		Across the countless chimneys 
		The horses ride and across 
		The country to the channel 
		Where warning beacons toss, 
		To a place where God and No-God 
		Play at pitch and toss. 
		
		Whichever wins I am happy 
		For God will give me bliss 
		But No-God will absolve me 
		From all I do amiss 
		And I need not suffer conscience 
		If the world was made amiss. 
		
		Under God we can reckon 
		On pardon when we fall 
		But if we are under No-God 
		Nothing will matter at all, 
		Adultery and murder 
		Will count for nothing at all. 
		
		So reinforced by logic 
		As having nothing to lose 
		My lust goes riding horseback 
		To ravish where I choose, 
		To burgle all the turrets 
		Of beauty as I choose. 
		
		But now the rain gives over 
		Its dance upon the town, 
		Logic and lust together 
		Come dimly tumbling down, 
		And neither God nor No-God 
		Is either up or down. 
		
		The argument was wilful, 
		The alternatives untrue, 
		We need no metaphysics 
		To sanction what we do 
		Or to muffle us in comfort 
		From what we did not do. 
		
		Whether the living river 
		Began in bog or lake, 
		The world is what was given, 
		The world is what we make. 
		And we only can discover 
		Life in the life we make. 
		
		So let the water sizzle 
		Upon the gleaming slates, 
		There will be sunshine after 
		When the rain abates 
		And rain returning duly 
		When the sun abates. 
		
		My wishes now come homeward, 
		Their gallopings in vain, 
		Logic and lust are quiet, 
		And again it starts to rain; 
		Falling asleep I listen 
		To the falling London rain. 


	3. PRAYER BEFORE BIRTH

		I am not yet born; O hear me. 
		Let not the bloodsucking bat or the rat or the stoat or the 
		club-footed ghoul come near me. 
		
		I am not yet born, console me. 
		I fear that the human race may with tall walls wall me, 
		with strong drugs dope me, with wise lies lure me, 
		on black racks rack me, in blood-baths roll me. 
		
		I am not yet born; provide me 
		With water to dandle me, grass to grow for me, trees to talk 
		to me, sky to sing to me, birds and a white light 
		in the back of my mind to guide me. 
		
		I am not yet born; forgive me 
		For the sins that in me the world shall commit, my words 
		when they speak me, my thoughts when they think me, 
		my treason engendered by traitors beyond me, 
		my life when they murder by means of my 
		hands, my death when they live me. 
		
		I am not yet born; rehearse me 
		In the parts I must play and the cues I must take when 
		old men lecture me, bureaucrats hector me, mountains 
		frown at me, lovers laugh at me, the white 
		waves call me to folly and the desert calls 
		me to doom and the beggar refuses 
		my gift and my children curse me. 
		
		I am not yet born; O hear me, 
		Let not the man who is beast or who thinks he is God 
		come near me. 
		
		I am not yet born; O fill me 
		With strength against those who would freeze my 
		humanity, would dragoon me into a lethal automaton, 
		would make me a cog in a machine, a thing with 
		one face, a thing, and against all those 
		who would dissipate my entirety, would 
		blow me like thistledown hither and 
		thither or hither and thither 
		like water held in the 
		hands would spill me. 
		
		Let them not make me a stone and let them not spill me. 
		Otherwise kill me.


	4. SNOW

		The room was suddenly rich and the great bay-window was
		Spawning snow and pink roses against it
		Soundlessly collateral and incompatible:
		World is suddener than we fancy it.
		
		World is crazier and more of it than we think,
		Incorrigibly plural. I peel and portion
		A tangerine and spit the pips and feel
		The drunkenness of things being various.
		
		And the fire flames with a bubbling sound for world
		Is more spiteful and gay than one supposes--
		On the tongue on the eyes on the ears in the palms of one’s hands--
		There is more than glass between the snow and the huge roses.


	5. SOAP SUDS

		This brand of soap has the same smell as once in the big
		House he visited when he was eight: the walls of the bathroom open
		To reveal a lawn where a great yellow ball rolls back through a hoop
		To rest at the head of a mallet held in the hands of a child.
		And these were the joys of that house: a tower with a telescope;
		Two great faded globes, one of the earth, one of the stars;
		A stuffed black dog in the hall; a walled garden with bees;
		A rabbit warren; a rockery; a vine under glass; the sea.
		To which he has now returned. The day of course is fine
		And a grown-up voice cries Play! The mallet slowly swings,
		Then crack, a great gong booms from the dog-dark hall and the ball
		Skims forward through the hoop and then through the next and then
		Through hoops where no hoops were and each dissolves in turn
		And the grass has grown head-high and an angry voice cries Play!
		But the ball is lost and the mallet slipped long since from the hands
		Under the running tap that are not the hands of a child.


	6. SUNDAY MORNING

		Down the road someone is practising scales, 
		The notes like little fishes vanish with a wink of tails, 
		Man’s heart expands to tinker with his car 
		For this is Sunday morning, Fate’s great bazaar; 
		Regard these means as ends, concentrate on this Now, 
		
		And you may grow to music or drive beyond Hindhead anyhow, 
		Take corners on two wheels until you go so fast 
		That you can clutch a fringe or two of the windy past, 
		That you can abstract this day and make it to the week of time 
		A small eternity, a sonnet self-contained in rhyme. 
		
		But listen, up the road, something gulps, the church spire 
		Open its eight bells out, skulls’ mouths which will not tire 
		To tell how there is no music or movement which secures 
		Escape from the weekday time. Which deadens and endures.


	7. THE SUNLIGHT ON THE GARDEN

		The sunlight on the garden 
		Hardens and grows cold, 
		We cannot cage the minute 
		Within its nets of gold, 
		When all is told 
		We cannot beg for pardon.
		
		Our freedom as free lances 
		Advances towards its end; 
		The earth compels, upon it 
		Sonnets and birds descend; 
		And soon, my friend, 
		We shall have no time for dances.


*** Stéphane Mallarmé (1842 - 1898)

	1. DISTRESS

		I don’t come to conquer your flesh tonight, O beast 
		In whom are the sins of the race, nor to stir 
		In your foul tresses a mournful tempest 
		Beneath the fatal boredom my kisses pour: 
		
		A heavy sleep without those dreams that creep 
		Under curtains alien to remorse, I ask of your bed, 
		Sleep you can savour after your dark deceits, 
		You who know more of Nothingness than the dead. 
		
		For Vice, gnawing this inborn nobleness of mine 
		Marked me, like you, with its sterility, 
		But shroud-haunted, pale, destroyed, I flee 
		
		While that heart no tooth of any crime 
		Can wound lives in your breast of stone, 
		Frightened of dying while I sleep alone.


	2. L’APRÈS-MIDI D’UN FAUNE

		I would immortalize these nymphs; so bright
		Their sunlit colouring so airy light
		It floats like drowsy down. Loved I a dream?
		My doubts born of oblivious darkness seem
		A subtle tracery of branches grown
		The tree’s true self--proving that I have known
		Thinking it love the blushing of a rose.
		But think. These nymphs their loveliness ... suppose
		They bodied forth your senses’ fabulous thirst?
		Illusion! which the blue eyes of the first
		As cold and chaste as is the weeping spring
		Beget: the other sighing passioning
		Is she the wind warm in your fleece at noon?
		No; through this quiet when a weary swoon
		Crushes and chokes the latest faint essay
		Of morning cool against the encroaching day
		There is no murmuring water save the gush
		Of my clear fluted notes; and in the hush
		Blows never a wind save that which through my reed
		Puffs out before the rain of notes can speed
		Upon the air with that calm breath of art
		That mounts the unwrinkled zenith visibly
		Where inspiration seeks its native sky.
		You fringes of a calm Sicilian lake
		The sun’s own mirror which I love to take
		Silent beneath your starry flowers tell
		_How here I cut the hollow rushes well_
		_Tamed by my skill when on the glaucous gold_
		_Of distant lawns about their fountain cold_
		_A living whiteness stirs like a lazy wave;_
		_And at the first slow notes my panpipes gave_
		_These flocking swans these naiads rather fly_
		_Or dive_. Noon burns inert and tawny dry
		Nor marks how clean that Hymen slipped away
		From me who seek in song the real A.
		Wake then to the first ardour and the sight
		O lonely faun of the old fierce white light
		With lilies one of you for innocence.
		Other than their lips’ delicate pretence
		The light caress that quiets treacherous lovers
		My breast I know not how to tell discovers
		The bitten print of some immortal’s kiss.
		But hush! a mystery so great as this
		I dare not tell save to my double reed
		Which sharer of my every joy and need
		Dreams down its cadenced monologues that we
		Falsely confuse the beauties that we see
		With the bright palpable shapes our song creates:
		My flute as loud as passion modulates
		Purges the common dream of flank and breast
		Seen through closed eyes and inwardly caressed
		Of every empty and monotonous line.
		
		Bloom then O Syrinx in thy flight malign
		A reed once more beside our trysting-lake.
		Proud of my music let me often make
		A song of goddesses and see their rape
		Profanely done on many a painted shape.
		So when the grape’s transparent juice I drain
		I quell regret for pleasures past and feign
		A new real grape. For holding towards the sky
		The empty skin I blow it tight and lie
		Dream-drunk till evening eyeing it.
		                                     Tell o’er
		Remembered joys and plump the grape once more.
		_Between the reeds I saw their bodies gleam_
		_Who cool no mortal fever in the stream_
		_Crying to the woods the rage of their desire:_
		_And their bright hair went down in jewelled fire_
		_Where crystal broke and dazzled shudderingly._
		_I check my swift pursuit: for see where lie_
		_Bruised being twins in love by languor sweet_
		_Two sleeping girls clasped at my very feet._
		_I seize and run with them nor part the pair_
		_Breaking this covert of frail petals where_
		_Roses drink scent of the sun and our light play_
		_’Mid tumbled flowers shall match the death of day._
		I love that virginal fury--ah the wild
		Thrill when a maiden body shrinks defiled
		Shuddering like arctic light from lips that sear
		Its nakedness ... the flesh in secret fear!
		Contagiously through my linked pair it flies
		Where innocence in either struggling dies
		Wet with fond tears or some less piteous dew.
		_Gay in the conquest of these fears I grew_
		_So rash that I must needs the sheaf divide_
		_Of ruffled kisses heaven itself had tied._
		_For as I leaned to stifle in the hair_
		_Of one my passionate laughter (taking care_
		_With a stretched finger that her innocence_
		_Might stain with her companion’s kindling sense_
		_To touch the younger little one who lay_
		_Child-like unblushing) my ungrateful prey_
		_Slips from me freed by passion’s sudden death_
		_Nor heeds the frenzy of my sobbing breath._
		
		Let it pass! others of their hair shall twist
		A rope to drag me to those joys I missed.
		See how the ripe pomegranates bursting red
		To quench the thirst of the mumbling bees have bled;
		So too our blood kindled by some chance fire
		Flows for the swarming legions of desire.
		At evening when the woodland green turns gold
		And ashen grey ’mid the quenched leaves behold!
		Red Etna glows by Venus visited
		Walking the lava with her snowy tread
		Whene’er the flames in thunderous slumber die.
		I hold the goddess!
		                   Ah sure penalty!
		
		But the unthinking soul and body swoon
		At last beneath the heavy hush of noon.
		Forgetful let me lie where summer’s drouth
		Sifts fine the sand and then with gaping mouth
		Dream planet-struck by the grape’s round wine-red star.
		
		Nymphs I shall see the shade that now you are.


	3. SEA BREEZE

		The flesh is sad, alas!--and I’ve read all the books.
		Let’s go! Far off. Let’s go! I sense
		That the birds, intoxicated, fly
		Deep into unknown spume and sky!
		Nothing--not even old gardens mirrored by eyes--
		Can restrain this heart that drenches itself in the sea,
		O nights, or the abandoned light of my lamp,
		On the void of paper, that whiteness defends,
		No, not even the young woman feeding her child.
		I shall go! Steamer, straining at your ropes
		Lift your anchor towards an exotic rawness!
		A Boredom, made desolate by cruel hope
		Still believes in the last goodbye of handkerchiefs!
		And perhaps the masts, inviting lightning,
		Are those the gale bends over shipwrecks,
		Lost, without masts, without masts, no fertile islands . . .
		But, oh my heart, listen to the sailors’ chant!


	4. THE PIPE

		Yesterday I found my pipe while pondering a long evening of work, 
		of fine winter work. Thrown aside were my cigarettes, with all the childish 
		joys of summer, into the past which the leaves shining blue in the sun, 
		the muslins, illuminate, and taken up once again was the grave pipe 
		of a serious man who wants to smoke for a long while without being disturbed, 
		so as better to work: but I was not prepared for the surprise that this 
		abandoned object had in store for me; for hardly had I drawn the first puff 
		when I forgot the grand books I was planning to write, and, amazed, moved to 
		a feeling of tenderness, I breathed in the air of the previous winter 
		which was now coming back to me. I had not been in contact with my 
		faithful sweetheart since returning to France, and now all of London, 
		London as I had lived it a year ago entirely alone, appeared before my eyes: 
		first the dear fogs that muffle one’s brains and have an odor of their own 
		there when they penetrate beneath the casements. My tobacco had the scent 
		of a somber room with leather furniture sprinkled by coal dust, on which 
		the thin black cat would curl and stretch; the big fires! and the maid 
		with red arms pouring coals, and the noise of those coals falling from 
		the sheet--iron bucket into the iron scuttle in the morning--when the postman 
		gave the solemn double knock that kept me alive! Once again I saw through 
		the windows those sickly trees of the deserted square--I saw the open sea, 
		crossed so often that winter, shivering on the deck of the steamer wet with 
		drizzle and blackened from the fumes--with my poor wandering beloved, decked out 
		in traveller’s clothes, a long dress, dull as the dust of the roads, 
		a coat clinging damply to her cold shoulders, one of those straw hats with 
		no feather and hardly any ribbons that wealthy ladies throw away upon arrival, 
		mangled as they are by the sea, and that poor loved ones refurbish for many 
		another season. Around her neck was wound the terrible handkerchief that 
		one waves when saying goodbye forever.


*** James Clarence Mangan (1803 - 1849)

	1. AND THEN NO MORE

		I SAW her once, one little while, and then no more: 
		’Twas Eden’s light on Earth a while, and then no more. 
		Amid the throng she passed along the meadow-floor: 
		Spring seemed to smile on Earth awhile, and then no more; 
		But whence she came, which way she went, what garb she wore
		I noted not; I gazed a while, and then no more! 
		
		I saw her once, one little while, and then no more: 
		’Twas Paradise on Earth a while, and then no more. 
		Ah! what avail my vigils pale, my magic lore? 
		She shone before mine eyes awhile, and then no more. 
		The shallop of my peace is wrecked on Beauty’s shore. 
		Near Hope’s fair isle it rode awhile, and then no more! 
		
		I saw her once, one little while, and then no more: 
		Earth looked like Heaven a little while, and then no more. 
		Her presence thrilled and lighted to its inner core 
		My desert breast a little while, and then no more. 
		So may, perchance, a meteor glance at midnight o’er 
		Some ruined pile a little while, and then no more! 
		
		I saw her once, one little while, and then no more: 
		The earth was Peri-land awhile, and then no more. 
		Oh, might I see but once again, as once before, 
		Through chance or wile, that shape awhile, and then no more! 
		Death soon would heal my griefs! This heart, now sad and sore, 
		Would beat anew a little while, and then no more.


	2. CAHAL MÓR OF THE WINE-RED HAND

		I WALKED entranced 
		Through a land of Morn: 
		The sun, with wondrous excess of light, 
		Shone down and glanced 
		Over seas of corn 
		And lustrous gardens aleft and right. 
		Even in the clime 
		Of resplendent Spain, 
		Beams no such sun upon such a land; 
		But it was the time, 
		’T was in the reign, 
		Of Cahal Mór of the Wine-red Hand. 
		
		Anon stood nigh 
		By my side a man 
		Of princely aspect and port sublime 
		Him queried I-- 
		“Oh, my Lord and Khan, 
		What clime is this, and what golden time?” 
		When he--“The clime 
		Is a clime to praise, 
		The clime is Erin’s, the green and bland; 
		And it is the time, 
		These be the days, 
		Of Cahal Mór of the Wine-red Hand.” 
		
		Then saw I thrones 
		And circling fires, 
		And a Dome rose near me, as by a spell, 
		Whence flowed the tones 
		Of silver lyres, 
		And many voices in wreathèd swell; 
		And their thrilling chime 
		Fell on mine ears 
		As the heavenly hymn of an angel-band-- 
		“It is now the time 
		These be the years, 
		Of Cahal Mór of the Wine-red Hand.” 
		
		I sought the hall, 
		And behold!--a change 
		From light to darkness, from joy to woe! 
		Kings, nobles, all, 
		Looked aghast and strange; 
		The minstrel group sate in dumbest show! 
		Had some great crime 
		Wrought this dread amaze, 
		This terror? None seemed to understand 
		’Twas then the time, 
		We were in the days, 
		Of Cahal Mór of the Wine-red Hand. 
		
		I again walked forth; 
		But lo! the sky 
		Showed flecked with blood, and an alien sun 
		Glared from the north, 
		And there stood on high, 
		Amid his shorn beams, a skeleton! 
		It was by the stream 
		Of the castled Maine, 
		One Autumn eve, in the Teuton’s land, 
		That I dreamed this dream 
		Of the time and reign 
		Of Cahal Mór of the Wine-red Hand.


	3. DARK ROSALEEN

		OH! my Dark Rosaleen,
		Do no sigh, do not weep!
		The priests are on the ocean green,
		They march along the Deep.
		There’s wine from the royal Pope
		Upon the ocean green;
		And Spanish ale shall give you hope,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My own Rosaleen!
		Shall glad your heart, shall give you hope,
		Shall give you health, and help, and hope,
		My Dark Rosaleen.
		
		Over hills and through dales
		Have I roamed for your sake;
		All yesterday I sailed with sails
		On river and on lake.
		The Erne, at its highest flood,
		I dashed across unseen,
		For there was lightning in my blood,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My own Rosaleen!
		Oh! there was lightning in my blood,
		Red lightning lightened through my blood,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		
		All day long in unrest
		To and fro do I move,
		The very soul within my breast
		Is wasted for you love!
		The heart in my bosom faints
		To think of you, my Queen,
		My life of life, my saint of saints,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My own Rosaleen!
		To hear your sweet and sad complaints,
		My life, my love, my saint of saints,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		
		Woe and pain, pain and woe,
		Are my lot night and noon,
		To see your bright face clouded so,
		Like to the mournful moon.
		But yet will I rear your throne
		Again in golden sheen;
		‘Tis you shall reign, shall reign alone,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My own Rosaleen!
		‘Tis you shall have the golden throne,
		‘Tis you shall reign, and reign alone,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		
		Over dews, over sands
		Will I fly for your weal;
		Your holy delicate white hands
		Shall girdle me with steel.
		At home in your emerald bowers,
		From morning’s dawn till e’en,
		You’ll pray for me, my flower of flowers,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My fond Rosaleen!
		You’ll think of me through daylight’s hours,
		My virgin flower, my flower of flowers,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		
		I could scale the blue air,
		I could plough the high hills,
		Oh, I could kneel all night in prayer,
		To heal your many ills!
		And one beamy smile for you
		Would float like light between
		My toils and me, my own, my true,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My fond Rosaleen!
		Would give me life and soul anew,
		A second life, a soul anew,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		
		O! the Erne shall run red
		With redundance of blood,
		The earth shall rock beneath our tread,
		And flames wrap hill and wood,
		And gun-peal, a slogan cry,
		Wake many a glen serene,
		Ere you shall fade, ere you shall die,
		My Dark Rosaleen!
		My own Rosaleen!
		The Judgement Hour must first be nigh,
		Ere you can fade, ere you can die,
		My Dark Rosaleen!


	4. KATHALEEN NY-HOULAHAN

		LONG they pine in weary woe--the nobles of our land--
		Long they wander to and fro, proscribed, alas! and banned;
		Feastless, houseless, altarless, they bear the exie’s brand,
		But their hope is in the coming-to of Kathaleen Ny-Houlahan.
		
		Think not her a ghastly hag, too hideous to be seen;
		Call her not unseemly names, our matchless Kathaleen;
		Young she is, and fair she is, and would be crowned a qeeen,
		Were the king’s son at home here with Kathaleen Ny-Houlahan.
		
		Sweet and mild would look her face--Oh! none so sweet and mild--
		Could she crush the foes by whom her beauty is reviled;
		Woolen plaids would grace herself and robes of silk her child,
		If the king’s son were living here with Kathaleen Ny-Houlahan.
		
		Sore disgrace it is to see the Arbitress of thrones
		Vassal to a Saxoneen of cold and hapless bones!
		Bitter anguish wrings our souls--with heavy sighs and groans
		We wait the Young Deliverer of Kathaleen Ny-Houlahan.
		
		Let us pray to Him who holds life’s issues in His hands,
		Him who formed the mighty globe, with all his thousand lands;
		Girding them with sea and mountains, rivers deep, and strands,
		To cast a look of pity upon Kathaleen Ny-Houlahan.
		
		He, who over sands and waves led Israel along--
		He who fed, with heavenly bread, that chosen tribe and throng;
		He who stood by Moses when his foes were fierce and strong,
		May He show forth His might in saving Kathaleen Ny-Houlahan.


	5. SHAPES AND SIGNS

		I SEE black dragons mount the sky,
		I see earth yawn beneath my feet--
		I feel within the asp, the worm
		That will not sleep and cannot die,
		Fair though may show the winding-sheet!
		I hear all night as through a storm
		Hoarse voices calling, calling
		My name upon the wind--
		All omens monstrous and appalling
		Affright my guilty mind.
		
		I exult alone in one wild hour--
		That hour in which the red cup drowns
		The memories it anon renews
		In ghastlier guise, in fiercer power--
		Then Fancy brings me golden crowns,
		And visions of all brilliant hues
		Lap my lost soul in gladness,
		Until I awake again,
		And the dark lava-fires of madness
		Once more sweep through my brain.


	6. SIBERIA

		IN Siberia’s wastes
		The ice-wind’s breath
		Woundeth like the toothed steel;
		Lost Siberia doth reveal
		Only blight and death.
		
		Blight and death alone.
		No Summer shines.
		Night is interblent with Day.
		In Siberia’s wastes alway
		The blood blackens, the heart pines.
		
		In Siberia’s wastes
		No tears are shed,
		For they freeze within the brain.
		Nought is felt but dullest pain,
		Pain acute, yet dead;
		
		Pain as in a dream,
		When years go by
		Funeral-paced, yet fugitive,
		When man lives, and doth not live.
		Doth not live--nor die.
		
		In Siberia’s wastes
		Are sands and rocks
		Nothing blooms of green or soft,
		But the snow-peaks rise aloft
		And the gaunt ice-blocks.
		
		And the exile there
		Is one with those;
		They are part, and lie is part,
		For the sands are in his heart,
		And the killing snows.
		
		Therefore, in those wastes
		None curse the Czar.
		Each man’s tongue is cloven by
		The North Blast, that heweth nigh
		With sharp scymitar.
		
		And such doom each sees,
		Till, hunger-gnawn,
		And cold-slain, he at length sinks there,
		Yet scarce more a corpse than ere
		His last breath was drawn.


	7. THE NAMELESS ONE

		ROLL forth, my song, like the rushing river, 
		  That sweeps along to the mighty sea; 
		God will inspire me while I deliver 
		  My soul of thee! 
		
		Tell thou the world, when my bones lie whitening 
		  Amid the last homes of youth and eld, 
		That once there was one whose veins ran lightning 
		  No eye beheld. 
		
		Tell how his boyhood was one drear night-hour, 
		  How shone for him, through his griefs and gloom, 
		No star of all heaven sends to light our 
		  Path to the tomb. 
		
		Roll on, my song, and to after ages 
		  Tell how, disdaining all earth can give, 
		He would have taught men, from wisdom’s pages, 
		  The way to live. 
		
		And tell how trampled, derided, hated, 
		  And worn by weakness, disease, and wrong, 
		He fled for shelter to God, who mated 
		  His soul with song. 
		
		--With song which alway, sublime or vapid, 
		  Flow’d like a rill in the morning beam, 
		Perchance not deep, but intense and rapid-- 
		  A mountain stream. 
		
		Tell how this Nameless, condemn’d for years long 
		  To herd with demons from hell beneath, 
		Saw things that made him, with groans and tears, long 
		  For even death. 
		
		Go on to tell how, with genius wasted, 
		  Betray’d in friendship, befool’d in love, 
		With spirit shipwreck’d, and young hopes blasted, 
		  He still, still strove; 
		
		Till, spent with toil, dreeing death for others 
		  (And some whose hands should have wrought for him, 
		If children live not for sires and mothers), 
		  His mind grew dim; 
		
		And he fell far through that pit abysmal, 
		  The gulf and grave of Maginn and Burns, 
		And pawn’d his soul for the devil’s dismal 
		  Stock of returns. 
		
		But yet redeem’d it in days of darkness, 
		  And shapes and signs of the final wrath, 
		When death, in hideous and ghastly starkness, 
		  Stood on his path. 
		
		And tell how now, amid wreck and sorrow, 
		  And want, and sickness, and houseless nights, 
		He bides in calmness the silent morrow, 
		  That no ray lights. 
		
		And lives he still, then? Yes! Old and hoary 
		  At thirty-nine, from despair and woe, 
		He lives, enduring what future story 
		  Will never know. 
		
		Him grant a grave to, ye pitying noble, 
		  Deep in your bosoms: there let him dwell! 
		He, too, had tears for all souls in trouble, 
		  Here and in hell.


*** Walter de la Mare (1873 - 1965)

	1. ALL THAT’S PAST

		Very old are the woods;
		And the buds that break
		Out of the brier’s boughs,
		When March winds wake,
		So old with their beauty are--
		Oh, no man knows
		Through what wild centuries
		Roves back the rose.
		Very old are the brooks;
		And the rills that rise
		Where snow sleeps cold beneath
		The azure skies
		Sing such a history
		Of come and gone,
		Their every drop is as wise
		As Solomon.
		
		Very old are we men;
		Our dreams are tales
		Told in dim Eden
		By Eve’s nightingales;
		We wake and whisper awhile,
		But, the day gone by,
		Silence and sleep like fields
		Of amaranth lie.


	2. ALONE

		As I mused by the hearthside,
		Puss said to me;
		“there burns the fire, man,
		and here sit we.
		
		Four walls around us
		against the cold air;
		and the latch drawn close
		to the draughty stair.
		
		A roof o’er our heads
		star-proof, moon immune,
		and a wind in the chimney
		to wail us a tune.”
		
		“What felicity!” miaowed he,
		“where none may intrude;
		just man and beast- met
		in this solitude!”
		
		“Dear God, what security,
		comfort and bliss!
		and to think, too what ages
		have brought us to this!”
		
		“You in your sheep’s’ wool coat,
		buttons of bone,
		and me in my fur-about
		on the warm hearthstone”


	3. ARABIA

		Far are the shades of Arabia,
		Where the Princes ride at noon,
		‘Mid the verdurous vales and thickets,
		Under the ghost of the moon;
		And so dark is that vaulted purple
		Flowers in the forest rise
		And toss into blossom ‘gainst the phantom stars
		Pale in the noonday skies.
		
		Sweet is the music of Arabia
		In my heart, when out of dreams
		I still in the thin clear mirk of dawn
		Descry her gliding streams;
		Hear her strange lutes on the green banks
		Ring loud with the grief and delight
		Of the dim-silked, dark-haired Musicians
		In the brooding silence of night.
		
		They haunt me--her lutes and her forests;
		No beauty on earth I see
		But shadowed with that dream recalls
		Her loveliness to me:
		Still eyes look coldly upon me,
		Cold voices whisper and say--
		‘He is crazed with the spell of far Arabia,
		They have stolen his wits away.’


	4. GOOD-BYE

		The last of last words spoken is, Good-bye--
		The last dismantled flower in the weed-grown hedge,
		The last thin rumour of a feeble bell far ringing,
		The last blind rat to spurn the mildewed rye.
		
		A hardening darkness glasses the haunted eye,
		Shines into nothing the watcher’s burnt-out candle,
		Wreathes into scentless nothing the wasting incense,
		Faints in the outer silence the hunting-cry.
		
		Love of its muted music breathes no sigh,
		Thought in her ivory tower gropes in her spinning,
		Toss on in vain the whispering trees of Eden,
		Last of all last words spoken is, Good-bye.


	5. MISTLETOE

		Sitting under the mistletoe
		(Pale-green, fairy mistletoe),
		One last candle burning low,
		All the sleepy dancers gone,
		Just one candle burning on,
		Shadows lurking everywhere:
		Some one came, and kissed me there.
		
		Tired I was; my head would go
		Nodding under the mistletoe
		(Pale-green, fairy mistletoe),
		No footsteps came, no voice, but only,
		Just as I sat there, sleepy, lonely,
		Stooped in the still and shadowy air
		Lips unseen—and kissed me there.


	6. MUSIC

		When music sounds, gone is the earth I know,
		And all her lovely things even lovelier grow;
		Her flowers in vision flame, her forest trees
		Lift burdened branches, stilled with ecstasies.
		
		When music sounds, out of the water rise
		Naiads whose beauty dims my waking eyes,
		Rapt in strange dreams burns each enchanted face,
		With solemn echoing stirs their dwelling-place.
		
		When music sounds, all that I was I am
		Ere to this haunt of brooding dust I came;
		And from Time’s woods break into distant song
		The swift-winged hours, as I hasten along.


	7. NOVEMBER

		There is wind where the rose was,
		Cold rain where sweet grass was,
		And clouds like sheep
		Stream o’er the steep
		Grey skies where the lark was.
		
		Nought warm where your hand was,
		Nought gold where your hair was,
		But phantom, forlorn,
		Beneath the thorn,
		Your ghost where your face was.
		
		Cold wind where your voice was,
		Tears, tears where my heart was,
		And ever with me,
		Child, ever with me,
		Silence where hope was.


	8. THE KEYS OF MORNING

		While at her bedroom window once,
		Learning her task for school,
		Little Louisa lonely sat
		In the morning clear and cool,
		She slanted her small bead-brown eyes
		Across the empty street,
		And saw Death softly watching her
		In the sunshine pale and sweet.
		
		His was a long lean sallow face;
		He sat with half-shut eyes,
		Like a old sailor in a ship
		Becalmed ‘neath tropic skies.
		Beside him in the dust he had set
		His staff and shady hat;
		These, peeping small, Louisa saw
		Quite clearly where she sat--
		The thinness of his coal-black locks,
		His hands so long and lean
		They scarcely seemed to grasp at all
		The keys that hung between:
		Both were of gold, but one was small,
		And with this last did he
		Wag in the air, as if to say,
		“Come hither, child, to me!”
		
		Louisa laid her lesson book
		On the cold window-sill;
		And in the sleepy sunshine house
		Went softly down, until
		She stood in the half-opened door,
		And peeped. But strange to say
		Where Death just now had sunning sat
		Only a shadow lay:
		Just the tall chimney’s round-topped cowl,
		And the small sun behind,
		Had with its shadow in the dust
		Called sleepy Death to mind.
		But most she thought how strange it was
		Two keys that he should bear,
		And that, when beckoning, he should wag
		The littlest in the air.


	9. THE LISTENERS

		“Is there anybody there?” said the Traveller,
		Knocking on the moonlit door;
		And his horse in the silence champed the grass
		Of the forest’s ferny floor;
		And a bird flew up out of the turret,
		Above the Traveller’s head:
		And he smote upon the door again a second time;
		“Is there anybody there?” he said.
		But no one descended to the Traveller;
		No head from the leaf-fringed sill
		Leaned over and looked into his grey eyes,
		Where he stood perplexed and still.
		But only a host of phantom listeners
		That dwelt in the lone house then
		Stood listening in the quiet of the moonlight
		To that voice from the world of men:
		Stood thronging the faint moonbeams on the dark stair,
		That goes down to the empty hall,
		Hearkening in an air stirred and shaken
		By the lonely Traveller’s call.
		And he felt in his heart their strangeness,
		Their stillness answering his cry,
		While his horse moved, cropping the dark turf,
		‘Neath the starred and leafy sky;
		For he suddenly smote on the door, even
		Louder, and lifted his head:--
		“Tell them I came, and no one answered,
		That I kept my word,” he said.
		Never the least stir made the listeners,
		Though every word he spake
		Fell echoing through the shadowiness of the still house
		From the one man left awake:
		Ay, they heard his foot upon the stirrup,
		And the sound of iron on stone,
		And how the silence surged softly backward,
		When the plunging hoofs were gone.


	10. WHY?

		Ever, ever
		Stir and shiver
		The reeds and rushes
		By the river:
		Ever, ever,
		As if in dream,
		The lone moon’s silver
		Sleeks the stream.
		What old sorrow,
		What lost love,
		Moon, reeds, rushes,
		Dream you of?


*** Paul Mariani (1940 - )

	1. GHOST

		After so much time you think 
		you’d have it netted 
		in the mesh of language. But again 
		it reconfigures, slick as Proteus.
		
		You’re in the kitchen talking 
		with your ex-Navy brother, his two kids
		snaking over his tattooed arms, as he goes on 
		& on about being out of work again.
		
		For an hour now you’ve listened, 
		his face growing dimmer in the lamplight 
		as you keep glancing at your watch 
		until it’s there again: the ghost rising
		
		as it did that first time when you, 
		the oldest, left home to marry. 
		You’re in the boat again, alone, and staring 
		at the six of them, your sisters
		
		& your brothers, their faces bobbing 
		in the water, as their fingers grapple 
		for the gunwales. The ship is going down, 
		your mother with it. One oar’s locked
		
		and feathered, and one oar’s lost, 
		there’s a slop of gurry pooling 
		in the bottom, and your tiny boat 
		keeps drifting further from them.
		
		Between each bitter wave you can count 
		their upturned faces--white roses 
		scattered on a mash of sea, eyes fixed 
		to see what you will do. And you?
		
		You their old protector, you their guardian 
		and go-between? _Each man for himself_, 
		you remember thinking, their faces 
		growing dimmer with each oarstroke.


	2. QUID PRO QUO

		Just after my wife’s miscarriage (her second 
		in four months), I was sitting in an empty 
		classroom exchanging notes with my friend, 
		a budding Joyce scholar with steelrimmed 
		glasses, when, lapsed Irish Catholic that he was, 
		he surprised me by asking what I thought now 
		of God’s ways toward man. It was spring,
		
		such spring as came to the flintbacked Chenango 
		Valley thirty years ago, the full force of Siberia 
		behind each blast of wind. Once more my poor wife 
		was in the local four-room hospital, recovering. 
		The sun was going down, the room’s pinewood panels 
		all but swallowing the gelid light, when, suddenly, 
		I surprised not only myself but my colleague
		
		by raising my middle finger up to heaven, _quid 
		pro quo_, the hardly grand defiant gesture a variant 
		on Vanni Fucci’s figs, shocking not only my friend 
		but in truth the gesture’s perpetrator too. I was 24, 
		and, in spite of having pored over the _Confessions_ 
		& that Catholic Tractate called the _Summa_, was sure 
		I’d seen enough of God’s erstwhile ways toward man.
		
		That summer, under a pulsing midnight sky 
		shimmering with Van Gogh stars, in a creaking, 
		cedarscented cabin off Lake George, having lied 
		to the gentrified owner of the boys’ camp 
		that indeed I knew wilderness & lakes and could, 
		if need be, lead a whole fleet of canoes down 
		the turbulent whitewater passages of the Fulton Chain
		
		(I who had last been in a rowboat with my parents 
		at the age of six), my wife and I made love, trying 
		not to disturb whosever headboard & waterglass 
		lie just beyond the paperthin partition at our feet. 
		In the great black Adirondack stillness, as we lay 
		there on our sagging mattress, my wife & I gazed out 
		through the broken roof into a sky that seemed
		
		somehow to look back down on us, and in that place, 
		that holy place, she must have conceived again, 
		for nine months later in a New York hospital she 
		brought forth a son, a little buddha-bellied 
		rumplestiltskin runt of a man who burned 
		to face the sun, the fact of his being there 
		both terrifying & lifting me at once, this son,
		
		this gift, whom I still look upon with joy & awe. Worst, 
		best, just last year, this same son, grown
		to manhood now, knelt before a marble altar to vow 
		everything he had to the same God I had had my own 
		erstwhile dealings with. How does one bargain
		with a God like this, who, _quid pro quo_, ups 
		the ante each time He answers one sign with another?


	3. REPUBLIC

		Midnight. For the past three hours 
		I’ve raked over Plato’s _Republic_ 
		with my students, all of them John 
		Jay cops, and now some of us 
		have come to Rooney’s to unwind. 
		Boilermakers. Double shots and triples. 
		Fitzgerald’s still in his undercover 
		clothes and giveaway white socks, and two 
		lieutenants--Seluzzi in the sharkskin suit 
		& D’Ambruzzo in the leather--have just 
		invited me to catch their fancy (and illegal) 
		digs somewhere up in Harlem, when 
		this cop begins to tell his story:
		
		how he and his partner trailed 
		this pusher for six weeks before 
		they trapped him in a burnt-out 
		tenement somewhere down in SoHo, 
		one coming at him up the stairwell, 
		the other up the fire escape 
		and through a busted window. But by 
		the time they’ve grabbed him 
		he’s standing over an open window 
		and he’s clean. The partner races down 
		into the courtyard and begins going 
		through the garbage until he finds 
		what it is he’s after: a white bag 
		hanging from a junk mimosa like 
		the Christmas gift it is, and which now 
		he plants back on the suspect.
		Cross-examined by a lawyer who does his best 
		to rattle them, he and his partner 
		stick by their story, and the charges stick.
		Fitzgerald shrugs. Business as usual. 
		But the cop goes on. Better to let 
		the guy go free than under oath 
		to have to lie like that.
		And suddenly you can hear the heavy 
		suck of air before Seluzzi, who 
		half an hour before was boasting 
		about being on the take, staggers 
		to his feet, outraged at what he’s heard, 
		and insists on taking the bastard 
		downtown so they can book him.
		
		Which naturally brings to an end 
		the discussion we’ve been having, 
		and soon each of us is heading 
		for an exit, embarrassed by the awkward 
		light the cop has thrown on things. 
		Which makes it clearer now to me why 
		the State would offer someone like Socrates 
		a shot of hemlock. And even clearer 
		why Socrates would want to drink it.


	4. THE GODS WHO COME AMONG US IN THE GUISE OF STRANGERS

		Late nights, with summer moths clinging 
		to the screens & the shadows of the Old Great 
		flickering across the tv screen, suddenly, 
		there would be Charlie’s inquisitorial head 
		peering in the window, the shock of white hair, 
		followed by the heart-stopping shock 
		of greeting. Just passing through, he’d say, 
		and--seeing as the light was on-- 
		thought we might have ourselves a talk.
		
		Did I ever have time enough for Charlie? 
		Usually not. The story of my life, 
		of the one, as Chaucer says of someone, 
		who seems always busier than he is. 
		Then, abruptly, & discourteously, 
		death put a stop to Charlie’s visits. 
		Summer moths collect still at the windows. 
		Then leaves & winter ice. Then summer moths 
		again. Each year, old ghost, I seem 
		to miss you more and more, your youth spent 
		with Auden & the Big Ones, words-- 
		theirs, yours--helping you survive 
		a brutal youth. Too late I see now 
		how you honored me like those hidden 
		gods of old who walk among us like 
		the dispossessed, and who, if you are 
		among the lucky ones, tap at your window 
		when you least expect to ask you for a cup 
		of water and a little of your time.


*** Christopher Marlowe (1564 - 1593)

	1. HERO AND LEANDER

		It lies not in our power to love or hate,
		For will in us is over-rul’d by fate.
		hen two are stript long ere the course begin,
		We wish that one should lose, the other win;
		And one especially do we affect
		Of two gold ingots, like in each respect:
		The reason no man knows; let it suffice,
		What we behold is censur’d by our eyes.
		Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
		Who ever lov’d, that lov’d not at first sight.


	2. THE FACE THAT LAUNCH’D A THOUSAND SHIPS

		Was this the face that launch’d a thousand ships,
		And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?
		Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
		Her lips suck forth my soul: see where it flies!
		Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.
		Here will I dwell, for heaven is in these lips,
		And all is dross that is not Helena.
		I will be Paris, and for love of thee,
		Instead of Troy, shall Wittenberg be sack’d;
		And I will combat with weak Menelaus,
		And wear thy colours on my plumed crest;
		Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel,
		And then return to Helen for a kiss.
		O, thou art fairer than the evening air
		Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;
		Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
		When he appear’d to hapless Semele;
		More lovely than the monarch of the sky
		In wanton Arethusa’s azur’d arms;
		And none but thou shalt be my paramour!


	3. THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE

		Come live with me and be my love,
		And we will all the pleasures prove,
		That valleys, groves, hills, and fields,
		Woods, or steepy mountain yields.
		And we will sit upon the rocks,
		Seeing the shepherds feed their flocks,
		By shallow rivers, to whose falls
		Melodious birds sing madrigals.
		And I will make thee beds of roses,
		And a thousand fragrant posies,
		A cap of flowers and a kirtle
		Embroider’d all with leaves of myrtle:
		A gown made of the finest wool,
		Which from our pretty lambs we pull;
		Fair lined slippers for the cold,
		With buckles of the purest gold:
		A belt of straw and ivy buds,
		With coral clasps and amber studs;
		And if these pleasures may thee move,
		Come live with me and be my love.
		The shepherd swains shall dance and sing
		For thy delight each May morning;
		If these delights thy mind may move,
		Then live with me and be my love.


*** José Martí (1853 - 1895)

	1. THE GIRL OF GUATEMALA

		I want, in the shadow of a wing,
		tell this tale in bloom:
		the girl from Guatemala,
		the one who died of love.
		
		The bouquets were made of lilies;
		and the borders of reseda
		and jasmine; we buried her
		in a silk box;
		
		She gave the forgetful
		a scent pad;
		he came back, he came back married;
		she died of love.
		
		They were carrying it on litters
		bishops and ambassadors;
		the people went behind in batches,
		all loaded with flowers;
		
		She, to see him again,
		He went out to see him at the viewpoint;
		he returned to his wife,
		she died of love.
		
		Like hot bronze,
		to the goodbye kiss,
		it was his forehead--the forehead
		that I have loved the most in my life!
		
		He entered the river late at night,
		the doctor took her out dead;
		they say he died of cold,
		I know that he died of love.
		
		There in the frozen vault
		they put it on two benches:
		I kissed his sharp hand
		I kissed his white shoes.
		
		Quiet, at dusk,
		The undertaker called me;
		I have never seen again
		to which he died of love.


	2. THE TWO PRINCES

		The palace is in mourning,
		The king cries on his throne;
		The queen is also crying,
		She’s crying all alone.
		In handkerchiefs of pure lace
		They cry in disbelief,
		The nobles of the palace,
		Beside themselves with grief.
		The royal horses, once so bright,
		Are now in black-array:
		The horses did not eat last night--
		Nor wanted food today.
		The courtyard’s stately laurel tree
		Is stripped of all its leaves:
		The people of the country
		All carry laurel wreaths.
		The king’s son has died today:
		The king’s heir has passed away.
		
		Upon the hill, the shepherd
		Has built his simple home:
		The shepherdess to ask is heard:
		“Why does the sun still come?”
		With lowered heads, the sheep
		Approach the shepherd’s door:
		A box he’s lining, long and deep,
		Upon the cottage floor.
		A sad dog keeps watch there;
		From the hut is heard a moan:
		“Little bird, take me where
		My precious one has flown.”
		The weeping shepherd takes the spade,
		And sinks it in the bower,
		And in the hole that he has made
		The shepherd lays his flower.
		The shepherd’s son has died today,
		The shepherd’s heir has passed away.


*** Andrew Marvell (1621 - 1678)

	1. A DIALOGUE BETWEEN SOUL AND BODY

		_Soul:_
		
		O Who shall, from this Dungeon, raise
		A Soul inslav’d so many wayes?
		With bolts of Bones, that fetter’d stands
		In Feet ; and manacled in Hands.
		Here blinded with an Eye ; and there
		Deaf with the drumming of an Ear.
		A Soul hung up, as ‘twere, in Chains
		Of Nerves, and Arteries, and Veins.
		Tortur’d, besides each other part,
		
		In a vain Head, and double Heart.
		
		
		_Body:_
		
		O who shall me deliver whole,
		From bonds of this Tyrannic Soul?
		Which, stretcht upright, impales me so,
		That mine own Precipice I go;
		And warms and moves this needless Frame:
		(A Fever could but do the same.)
		And, wanting where its spight to try,
		Has made me live to let me dye.
		A Body that could never rest,
		Since this ill Spirit it possest.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		What Magic could me thus confine
		Within anothers Grief to pine?
		Where whatsoever it complain,
		I feel, that cannot feel, the pain.
		And all my Care its self employes,
		That to preserve, which me destroys:
		Constrain’d not only to indure
		Diseases, but, whats worse, the Cure:
		And ready oft the Port to gain,
		Am Shipwrackt into Health again.
		
		
		_Body:_
		
		But Physick yet could never reach
		The Maladies Thou me dost teach;
		Whom first the Cramp of Hope does Tear:
		And then the Palsie Shakes of Fear.
		The Pestilence of Love does heat :
		Or Hatred’s hidden Ulcer eat.
		Joy’s chearful Madness does perplex:
		Or Sorrow’s other Madness vex.
		Which Knowledge forces me to know;
		And Memory will not foregoe.
		What but a Soul could have the wit
		To build me up for Sin so fit?
		So Architects do square and hew,
		Green Trees that in the Forest grew.


	2. A DIALOGUE BETWEEN SOUL AND PLEASURE

		_Soul:_
		
		Courage my Soul, now learn to wield
		The weight of thine immortal Shield.
		Close on thy Head thy Helmet bright.
		Ballance thy Sword against the Fight.
		See where an Army, strong as fair,
		With silken Banners spreads the air.
		Now, if thou bee’st that thing Divine,
		In this day’s Combat let it shine:
		And shew that Nature wants an Art
		To conquer one resolved Heart.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		Welcome the Creations Guest,
		Lord of Earth, and Heavens Heir.
		Lay aside that Warlike Crest,
		And of Nature’s banquet share:
		Where the Souls of fruits and flow’rs
		Stand prepar’d to heighten yours.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		I sup above, and cannot stay
		To bait so long upon the way.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		On these downy Pillows lye,
		Whose soft Plumes will thither fly:
		On these Roses strow’d so plain
		Lest one Leaf thy Side should strain.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		My gentler Rest is on a Thought,
		Conscious of doing what I ought.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		If thou bee’st with Perfumes pleas’d,
		Such as oft the Gods appeas’d,
		Thou in fragrant Clouds shalt show
		Like another God below.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		A Soul that knowes not to presume
		Is Heaven’s and its own perfume.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		Every thing does seem to vie
		Which should first attract thine Eye:
		But since none deserves that grace,
		In this Crystal view thy face.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		When the Creator’s skill is priz’d,
		The rest is all but Earth disguis’d.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		Heark how Musick then prepares
		For thy Stay these charming Aires ;
		Which the posting Winds recall,
		And suspend the Rivers Fall.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		Had I but any time to lose,
		On this I would it all dispose.
		Cease Tempter. None can chain a mind
		Whom this sweet Chordage cannot bind.
		
		
		_Chorus:_
		
		Earth cannot shew so brave a Sight
		As when a single Soul does fence
		The Batteries of alluring Sense,
		And Heaven views it with delight.
		Then persevere: for still new Charges sound:
		And if thou overcom’st thou shalt be crown’d.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		All this fair, and cost, and sweet,
		Which scatteringly doth shine,
		Shall within one Beauty meet,
		And she be only thine.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		If things of Sight such Heavens be,
		What Heavens are those we cannot see?
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		Where so e’re thy Foot shall go
		The minted Gold shall lie;
		Till thou purchase all below,
		And want new Worlds to buy.
		
		
		_Soul_:
		
		Wer’t not a price who ‘ld value Gold?
		And that’s worth nought that can be sold.
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		Wilt thou all the Glory have
		That War or Peace commend?
		Half the World shall be thy Slave
		The other half thy Friend.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		What Friends, if to my self untrue?
		What Slaves, unless I captive you?
		
		
		_Pleasure:_
		
		Thou shalt know each hidden Cause;
		And see the future Time:
		Try what depth the Centre draws;
		And then to Heaven climb.
		
		
		_Soul:_
		
		None thither mounts by the degree
		Of Knowledge, but Humility.
		
		
		_Chorus_
		
		Triumph, triumph, victorious Soul;
		The World has not one Pleasure more:
		The rest does lie beyond the pole,
		And is thine everlasting Store.


	3. AN HORATIAN ODE

		The forward Youth that would appear
		Must now forsake his Muses dear,
		Nor in the Shadows sing
		His Numbers languishing.
		‘Tis time to leave the Books in dust,
		And oyl th’unused Armours rust:
		Removing from the Wall
		The Corslet of the Hall.
		So restless Cromwell could not cease
		In the inglorious Arts of Peace,
		But through adventrous War
		Urged his active Star.
		And, like the three-fork’d Lightning, first
		Breaking the Clouds where it was nurst,
		Did through his own Side
		His fiery way divide.
		For ‘tis all one to Courage high
		The Emulous or Enemy;
		And with such to inclose
		Is more then to oppose.
		Then burning through the Air he went,
		And Pallaces and Temples rent:
		And Caesars head at last
		Did through his Laurels blast.
		‘Tis Madness to resist or blame
		The force of angry Heavens flame:
		And, if we would speak true,
		Much to the Man is due.
		Who, from his private Gardens, where
		He liv’d reserved and austere,
		As if his hightest plot
		To plant the Bergamot,
		Could by industrious Valour climbe
		To ruine the great Work of Time,
		And cast the Kingdome old
		Into another Mold.
		Though Justice against Fate complain,
		And plead the antient Rights in vain:
		But those do hold or break
		As Men are strong or weak.
		Nature that hateth emptiness,
		Allows of penetration less:
		And therefore must make room.
		Where greater Spirits come.
		What Field of all the Civil Wars,
		Where his were not the deepest Scars?
		And Hampton shows what part
		He had of wiser Art.
		Where, twining subtile fears with hope,
		He wove a Net of such a scope,
		That Charles himself might chase
		To Caresbrooks narrow case.
		That thence the Royal Actor born
		The Tragick Scaffold might adorn
		While round the armed Bands
		Did clap their bloody hands.
		He nothing common did or mean
		Upon that memorable Scene:
		But with his keener Eye
		The Axes edge did try:
		Nor call’d the Gods with vulgar spight
		To vindicate his helpless Right,
		But bow’d his comely Head,
		Down as upon a Bed.
		This was that memorable Hour
		Which first assur’d the forced Pow’r.
		So when they did design
		The Capitols first Line,
		A bleeding Head where they begun,
		Did fright the Architects to run;
		And yet in that the State
		Foresaw it’s happy Fate.
		And now the Irish are asham’d
		To see themselves in one Year tam’d:
		So much one Man can do,
		That does both act and know.
		They can affirm his Praises best,
		And Have, though overcome, confest
		How good he is, how just,
		And fit for highest Trust:
		Nor yet grown stiffer with Command,
		But still in the Republick’s hand:
		How fit he is to sway
		That can so well obey.
		He to the Common Feet presents
		A Kingdome, for his first years rents:
		And, what he may, forbears
		His Fame to make it theirs:
		And has his Sword and Spoyls ungirt,
		To lay them at the Publick’s skirt.
		So when the Falcon high
		Falls heavy from the Sky,
		She, having kill’d no more does search,
		But on the next green Bow to pearch;
		Where, when he first does lure,
		The Falckner has her sure.
		What may not then our Isle presume
		While Victory his Crest does plume!
		What may not others fear
		If thus he crown each Year!
		A Caesar he ere long to Gaul,
		To Italy an Hannibal,
		And to all States not free
		Shall Clymacterick be.
		The Pict no shelter now shall find
		Within his party-colour’d Mind;
		But from this Valour sad
		Shrink underneath the Plad:
		Happy if in the tufted brake
		The English Hunter him mistake;
		Nor lay his Hounds in near
		The Caledonian Deer.
		But thou the Wars and Fortunes Son
		March indefatigably on;
		And for the last effect
		Still keep thy Sword erect:
		Besides the Force it has to fright
		The Spirits of the shady Night,
		The same Arts that did gain
		A Pow’r must it maintain.


	4. BERMUDAS

		Where the remote Bermudas ride
		In th’ Oceans bosome unespy’d,
		From a small Boat, that row’d along,
		The listning Winds receiv’d this Song.
		What should we do but sing his Praise
		That led us through the watry Maze,
		Unto an Isle so long unknown,
		And yet far kinder than our own?
		Where he the huge Sea-Monsters wracks,
		That lift the Deep upon their Backs.
		He lands us on a grassy stage;
		Safe from the Storms, and Prelat’s rage.
		He gave us this eternal Spring,
		Which here enamells every thing;
		And sends the Fowl’s to us in care,
		On daily Visits through the Air,
		He hangs in shades the Orange bright,
		Like golden Lamps in a green Night.
		And does in the Pomgranates close,
		Jewels more rich than Ormus show’s.
		He makes the Figs our mouths to meet;
		And throws the Melons at our feet.
		But Apples plants of such a price,
		No Tree could ever bear them twice.
		With Cedars, chosen by his hand,
		From Lebanon, he stores the Land.
		And makes the hollow Seas, that roar,
		Proclaime the Ambergris on shoar.
		He cast (of which we rather boast)
		The Gospels Pearl upon our coast.
		And in these Rocks for us did frame
		A Temple, where to sound his Name.
		Oh let our Voice his Praise exalt,
		Till it arrive at Heavens Vault:
		Which thence (perhaps) rebounding, may
		Eccho beyond the Mexique Bay.
		Thus sung they, in the English boat,
		An holy and a chearful Note,
		And all the way, to guide their Chime,
		With falling Oars they kept the time.


	5. EYES AND TEARS

		How wisely Nature did decree,
		With the same Eyes to weep and see!
		That, having view’d the object vain,
		They might be ready to complain.
		
		And since the Self-deluding Sight,
		In a false Angle takes each hight;
		These Tears which better measure all,
		Like wat’ry Lines and Plummets fall.
		
		Two Tears, which Sorrow long did weigh
		Within the Scales of either Eye,
		And then paid out in equal Poise,
		Are the true price of all my Joyes.
		
		What in the World most fair appears,
		Yea even Laughter, turns to Tears:
		And all the Jewels which we prize,
		Melt in these Pendants of the Eyes.
		
		I have through every Garden been,
		Amongst the Red, the White, the Green;
		And yet, from all the flow’rs I saw,
		No Hony, but these Tears could draw.
		
		So the all-seeing Sun each day
		Distills the World with Chymick Ray;
		But finds the Essence only Showers,
		Which straight in pity back he powers.
		
		Yet happy they whom Grief doth bless,
		That weep the more, and see the less:
		And, to preserve their Sight more true,
		Bath still their Eyes in their own Dew.
		
		So Magdalen, in Tears more wise
		Dissolv’d those captivating Eyes,
		Whose liquid Chains could flowing meet
		To fetter her Redeemers feet.
		
		Not full sailes hasting loaden home,
		Nor the chast Ladies pregnant Womb,
		Nor Cynthia Teeming show’s so fair,
		As two Eyes swoln with weeping are.
		
		The sparkling Glance that shoots Desire,
		Drench’d in these Waves, does lose it fire.
		Yea oft the Thund’rer pitty takes
		And here the hissing Lightning slakes.
		
		The Incense was to Heaven dear,
		Not as a Perfume, but a Tear.
		And Stars shew lovely in the Night,
		But as they seem the Tears of Light.
		
		Ope then mine Eyes your double Sluice,
		And practise so your noblest Use.
		For others too can see, or sleep;
		But only humane Eyes can weep.
		
		Now like two Clouds dissolving, drop,
		And at each Tear in distance stop:
		Now like two Fountains trickle down:
		Now like two floods o’return and drown.
		
		Thus let your Streams o’reflow your Springs,
		Till Eyes and Tears be the same things:
		And each the other’s difference bears;
		These weeping Eyes, those seeing Tears.


	6. THE CORONET

		When for the Thorns with which I long, too long,
		With many a piercing wound,
		My Saviours head have crown’d,
		I seek with Garlands to redress that Wrong:
		Through every Garden, every Mead,
		I gather flow’rs (my fruits are only flow’rs)
		Dismantling all the fragrant Towers
		That once adorn’d my Shepherdesses head.
		And now when I have summ’d up all my store,
		Thinking (so I my self deceive)
		So rich a Chaplet thence to weave
		As never yet the king of Glory wore:
		Alas I find the Serpent old
		That, twining in his speckled breast,
		About the flow’rs disguis’d does fold,
		With wreaths of Fame and Interest.
		Ah, foolish Man, that would’st debase with them,
		And mortal Glory, Heavens Diadem!
		But thou who only could’st the Serpent tame,
		Either his slipp’ry knots at once untie,
		And disintangle all his winding Snare:
		Or shatter too with him my curious frame:
		And let these wither, so that he may die,
		Though set with Skill and chosen out with Care.
		That they, while Thou on both their Spoils dost tread,
		May crown thy Feet, that could not crown thy Head.


	7. THE DEFINITION OF LOVE

		My Love is of a birth as rare
		As ‘tis for object strange and high:
		It was begotten by despair
		Upon Impossibility.
		
		Magnanimous Despair alone.
		Could show me so divine a thing,
		Where feeble Hope could ne’r have flown
		But vainly flapt its Tinsel Wing.
		
		And yet I quickly might arrive
		Where my extended Soul is fixt,
		But Fate does Iron wedges drive,
		And alwaies crouds it self betwixt.
		
		For Fate with jealous Eye does see.
		Two perfect Loves; nor lets them close:
		Their union would her ruine be,
		And her Tyrannick pow’r depose.
		
		And therefore her Decrees of Steel
		Us as the distant Poles have plac’d,
		(Though Loves whole World on us doth wheel)
		Not by themselves to be embrac’d.
		
		Unless the giddy Heaven fall,
		And Earth some new Convulsion tear;
		And, us to joyn, the World should all
		Be cramp’d into a Planisphere.
		
		As Lines so Loves Oblique may well
		Themselves in every Angle greet:
		But ours so truly Paralel,
		Though infinite can never meet.
		
		Therefore the Love which us doth bind,
		But Fate so enviously debarrs,
		Is the Conjunction of the Mind,
		And Opposition of the Stars.


	8. THE GARDEN

		How vainly men themselves amaze
		To win the Palm, the Oke, or Bayes;
		And their uncessant Labours see
		Crown’d from some single Herb or Tree,
		Whose short and narrow verged Shade
		Does prudently their Toyles upbraid;
		While all Flow’rs and all Trees do close
		To weave the Garlands of repose.
		Fair quiet, have I found thee here,
		And Innocence thy Sister dear!
		Mistaken long, I sought you then
		In busie Companies of Men.
		Your sacred Plants, if here below,
		Only among the Plants will grow.
		Society is all but rude,
		To this delicious Solitude.
		No white nor red was ever seen
		So am’rous as this lovely green.
		Fond Lovers, cruel as their Flame,
		Cut in these Trees their Mistress name.
		Little, Alas, they know, or heed,
		How far these Beauties Hers exceed!
		Fair Trees! where s’eer your barkes I wound,
		No Name shall but your own be found.
		When we have run our Passions heat,
		Love hither makes his best retreat.
		The Gods, that mortal Beauty chase,
		Still in a Tree did end their race.
		Apollo hunted Daphne so,
		Only that She might Laurel grow.
		And Pan did after Syrinx speed,
		Not as a Nymph, but for a Reed.
		What wond’rous Life in this I lead!
		Ripe Apples drop about my head;
		The Luscious Clusters of the Vine
		Upon my Mouth do crush their Wine;
		The Nectaren, and curious Peach,
		Into my hands themselves do reach;
		Stumbling on Melons, as I pass,
		Insnar’d with Flow’rs, I fall on Grass.
		Mean while the Mind, from pleasure less,
		Withdraws into its happiness:
		The Mind, that Ocean where each kind
		Does streight its own resemblance find;
		Yet it creates, transcending these,
		Far other Worlds, and other Seas;
		Annihilating all that’s made
		To a green Thought in a green Shade.
		Here at the Fountains sliding foot,
		Or at some Fruit-trees mossy root,
		Casting the Bodies Vest aside,
		My Soul into the boughs does glide:
		There like a Bird it sits, and sings,
		Then whets, and combs its silver Wings;
		And, till prepar’d for longer flight,
		Waves in its Plumes the various Light.
		Such was that happy Garden-state,
		While Man there walk’d without a Mate:
		After a Place so pure, and sweet,
		What other Help could yet be meet!
		But ‘twas beyond a Mortal’s share
		To wander solitary there:
		Two Paradises ‘twere in one
		To live in Paradise alone.
		How well the skilful Gardner drew
		Of flow’rs and herbes this Dial new;
		Where from above the milder Sun
		Does through a fragrant Zodiack run;
		And, as it works, th’ industrious Bee
		Computes its time as well as we.
		How could such sweet and wholsome Hours
		Be reckon’d but with herbs and flow’rs!


	9. TO HIS COY MISTRESS

		Had we but World enough, and Time,
		This coyness Lady were no crime.
		We would sit down, and think which way
		To walk, and pass our long Loves Day.
		Thou by the Indian Ganges side.
		Should’st Rubies find: I by the Tide
		Of Humber would complain. I would
		Love you ten years before the Flood:
		And you should if you please refuse
		Till the Conversion of the Jews.
		My vegetable Love should grow
		Vaster then Empires, and more slow.
		An hundred years should go to praise
		Thine Eyes, and on thy Forehead Gaze.
		Two hundred to adore each Breast.
		But thirty thousand to the rest.
		An Age at least to every part,
		And the last Age should show your Heart.
		For Lady you deserve this State;
		Nor would I love at lower rate.
		But at my back I alwaies hear
		Times winged Charriot hurrying near:
		And yonder all before us lye
		Desarts of vast Eternity.
		Thy Beauty shall no more be found;
		Nor, in thy marble Vault, shall sound
		My ecchoing Song: then Worms shall try
		That long preserv’d Virginity:
		And your quaint Honour turn to durst;
		And into ashes all my Lust.
		The Grave’s a fine and private place,
		But none I think do there embrace.
		Now therefore, while the youthful hew
		Sits on thy skin like morning glew,
		And while thy willing Soul transpires
		At every pore with instant Fires,
		Now let us sport us while we may;
		And now, like am’rous birds of prey,
		Rather at once our Time devour,
		Than languish in his slow-chapt pow’r.
		Let us roll all our Strength, and all
		Our sweetness, up into one Ball:
		And tear our Pleasures with rough strife,
		Thorough the Iron gates of Life.
		Thus, though we cannot make our Sun
		Stand still, yet we will make him run.


	10. YOUNG LOVE

		Come little Infant, Love me now,
		While thine unsuspected years
		Clear thine aged Fathers brow
		From cold Jealousie and Fears.
		
		Pretty surely ‘twere to see
		By young Love old Time beguil’d:
		While our Sportings are as free
		As the Nurses with the Child.
		
		Common Beauties stay fifteen;
		Such as yours should swifter move;
		Whole fair Blossoms are too green
		Yet for lust, but not for Love.
		
		Love as much the snowy Lamb
		Or the wanton Kid does prize,
		As the lusty Bull or Ram,
		For his morning Sacrifice.
		
		Now then love me: time may take
		Thee before thy time away:
		Of this Need wee’l Virtue make,
		And learn Love before we may.
		
		So we win of doubtful Fate;
		And, if good she to us meant,
		We that Good shall antedate,
		Or, if ill, that Ill prevent.
		
		Thus as Kingdomes, frustrating
		Other Titles to their Crown,
		In the craddle crown their King,
		So all Forraign Claims to drown.
		
		So, to make all Rivals vain,
		Now I crown thee with my Love:
		Crown me with thy Love again,
		And we both shall Monarchs prove.


*** John Masefield (1878 - 1967)

	1. BY A BIER-SIDE

		This is a sacred city built of marvellous earth.
		Life was lived nobly here to give such beauty birth.
		
		Beauty was in this brain and in this eager hand:
		Death is so blind and dumb Death does not understand.
		Death drifts the brain with dust and soils the young limbs’ glory,
		Death makes justice a dream, and strength a traveller’s story.
		Death drives the lovely soul to wander under the sky.
		Death opens unknown doors.  It is most grand to die.


	2. ON GROWING OLD

		Be with me, Beauty, for the fire is dying;
		My dog and I are old, too old for roving.
		Man, whose young passion sets the spindrift flying,
		Is soon too lame to march, too cold for loving.
		I take the book and gather to the fire,
		Turning old yellow leaves; minute by minute
		The clock ticks to my heart. A withered wire,
		Moves a thin ghost of music in the spinet.
		I cannot sail your seas, I cannot wander
		Your cornland, nor your hill-land, nor your valleys
		Ever again, nor share the battle yonder
		Where the young knight the broken squadron rallies.
		Only stay quiet while my mind remembers
		The beauty of fire from the beauty of embers.
		
		Beauty, have pity! for the strong have power,
		The rich their wealth, the beautiful their grace,
		Summer of man its sunlight and its flower.
		Spring-time of man, all April in a face.
		Only, as in the jostling in the Strand,
		Where the mob thrusts, or loiters, or is loud,
		The beggar with the saucer in his hand
		Asks only a penny from the passing crowd,
		So, from this glittering world with all its fashion,
		Its fire, and play of men, its stir, its march,
		Let me have wisdom, Beauty, wisdom and passion,
		Bread to the soul, rain when the summers parch.
		Give me but these, and though the darkness close
		Even the night will blossom as the rose.


	3. SEA FEVER

		I must go down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky,
		And all I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by,
		And the wheel’s kick and the wind’s song and the white sail’s shaking,
		And a gray mist on the sea’s face, and a gray dawn breaking.
		
		I must go down to the seas again, for the call of the running tide
		Is a wild call and a clear call that may not be denied;
		And all I ask is a windy day with the white clouds flying,
		And the flung spray and the blown spume, and the sea-gulls crying.
		
		I must go down to the seas again, to the vagrant gypsy life,
		To the gull’s way and the whale’s way, where the wind’s like a whetted knife;
		And all I ask is a merry yarn from a laughing fellow-rover,
		And quiet sleep and a sweet dream when the long trick’s over.


	4. THE BUILDERS

		Before the unseen cock had called the time,
		    Those workers left their beds and stumbled out
		Into the street, where dust lay white as lime
		    Under the last star that keeps bats about.
		Then blinking still from bed, they trod the street,
		    The doors closed up and down; the traveller heard
		Doors opened, closed, then silence, then men’s feet
		    Moving to toil, the men too drowsed for word.
		The bean-field was a greyness as they passed,
		    The darkness of the hedge was starred with flowers,
		The moth, with wings like dead leaves, sucked his last,
		    The triumphing cock cried out with all his powers;
		His fire of crying made the twilight quick,
		Then clink, clink, clink, men’s trowels tapped the brick.
		
		I saw the delicate man who built the tower
		    Look from the turret at the ground below,
		The granite column wavered like a flower,
		    But stood in air whatever winds might blow.
		Its roots were in the rock, its head stood proud,
		    No earthly forest reared a head so high;
		Sometimes the eagle came there, sometimes cloud,
		    It was man’s ultimate footstep to the sky.
		And in that peak the builder kept his treasure,
		    Books with the symbols of his art, the signs
		Of knowledge in excitement, skill in pleasure,
		    The edge that cut, the rule that kept the lines.
		He who had seen his tower beneath the grass,
		Rock in the earth, now smiled, because it was.
		
		How many thousand men had done his will,  
		    Men who had hands, or arms, or strength to spend,
		Or cunning with machines, or art, or skill !
		    All had obeyed him, working to this end.      
		Hundreds in distant lands had given their share
		    Of power, to deck it; on its every stone
		Their oddity of pleasure was laid bare,
		    Yet was the tower his offspring, his alone.
		His inner eye had seen, his will had made it,
		    All the opposing army of men’s minds
		Had bowed, had turned, had striven as he bade it,
		    Each to his purpose in their myriad kinds.
		Now it was done, and in the peak he stood
		Seeing his work, and smiled to find it good.
		
		It had been stone, earth’s body, hidden deep,
		    Lightless and shapeless, where it cooled and hardened.
		Now it was as the banner on man’s keep
		    Or as the Apple in Eden where God gardened.
		Lilies of stone ran round it, and like fires
		    The tongues of crockets shot from it and paused,
		Horsemen who raced were carven on’t, the spires
		    Were bright with gold ;  all this the builder caused.
		And standing there, it seemed that all the hive
		    Of human skill which now it had become,
		Was stone no more, nor building, but alive,
		    Trying to speak, this tower that was dumb,
		Trying to speak, nay, speaking, soul to soul
		With powers who are, to raven or control.


	5. THE EVERLASTING MERCY

		_Thy place is biggyd above the sterrys cleer,
		Noon erthely paleys wrouhte in so statly wyse,
		Com on my freend, my brothir moost enteer,
		For the I offryd my blood in sacrifise._
					--John Lydgate
		
		
		From ‘41 to ‘51
		I was folk’s contrary son;
		I bit my father’s hand right through
		And broke my mother’s heart in two.
		I sometimes go without my dinner
		Now that I know the times I’ve gi’n her.
		
		From ‘51 to ‘61
		I cut my teeth and took to fun.
		I learned what not to be afraid of
		And what stuff women’s lips are made of;
		I learned with what a rosy feeling
		Good ale makes floors seem like the ceiling,
		And how the moon give shiny light
		To lads as roll home singing by’t.
		My blood did leap, my flesh did revel,
		Saul Kane was tokened to the devil.
		
		From ‘61 to’71
		I lived in disbelief of Heaven.
		I drunk, I fought, I poached, I whored,
		I did despite unto the Lord.
		I cursed, ‘would make a man look pale,
		And nineteen times I went to gaol
		
		Now, friends, observe and look upon me,
		Mark how the Lord took pity on me.
		By Dead Man’s Thorn, while setting wires,
		Who should come up but Billy Myers,
		A friend of mine, who used to be
		As black a sprig of hell as me,
		With whom I’d planned, to save encroachin’,
		Which fields and coverts each should poach in.
		Now when he saw me set my snare,
		He tells me “Get to hell from there.
		This field is mine,” he says, “by right;
		If you poach here, there’ll be a fight.
		Out now,” he says, “and leave your wire;
		It’s mine.”
		“It ain’t.”
		“You put.”
		“You liar.”
		“You closhy put.”
		“You bloody liar.”
		“This is my field.”
		“This is my wire.”
		“I’m ruler here.”
		“You ain’t.”
		“I am.”
		“I’ll fight you for it.”
		“Right, by damn.
		Not now, though, I’ve a-sprained my thumb,
		We’ll fight after the harvest hum.
		And Silas Jones, that bookie wide,
		Will make a purse five pounds a side.”
		Those were the words, that was the place
		By which God brought me into grace.
		
		On Wood Top Field the peewits go
		Mewing and wheeling ever so;
		And like the shaking of a timbrel
		Cackles the laughter of the whimbrel..
		
		In the old quarry-pit they say
		Head-keeper Pike was made away.
		He walks, head-keeper Pike, for harm,
		He taps the windows of the farm;
		The blood drips from his broken chin,
		He taps and begs to be let in.
		On Wood Top, nights, I’ve shaked to hark
		The peewits wambling in the dark
		Lest in the dark the old man might
		Creep up to me to beg a light.
		
		But Wood Top grass is short and sweet
		And springy to a boxer’s feet;
		At harvest hum the moon so bright
		Did shine on Wood Top for the fight.
		
		When Bill was stripped down to his bends
		I thought how long we two’d been friends,
		And in my mind, about that wire,
		I thought “He’s right, I am a liar.
		As sure as skilly’s made in prison
		The right to poach that copse is his’n.
		I’ll have no luck tonight,” thinks I.
		“I’m fighting to defend a lie.
		And this moonshiny evening’s fun
		Is worse than aught I’ve ever done.”
		And thinking that way my heart bled so
		I almost stept to Bill and said so.
		And now Bill’s dead I would be glad
		If I could only think I had.
		But no. I put the thought away
		For fear of what my friends would say.
		They’d backed me, see? O Lord, the sin
		Done for things there’s money in.
		
		The stakes were drove, the ropes were hitched,
		Into the ring my hat I pitched.
		My corner faced the Squire’s park
		Just where the fir trees make it dark;
		The place where I begun poor Nell
		Upon the woman’s road to hell.
		I thought of’t, sitting in my corner
		After the time-keep struck his warner
		(Two brandy flasks, for fear of noise,
		Clinked out the time to us two boys).
		And while the seconds chafed and gloved me
		I thought of Nell’s eyes when she loved me,
		And wondered how my tot would end,
		First Nell cast off and now my friend;
		And in the moonlight dim and wan
		I knew quite well my luck was gone;
		And looking round I felt a spite
		At all who’d come to see me fight;
		The five and forty human faces
		Inflamed by drink and going to races,
		Faces of men who’d never been
		Merry or true or live or clean;
		Who’d never felt the boxer’s trim
		Of brain divinely knit to limb,
		Nor felt the whole live body go
		One tingling health from top to toe;
		Nor took a punch nor given a swing,
		But just soaked dead round the ring
		Until their brains and bloods were foul
		Enough to make their throttles howl,
		While we whom Jesus died to teach
		Fought round on round, three minutes each.
		
		And think that, you’ll understand
		I thought, “I’ll go and take Bill’s hand.
		I’ll up and say the fault was mine,
		He shan’t make play for these here swine.”
		And then I thought that that was silly,
		They’d think I was afraid of Billy;
		They’d think (I thought it, God forgive me)
		I funked the hiding Bill could give me.
		And that thought made me mad and hot.
		“Think that, will they? Well, they shall not.
		They shan’t think that. I will not. I’m
		Damned if I will. I will not.”
		Time!
		
		From the beginning of the bout
		My luck was gone, my hand was out.
		Right from the start Bill called the play,
		But I was quick and kept away
		Till the fourth round, when work got mixed,
		And then I knew Bill had me fixed.
		My hand was out, why, Heaven knows;
		Bill punched me when and where he chose.
		Through two more rounds we quartered wide,
		And all the time my hands seemed tied;
		Bill punched me when and where he pleased.
		The cheering from my backers eased,
		But every punch I heard a yell
		Of “That’s the style, Bill, give him hell.”
		No one for me, but Jimmy’s light
		“Straight left! Straight left!” and “Watch his right.”
		
		I don’t know how a boxer goes
		When all his body hums from blows;
		I know I seemed to rock and spin,
		I don’t know how I saved my chin;
		I know I thought my only friend
		Was that clinked flash at each round’s end
		When my two seconds, Ed and Jimmy,
		Had sixty seconds help to gimme.
		But in the ninth, with pain and knocks
		I stopped: I couldn’t fight nor box.
		Bill missed his swing, the light was tricky,
		But I went down, and stayed down, dicky.
		“Get up,” cried Jim. I said, “I will.”
		Then all the gang yelled, “Out him, bill.
		Out him.” Bill rushed . . . and Clink, Clink, Clink.
		Time! And Jim’s knee, and rum to drink.
		And round the ring there ran a titter:
		“Saved by the call, the bloody quitter.”
		
		They drove (a dodge that never fails)
		A pin beneath my finger nails.
		They poured what seemed a running beck
		Of cold spring water down my neck;
		Jim with a lancet quick as flies
		Lowered the swelling round my eyes.
		They sluiced my legs and fanned my face
		Through all that blessed minute’s grace;
		They gave my calves a thorough kneading,
		They salved my cuts and stopped the bleeding.
		A gulp of liquor dulled the pain,
		And then the flasks clinked again.
		Time!
		
		There was Bill as grim as death,
		He rushed, I clinched, to get more breath,
		And breath I got, though Billy bats
		Some stinging short-arms in my slats.
		And when we broke, as I foresaw,
		He swung his right in for the jaw.
		I stopped it on my shoulder bone,
		And at the shock I heard Bill groan
		A little groan or moan or grunt
		As though I’d hit his wind a bunt.
		At that, I clinched, and while we clinched,
		His old time right arm dig was flinched,
		And when we broke he hit me light
		As though he didn’t trust his right,
		He flapped me somehow with his wrist
		As though he couldn’t use his fist,
		And when he hit he winced with pain.
		I thought, “Your sprained thumb’s crocked again.”
		So I got strength and Bill gave ground,
		And that round was an easy round.
		
		During the wait my Jimmy said,
		
		What’s making Billy fight so dead?
		He’s all to pieces. Is he blown?”
		“His thumb’s out.”
		“No? Then it’s your own.
		It’s all your own, but don’t be rash
		He’s got the goods if you’ve got the cash,
		And what one hand can do he’ll do.
		Be careful this next round or two.”
		
		Time. There was Bill, and I felt sick
		That luck should play so mean a trick
		And give me leave to knock him out
		After he’d plainly won the bout.
		But by the way the man came at me
		He made it plain he meant to bat me;
		If you’d a seen the way he come
		You wouldn’t think he’d crocked a thumb.
		With all his skill and all his might
		He clipped me dizzy left and right;
		The Lord knows what the effort cost,
		but he was mad to think he’d lost,
		And knowing nothing else could save him
		He didn’t care what pain it gave him.
		He called the music and the dance
		For five rounds more and gave no chance.
		
		Try to imagine if you can
		The kind of manhood in the man,
		And if you’d like to feel his pain
		You sprain your thumb and hit the sprain.
		And hit it hard with all your power
		On something hard for half-an-hour,
		While someone thumps you black and blue,
		And then you’ll know what Billy knew.
		Bill took that pain without a sound
		Till halfway through the eighteenth round,
		And then I sent him down and out,
		And Silas said, “Kane wins the bout.”
		
		When Bill came to, you understand,
		I ripped the mitten from my hand
		And across to ask Bill shake,
		My limbs were all one pain and ache,
		I was so weary and so sore
		I don’t think I’d a stood much more.
		Bill in his corner bathed his thumb,
		Buttoned his shirt and glowered glum.
		“I’ll never shake your hand” he said.
		“I’d rather see my children dead.
		I’ve been about had some fun with you,
		But you’re a liar and I’ve done with you.
		You’ve knocked me out, you didn’t beat me;
		Look out the next time that you meet me,
		There’ll be no friend to watch the clock for you
		And no convenient thumb to crock for you,
		And I’ll take care, with much delight,
		You’ll get what you’d a got tonight;
		That puts my meaning clear, I guess,
		Now get to hell; I want to dress.”
		
		
		
		I dressed. My backers one and all
		Said, “Well done you” or “Good old Saul.”
		“Saul is a wonder and a fly ‘un,
		What’ll you have, Saul, at the Lion?”
		With merry oaths they helped me down
		The stony wood path to the town.
		
		The moonlight shone on Cabbage Walk,
		It made the limestone look like chalk.
		It was too late for any people,
		Twelve struck as we went by the steeple.
		A dog barked, and an owl was calling,
		The squire’s brook was still a-falling,
		The carved heads on the church looked down
		On “Russell, Blacksmith of this Town,”
		And all the graves of all the ghosts
		Who rise on Christmas Eve in hosts
		To dance and carol in festivity
		For joy of Jesus Christ’s Nativity
		(Bell-ringer Dawe and his two sons
		Beheld ‘em from the bell-tower once},
		To and two about about
		Singing the end of Advent out,
		Dwindling down to windlestraws
		When the glittering peacock craws,
		As craw the glittering peacock should
		When Christ’s own star come over the wood.
		Lamb of the sky comes out of fold
		Wandering windy heavens cold.
		So they shone and sang till twelve
		When all the bells ring out of theirselve.
		Rang a peal for Christmas morn,
		Glory, men, for Christ is born.
		
		All the old monks’ singing places
		
		Glimmered quick with flitting faces,
		Singing anthems, singing hymns
		Under carven cherubims.
		Ringer Dave aloft could mark
		Faces at the window dark
		Crowding, crowding, row on row,
		Till all the church began to glow.
		The chapel glowed, the nave, the choir,
		All he faces became fire
		Below the eastern window high
		To see Christ’s star come up the sky.
		Then they lifted hands and turned,
		And all their lifted fingers burned,
		Burned like the golden altar tallows,
		Burned like a troop of God’s own Hallows,
		Bringing to mind the burning time
		When all the bells will rock and chime
		And burning saints on burning horses
		Will sweep the planets from their courses
		And loose the stars to burn up night.
		Lord, give us eyes to bear the light.
		
		We all went quiet down the Scallenge
		Lest Police Inspector Drew should challenge.
		But ‘Spector Drew was sleeping sweet,
		His head upon a charges sheet,
		Under the gas jet flaring full,
		Snorting and snoring like a bull,
		His bull cheeks puffed, his bull lips plowing,
		His ugly yellow front teeth showing.
		Just as we peeped we saw him fumble
		And scratch his head, and shift, and mumble.
		Down in the lane so thick and dark
		The tan-yards stank of bitter bark,
		The curate’s pigeons gave a flutter,
		A cart went courting down the gutter,
		And none else stirred a foot or feather.
		The houses put their heads together,
		Talking, perhaps, so dark and sly,
		Of all the folk they’d seen go by,
		Children, and men and women, merry all,
		Who’d some day pass that way to burial.
		It was all dark, but at the turning
		The Lion had a window burning.
		So in we went and up the stairs,
		Treading as still as cats and hares.
		The way the stairs creaked made you wonder
		If dead men’s bones were hidden under.
		At head of stairs upon the landing
		A woman with a lamp was standing;
		she greet each gent at head of stairs,
		With “Step in, gents, and take your chairs.
		The punch’ll come when kettle bubble,
		But don’t make noise or there’ll be trouble.”
		‘Twas Doxy Jane, a bouncing girl
		With eyes all sparks and hair all curl,
		And cheeks all red and lips all coal,
		And thirst for men instead of soul.
		She’s trod her pathway to the fire.
		Old Rivers had his nephew by her.
		
		I step aside from Tom and Jimmy
		To find if she’d a kiss to gimme.
		I blew out lamp ‘fore she could speak.
		She said, “If you ain’t got a cheek,”
		And then beside me in the dim,
		“Did he beat you or you beat him?”
		“Why, I beat him” (though that was wrong).
		She said, “You must be turble strong,
		I’d be afraid you’d beat me, too.”
		“You’d not,” I said, “I wouldn’t do.”
		“Never?”
		“No, never.”
		“Never?”
		“No.”
		“O Saul. Here’s missus. Let me go.”
		It wasn’t missus, so I didn’t,
		Whether I mid do or I midn’t,
		Until she’d promised we should meet
		Next evening, six, at top of street,
		When we could have a quiet talk
		On that low wall up Worcester Walk.
		And while we whispered there together
		I give her silver for a feather
		And felt a drunkenness like wine
		And shut out Christ in husks and swine.
		I felt the dart strike through my liver.
		God punish me for’t and forgive her.
		
		Each one could be a Jesus mild,
		Each one has been a little child,
		A little child with laughing look,
		A lovely white unwritten book;
		A book that God will take, my friend,
		As each goes out a journey’s end.
		The Lord Who gave us Earth and Heaven
		Takes that as thanks for all He’s given.
		The book He lent is given back
		All blotted red and smutted black.
		
		“Open the door,” said Jim, “and call.”
		Jane gasped “They’ll see me. Loose me, Saul.”
		She pushed me by, and ducked downstair
		With half the pins out of her hair.
		I went inside the lit room rollen
		Her scented handkerchief I’d stolen.
		“What would you fancy, Saul?” they said.
		“A gin punch hot and then to bed.”
		“Jane, fetch the punch bowl to the gemmen;
		And mind you don’t put too much lemon.
		Our good friend Saul has had a fight of it,
		Now smoke up, boys, and make a night of it.”
		
		The room was full of men and stink
		Of bad cigars and heavy drink.
		Riley was nodding to the floor
		And gurgling as he wanted more.
		His mouth was wide, his face was pale,
		His swollen face was sweating ale;
		And one of those assembled Greeks
		Had corked black crosses on his cheeks.
		Thomas was having words with Goss,
		He “wouldn’t pay, the fight was cross.”
		And Goss told Tom that “cross or no,
		The bets go as the verdicts go,
		By all I’ve ever heard or read of.
		So pay, or else I’ll knock your head off.”
		Jim Gurvil said his smutty say
		About a girl down Bye Street way,
		And how the girl from Froggatt’s circus
		Died giving birth in Newent work’us.
		And Dick told how the Dymock wench
		Bore twins, poor things, on Dog Hill bench;
		And how he’d owned to one Court
		And how Judge made him sorry for’t.
		Jack set a jew’s harp twanging drily;
		“gimme another cup,” said Riley.
		A dozen more were in their glories
		With laughs and smokes and smutty stories;
		And Jimmy joked and took his sup
		And sang his song of “Up, come up.”
		Jane brought the bowl of stewing gin
		And poured the egg and lemon in,
		And whisked it up and served it out
		While bawdy questions went about.
		Jack chucked her chin, and Jim accost her
		With bits out of the “Maid of Gloster.”
		And fifteen arms went round her waist.
		(And then men ask, Are Barmaids chaste?}
		
		O young men, pray to be kept whole
		from bringing down a weaker soul.
		Your minute’s joy so meet in doin’
		May be the woman’s door to ruin;
		The door to wandering up and down,
		A painted whore with half a crown.
		The bright mind fouled, the beauty gay
		All eaten out and fallen away,
		By drunken days and weary tramps
		From pub to pub by city lamps
		Till men despise the game they started
		Till health and beauty are departed,
		and in a slum the reeking hag
		Mumbles a crust with toothy jag,
		Or gets the river’s help to end
		The life too wrecked for man to mend.
		We spat and smoked and took our swipe
		Till Silas up and tap his pipe,
		And begged us all to pay attention
		Because he’d several things to mention.
		We’d seen the fight (Hear, hear. That’s you);
		But still one task remained to do.
		That task was his, he didn’t shun it,
		To give the purse to him as won it.
		With this remark, from start to out
		He’d never seen a brisker bout.
		There was the purse. At that he’d leave it.
		Let Kane come forward to receive it.
		
		I took the purse and hemmed and bowed,
		And called for gin punch for the crowd;
		And when the second bowl was done,
		I called, “Let’s have another one.”
		Si’s wife come in and sipped and sipped
		(As women will) till she was pipped.
		And Si hit Dicky Twot a clouter
		Because he put his arms about her;
		But after Si got overtasked
		She sat and kissed whoever asked.
		My Doxy Jane was splashed by this,
		I took her on my knee to kiss.
		And Tom cried out, “O damn the gin;
		Why can’t we all have women in?
		Bess Evans now, or Sister Polly,
		Or those two housemaids at the Folly?
		Let someone nip to Biddy Price’s,
		They’d all come in a brace of trices.
		Rose Davies, Sue, and Betsy Perks;
		One man, one girl, and damn all Turks.”
		But, no. “More gin,” they cried; “Come on.
		We’ll have the girls in when it’s gone.”
		So round the g in went, hot and heady,
		Hot Hollands punch on top of deady.
		
		Hot Hollands punch on top of stout
		Puts madness in and wisdom out.
		From drunken man to drunken man
		The drunken madness raged and ran.
		“I’m climber Joe who climbed the spire.”
		“You’re climber Joe the bloody liar.”
		“Who says I lie?” “I do.”
		“You lie,
		I climbed the spire and had a fly.”
		“I’m French Suzanne, the Circus Dancer,
		I’m going to dance a bloody Lancer.”
		“If I’d my rights I’m Squire’s heir.”
		“By rights I’d be a millionaire.”
		“By rights I’d be the lord of you,
		But Farmer Scriggins had his do,
		He done me, so I’ve had to hoove it,
		I’ve got it all wrote down to prove it.
		And one of these dark winter nights
		He’ll learn I mean to have my rights;
		I’ll bloody him a bloody fix,
		I’ll bloody burn his bloody ricks.”
		
		From three long hours of gin and smokes,
		And two girls’ breath and fifteen blokes,
		A warmish night, and windows shut,
		The room stank like a fox’s gut.
		The heat and smell and drinking deep
		Began to stun the gang to sleep.
		Some fell downstairs to sleep on mat,
		Some snored it sodden where they sat.
		Dick Twot had lost a tooth and wept;
		But all the drunken others slept.
		Jane slept beside me in the chair,
		And I got up; I wanted air.
		
		I opened window wide and leaned
		Out of that pigstye of the fiend
		And felt a cool wind go like grace
		About the sleeping market-place.
		The clock struck three, and sweetly, slowly,
		The bells chimed Holy, Holy, Holy;
		And in a second’s pause there fell
		The cold note of the chapel bell.
		And then a cock crew, flapping wings,
		And summat made me think of things.
		How long those ticking clocks had gone
		From church to chapel, on and on,
		Ticking the time out, ticking slow
		To men and girls who’d come and go,
		And how they ticked in belfry dark
		When half the town was bishop’s park,
		And how they’d run a chime full tilt
		The night after the church was built,
		And that night was Lambert’s Feast,
		The night I’d fought and been a beast.
		And how a change had come. And then
		I thought, “You tick to different men.”
		What with the fight and what with drinking
		And being awake alone there thinking,
		My mind began to carp and tetter,
		“If this life’s all, the beasts are better.”
		And then I thought, “I wish I’d seen
		The many towns this town has been;
		I wish I knew if they’d a got
		A kind of summat we’ve a-not,
		If them as built the church so fair
		Were half the chaps folk say they were;
		For they’d the skill to draw their plan,
		And skill’s a joy to any man;
		And they’d the strength, not skill alone,
		To build it beautiful in stone;
		And strength and skill together thus
		O, they were happier men than us.
		But if they were, they had to die
		The same as every one and I.
		And no one lives again, but dies,
		And all the bright goes out of eyes,
		and all the skill goes out of hands,
		And all the wise brain understands,
		And all the beauty, all the power
		Is cut down like a withered flower.
		In all the show from birth to rest
		I give the poor dumb cattle best.”
		
		I wondered, then, why life should be,
		And what would be the end of me
		When youth and health and strength were gone
		And cold old age came creeping on?
		A keeper’s gun? The Union ward?
		Or that new quod at Hereford?
		And looking round I felt disgust
		At all the nights of drink and lust,
		And all the looks of all the swine
		Who’d said that they were friends of mine;
		And yet I knew, when morning came,
		The morning would be just the same,
		for I’d have drinks and Jane would meet me
		And drunken Silas Jones would greet me,
		And I’d risk quod and keeper’s gun
		Till all the silly game was done.
		“For parson chaps are mad, supposin’
		A chap can change the road he’s chosen.”
		And then the Devil whispered, “Saul,
		Why should you want to live at all?
		Why fret and sweat and try to mend?
		It’s all the same thing in the end.
		But when it’s done,” he said, “it’s ended.
		Why stand it , since it can’t be mended?”
		And in my heart I heard him plain,
		“Throw yourself down and end it, Kane.”
		
		“Why not?” said I. “Why not? But no.
		I won’t. I’ve never had my go.
		I’ve not had all the world can give.
		Death by and by, but first I’ll live.
		The world owes me my time of times,
		And that time’s coming now, by crimes.”
		
		A madness took me then. I felt
		I’d like to hit the world a belt.
		I felt that I could fly through air,
		A screaming star with blazing hair,
		A rushing comet, crackling, numbing
		The folk with fear of judgment coming,
		A ‘Lijah in a fiery car,
		Coming to tell folk what they are.
		“That’s what I’ll do,” I shouted loud.
		“I’ll tell this sanctimonious crowd
		This town of window peeping, prying,
		Maligning, peering, hinting, lying,
		Male and female human blots
		Who would, but daren’t be, whores and sots,
		That they’re so steeped in petty vice
		That they’re less excellent than lice,
		That touching one of them will dirt you,
		Dirt you with the stain of mean
		Cheating trade and going between,
		Pinching, starving, scraping, hoarding
		To see if Sue, the prentice lean,
		Dares to touch the margarine.
		Fawning, cringing, oiling boots,
		Raging in the crowd’s pursuits,
		Flinging stones at all the Stephens,
		Standing firm with all the evens
		Making hell for all the odd,
		All the lonely ones of God,
		Those poor lonely ones who find
		Dogs more mild than human kind.
		For dogs,” I said, “are nobles born
		To most of you, you cockled corn.
		I’ve known dogs to leave their dinner,
		Nosing a kind heart in a sinner.
		Poor old Crafty wagged his tail
		The day I first came home from jail.
		When all my folk, so primly clad,
		Glowered black and thought me mad,.
		And muttered how they’d all expected.
		(I’ve thought of that old dog for years,
		And of how near I come to tears.)
		
		But you, you minds of bread and cheese,
		Are less divine tha[n] that dog’s fleas,
		You suck blood from kindly friends,
		And kill them when it serves your ends.,
		Double traitors, double black,
		Stabbing only in the back,
		Stabbing with the knives you borrow
		From the friends you bring to sorrow.
		You stab all that’s true and strong,
		Truth and strength you say are wrong,
		Meek and mild, and sweet and creeping,
		Repeating, canting cadging, peeping,
		That’s the art and that’s the life
		To win a man his neighbour’s wife.
		All that’s good and all that’s true,
		You kill that, so I’ll kill you.”
		At that I tore my clothes in shreds
		And hurled them on the window leads;
		I flung my boots through both the winders
		And knocked the glass to little flinders;
		The punch bowl and the tumblers followed,
		and then I seized the lamps and holloed,
		And down the stairs, and tore back bolts,
		As mad as twenty blooded colts;
		And out into the street I pass,
		As mad as two-year-olds at grass
		A naked madman saving grand
		A blazing lamp in either hand.
		I yelled like twenty drunken sailors,
		:The devil’s come among the tailors.”
		A blaze of flame behind me streamed,
		And then I clashed the lamps and screamed
		“I’m Satan, newly come from hell.”
		And then I spied the fire bell.
		
		I’ve been a ringer, so I know
		How best to make a big bell go.
		So on to bell-rope swift swoop,
		And stick my one foot in the loop
		And heave a down-swig till I groan
		“Awake, you swine, you devil’s own.”
		I made the fire-bell awake,
		I felt the bell-rope throb and shake;
		I felt the air mingle and clang
		And beat the walls a muffled bang,
		And stifle back and boom and bay
		Like muffled peals on Boxing Day,
		And then surge up and gather shape,
		And spread great pinions and escape;
		And each great bird of clanging shrieks
		O Fire! Fire, from iron beaks.
		My shoulders cracked to send around
		Those shrieking birds made out of sound
		With news of fire in their bills.
		(They heard ‘em plain beyond Wall Hills.).
		
		Up go the winders, out come heads,
		I heard the springs go creak in beds;
		But still I heave and sweat and tire,
		And still the clang goes “Fire, Fire!”
		“Where is it, then? Who is it, there?
		You ringer, stop, and tell us where.”
		“Run round and let the Captain know.”
		“It must be bad, he’s ringing so,”
		“It’s in the town, I see the flame;
		Look there! Look there, how red it came.”
		“Where is it, then? O stop the bell.”
		I stopped and called: “It’s fire of hell;
		And this is Sodom and Gomorrah,
		And now I’ll burn you up, begorra.”
		
		By this time firemen were mustering,
		The half-dressed stable men were flustering,
		Backing the horses out of stalls
		While this man swears and that man bawls,
		“Don’t take th’old mare. Back, Toby, back.
		Back, Lincoln. Where’s the fire, Jack?”
		“Damned if I know. Out Preston way.”
		“No. It’s at Chancey’s Pitch, they say.”
		“It’s sixteen ricks at Pauntley burnt.”
		“You back old Darby out, I durn’t.”
		They ran the big red engine out,
		And put ‘em to with damn and shout.
		And then they start to raise the shire,
		“Who brought the news, and where’s the fire?”
		They’s moonlight, lamps, and gas to light ‘em.
		I give a screech-owl’s screech to fright ‘em,
		And snatch from underneath their noses
		The nozzles of the fire hoses.
		“I am the fire. Back, stand back,
		Or else I’ll fetch your skulls a crack;
		D’you see these copper nozzles here?
		They weigh ten pounds a piece, my dear;
		I’m fire of hell come up this minute
		To burn this town and burn you clean,
		You cogwheels in a stopped machine,
		You hearts of snakes, and brains of pigeons,
		You dead devout of dead religions,
		You offspring of the hen and ass,
		By Pilate ruled, and Caiaphas.
		Now your account is totted. Learn
		Hell’s flames are loose and you shall burn.”
		
		At that I leaped and screamed and ran,
		I heard their cries go, “Catch him, man.”
		“Who was it?” “Down him.” “Out him, Em.”
		“Duck him at pump, we’ll see who’ll burn.”
		A policeman clutched, a fireman clutched,
		A dozen others snatched and touched.
		“By God, he’s stripped down to his buff.”
		“By God, we’ll make him warm enough.”
		“After him,” “Catch him,” “Out him,” ” Scrob him.”
		“We’ll give him hell.” “By God, we’ll mob him.”
		“We’ll duck him, scrout him, flog him, fratch him.”
		“All right,” I said. “But first you’ll catch him.”
		
		The men who don’t know to the root
		The joy of being swift of foot,
		Have never known divine and fresh
		The glory of the gift of flesh,
		Nor felt the feet exult, not gone
		Along a dim road, on and on,
		Knowing again the bursting glows,
		the mating hare in April knows,
		Who tingles to the pads with mirth
		At being the swiftest thing on earth.
		O, if you want to know delight,
		Run naked in an autumn night,
		And laugh, as I laughed then, to find
		A running rabble drop behind,
		and whang, on ever door you pass,
		Two copper nozzles, tipped with brass,
		And double whang at every turning,
		And yell, “All hell’s loose, and burning.”
		
		I beat my brass and shouted fire
		At doors of parson, lawyer, squire,
		at all three doors I threshed and slammed
		And yelled aloud that they were damned.
		I clodded squire’s glass with turves
		Because he spring-gunned his preserves.
		Through parson’s glass my nozzle swishes
		Because he stood for loaves and fishes,
		but parson’s glass I spared a tittle.
		He give me a orange once when little,
		And he who gives a child a treat
		Makes joy-bells ring in Heaven’s street,
		And he who gives a child a home
		Build palaces in Kingdom come
		and she who gives a baby birth
		Brings Saviour Christ again to Earth,
		For life is joy, and mind is fruit,
		And body’s precious earth and root.
		But lawyer’s glass-well, never mind,
		Th’ old Adam’s strong in me, I find.
		God pardon man, and may God’s son
		Forgive the evil things I’ve done.
		
		What more? By Dirty Lane I crept
		Back to the Lion, where I slept.
		The raging madness hot and floodin’
		Boiled itself out and left me sudden,
		Left me worn out and sick and cold,
		Aching as though I’d all grown old;
		So there I lay, and there they found me
		On door-mat, with a curtain round me.
		Si took my heels and Jane my head
		And laughed, and carried me to bed.
		And from the neighbouring street they reskied
		My boots and trousers, coat and weskit;
		They bath-bricked both the nozzles bright
		To be mementoes of the night,
		And knowing what I should awake with,
		They flanelled me a quart to slake with
		And sat and shook till half past two
		Expecting Police Inspector Drew.
		I woke and drank, nd went to meat
		In clothes still dirty from the street.
		Down in the bar I hear ‘em tell
		How someone rang the fire bell,
		And how th’inspector’s search had thriven,
		And how five pounds reward was given.
		And shepherd Boyce, of Marley, glad us
		By saying was blokes from mad’us.
		Or two young rips lodged at the Prince
		Whom none had seen nor heard of since,
		Or that young blade from Worcester Walk
		(You know how country people talk).
		Young Joe the ostler come in sad,
		He said th’old mare had bit his dad.
		He said there’d come a blazing screeching
		Daft Bible-prophet chap a-preaching,
		Had put th’old mare in such a taking
		she’d thought the bloody earth was quaking.
		And others come and spread a tale
		Of cut-throats out of Gloucester jail,
		And how we needed extra cops
		With all them Welsh come picking hops:
		With drunken Welsh in all our sheds
		We might be murdered in our beds.
		
		By all accounts, both men and wives
		Had had the scare up of their lives.
		
		I ate and drank and gathered strength,
		And stretched along the bench full length,
		Or crossed to window seat to pat
		Black Silas Jones’s little cat.
		At four I called, “You devil’s own,
		The second trumpet shall be blown.
		The second trump, the second blast;
		Hell’s flames are loosed, and judgment’s passed.
		Too late for mercy now. Take warning.
		I’m death and hell and Judgment morning.”
		I hurled the bench into the settle,
		I banged the table on the kettle,
		I sent Joe’s quart of cider spinning.
		“Lo, here begins my second inning.”
		Each bottle, mug, and jug and pot
		I smashed to crocks in half a tot;
		And Joe, and Si, and Nick, and Percy
		I rolled together topsy versy.
		And as I ran I heard ‘em call,
		“Now damn to hell, what’s gone with Saul?”
		Out into street I ran uproarious
		The devil dancing in me glorious.
		And as I ran I yell and shriek
		“Come on, now, turn the other cheek.”
		Across the way by almshouse pump
		I see old puffing parson stump.
		Old parson, red-eyed as a ferret
		From nightly wrestlings with the spirit;
		I ran acrosss, and barred his path.
		His turkey gills went red as wrath
		And then he froze as parsons can.
		“The police will deal with you, my man.”
		“Not yet, “said I, “not yet they won’t;
		And now you’ll hear me, like or don’t.
		The English Church both is and was
		A subsidy of Caiaphas.
		I don’t believe in Prayer or Bible,
		They’re lies all through, and you’re a libel,
		A libel on the Devil’s plan
		When first he miscreated man.
		You mumble through a formal code
		To get which martyrs burned and blowed.
		
		I look on martyrs as mistakes,
		But still they burned for it at stakes;
		Your only fire’s the jolly fire
		Where you can guzzle port with Squire,
		And back and praise his damned opinions
		About his temporal dominions.
		You let him give the man who digs,
		A filthy hut unfit for pigs,
		Without a well, without a drain,
		With mossy thatch that lets in rain,
		Without a ‘lotment, ‘less he rent it,
		And never meat, unless he scent it,
		But weekly doles of ‘leven shilling
		To make a grown man strong and willing,
		To do the hardest work on earth
		And feed his wife when she gives birth,
		And feed his little children’s bones.
		I tell you, man, the Devil groans.
		With all your main and all your might
		You back what is against what’s right;
		You let the Squire do things like these,
		You back him in’t and give him ease,
		You take his hand and drink his wine,
		And he’s a hog, but you’re a swine.
		For you take gold to teach God’s ways
		And teach man how to sing God’s praise.
		And now I’ll tell you what you teach
		In downright honest English speech.
		
		“You teach the ground-down starving man
		That Squire’s greed’s Jehovah’s plan.
		You get his learning circumvented
		Lest it should make him discontented
		(Better a brutal, starving nation
		Than men with thoughts above their station),
		You let him neither read nor think,
		You goad his wretched soul to drink
		And then to jail, the drunken boor;
		O sad intemperance of the poor.
		You starve his soul till it’s rapscallion,
		Then blame his flesh for being stallion.
		You send your wife around to paint
		The golden glories of “restraint.”
		How moral exercise bewild’rin’
		Would soon result in fewer children.
		You work a day in Squire’s fields
		And see what sweet restraint it yields,
		A woman’s day at turnip picking,
		Your hearts too fat for plough or ricking.
		
		“And you whom luck taught French and Greek
		Have purple flaps on either cheek,
		A stately house, and time for knowledge,
		And gold to send your sons to college,
		That pleasant place, where getting learning
		Is also key to money earning.
		But quite your damndest want of grace
		Is what you do to save your face;
		The way you sit astride the gates
		By padding wages out of rates;
		Your Christmas gifts of shoddy blankets
		That every working soul may thank its
		Loving parson, loving squire
		Through whom he can’t afford a fire.
		Your well-packed bench, your prison pen,
		To keep them something less than men;
		Your friendly clubs to help ‘em bury.
		Your charities of midwifery.
		Your bidding children duck and cap
		To them who give them workhouse pap.
		O, what you are, and what you preach,
		And what you do, and what you teach
		Is not God’s Word, nor honest schism,
		But Devil’s scant and pauperism.”
		
		By this time many folk had gathered
		To listen to me while I blathered;
		I said my piece, and when I’d said it,
		I’ll do the purple parson credit,
		He sunk (as sometimes parsons can)
		His coat’s excuses in the man.
		“You’d think the Squire and I are kings
		Who made the existing state of things,
		And made it ill. I answer, No,
		States are not made, nor patched; they grow,
		Grow slow through centuries of pain
		And grow correctly in the main,
		But only grow by certain laws
		Of certain bits in certain jaws.
		You want to doctor that. Let be.
		You cannot patch a growing tree.
		Put these two words beneath your hat,
		These two: securus judicat.
		The social states of human kinds
		Are made by multitudes of minds,
		And after multitudes of years
		A little human growth appears
		Worth having, even to the soul
		Who sees most plain it’s not the whole.
		
		This state is dull and evil, both,
		I keep it in the path of growth;
		You think the Church an outworn fetter;
		Kane, keep it, till you’ve built a better.
		And keep the existing social state;
		I quite agree it’s out of date,
		One does too much, another shirks,
		Unjust, I grant; but still. . . it works.
		To get the whole world out of bed
		And washed, and dressed, and warmed, and fed,
		To work, and back to bed again,
		Believe me, Saul, costs worlds of pain.
		Then, as to whether true or sham
		That book of Christ, Whose priest I am;
		The Bible is a lie, say you,
		where do you stand, suppose it true?
		Goodbye. But if you’ve more to say
		My doors are open night and day.
		Meanwhile, my friend, ‘twould be no sin
		To mix more water in your gin.
		We’re neither saints nor Philip Sidneys,
		But mortal men with mortal kidneys.”
		
		
		
		He took his snuff, and wheezed a greeting,
		And waddled off to mother’s meeting;
		I hung my head upon my chest,
		I give old purple parson best.
		For while the Plough tips round the Pole
		The trained mind outs the upright soul,
		As Jesus said the trained mind might,
		Being wiser than the sons of light,
		But trained men’s minds are spread so thin
		They let all sorts of darkness in;
		Whatever light man finds they doubt it
		They love, not light, but talk about it.
		
		But parson’d proved to people’s eyes
		That I was drunk, and he was wise;
		And people grinned and women tittered,
		And little children mocked and twittered.
		So, blazing mad, I stalked to bar
		To show how noble drunkards are,
		And guzzled spirits like a beast,
		To show contempt for Church and priest,
		Until, by six, my wits went round
		Like hungry pigs in parish pound.
		At half past six, rememb’ring Jane,
		I staggered into street again
		With mind made up (or primed for gin)
		To bash the coop who’d run me in;
		For well I knew I’d have to cock up
		My legs that night inside the lock-up,
		And it was my most fixed intent
		To have a fight before I went.
		Our Fates are strange, and no one now his;
		Our lovely Saviour Christ disposes.
		
		Jane wasn’t where we’d planned, the jade.
		She’d thought me drunk and hadn’t stayed.
		So I went up the Walk to look for her
		And lingered by the little brook for her,
		And dowsed my face, and drank at spring,
		And watched two wild ducks on the wing,
		The moon come pale, the wind come cool,
		A big pike leapt in Lower Pool,
		The Peacock screamed, the clouds were straking,
		My cut cheek felt the weather breaking;
		An orange sunset waned and thinned
		Foretelling rain and western wind,
		And while I watched I heard distinct
		The metals on the railway clinked.
		The blood-edged clouds were all in tatters,
		The sky and earth seemed mad as hatters;
		they had a death look, wild and odd,
		Of something dark foretold by God.
		And seeing it so, I felt so shaken
		I wouldn’t keep the road I’d taken,
		But wandered back towards the inn
		Resolved to brace myself with gin.
		And as I walked, I said, “It’s strange,
		There’s Death let loose to-night, and Change.”
		
		In Cabbage Walk, I made a haul
		Of two big pears from lawyer’s wall,
		And, munching one, I took the lane
		Back into Market-place again.
		Lamp-lighter Dick had passed the turning.
		And all the Homend lamps were burning,
		The windows shone, the shops were busy,
		But that strange Heaven made me dizzy.
		The sky had all God’s warning writ
		In bloody marks all over it,
		And over all I thought there was
		A ghastly light besides the gas.
		The Devil’s tasks and Devil’s rages
		Were giving me the Devil’s wages.
		
		In Market-place it’s always light,
		The big shop windows make it bright;
		And in the press of people buying
		I spied a little fellow crying
		Because his mother’d gone inside
		And left him there, and so he cried.
		And mother’d beat him when she found him,
		And mother’s whip would curl right round him,
		And mother’d say h’ed done to crost her,
		Though there being crowds about he’d lost her.
		
		Lord, give to men who are old and rougher
		The things that little children suffer,
		And let keep bright and undefiled
		The young years of the little child.
		I pat his head at edge of street
		And gi’m my second pear to eat.
		Right under lamp I pat his head,
		“I’ll stay till mother come,” I said,
		And stay I did, and joked and talked,
		And shoppers wondered as they walked,
		“There’s that Saul Kane, the drunken blaggard,
		Talking to little Jimmy Jaggard.
		The drunken blaggard reeks of drink.”
		“Whatever will his mother think?”
		“Wherever has his mother gone?
		Nip round to Mrs. Jaggard’s, John,
		And say her Jimmy’s out again,
		In Market-place with boozer Kane.”
		“When he come out to-day he staggered.
		O, Jimmy Jaggard, Jimmy Jaggard.”
		“His mother’s gone inside to bargain,
		Run in and tell her , Polly Margin,
		And tell her poacher Kane is tipsy
		And selling Jimmy to a gipsy.”
		“Run in to Mrs. Jaggard, Ellen,
		Or else, dear knows, there’ll be no tellin’,
		And don’t dare leave yer till you’ve fount her,
		You’ll find her at the linen counter.”
		I told a tale, to Jim’s delight
		Of where the tom-cats go by night,
		And how when moonlight came they went
		Among the chimneys black and bent,
		From roof to roof, from house to house,
		With little baskets full of mouse
		All red and white, both joint and chnop
		Like meat out of a butcher’s shop;
		Then all along the wall they creep
		And everyone is fast asleep,
		And honey-hunting moths go by,
		And by the bread-batch crickets cry;
		Then on they hurry, never waiting
		To lawyer’s backyard cellar grating
		where Jaggard’s cat, with clever paw,’
		Unhooks a broke-brick’s secret door;
		Then down into the cellar black,
		Across the wood slug’s slimy track,
		Into an old cask’s quiet hollow,
		Where they’ve got seats for what’s to follow;
		Then each tom-cats light little candles,
		And O, the stories and the scandals,
		And O, the songs and Christmas carols,
		And O, the milk from little barrels.
		They light a fire fit for roasting
		(And how good mouse-meat smells when toasting),
		Then down they sit to merry feast
		While moon goes west and sun comes east.
		
		Sometimes they make so merry there
		Old lawyer comes to head of stair
		To ‘fend with fist and poker took firm
		His parchments channeled by the bookworm,
		And all his deeds, and all his packs
		Of withered ink and sealing wax;
		And there he stands, with candle raised,
		And listens like a man amazed,
		Or like ghost a man stands dumb at,
		He says, “Hush! Hush! I’m sure there’s summat.”
		He hears outside the brown owl call,
		He hears the death-tick tap the wall,
		the gnawing of the wainscot mouse,
		The creaking ujp and down the house,
		The unhooked window’s hinges ranging,
		The sounds that say the wind is changing.
		At last he turns and shakes his head,
		“It’s nothing. I’ll go back to bed.”
		
		And just then Mrs. Jaggard came
		To view and end her Jimmy’s shame.
		
		She made on rush and gi’m a bat
		And shook him like a dog a rat.
		“I can’t turn round but what you’re straying.
		I’ll give you tales and gipsy playing.
		I’ll give you wand’ring off like this
		And listening to whatever ‘tis,
		You’ll laugh the little side of the can,
		You’ll have the whip for his, my man;
		And not a bite of meat nor bread
		You’ll touch before you go to bed.
		Some day you’ll break your mother’s heart,
		After God knows she done her part,
		Working her arms off day and night
		Trying to keep your collars white.
		Look at your face, too, in the street.
		What dirty filth’ve you found to eat?
		Now don’t you blubber here, boy, or
		I’ll give you sum’t to blubber for.”
		She snatched him off from where we stand
		And knocked the pear-core from his hand,
		and looked at me, “You Devil’s limb,
		How dare you talk to Jaggard’s Jim;
		You drunken, poaching, boozing brute, you,
		If Jaggard was a man, he’d shoot you.”
		She glared all this, but didn’t speak,
		she gasped, white hollows in her cheek;
		Jimmy was writhing, screaming wild,
		The shoppers thought I’d killed the child.
		
		I had to speak, so I begun.
		“You oughtn’t beat your little son;
		He did no harm, but seeing him there
		I talked to him and gi’m a pear;
		I’m sure the poor child meant no wrong,
		It’s all my fault he stayed so long,
		He’d not have stayed, mum, I’ll be bound
		If I’d not chanced to come around.
		It’s all my fault he stayed, not his.
		I kept him here, that’s how it is.”
		“Oh!” And how dare you, then?” says she,
		How dare yo tempt my boy from me?
		How dare you do’t, you drunken swine,
		Is he your child or is he mine?
		A drunken sot they’ve had the beak to,
		Has got his dirty whores to speak to,
		His dirty mates with home he drink,
		Not little children, one would think.
		“Look on him, there,” she says, “Look on him
		And smell the stinking gin upon him,
		The lowest sot, the drunknest liar,
		The dirtiest dog in all the shire:
		Nice friends for any woman’s son
		After ten years, and all she’s done.
		
		“For I’ve had eight, and buried five,
		And only three are left alive.
		I’ve given them all we could afford.
		I’ve taught them all to fear the Lord.
		They’ve had the best we had to give,
		The only three the Lord let live.
		
		“For Minnie whom I love the worst
		Died mad in childbirth with her first.
		And John and Mary died of measles,
		And Rob was drowned at the Teasels.
		And little Nan, dear little sweet,
		A cart run over in the street;
		Her little shift was all one stain,
		I prayed God put her out of pain.
		And all the rest are gone or going
		The road to hell, and there’s no knowing
		For all I’ve done and all I’ve made them
		I’d better not have overlaid them.
		For Susan went the ways of shame
		The time the ‘till’ry regiment came,
		And t’have her child without a father
		I think I’d have her buried father.
		And Dicky boozes, God forgimme,
		And now’t's to be the same with Jimmy.
		And all I’ve done and all I’ve bore
		Has made a drunkard and a whore,,
		A bastard boy who wasn’t meant,
		And Jimmy gwine where Dicky went;
		For Dick began the self-same way
		And my old hairs are going gray,
		And my poor man’s a withered knee,
		And all the burden falls on me.
		“I’ve washed eight little children’s limbs,
		I’ve taught eight little souls their hymns,
		I’ve risen sick and lain down pinched
		And borne it all and never flinched;
		But to see him, the town’s disgrace,
		With God’s commandments broke in’s face,
		Who never worked, not he, nor earned,
		Nor will do till the seas are burned,
		Who never did since he was whole
		A hand’s turn for a human soul,
		But poached and stole and gone with women,
		And swilled down gin enough to swim in,
		To see him only lift a finger
		To make my little Jimmy linger.
		In spite of all his mother’s prayers,
		And all her ten long years of cares,
		and all her broken spirit’s cry
		That drunkard’s finger puts them by,
		And Jimmy turns. And now I see
		That just as Dick was, Jim will be,
		And all my life will have been in vain.
		I might have spared myself the pain,
		And done the world a blessed riddance
		If I’d a drowned ‘em all like kittens.
		And he the sot, so strong and proud,
		Who’d make white shirts of a mother’s shroud,
		He laughs now, it’s a joke to him,
		Though it’s the gates of hell for Jim.
		
		“I’ve had my heart burnt out like coal,
		And drops of blood wrung from my soul
		Day in, day out, in pain and tears,
		For five and twenty wretched years;
		And he, he’s ate the fat and sweet,
		And loafed and spat at top of street,
		And drunk and leched from day till morrow,
		And never known a moment’s sorrow.
		He come out drunk from th’inn to look
		the day my little Nan was took;
		He sat there drinking, glad and gay,
		The night my girl was led astray;
		He praised my Dick for singing well,
		The night Dick took the road to hell;
		And when my corpse goes stiff and blind,
		Leaving four helpless souls behind,
		He will be there still, drunk and strong.
		It do seem hard. It do seem wring.
		But “Woe to him by whom the offense,”
		Says our Lord Jesus’ Testaments.
		Whatever seems, God doth not slumber
		Though he lets pass times without number.
		He’ll come with trump to call his own,
		And t his world’s way’ll be overthrown.
		He’ll come with glory and with fire
		To cast great darkness on the liar,
		To burn the drunkard and the treacher,
		And do his judgment on the lecher,
		To glorify the spirit’s faces
		Of those whose ways were stony places
		Who chose with Ruth the better part;
		O Lord, i see Thee as Thou are,
		O God, the fiery, four-edged sword,
		The thunder of the wrath outpoured,
		The fiery four-faced creatures burning,
		And all the four-faced wheels all turning,
		Coming with trump and fiery saint.
		Jim, take me home, I’m turning faint.”
		They went, and some cried, “Good old sod.”
		“She put it to him straight, by God.”
		
		Summat, whe was, or looked, or said,
		Went home and made me hang my head.
		I slunk away into the night
		Knowing deep down that she was right.
		I’d often hear[d] religious ranters,
		And put them down as windy canters,
		But this old mother made me see
		the harm I done by being me.
		Being both strong and given to sin
		I ‘stracted weaker vessels in.
		So back to bar to get more drink,
		I didn’t dare begin to think,
		And there were drinks and drunken singing,
		As though this life were dice for flinging;
		Dice to be flung, and nothing furder,
		And Christ’s blood just another murder.
		“Come on, drinks round, salue, drink hearty,
		Now, Jane, the punch-bowl for the party.
		If any here won’t drink with me
		I’ll knock his bloody eyes out. See?
		Come on, cigars round, rum for mine,
		Sing us a smutty song, some swine.”
		But though the drinks and songs went round
		That thought remained, it was not drowned.
		And when I’d rise to get a light
		I’d think, “What’s come to me tonight?”
		
		There’s always crowds when drinks are standing.
		The house doors slammed along the landing,
		The rising wind was gusty yet,
		And those who cam in late were wet;
		And all my body’s nerves were snappin’
		With sense of summat ‘bout to happen,
		And music seemed to come and go
		And seven lights danced in a row.
		There used be a custom then,
		Miss Bourne, the Friend, went round at ten
		To all the pubs in all the place,
		To bring the drunkards’ souls to grace;
		Some sulked, of course, and some were stirred,
		But none give her a dirty word.
		A tall pale woman, grey and bent,
		Folk said of her that she was sent
		She wore Friend’s clothes, and women smiled,
		But she’d a heart just like a child.
		She come to us near closing time
		when we were at some smutty rhyme,
		And I was mad, and ripe for fun;
		I wouldn’t a minded what I done.
		So when she come so prim and grey
		I pound the bar and sing, “Hooray,
		Here’s Quaker come to bless and kiss us,
		Come, have a gin and bitters, missus,
		Or may be Quaker girls so prim
		Would rather start a bloody hymn.
		Now Dick, oblige. A hymn, you swine,
		Pipe up the ‘Officer of the Line,’
		A song to make one’s belly ache,
		Or ‘Nell and Roger at the Wake,’
		Or that sweet song, the talk in town,
		‘The lady fair and Abel Brown.’
		‘O, who’s that knocking at the door,’
		Miss Bourne’ll play the music score.”
		The men stood dumb as cattle are,
		They grinned, but thought I’d gone too far,
		There come a hush and no one break it,
		They wondered how Miss Bourne would take it.
		She up to me with black eyes wide,
		She looked as though her spirit cried;
		She took my tumbler from the bar
		Beside where all the matches are
		And poured it out upon the floor dust,
		Among the fag-ends, spit and saw-dust.
		
		“Saul Kane,” she said, “when next you drink,
		Do me the gentleness to think
		That every drop of drink accursed
		Makes Christ within you die of thirst,
		That every dirty word you say
		Is one more flint upon his way,
		Another thorn about His head,
		Another mock by where He tread,
		Another nail, another cross.
		All that you are is that Christ’s loss.”
		The clock run down and struck a chime
		And Mrs. Si said, “Closing time.”
		
		The wet was pelting on the pane
		And something broke inside my brain,
		I heard the rain drip from the gutters
		And Silas putting up the shutters,
		While one by one the drinkers went;
		I got a glimpse of what it meant,
		How she and I had stood before
		In some old town by some old door
		Waiting intent while someone knocked
		Before the door for ever locked;
		She was so white that I was scared,
		A gas jet, turned the wrong way, flared,
		And Silas snapped the bars in place.
		Miss Bourne stood white and searched my face.
		When Silas done, with ends of tunes
		He ‘gan a gathering the spittoons,
		His wife primmed lips and took the till.
		Miss Bourne stood still and I stood still.
		Miss Bourne stood still and I stood still,
		And “Tick. Slow. Tick. Slow” went the clock.
		She said, “He waits until you knock.”
		She turned at that and went out swift,
		Si grinned and winked, his missus sniffed.
		
		I heard her clang the Lion door,
		I marked a drink-drop roll to floor;
		It took up scraps of sawdust, furry,
		And crinkled on, a half inch, blurry;
		A drop from my last glass of gin;
		And someone waiting to come in,
		A hand upon the door latch gropen
		Knocking the man inside to open.
		I know the very words I said,
		They bayed like bloodhounds in my head.
		“The water’s going out to sea
		And there’s a great moon calling me;
		But there’s a great sun calls the moon,
		And all God’s bells will carol soon
		For joy and glory and delight
		Of someone coming home to-night.”
		Out into darkness, out to night,
		My flaring heart gave plenty light,
		So wild it was there was no knowing
		Whether the clouds or stars were blowing;
		Blown chimney pots and folk blown blind,
		And puddles glimmering in my mind,
		And chinking glass from windows banging,
		And inn signs swung like people hanging,
		And in my heart the drink unpriced,
		The burning cataracts of Christ.
		
		I did not think, I did not strive,
		The deep peace burnt my me alive;
		The bolted door had broken in,
		I knew that I had done with sin.
		I knew that Christ had given me birth
		To brother all the souls on earth,
		And every bird and every beast
		Should share the crumbs broke at the feast.
		
		
		
		O glory of the lighted mind.
		How dead I’d been, how dumb, how blind.
		The station brook, to my new eyes,
		Was babbling out of Paradise,
		The waters rushing from the rain
		Were singing Christ has risen again.
		I thought all earthly creatures knelt
		From rapture of the joy I felt.
		The narrow station-wall’s brick ledge,
		The wild hop withering in the hedge,
		The lights in huntsmans’ upper storey
		Were parts of an eternal glory,
		Were God’s eternal garden flowers.
		I stood in bliss at this for hours.
		
		O glory of the lighted soul.
		The dawn came up on Bradlow Knoll,
		The dawn with glittering on the grasses,
		The dawn which pass and never passes.
		
		“It’s dawn,” I said, “And chimney’s smoking,
		And all the blessed fields are soaking.’
		It’s dawn, and there’s an engine shunting;
		And hounds, for huntsman’s going hunting.
		It’s dawn, and I must wander north
		Along the road Christ led me forth.”
		
		So up the road I wander slow
		Past where the snowdrops used to grow
		With celandines in early springs,
		When rainbows were triumphant things
		And dew so bright and flowers so glad,
		Eternal joy to lass and lad.
		And past the lovely brook I paced,
		The brook whose source I never traced,
		The brook, the one of two which rise
		In my green dream in Paradise,
		In wells where heavenly buckets clink
		To give God’s wandering thirsty drink
		By those clean cots of carven stone
		Where the clear water sings alone.
		Then down, past that white-blossomed pond,
		And past the chestnut trees beyond,
		And past the bridge the fishers knew,
		Where yellow flag flowers once grew,
		Where we’d go gathering cops of clover,
		In sunny June times long since over.
		O clover-cops half white, half red,
		O beauty from beyond the dead.
		O blossom, key to earth and heaven,
		O souls that Christ has new forgiven.
		Then down the hill to gipsies’ pitch
		By where the brook clucks in the ditch.
		A gipsy’s camp was in the copse,
		Three felted tents, with beehive tops,
		And round black marks where fires had been,
		And one old waggon painted green,
		And three ribbed horses wrenching grass,
		And three wild boys to watch me pass,
		And one old woman by the fire
		Hulking a rabbit warm from wire.
		I loved to see the horses bait,
		I felt I walked at Heaven’s gate,
		That Heaven’s gate was opened wide
		Yet still the gipsies camped outside.
		The waste souls will prefer the wild,
		Long after life is meek and mild.
		Perhaps when man has entered in’
		His perfect city free from sin,
		The campers will come past the walls
		With old lame horses full of galls,
		And waggons hung about with withies,
		And burning coke in tinker’s stithies,
		And see the golden town, and choose,
		And think the wild to good to lose.
		And camp outside, as these camped then
		With wonder at the entering men.
		So past, and past the stone heap white
		That dewberry trailers hid from sight,
		And down the field so full of springs,
		Where mewing peewits clap their wings,
		And past the trap made for the mill
		Into the field below the hill.
		There was a mist along the stream,
		A wet mist, dim, like in a dream;
		I heard the heavy breath of cows
		And waterdrops from th’alder boughs;
		And eels, or snakes, in dripping grass,
		Whipping aside to let me pass.
		The gate was backed against the ryme
		To pass the cows at milking time.
		And by the gate as I went out
		A moldwarp rooted earth wi’s snout.
		A few steps up the Callow’s Lane
		Brought me above the mist again,
		The two great fields arose like death
		Above the mists of human breath.
		
		All earthly things that blessиd morning
		Were everlasting joy and warning,
		The gate was Jesus’way made plain,
		the mole was Satan foiled again,
		black blinded Satan snouting way
		Along the red of Adam’s clay;
		The mist was error and damnatiion,
		The lane the road unto salvation.
		Out of the mist into the light,
		O blessиd gift of inner sight.
		The past was faded like a dream;
		There come the jingling of a team,
		A ploughman’s voice, a clink of chain,
		Slow hoofs, and harness under strain.
		Up the slow slope a team came bowing,
		Old Callow at his autumn ploughing,
		Old Callow, stooped above the hales,
		Ploughing the stubble into wales.
		His grave eyes looking straight ahead,
		Shearing a long straight furrow red;
		His plough-foot high to give it earth
		To bring new food for men to birth.
		O wet red swathe of earth laid bare,
		O truth, O strength, O gleaming share,
		O patient eyes that watch the goal,
		O ploughman of the sinner’s soul.
		O Jesus, drive the coulter deep
		To plough my living man from sleep.
		
		Slow up the hill the plough team plod,
		Old Callow at the task of God,
		Helped by man’s wit, helped by the brute,
		Turning a stubborn clay to fruit,
		His eyes forever on some sign
		To help him plough a perfect line.
		At top of rise the plough team stopped,
		The fore-horse bent his head and cropped.
		Then the chains chack, the brasses jingle,
		The lean reins gather through the cringle,
		The figures move against the sky,
		The clay wave breaks as they go by.
		I kneeled there in the muddy fallow,
		I knew that Christ was there with Callow,
		That Christ was standing there with me,
		That Christ had taught me what to be,
		That I should plough, and as I ploughed
		My Saviour Christ would sing aloud,
		And as I drove the clods apart
		Christ would be ploughing in my heart,
		Through rest-harrow and bitter roots,
		Through all my bad life’s rotten fruits.
		
		O Christ who holds the open gate,
		O Christ who drives the furrow straight,
		O Christ, the plough, O Christ, the laughter
		Of holy white birds flying after,
		Lo, all my heart’s field red and torn,
		And Thou wilt bring the young green corn,
		The young green corn divinely springing,
		The young green corn forever singing;
		And when the field is fresh and fair
		Thy blessиd feet shall glitter there,
		And we will walk the weeded field,
		And tell the holden harvests’s yield,
		The corn that makes the holy bread
		By which the soul of man is fed,
		The holy bread, the food unpriced,
		Thy everlasting mercy, Christ.
		
		The share will jar on many a stone,
		Thou wilt not let me stand alone;
		And I shall feel (thou wilt not fail),
		Thy hand on mine upon the hale.
		Near Bullen Bank, on Gloucester Road,
		Thy everlasting mercy showed
		The ploughman patient on the hill
		Forever there, forever still,
		Ploughing the hill with steady yoke
		Of pine-trees lightning-struck and broke.
		I’ve marked the May Hill ploughman stay
		There on his hill, day after day
		Driving his team against the sky,
		While men and women live and die.
		And now and then he seems to stoop
		To clear the coulter with the scoop,
		Or touch an ox to haw or gee
		While Severn stream goes out to sea.
		The sea with all her ships and sails,
		And that great smoky port in Wales,
		And Gloucester tower bright i’ the sun,
		All know that patient wandering one.
		And sometimes when they burn the leaves
		The bonfires’ smoking trails and heaves,
		And girt red flamлs twink and twire
		As though he ploughed the hill afire.
		And in men’s hearts in many lands
		A spiritual ploughman stands
		Forever waiting, waiting now,
		The heart’s “Put in, man, zook the plough.”
		
		By this the sun was all one glitter,
		The little birds were all atwitter;
		Out of a tuft a little lark
		Went higher up than I could mark,
		His little throat was all one thirst
		To sing until his heart should burst
		To sing aloft in golden light
		His song from blue air out of sight.
		The mist drove by, and now the cows
		Came plodding up to milking house.
		Followed by Frank, the Callow’s cowman,
		Who whistled, “Adam was a ploughman.”
		There came such cawing from the rooks,
		Such running chuck from little brooks,
		One thought it March, just budding green,
		With hedgerows full of celandine.
		An otter’ out of stream and played,
		Two hares come loping up and stayed;
		Wide-eyed and tender-eared but bold.
		Sheep bleated up from Penny’s fold.
		I heard a partridge covey call,
		The morning sun was bright on all.
		Down the long slope the plough team drove
		The tossing rooks arose and hove.
		A stone struck on the share. A word
		Came to the team. The red earth stirred.
		
		I crossed the hedge by shooter’s gap,
		I hitched my boxer’s belt a strap,
		I jumped the ditch and crossed the fallow:
		I took the hales from framer Callow.
		
		How swift the summer goes,
		Forget-me-not, pink, rose.
		The young grass when I started
		And now the hay is carted,
		And now my song is ended,
		And all the summer splended;
		The blackbirds’ second brood
		Routs beech leaves in the wood;
		The pink and rose have speeded,
		Forget-me-not has seeded.
		Only the winds that blew,
		The rain that makes things new,
		The earth that hides things old,
		And blessings manifold.
		
		O lovely lily clean,
		O lily springing green,
		O lily bursting white,
		Dear lily of delight,
		Spring my heart agen
		That I may flower to men.


	6. THE LEMMINGS

		Once in a hundred years the Lemmings come
		Westward, in search of food, over the snow;
		Westward until the salt sea drowns them dumb;
		Westward, till all are drowned, those Lemmings go.
		Once, it is thought, there was a westward land
		Now drowned where there was food for those starved things,
		And memory of the place has burnt its brand
		In the little brains of all the Lemming Kings.
		Perhaps, long since, there was a land beyond
		Westward from death, some city, some calm place
		Where one could taste God’s quiet and be fond
		With the little beauty of a human face;
		But now the land is drowned. Yet we still press
		Westward, in search, to death, to nothingness.


*** James McAuley (1917 - 1976)

	1. AUTUMN

		Lord, it is time. The fruitful summer yields;
		The shadows fall across the figured dial,
		The winds are loosed upon the harvest fields.
		See that these last fruits swell upon the vine;
		Grant them as yet a southern day or two
		Then press them to fulfilment, and pursue
		The last of sweetness in the heavy wine.
		Who now is homeless shall not build this year.
		He shall be solitary and long alone;
		Shall wake, and read, and write long letters home,
		And on deserted pavements here and there
		Shall wander restless, as the leaves are blown.


	2. IN A LATE HOUR

		Though all men should desert you
		My faith shall not grow less,
		But keep that single virtue
		Of simple thankfulness.
		Pursuit had closed around me,
		Terrors had pressed me low;
		You sought me, and you found me,
		And I will not let you go.
		The hearts of men grow colder,
		The final things draw near,
		Forms vanish, kingdoms moulder,
		The Antirealm is here;
		Whose order is derangement:
		Close-driven, yet alone,
		Men reach the last estrangement--
		The sense of nature gone.
		Though the stars run distracted,
		And from wounds deep rancours flow,
		While the mystery is enacted
		I will not let you go.


	3. ONE TUESDAY IN SUMMER

		That sultry afternoon the world went strange.
		Under a violet and leaden bruise
		The air was filled with sinister yellow light;
		Trees, houses, grass took on unnatural hues.
		Thunder rolled near. The intensity grew and grew
		Like doom itself with lightnings on its face.
		And Mr Pitt, the grocer’s order-man,
		Who made his call on Tuesdays at our place,
		Said to my mother, looking at the sky,
		“You’d think the ending of the world had come.”
		A leathern little man, with bicycle-clips
		Around his ankles, doing our weekly sum,
		He too looked strange in that uncanny light;
		As in the Bible ordinary men
		Turn out to be angelic messengers,
		Pronouncing the Lord’s judgments why and when.
		I watched the scurry of the small black ants
		That sensed the storm. What Mr Pitt had said
		I didn’t quite believe, or disbelieve;
		But still the words had got into my head,
		For nothing less seemed worthy of the scene.
		The darkening imminence hung on and on,
		Till suddenly, with lightning-stroke and rain,
		Apocalypse exploded, and was gone.
		By nightfall things had their familiar look.
		But I had seen the world stand in dismay
		Under the aspect of another meaning
		That rain or time would hardly wash away.


	4. WINTER NIGHTFALL

		Snow falls on the darkening boughs,
		Evening bell rings through the shade;
		For many guests the table’s laid,
		Well-appointed is the house.
		Travellers come from field and fold
		By dark pathways to the gate;
		The Tree of Grace has blossomed late,
		Turning earth’s cool sap to gold.
		Hard with pain the stony sill;
		Indoors on the table shine
		With pure brightness bread and wine;
		Enter, wanderer, take your fill.


	5. WISTARIA

		Does that wistaria vine still break in flower
		Like grape-clusters transformed to lilac light
		For bees to hover in? It had a power,
		Then, to absorb all feelings into sight.
		And the mute aching sweetness of its scent
		Stored up the quotient of long afternoons
		Where time stretched forward, empty of event,
		Drifting-with bells, pagodas, pale balloons--
		Shapes that changed back to flowers at a touch.
		The soul must feed on something for its dreams
		In those brick suburbs, and there wasn’t much:
		It can make do with little, so it seems.
		Its formal home had crossed flags at the back
		And reverent doubt up front. In equipoise
		Between the brass cross and the Union Jack,
		It could still quiver to the cheerful noise
		That called upon all things to render praise.
		Of all things, I liked best that tough old vine
		Roping our side fence, offering my days
		Clusters of hope that stirred the sense like wine.


*** John McCrae (1872 - 1918)

	1. A SONG OF COMFORT

		    _“Sleep weary ones while ye may--
		        Sleep oh sleep!“_
		                             --Eugene Field.
		
		Thro’ May time blossoms with whisper low
		The soft wind sang to the dead below:
		“Think not with regret on the Springtime’s song
		And the task ye left while your hands were strong.
		The song would have ceased when the Spring was past
		And the task that was joyous be weary at last.”
		
		To the winter sky when the nights were long
		The tree-tops tossed with a ceaseless song:
		“Do ye think with regret on the sunny days
		And the path ye left with its untrod ways?
		The sun might sink in a storm cloud’s frown
		And the path grow rough when the night came down.”
		
		In the grey twilight of the autumn eves
		It sighed as it sang through the dying leaves:
		“Ye think with regret that the world was bright
		That your path was short and your task was light;
		The path though short was perhaps the best
		And the toil was sweet that it led to rest.”


	2. ANARCHY

		I saw a city filled with lust and shame
		Where men like wolves slunk through the grim half-light;
		And sudden in the midst of it there came
		One who spoke boldly for the cause of Right.
		
		And speaking fell before that brutish race
		Like some poor wren that shrieking eagles tear
		While brute Dishonour with her bloodless face
		Stood by and smote his lips that moved in prayer.
		
		“Speak not of God! In centuries that word
		Hath not been uttered! Our own king are we.”
		And God stretched forth his finger as He heard
		And o’er it cast a thousand leagues of sea.


	3. EVENTIDE

		The day is past and the toilers cease;
		The land grows dim ‘mid the shadows grey
		And hearts are glad for the dark brings peace
		           At the close of day.
		
		Each weary toiler with lingering pace
		As he homeward turns with the long day done
		Looks out to the west with the light on his face
		           Of the setting sun.
		
		Yet some see not (with their sin-dimmed eyes)
		The promise of rest in the fading light;
		But the clouds loom dark in the angry skies
		           At the fall of night.
		
		And some see only a golden sky
		Where the elms their welcoming arms stretch wide
		To the calling rooks as they homeward fly
		           At the eventide.
		
		It speaks of peace that comes after strife
		Of the rest He sends to the hearts He tried
		Of the calm that follows the stormiest life--
		           God’s eventide.


	4. IN FLANDERS FIELDS

		In Flanders fields the poppies blow
		Between the crosses row on row
		That mark our place; and in the sky
		The larks still bravely singing fly
		Scarce heard amid the guns below.
		
		We are the Dead. Short days ago
		We lived felt dawn saw sunset glow
		Loved and were loved and now we lie
		           In Flanders fields.
		
		Take up our quarrel with the foe:
		To you from failing hands we throw
		The torch; be yours to hold it high.
		If ye break faith with us who die
		We shall not sleep though poppies grow
		           In Flanders fields.


	5. PENANCE

		My lover died a century ago
		Her dear heart stricken by my sland’rous breath
		Wherefore the Gods forbade that I should know
		           The peace of death.
		
		Men pass my grave and say “‘Twere well to sleep
		Like such an one amid the uncaring dead!”
		How should they know the vigils that I keep
		           The tears I shed?
		
		Upon the grave I count with lifeless breath
		Each night each year the flowers that bloom and die
		Deeming the leaves that fall to dreamless death
		           More blest than I.
		
		‘Twas just last year--I heard two lovers pass
		So near I caught the tender words he said:
		To-night the rain-drenched breezes sway the grass
		           Above his head.
		
		That night full envious of his life was I
		That youth and love should stand at his behest;
		To-night I envy him that he should lie
		           At utter rest.


	6. RECOMPENSE

		I saw two sowers in Life’s field at morn
		To whom came one in angel guise and said
		“Is it for labour that a man is born?
		Lo: I am Ease. Come ye and eat my bread!”
		Then gladly one forsook his task undone
		And with the Tempter went his slothful way
		The other toiled until the setting sun
		With stealing shadows blurred the dusty day.
		
		Ere harvest time upon earth’s peaceful breast
		Each laid him down among the unreaping dead.
		“Labour hath other recompense than rest
		Else were the toiler like the fool“ I said;
		“God meeteth him not less but rather more
		Because he sowed and others reaped his store.”


	7. THE HOPE OF MY HEART

		_“Delicta juventutis et ignorantius ejus
		       quoesumus ne memineris Domine.”_
		
		I left to earth a little maiden fair
		With locks of gold and eyes that shamed the light;
		I prayed that God might have her in His care
		           And sight.
		
		Earth’s love was false; her voice a siren’s song;
		(Sweet mother-earth was but a lying name)
		The path she showed was but the path of wrong
		           And shame.
		
		“Cast her not out!“ I cry. God’s kind words come--
		“Her future is with Me as was her past;
		It shall be My good will to bring her home
		           At last.”


	8. THE NIGHT COMETH

		Cometh the night. The wind falls low
		The trees swing slowly to and fro:
		Around the church the headstones grey
		Cluster like children strayed away
		But found again and folded so.
		
		No chiding look doth she bestow:
		If she is glad they cannot know;
		If ill or well they spend their day
		           Cometh the night.
		
		Singing or sad intent they go;
		They do not see the shadows grow;
		“There yet is time“ they lightly say
		“Before our work aside we lay“;
		Their task is but half-done and lo!
		           Cometh the night.


	9. THE SHADOW OF THE CROSS

		At the drowsy dusk when the shadows creep
		From the golden west where the sunbeams sleep
		
		An angel mused: “Is there good or ill
		In the mad world’s heart since on Calvary’s hill
		
		‘Round the cross a mid-day twilight fell
		That darkened earth and o’ershadowed hell?”
		
		Through the streets of a city the angel sped;
		Like an open scroll men’s hearts he read.
		
		In a monarch’s ear his courtiers lied
		And humble faces hid hearts of pride.
		
		Men’s hate waxed hot and their hearts grew cold
		As they haggled and fought for the lust of gold.
		
		Despairing he cried “After all these years
		Is there naught but hatred and strife and tears?”
		
		He found two waifs in an attic bare;
		--A single crust was their meagre fare--
		
		One strove to quiet the other’s cries
		And the love-light dawned in her famished eyes
		
		As she kissed the child with a motherly air:
		“I don’t need mine you can have my share.”
		
		Then the angel knew that the earthly cross
		And the sorrow and shame were not wholly loss.
		
		At dawn when hushed was earth’s busy hum
		And men looked not for their Christ to come
		
		From the attic poor to the palace grand
		The King and the beggar went hand in hand.


	10. THE UNCONQUERED DEAD

		    “. . . defeated with great loss.”
		
		Not we the conquered! Not to us the blame
		Of them that flee of them that basely yield;
		Nor ours the shout of victory the fame
		Of them that vanquish in a stricken field.
		
		That day of battle in the dusty heat
		We lay and heard the bullets swish and sing
		Like scythes amid the over-ripened wheat
		And we the harvest of their garnering.
		
		Some yielded No not we! Not we we swear
		By these our wounds; this trench upon the hill
		Where all the shell-strewn earth is seamed and bare
		Was ours to keep; and lo! we have it still.
		
		We might have yielded even we but death
		Came for our helper; like a sudden flood
		The crashing darkness fell; our painful breath
		We drew with gasps amid the choking blood.
		
		The roar fell faint and farther off and soon
		Sank to a foolish humming in our ears
		Like crickets in the long hot afternoon
		Among the wheat fields of the olden years.
		
		Before our eyes a boundless wall of red
		Shot through by sudden streaks of jagged pain!
		Then a slow-gathering darkness overhead
		And rest came on us like a quiet rain.
		
		Not we the conquered! Not to us the shame
		Who hold our earthen ramparts nor shall cease
		To hold them ever; victors we who came
		In that fierce moment to our honoured peace.


*** Claude McKay (1890 - 1948)

	1. AFTER THE WINTER

		Some day, when trees have shed their leaves
		    And against the morning’s white
		The shivering birds beneath the eaves
		    Have sheltered for the night,
		We’ll turn our faces southward, love,
		    Toward the summer isle
		Where bamboos spire the shafted grove
		    And wide-mouthed orchids smile.
		
		And we will seek the quiet hill
		    Where towers the cotton tree,
		And leaps the laughing crystal rill,
		    And works the droning bee.
		And we will build a cottage there
		    Beside an open glade,
		With black-ribbed blue-bells blowing near,
		    And ferns that never fade.


	2. AMERICA

		Although she feeds me bread of bitterness,
		And sinks into my throat her tiger’s tooth,
		Stealing my breath of life, I will confess
		I love this cultured hell that tests my youth.
		Her vigor flows like tides into my blood,
		Giving me strength erect against her hate,
		Her bigness sweeps my being like a flood.
		Yet, as a rebel fronts a king in state,
		I stand within her walls with not a shred
		Of terror, malice, not a word of jeer.
		Darkly I gaze into the days ahead,
		And see her might and granite wonders there,
		Beneath the touch of Time’s unerring hand,
		Like priceless treasures sinking in the sand.


	3. DECEMBER, 1919

		Last night I heard your voice, mother,
		The words you sang to me
		When I, a little barefoot boy,
		Knelt down against your knee.
		
		And tears gushed from my heart, mother,
		And passed beyond its wall,
		But though the fountain reached my throat
		The drops refused to fall.
		
		‘Tis ten years since you died, mother,
		Just ten dark years of pain,
		And oh, I only wish that I
		Could weep just once again.


	4. FUTILITY

		Oh, I have tried to laugh the pain away,
		Let new flames brush my love-springs like a feather.
		But the old fever seizes me to-day,
		As sickness grips a soul in wretched weather.
		I have given up myself to every urge,
		With not a care of precious powers spent,
		Have bared my body to the strangest scourge,
		To soothe and deaden my heart’s unhealing rent.
		But you have torn a nerve out of my frame,
		A gut that no physician can replace,
		And reft my life of happiness and aim.
		Oh what new purpose shall I now embrace?
		What substance hold, what lovely form pursue,
		When my thought burns through everything to you?


	5. I KNOW MY SOUL

		I plucked my soul out of its secret place,
		And held it to the mirror of my eye,
		To see it like a star against the sky,
		A twitching body quivering in space,
		A spark of passion shining on my face.
		And I explored it to determine why
		This awful key to my infinity
		Conspires to rob me of sweet joy and grace.
		And if the sign may not be fully read,
		If I can comprehend but not control,
		I need not gloom my days with futile dread,
		Because I see a part and not the whole.
		Contemplating the strange, I’m comforted
		By this narcotic thought: I know my soul.


	6. JOY IN THE WOODS

		There is joy in the woods just now,
		      The leaves are whispers of song,
		And the birds make mirth on the bough
		      And music the whole day long,
		And God! to dwell in the town
		      In these springlike summer days,
		On my brow an unfading frown
		      And hate in my heart always--
		
		A machine out of gear, aye, tired,
		Yet forced to go on--for I’m hired.
		
		Just forced to go on through fear,
		      For every day I must eat
		And find ugly clothes to wear,
		      And bad shoes to hurt my feet
		And a shelter for work-drugged sleep!
		      A mere drudge! but what can one do?
		A man that’s a man cannot weep!
		      Suicide? A quitter? Oh, no!
		
		But a slave should never grow tired,
		Whom the masters have kindly hired.
		
		But oh! for the woods, the flowers
		      Of natural, sweet perfume,
		The heartening, summer showers
		      And the smiling shrubs in bloom,
		Dust-free, dew-tinted at morn,
		      The fresh and life-giving air,
		The billowing waves of corn
		      And the birds’ notes rich and clear:--
		
		For a man-machine toil-tired
		May crave beauty too--though he’s hired.


	7. ON BROADWAY

		About me young careless feet
		Linger along the garish street;
		Above, a hundred shouting signs
		Shed down their bright fantastic glow
		Upon the merry crowd and lines
		Of moving carriages below.
		Oh wonderful is Broadway--only
		My heart, my heart is lonely.
		Desire naked, linked with Passion,
		Goes trutting by in brazen fashion;
		From playhouse, cabaret and inn
		The rainbow lights of Broadway blaze
		All gay without, all glad within;
		As in a dream I stand and gaze
		At Broadway, shining Broadway--only
		My heart, my heart is lonely.


	8. SUMMER MORN IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

		All yesterday it poured, and all night long
		I could not sleep; the rain unceasing beat
		Upon the shingled roof like a weird song,
		Upon the grass like running children’s feet.
		And down the mountains by the dark cloud kissed,
		Like a strange shape in filmy veiling dressed,
		Slid slowly, silently, the wraith-like mist,
		And nestled soft against the earth’s wet breast.
		
		But lo, there was a miracle at dawn!
		The still air stirred at touch of the faint breeze,
		The sun a sheet of gold bequeathed the lawn,
		The songsters twittered in the rustling trees.
		And all things were transfigured in the day,
		But me whom radiant beauty could not move;
		For you, more wonderful, were far away,
		And I was blind with hunger for your love.


	9. THROUGH AGONY

		I
		
		All night, through the eternity of night,
		Pain was my potion though I could not feel.
		Deep in my humbled heart you ground your heel,
		Till I was reft of even my inner light,
		Till reason from my mind had taken flight,
		And all my world went whirling in a reel.
		And all my swarthy strength turned cold like steel,
		A passive mass beneath your puny might.
		Last night I gave you triumph over me,
		So I should be myself as once before,
		I marveled at your shallow mystery,
		And haunted hungrily your temple door.
		I gave you sum and substance to be free,
		Oh, you shall never triumph any more!
		
		
		II
		
		I do not fear to face the fact and say,
		How darkly-dull my living hours have grown,
		My wounded heart sinks heavier than stone,
		Because I loved you longer than a day!
		I do not shame to turn myself away
		From beckoning flowers beautifully blown,
		To mourn your vivid memory alone
		In mountain fastnesses austerely gray.
		The mists will shroud me on the utter height,
		The salty, brimming waters of my breast
		Will mingle with the fresh dews of the night
		To bathe my spirit hankering to rest.
		But after sleep I’ll wake with greater might,
		Once more to venture on the eternal quest.


	10. TO ONE COMING NORTH

		At first you’ll joy to see the playful snow,
		 Like white moths trembling on the tropic air,
		Or waters of the hills that softly flow
		 Gracefully falling down a shining stair.
		
		And when the fields and streets are covered white
		 And the wind-worried void is chilly, raw,
		Or underneath a spell of heat and light
		 The cheerless frozen spots begin to thaw,
		
		Like me you’ll long for home, where birds’ glad song
		 Means flowering lanes and leas and spaces dry,
		And tender thoughts and feelings fine and strong,
		 Beneath a vivid silver-flecked blue sky.
		
		But oh! more than the changeless southern isles,
		 When Spring has shed upon the earth her charm,
		You’ll love the Northland wreathed in golden smiles
		 By the miraculous sun turned glad and warm.


*** Thomas Merton (1915 - 1968)

	1. A DIRGE

		Some one who hears the bugle neigh will know
		How cold it is, when sentries die by starlight.
		
		But none who love to hear the hammering drum
		Will look, when the betrayer
		Laughs in the desert like a broken monument,
		Ringing his tongue in the red bell of his head,
		Gesturing like a flag.
		
		The air that quivered after the earthquake
		(When God died like a thief)
		Still plays the ancient forums like pianos;
		The treacherous wind, lover of the demented,
		Will harp forever in the haunted temples.
		
		What speeches do the birds make
		With their beaks, to the desolate dead?
		And yet we love those carsick amphitheaters,
		
		Nor hear our messenger come home from hell
		With hands shot full of blood.
		
		No one who loves the fleering fife, will feel
		The light of morning stab his flesh,
		
		But some who hear the trumpet’s raving, in the ruined sky,
		Will dread the burnished helmet of the sun
		Whose anger goes before the King.


	2. A HYMN OF NOT MUCH PRAISE FOR NEW YORK

		When the windows of the West Side clash like cymbals in the setting sunlight,
		And when wind wails amid the East Side’s aerials,
		And when, both north and south of thirty-fourth street,   
		In all the dizzy buildings,
		The elevators clack their teeth and rattle the bars of their cages,   
		Then the children of the city,
		Leaving the monkey-houses
		  of their office-buildings and apartments,
		With the greatest difficulty open their mouths, and sing:
		“Queen among the cities of the Earth: New York!   
		Rich as a cake, common as a doughnut,
		Expensive as a fur and crazy as cocaine,
		We love to hear you shake
		Your big face like a shining bank
		Letting the mad world know you’re full of dimes!
		
		”This is your night to make maraccas out of all that metal money
		Paris is in the prison-house, and London dies of cancer.   
		This is the time for you to whirl,
		Queen of our hopped-up peace,
		And let the excitement of your somewhat crippled congas   
		Supersede the waltzes of more shining
		Capitals that have been bombed.
		
		“Meanwhile we, your children,
		Weeping in our seasick zoo of windows while you dance,   
		Will gobble aspirins,
		And try to keep our cage from caving in.
		All the while our minds will fill with these petitions,   
		Flowering quietly in between our gongs of pulse.   
		These will have to serve as prayers:
		
		“ ‘O lock us in the safe jails of thy movies!
		Confine us to the semiprivate wards and white asylums   
		Of the unbearable cocktail parties, O New York!   
		Sentence us for life to the penitentiaries of thy bars and nightclubs,
		And leave us stupefied forever by the blue, objective lights   
		That fill the pale infirmaries of thy restaurants,
		And the clinics of thy schools and offices,
		And the operating-rooms of thy dance-halls.
		
		“ ‘But never give us any explanations, even when we ask,   
		Why all our food tastes of iodoform,
		And even the freshest flowers smell of funerals.
		No, never let us look about us long enough to wonder   
		Which of the rich men, shivering in the overheated office,   
		And which of the poor men, sleeping face-down on the Daily Mirror,
		Are still alive, and which are dead.’ ”


	3. ADVICE TO A YOUNG PROPHET

		Keep away, son, these lakes are salt. These flowers   
		Eat insects. Here private lunatics   
		Yell and skip in a very dry country.
		
		Or where some haywire monument   
		Some badfaced daddy of fear   
		Commands an unintelligent rite.
		
		To dance on the unlucky mountain,   
		To dance they go, and shake the sin   
		Out of their feet and hands,
		
		Frenzied until the sudden night   
		Falls very quiet, and magic sin   
		Creeps, secret, back again.
		
		Badlands echo with omens of ruin:
		Seven are very satisfied, regaining possession:   
		(Bring a little mescaline, you’ll get along!)
		
		There’s something in your bones,
		There’s someone dirty in your critical skin,
		There’s a tradition in your cruel misdirected finger   
		Which you must obey, and scribble in the hot sand:
		
		“Let everybody come and attend   
		Where lights and airs are fixed
		To teach and entertain. O watch the sandy people   
		Hopping in the naked bull’s-eye,
		
		Shake the wildness out of their limbs,
		Try to make peace like John in skins
		Elijah in the timid air   
		or Anthony in tombs:
		
		Pluck the imaginary trigger, brothers.   
		Shoot the devil: he’ll be back again!”
		
		America needs these fatal friends
		Of God and country, to grovel in mystical ashes,   
		Pretty big prophets whose words don’t burn,   
		Fighting the strenuous imago all day long.
		
		Only these lunatics, (O happy chance)
		Only these are sent. Only this anaemic thunder   
		Grumbles on the salt flats, in rainless night:
		
		O go home, brother, go home!   
		The devil’s back again,
		And magic Hell is swallowing flies.


	4. AT THIS PRECISE MOMENT OF HISTORY

		1. At this precise moment of history   
		   With Goody-two-shoes running for Congress
		   We are testing supersonic engines   
		   To keep God safe in the cherry tree.   
		   When I said so in this space last Thursday   
		   I meant what I said: power struggles.
		
		2. You would never dream of such corn. The colonials in   
		   sandalwood like running wide open and available for   
		   protection. You can throw them away without a refund.
		
		3. Dr. Hanfstaengel who was not called Putzi except by   
		   those who did not know him is taped in the national   
		   archives. J. Edgar Hoover he ought to know
		   And does know.
		
		   But calls Dr. Hanfstaengel Putzi nevertheless   
		   Somewhere on tape in the   
		   Archives.
		
		   He (Dr. H.) is not a silly man.   
		   He left in disgust
		   About the same time Shirley Temple
		   Sat on Roosevelt’s knee   
		   An accomplished pianist
		   A remembered personality.   
		   He (Dr. H.) began to teach   
		   Immortal anecdotes
		   To his mother a Queen Bee   
		   In the American colony.
		
		4. What is your attitude toward historical subjects?   
		   --Perhaps it’s their size!
		
		5. When I said this in space you would never believe   
		   Corn Colonel was so expatriated.
		   --If you think you know,
		   Take this wheel
		   And become standard.
		
		6. She is my only living mother
		   This bee of the bloody arts
		   Bandaging victims of Saturday’s dance   
		   Like a veritable sphinx
		   In a totally new combination.
		
		7. The Queen Mother is an enduring vignette   
		      at an early age.
		   Now she ought to be kept in submersible   
		      decompression chambers
		
		   For a while.
		
		8. What is your attitude toward historical subjects   
		   Like Queen Colonies?
		   --They are permanently fortified
		   For shape retention.
		
		9. Solid shades   
		   Seven zippered pockets   
		   Close to my old place
		   Waiting by the road
		   Big disk brakes
		   Spinoff
		   Zoom
		   Long lights stabbing at the   
		   Two together piggyback   
		   In a stark sports roadster
		
		   Regretting his previous outburst   
		   Al loads his Cadillac   
		   With lovenests.
		
		10. She is my only living investment   
		     She examines the housing industry   
		     Counts 3.5 million postwar children   
		     Turning twenty-one
		     And draws her own conclusion   
		     In the commercial fishing field.
		
		11. Voice of little sexy ventriloquist mignonne:
		     “Well I think all of us are agreed and sincerely I my-
		     self believe that honest people on both sides have got   
		     it all on tape. Governor Reagan thinks that nuclear   
		     wampums are a last resort that ought not to be re-
		     sorted.” (But little mignonne went right to the point   
		     with: “We have a commitment to fulfill and we better   
		     do it quick.” No dupe she!)
		
		     All historians die of the same events at least twice.
		
		13. I feel that I ought to open this case with an apology.   
		     Dr. H. certainly has a beautiful voice. He is not a silly   
		     man. He is misunderstood even by Presidents.
		
		14. You people are criticizing the Church but what are   
		     you going to put in her place? Sometime sit down with   
		     a pencil and paper and ask yourself what you’ve got   
		     that the Church hasn’t.
		
		15. Nothing to add
		     But the big voice of a detective   
		     Using the wrong first names   
		     In national archives.
		
		16. She sat in shocking pink with an industrial zipper spe-
		     cially designed for sitting on the knees of presidents in   
		     broad daylight. She spoke the president’s mind. “We   
		     have a last resort to be resorted and we better do it   
		     quick.” He wondered at what he had just said.
		
		17. It was all like running wideopen in a loose gown   
		     Without slippers   
		     At least someplace.


	5. AUBADE-HARLEM

		Across the cages of the keyless aviaries,
		The lines and wires, the gallows of the broken kites,   
		Crucify, against the fearful light,
		The ragged dresses of the little children.
		Soon, in the sterile jungles of the waterpipes and ladders,   
		The bleeding sun, a bird of prey, will terrify the poor,   
		These will forget the unbelievable moon.
		
		But in the cells of whiter buildings,
		Where the glass dawn is brighter than the knives of surgeons,   
		Paler than alcohol or ether, shinier than money,
		The white men’s wives, like Pilate’s,
		Cry in the peril of their frozen dreams:
		
		“Daylight has driven iron spikes,
		Into the flesh of Jesus’ hands and feet:
		Four flowers of blood have nailed Him to the walls of Harlem.”
		
		Along the white halls of the clinics and the hospitals   
		Pilate evaporates with a cry:
		They have cut down two hundred Judases,
		Hanged by the neck in the opera houses and the museum.
		
		Across the cages of the keyless aviaries,
		The lines and wires, the gallows of the broken kites,   
		Crucify, against the fearful light,
		The ragged dresses of the little children.


	6. BIRDCAGE WALK

		I
		
		One royal afternoon
		When I was young and easily surprised   
		By uncles coming from the park
		At the command of nurses and of guards,
		
		I wondered, over trees and ponds,   
		At the sorry, rude walls
		And the white windows of the apartments.
		
		“These,” said my uncle, “are the tallest houses.”   
		
		
		II
		
		Yes, in the spring of my joy
		When I was visibly affected by a gaitered bishop,   
		Large and unsteady in the flagged yard,
		Guards, dogs and blackbirds fled on every hand.
		
		“He is an old one,” said uncle,   
		“The gaiters are real.”
		
		
		III
		
		Rippled, fistfed windows of your
		Dun high houses! Then
		Come cages made of pretty willows
		Where they put the palace girls!
		Green ducks wade slowly from the marble water.   
		One swan reproves a saucy daughter.
		
		I consider my own true pond,
		Look for the beginning and the end.
		I lead the bishop down lanes and islands.
		
		
		IV
		
		Yes, in the windows of my first existence   
		Before my yawns became seasons,
		When nurses and uncles were sure,   
		Chinese fowl fought the frosty water   
		Startled by this old pontifex.
		
		“No bridge” (He smiled   
		Between the budding branches),
		“No crossing to the cage   
		Of the paradise bird!”
		
		Astounded by the sermons in the leaves
		I cried, “No! No! The stars have higher houses!”
		
		Kicking the robins and ganders   
		From the floor of his insular world
		The magic bishop leaned his blessing on the children.
		
		
		V
		
		That was the bold day when
		Moved by the unexpected summons   
		I opened all the palace aviaries   
		As by a king’s representative
		I was appointed fowler.


	7. FROM THE LEGEND OF ST. CLEMENT

		I have seen the sun
		Spilling its copper petals on the Black Sea
		By the base of the prisoners’ cliff
		Where, from the acts of martyrs,
		Tall poems grow up like buildings.
		
		Deep in the wall of the wounded mountain
		(Where seas no longer frown)
		The songs of the martyrs come up like cities or buildings.
		Their chains shine with hymns
		And their hands cut down the giant blocks of stone.
		
		Poetry, psalms
		Flower with a huge architecture
		Raising their grandeur on the gashed cape.
		Words of God blaze like a disaster
		In the windows of their prophetic cathedral.
		But the sighs of the deep multitude
		Grow out of the mountain’s heart as clean as vines.
		
		O martyrs! O tremendous prisoners!
		Burying your murder in this marble hill!
		The Lamb shall soon stand
		White as a shout against the sky:
		His feet shall soon strike rainbows from the rock.
		The cliffs give up their buried streams.
		Throw down the chains of your wrists, prisoners!
		Drink, and swim!
		
		The winds have carried your last sentences
		Across Ukraine.
		Your poetry shall grow in distant places.
		Asia, Greece, Egypt, England know your name.
		Your hymns shall stand like vineyards
		And swing with fruit in other worlds, in other centuries.
		
		And your ecstasy shall make shade,
		Foliage for summers unforeseen
		To cover travellers in continents you have not known
		When the temples have fallen,
		The theaters cemented in your blood have long ago fallen.
		
		Your joy echoes across the carved ridge
		Plays across mountains
		Stands like fleets or islands
		Sailing the seas to Greece
		And after twenty times one hundred
		Years of repercussion
		Your waters shatter the land at my feet with seas forever
		young.


	8. HOW TO ENTER THE BIG CITY

		I
		
		Swing by starwhite bones and
		Lights tick in the middle.
		Blue and white steel
		Black and white
		People hurrying along the wall.   
		”Here you are, bury my dead bones.“
		
		Curve behind the sun again   
		Towers full of ice. Rich   
		Glass houses, “Here,
		Have a little of my blood,”   
		Rich people!”
		
		Wheat in towers. Meat on ice.
		Cattlecars. Miles of wide-open walls.   
		Baseball between these sudden tracks.   
		Yell past the red street--
		Have you any water to drink, City?   
		Rich glass buildings, give us milk!   
		Give us coffee! Give us rum!
		
		There are huge clouds all over the sky.
		River smells of gasoline.
		Cars after cars after cars, and then
		A little yellow street goes by without a murmur.
		
		There came a man
		(”Those are radios, that were his eyes“)   
		Who offered to sell us his bones.
		
		Swing by starwhite buildings and   
		Lights come to life with a sound   
		Of bugs under the dead rib.
		
		Miles of it. Still the same city.   
		
		
		II
		
		Do you know where you are going?   
		Do you know whom you must meet?
		
		Fortune, perhaps, or good news   
		Or the doctor, or the ladies   
		In the long bookstore,
		The angry man in the milkbar   
		The drunkard under the clock.   
		Fortune, perhaps, or wonder   
		Or, perhaps, death.
		
		In any case, our tracks
		Are aimed at a working horizon.
		The buildings, turning twice about the sun,   
		Settle in their respective positions.
		Centered in its own incurable discontent, the City   
		Consents to be recognized.
		
		
		III
		
		Then people come out into the light of afternoon,   
		Covered all over with black powder,
		And begin to attack one another with statements   
		Or to ignore one another with horror.
		Customs have not changed.
		Young men full of coffee and
		Old women with medicine under their skin
		Are all approaching death at twenty miles an hour.
		
		Everywhere there is optimism without love
		And pessimism without understanding,
		They who have new clothes, and smell of haircuts   
		Cannot agree to be at peace
		With their own images, shadowing them in windows   
		From store to store.
		
		
		IV
		
		Until the lights come on with a swagger of frauds   
		And savage ferns,
		The brown-eyed daughters of ravens,
		Sing in the lucky doors
		While night comes down the street like the millennium   
		Wrapping the houses in dark feathers
		Soothing the town with a sign
		Healing the strong wings of sunstroke.
		Then the wind of an easy river wipes the flies
		Off my Kentucky collarbone.
		
		The claws of the treacherous stars   
		Renegade drums of wood
		Endure the heavenward protest.   
		Their music heaves and hides.   
		Rain and foam and oil
		Make sabbaths for our wounds.   
		(Come, come, let all come home!)
		The summer sighs, and runs.
		My broken bird is under the whole town,   
		My cross is for the gypsies I am leaving   
		And there are real fountains under the floor.
		
		
		V
		
		Branches baptize our faces with silver
		Where the sweet silent avenue escapes into the hills.   
		Winds at last possess our empty country
		There, there under the moon   
		In parabolas of milk and iron   
		The ghosts of historical men   
		(Figures of sorrow and dust)
		Weep along the hills like turpentine.   
		And seas of flowering tobacco
		Surround the drowning sons of Daniel Boone.


	9. KINGFISHER

		As king fishers catch fire, dragonflies draw flame;
		As tumbled over rim in roundy wells
		Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell’s
		Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;
		Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
		Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
		Selves--goes itself; myself it speaks and spells,
		Crying What I do is me: for that I came.
		I say more: the just man justices;
		Keeps grace: that keeps all his goings graces;
		Acts in God’s eye what in God’s eye he is--
		Christ. For Christ plays in ten thousand places,
		Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his
		To the Father through the features of men’s faces. 


	10. NOTES FOR A NEW LITURGY

		There’s a big Zulu runs our congregation
		A woe doctor cherubim chaser
		Puts his finger on the chief witch
		Has a mind to deter foes
		Is by the Star Archangel shown a surprise
		Writes his letters in vision mentions his B.A.
		From many a college
		Has a fan to scatter flies
		Receives a penetrating look
		From an imaginary visitant in white
		Knows all the meanings at once
		Knows he is in heaven in rectangles
		Of invented saints
		Flaming with new degrees and orders every day
		
		“I dreamt this Church I dreamt
		Seven precious mitres over my head
		My word is final.
		
		“I now General Overseer Concession Registrar
		Of rains and weather Committeeman
		For Pepsi-Cola all over the islands
		Flail of incontinent clergy
		Wave my highstrung certificate in times of change
		Don’t you need a Defender with a medical guarantee?
		
		“You think that I am only a clown-healer from the out-district?
		Hold this black bag while I lay hands on children
		Steady my followers with magic curios
		
		When I sleep I watch you with eyes in my feet
		Last night I dreamt of four beds
		I must marry again must go get
		Another angel-nun
		Come holy deaconess we’ll ride
		Barefoot in yellow busses to Jordan River
		Wearing emblems of the common vow
		
		“Subleaders keep telling the message
		Like it was new
		Confirming my charism as Prime-Mover in Management
		I shall continue in office as President
		For all time until the earth melt
		As all Full-Leaders stand over you wearing their watches
		Moulding you by government of thought
		And I return a while to the Origin
		Ruling through a female medium from an obscure place:
		
		“HOLD THIS MITRE WHILE I STRANGLE CHICKENS
		AND THROW THEM IN THE AIR
		COVERING THE SACRED STONE WITH BLOODY FEATHERS
		(And surround the altar
		With lie detectors.”)


	11. NOW YOU ARE ALL HERE

		1. Now you are all here you might as well know this is America we do what we like. 
		2. Be spontaneous it is the right way. 
		3. Mothers you have met before still defy comprehension. 
		4. Our scene is foggy we are asking you to clarify. 
		5. Explains geomoetry of life. Where? At Catholic Worker. 
		6. Very glad you came. With our mouths full of cornflakes we were expecting an emergency. 
		7. Cynics declare you are in Greece. 
		8. Better get back quick before the place is all used up. 
		9. The night court: the mumbling judge: confused. 
		10. Well-wishers are there to meet you head on. 
		11. For the journal: soldiers, harbingers of change. 
		12. You came just in time, the score is even. 
		13. None of the machines has yet been broken. 
		14. Come on we know you have seen Popes. 
		15. People have been a little self-conscious around here in the emergency. 
		16. Who cares what the cynics declare. But you have been in Greece.


	12. PROVERBS

		1. I will tell you what you can do ask me if you do not understand what I just said 
		
		2. One thing you can do be a manufacturer make appliances 
		
		3. Be a Man-u-fac-tu-rer 
		
		4. Make appliances sell them for a high price 
		
		5. I will tell you about industry make appliances 
		
		6. Make appliances that move 
		
		7. Ask me if you do not understand what is move 
		
		8. First get the facts 
		
		9. Where to apply? Ask industry 
		
		10. Do not expect to get by without Mr. and Mrs. Consumer 
		
		11. Man-u-fic-tion 
		
		12. I am wondering if you got the idea be a manu 
		
		13. MAKE FALSE GODS 
		
		14. Apply mind energy they will move 
		
		15. Mention one of the others see what happens 
		
		16. Now apply that to our problem 
		
		17. Try not to understand 
		
		18. Be a mounte-fictioner 
		
		19. Surpass all others in price and profit 
		
		20. Assail the public with lies 
		
		21. Home-spun-facts-are-more-fun repeat this 
		
		22. Prevent spreading on garments 
		
		23. Breathe more than others 
		
		24. Supply movement and traction 
		
		25. Our epidemix will exceed 
		
		26. A homemade appliance: no honorable mention 
		
		27. Now you can refer to garments and spread out 
		
		28. But there are still more facts 
		
		29. For excitement: say whose epidemic may be next 
		
		30. Apply this to the facts and see what happens 
		
		31. Wear dermal gloves in bed 
		
		32. Here is an appliance that will terrorize mothers 
		
		33. And fight the impossible 
		
		34. Man-u-fac-ture: wear it on your head 
		
		35. Beat it here come the mothers


	13. SINCERITY

			_Omnis homo mendax_
		
		As for the liar, fear him less
		Than one who thinks himself sincere
		Who, having deceived himself,
		Can deceive you with a good conscience.
		
		One who doubts his own truth
		May mistrust another less:
		
		Knowing, in his own heart,
		That all men are liars
		He will be less outraged
		When he is deceived by another.
		
		So, too, will he sooner believe
		In the sincerity of God.
		
		The sincerity of God! Who never justifies
		His actions to men! Who makes no bargains
		With any other sincerity, because He knows
		There is no other! Who does what He pleases
		And never protests His innocence!
		
		Which of us can stand the sincerity of God?
		
		Which of us can bear a Lord
		Who is neither guilty nor innocent
		(Who cannot be innocent because He cannot
		be guilty)?
		
		What has our sincerity to do with His
		Whose truth is no approval of our truth
		And is not judged by anyone,
		Even by Himself?
		
		(Yet if I think myself sincere
		I will approve the purity of God
		Convinced that my own purity
		Is approved by Him)
		
		So, when the Lord speaks, we go to sleep
		Or turn quickly to some congenial business
		Since, as every liar knows,
		No man can bear such sincerity.


	14. ST. MALACHY

		In November, in the days to remember the dead
		When air smells cold as earth,
		St. Malachy, who is very old, gets up,
		Parts the thin curtain of trees and dawns upon our land.
		
		His coat is filled with drops of rain, and he is bearded
		With all the seas of Poseidon.
		(Is it a crozier, or a trident in his hand?)
		He weeps against the gothic window, and the empty
		cloister
		Mourns like an ocean shell.
		
		Two bells in the steeple
		Talk faintly to the old stranger
		And the tower considers his waters.
		“I have been sent to see my festival,” (his cavern speaksl)
		“For I am the saint of the day.
		Shall I shake the drops from my locks and stand in your
		transept,
		Or, leaving you, rest in the silence of my history?”
		
		So the bells rang and we opened the antiphoners
		And the wrens and larks flew up out of the pages.
		Our thoughts became lambs. Our hearts swam like seas.
		One monk believed that we should sing to him
		Some stone-age hymn
		Or something in the giant language.
		So we played to him in the plainsong of the giant Gregory
		And oceans of Scripture sang upon bony Eire.
		
		Then the last salvage of flowers
		(Fostered under glass after the gardens foundered)
		Held up their little lanterns on Malachy’s altar
		To peer into his wooden eyes before the Mass began.
		
		Rain sighed down the sides of the stone church.
		Storms sailed by all day in battle fleets.
		At five o’clock, when we tried to see the sun, the speechless
		visitor
		Sighed and arose and shook the humus from his feet
		And with his trident stirred our trees
		And left down-wood, shaking some drops upon the ground.
		
		Thus copper flames fall, tongues of fire fall
		The leaves in hundreds fall upon his passing
		While night sends down her dreadnought darkness
		Upon this spurious Pentecost.
		
		And the Melchisedec of our year’s end
		Who came without a parent, leaves without a trace,
		And rain comes rattling down upon our forest
		Like the doors of a country jail.


	15. THE DARK MORNING

		This is the black day when
		Fog rides the ugly air:
		Water wades among the buildings
		To the prisoner’s curled ear.
		
		Then rain, in thin sentences,
		Slakes him like danger,
		Whose heart is his Germany
		Fevered with anger.
		
		This is the dark day when
		Locks let the enemy in
		Through all the coiling passages of
		(Curled ear) my prison!


	16. WITH THE WORLD IN MY BLOODSTREAM

		I lie on my hospital bed
		Water runs inside the walls
		And the musical machinery
		All around overhead
		Plays upon my metal system
		My invented back bone
		Lends to the universal tone
		A flat impersonal song
		All the planes in my mind
		Sing to my worried blood
		To my jet streams
		I swim in the world’s genius
		The spring’s plasm
		I wonder who the hell I am.
		
		The world’s machinery
		Expands in the walls
		Of the hot musical building
		Made in maybe twenty-four
		And my lost childhood remains
		One of the city’s living cells
		Thanks to this city
		I am still living
		But whose life lies here
		And whose invented music sings?
		
		All the freights in the night
		Swing my dark technical bed
		All around overhead
		And wake the questions in my blood
		My jet streams fly far above
		But my low gash is no good
		Here below earth and bone
		Bleeding in a numbered bed
		Though all my veins run
		With Christ and with the stars’ plasm.
		
		Ancestors and Indians
		Zen Masters and Saints
		Parade in the incredible hotel
		And dark-eyed Negro mercy bends
		And uncertain fibers of the will
		Toward recovery and home.
		What recovery and what Home?
		I have no more sweet home
		I doubt the bed here and the road there
		And WKLO I most abhor
		My head is rotten with the town’s song.
		
		Here below stars and light
		And the Chicago plane
		Slides up the rainy straits of night
		While in my maze I walk and sweat
		Wandering in the low bone system
		Or searching the impossible ceiling
		For the question and the meaning
		Till the machine rolls in again
		I grow hungry for invented air
		And for the technical community of men
		For my lost Zen breathing
		For the unmarried fancy
		And the wild gift I made in those days
		For all the compromising answers
		All the gambles and blue rhythms
		Of individual despair.
		
		So the world’s logic runs
		Up and down the doubting walls
		While the frights and the planes
		Swing my sleep out the window
		All around, overhead
		In doubt and technical heat
		In oxygen and jet streams
		In the world’s enormous space
		And in man’s enormous want
		Until the want itself is gone
		Nameless bloodless and alone
		The Cross comes and Eckhart’s scandal
		The Holy Supper and the precise wrong
		And the accurate little spark
		In emptiness in the jet stream
		Only the spark can understand
		All that burns flies upward
		Where the rainy jets have gone
		A sign of needs and possible homes
		An invented back bone
		A dull song of oxygen
		A lost spark in Eckhart’s Castle.
		World’s plasm and world’s cell
		I bleed myself awake and well
		
		Only the spark is now true
		Dancing in the empty room
		All around overhead
		While the frail body of Christ
		Sweats in a technical bed
		I am Christ’s lost cell
		His childhood and desert age
		His descent into hell.
		Love without need and without name
		Bleeds in the empty problem
		And the spark without identity
		Circles the empty ceiling.


*** W. S. Merwin (1927 - 2019)

	1. A NIGHT FRAGRANCE

		Now I am old enough to remember
		people speaking of immortality
		as though it were something known to exist
		a tangible substance that might be acquired
		to be used perhaps in the kitchen
		every day in whatever was made there
		forever after and they applied the word
		to literature and the names of things
		names of persons and the naming of other
		things for them and no doubt they repeated
		that word with some element of belief
		when they named a genus of somewhat more than
		a hundred species of tropical trees and shrubs
		some with flowers most fragrant at night
		for James Theodore Tabernaemontanus
		of Heidelberg physician and botanist
		highly regarded in his day over
		four centuries ago immortality
		might be like that with the scattered species
		continuing their various evolutions
		the flowers opening by day or night
		with no knowledge of bearing a name
		of anyone and their fragrance if it
		reminds at all not reminding of him


	2. AFTER THE ALPHABETS

		I am trying to decipher the language of insects
		they are the tongues of the future
		their vocabularies describe buildings as food
		they can instruct of dark water and the veins of trees
		they can convey what they do not know
		and what is known at a distance
		and what nobody knows
		they have terms for making music with the legs
		they can recount changing in a sleep like death
		they can sing with wings
		the speakers are their own meaning in a grammar without
		   horizons
		they are wholly articulate
		they are never important they are everything


	3. AFTER THE SPRING

		The first hay is in and all at once
		in the silent evening summer has come
		knowing the place wholly the green skin
		of its hidden slopes where the shadows will
		never reach so far again and a few
		gray hairs motionless high in the late
		sunlight tell of rain before morning
		and of finding the daybreak under green
		water with no shadows but all still the same
		still known still the known faces of summer
		faces of water turning into themselves
		changing without a word into themselves


	4. AIR

		Naturally it is night.
		Under the overturned lute with its
		One string I am going my way
		Which has a strange sound.
		
		This way the dust, that way the dust.
		I listen to both sides
		But I keep right on.
		I remember the leaves sitting in judgment
		And then winter.
		
		I remember the rain with its bundle of roads.
		The rain taking all its roads.
		Nowhere.


	5. AMONG THE EYES

		The blind guides have come for us
		We summoned them thinking to save ourselves
		
		These are the terms
		Nothing is forgiven nothing is remembered
		
		And order they tell us was never ours


	6. AN END IN SPRING

		It is carried beyond itself a little way
		And covered with a sky of old bedding
		
		The compatriots stupid as their tables
		Go on eating their packages
		Selling gloves to the clocks
		Doing alright
		
		Ceasing to exist it becomes a deity
		
		It is with the others that are not there
		The centuries are named for them the names
		Do not come down to us
		
		On the way to them the words
		Die


	7. AN ISLAND IN THE HARBOR

		My own country my countrymen the exchanges
		Yes this is the place
		
		The flag of the blank wall the birds of money
		
		Prisoners in the watch towers
		And the motto
		       _The hopes of others our
		       Guardians_
		
		Even here
		Spring passes looking for the cradles
		
		The beating on the bars of the cages
		Is caught and parcelled out to the bells
		
		It is twelve the prisoners’ own hour
		
		The mouse bones in the plaster
		Prepare for the resurrection


	8. ANIMALS FROM MOUNTAINS

		When I was small and stayed quiet
		some animals came
		new ones each time
		and waited there near me
		and all night they were eating the black
		
		they knew me they knew me
		nobody saw them
		I watched how they watched me
		they waited right there
		nobody heard them talking laughing
		laughing
		Laugh they told me nobody will hear
		
		and we went out one time
		onto one mountain
		all the way and nobody knew we went
		we went together we sounded like chewing
		the next day the mountain was gone
		
		we went out onto two mountains
		we made no noise
		no more noise than smoke
		nobody saw us far away
		the next day those mountains were almost gone
		
		we went out
		onto my dead grandmother’s mountain
		there an old wind lives
		that’s never been away
		it lives on and on there alone
		but the mountain’s gone
		and some of us
		never came back all the way


	9. ANOTHER DREAM OF BURIAL

		Sometimes it is a walled garden
		with the stone over the entrance
		broken and inside it a few
		silent dried-up weeds or it may
		be a long pool perfectly still
		with the clear water revealing
		no color but that of the gray
		stone around it and once there was
		in a painting of a landscape
		one torn place imperfectly mended
		that showed the darkness under it
		but still I have set nothing down
		and turned and walked away from it
		into the whole world the whole world


	10. ANY TIME

		How long ago the day is
		when at last I look at it
		with the time it has taken
		to be there still in it
		now in the transparent light
		with the flight in the voices
		the beginning in the leaves
		everything I remember
		and before it before me
		present at the speed of light
		in the distance that I am
		who keep reaching out to it
		seeing all the time faster
		where it has never stirred from
		before there is anything
		the darkness thinking the light


	11. APRIL

		When we have gone the stone will stop singing
		
		April April
		Sinks through the sand of names
		
		Days to come
		With no stars hidden in them
		
		You that can wait being there
		
		You that lose nothing
		Know nothing


	12. BALLAD OF JOHN CABLE AND THREE GENTLEMEN

		He that had come that morning,   
		One after the other,
		Over seven hills,
		Each of a new color,
		
		Came now by the last tree,   
		By the red-colored valley,   
		To a gray river
		Wide as the sea.
		
		There at the shingle
		A listing wherry
		Awash with dark water;   
		What should it carry?
		
		There on the shelving,   
		Three dark gentlemen.   
		Might they direct him?   
		Three gentlemen.
		
		“Cable, friend John, John Cable,”   
		When they saw him they said,   
		“Come and be company
		As far as the far side.”
		
		“Come follow the feet,” they said,   
		“Of your family,
		Of your old father
		That came already this way.”
		
		But Cable said, “First I must go   
		Once to my sister again;
		What will she do come spring   
		And no man on her garden?
		
		She will say ‘Weeds are alive   
		From here to the Stream of Friday;   
		I grieve for my brother’s plowing,’
		Then break and cry.”
		
		“Lose no sleep,” they said, “for that fallow:   
		She will say before summer,
		‘I can get me a daylong man,
		Do better than a brother.’ ”
		
		Cable said, “I think of my wife:   
		Dearly she needs consoling;   
		I must go back for a little
		For fear she die of grieving.”
		
		“Cable,” they said, “John Cable,   
		Ask no such wild favor;
		Still, if you fear she die soon,   
		The boat might wait for her.”
		
		But Cable said, “I remember:   
		Out of charity let me
		Go shore up my poorly mother,   
		Cries all afternoon.”
		
		They said, “She is old and far,   
		Far and rheumy with years,   
		And, if you like, we shall take   
		No note of her tears.”
		
		But Cable said, “I am neither   
		Your hired man nor maid,   
		Your dog nor shadow
		Nor your ape to be led.”
		
		He said, “I must go back:
		Once I heard someone say
		That the hollow Stream of Friday   
		Is a rank place to lie;
		
		And this word, now I remember,   
		Makes me sorry: have you   
		Thought of my own body   
		I was always good to?
		
		The frame that was my devotion   
		And my blessing was,
		The straight bole whose limbs   
		Were long as stories--
		
		Now, poor thing, left in the dirt   
		By the Stream of Friday
		Might not remember me
		Half tenderly.”
		
		They let him nurse no worry;
		They said, “We give you our word:   
		Poor thing is made of patience;   
		Will not say a word.”
		
		“Cable, friend John, John Cable,”   
		After this they said,
		“Come with no company
		To the far side.
		
		To a populous place,
		A dense city
		That shall not be changed   
		Before much sorrow dry.”
		
		Over shaking water
		Toward the feet of his father,   
		Leaving the hills’ color
		And his poorly mother
		
		And his wife at grieving   
		And his sister’s fallow   
		And his body lying   
		In the rank hollow,
		
		Now Cable is carried   
		On the dark river;   
		Nor even a shadow   
		Followed him over.
		
		On the wide river   
		Gray as the sea
		Flags of white water   
		Are his company.


	13. BEAR

		And in the northmost of the world’s whiteness, pacing
		   slowly
		Far and small in those spaces, white like a shadow
		Of white, over that blank plain of silence without
		End, those plateaus of solitude, he moves : further
		In the secret of whiteness than ever the high-honking
		   faint
		Black ravels of wild geese fly wavering at the end
		Of winter; further in silence than the last
		Black tracery of unvisited forests that stand bleak
		And tall like white-bound navies, hulls sunk in the
		   virgin
		Hush, where the sky is the sheen of a wide shell, and
		   the creaking
		Of their empty rigging gives weight to the stillness;
		   and further
		In solitude than all charactery of shadows
		The figured world casts in its turning, the pads of his
		   white
		Feet, wandering, fill their own shadows. Below him,
		   far
		On the grilled globe of the middle earth the furrowed
		Fields of men know husbandry and harvest; and there
		Are the stern gods on their gray hills, the audacious
		Prows of vessels tempting the goddess-natured sea,
		And the falling of rain, air’s softnesses, and there is
		 company there,
		Variety and houses, coupling and colours; and
		The fires are warm there, the water flows, and the
		 other
		Beasts and their seasons revolve their patient
		Caravan; but that is in a different dream. And beyond
		the green-altering
		Tundra and the stiff sea, indeed before these, he
		 slouches
		Beyond maps, before maps, in a region
		With not so much conformation, no: on the dim
		Comb of the world, that place
		That the maps make white for that they have not found
		 it,
		And white it is, in the yellowish green whiteness
		Of its long dusk: the flatness vanishing
		Under the bursts and whirls of its misted horizon; even
		The years have not yet come to pass, but all
		Drifts lost where yet no finding is. Yet all
		Conjunction is bloodless, thin as the still air: the
		 abstract
		Meeting of lines projected from elsewhere, degrees
		Of the rank world’s longitude, rhumbs of stars; but
		 though they join
		Always under his shifting feet, there is
		No narrowness engendered there, but only
		The beginnings of distance; and all directions join,
		Are lost in his shadow beneath him, and direction
		Becomes merely the way he walks, shambling: he the
		 one
		Hill on this level pallor, the single floe


	14. BEFORE A DEPARTURE IN SPRING

		Once more it is April with the first light sifting
		through the young leaves heavy with dew making the colors
		remember who they are the new pink of the cinnamon tree
		the gilded lichens of the bamboo the shadowed bronze
		of the kamani and the blue day opening
		as the sunlight descends through it all like the return
		of a spirit touching without touch and unable
		to believe it is here and here again and awake
		reaching out in silence into the cool breath
		of the garden just risen from darkness and days of rain
		it is only a moment the birds fly through it calling
		to each other and are gone with their few notes and the flash
		of their flight that had vanished before ever we knew it
		we watch without touching any of it and we
		can tell ourselves only that this is April this is the morning
		this never happened before and we both remember it


	15. BEFORE THAT

		It was never there and already it’s vanishing
		
		City unhealthy pale with pictures of
		Cemeteries sifting on its windows
		Its planets with wind in their eyes searching among
		The crosses again
		At night
		In dark clothes
		
		It was never there
		
		Papers news from the desert
		Moving on or
		Kip in go their
		Voices
		
		The river flowing past its other shore
		Past the No Names the windows washed at night
		And who is my
		Name for
		
		In my pocket
		Slowly the photographs becoming saints
		Never there
		
		I put out my hand and the dark falls through it
		Following a fag
		
		Gutters made in my time rounded with
		The wounded in mind
		The streets roped off for the affectionate
		
		Will do for the
		Mutilated
		
		If I
		Lie down in the street and that smoke comes out of me
		
		Who
		Was it
		
		It was a night like this that the ashes were made
		
		Before that
		Was always the fire


	16. BREAD

		Each face in the street is a slice of bread
		wandering on
		searching
		
		somewhere in the light the true hunger
		appears to be passing them by
		they clutch
		
		have they forgotten the pale caves
		they dreamed of hiding in
		their own caves
		full of the waiting of their footprints
		hung with the hollow marks of their groping
		full of their sleep and their hiding
		
		have they forgotten the ragged tunnels
		they dreamed of following in out of the light
		to hear step after step
		
		the heart of bread
		to be sustained by its dark breath
		and emerge
		
		to find themselves alone
		before a wheat field
		raising its radiance to the moon


	17. BREAD AND BUTTER

		I keep finding this letter
		To the gods of abandon,
		Tearing it up: Sirs,
		Having lived in your shrines
		I know what I owe you--
		
		I don’t, did I ever? With both hands
		I’ve forgotten, I keep
		Having forgotten. I’ll have no such shrines here.
		I will not bow in the middle of the room
		To the statue of nothing
		With the flies turning around it.
		On these four walls I am the writing.
		
		Why would I start such a letter?
		Think of today, think of tomorrow.
		Today on the tip of my tongue,
		Today with my eyes,
		Tomorrow the vision,
		Tomorrow
		
		In the broken window
		The broken boats will come in,
		The life boats
		Waving their severed hands,
		
		And I will love as I ought to
		Since the beginning.


	18. BREAD AT MIDNIGHT

		The judges have chains in their sleeves
		To get where they are they have
		Studied many flies
		They drag their voices up a long hill
		Announcing It is over
		
		Well now that it is over
		I remember my homeland the mountains of chaff
		
		And hands hands deaf as starfish fetching
		The bread still frozen
		To the tables


	19. BY DARK

		When it is time I follow the black dog
		into the darkness that is the mind of day
		
		I can see nothing there but the black dog
		the dog I know going ahead of me
		
		not looking back oh it is the black dog
		I trust now in my turn after the years
		
		when I had all the trust of the black dog
		through an age of brightness and through shadow
		
		on into the blindness of the black dog
		where the rooms of the dark were already known
		
		and had no fear in them for the black dog
		leading me carefully up the blind stairs


	20. BY DAY AND BY NIGHT

		Shadow, index of the sun,
		Who knows him as you know him,
		Who have never turned to look at him since the beginning?
		
		In the court of his brilliance
		You set up his absence like a camp.
		And his fire only confirms you. And his death is your freedom.


	21. CALLING LATE

		Oh white lemurs who invented the dance
		this is the time afterward
		can you hear me
		who invented the story
		
		part of the story
		
		oh blind lemurs who invented the morning
		who touched the day
		who held it aloft when it was early
		who taught it to fly
		can you hear the story
		
		can you see now
		
		oh shining lemurs who invented the beginning
		who brought it along with you all the way
		throwing it high up catching it never letting it fall
		throwing it ahead throwing it far overhead
		leaping up to it climbing into it
		
		going to sleep in it shutting your eyes
		with it safe inside them
		are you listening
		
		to the story
		it has no beginning


	22. CAMEL

		Remember that we are dust. It is said
		That this place of our passage is prone to mirages:
		That the waves of the drifting desert, the heat-daft
		Air playing like water-light, the horizon
		Swirling slow as a shadow and laying up
		To itself all their unearthly shiftings,
		Or simply the salt tides working
		Of need or desire, out of some fold
		Of their flowing raise often visions
		As of white cities like walled clouds, agleam
		On their hills, so clear that you can see the tiered
		Buildings glint still in the rocking daylight,
		Or again of trees even whose shadows
		Seem green and to breathe, or merely of pools
		Of simple water on that same dry surge borne,
		That will ride nearer, nearer, like elusive
		Aphrodite; and these are nothing
		But the playing of the heated light teasing
		Like pain over this dust. In truth, it may
		Be nothing but ourselves, this that is
		All about us for our eves to see: this dust
		That we cannot see beyond. Remember
		That we are dust, dust and a little breath,
		As the sand dervishes the wind lifts
		Whirling and sends over the sea-shaped dunes;
		As does their dancing, we wind between breathless
		Dust and breathless dust, and our passage
		Even as theirs, may be no more
		Than a casual sport of the air gliding
		To no depth over the delusive surface
		Of our breathless selves. But speaking of virtues
		We think of water; moving, we think
		Of arrival as of water, of virtue
		As the means of arrival. And we have named
		For water him who is visibly
		Our practice of virtue, beast of our motion,
		Calling him “Ship of the Desert.” Who rolls
		When he walks; whose going also
		Has strangely the gait of a cradle. He too is dust,
		Yet not as we, save as that figure
		Of what our faring is, for his breath is speechless,
		His back that bears us has a wave’s shape
		Drawn by a child; or hill’s lurching
		As he strides; when he runs, his shadow
		Over the rippling dust is a wind’s
		Shudder across modelled bay-water,
		Curved gust across grain-field, or storm silvering
		Fast as some hastening angel over
		Hillsides of olive trees, darkness
		Of rain-cloud chasing the sunlight
		On carved hills, or wave-crest over
		Far reef flung, its main strength still racing
		For shore. Even as these
		It would seem our progress is, in itself bearing
		Its own sustenance for long waste-wending;
		A power that may be, in event of all
		Arrival failing, other resources
		Parched, our water of desperation; that is not
		Ourselves; whose capacities may not be
		Arrived at even by prayer, patient study
		And deprivation, yet whose presence we have known
		To affect us so that even in places of water,
		Of pleasure, repose, abode, when we had thought
		To escape the sense of it, it will sometimes break
		From where it was tethered and find us out,
		Intruding its ungainly ill-smelling head
		Over our shoulders. A creature that can shut
		Both eyes and nostrils against the lash
		Of dust risen suddenly savage. That if not
		Drained at last dry as a white bone,
		Exhausted beyond sense, or buried
		In the capricious cruelty of
		Its own condition, can sense more surely than we
		Over the dust-driven horizon the green
		Places where the roots grope trusting
		Down into the dark breathlessness, the trees
		Sway and give shade, dew falls early,
		Stones drip in the mossed shadow, and the motes
		Seem to dance to a falling cadence
		That mortal ears might apprehend. Catching, as we,
		At phantoms, breaking into a dangerous
		Rocking-horse sprint at false visions, nevertheless
		When we are despairing, drawn it would seem
		By deceptions only, working to wean
		Our minds from arrival, staring vacantly
		At the tormented air, while the enraged sun
		Careens in white circles about a sky
		The blood-orange of an eyelid, he can with no warning
		Lift the furred neck swinging there
		Like a winter serpent, flare divining nostrils,
		Even from far off smell the true water.


	23. CEREMONY AFTER AN AMPUTATION

		Spirits of the place who were here before I saw it
		to whom I have made such offerings as I have known how to
		 make
		wanting from the first to approach you with recognition
		bringing for your swept ridge trees lining the wind with
		 seedlings
		that have grown now to become these long wings in chorus
		where the birds assemble and settle their flying lives
		you have taught me without meaning and have lifted me up
		without talk or promise and again and again reappeared to me
		unmistakable and changing and unpronounceable as a face
		
		dust of the time a day in late spring after the silk of rain
		had fallen softly through the night and after the green morning
		the afternoon floating brushed with gold and then the sounds
		of machines erupting across the valley and elbowing up the
		 slopes
		pushing themselves forward to occupy you to be more of you
		who remain the untouched silence through which they are
		 passing
		I try to hear you remembering that we are not separate
		to find you who cannot be lost or elsewhere or incomplete
		
		nature of the solitary machine coming into the story
		from the minds that conceived you and the hands that first
		 conjured up
		the phantom of you in fine lines on the drawing board
		you for whom function is all the good that exists
		you to whom I have come with nothing but purpose
		a purpose of my own as though it was something we shared
		you that were pried from the earth without anyone
		consulting you and were carried off burned beaten
		 metamorphosed
		according to plans and lives to which you owed nothing
		let us be at peace with each other let peace be what is between us
		and you now single vanished part of my left hand bit of bone
		 finger end index
		
		who began with me in the dark that was already my mother
		you who touched whatever I could touch of the beginning
		and were how I touched and who remembered the sense of it
		when I thought I had forgotten it you in whom it waited
		under your only map of one untrodden mountain
		you who did as well as we could through all the hours at the
		 piano
		and who helped undo the bras and found our way to the
		 treasure
		
		and who held the fruit and the pages and knew how to button
		my right cuff and to wash my left ear and had taken in
		heart beats of birds and beloved faces and hair by day and by
		 night
		fur of dogs ears of horses tongues and the latches of doors
		so that I still feel them clearly long after they are gone
		and water beside the boat one evening of an ancient summer
		and the vibration of a string over which the bow was moving
		as though the sound of the note were still playing
		and the hand of my wife found in the shallows of waking
		
		you who in a flicker of my inattention
		signalled to me once only my error telling me
		of the sudden blow from the side so that I looked down
		to see not you any longer but instead a mouth
		full of blood calling after you who had already gone gone
		gone ahead into what I cannot know or reach or touch
		leaving in your place only the cloud of pain rising
		into the day filling the light possessing every sound
		becoming the single color and taste and direction
		
		yet as the pain recedes and the moment of it
		you remain with me even in the missing of you
		small boat moving before me on the current under the daylight
		whatever you had touched and had known and took with you
		is with me now as you are when you are already there
		unseen part of me reminding me warning me
		pointing to what I cannot see never letting me forget
		you are my own speaking only to me going with me
		all the rest of the way telling me what is still here


	24. DECEMBER NIGHT

		The cold slope is standing in darkness
		But the south of the trees is dry to the touch
		
		The heavy limbs climb into the moonlight bearing feathers
		I came to watch these
		White plants older at night
		The oldest
		Come first to the ruins
		
		And I hear magpies kept awake by the moon
		The water flows through its
		Own fingers without end
		
		Tonight once more
		I find a single prayer and it is not for men


	25. DESPAIR

		Some lit theirs at both ends.
		Some clutched theirs as a blind man does his cane.
		Some sucked theirs like the only orange.
		Some packed clean shirts and a few socks in theirs.
		Some spent their lives looking for theirs and they
		 were wearing it all the time.
		Some neglected theirs but the roots found a way.
		Some buried theirs. The stones tell when and where.


	26. DISTANT MORNING

		We were a time of our own the redstart reappeared
		 on the handle of the fork left alone for that moment
		upright in the damp earth the shriek of the black kite
		 floated high over the river as the day warmed
		the weasel slipped like a trick of light through the ivy
		 there was one wryneck pretending to be a shadow
		on the trunk of a dead plum tree while the far figures
		 of daylight crossed the dark crystal of its eye
		the tawny owl clenched itself in its oak hearing the paper
		 trumpet and rapid knocking that told where the nuthatch
		prospected and the gray adder gathered itself
		 on its gray stone with the ringing of a cricket suspended
		around it the nightwalkers slept curled in their houses
		 the hedgehogs in the deep brush the badgers and foxes
		in their home ground the bats in the high crevices
		 none of it could be held or denied or summoned back
		none of it would be given its meaning later


	27. DIVINITIES

		Having crowded once onto the threshold of mortality
		And not been chosen
		There is no freedom such as theirs
		That have no beginning
		
		The air itself is their memory
		A domain they cannot inhabit
		But from which they are never absent
		
		_What are you_ they say _that simply exist_
		And the heavens and the earth bow to them
		Looking up from their choices
		Perishing
		
		All day and all night
		Everything that is mistaken worships them
		Even the dead sing them an unending hymn


	28. ENTRY

		When it seems that the world is made of a single
		 summer as it always has been and that the gray leaves
		will hang that same way without moving over the empty
		 road until the end while the wheat continues to stand
		in its sleep with no dreams shining boundless into
		 the hovering day along the stopped film of the river
		when the doors facing south have turned to stone every one
		 and the parched syllable of cicadas joined with the hum
		of fields hangs still in the light and from shuttered
		 windows voices sift like the settling of dust
		all at once the blank sky will be half dark with the black
		 cloud welling from which a cold wind rolls and the first
		thunder splits all around to build upon its own
		 deafening echoes then suddenly the light will be only
		the weight of rain cascading shot through with lightning
		 at that time if you are away from home and can stumble
		to any house they will let you in to a dark room
		 when it closes behind you at the heart of the roar
		you will see as through water an unknown face but you
		 will hear not a sound it makes and behind it you will see others
		looking up from around a table in that silence
		 knowing nothing about you except why you are there


	29. ESTHER

		Tomorrow they will come for you
		old female word from the corner
		lucidity
		motionless in the dark
		they will take you out to be
		bared elsewhere
		opened before it is May
		
		there is no one else here
		the door wide to the blinding
		spring
		the wind one of the family
		like a cold hen
		mute about the kitchen
		the rest away busy the shirts waiting
		for the iron
		the calendar ticking
		
		tomorrow
		the animals will keep away
		we do not believe in
		happening
		the sunlight will always lie there
		even tonight even tomorrow night
		it was always there
		but you go back to another time
		it is said
		as though there is one
		
		If tomorrow is really
		not today
		how can one believe in anything
		as vou say
		hands holding each other in
		paper bags older than they are
		eyes cut out of your dress hung
		to dry
		burst package to be
		carried past the toys out
		in the bright dirt
		past the shadows waving
		ringing their bells raising
		their instruments
		whatever is brought back as you know
		is not all
		
		but if you get
		later to a place with a blackened wall
		and two sticks held together
		by a little smoke
		maybe they would let you sit by it
		in the day
		staring
		and you could announce what he is doing
		the animal their sky


	30. FAR COMPANY

		At times now from some margin of the day
		I can hear birds of another country
		not the whole song but a brief phrase of it
		out of a music that I may have heard
		once in a moment I appear to have
		forgotten for the most part that full day
		no sight of which I can remember now
		though it must have been where my eyes were then
		that knew it as the present while I thought
		of somewhere else without noticing that
		singing when it was there and still went on
		whether or not I noticed now it falls
		silent when I listen and leaves the day
		and flies before it to be heard again
		somewhere ahead when I have forgotten


	31. FOR THE ANNIVERSARY OF MY DEATH

		Every year without knowing it I have passed the day
		When the last fires will wave to me
		And the silence will set out
		Tireless traveller
		Like the beam of a lightless star
		
		Then I will no longer
		Find myself in life as in a strange garment
		Surprised at the earth
		And the love of one woman
		And the shamelessness of men
		As today writing after three days of rain
		Hearing the wren sing and the falling cease
		And bowing not knowing to what


	32. FOX SLEEP

		On a road through the mountains with a friend many years ago 
		I came to a curve on a slope where a clear stream 
		flowed down flashing across dark rocks through its own 
		echoes that could neither be caught nor forgotten 
		it was the turning of autumn and already 
		the mornings were cold with ragged clouds in the hollows 
		long after sunrise but the pasture sagging like a roof 
		the glassy water and flickering yellow leaves 
		in the few poplars and knotted plum trees were held up 
		in a handful of sunlight that made the slates on the silent 
		mill by the stream glisten white above their ruin 
		and a few relics of the life before had been arranged 
		in front of the open mill house to wait 
		pale in the daylight out on the open mountain 
		after whatever they had been made for was over 
		the dew was drying on them and there were few who took that road 
		who might buy one of them and take it away somewhere 
		to be unusual to be the only one 
		to become unknown a wooden bed stood there on rocks 
		a cradle the color of dust a cracked oil jar iron pots 
		wooden wheels iron wheels stone wheels the tall box of a clock 
		and among them a ring of white stone the size of an 
		embrace set into another of the same size 
		an iron spike rising from the ring where the wooden 
		handle had fitted that turned it in its days as a hand mill 
		you could see if you looked closely that the top ring 
		that turned in the other had been carved long before in the form 
		of a fox lying nose in tail seeming to be 
		asleep the features worn almost away where it 
		had gone around and around grinding grain and salt 
		to go into the dark and to go on and remember 
		
		What I thought I had left I kept finding again 
		but when I went looking for what I thought I remembered 
		as anyone could have foretold it was not there 
		when I went away looking for what I had to do 
		I found that I was living where I was a stranger 
		but when I retraced my steps the familiar vision 
		turned opaque and all surface and in the wrong places 
		and the places where I had been a stranger appeared to me 
		to be where I had been at home called by name and answering 
		getting ready to go away and going away 
		
		Every time they assembled and he spoke to them 
		about waking there was an old man who stood listening 
		and left before the others until one day the old man stayed 
		and Who are you he asked the old man 
		and the old man answered I am not a man 
		many lives ago I stood where you are standing 
		and they assembled in front of me and I spoke to them 
		about waking until one day one of them asked me 
		When someone has wakened to what is really there 
		is that person free of the chain of consequences 
		and I answered yes and with that I turned into a fox 
		and I have been a fox for five hundred lives 
		and now I have come to ask you to say what will 
		free me from the body of a fox please tell me 
		when someone has wakened to what is really there 
		is that person free of the chain of consequences 
		and this time the answer was That person sees it as it is 
		then the old man said Thank you for waking me 
		you have set me free of the body of the fox 
		which you will find on the other side of the mountain 
		I ask you to bury it please as one of your own 
		that evening he announced a funeral service 
		for one of them but they said nobody has died 
		then he led them to the other side of the mountain 
		and a cave where they found a fox’s body 
		and he told them the story and they buried the fox 
		as one of them but later one of them asked 
		what if he had given the right answer every time 
		
		Once again I was there and once again I was leaving 
		and again it seemed as though nothing had changed 
		even while it was all changing but this time 
		was a time of ending this time the long marriage was over 
		the orbits were flying apart it was autumn again 
		sunlight tawny in the fields where the shadows 
		each day grew longer and the still afternoons 
		ripened the distance until the sun went down 
		across the valley and the full moon rose out of the trees 
		it was the time of year when I was born and that evening 
		I went to see friends for the last time and I came back 
		after midnight along the road white with the moon 
		I was crossing the bars of shadow and seeing ahead of me 
		the wide silent valley full of silver light 
		and there just at the corner of the land that I had 
		come back to so many times and now was leaving 
		at the foot of the wall built of pale stone I saw the body 
		stretched in the grass and it was a fox a vixen 
		just dead with no sign of how it had come to happen 
		no blood the long fur warm in the dewy grass 
		nothing broken or lost or torn or unfinished 
		I carried her home to bury her in the garden 
		in the morning of the clear autumn that she had left 
		and to stand afterward in the turning daylight 
		
		There are the yellow beads of the stonecrops and the twisted flags 
		of dried irises knuckled into the hollows 
		of moss and rubbly limestone on the waves of the low wall 
		the ivy has climbed along them where the weasel ran 
		the light has kindled to gold the late leaves of the cherry tree 
		over the lane by the house chimney there is the roof 
		and the window looking out over the garden 
		summer and winter there is the field below the house 
		there is the broad valley far below them all with the curves 
		of the river a strand of sky threaded through it 
		and the notes of bells rising out of it faint as smoke 
		and there beyond the valley above the rim of the wall 
		the line of mountains I recognize like a line of writing 
		that has come back when I had thought it was forgotten


	33. GOOD PEOPLE

		From the kindness of my parents   
		I suppose it was that I held   
		that belief about suffering   
		
		imagining that if only   
		it could come to the attention   
		of any person with normal   
		feelings certainly anyone   
		literate who might have gone   
		
		to college they would comprehend   
		pain when it went on before them   
		and would do something about it   
		whenever they saw it happen   
		in the time of pain the present   
		they would try to stop the bleeding   
		for example with their own hands   
		
		but it escapes their attention   
		or there may be reasons for it   
		the victims under the blankets   
		the meat counters the maimed children   
		the animals the animals   
		staring from the end of the world


	34. GREEN FIELDS

		By this part of the century few are left who believe
		in the animals for they are not there in the carved parts
		of them served on plates and the pleas from the slatted trucks
		are sounds of shadows that possess no future
		there is still game for the pleasure of killing
		and there are pets for the children but the lives that followed
		courses of their own other than ours and older
		have been migrating before us some are already
		far on the way and yet Peter with his gaunt cheeks
		and point of white beard the face of an aged Lawrence
		Peter who had lived on from another time and country
		and who had seen so many things set out and vanish
		still believed in heaven and said he had never once
		doubted it since his childhood on the farm in the days
		of the horses he had not doubted it in the worst
		times of the Great War and afterward and he had come
		to what he took to be a kind of earthly
		model of it as he wandered south in his sixties
		by that time speaking the language well enough
		for them to make him out he took the smallest roads
		into a world he thought was a thing of the past
		with wildflowers he scarcely remembered and neighbors
		working together scything the morning meadows
		turning the hay before the noon meal bringing it in
		by milking time husbandry and abundance
		all the virtues he admired and their reward bounteous
		in the eyes of a foreigner and there he remained
		for the rest of his days seeing what he wanted to see
		until the winter when he could no longer fork
		the earth in his garden and then he gave away
		his house land everything and committed himself
		to a home to die in an old chateau where he lingered
		for some time surrounded by those who had lost
		the use of body or mind and as he lay there he told me
		that the wall by his bed opened almost every day
		and he saw what was really there and it was eternal life
		as he recognized at once when he saw the gardens
		he had made and the green fields where he had been
		a child and his mother was standing there then the wall would close
		and around him again were the last days of the world


	35. I LIVE UP HERE

		I live up here
		And a little bit to the left
		And I go down only
		
		For the accidents and then
		Never a moment too soon
		
		Just the same it’s a life it’s plenty
		
		The stairs the petals she loves me
		Every time
		Nothing has changed
		
		Oh down there down there
		Every time
		The glass knights lie by their gloves of blood
		
		In the pans of the scales the helmets
		Brim over with water
		It’s perfectly fair
		
		The pavements are dealt out the dice
		Every moment arrive somewhere
		
		You can hear the hearses getting lost in lungs
		Their bells stalling
		And then silence comes with the plate and I
		Give what I can
		
		Feeling _It’s worth it_
		
		For I see
		What my votes the mice are accomplishing
		And I know I’m free
		
		This is how I live
		Up here and simply
		
		Others do otherwise
		Maybe


	36. IT IS MARCH

		It is March and black dust falls out of the books
		Soon I will be gone
		The tall spirit who lodged here has
		Left already
		On the avenues the colorless thread lies under
		Old prices
		
		When you look back there is always the past
		Even when it has vanished
		But when you look forward
		With your dirty knuckles and the wingless
		Bird on your shoulder
		What can you write
		
		The bitterness is still rising in the old mines
		The fist is coming out of the egg
		The thermometers out of the mouths of the corpses
		
		At a certain height
		The tails of the kites for a moment are
		Covered with footsteps
		
		Whatever I have to do has not yet begun


	37. JANUARY

		So after weeks of rain
		at night the winter stars
		that much farther in heaven
		without our having seen them
		in far light are still forming
		the heavy elements
		that when the stars are gone
		fly up as dust finer
		by many times than a hair
		and recognize each other
		in the dark travelling
		at great speed and becoming
		our bodies in our time
		looking up after rain
		in the cold night together


	38. MERCY

		Even the hunters, who smile to cock
		The deadly choice in their minds, and like
		To carry it by loving custom lightly,
		Looking for something to kill, even
		The hunters sometimes it overtakes
		Over the half-killed quarry. Do not look
		In their eyes, they will tell you, there are questions
		That cannot be put out with knives. Sooner
		Or later, just the same, the eyes are there
		Asking out of the bird broken
		On wires, out of the crushed rabbit


	39. MOUNTAIN TOWN

		My memory the invisible buffalo
		Lumbers through the vacant street
		Considering the fences their
		
		Sorrows
		
		And the lightning died in its
		Mine ob it must be
		Some time back its name
		Is written everywhere in faded
		Dust
		
		One of its
		Gloves wheels on the sky over
		The blind movie
		And the station where the white train still
		Attends
		
		A bell that I hung onto as long as I could
		Is about to arrive and start ringing


	40. OAK TIME

		Storms in absence like the ages before I was anywhere
		 and out in the shred of forest through the seasons
		a few oaks have fallen towering ancients elders
		 the last of elders standing there while the wars drained away
		and slow-dancing with the ice when time had not discovered them
		 in a scrap of what had been their seamless fabric these late ones
		are lying shrouded already in eglantine and brambles
		 bird-cherry nettles and the tangled ivy
		that prophesies disappearance and had already
		 crept into the shadows they made when they held up their lives
		and the nightingales sang here even in the daytime
		 and cowbells echoed through the long twilight of summer
		the ivy knew the way oh the knowing ivy
		 that was never wrong how few now the birds seem to be
		no animals are led out any longer from the barns
		 after the milking to spend the night pastured here
		they are all gone from the village Edouard is gone
		 who walked out before them to the end of his days
		keeping an eye on the walnuts still green along the road
		 when the owl was safe in these oaks and in the night
		I could hear the fox that would bark here bark and be gone


	41. RETURNING SEASON

		When the spring sun finds the village now it is empty
		 but from the beginning this was the afterlife
		it was not so apparent a generation gone
		 these were still roofs under which the names were born
		that came home winter evenings before all the wars to sleep
		 through freezing nights when the dogs curled low in the cow barns
		and sheep nudged their rank clouds in the dark as one
		 now only wagons sleep there and stalled plows
		and machine skeletons rusting around stopped notes
		 of far-off bells in a cold longer than winter’s
		they will not be wanted again nor wake into any life
		 when the recesses from a better world begin
		the year goes on turning and the barns remain without breath
		 and now after sundown a city bulb keeps an eye on the village
		until past midnight but the owls sweep by the low eaves
		 and over black gardens in the light of finished stars


	42. SIRE

		Here comes the shadow not looking where it is going,
		And the whole night will fall; it is time.
		Here comes the little wind which the hour
		Drags with it everywhere like an empty wagon through leaves.
		Here comes my ignorance shuffling after them
		Asking them what they are doing.
		
		Standing still, I can hear my footsteps
		Come up behind me and go on
		Ahead of me and come up behind me and
		With different keys clinking in the pockets,
		And still I do not move. Here comes
		The white-haired thistle seed stumbling past through the branches
		Like a paper lantern carried by a blind man.
		I believe it is the lost wisdom of my grandfather
		Whose ways were his own and who died before I could ask.
		
		Forerunner, I would like to say, silent pilot,
		Little dry death, future,
		Your indirections are as strange to me
		As my own. I know so little that anything
		You might tell me would be a revelation.
		
		Sir, I would like to say,
		It is hard to think of the good woman
		Presenting you with children, like cakes,
		Granting you the eye of her needle,
		Standing in doorways, flinging after you
		Little endearments, like rocks, or her silence
		Like a whole Sunday of bells. Instead, tell me:
		Which of my many incomprehensions
		Did you bequeath me, and where did they take you? Standing
		In the shoes of indecision, I hear them
		Come up behind me and go on ahead of me
		Wearing boots, on crutches, barefoot, they could never
		Get together on any door-sill or destination--
		The one with the assortment of smiles, the one
		Jailed in himself like a forest, the one who comes
		Back at evening drunk with despair and turns
		Into the wrong night as though he owned it--oh small
		Deaf disappearance in the dusk, in which of their shoes
		Will I find myself tomorrow?


	43. SOME LAST QUESTIONS

		What is the head
		                        a. Ash
		
		What are the eyes
		                        a. The wells have fallen in and have
		                             Inhabitants
		
		What are the feet
		                        a. Thumbs left after the auction
		
		No what are the feet
		                        a. Under them the impossible road is moving
		                             Down which the broken necked mice push
		                             Balls of blood with their noses
		
		What is the tongue
		                        a. The black coat that fell off the wall
		                             With sleeves trying to say something
		
		What are the hands
		                        a. Paid
		
		No what are the hands
		                        a. Climbing back down the museum wall
		                             To their ancestors the extinct shrews that will
		                             Have left a message
		
		What is the silence
		                       a. As though it had a right to more
		
		Who are the compatriots
		                       a. They make the stars of bone


	44. ST. VINCENT’S

		Thinking of rain clouds that rose over the city
		on the first day of the year
		
		in the same month
		I consider that I have lived daily and with
		
		eyes open and ears to hear
		these years across from St Vincent’s Hospital
		above whose roof those clouds rose
		
		its bricks by day a French red under
		cross facing south
		blown-up neo-classic facades the tall
		dark openings between columns at
		the dawn of history
		exploded into many windows
		in a mortised face
		
		inside it the ambulances have unloaded
		after sirens’ howling nearer through traffic on
		Seventh Avenue long
		ago I learned not to hear them
		even when the sirens stop
		
		they turn to back in
		few passers-by stay to look
		and neither do I
		
		at night two long blue
		windows and one short one on the top floor
		burn all night
		many nights when most of the others are out
		on what floor do they have
		anything
		
		I have seen the building drift moonlit through geraniums
		late at night when trucks were few
		moon just past the full
		upper windows parts of the sky
		as long as I looked
		I watched it at Christmas and New Year
		early in the morning I have seen the nurses ray out through
		arterial streets
		in the evening have noticed internes blocks away
		on doorsteps one foot in the door
		
		I have come upon the men in gloves taking out
		the garbage at all hours
		piling up mountains of
		plastic bags white strata with green intermingled and
		black
		I have seen one pile
		catch fire and studied the cloud
		at the ends of the jets of the hoses
		the fire engines as near as that
		red beacons and
		machine-throb heard by the whole body
		I have noticed molded containers stacked outside
		a delivery entrance on Twelfth Street
		whether meals from a meal factory made up with those
		mummified for long journeys by plane
		or specimens for laboratory
		examination sealed at the prescribed temperatures
		either way closed delivery
		
		and approached faces staring from above
		crutches or tubular clamps
		out for tentative walks
		have paused for turtling wheel-chairs
		heard visitors talking in wind on each corner
		while the lights changed and
		hot dogs were handed over at the curb
		in the middle of afternoon
		mustard ketchup onions and relish
		and police smelling of ether and laundry
		were going back
		
		and I have known them all less than the papers of our days
		smoke rises from the chimneys do they have an incinerator
		what for
		how warm do they believe they have to maintain the air
		in there
		several of the windows appear
		to be made of tin
		but it may be the light reflected
		
		I have imagined bees coming and going
		on those sills though I have never seen them
		
		who was St Vincent


	45. STAR

		All the way north on the train the sun
		followed me followed me without moving
		still the sun of that other morning
		when we had gone over Come on over
		men at the screen door said to my father
		You have to see this it’s an ape bring
		the little boy bring the boy along
		
		so he brought me along to the field
		of dry grass hissing behind the houses
		in the heat that morning and there was
		nothing else back there but the empty day
		above the grass waving as far away
		as I could see and the sight burned my eyes
		white birds were flying off beyond us
		
		and a raised floor of boards like a house
		with no house on it part way out there
		was shining by itself a color
		of shadow and the voices of the men
		were smaller in the field as we walked on
		something was standing out there on the floor
		the men kept saying Come on over
		
		it’s on a chain and my father said
		to me Don’t get too close I saw it was
		staring down at each of our faces
		one after the other as though it might
		catch sight of something in one of them
		that it remembered I stood watching its eyes
		as they turned away from each of us


	46. THANKS

		Listen
		with the night falling we are saying thank you
		we are stopping on the bridges to bow from the railings
		we are running out of the glass rooms
		with our mouths full of food to look at the sky
		and say thank you
		we are standing by the water thanking it
		standing by the windows looking out
		in our directions
		
		back from a series of hospitals back from a mugging
		after funerals we are saying thank you
		after the news of the dead
		whether or not we knew them we are saying thank you
		
		over telephones we are saying thank you
		in doorways and in the backs of cars and in elevators
		remembering wars and the police at the door
		and the beatings on stairs we are saying thank you
		in the banks we are saying thank you
		in the faces of the officials and the rich
		and of all who will never change
		we go on saying thank you thank you
		
		with the animals dying around us
		taking our feelings we are saying thank you
		with the forests falling faster than the minutes
		of our lives we are saying thank you
		with the words going out like cells of a brain
		with the cities growing over us
		we are saying thank you faster and faster
		with nobody listening we are saying thank you
		thank you we are saying and waving
		dark though it is


	47. THE ASIANS DYING

		When the forests have been destroyed their darkness remains
		The ash the great walker follows the possessors
		Forever
		Nothing they will come to is real
		Nor for long
		Over the watercourses
		Like ducks in the time of the ducks
		The ghosts of the villages trail in the sky
		Making a new twilight
		
		Rain falls into the open eyes of the dead
		Again again with its pointless sound
		When the moon finds them they are the color of everything
		
		The nights disappear like bruises but nothing is healed
		The dead go away like bruises
		The blood vanishes into the poisoned farmlands
		Pain the horizon
		Remains
		Overhead the seasons rock
		They are paper bells
		Calling to nothing living
		
		The possessors move everywhere under Death their star
		Like columns of smoke they advance into the shadows
		Like thin flames with no light
		They with no past
		And fire their only future


	48. THE BIRD

		Might it be like this then to come back descending
		through the gray sheeted hour when it is said that dreams
		are to be believed the moment when the ghosts go home
		with the last stars still on far below in a silence
		that deepens like water a sinking softly toward them
		to find a once-familiar capital half dissolved
		like a winter its faces piled in their own wreckage
		and over them unfinished towers of empty
		mirrors risen framed in air then beside pewter rivers
		under black nests in the naked poplars arriving
		at the first hesitations of spring the thin leaves
		shivering and the lights in them and at cold April with trees
		all in white its mullein wool opening on thawed banks
		cowslips and mustard in the morning russet cows on green slope
		running clouds behind hands of willows the song of the wren
		and both recognizing and being recognized with doubting
		belief neither stranger nor true inhabitant
		neither knowing nor not knowing coming at last
		to the door in sunlight and seeing as through glasses far
		away the old claims the longings to stay and to leave
		the new heights of the trees the children grown tall and polite
		the animal absences and scarcely touching anything
		holding it after all as uncertainly
		as the white blossoms were held that have been blown down
		most of them in one night or this empty half
		of a bird’s egg flung out of the bare flailing branches


	49. THE BURNT CHILD

		Matches among other things that were not allowed
		never would be
		lying high in a cool blue box
		that opened in other hands and there they all were
		bodies clean and smooth blue heads white crowns
		white sandpaper on the sides of the box scoring
		fire after fire gone before
		
		I could hear the scratch and flare
		when they were over
		and catch the smell of the striking
		I knew what the match would feel like
		lighting
		when I was very young
		
		a fire engine came and parked
		in the shadow of the big poplar tree
		on Fourth Street one night
		keeping its engine running
		pumping oxygen to the old woman
		in the basement
		when she died the red lights went on burning


	50. THE CAUSEWAY

		This is the bridge where at dusk they hear voices
		far out in the meres and marshes or they say they hear voices
		
		the bridge shakes and no one else is crossing at this hour
		somewhere along here is where they hear voices
		
		this is the only bridge though it keeps changing
		from which some always say they hear voices
		
		the sounds pronounce an older utterance out of the shadows
		sometimes stifled sometimes carried from clear voices
		
		what can be recognized in the archaic syllables
		frightens many and tells others not to fear voices
		
		travellers crossing the bridge have forgotten where they were going
		in a passage between the remote and the near voices
		
		there is a tale by now of a bridge a long time before this one
		already old before the speech of our day and the mere voices
		
		when the Goths were leaving their last kingdom in Scythia
		they could feel the bridge shaking under their voices
		
		the bank and the first spans are soon lost to sight
		there seemed no end to the horses carts people and all their voices
		
		in the mists at dusk the whole bridge sank under them
		into the meres and marshes leaving nothing but their voices
		
		they are still speaking the language of their last kingdom
		that no one remembers who now hears their voices
		
		whatever translates from those rags of sound
		persuades some who hear them that they are familiar voices
		
		grandparents never seen ancestors in their childhoods
		now along the present bridge they sound like dear voices
		
		some may have spoken in my own name in an earlier language
		when last they drew breath in the kingdom of their voices


	51. THE HIGHWAY

		It seems too enormous just for a man to be
		Walking on. As if it and the empty day
		Were all there is. And a little dog trotting
		In time with the heat waves, away down
		Near the horizon, seeming never to get
		Any further. The sun and everything
		Are stuck in the same places, and the ditch
		Is the same all the time, full of every kind
		Of bone, while the empty air keeps humming
		That sound it has memorized of things going
		Past. And the signs with huge heads and starved
		Bodies, dancing suggestive dances in
		The heat without moving from where they stand,
		And the others big as houses, all promise
		But with nothing inside and only one wall,
		Tell of other places where you can eat
		And drink and get a bath and lie on a bed
		Listening to music, and be safe. If you
		Look around you see it is just the same
		The other way, going back. Maybe hope
		Was never anything but feet, and wherever
		It heads for it must get there burning.


	52. THE HUMMINGBIRD

		There was a city hidden in the forest
		and there was a house in the city
		and in it a girl who was so beautiful
		that her mother never let her out of sight
		
		one day one of the servant girls went down
		to the fountain to bring back some water
		and when she came there she saw the hummingbird
		and she stood still with a spell holding her
		
		since she stayed away so long the mother
		sent another servant girl who came there
		and saw the hummingbird and she stood still
		the same way with the same spell holding her
		
		then the mother sent another servant girl
		who saw the hummingbird and stayed there
		and at that the mother went too and saw
		the hummingbird and at the sight of its
		
		feathers and its flight the same spell took her
		and she stood still until finally the girl
		herself decided to go to the fountain
		and see what was keeping them and when she
		
		came there the hummingbird flew to her
		and tapped her on the forehead with his beak
		and changed her into a hummingbird
		and they both flew off into the forest


	53. THE HYDRA

		No no the dead have no brothers
		
		The Hydra calls me but I am used to it
		It calls me Everybody
		But I know my name and do not answer
		
		And you the dead
		You know your names as I do not
		But at moments you have just finished speaking
		
		The snow stirs in its wrappings
		Every season comes from a new place
		
		Like your voice with its resemblances
		
		A long time ago the lightning was practising
		Something I thought was easy
		
		I was young and the dead were in other
		Ages
		As the grass had its own language
		
		Now I forget where the difference falls
		
		One thing about the living sometimes a piece of us
		Can stop dying for a moment
		But you the dead
		
		Once you go into those names you go on you never
		Hesitate
		You go on


	54. THE LAST ONE

		Well they’d made up their minds to be everywhere because why
		 not.
		Everywhere was theirs because they thought so.
		They with two leaves they whom the birds despise.
		In the middle of stones they made up their minds.
		They started to cut.
		
		Well they cut everything because why not.
		Everything was theirs because they thought so
		It fell into its shadows and they took both away.
		Some to have some for burning.
		
		Well cutting everything they came to the water.
		They came to the end of the day there was one left standing.
		They would cut it tomorrow they went away.
		The night gathered in the last branches.
		The shadow of the night gathered in the shadow on the water.
		The night and the shadow put on the same head
		And it said Now.
		
		Well in the morning they cut the last one.
		Like the others the last one fell into its shadow.
		It fell into its shadow on the water.
		They took it away its shadow stayed on the water.
		
		Well they shrugged they started trying to get the shadow away.
		They cut right to the ground the shadow stayed whole.
		They laid boards on it the shadow came out on top.
		They shone lights on it the shadow got blacker and clearer.
		They exploded the water the shadow rocked.


	55. THE OTHER TREE

		It seems that the odour that the dark makes
		When the night uncovers its cold, is a green thing.
		I have seen the turning light rustle like leaves
		And at sundown the birds sink like seeds falling.
		
		Like folded seeds falling from no bough we can see
		But out of the veined air and the light’s failing.
		Sometimes I have felt there was, not shadow
		But a dry branch, above my shoulder growing.
		
		All day growing, and not shadow, and with no wind
		 diverted.
		I have not thought of the birds resting there. I think
		 of them circling
		All day in the rocking light, till they are shaken down
		To curl blind like kernels, and cluster, like the fruit of
		 sleeping.
		
		In the same cold sleeping as the night’s foliate
		Tropism. But I think how the dark’s flowering
		Would open to no singing that we know, how its fruit,
		Like the night’s green odour, would taste of nothing.
		
		With that taste of nothing which sometimes at noon
		Which we say resembles a perfect flower, the thirsting
		Tongue will dream of, dry in its dark vault,
		As of a thing forbidden, lusting and leching.


	56. THE SPEED OF LIGHT

		So gradual in those summers was the going
		of the age it seemed that the long days setting out
		when the stars faded over the mountains were not
		leaving us even as the birds woke in full song and the dew
		glittered in the webs it appeared then that the clear morning
		opening into the sky was something of ours
		to have and keep and that the brightness we could not touch
		and the air we could not hold had come to be there all the time
		for us and would never be gone and that the axle
		we did not hear was not turning when the ancient car
		coughed in the roofer’s barn and rolled out echoing
		first thing into the lane and the only tractor
		in the village rumbled and went into its rusty
		mutterings before heading out of its lean-to
		into the cow pats and the shadow of the lime tree
		we did not see that the swallows flashing and the sparks
		of their cries were fast in the spokes of the hollow
		wheel that was turning and turning us taking us
		all away as one with the tires of the baker’s van
		where the wheels of bread were stacked like days in calendars
		coming and going all at once we did not hear
		the rim of the hour in whatever we were saying
		or touching all day we thought it was there and would stay
		it was only as the afternoon lengthened on its
		dial and the shadows reached out farther and farther
		from everything that we began to listen for what
		might be escaping us and we heard high voices ringing
		the village at sundown calling their animals home
		and then the bats after dark and the silence on its road


	57. THE WAY TO THE RIVER

		The way to the river leads past the names of
		Ash the sleeves the wreaths of hinges
		Through the song of the bandage vendor
		
		I lay your name by my voice
		As I go
		
		The way to the river leads past the late
		Doors and the games of the children born looking backwards
		They play that they are broken glass
		The numbers wait in the halls and the clouds
		Call
		From windows
		They play that they are old they are putting the horizon
		Into baskets they are escaping they are
		Hiding
		
		I step over the sleepers the fires the calendars
		My voice turns to you
		
		I go past the juggler’s condemned building the hollow
		Windows gallery
		Of invisible presidents the same motion in them all
		In a parked cab by the sealed wall the hats are playing
		Sort of poker with somebody’s
		
		Old snapshots game I don’t understand they lose
		The rivers one
		After the other I begin to know where I am
		I am home
		
		Be here the flies from the house of the mapmaker
		Walk on our letters I can tell
		And the days hang medals between us
		I have lit our room with a glove of yours be
		Here I turn
		To your name and the hour remembers
		Its one word
		Now
		
		Be here what can we
		Do for the dead the footsteps full of money
		I offer you what I have my
		Poverty
		
		To the city of wires I have brought home a handful
		Of water I walk slowly
		In front of me they are building the empty
		Ages I see them reflected not for long
		Be here I am no longer ashamed of time it is too brief its hands
		Have no names
		I have passed it I know
		
		        _Oh Necessity you with the face you with
		        All the faces_
		
		This is written on the back of everything
		
		But we
		Will read it together


	58. TO LINGERING REGRETS

		Without wanting to
		I have come slowly
		to admit that I know
		who you are one by one
		oh lovely and mournful
		with downcast eyes
		appearing to me as
		you are turning away
		to stand silent and late
		in a remembered light
		touched with amber
		as the sun is going
		from a day that it brought
		you come to me again
		and again to wait
		as beautiful as ever
		at the edge of the light
		you have not changed at all
		as far as I can tell
		and you learn nothing from me
		who do not talk with you
		but see you waiting there
		without once moving toward you
		oh forever hopeful
		and forever young
		you are the foolish virgins
		with no oil for your lamps
		and no one else to lead you
		where you want to go


	59. TO THE ANCIENT ORDER OF LEGS

		Barefoot all the way
		from the embryo
		and the drifting sands
		where the prints washed away
		untold lives ago
		you were born to be
		one of a number
		upholding a larger
		company on one
		side or the other
		always in the infantry
		and singular though
		at first you were many
		balancing alternately
		unable to see
		where you were going
		climbing along yourself
		by the numbers in
		a pace of your own
		and stepping into
		new talents positions
		memberships bringing
		the count down to
		eight and four and two
		coming in turn to be
		less dispensable
		half solitary painful
		surviving ancestor
		heir to the distances
		sustain the limbs of friends
		you that have borne the world
		this far in us all walk on
		light on your feet as
		the days walk through the days


	60. TO THE CONSOLATIONS OF PHILOSOPHY

		Thank you but 
		not just at the moment 
		
		I know you will say 
		I have said that before 
		I know you have been 
		there all along somewhere 
		in another time zone 
		
		I studied once 
		those beautiful instructions 
		when I was young and 
		far from here 
		they seemed distant then 
		they seem distant now 
		from everything I remember 
		
		I hope they stayed with you 
		when the noose started to tighten 
		and you could say no more 
		and after wisdom 
		and the days of iron 
		the eyes started from your head 
		
		I know the words 
		must have been set down 
		partly for yourself 
		unjustly condemned after 
		a good life 
		
		I know the design 
		of the world is beyond 
		our comprehension 
		thank you 
		but grief is selfish and in 
		the present when 
		the stars do not seem to move 
		I was not listening 
		
		I know it is not 
		sensible to expect 
		fortune to grant her 
		gifts forever 
		I know


	61. TO THE LIGHT OF SEPTEMBER

		When you are already here 
		you appear to be only 
		a name that tells of you 
		whether you are present or not 
		
		and for now it seems as though 
		you are still summer 
		still the high familiar 
		endless summer 
		yet with a glint 
		of bronze in the chill mornings 
		and the late yellow petals 
		of the mullein fluttering 
		on the stalks that lean 
		over their broken 
		shadows across the cracked ground 
		
		but they all know 
		that you have come 
		the seed heads of the sage 
		the whispering birds 
		with nowhere to hide you 
		to keep you for later 
		
		you 
		who fly with them 
		
		you who are neither 
		before nor after 
		you who arrive 
		with blue plums 
		that have fallen through the night 
		
		perfect in the dew


	62. TO THE NEW YEAR

		With what stillness at last
		you appear in the valley
		your first sunlight reaching down
		to touch the tips of a few
		high leaves that do not stir
		as though they had not noticed
		and did not know you at all
		then the voice of a dove calls
		from far away in itself
		to the hush of the morning
		
		so this is the sound of you
		here and now whether or not
		anyone hears it this is
		where we have come with our age
		our knowledge such as it is
		and our hopes such as they are
		invisible before us
		untouched and still possible


	63. VIXEN

		Comet of stillness princess of what is over
		      high note held without trembling without voice without sound
		aura of complete darkness keeper of the kept secrets
		      of the destroyed stories the escaped dreams the sentences
		never caught in words warden of where the river went
		      touch of its surface sibyl of the extinguished
		window onto the hidden place and the other time
		      at the foot of the wall by the road patient without waiting
		in the full moonlight of autumn at the hour when I was born
		      you no longer go out like a flame at the sight of me
		you are still warmer than the moonlight gleaming on you
		      even now you are unharmed even now perfect
		as you have always been now when your light paws are running
		      on the breathless night on the bridge with one end I remember you
		when I have heard you the soles of my feet have made answer
		      when I have seen you I have waked and slipped from the calendars
		from the creeds of difference and the contradictions
		      that were my life and all the crumbling fabrications
		as long as it lasted until something that we were
		      had ended when you are no longer anything
		let me catch sight of you again going over the wall
		      and before the garden is extinct and the woods are figures
		guttering on a screen let my words find their own
		      places in the silence after the animals


	64. WHEN YOU GO AWAY

		When you go away the wind clicks around to the north
		The painters work all day but at sundown the paint falls
		Showing the black walls
		The clock goes back to striking the same hour
		That has no place in the years
		
		And at night wrapped in the bed of ashes
		In one breath I wake
		It is the time when the beards of the dead get their growth
		I remember that I am falling
		That I am the reason
		And that my words are the garment of what I shall never be
		Like the tucked sleeve of a one-armed boy


	65. WHENEVER I GO THERE

		Whenever I go there everything is changed
		
		The stamps on the bandages the titles
		Of the professors of water
		
		The portrait of Glare the reasons for
		The white mourning
		
		In new rocks new insects are sitting
		With the lights off
		And once more I remember that the beginning
		
		Is broken
		
		No wonder the addresses are torn
		
		To which I make my way eating the silence of animals
		Offering snow to the darkness
		
		Today belongs to few and tomorrow to no one


	66. YESTERDAY

		My friend says I was not a good son
		you understand
		I say yes I understand
		
		he says I did not go
		to see my parents very often you know
		and I say yes I know
		
		even when I was living in the same city he says
		maybe I would go there once
		a month or maybe even less
		I say oh yes
		
		he says the last time I went to see my father
		I say the last time I saw my father
		
		he says the last time I saw my father
		he was asking me about my life
		how I was making out and he
		went into the next room
		to get something to give me
		
		oh I say
		feeling again the cold
		of my father’s hand the last time
		
		he says and my father turned
		in the doorway and saw me
		look at my wristwatch and he
		said you know I would like you to stay
		and talk with me
		
		oh yes I say
		
		but if you are busy he said
		I don’t want you to feel that you
		have to
		just because I’m here
		
		I say nothing
		
		he says my father
		said maybe
		you have important work you are doing
		or maybe you should be seeing
		somebody I don’t want to keep you
		
		I look out the window
		my friend is older than I am
		he says and I told my father it was so
		and I got up and left him then
		you know
		
		though there was nowhere I had to go
		and nothing I had to do


*** Alice Meynell (1847 - 1922)

	1. I AM THE WAY

		Thou art the Way.
		Hadst Thou been nothing but the goal,
		I cannot say
		If Thou hadst ever met my soul.
		
		I cannot see--
		I, child of process--if there lies
		An end for me,
		Full of repose, full of replies.
		
		I’ll not reproach
		The way that goes, my feet that stir.
		Access, approach,
		Art Thou, time, way, and wayfarer.


	2. IN AUTUMN

		The leaves are many under my feet,
		And drift one way.
		Their scent of death is weary and sweet.
		A flight of them is in the grey
		Where sky and forest meet.
		
		The low winds moan for sad sweet years;
		The birds sing all for pain,
		Of a common thing, to weary ears,--
		Only a summer’s fate of rain,
		And a woman’s fate of tears.
		
		I walk to love and life alone
		Over these mournful places,
		Across the summer overthrown,
		The dead joys of these silent faces,
		To claim my own.
		
		I know his heart has beat to bright
		Sweet loves gone by;
		I know the leaves that die to-night
		Once budded to the sky;
		And I shall die from his delight.
		
		O leaves, so quietly ending now,
		You heard the cuckoos sing.
		And I will grow upon my bough
		If only for a spring,
		And fall when the rain is on my brow.
		
		O tell me, tell me ere you die,
		Is it worth the pain?
		You bloomed so fair, you waved so high;
		Now that the sad days wane,
		Are you repenting where you lie?
		
		I lie amongst you, and I kiss
		Your fragrance mouldering.
		O dead delights, is it such bliss,
		That tuneful Spring?
		Is love so sweet, that comes to this?
		
		Kiss me again as I kiss you;
		Kiss me again;
		For all your tuneful nights of dew,
		In this your time of rain,
		For all your kisses when Spring was new.
		
		You will not, broken hearts; let be.
		I pass across your death
		To a golden summer you shall not see,
		And in your dying breath
		There is no benison for me.
		
		There is an autumn yet to wane,
		There are leaves yet to fall,
		Which, when I kiss, may kiss again,
		And, pitied, pity me all for all,
		And love me in mist and rain.


	3. IN FEBRUARY

		Rich meanings of the prophet-Spring adorn,
		Unseen, this colourless sky of folded showers,
		And folded winds; no blossom in the bowers;
		A poet’s face asleep in this grey morn.
		Now in the midst of the old world forlorn
		A mystic child is set in these still hours.
		I keep this time, even before the flowers,
		Sacred to all the young and the unborn.
		
		To all the miles and miles of unsprung wheat,
		And to the Spring waiting beyond the portal,
		And to the future of my own young art,
		And, among all these things, to you, my sweet,
		My friend, to your calm face and the immortal
		Child tarrying all your life-time in your heart.


	4. MY HEART SHALL BE THY GARDEN

		My heart shall be thy garden. Come, my own,
		Into thy garden; thine be happy hours
		Among my fairest thoughts, my tallest flowers,
		From root to crowning petal, thine alone.
		Thine is the place from where the seeds are sown
		Up to the sky inclosed, with all its showers.
		But ah, the birds, the birds! Who shall build bowers
		To keep these thine? O friend, the birds have flown.
		
		For as these come and go, and quit our pine
		To follow the sweet season, or, new-corners,
		Sing one song only from our alder-trees,
		My heart has thoughts, which, though thine eyes hold mine.
		Flit to the silent world and other summers,
		With wings that dip beyond the silver seas.


	5. RENOUNCEMENT

		I must not think of thee; and, tired yet strong,
		I shun the love that lurks in all delight--
		The love of thee--and in the blue heaven’s height,
		And in the dearest passage of a song.
		Oh, just beyond the sweetest thoughts that throng
		This breast, the thought of thee waits hidden yet bright;
		But it must never, never come in sight;
		I must stop short of thee the whole day long.
		But when sleep comes to close each difficult day,
		When night gives pause to the long watch I keep,
		And all my bonds I needs must loose apart,
		Must doff my will as raiment laid away,--
		With the first dream that comes with the first sleep
		I run, I run, I am gather’d to thy heart.


	6. YOUR OWN FAIR YOUTH

		Your own fair youth, you care so little for it--
		Smiling toward Heaven, you would not stay the advances
		Of time and change upon your hapiest fancies.
		I keep your golden hour, and will restore it.
		If ever, in time to come, you would explore it--
		Your old self, whose thoughts went like last year’s pansies,
		Look unto me; no mirror keeps its glances;
		In my unfailing praises now I store it.
		
		To guard all joys of yours from Time’s estranging,
		I shall then be a treasury where your gay,
		Happy, and pensive past unaltered is.
		I shall then be a garden charmed from changing,
		In which your June has never passed away.
		Walk there awhile among my memories.


*** Adam Mickiewicz (1798 - 1855)

	1. THE AKKERMAN STEPPE

		I launch myself across the dry and open narrows, 
		My carriage plunging into green as if a ketch, 
		Floundering through the meadow flowers in the stretch. 
		I pass an archipelago of coral yarrows. 
		
		It’s dusk now, not a road in sight, nor ancient barrows. 
		I look up at the sky and look for stars to catch. 
		There distant clouds glint--there tomorrow starts to etch; 
		The Dnieper glimmers; Akkerman’s lamp shines and harrows. 
		
		I stand in stillness, hear the migratory cranes, 
		Their necks and wings beyond the reach of preying hawks; 
		Hear where the sooty copper glides across the plains, 
		
		Where on its underside a viper writhes through stalks. 
		Amid the hush I lean my ears down grassy lanes 
		And listen for a voice from home. Nobody talks. 


	2. THE GREAT IMPROVISATION

		. . . Listen to me, God, and you, Nature! 
		Here is music that is worthy of you, songs that are worthy of you. 
		I am master! 
		Master, I stretch out my hands! 
		I stretch them to the sky, I place my fingers on the stars. 
		They are my musical glasses, my armonica. 
		Now swiftly, now slowly 
		My spirit turns the stars. 
		Millions on millions of tones resound, 
		It is I who called them forth, I know them all; 
		I combine them, I separate them, I reunite them, 
		I weave them into rainbows, into chords, into strophes, 
		I scatter them in sounds and in ribbons of fire. 
		
		I raised my hands, 
		I held them high above the ridge of the world, 
		And the wheels of the armonica suddenly ceased to whirl. 
		I sing alone, I hear my songs 
		Long lingering like the breath of the wind, 
		They blow through all mankind, 
		They moan like pain, 
		They roar like the storm. 
		Tonelessly, the centuries accompany them; each sound resounds and burns, 
		Is in my ear, is in my eye, 
		As when the wind blows over the waves, 
		In its whistlings I hear its flight 
		And see it in its coat of cloud. 
		
		These songs are worthy of God, of Nature! 
		This is a mighty song, a creator-song. 
		This song is force and power, 
		This song is immortality! 
		I feel immortality, I create immortality, 
		And you, God, what more could you do? 
		See how I draw my thoughts out of myself, 
		I incarnate them, 
		They scatter across the skies, 
		They whirl, they sing, they shine, 
		Already far away, I feel them still, 
		Still feel their charm, 
		I feel their roundness in my hand, 
		I sense their movements in my mind: 
		I love you, my poetic children! 
		My thoughts! My stars! 
		My feelings! My storms! 
		Among you I am like a father in the midst of his family, 
		All of you are mine. 
		
		. . . Not from Eden’s tree have I drawn this power--
		From the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil--
		Not from books or tales that are told, 
		Not from the solution of problems, 
		Or the practice of magic. 
		Creator I was born: 
		I have drawn my powers from the source 
		From which you drew yours: 
		You did not search for your powers--you have them; 
		You do not fear to lose them and neither do I! 
		Was it you who gave me, 
		Or did I, like you, have to seize it, 
		This piercing and powerful eye: 
		When I raise my eyes toward the track of the clouds, 
		And hear the birds flying south on almost invisible wings, 
		Suddenly, only by willing, I hold them as in a net with my eyes; 
		The flock gives a cry of distress, but, till I release them, 
		Your winds cannot move them. 
		If I gaze at a comet with all the strength of my soul, 
		It cannot stir from the spot while my eyes are upon it


	3. THE ROMANTIC

		‘Silly girl, listen!’ 
		But she doesn’t listen 
		While the village roofs glisten, 
		Bright in the sun. 
		‘Silly girl, what do you do there, 
		As if there were someone to view there, 
		A face to gaze on and greet there, 
		A live form warmly to meet there, 
		When there is no one, none, do you hear?’ 
		But she doesn’t hear. 
		
		Like a dead stone 
		She stands there alone, 
		Staring ahead of her, peering around 
		For something that has to be found 
		Till, suddenly spying it, 
		She touches it, clutches it, 
		Laughing and crying. 
		
		Is it you, my Johnny, my true love, my dear? 
		I knew you would never forget me, 
		Even in death! Come with me, let me 
		Show you the way now! 
		Hold your breath, though, 
		And tiptoe lest stepmother hear! 
		
		What can she hear? They have made him 
		A grave, two years ago laid him 
		Away with the dead. 
		Save me, Mother of God! I’m afraid. 
		But why? Why should I flee you now? 
		What do I dread? 
		Not Johnny! My Johnny won’t hurt me. 
		It is my Johnny! I see you now, 
		Your eyes, your white shirt. 
		
		But it’s pale as linen you are, 
		Cold as winter you are! 
		Let my lips take the cold from you, 
		Kiss the chill o f the mould from you. 
		
		Dearest love, let me die with you, 
		In the deep earth lie with you, 
		For this world is dark and dreary, 
		I am lonely and weary! 
		
		Alone among the unkind ones 
		Who mock at my vision, 
		My tears their derision, 
		Seeing nothing, the blind ones! 
		
		Dear God! A cock is crowing, 
		Whitely glimmers the dawn. 
		Johnny! Where are you going? 
		Don’t leave me! I am forlorn! 
		
		So, caressing, talking aloud to her 
		Lover, she stumbles and falls, 
		And her cry of anguish calls 
		A pitying crowd to her. 
		
		‘Cross yourselves! It is, surely, 
		Her Johnny come back from the grave: 
		While he lived, he loved her entirely. 
		May God his soul now save!’ 
		
		Hearing what they are saying, 
		I, too, start praying. 
		
		‘The girl is out of her senses!’ 
		Shouts a man with a learned air, 
		‘My eye and my lenses 
		Know there’s nothing there. 
		
		Ghosts are a myth 
		Of ale-wife and blacksmith. 
		Clodhoppers! This is treason 
		Against King Reason!’ 
		
		‘Yet the girl loves,’ I reply diffidently, 
		‘And the people believe reverently: 
		Faith and love are more discerning 
		Than lenses or learning. 
		
		You know the dead truths, not the living, 
		The world of things, not the world of loving. 
		Where does any miracle start? 
		Cold eye, look in your heart!’


	4. THE RUINS

		These castles heaped in shattered piles once graced
		And guarded you, Crimea, thankless land!
		Today like giant skulls set high they stand
		And shelter reptiles, or men more debased.
		Upon that tower a coat of arms is traced,
		And letters, some dead hero’s name, whose hand
		Scourged armies. Now he sleeps forgotten and
		The grapevine holds him, like a worm, embraced.
		Here Greeks have chiseled Attic ornament,
		Italians cast the Mongols into chains
		And pilgrims chanted slowly, Mecca bent:
		Today the black-winged vulture only reigns
		As in a city, dead and pestilent,
		Where mourning banners flutter to the plains.


	5. THE STORM

		The rudder breaks, the sails are ripped, the roar
		Of waters mingles with the ominous sound
		Of pumps and panic voices; all around
		Torn ropes. The sun sets red, we hope no more--
		The tempest howls in triumph; from the shore
		Where wet cliffs rising tier on tier surround
		The ocean chaos, death advances, bound
		To carry ramparts broken long before,
		One man has swooned, one wrings his hands ,one sinks
		Upon his friends, embracing them. Some say
		a prayer to death that it may pass them by.
		One traveller sits apart and sadly thinks:
		“Happy the man who faints or who can pray
		Or has a friend to whom to say goodbye.”


*** Edna St. Vincent Millay (1892 - 1950)

	1. AFTERNOON ON A HILL

		I will be the gladdest thing
		 Under the sun!
		I will touch a hundred flowers
		 And not pick one.
		
		I will look at cliffs and clouds
		 With quiet eyes
		Watch the wind bow down the grass
		 And the grass rise.
		
		And when lights begin to show
		 Up from the town
		I will mark which must be mine
		 And then start down.


	2. ASHES OF LIFE

		Love has gone and left me and the days are all alike;
		 Eat I must and sleep I will--and would that night were here!
		But ah!--to lie awake and hear the slow hours strike!
		 Would that it were day again!--with twilight near!
		
		Love has gone and left me and I don’t know what to do;
		 This or that or what you will is all the same to me;
		But all the things that I begin I leave before I’m through--
		 There’s little use in anything as far as I can see.
		
		Love has gone and left me--and the neighbours knock and borrow
		 And life goes on forever like the gnawing of a mouse--
		And to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow
		 There’s this little street and this little house.


	3. BLIGHT

		Hard seeds of hate I planted
		 That should by now be grown--
		Rough stalks and from thick stamens
		 A poisonous pollen blown
		And odours rank unbreathable
		 From dark corollas thrown!
		
		At dawn from my damp garden
		 I shook the chilly dew;
		The thin boughs locked behind me
		 That sprang to let me through;
		The blossoms slept--I sought a place
		 Where nothing lovely grew.
		
		And there when day was breaking
		 I knelt and looked around:
		The light was near the silence
		 Was palpitant with sound;
		I drew my hate from out my breast
		 And thrust it in the ground.
		
		Oh ye so fiercely tended
		 Ye little seeds of hate!
		I bent above your growing
		 Early and noon and late
		Yet are ye drooped and pitiful--
		 I cannot rear ye straight!
		
		The sun seeks out my garden
		 No nook is left in shade
		No mist nor mould nor mildew
		 Endures on any blade
		Sweet rain slants under every bough:
		 Ye falter and ye fade.


	4. CITY TREES

		The trees along this city street
		 Save for the traffic and the trains
		Would make a sound as thin and sweet
		 As trees in country lanes.
		
		And people standing in their shade
		 Out of a shower undoubtedly
		Would hear such music as is made
		 Upon a country tree.
		
		Oh little leaves that are so dumb
		 Against the shrieking city air
		I watch you when the wind has come--
		 I know what sound is there.


	5. ELAINE

		Oh come again to Astolat!
		 I will not ask you to be kind.
		And you may go when you will go
		 And I will stay behind.
		
		I will not say how dear you are
		 Or ask you if you hold me dear
		Or trouble you with things for you
		 The way I did last year.
		
		So still the orchard Lancelot
		 So very still the lake shall be
		You could not guess--though you should guess--
		 What is become of me.
		
		So wide shall be the garden-walk
		 The garden-seat so very wide
		You needs must think--if you should think--
		 The lily maid had died.
		
		Save that a little way away
		 I’d watch you for a little while
		To see you speak the way you speak
		 And smile--if you should smile.


	6. GOD’S WORLD

		O world I cannot hold thee close enough!
		     Thy winds thy wide grey skies!
		     Thy mists that roll and rise!
		Thy woods this autumn day that ache and sag
		And all but cry with colour! That gaunt crag
		To crush! To lift the lean of that black bluff!
		World World I cannot get thee close enough!
		
		Long have I known a glory in it all
		     But never knew I this;
		     Here such a passion is
		As stretcheth me apart--Lord I do fear
		Thou’st made the world too beautiful this year;
		My soul is all but out of me--let fall
		No burning leaf; prithee let no bird call.


	7. INDIFFERENCE

		I said--for Love was laggard O Love was slow to come--
		 “I’ll hear his step and know his step when I am warm in bed;
		But I’ll never leave my pillow though there be some
		 As would let him in--and take him in with tears!” I said.
		I lay--for Love was laggard O he came not until dawn--
		I lay and listened for his step and could not get to sleep;
		And he found me at my window with my big cloak on
		 All sorry with the tears some folks might weep!


	8. JOURNEY

		Ah could I lay me down in this long grass
		And close my eyes and let the quiet wind
		Blow over me--I am so tired so tired
		Of passing pleasant places! All my life
		Following Care along the dusty road
		Have I looked back at loveliness and sighed;
		Yet at my hand an unrelenting hand
		Tugged ever and I passed. All my life long
		   Over my shoulder have I looked at peace
		   And now I fain would lie in this long grass
		   And close my eyes.
		                     Yet onward!
		                               Cat-birds call
		Through the long afternoon and creeks at dusk
		Are guttural. Whip-poor-wills wake and cry
		Drawing the twilight close about their throats.
		Only my heart makes answer. Eager vines
		Go up the rocks and wait; flushed apple-trees
		Pause in their dance and break the ring for me;
		Dim shady wood-roads redolent of fern
		And bayberry that through sweet bevies thread
		Of round-faced roses pink and petulant
		Look back and beckon ere they disappear.
		Only my heart only my heart responds.
		Yet ah my path is sweet on either side
		All through the dragging day--sharp underfoot
		And hot and like dead mist the dry dust hangs--
		But far oh far as passionate eye can reach
		And long ah long as rapturous eye can cling
		The world is mine: blue hill still silver lake
		Broad field bright flower and the long white road
		A gateless garden and an open path:
		My feet to follow and my heart to hold.


	9. MY CANDLE BURNS AT BOTH ENDS

		My candle burns at both ends;
		 It will not last the night;
		But ah my foes and oh my friends--
		 It gives a lovely light!


	10. PASTORAL

		If it were only still!--
		With far away the shrill
		Crying of a cock;
		Or the shaken bell
		From a cow’s throat
		Moving through the bushes;
		Or the soft shock
		Of wizened apples falling
		From an old tree
		In a forgotten orchard
		Upon the hilly rock!
		
		Oh grey hill
		Where the grazing herd
		Licks the purple blossom
		Crops the spiky weed!
		Oh stony pasture
		Where the tall mullein
		Stands up so sturdy
		On its little seed!


	11. RENASCENCE

		All I could see from where I stood
		Was three long mountains and a wood;
		I turned and looked another way
		And saw three islands in a bay.
		So with my eyes I traced the line
		Of the horizon thin and fine
		Straight around till I was come
		Back to where I’d started from
		And all I saw from where I stood
		Was three long mountains and a wood.
		Over these things I could not see:
		These were the things that bounded me;
		And I could touch them with my hand
		Almost I thought from where I stand.
		And all at once things seemed so small
		My breath came short and scarce at all.
		But sure the sky is big I said;
		Miles and miles above my head;
		So here upon my back I’ll lie
		And look my fill into the sky.
		And so I looked and after all
		The sky was not so very tall.
		The sky I said must somewhere stop
		And--sure enough!--I see the top!
		The sky I thought is not so grand;
		I ’most could touch it with my hand!
		And reaching up my hand to try
		I screamed to feel it touch the sky.
		
		I screamed and--lo!--Infinity
		Came down and settled over me;
		Forced back my scream into my chest
		Bent back my arm upon my breast
		And pressing of the Undefined
		The definition on my mind
		Held up before my eyes a glass
		Through which my shrinking sight did pass
		Until it seemed I must behold
		Immensity made manifold;
		Whispered to me a word whose sound
		Deafened the air for worlds around
		And brought unmuffled to my ears
		The gossiping of friendly spheres
		The creaking of the tented sky
		The ticking of Eternity.
		I saw and heard and knew at last
		The How and Why of all things past
		And present and for evermore.
		The Universe cleft to the core
		Lay open to my probing sense
		That sick’ning I would fain pluck thence
		But could not--nay! But needs must suck
		At the great wound and could not pluck
		My lips away till I had drawn
		All venom out.--Ah fearful pawn!
		For my omniscience paid I toll
		In infinite remorse of soul.
		All sin was of my sinning all
		Atoning mine and mine the gall
		Of all regret. Mine was the weight
		Of every brooded wrong the hate
		That stood behind each envious thrust
		Mine every greed mine every lust.
		And all the while for every grief
		Each suffering I craved relief
		With individual desire--
		Craved all in vain! And felt fierce fire
		About a thousand people crawl;
		Perished with each--then mourned for all!
		A man was starving in Capri;
		He moved his eyes and looked at me;
		I felt his gaze I heard his moan
		And knew his hunger as my own.
		I saw at sea a great fog bank
		Between two ships that struck and sank;
		A thousand screams the heavens smote;
		And every scream tore through my throat.
		No hurt I did not feel no death
		That was not mine; mine each last breath
		That crying met an answering cry
		From the compassion that was I.
		All suffering mine and mine its rod;
		Mine pity like the pity of God.
		Ah awful weight! Infinity
		Pressed down upon the finite Me!
		My anguished spirit like a bird
		Beating against my lips I heard;
		Yet lay the weight so close about
		There was no room for it without.
		And so beneath the weight lay I
		And suffered death but could not die.
		
		Long had I lain thus craving death
		When quietly the earth beneath
		Gave way and inch by inch so great
		At last had grown the crushing weight
		Into the earth I sank till I
		Full six feet under ground did lie
		And sank no more--there is no weight
		Can follow here however great.
		From off my breast I felt it roll
		And as it went my tortured soul
		Burst forth and fled in such a gust
		That all about me swirled the dust.
		Deep in the earth I rested now;
		Cool is its hand upon the brow
		And soft its breast beneath the head
		Of one who is so gladly dead.
		And all at once and over all
		The pitying rain began to fall;
		I lay and heard each pattering hoof
		Upon my lowly thatchèd roof
		And seemed to love the sound far more
		Than ever I had done before.
		For rain it hath a friendly sound
		To one who’s six feet under ground;
		And scarce the friendly voice or face:
		A grave is such a quiet place.
		
		The rain I said is kind to come
		And speak to me in my new home.
		I would I were alive again
		To kiss the fingers of the rain
		To drink into my eyes the shine
		Of every slanting silver line
		To catch the freshened fragrant breeze
		From drenched and dripping apple-trees.
		For soon the shower will be done
		And then the broad face of the sun
		Will laugh above the rain-soaked earth
		Until the world with answering mirth
		Shakes joyously and each round drop
		Rolls twinkling from its grass-blade top.
		How can I bear it buried here
		While overhead the sky grows clear
		And blue again after the storm?
		O multi-coloured multiform
		Beloved beauty over me
		That I shall never never see
		Again! Spring-silver autumn-gold
		That I shall never more behold!
		Sleeping your myriad magics through
		Close-sepulchred away from you!
		O God I cried give me new birth
		And put me back upon the earth!
		Upset each cloud’s gigantic gourd
		And let the heavy rain down-poured
		In one big torrent set me free
		Washing my grave away from me!
		
		I ceased; and through the breathless hush
		That answered me the far-off rush
		Of herald wings came whispering
		Like music down the vibrant string
		Of my ascending prayer and--crash!
		Before the wild wind’s whistling lash
		The startled storm-clouds reared on high
		And plunged in terror down the sky
		And the big rain in one black wave
		Fell from the sky and struck my grave.
		I know not how such things can be;
		I only know there came to me
		A fragrance such as never clings
		To aught save happy living things;
		A sound as of some joyous elf
		Singing sweet songs to please himself
		And through and over everything
		A sense of glad awakening.
		The grass a-tiptoe at my ear
		Whispering to me I could hear;
		I felt the rain’s cool finger-tips
		Brushed tenderly across my lips
		Laid gently on my sealèd sight
		And all at once the heavy night
		Fell from my eyes and I could see--
		A drenched and dripping apple-tree
		A last long line of silver rain
		A sky grown clear and blue again.
		And as I looked a quickening gust
		Of wind blew up to me and thrust
		Into my face a miracle
		Of orchard-breath and with the smell--
		I know not how such things can be!--
		I breathed my soul back into me.
		
		Ah! Up then from the ground sprang I
		And hailed the earth with such a cry
		As is not heard save from a man
		Who has been dead and lives again.
		About the trees my arms I wound;
		Like one gone mad I hugged the ground;
		I raised my quivering arms on high;
		I laughed and laughed into the sky
		Till at my throat a strangling sob
		Caught fiercely and a great heart-throb
		Sent instant tears into my eyes;
		O God I cried no dark disguise
		Can e’er hereafter hide from me
		Thy radiant identity!
		Thou canst not move across the grass
		But my quick eyes will see Thee pass
		Nor speak however silently
		But my hushed voice will answer Thee.
		I know the path that tells Thy way
		Through the cool eve of every day;
		God I can push the grass apart
		And lay my finger on Thy heart!
		
		The world stands out on either side
		No wider than the heart is wide;
		Above the world is stretched the sky--
		No higher than the soul is high.
		The heart can push the sea and land
		Farther away on either hand;
		The soul can split the sky in two
		And let the face of God shine through.
		But East and West will pinch the heart
		That cannot keep them pushed apart;
		And he whose soul is flat--the sky
		Will cave in on him by and by.


	12. SONG OF A SECOND APRIL

		April this year not otherwise
		 Than April of a year ago
		Is full of whispers full of sighs
		 Of dazzling mud and dingy snow;
		 Hepaticas that pleased you so
		Are here again and butterflies.
		
		There rings a hammering all day
		 And shingles lie about the doors;
		In orchards near and far away
		 The grey woodpecker taps and bores;
		 And men are merry at their chores
		And children earnest at their play.
		
		The larger streams run still and deep
		 Noisy and swift the small brooks run
		Among the mullein stalks the sheep
		 Go up the hillside in the sun
		 Pensively--only you are gone
		You that alone I cared to keep.


	13. SPRING

		To what purpose April do you return again?
		Beauty is not enough.
		You can no longer quiet me with the redness
		Of little leaves opening stickily.
		I know what I know.
		The sun is hot on my neck as I observe
		The spikes of the crocus.
		The smell of the earth is good.
		It is apparent that there is no death.
		But what does that signify?
		Not only under ground are the brains of men
		Eaten by maggots.
		Life in itself
		Is nothing
		An empty cup a flight of uncarpeted stairs.
		It is not enough that yearly down this hill
		April
		Comes like an idiot babbling and strewing flowers.


	14. TAVERN

		I’ll keep a little tavern
		 Below the high hill’s crest
		Wherein all grey-eyed people
		 May sit them down and rest.
		
		There shall be plates a-plenty
		 And mugs to melt the chill
		Of all the grey-eyed people
		 Who happen up the hill.
		
		There sound will sleep the traveller
		 And dream his journey’s end
		But I will rouse at midnight
		 The falling fire to tend.
		
		Aye ’tis a curious fancy--
		 But all the good I know
		Was taught me out of two grey eyes
		 A long time ago.


	15. THREE SONGS OF SHATTERING

		I
		
		 The first rose on my rose-tree
		   Budded bloomed and shattered
		 During sad days when to me
		   Nothing mattered.
		
		 Grief of grief has drained me clean;
		   Still it seems a pity
		 No one saw--it must have been
		     Very pretty.
		
		
		II
		
		 Let the little birds sing;
		   Let the little lambs play;
		 Spring is here; and so ’tis spring;--
		   But not in the old way!
		
		 I recall a place
		   Where a plum-tree grew;
		 There you lifted up your face
		   And blossoms covered you.
		
		 If the little birds sing
		   And the little lambs play
		 Spring is here; and so ’tis spring--
		   But not in the old way!
		
		
		III
		
		 All the dog-wood blossoms are underneath the tree!
		   Ere spring was going--ah! spring is gone!
		 And there comes no summer to the like of you and me--
		   Blossom time is early but no fruit sets on.
		
		 All the dog-wood blossoms are underneath the tree
		   Browned at the edges turned in a day;
		 And I would with all my heart they trimmed a mound for me
		   And weeds were tall on all the paths that led that way!


	16. WHEN THE YEAR GROWS OLD

		I cannot but remember
		 When the year grows old--
		October--November--
		 How she disliked the cold!
		
		She used to watch the swallows
		 Go down across the sky
		And turn from the window
		 With a little sharp sigh.
		
		And often when the brown leaves
		 Were brittle on the ground
		And the wind in the chimney
		 Made a melancholy sound
		
		She had a look about her
		 That I wish I could forget--
		The look of a scared thing
		 Sitting in a net!
		
		Oh beautiful at nightfall
		 The soft spitting snow!
		And beautiful the bare boughs
		 Rubbing to and fro!
		
		But the roaring of the fire
		 And the warmth of fur
		And the boiling of the kettle
		 Were beautiful to her!
		
		I cannot but remember
		 When the year grows old--
		October--November--
		 How she disliked the cold!


	17. WILD SWANS

		I looked in my heart while the wild swans went over.
		And what did I see I had not seen before?
		Only a question less or a question more;
		Nothing to match the flight of wild birds flying.
		Tiresome heart forever living and dying
		House without air I leave you and lock your door.
		Wild swans come over the town come over
		The town again trailing your legs and crying!


*** A. A. Milne (1882 - 1956)

	1. SPRING MORNING

		Where am I going? I don’t quite know.
		Down to the stream where the king-cups grow--
		Up on the hill where the pine-trees blow--
		Anywhere, anywhere. I don’t know.
		
		Where am I going? The clouds sail by,
		Little ones, baby ones, over the sky.
		Where am I going? The shadows pass,
		Little ones, baby ones, over the grass.
		
		If you were a cloud, and sailed up there,
		You’d sail on water as blue as air,
		And you’d see me here in the fields and say:
		“Doesn’t the sky look green today?”
		
		Where am I going? The high rooks call:
		“It’s awful fun to be born at all.”
		Where am I going? The ring-doves coo:
		“We do have beautiful things to do.”
		
		If you were a bird, and lived on high,
		You’d lean on the wind when the wind came by,
		You’d say to the wind when it took you away:
		“That’s where I wanted to go today!”
		
		Where am I going? I don’t quite know.
		What does it matter where people go?
		Down to the wood where the blue-bells grow--
		Anywhere, anywhere. I don’t know.


	2. THE THREE FOXES

		Once upon a time there were three little foxes
		Who didn’t wear stockings, and they didn’t wear sockses,
		But they all had handkerchiefs to blow their noses,
		And they kept their handkerchiefs in cardboard boxes.
		
		And they lived in forest in three little houses,
		And they didn’t wear coats, and they didn’t wear trousies.
		They ran through the woods on their little bare tootsies,
		And they played “Touch Last” with a family of mouses.
		
		They didn’t go shopping in the High Street shopses,
		But caught what they wanted in the woods and copses.
		They all went fishing, and they caught three wormses,
		They went out hunting, and they caught three wopses.
		
		They wen to a Fair, and they all won prizes--
		Tree plum-puddingses and three mince-pieses.
		They rode on elephants and swang on swingses,
		And hit three coco-nuts at coco-nut shieses.
		
		That’s all I know of three little foxes
		Who kept their handkerchiefs in three little boxes.
		They lived in the forest in three little houses,
		But they didn’t wear coats and they didn’t wear trousies,
		And they didn’t wear stockings and they didn’t wear sockses.


*** Czesław Miłosz (1911 - 2004)

	1. A MAGIC MOUNTAIN

		I don’t remember exactly when Budberg died, it was either two years   
		     ago or three.   
		The same with Chen. Whether last year or the one before.   
		Soon after our arrival, Budberg, gently pensive,   
		Said that in the beginning it is hard to get accustomed,   
		For here there is no spring or summer, no winter or fall.   
		
		“I kept dreaming of snow and birch forests.   
		Where so little changes you hardly notice how time goes by.   
		This is, you will see, a magic mountain.”   
		
		Budberg: a familiar name in my childhood.   
		They were prominent in our region,   
		This Russian family, descendants of German Balts.   
		I read none of his works, too specialized.   
		And Chen, I have heard, was an exquisite poet,   
		Which I must take on faith, for he wrote in Chinese.
		
		Sultry Octobers, cool Julys, trees blossom in February.   
		Here the nuptial flight of hummingbirds does not forecast spring.   
		Only the faithful maple sheds its leaves every year.   
		For no reason, its ancestors simply learned it that way.   
		
		I sensed Budberg was right and I rebelled.   
		So I won’t have power, won’t save the world?   
		Fame will pass me by, no tiara, no crown?   
		Did I then train myself, myself the Unique,   
		To compose stanzas for gulls and sea haze,   
		To listen to the foghorns blaring down below?
		
		Until it passed. What passed? Life.   
		Now I am not ashamed of my defeat.   
		One murky island with its barking seals   
		Or a parched desert is enough   
		To make us say: yes, _oui, si._
		“Even asleep we partake in the becoming of the world.”   
		Endurance comes only from enduring.   
		With a flick of the wrist I fashioned an invisible rope,   
		And climbed it and it held me.   
		
		What a procession! _Quelles délices!_
		What caps and hooded gowns!
		Most respected Professor Budberg,   
		Most distinguished Professor Chen,   
		Wrong Honorable Professor Milosz   
		Who wrote poems in some unheard-of tongue.   
		Who will count them anyway. And here sunlight.   
		So that the flames of their tall candles fade.   
		And how many generations of hummingbirds keep them company   
		As they walk on. Across the magic mountain.   
		And the fog from the ocean is cool, for once again it is July.   


	2. A SONG ON THE END OF THE WORLD

		On the day the world ends
		A bee circles a clover,
		A fisherman mends a glimmering net.
		Happy porpoises jump in the sea,
		By the rainspout young sparrows are playing
		And the snake is gold-skinned as it should always be.
		        
		On the day the world ends
		Women walk through the fields under their umbrellas,
		A drunkard grows sleepy at the edge of a lawn,
		Vegetable peddlers shout in the street
		And a yellow-sailed boat comes nearer the island,
		The voice of a violin lasts in the air
		And leads into a starry night.
		
		And those who expected lightning and thunder
		Are disappointed.
		And those who expected signs and archangels’ trumps
		Do not believe it is happening now.
		As long as the sun and the moon are above,
		As long as the bumblebee visits a rose,
		As long as rosy infants are born
		No one believes it is happening now.
		
		Only a white-haired old man, who would be a prophet
		Yet is not a prophet, for he’s much too busy,
		Repeats while he binds his tomatoes:
		There will be no other end of the world,
		There will be no other end of the world.


	3. ACCOUNT

		The history of my stupidity would fill many volumes.
		
		Some would be devoted to acting against consciousness,
		Like the flight of a moth which, had it known,
		Would have tended nevertheless toward the candle’s flame.
		
		Others would deal with ways to silence anxiety,
		The little whisper which, though it is a warning, is ignored.
		
		I would deal separately with satisfaction and pride,
		The time when I was among their adherents
		Who strut victoriously, unsuspecting.
		
		But all of them would have one subject, desire,
		If only my own--but no, not at all; alas,
		I was driven because I wanted to be like others.
		I was afraid of what was wild and indecent in me.
		
		The history of my stupidity will not be written.
		For one thing, it’s late. And the truth is laborious.


	4. ARS POETICA?

		I have always aspired to a more spacious form   
		that would be free from the claims of poetry or prose   
		and would let us understand each other without exposing   
		the author or reader to sublime agonies.   
		
		In the very essence of poetry there is something indecent:   
		a thing is brought forth which we didn’t know we had in us,   
		so we blink our eyes, as if a tiger had sprung out   
		and stood in the light, lashing his tail.   
		
		That’s why poetry is rightly said to be dictated by a daimonion,   
		though it’s an exaggeration to maintain that he must be an angel.   
		It’s hard to guess where that pride of poets comes from,   
		when so often they’re put to shame by the disclosure of their frailty.   
		
		What reasonable man would like to be a city of demons,   
		who behave as if they were at home, speak in many tongues,   
		and who, not satisfied with stealing his lips or hand,   
		work at changing his destiny for their convenience?   
		
		It’s true that what is morbid is highly valued today,   
		and so you may think that I am only joking   
		or that I’ve devised just one more means   
		of praising Art with the help of irony.   
		
		There was a time when only wise books were read,   
		helping us to bear our pain and misery.   
		This, after all, is not quite the same   
		as leafing through a thousand works fresh from psychiatric clinics.   
		
		And yet the world is different from what it seems to be   
		and we are other than how we see ourselves in our ravings.
		People therefore preserve silent integrity,   
		thus earning the respect of their relatives and neighbors.   
		
		The purpose of poetry is to remind us   
		how difficult it is to remain just one person,   
		for our house is open, there are no keys in the doors,   
		and invisible guests come in and out at will.
		
		What I’m saying here is not, I agree, poetry,   
		as poems should be written rarely and reluctantly,   
		under unbearable duress and only with the hope   
		that good spirits, not evil ones, choose us for their instrument.


	5. CAMPO DEL FIORI

		In Rome on the Campo dei Fiori
		baskets of olives and lemons,
		cobbles spattered with wine
		and the wreckage of flowers.
		Vendors cover the trestles
		with rose-pink fish;
		armfuls of dark grapes
		heaped on peach-down.
		
		On this same square
		they burned Giordano Bruno.
		Henchmen kindled the pyre
		close-pressed by the mob.
		Before the flames had died
		the taverns were full again,
		baskets of olives and lemons
		again on the vendors’ shoulders.
		
		I thought of the Campo dei Fiori
		in Warsaw by the sky-carousel
		one clear spring evening
		to the strains of a carnival tune.
		The bright melody drowned
		the salvos from the ghetto wall,
		and couples were flying
		high in the cloudless sky.
		
		At times wind from the burning
		would drift dark kites along
		and riders on the carousel
		caught petals in midair.
		That same hot wind
		blew open the skirts of the girls
		and the crowds were laughing
		on that beautiful Warsaw Sunday.
		
		Someone will read as moral
		that the people of Rome or Warsaw
		haggle, laugh, make love
		as they pass by the martyrs’ pyres.
		Someone else will read
		of the passing of things human,
		of the oblivion
		born before the flames have died.
		
		But that day I thought only
		of the loneliness of the dying,
		of how, when Giordano
		climbed to his burning
		he could not find
		in any human tongue
		words for mankind,
		mankind who live on.
		
		Already they were back at their wine
		or peddled their white starfish,
		baskets of olives and lemons
		they had shouldered to the fair,
		and he already distanced
		as if centuries had passed
		while they paused just a moment
		for his flying in the fire.
		
		Those dying here, the lonely
		forgotten by the world,
		our tongue becomes for them
		the language of an ancient planet.
		Until, when all is legend
		and many years have passed,
		on a new Campo dei Fiori
		rage will kindle at a poet’s word.


	6. CITY WITHOUT A NAME

		1
		
		Who will honor the city without a name
		If so many are dead and others pan gold
		Or sell arms in faraway countries?
		
		What shepherd’s horn swathed in the bark of birch
		Will sound in the Ponary Hills the memory of the absent—
		Vagabonds, Pathfinders, brethren of a dissolved lodge?
		
		This spring, in a desert, beyond a campsite flagpole,
		—In silence that stretched to the solid rock of yellow and red mountains—
		I heard in a gray bush the buzzing of wild bees.
		
		The current carried an echo and the timber of rafts.
		A man in a visored cap and a woman in a kerchief
		Pushed hard with their four hands at a heavy steering oar.
		
		In the library, below a tower painted with the signs of the zodiac,
		Kontrym would take a whiff from his snuffbox and smile
		For despite Metternich all was not yet lost.
		
		And on crooked lanes down the middle of a sandy highway
		Jewish carts went their way while a black grouse hooted
		Standing on a cuirassier’s helmet, a relict of La Grande Armée.
		
		
		2
		
		In Death Valley I thought about styles of hairdo,
		About a hand that shifted spotlights at the Student’s Ball
		In the city from which no voice could reach me.
		Minerals did not sound the last trumpet.
		There was only the rustle of a loosened grain of lava.
		
		In Death Valley salt gleams from a dried-up lake bed.
		Defend, defend yourself, says the tick-tock of the blood.
		From the futility of solid rock, no wisdom.
		
		In Death Valley no hawk or eagle against the sky.
		The prediction of a Gypsy woman has come true.
		In a lane under an arcade, then, I was reading a poem
		Of someone who had lived next door, entitled “An Hour of Thought.”
		
		I looked long at the rearview mirror: there, the one man
		Within three miles, an Indian, was walking a bicycle uphill.
		
		
		3
		
		With flutes, with torches
		And a drum, boom, boom,
		Look, the one who died in Istanbul, there, in the first row.
		He walks arm in arm with his young lady,
		And over them swallows fly.
		
		They carry oars or staffs garlanded with leaves
		And bunches of flowers from the shores of the Green Lakes,
		As they came closer and closer, down Castle Street.
		And then suddenly nothing, only a white puff of cloud
		Over the Humanities Student Club,
		Division of Creative Writing.
		
		
		4
		
		Books, we have written a whole library of them.
		Lands, we have visited a great many of them.
		Battles, we have lost a number of them.
		Till we are no more, we and our Maryla.
		
		
		5
		
		Understanding and pity,
		We value them highly.
		What else?
		
		Beauty and kisses,
		Fame and its prizes,
		Who cares?
		
		Doctors and lawyers,
		Well-turned-out majors,
		Six feet of earth.
		
		Rings, furs, and lashes,
		Glances at Masses,
		Rest in peace.
		
		Sweet twin breasts, good night.
		Sleep through to the light,
		Without spiders.
		
		
		6
		
		The sun goes down above the Zealous Lithuanian Lodge
		And kindles fire on landscapes “made from nature”:
		The Wilia winding among pines; black honey of the Żejmiana;
		The Mereczanka washes berries near the Żegaryno village.
		The valets had already brought in Theban candelabra
		And pulled curtains, one after the other, slowly,
		While, thinking I entered first, taking off my gloves,
		I saw that all the eyes were fixed on me.
		
		
		7
		
		When I got rid of grieving
		And the glory I was seeking,
		Which I had no business doing,
		
		I was carried by dragons
		Over countries, bays, and mountains,
		By fate, or by what happens.
		
		Oh yes, I wanted to be me.
		I toasted mirrors weepily
		And learned my own stupidity.
		
		From nails, mucous membrane,
		Lungs, liver, bowels, and spleen
		Whose house is made? Mine.
		
		So what else is new?
		I am not my own friend.
		Time cuts me in two.
		
		Monuments covered with snow,
		Accept my gift. I wandered;
		And where, I don’t know.
		
		
		8
		
		Absent, burning, acrid, salty, sharp.
		Thus the feast of Insubstantiality.
		Under a gathering of clouds anywhere.
		In a bay, on a plateau, in a dry arroyo.
		No density. No harness of stone.
		Even the _Summa_ thins into straw and smoke.
		And the angelic choirs fly over in a pomegranate seed
		Sounding every few instants, not for us, their trumpets.
		
		
		9
		
		Light, universal, and yet it keeps changing.
		For I love the light too, perhaps the light only.
		Yet what is too dazzling and too high is not for me.
		So when the clouds turn rosy, I think of light that is level
		In the lands of birch and pine coated with crispy lichen,
		Late in autumn, under the hoarfrost when the last milk caps
		Rot under the firs and the hounds’ barking echoes,
		And jackdaws wheel over the tower of a Basilian church.
		
		
		10
		
		Unexpressed, untold.
		But how?
		The shortness of life,
		the years quicker and quicker,
		not remembering whether it happened in this or that autumn.
		Retinues of homespun velveteen skirts,
		giggles above a railing, pigtails askew,
		sittings on chamberpots upstairs
		when the sledge jingles under the columns of the porch
		just before the moustachioed ones in wolf fur enter.
		Female humanity,
		children’s snots, legs spread apart,
		snarled hair, the milk boiling over,
		stench, shit frozen into clods.
		And those centuries,
		conceiving in the herring smell of the middle of the night
		instead of playing something like a game of chess
		or dancing an intellectual ballet.
		And palisades,
		and pregnant sheep,
		and   pigs, fast eaters and poor eaters,
		and cows cured by incantations.
		
		
		11
		
		Not the Last Judgment, just a kermess by a river.
		Small whistles, clay chickens, candied hearts.
		So we trudged through the slush of melting snow
		To buy bagels from the district of Smorgonie.
		
		A fortune-teller hawking: “Your destiny, your planets.”
		And a toy devil bobbing in a tube of crimson brine.
		Another, a rubber one, expired in the air squeaking,
		By the stand where you bought stories of King Otto and Melusine.
		
		
		12
		
		Why should that city, defenseless and pure as the wedding necklace of
		a forgotten tribe, keep offering itself to me?
		Like blue and red-brown seeds beaded in Tuzigoot in the copper desert
		seven centuries ago.
		
		Where ocher rubbed into stone still waits for the brow and cheekbone
		it would adorn, though for all that time there has been no one.
		
		What evil in me, what pity has made me deserve this offering?
		
		It stands before me, ready, not even the smoke from one chimney is
		lacking, not one echo, when I step across the rivers that separate us.
		
		Perhaps Anna and Dora Drużyno have called to me, three hundred miles
		inside Arizona, because except fo me no one else knows that they ever
		lived.
		
		They trot before me on Embankment Street, two hently born parakeets
		from Samogitia, and at night they unravel their spinster tresses of gray
		hair.
		
		Here there is no earlier and no later; the seasons of the year and of the
		day are simultaneous.
		
		At dawn shit-wagons leave town in long rows and municipal employees
		at the gate collect the turnpike toll in leather bags.
		
		Rattling their wheels, “Courier” and “Speedy” move against the current
		to Werki, and an oarsman shot down over England skiffs past, spread-
		eagled by his oars.
		
		At St. Peter and Paul’s the angels lower their thick eyelids in a smile
		over a nun who has indecent thoughts.
		
		Bearded, in a wig, Mrs. Sora Klok sits at the counter, instructing her
		twelve shopgirls.
		
		And all of German Street tosses into the air unfurled bolts of fabric,
		preparing itself for death and the conquest of Jerusalem.
		
		Black and princely, an underground river knocks at cellars of the
		cathedral under the tomb of St. Casimir the Young and under the
		half-charred oak logs in the hearth.
		
		Carrying her servant’s-basket on her shoulder, Barbara, dressed in
		mourning, returns from the Lithuanian Mass at St. Nicholas to the
		Romers’ house in Bakszta Street.
		
		How it glitters! the snow on Three Crosses Hill and Bekiesz Hill, not
		to be melted by the breath of these brief lives.
		
		And what do I know now, when I turn into Arsenal Street and open
		my eyes once more on a useless end of the world?
		
		I was running, as the silks rustled, through room after room without
		stopping, for I believed in the existence of a last door.
		
		But the shape of lips and an apple and a flower pinned to a dress were
		all that one was permitted to know and take away.
		
		The Earth, neither compassionate nor evil, neither beautiful nor atro-
		cious, persisted, innocent, open to pain and desire.
		
		And the gift was useless, if, later on, in the flarings of distant nights,
		there was not less bitterness but more.
		
		If I cannot so exhaust my life and their life that the bygone crying is
		transformed, at last, into harmony.
		
		Like a _Noble Jan Dęboróg_ in the Straszun’s secondhand-book shop, I am
		put to rest forever between two familiar names.
		
		The castle tower above the leafy tumulus grows small and there is still
		a hardly audible—is it Mozart’s _Requiem_?—music.
		
		In the immobile light I move my lips and perhaps I am even glad not
		to find the desired word.


	7. DEDICATION

		You whom I could not save
		Listen to me.   
		Try to understand this simple speech as I would be ashamed of another.   
		I swear, there is in me no wizardry of words.   
		I speak to you with silence like a cloud or a tree.
		
		What strengthened me, for you was lethal.   
		You mixed up farewell to an epoch with the beginning of a new one,   
		Inspiration of hatred with lyrical beauty;   
		Blind force with accomplished shape.
		
		Here is a valley of shallow Polish rivers. And an immense bridge   
		Going into white fog. Here is a broken city;   
		And the wind throws the screams of gulls on your grave   
		When I am talking with you.
		
		What is poetry which does not save   
		Nations or people?   
		A connivance with official lies,   
		A song of drunkards whose throats will be cut in a moment,   
		Readings for sophomore girls.
		That I wanted good poetry without knowing it,   
		That I discovered, late, its salutary aim,   
		In this and only this I find salvation.
		
		They used to pour millet on graves or poppy seeds   
		To feed the dead who would come disguised as birds.   
		I put this book here for you, who once lived   
		So that you should visit us no more.


	8. ENCOUNTER

		We were riding through frozen fields in a wagon at dawn.
		A red wing rose in the darkness.
		
		And suddenly a hare ran across the road.
		One of us pointed to it with his hand.
		
		That was long ago. Today neither of them is alive,
		Not the hare, nor the man who made the gesture.
		
		O my love, where are they, where are they going
		The flash of a hand, streak of movement, rustle of pebbles.
		I ask not out of sorrow, but in wonder.


	9. INCANTATION

		Human reason is beautiful and invincible.
		No bars, no barbed wire, no pulping of books,
		No sentence of banishment can prevail against it.
		It establishes the universal ideas in language,
		And guides our hand so we write Truth and Justice
		With capital letters, lie and oppression with small.
		It puts what should be above things as they are,
		Is an enemy of despair and a friend of hope.
		It does not know Jew from Greek or slave from master,
		Giving us the estate of the world to manage.
		It saves austere and transparent phrases
		From the filthy discord of tortured words.
		It says that everything is new under the sun,
		Opens the congealed fist of the past.
		Beautiful and very young are Philo-Sophia
		And poetry, her ally in the service of the good.
		As late as yesterday Nature celebrated their birth,
		The news was brought to the mountains by a unicorn and an echo.
		Their friendship will be glorious, their time has no limit.
		Their enemies have delivered themselves to destruction.


	10. LATE RIPENESS

		Not soon, as late as the approach of my ninetieth year,   
		I felt a door opening in me and I entered   
		the clarity of early morning.   
		
		One after another my former lives were departing,   
		like ships, together with their sorrow.   
		
		And the countries, cities, gardens, the bays of seas   
		assigned to my brush came closer,   
		ready now to be described better than they were before.   
		
		I was not separated from people,   
		grief and pity joined us.   
		We forget--I kept saying--that we are all children of the King.   
		
		For where we come from there is no division   
		into Yes and No, into is, was, and will be.   
		
		We were miserable, we used no more than a hundredth part   
		of the gift we received for our long journey.   
		
		Moments from yesterday and from centuries ago--   
		a sword blow, the painting of eyelashes before a mirror   
		of polished metal, a lethal musket shot, a caravel   
		staving its hull against a reef--they dwell in us,   
		waiting for a fulfillment.   
		
		I knew, always, that I would be a worker in the vineyard,   
		as are all men and women living at the same time,   
		whether they are aware of it or not. 


	11. NORMALIZATION

		This happened long ago, before the onset 
		of universal genetic correctness. 
		
		Boys and girls would stand naked before mirrors 
		studying the defects of their structure. 
		
		Nose too long, ears like burdocks, 
		sunken chin just like a mongoloid. 
		
		Breasts too small, too large, lopsided shoulders, 
		penis too short, hips too broad or else too narrow. 
		
		And just an inch or two taller! 
		
		Such was the house they inhabited for life. 
		
		Hiding, feigning, concealing defects. 
		
		But somehow they still had to find a partner. 
		
		Following incomprehensible tastes—airy creatures 
		paired with potbellies, skin and bones enamored of salt pork. 
		
		They had a saying then: “Even monsters 
		have their mates.” So perhaps they learned to tolerate their partners’ 
		flaws, trusting that theirs would be forgiven in turn. 
		
		Now every genetic error meets with such 
		disgust that crowds might spit on them and stone them. 
		
		As happened in the city of K., where the town council 
		voted to exile a girl 
		
		So thickset and squat 
		that no stylish dress could ever suit her, 
		
		But let’s not yearn for the days of prenormalization. 
		Just think of the torments, the anxieties, the sweat, 
		the wiles needed to entice, in spite of all. 


	12. THEODICY

		No, it won’t do, my sweet theologians.
		Desire will not save the morality of God.
		If he created beings able to choose between good and evil,
		And they chose, and the world lies in iniquity,
		Nevertheless, there is pain, and the undeserved torture of creatures,
		Which would find its explanation only by assuming
		The existence of an archetypal Paradise
		And a pre-human downfall so grave
		That the world of matter received its shape from diabolic power.


	13. VENI CREATOR

		Come, Holy Spirit,   
		bending or not bending the grasses,   
		appearing or not above our heads in a tongue of flame,   
		at hay harvest or when they plough in the orchards or when snow   
		covers crippled firs in the Sierra Nevada.   
		I am only a man: I need visible signs.   
		I tire easily, building the stairway of abstraction.   
		Many a time I asked, you know it well, that the statue in church   
		lifts its hand, only once, just once, for me.   
		But I understand that signs must be human,   
		therefore call one man, anywhere on earth,   
		not me--after all I have some decency--   
		and allow me, when I look at him, to marvel at you.   


*** John Milton (1608 - 1674)

	1. AT A SOLEMN MUSIC

		Blest pair of Sirens, pledges of Heav’ns joy, 
		Sphear-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Vers, 
		Wed your divine sounds, and mixt power employ 
		Dead things with inbreath’d sense able to pierce, 
		And to our high-rais’d phantasie present,
		That undisturbèd Song of pure content, 
		Ay sung before the saphire-colour’d throne 
		To him that sits theron
		  With Saintly shout, and solemn Jubily, 
		Where the bright Seraphim in burning row
		Their loud up-lifted Angel trumpets blow, 
		And the Cherubick host in thousand quires 
		Touch their immortal Harps of golden wires, 
		With those just Spirits that wear victorious Palms, 
		Hymns devout and holy Psalms
		Singing everlastingly; 
		That we on Earth with undiscording voice 
		May rightly answer that melodious noise; 
		As once we did, till disproportion’d sin 
		Jarr’d against natures chime, and with harsh din
		Broke the fair musick that all creatures made 
		To their great Lord, whose love their motion sway’d 
		In perfect Diapason, whilst they stood 
		In first obedience, and their state of good. 
		O may we soon again renew that Song
		And keep in tune with Heav’n, till God ere long 
		To his celestial consort us unite, 
		To live with him, and sing in endles morn of light.  


	2. HOW SOON HATH TIME

		How soon hath Time, the subtle thief of youth,
		      Stol’n on his wing my three-and-twentieth year!
		      My hasting days fly on with full career,
		      But my late spring no bud or blossom shew’th.
		Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth
		      That I to manhood am arriv’d so near;
		      And inward ripeness doth much less appear,
		      That some more timely-happy spirits endu’th.
		Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow,
		      It shall be still in strictest measure ev’n
		      To that same lot, however mean or high,
		Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heav’n:
		      All is, if I have grace to use it so
		      As ever in my great Task-Master’s eye.


	3. LYCIDAS

		     Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more
		Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
		I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude,
		And with forc’d fingers rude
		Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.
		Bitter constraint and sad occasion dear
		Compels me to disturb your season due;
		For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
		Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer.
		Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew
		Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
		He must not float upon his wat’ry bier
		Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
		Without the meed of some melodious tear.
		
		     Begin then, Sisters of the sacred well
		That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring;
		Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string.
		Hence with denial vain and coy excuse!
		So may some gentle muse
		With lucky words favour my destin’d urn,
		And as he passes turn
		And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud!
		
		     For we were nurs’d upon the self-same hill,
		Fed the same flock, by fountain, shade, and rill;
		Together both, ere the high lawns appear’d
		Under the opening eyelids of the morn,
		We drove afield, and both together heard
		What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
		Batt’ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
		Oft till the star that rose at ev’ning bright
		Toward heav’n's descent had slop’d his westering wheel.
		Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute,
		Temper’d to th’oaten flute;
		Rough Satyrs danc’d, and Fauns with clov’n heel,
		From the glad sound would not be absent long;
		And old Damætas lov’d to hear our song.
		
		     But O the heavy change now thou art gone,
		Now thou art gone, and never must return!
		Thee, Shepherd, thee the woods and desert caves,
		With wild thyme and the gadding vine o’ergrown,
		And all their echoes mourn.
		The willows and the hazel copses green
		Shall now no more be seen
		Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays.
		As killing as the canker to the rose,
		Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze,
		Or frost to flowers that their gay wardrobe wear
		When first the white thorn blows:
		Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd’s ear.
		
		     Where were ye, Nymphs, when the remorseless deep
		Clos’d o’er the head of your lov’d Lycidas?
		For neither were ye playing on the steep
		Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie,
		Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
		Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream.
		Ay me! I fondly dream
		Had ye bin there’—for what could that have done?
		What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore,
		The Muse herself, for her enchanting son,
		Whom universal nature did lament,
		When by the rout that made the hideous roar
		His gory visage down the stream was sent,
		Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore?
		
		     Alas! what boots it with incessant care
		To tend the homely, slighted shepherd’s trade,
		And strictly meditate the thankless Muse?
		Were it not better done, as others use,
		To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
		Or with the tangles of Neæra’s hair?
		Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
		(That last infirmity of noble mind)
		To scorn delights and live laborious days;
		But the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
		And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
		Comes the blind Fury with th’abhorred shears,
		And slits the thin-spun life. “But not the praise,”
		Phoebus replied, and touch’d my trembling ears;
		“Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
		Nor in the glistering foil
		Set off to th’world, nor in broad rumour lies,
		But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes
		And perfect witness of all-judging Jove;
		As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
		Of so much fame in Heav’n expect thy meed.”
		
		     O fountain Arethuse, and thou honour’d flood,
		Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown’d with vocal reeds,
		That strain I heard was of a higher mood.
		But now my oat proceeds,
		And listens to the Herald of the Sea,
		That came in Neptune’s plea.
		He ask’d the waves, and ask’d the felon winds,
		“What hard mishap hath doom’d this gentle swain?”
		And question’d every gust of rugged wings
		That blows from off each beaked promontory.
		They knew not of his story;
		And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
		That not a blast was from his dungeon stray’d;
		The air was calm, and on the level brine
		Sleek Panope with all her sisters play’d.
		It was that fatal and perfidious bark,
		Built in th’eclipse, and rigg’d with curses dark,
		That sunk so low that sacred head of thine.
		
		     Next Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow,
		His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge,
		Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge
		Like to that sanguine flower inscrib’d with woe.
		“Ah! who hath reft,“ quoth he, “my dearest pledge?”
		Last came, and last did go,
		The Pilot of the Galilean lake;
		Two massy keys he bore of metals twain
		(The golden opes, the iron shuts amain).
		He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake:
		“How well could I have spar’d for thee, young swain,
		Enow of such as for their bellies’ sake
		Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold?
		Of other care they little reck’ning make
		Than how to scramble at the shearers’ feast
		And shove away the worthy bidden guest.
		Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold
		A sheep-hook, or have learn’d aught else the least
		That to the faithful herdman’s art belongs!
		What recks it them? What need they? They are sped;
		And when they list their lean and flashy songs
		Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw,
		The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed,
		But, swoll’n with wind and the rank mist they draw,
		Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread;
		Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw
		Daily devours apace, and nothing said,
		But that two-handed engine at the door
		Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more“.
		
		     Return, Alpheus: the dread voice is past
		That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian Muse,
		And call the vales and bid them hither cast
		Their bells and flow’rets of a thousand hues.
		Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use
		Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
		On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks,
		Throw hither all your quaint enamel’d eyes,
		That on the green turf suck the honied showers
		And purple all the ground with vernal flowers.
		Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
		The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,
		The white pink, and the pansy freak’d with jet,
		The glowing violet,
		The musk-rose, and the well attir’d woodbine,
		With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
		And every flower that sad embroidery wears;
		Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed,
		And daffadillies fill their cups with tears,
		To strew the laureate hearse where Lycid lies.
		For so to interpose a little ease,
		Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
		Ay me! Whilst thee the shores and sounding seas
		Wash far away, where’er thy bones are hurl’d;
		Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides,
		Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
		Visit’st the bottom of the monstrous world,
		Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied,
		Sleep’st by the fable of Bellerus old,
		Where the great vision of the guarded mount
		Looks toward Namancos and Bayona’s hold:
		Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth;
		And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth.
		
		     Weep no more, woeful shepherds, weep no more,
		For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead,
		Sunk though he be beneath the wat’ry floor;
		So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed,
		And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
		And tricks his beams, and with new spangled ore
		Flames in the forehead of the morning sky:
		So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high
		Through the dear might of him that walk’d the waves;
		Where, other groves and other streams along,
		With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves,
		And hears the unexpressive nuptial song,
		In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love.
		There entertain him all the Saints above,
		In solemn troops, and sweet societies,
		That sing, and singing in their glory move,
		And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes.
		Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more:
		Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore,
		In thy large recompense, and shalt be good
		To all that wander in that perilous flood.
		
		     Thus sang the uncouth swain to th’oaks and rills,
		While the still morn went out with sandals gray;
		He touch’d the tender stops of various quills,
		With eager thought warbling his Doric lay;
		And now the sun had stretch’d out all the hills,
		And now was dropp’d into the western bay;
		At last he rose, and twitch’d his mantle blue:
		To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new.


	4. L’ALLEGRO

		Hence, loathed Melancholy!
		Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born,
		     In Stygian cave forlorn,
		‘Mongst horrid shapes, and shrieks, and sights unholy.
		     Find out some uncouth cell,
		Where brooding Darkness spreads his jealous wings,
		     And the night-raven sings;
		There, under ebon shades and low-browed rocks
		     As ragged as thy locks,
		In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.
		   But come, thou Goddess fair and free,
		 In Heaven yclept Euphrosynè,
		 And by men, heart-easing Mirth;
		 Whom lovely Venus, at a birth
		 With two sister Graces more,
		 To ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
		 Or whether, as some sager sing,
		 The frolic wind that breathes the spring,
		 Zephyr, with Aurora playing,
		 As he met her once a-maying,
		 There, on beds of violets blue,
		 And fresh-blown roses washed in dew,
		 Filled her with thee, a daughter fair,
		 So buxom, blithe, and debonair.
		   Haste thee, Nymph, and bring with thee
		 Jest, and youthful Jollity,
		 Quips, and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
		 Nods and Becks, and wreathed Smiles--
		 Such as hang on Hebe’s cheek,
		 And love to live in dimple sleek;
		 Sport, that wrinkled Care derides,
		 And Laughter, holding both his sides:
		 Come, and trip it as you go
		 On the light fantastic toe;
		 And in thy right hand lead with thee
		 The mountain-nymph, sweet Liberty;
		 And, if I give thee honour due,
		 Mirth, admit me of thy crew
		 To live with her and live with thee,
		 In unreproved pleasures free;
		 To hear the lark begin his flight,
		 And singing startle the dull night
		 From his watch-tower in the skies,
		 Till the dappled dawn doth rise;
		 Then to come, in spite of sorrow,
		 And at my window bid good-morrow,
		 Through the sweet-briar, or the vine,
		 Or the twisted eglantine;
		 While the cock, with lively din,
		 Scatters the rear of darkness thin,
		 And, to the stack or the barn-door,
		 Stoutly struts his dames before:
		 Oft listening how the hounds and horn
		 Cheerly rouse the slumbering Morn,
		 From the side of some hoar hill,
		 Through the high wood echoing shrill.
		 Sometime walking, not unseen,
		 By hedgerow elms, on hillocks green,
		 Right against the eastern gate,
		 Where the great Sun begins his state,
		 Robed in flames and amber light,
		 The clouds in thousand liveries dight;
		 While the ploughman, near at hand,
		 Whistles o’er the furrowed land,
		 And the milkmaid singeth blithe,
		 And the mower whets his scythe,
		 And every shepherd tells his tale,
		 Under the hawthorn in the dale.
		 Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures,
		 Whilst the landscape round it measures;
		 Russet lawns, and fallows gray,
		 Where the nibbling flocks do stray,
		 Mountains on whose barren breast
		 The labouring clouds do often rest,
		 Meadows trim with daisies pied,
		 Shallow brooks, and rivers wide,
		 Towers and battlements it sees,
		 Bosomed high in tufted trees,
		 Where perhaps some Beauty lies,
		 The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes.
		 Hard by a cottage-chimney smokes
		 From betwixt two aged oaks,
		 Where Corydon and Thyrsis, met,
		 Are at their savoury dinner set
		 Of herbs and other country messes,
		 Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses;
		 And then in haste her bower she leaves,
		 With Thestylis to bind the sheaves;
		 Or, if the earlier season lead,
		 To the tanned haycock in the mead.
		   Sometimes, with secure delight,
		 The upland hamlets will invite,
		 When the merry bells ring round,
		 And the jocund rebecks sound,
		 To many a youth and many a maid,
		 Dancing in the chequered shade,
		 And young and old come forth to play
		 On a sunshine holiday,
		 Till the live-long daylight fail;
		 Then to the spicy nut-brown ale,
		 With stories told of many a feat,
		 How faery Mab the junkets eat;
		 She was pinched and pulled, she said;
		 And he, by Friar’s lantern led,
		 Tells how the drudging goblin sweat,
		 To earn his cream-bowl duly set,
		 When in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
		 His shadowy flail hath threshed the corn
		 That ten day-labourers could not end;
		 Then lies him down, the lubber-fiend,
		 And, stretched out all the chimney’s length,
		 Basks at the fire his hairy strength,
		 And crop-full out of doors he flings,
		 Ere the first cock his matin rings.
		 Thus done the tales, to bed they creep,
		 By whispering winds soon lulled asleep.
		   Towered cities please us then,
		 And the busy hum of men,
		 Where throngs of knights and barons bold,
		 In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold,
		 With store of ladies, whose bright eyes
		 Rain influence, and judge the prize
		 Of wit or arms, while both contend
		 To win her grace, whom all commend.
		 There let Hymen oft appear
		 In saffron robe, with taper clear,
		 And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
		 With mask and antique pageantry;
		 Such sights as youthful poets dream,
		 On summer-eves by haunted stream.
		 Then to the well-trod stage anon,
		 If Jonson’s learned sock be on,
		 Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy’s child,
		 Warble his native wood-notes wild.
		   And ever, against eating cares,
		 Lap me in soft Lydian airs,
		 Married to immortal verse,
		 Such as the meeting soul may pierce,
		 In notes with many a winding bout
		 Of linked sweetness long drawn out,
		 With wanton heed and giddy cunning
		 The melting voice through mazes running
		 Untwisting all the chains that tie
		 The hidden soul of harmony;
		 That Orpheus’ self may heave his head,
		 From golden slumber on a bed
		 Of heaped Elysian flowers, and hear
		 Such strains as would have won the ear
		 Of Pluto, to have quite set free
		 His half-regained Eurydicè.
		   These delights if thou canst give,
		 Mirth, with thee I mean to live.


	5. ON HIS BLINDNESS

		When I consider how my light is spent
		 Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
		 And that one talent, which is death to hide,
		 Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent
		To serve therewith my Maker, and present
		 My true account, lest He, returning, chide;
		 ‘Doth God exact day-labour, light denied?’
		 I fondly ask. But Patience, to prevent
		That murmur, soon replies: ‘God doth not need
		 Either man’s work or his own gifts. Who best
		 Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state
		Is kingly. Thousands, at his bidding, speed
		 And post o’er land and ocean, without rest;
		 They also serve who only stand and wait.’


	6. ON THE LATE MASSACRE IN PIEDMONT

		Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughter’d saints, whose bones
		      Lie scatter’d on the Alpine mountains cold,
		      Ev’n them who kept thy truth so pure of old,
		      When all our fathers worshipp’d stocks and stones;
		Forget not: in thy book record their groans
		      Who were thy sheep and in their ancient fold
		      Slain by the bloody Piemontese that roll’d
		      Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans
		The vales redoubl’d to the hills, and they
		      To Heav’n. Their martyr’d blood and ashes sow
		      O’er all th’ Italian fields where still doth sway
		The triple tyrant; that from these may grow
		      A hundred-fold, who having learnt thy way
		Early may fly the Babylonian woe.


	7. ON THE MORNING OF CHRIST’S NATIVITY

		I
		
		 This is the month, and this the happy morn,
		   Wherein the Son of Heaven’s eternal King,
		 Of wedded Maid and Virgin-Mother born,
		   Our great redemption from above did bring;
		   For so the holy sages once did sing,
		 That he our deadly forfeit should release,
		And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.
		
		
		II
		
		 That glorious form, that light unsufferable,
		   And that far-beaming blaze of majesty,
		 Wherewith he wont at Heaven’s high council-table
		   To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
		   He laid aside; and, here with us to be,
		 Forsook the courts of everlasting day,
		And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay.
		
		
		III
		
		 Say, heavenly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein
		   Afford a present to the Infant God?
		 Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain,
		   To welcome him to this his new abode,
		   Now, while the heaven, by the Sun’s team untrod,
		 Hath took no print of the approaching light,
		And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?
		
		
		IV
		
		 See how from far upon the eastern road
		   The star-led wizards haste with odours sweet!
		 Oh! run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
		   And lay it lowly at his blessed feet;
		   Have thou the honour first thy Lord to greet,
		 And join thy voice unto the angel quire,
		From out his secret altar touched with hallowed fire.


	8. THE HYMN

		I
		
		     It was the winter wild,
		     While the heaven-born child
		 All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies;
		     Nature in awe to him
		     Had doffed her gaudy trim,
		 With her great Master so to sympathize.
		   It was no season then for her
		To wanton with the Sun her lusty paramour.
		
		
		II
		
		     Only with speeches fair
		     She woos the gentle air
		 To hide her guilty front with innocent snow,
		     And on her naked shame,
		     Pollute with sinful blame,
		 The saintly veil of maiden-white to throw,
		   Confounded, that her Maker’s eyes
		Should look so near upon her foul deformities.
		
		
		III
		
		     But he, her fears to cease,
		     Sent down the meek-eyed Peace;
		 She, crowned with olive-green, came softly sliding
		     Down through the turning sphere,
		     His ready harbinger,
		 With turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing;
		   And, waving wide her myrtle wand,
		She strikes an universal peace through sea and land.
		
		
		IV
		
		     No war or battle’s sound
		     Was heard the world around;
		 The idle spear and shield were high up hung;
		     The hooked chariot stood,
		     Unstained with hostile blood;
		 The trumpet spake not to the armed throng;
		   And kings sat still with awful eye,
		As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by.
		
		
		V
		
		     But peaceful was the night,
		     Wherein the Prince of Light
		 His reign of peace upon the earth began.
		     The winds, with wonder whist,
		     Smoothly the waters kissed,
		 Whispering new joys to the mild ocean,
		   Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
		While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.
		
		
		VI
		
		     The stars, with deep amaze,
		     Stand fixed in steadfast gaze,
		 Bending one way their precious influence,
		     And will not take their flight,
		     For all the morning-light,
		 Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;
		   But in their glimmering orbs did glow,
		Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.
		
		
		VII
		
		     And, though the shady gloom
		     Had given day her room,
		 The sun himself withheld his wonted speed;
		     And hid his head for shame,
		     As his inferior flame
		 The new-enlightened world no more should need;
		   He saw a greater sun appear
		Than his bright throne or burning axletree could bear.
		
		
		VIII
		
		     The shepherds on the lawn,
		     Or ere the point of dawn,
		 Sat simply chatting in a rustic row;
		     Full little thought they than
		     That the mighty Pan
		 Was kindly come to live with them below.
		   Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep,
		Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.
		
		
		IX
		
		     When such music sweet
		     Their hearts and ears did greet,
		 As never was by mortal finger strook;
		     Divinely-warbled voice
		     Answering the stringed noise,
		 As all their souls in blissful rapture took.
		   The air, such pleasure loth to lose,
		With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.
		
		
		X
		
		     Nature, that heard such sound,
		     Beneath the hollow round
		 Of Cynthia’s seat, the airy region thrilling,
		     Now was almost won
		     To think her part was done,
		 And that her reign had here its last fulfilling.
		   She knew such harmony alone
		Could hold all Heaven and Earth in happier union.
		
		
		XI
		
		     At last surrounds their sight
		     A globe of circular light,
		 That with long beams the shame-faced Night arrayed.
		     The helmed Cherubim,
		     And sworded Seraphim,
		 Are seen, in glittering ranks with wings displayed,
		   Harping, in loud and solemn quire,
		With unexpressive notes to Heaven’s new-born Heir.
		
		
		XII
		
		     Such music--as ‘tis said--
		     Before was never made,
		 But when of old the Sons of Morning sung;
		     While the Creator great
		     His constellations set,
		 And the well-balanced World on hinges hung,
		   And cast the dark foundations deep,
		And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep.
		
		
		XIII
		
		     Ring out, ye crystal spheres!
		     Once bless our human ears,
		 --If ye have power to touch our senses so--
		     And let your silver-chime
		     Move in melodious time,
		 And let the base of heaven’s deep organ blow;
		   And with your ninefold harmony
		Make up full consort to the angelic symphony.
		
		
		XIV
		
		     For if such holy song
		     Enwrap our fancy long,
		 Time will run back, and fetch the Age of Gold;
		     And speckled Vanity
		     Will sicken soon and die,
		 And leprous Sin will melt from earthly mould;
		   And Hell itself will pass away,
		And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day.
		
		
		XV
		
		     Yea Truth and Justice then
		     Will down return to men,
		 Orbed in a rainbow, and like glories wearing;
		     Mercy will sit between,
		     Throned in celestial sheen,
		 With radiant feet the tissued clouds down steering;
		   And Heaven, as at some festival,
		Will open wide the gates of her high palace-hall.
		
		
		XVI
		
		     But wisest Fate says No,
		     This must not yet be so,
		 The Babe lies yet in smiling infancy,
		     That, on the bitter cross,
		     Must redeem our loss;
		 So both himself and us to glorify:
		   Yet first, to those ychained in sleep,
		The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep.
		
		
		XVII
		
		     With such a horrid clang
		     As on Mount Sinai rang,
		 While the red fire and smouldering clouds outbrake,
		     The aged earth aghast,
		     With terror of that blast,
		 Shall from the surface to the centre shake;
		   When, at the world’s last session,
		The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread his throne.
		
		
		XVIII
		
		     And then at last our bliss
		     Full and perfect is,
		 But now begins; for from this happy day
		     The Old Dragon under ground,
		     In straiter limits bound,
		 Not half so far casts his usurped sway,
		   And, wroth to see his kingdom fail,
		Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail.
		
		
		XIX
		
		     The oracles are dumb,
		     No voice or hideous hum
		 Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving.
		     Apollo from his shrine
		     Can no more divine,
		 With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving.
		   No nightly trance, or breathed spell,
		Inspires the pale-eyed priest from the prophetic cell.
		
		
		XX
		
		     The lonely mountains o’er,
		     And the resounding shore,
		 A voice of weeping heard and loud lament;
		     From haunted spring, and dale
		     Edged with poplar pale,
		 The parting Genius is with sighing sent;
		   With flower-inwoven tresses torn
		The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.
		
		
		XXI
		
		     In consecrated earth,
		     And on the holy hearth,
		 The Lars and Lemures moan with midnight plaint;
		     In urns and altars round,
		     A drear and dying sound
		 Affrights the Flamens at their service quaint;
		   And the chill marble seems to sweat,
		While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.
		
		
		XXII
		
		     Peor and Baälim
		     Forsake their temples dim,
		 With that twice battered god of Palestine;
		     And mooned Ashtaroth,
		     Heaven’s queen and mother both,
		 Now sits not girt with tapers’ holy shine;
		   The Lybic Hammon shrinks his horn;
		In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn.
		
		
		XXIII
		
		     And sullen Moloch, fled,
		     Hath left in shadows dread
		 His burning idol all of blackest hue;
		     In vain with cymbals’ ring
		     They call the grisly king,
		 In dismal dance about the furnace blue;
		   The brutish gods of Nile as fast,
		Isis, and Orus, and the dog Anubis haste.
		
		
		XXIV
		
		     Nor is Osiris seen
		     In Memphian grove or green,
		 Trampling the unshowered grass with lowings loud;
		     Nor can he be at rest
		     Within his sacred chest,
		 Nought but profoundest hell can be his shroud;
		   In vain, with timbrelled anthems dark,
		The sable-stoled sorcerers bear his worshipped ark.
		
		
		XXV
		
		     He feels, from Juda’s land,
		     The dreaded Infant’s hand,
		 The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;
		     Nor all the gods beside
		     Longer dare abide,
		 Nor Typhon huge ending in snaky twine.
		   Our Babe, to shew his Godhead true,
		Can in his swaddling-bands control the damned crew.
		
		
		XXVI
		
		     So when the sun in bed,
		     Curtained with cloudy red,
		 Pillows his chin upon an orient wave,
		     The flocking shadows pale
		     Troop to the infernal jail,
		 Each fettered ghost slips to his several grave,
		   And the yellow-skirted fayes
		Fly after the Night steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze.
		
		
		XXVII
		
		     But see! the Virgin blest
		     Hath laid her Babe to rest,
		 Time is our tedious song should here have ending;
		     Heaven’s youngest-teemed star
		     Hath fixed her polished car,
		 Her sleeping Lord with handmaid-lamp attending;
		   And all about the courtly stable
		Bright-harnessed angels sit in order serviceable.


	9. WHEN I CONSIDER HOW MY LIGHT IS SPENT

		When I consider how my light is spent,
		  Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
		  And that one Talent which is death to hide
		  Lodged with me useless, though my Soul more bent
		To serve therewith my Maker, and present
		  My true account, lest he returning chide;
		  “Doth God exact day-labour, light denied?”
		  I fondly ask. But patience, to prevent
		That murmur, soon replies, “God doth not need
		  Either man’s work or his own gifts; who best
		  Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state
		Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed
		  And post o’er Land and Ocean without rest:
		  They also serve who only stand and wait.”


*** Gabriela Mistral (1889 - 1957)

	1. I AM NOT ALONE

		The night, it is deserted 
		from the mountains to the sea. 
		But I, the one who rocks you, 
		I am not alone! 
		
		The sky, it is deserted 
		for the moon falls to the sea. 
		But I, the one who holds you,
		I am not alone! 
		
		The world, it is deserted. 
		All flesh is sad you see. 
		But I, the one who hugs you, 
		I am not alone!


	2. THE SAD MOTHER

		Sleep, sleep, my beloved, 
		without worry, without fear, 
		although my soul does not sleep, 
		although I do not rest. 
		
		Sleep, sleep, and in the night 
		may your whispers be softer 
		than a leaf of grass, 
		or the silken fleece of lambs. 
		
		May my flesh slumber in you, 
		my worry, my trembling. 
		In you, may my eyes close 
		and my heart sleep.


	3. THOSE WHO DO NOT DANCE

		A crippled child 
		Said, “How shall I dance?” 
		Let your heart dance 
		We said. 
		
		Then the invalid said: 
		“How shall I sing?” 
		Let your heart sing 
		We said 
		
		Then spoke the poor dead thistle, 
		But I, how shall I dance?” 
		Let your heart fly to the wind 
		We said. 
		
		Then God spoke from above 
		“How shall I descend from the blue?” 
		Come dance for us here in the light 
		We said. 
		
		All the valley is dancing 
		Together under the sun, 
		And the heart of him who joins us not 
		Is turned to dust, to dust.


	4. TO SEE HIM AGAIN

		Never, never again?
		Not on nights filled with quivering stars,
		or during dawn’s maiden brightness
		or afternoons of sacrifice?
		
		Or at the edge of a pale path
		that encircles the farmlands,
		or upon the rim of a trembling fountain,
		whitened by a shimmering moon?
		
		Or beneath the forest’s
		luxuriant, raveled tresses
		where, calling his name,
		I was overtaken by the night?
		Not in the grotto that returns
		the echo of my cry?
		
		Oh no. To see him again--
		it would not matter where--
		in heaven’s deadwater
		or inside the boiling vortex,
		under serene moons or in bloodless fright!
		
		To be with him . . .
		every springtime and winter,
		united in one anguished knot
		around his bloody neck!


*** Marianne Moore (1887 - 1972)

	1. A GRAVEYARD

		Man looking into the sea,
		taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have to yourself,
		it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing,
		but you cannot stand in the middle of this;
		the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave.
		The firs stand in a procession, each with an emerald turkey-foot at the top,
		reserved as their contours, saying nothing;
		repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea;
		the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look.
		There are others besides you who have worn that look--
		whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them
		for their bones have not lasted:
		men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave,
		and row quickly away--the blades of the oars
		moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death.
		The wrinkles progress among themselves in a phalanx--beautiful under networks of foam,
		and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed;
		the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting cat-calls as heretofore--
		the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them;
		and the ocean, under the pulsation of lighthouses and noise of bellbuoys,
		advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink--
		in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness.


	2. A JELLY-FISH

		Visible, invisible,
		A fluctuating charm,
		An amber-colored amethyst
		Inhabits it; your arm
		Approaches, and
		It opens and
		It closes;
		You have meant
		To catch it,
		And it shrivels;
		You abandon
		Your intent--
		It opens, and it
		Closes and you
		Reach for it--
		The blue
		Surrounding it
		Grows cloudy, and
		It floats away
		From you.


	3. CRITICS AND CONNOISSEURS

		There is a great amount of poetry in unconscious 
		   fastidiousness.  Certain Ming 
		       products, imperial floor coverings of coach- 
		   wheel yellow, are well enough in their way but I have seen something 
		           that I like better--a 
		               mere childish attempt to make an imperfectly bal- 
		                       lasted animal stand up, 
		               similar determination to make a pup 
		                   eat his meat from the plate.
		
		I remember a swan under the willows of Oxford, 
		   with flamingo-colored, maple- 
		       leaflike feet.  It reconnoitered like a battle- 
		   ship.  Disbelief and conscious fastidiousness were 
		           ingredients in its 
		               disinclination to move.  Finally its hardihood was 
		                       not proof against its 
		               proclivity to more fully appreciate such bits 
		                   of food as the stream
		
		bore counter to it; it made away with what I gave it 
		   to eat.  I have seen this swan and 
		       I have seen you; I have seen ambition without 
		   understanding it in a variety of forms.  Happening to stand 
		           by an ant-hill, I have 
		               seen a fastidious ant carrying a stick north, south, 
		                       east, west, till it turned on 
		               itself, struck out from the flower bed into the lawn, 
		                   and returned to the point
		
		From which it had started.  Then abandoning the stick as 
		   useless and overtaxing its 
		       jaws with a particle of whitewash--pill-like but 
		   heavy--it again went throught the same course of procedure. 
		                       What is 
		           there in being able 
		               to say that one has dominated the stream in an attitude of 
		                       self-defense; 
		               in proving that one has had the experience 
		                   of carrying a stick?


	4. GEORGE MOORE

		In speaking of ‘aspiration,’ 
		From the recesses of a pen more dolorous than blackness 
		itself, 
		Were you presenting us with one more form of imperturbable 
		French drollery, 
		Or was it self directed banter? 
		Habitual ennui 
		Took from you, your invisible, hot helmet of anaemia-- 
		While you were filling your “little glass” from the 
		decanter 
		Of a transparent-murky, would-be-truthful “hobohemia”-- 
		And then facetiously 
		Went off with it? Your soul’s supplanter, 
		The spirit of good narrative, flatters you, convinced that 
		in reporting briefly 
		One choice incident, you have known beauty other than that 
		of stys, on 
		Which to fix your admiration. 
		
		_So far as the future is concerned, 
		“Shall not one say, with the Russian philosopher, 
		‘How is one to know what one doesn’t know?’” 
		So far as the present is concerned,_
		
		If external action is effete 
		And rhyme is outmoded, 
		I shall revert to you, 
		Habakkuk, as on a recent occasion I was goaded 
		Into doing, by XY, who was speaking of unrhymed 
		verse. 
		This man said--I think that I repeat 
		His identical words: 
		“Hebrew poetry is 
		Prose with a sort of heightened consciousness. ‘Ecstacy 
		affords 
		The occasion and expediency determines the form.’” 


	5. NO SWAN SO FINE

		“No water so still as the 
		dead fountains of Versailles.“ No swan, 
		with swart blind look askance 
		and gondoliering legs, so fine 
		as the chinz china one with fawn- 
		brown eyes and toothed gold 
		collar on to show whose bird it was. 
		
		Lodged in the Louis Fifteenth 
		candelabrum-tree of cockscomb- 
		tinted buttons, dahlias, 
		sea-urchins, and everlastings, 
		it perches on the branching foam 
		of polished sculptured 
		flowers--at ease and tall. The king is dead.


	6. POETRY

		I too, dislike it: there are things that are important beyond all this fiddle.
		  Reading it, however, with a perfect contempt for it, one discovers that there is in
		  it after all, a place for the genuine.
		     Hands that can grasp, eyes
		     that can dilate, hair that can rise
		        if it must, these things are important not because a
		
		high-sounding interpretation can be put upon them but because they are
		  useful; when they become so derivative as to become unintelligible, the
		  same thing may be said for all of us--that we
		     do not admire what
		     we cannot understand. The bat,
		        holding on upside down or in quest of something to
		
		eat, elephants pushing, a wild horse taking a roll, a tireless wolf under
		  a tree, the immovable critic twinkling his skin like a horse that feels a flea, the base--
		  ball fan, the statistician--case after case
		     could be cited did
		     one wish it; nor is it valid
		        to discriminate against “business documents and
		
		school-books”; all these phenomena are important. One must make a distinction
		  however: when dragged into prominence by half poets, the result is not poetry,
		  nor till the autocrats among us can be
		    “literalists of
		     the imagination”--above
		        insolence and triviality and can present
		
		for inspection, imaginary gardens with real toads in them, shall we have
		  it. In the meantime, if you demand on the one hand, in defiance of their opinion--
		  the raw material of poetry in
		     all its rawness, and
		     that which is on the other hand,
		        genuine, then you are interested in poetry.


	7. THE FISH

		wade
		through black jade.
		      Of the crow-blue mussel-shells, one keeps
		      adjusting the ash-heaps;
		             opening and shutting itself like
		
		an
		injured fan.
		      The barnacles which encrust the side
		      of the wave, cannot hide
		             there for the submerged shafts of the
		
		sun,
		split like spun
		      glass, move themselves with spotlight swiftness
		      into the crevices--
		             in and out, illuminating
		
		the
		turquoise sea
		      of bodies. The water drives a wedge
		      of iron through the iron edge
		             of the cliff; whereupon the stars,
		
		pink
		rice-grains, ink-
		      bespattered jelly fish, crabs like green
		      lilies, and submarine
		             toadstools, slide each on the other.
		
		All
		external
		      marks of abuse are present on this
		      defiant edifice--
		             all the physical features of
		
		ac-
		cident--lack
		      of cornice, dynamite grooves, burns, and
		      hatchet strokes, these things stand
		             out on it; the chasm-side is
		
		dead.
		Repeated
		      evidence has proved that it can live
		      on what can not revive
		             its youth. The sea grows old in it.


	8. THE MIND IS AN ENCHANTING THING

		is an enchanted thing
		    like the glaze on a
		katydid-wing
		        subdivided by sun
		        till the nettings are legion.
		Like Gieseking playing Scarlatti;
		
		like the apteryx-awl
		    as a beak, or the
		kiwi’s rain-shawl
		        of haired feathers, the mind
		        feeling its way as though blind,
		walks along with its eyes on the ground.
		
		It has memory’s ear
		    that can hear without
		having to hear.
		        Like the gyroscope’s fall,
		        truly unequivocal
		because trued by regnant certainty,
		
		it is a power of
		    strong enchantment. It
		is like the dove-
		        neck animated by
		        sun; it is memory’s eye;
		it’s conscientious inconsistency.
		
		It tears off the veil, tears
		    the temptation, the
		mist the heart wears,
		        from its eyes--if the heart
		        has a face; it takes apart
		dejection. It’s fire in the dove-neck’s
		
		iridescence; in the
		    inconsistencies
		of Scarlatti.
		        Unconfusion submits
		        its confusion to proof; it’s
		not a Herod’s oath that cannot change.


	9. TO A CHAMELEON

		Hid by the august foliage and fruit of the grape-vine
		twine
		your anatomy
		round the pruned and polished stem,
		Chameleon.
		Fire laid upon
		an emerald as long as
		the Dark King’s massy
		one,
		could not snap the spectrum up for food as you have done.


	10. TO A STEAM ROLLER

		The illustration
		is nothing to you without the application.
		  You lack half wit. You crush all the particles down
		     into close conformity, and then walk back and forth 
		        on them.
		
		Sparkling chips of rock
		are crushed down to the level of the parent block.
		  Were not ‘impersonal judgment in aesthetic
		     matters, a metaphysical impossibility,‘ you
		
		might fairly achieve
		It. As for butterflies, I can hardly conceive
		  of one’s attending upon you, but to question
		     the congruence of the complement is vain, if it exists.


*** Edwin Muir (1887 - 1959)

	1. ABRAHAM

		The rivulet-loving wanderer Abraham
		Through waterless wastes tracing his fields of pasture
		Led his Chaldean herds and fattening flocks
		With the meandering art of wavering water
		That seeks and finds, yet does not know its way.
		He came, rested and prospered, and went on,
		Scattering behind him little pastoral kingdoms,
		And over each one its own particular sky,
		Not the great rounded sky through which he journeyed,
		That went with him but when he rested changed.
		His mind was full of names
		Learned from strange peoples speaking alien tongues,
		And all that was theirs one day he would inherit.
		He died content and full of years, though still
		The Promise had not come, and left his bones,
		Far from his father’s house, in alien Canaan.


	2. SCOTLAND’S WINTER

		Now the ice lays its smooth claws on the sill,
		The sun looks from the hill
		Helmed in his winter casket,
		And sweeps his arctic sword across the sky.
		The water at the mill
		Sounds more hoarse and dull.
		The miller’s daughter walking by
		With frozen fingers soldered to her basket
		Seems to be knocking
		Upon a hundred leagues of floor
		With her light heels, and mocking
		Percy and Douglas dead,
		And Bruce on his burial bed,
		Where he lies white as may
		With wars and leprosy,
		And all the kings before
		This land was kingless,
		And all the singers before
		This land was songless,
		This land that with its dead and living waits the Judgement Day.
		But they, the powerless dead,
		Listening can hear no more
		Than a hard tapping on the floor
		A little overhead
		Of common heels that do not know
		Whence they come or where they go
		And are content
		With their poor frozen life and shallow banishment.


	3. THE CASTLE

		All through that summer at ease we lay,
		And daily from the turret wall
		We watched the mowers in the hay
		And the enemy half a mile away
		They seemed no threat to us at all.
		
		For what, we thought, had we to fear
		With our arms and provender, load on load,
		Our towering battlements, tier on tier,
		And friendly allies drawing near
		On every leafy summer road.
		
		Our gates were strong, our walls were thick,
		So smooth and high, no man could win
		A foothold there, no clever trick
		Could take us, have us dead or quick.
		Only a bird could have got in.
		
		What could they offer us for bait?
		Our captain was brave and we were true . . .
		There was a little private gate,
		A little wicked wicket gate.
		The wizened warder let them through.
		
		Oh then our maze of tunneled stone
		Grew thin and treacherous as air.
		The cause was lost without a groan,
		The famous citadel overthrown,
		And all its secret galleries bare.
		
		How can this shameful tale be told?
		I will maintain until my death
		We could do nothing, being sold;
		Our only enemy was gold,
		And we had no arms to fight it with.


	4. THE COMBAT

		It was not meant for human eyes,
		That combat on the shabby patch
		Of clods and trampled turf that lies
		Somewhere beneath the sodden skies
		For eye of toad or adder to catch.
		
		And having seen it I accuse
		The crested animal in his pride,
		Arrayed in all the royal hues
		Which hide the claws he well can use
		To tear the heart out of the side.
		
		Body of leopard, eagle’s head
		And whetted beak, and lion’s mane,
		And frost-grey hedge of feathers spread
		Behind--he seemed of all things bred.
		I shall not see his like again.
		
		As for his enemy there came in
		A soft round beast as brown as clay;
		All rent and patched his wretched skin;
		A battered bag he might have been,
		Some old used thing to throw away.
		
		Yet he awaited face to face
		The furious beast and the swift attack.
		Soon over and done. That was no place
		Or time for chivalry or for grace.
		The fury had him on his back.
		
		And two small paws like hands flew out
		To right and left as the trees stood by.
		One would have said beyond a doubt
		That was the very end of the bout,
		But that the creature would not die.
		
		For ere the death-stroke he was gone,
		Writhed, whirled, into his den,
		Safe somehow there. The fight was done,
		And he had lost who had all but won.
		But oh his deadly fury then.
		
		A while the place lay blank, forlorn,
		Drowsing as in relief from pain.
		The cricket chirped, the grating thorn
		Stirred, and a little sound was born.
		The champions took their posts again.
		
		And all began. The stealthy paw
		Slashed out and in. Could nothing save
		These rags and tatters from the claw?
		Nothing. And yet I never saw
		A beast so helpless and so brave.
		
		And now, while the trees stand watching, still
		The unequal battle rages there.
		The killing beast that cannot kill
		Swells and swells in his fury till
		You’d almost think it was despair.


	5. THE DYING CHILD

		Unfriendly friendly universe,
		I pack your stars into my purse,
		And bid you so farewell.
		That I can leave you, quite go out,
		Go out, go out beyond all doubt,
		My father says, is the miracle.
		
		You are so great, and I so small:
		I am nothing, you are all:
		Being nothing, I can take this way.
		Oh I need neither rise nor fall,
		For when I do not move at all
		I shall be out of all your day.
		
		It’s said some memory will remain
		In the other place, grass in the rain,
		Light on the land, sun on the sea,
		A flitting grace, a phantom face,
		But the world is out. There is not place
		Where it and its ghost can ever be.
		
		Father, father, I dread this air
		Blown from the far side of despair
		The cold cold corner. What house, what hold,
		What hand is there? I look and see
		Nothing-filled eternity,
		And the great round world grows weak and old.
		
		Hold my hand, oh hold it fast--
		I am changing!--until at last
		My hand in yours no more will change,
		Though yours change on. You here, I there,
		So hand in hand, twin-leafed despair--
		I did not know death was so strange.


	6. THE FATHERS

		Our fathers all were poor,
		Poorer our fathers’ fathers;
		Beyond, we dare not look.
		We, the sons, keep store
		Of tarnished gold that gathers
		Around us from the night,
		Record it in this book
		That, when the line is drawn,
		Credit and creditor gone,
		Column and figure flown,
		Will open into light.
		
		Archaic fevers shake
		Our healthy flesh and blood
		Plumped in the passing day
		And fed with pleasant food.
		The fathers’ anger and ache
		Will not, will not away
		And leave the living alone,
		But on our careless brows
		Faintly their furrows engrave
		Like veinings in a stone,
		Breathe in the sunny house
		Nightmare of blackened bone,
		Cellar and choking cave.
		
		Panics and furies fly
		Through our unhurried veins,
		Heavenly lights and rains
		Purify heart and eye,
		Past agonies purify
		And lay the sullen dust.
		The angers will not away.
		We hold our fathers’ trust,
		Wrong, riches, sorrow and all
		Until they topple and fall,
		And fallen let in the day.


	7. THE HORSES

		Barely a twelvemonth after
		The seven days war that put the world to sleep,
		Late in the evening the strange horses came.
		By then we had made our covenant with silence,
		But in the first few days it was so still
		We listened to our breathing and were afraid.
		On the second day
		The radios failed; we turned the knobs; no answer.
		On the third day a warship passed us, heading north,
		Dead bodies piled on the deck. On the sixth day
		A plane plunged over us into the sea. Thereafter
		Nothing. The radios dumb;
		And still they stand in corners of our kitchens,
		And stand, perhaps, turned on, in a million rooms
		All over the world. But now if they should speak,
		If on a sudden they should speak again,
		If on the stroke of noon a voice should speak,
		We would not listen, we would not let it bring
		That old bad world that swallowed its children quick
		At one great gulp. We would not have it again.
		Sometimes we think of the nations lying asleep,
		Curled blindly in impenetrable sorrow,
		And then the thought confounds us with its strangeness.
		The tractors lie about our fields; at evening
		They look like dank sea-monsters couched and waiting.
		We leave them where they are and let them rust:
		“They’ll molder away and be like other loam.”
		We make our oxen drag our rusty plows,
		Long laid aside. We have gone back
		Far past our fathers’ land.
		And then, that evening
		Late in the summer the strange horses came.
		We heard a distant tapping on the road,
		A deepening drumming; it stopped, went on again
		And at the corner changed to hollow thunder.
		We saw the heads
		Like a wild wave charging and were afraid.
		We had sold our horses in our fathers’ time
		To buy new tractors. Now they were strange to us
		As fabulous steeds set on an ancient shield.
		Or illustrations in a book of knights.
		We did not dare go near them. Yet they waited,
		Stubborn and shy, as if they had been sent
		By an old command to find our whereabouts
		And that long-lost archaic companionship.
		In the first moment we had never a thought
		That they were creatures to be owned and used.
		Among them were some half a dozen colts
		Dropped in some wilderness of the broken world,
		Yet new as if they had come from their own Eden.
		Since then they have pulled our plows and borne our loads,
		But that free servitude still can pierce our hearts.
		Our life is changed; their coming our beginning.


	8. THE INCARNATE ONE

		The windless northern surge, the sea-gull’s scream,
		And Calvin’s kirk crowning the barren brae.
		I think of Giotto the Tuscan shepherd’s dream,
		Christ, man and creature in their inner day.
		How could our race betray
		The Image, and the Incarnate One unmake
		Who chose this form and fashion for our sake?
		
		The Word made flesh here is made word again
		A word made word in flourish and arrogant crook.
		See there King Calvin with his iron pen,
		And God three angry letters in a book,
		And there the logical hook
		On which the Mystery is impaled and bent
		Into an ideological argument.
		
		There’s better gospel in man’s natural tongue,
		And truer sight was theirs outside the Law
		Who saw the far side of the Cross among
		The archaic peoples in their ancient awe,
		In ignorant wonder saw
		The wooden cross-tree on the bare hillside,
		Not knowing that there a God suffered and died.
		
		The fleshless word, growing, will bring us down,
		Pagan and Christian man alike will fall,
		The auguries say, the white and black and brown,
		The merry and the sad, theorist, lover, all
		Invisibly will fall:
		Abstract calamity, save for those who can
		Build their cold empire on the abstract man.
		
		A soft breeze stirs and all my thoughts are blown
		Far out to sea and lost. Yet I know well
		The bloodless word will battle for its own
		Invisibly in brain and nerve and cell.
		The generations tell
		Their personal tale: the One has far to go
		Past the mirages and the murdering snow.


*** Les Murray (1938 - 2019)

	1. AURORA PRONE

		The lemon sunlight poured out far between things
		inhabits a coolness. Mosquitoes have subsided,
		flies are for later heat.
		Every tree’s an auburn giant with a dazzled face
		and the back of its head to an infinite dusk road.
		Twilights broaden away from our feet too
		as rabbits bounce home up defiles in the grass.
		Everything widens with distance, in this perspective.
		The dog’s paws, trotting, rotate his end of infinity
		and dam water feels a shiver few willow drapes share.
		Bright leaks through their wigwam re-purple the skinny beans
		then rapidly the light tops treetops and is shortened
		into a day. Everywhere stands pat beside its shadow
		for the great bald radiance never seen in dreams.


	2. FLOWERING EUCALYPT IN AUTUMN

		That slim creek out of the sky
		the dried-blood western gum tree
		is all stir in its high reaches:
		
		its strung haze-blue foliage is dancing
		points down in breezy mobs, swapping
		pace and place in an all-over sway
		
		retarded en masse by crimson blossom.
		Bees still at work up there tack
		around their exploded furry likeness
		
		and the lawn underneath’s a napped rug
		of eyelash drift, of blooms flared
		like a sneeze in a redhaired nostril,
		
		minute urns, pinch-sized rockets
		knocked down by winds, by night-creaking
		fig-squirting bats, or the daily
		
		parrot gang with green pocketknife wings.
		Bristling food tough delicate
		raucous life, each flower comes
		
		as a spray in its own turned vase,
		a taut starbust, honeyed model
		of the tree’s fragrance crisping in your head.
		
		When the japanese plum tree
		was shedding in spring, we speculated
		there among the drizzling petals
		
		what kind of exquisitely precious
		artistic bloom might be gendered
		in a pure ethereal compost
		
		of petals potted as they fell.
		From unpetalled gun-debris
		we know what is grown continually,
		
		a tower of fabulous swish tatters,
		a map hoisted upright, a crusted
		riverbed with up-country show towns.


	3. ON THE BORDERS

		We’re driving across tableland
		somewhere in the world;
		it is almost bare of trees.
		
		Upland near void of features
		always moves me, but not to thought;
		it lets me rest from thinking.
		
		I feel no need to interpret it
		as if it were art. Too much
		of poetry is criticism now.
		
		That hawk, clinging to
		the eaves of the wind, beating
		its third wing, its tail
		
		isn’t mine to sell. And here is
		more like the space that needs
		to exist around an image.
		
		This cloud-roof country reminds me
		of the character of people
		who first encountered roses in soap.


	4. PERFORMANCE

		I starred that night, I shone:
		I was footwork and firework in one,
		
		a rocket that wriggled up and shot
		darkness with a parasol of brilliants
		and a peewee descant on a flung bit;
		I was blusters of glitter-bombs expanding
		to mantle and aurora from a crown,
		I was fouéttes, falls of blazing paint,
		para-flares spot-welding cloudy heaven,
		loose gold off fierce toeholds of white,
		a finale red-tongued as a haka leap:
		that too was a butt of all right!
		
		As usual after any triumph, I was
		of course, inconsolable.


	5. PREDAWN IN HEALTH

		The stars are filtering through a tree
		outside in the moon’s silent era.
		
		Reality is moving layer over layer
		like crystal spheres now called laws.
		
		The future is right behind your head;
		just over all horizons is the past.
		
		The soul sits looking at its offer.


	6. THE DREAM OF WEARING SHORTS FOREVER

		To go home and wear shorts forever
		in the enormous paddocks, in that warm climate,
		adding a sweater when winter soaks the grass,
		
		to camp out along the river bends
		for good, wearing shorts, with a pocketknife,
		a fishing line and matches,
		
		or there where the hills are all down, below the plain,
		to sit around in shorts at evening
		on the plank verandah;
		
		If the cardinal points of costume
		are Robes, Tat, Rig and Scunge,
		where are shorts in this compass?
		
		They are never Robes
		as other bareleg outfits have been:
		the toga, the kilt, the lava-lava
		the Mahatma’s cotton dhoti;
		
		archbishops and field marshals
		at their ceremonies never wear shorts.
		The very word
		means underpants in North America.
		
		Shorts can be Tat,
		Land-Rovering bush-environmental tat,
		socio-political ripped-and-metal-stapled tat,
		solidarity-with-the-Third World tat tvam asi,
		
		likewise track-and-field shorts worn to parties
		and the further humid, modelling negligee
		of the Kingdom of Flaunt,
		that unchallenged aristocracy.
		
		More plainly climatic, shorts
		are farmers’ rig, leathery with salt and bonemeal;
		are sailors’ and branch bankers’ rig,
		the crisp golfing style
		of our youngest male National Costume.
		
		Most loosely, they are Scunge,
		ancient Bengal bloomers or moth-eaten hot pants
		worn with a former shirt,
		feet, beach sand, hair
		and a paucity of signals.
		
		Scunge, which is real negligee
		housework in a swimsuit, pyjamas worn all day,
		is holiday, is freedom from ambition.
		Scunge makes you invisible
		to the world and yourself.
		
		The entropy of costume,
		scunge can get you conquered by more vigorous cultures
		and help you notice it less.
		
		To be or to become
		is a serious question posed by a work-shorts counter
		with its pressed stack, bulk khaki and blue,
		reading Yakka or King Gee, crisp with steely warehouse odour.
		
		Satisfied ambition, defeat, true unconcern,
		the wish and the knack of self-forgetfulness
		all fall within the scunge ambit
		wearing board shorts of similar;
		it is a kind of weightlessness.
		
		Unlike public nakedness, which in Westerners
		is deeply circumstantial, relaxed as exam time,
		artless and equal as the corsetry of a hussar regiment,
		
		shorts and their plain like
		are an angelic nudity,
		spirituality with pockets!
		A double updraft as you drop from branch to pool!
		
		Ideal for getting served last
		in shops of the temperate zone
		they are also ideal for going home, into space,
		into time, to farm the mind’s Sabine acres
		for product and subsistence.
		
		Now that everyone who yearned to wear long pants
		has essentially achieved them,
		long pants, which have themselves been underwear
		repeatedly, and underground more than once,
		it is time perhaps to cherish the culture of shorts,
		
		to moderate grim vigour
		with the knobble of bare knees,
		to cool bareknuckle feet in inland water,
		slapping flies with a book on solar wind
		or a patient bare hand, beneath the cadjiput trees,
		
		to be walking meditatively
		among green timber, through the grassy forest
		towards a calm sea
		and looking across to more of that great island
		and the further tropics.


	7. THE MEANING OF EXISTENCE

		Everything except language
		knows the meaning of existence.
		Trees, planets, rivers, time
		know nothing else. They express it
		moment by moment as the universe.
		Even this fool of a body
		lives it in part, and would
		have full dignity within it
		but for the ignorant freedom
		of my talking mind.


	8. THE QUALITY OF SPRAWL

		Sprawl is the quality
		of the man who cut down his Rolls-Royce
		into a farm utility truck, and sprawl
		is what the company lacked when it made repeated efforts
		to buy the vehicle back and repair its image.
		
		Sprawl is doing your farm work by aeroplane, roughly,
		or driving a hitchhiker that extra hundred miles home.
		It is the rococo of being your own still centre.
		It is never lighting cigars with ten dollar notes:
		that’s idiot ostentation and murder of starving people.
		Nor can it be bought with the ash of million dollar deeds.
		
		Sprawl lengthens the legs; it trains greyhounds on liver and beer.
		Sprawl almost never says, Why not?, with palms comically raised
		nor can it be dressed for, not even in running shoes worn
		with mink and a nose ring. That is Society. That’s Style.
		Sprawl is more like the thirteenth banana in a dozen
		or anyway the fourteenth.
		
		Sprawl is Hank Stamper in Never Give an Inch
		bisecting an obstructive official’s desk with a chain saw.
		Not harming the official. Sprawl is never brutal,
		though it’s often intransigent. Sprawl is never Simon de Montfort
		at a town-storming: Kill them all! God will know His own.
		Knowing the man’s name this was said to might be sprawl.
		
		Sprawl occurs in art. The fifteenth to twenty-first
		lines in a sonnet, for example. And in certain paintings.
		I have sprawl enough to have forgotten which paintings.
		Turner’s glorious Burning of the Houses of Parliament
		comes to mind, a doubling bannered triumph of sprawl -
		except he didn’t fire them.
		
		Sprawl gets up the noses of many kinds of people
		(every kind that comes in kinds) whose futures don’t include it.
		Some decry it as criminal presumption, silken-robed Pope Alexander
		dividing the new world between Spain and Portugal.
		If he smiled in petto afterwards, perhaps the thing did have sprawl.
		
		Sprawl is really classless, though. It is John Christopher Frederick Murray
		asleep in his neighbours’ best bed in spurs and oilskins,
		but not having thrown up:
		sprawl is never Calum, who, in the loud hallway of our house
		reinvented the Festoon. Rather
		it’s Beatrice Miles going twelve hundred ditto in a taxi,
		No Lewd Advances, no Hitting Animals, no Speeding,
		on the proceeds of her two-bob-a-sonnet Shakespeare readings.
		An image of my country. And would thatit were more so.
		
		No, sprawl is full gloss murals on a council-house wall.
		Sprawl leans on things. It is loose-limbed in its mind.
		Reprimanded and dismissed,
		it listens with a grin and one boot up on the rail
		of possibility. It may have to leave the Earth.
		Being roughly Christian, it scratches the other cheek
		And thinks it unlikely. Though people have been shot for sprawl.


*** Ogden Nash (1902 - 1971)

	1. A CAUTION FOR EVERYBODY

		Consider the auk;
		Becoming extinct because he forgot how to fly, and could only walk.
		Consider man, who may well become extinct
		Because he forgot how to walk and learned how to fly before he thinked.


	2. A DRINK WITH SOMETHING IN IT

		There is something about a Martini,
		A tingle remarkably pleasant;
		A yellow, a mellow Martini;
		I wish I had one at present.
		There is something about a Martini,
		Ere the dining and dancing begin,
		And to tell you the truth,
		It is not the vermouth--
		I think that perhaps it’s the gin.


	3. ADVENTURES OF ISABEL

		Isabel met an enormous bear,
		Isabel, Isabel, didn’t care;
		The bear was hungry, the bear was ravenous,
		The bear’s big mouth was cruel and cavernous.
		The bear said, Isabel, glad to meet you,
		How do, Isabel, now I’ll eat you!
		Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry.
		Isabel didn’t scream or scurry.
		She washed her hands and she straightened her hair up,
		Then Isabel quietly ate the bear up.
		Once in a night as black as pitch
		Isabel met a wicked old witch.
		the witch’s face was cross and wrinkled,
		The witch’s gums with teeth were sprinkled.
		Ho, ho, Isabel! the old witch crowed,
		I’ll turn you into an ugly toad!
		Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry,
		Isabel didn’t scream or scurry,
		She showed no rage and she showed no rancor,
		But she turned the witch into milk and drank her.
		Isabel met a hideous giant,
		Isabel continued self reliant.
		The giant was hairy, the giant was horrid,
		He had one eye in the middle of his forhead.
		Good morning, Isabel, the giant said,
		I’ll grind your bones to make my bread.
		Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry,
		Isabel didn’t scream or scurry.
		She nibled the zwieback that she always fed off,
		And when it was gone, she cut the giant’s head off.
		Isabel met a troublesome doctor,
		He punched and he poked till he really shocked her.
		The doctor’s talk was of coughs and chills
		And the doctor’s satchel bulged with pills.
		The doctor said unto Isabel,
		Swallow this, it will make you well.
		Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry,
		Isabel didn’t scream or scurry.
		She took those pills from the pill concocter,
		And Isabel calmly cured the doctor.


	4. BANKERS ARE JUST LIKE ANYONE ELSE, EXCEPT RICHER

		This is a song to celebrate banks,
		Because they are full of money and you go into them and all
		you hear is clinks and clanks,
		Or maybe a sound like the wind in the trees on the hills,
		Which is the rustling of the thousand dollar bills.
		Most bankers dwell in marble halls,
		Which they get to dwell in because they encourage deposits
		and discourage withdrawals,
		And particularly because they all observe one rule which woe
		betides the banker who fails to heed it,
		Which is you must never lend any money to anybody unless
		they don’t need it.
		I know you, you cautious conservative banks!
		If people are worried about their rent it is your duty to deny
		them the loan of one nickel, yes, even one copper engraving
		of the martyred son of the late Nancy Hanks;
		Yes, if they request fifty dollars to pay for a baby you must
		look at them like Tarzan looking at an uppity ape in the
		jungle,
		And tell them what do they think a bank is, anyhow, they had
		better go get the money from their wife’s aunt or ungle.
		But suppose people come in and they have a million and they
		want another million to pile on top of it,
		Why, you brim with the milk of human kindness and you
		urge them to accept every drop of it,
		And you lend them the million so then they have two million
		and this gives them the idea that they would be better off
		with four,
		So they already have two million as security so you have no
		hesitation in lending them two more,
		And all the vice-presidents nod their heads in rhythm,
		And the only question asked is do the borrowers want the
		money sent or do they want to take it withm.
		Because I think they deserve our appreciation and thanks,
		the jackasses who go around saying that health and happi-
		ness are everything and money isn’t essential,
		Because as soon as they have to borrow some unimportant
		money to maintain their health and happiness they starve
		to death so they can’t go around any more sneering at good
		old money, which is nothing short of providential.


	5. BIOLOGICAL REFLECTION

		A girl whose cheeks are covered with paint
		Has an advantage with me over one whose ain’t.


	6. CELERY

		Celery, raw
		Develops the jaw,
		But celery, stewed,
		Is more quietly chewed.


	7. COME ON IN, THE SENILITY IS FINE

		People live forever in Jacksonville and St. Petersburg and Tampa,
		But you don’t have to live forever to become a grampa.
		The entrance requirements for grampahood are comparatively mild,
		You only have to live until your child has a child.
		From that point on you start looking both ways over your shoulder,
		Because sometimes you feel thirty years younger and sometimes
		thirty years older.
		Now you begin to realize who it was that reached the height of
		imbecility,
		It was whoever said that grandparents have all the fun and none of
		the responsibility.
		This is the most enticing spiderwebs of a tarradiddle ever spun,
		Because everybody would love to have a baby around who was no
		responsibility and lots of fun,
		But I can think of no one but a mooncalf or a gaby
		Who would trust their own child to raise a baby.
		So you have to personally superintend your grandchild from diapers
		to pants and from bottle to spoon,
		Because you know that your own child hasn’t sense enough to come
		in out of a typhoon.
		You don’t have to live forever to become a grampa, but if you do
		want to live forever,
		Don’t try to be clever;
		If you wish to reach the end of the trail with an uncut throat,
		Don’t go around saying Quote I don’t mind being a grampa but I
		hate being married to a gramma Unquote.


	8. I DO, I WILL, I HAVE

		How wise I am to have instructed the butler
		to instruct the first footman to instruct the second
		footman to instruct the doorman to order my carriage;
		I am about to volunteer a definition of marriage.
		Just as I know that there are two Hagens, Walter and Copen,
		I know that marriage is a legal and religious alliance entered
		into by a man who can’t sleep with the window shut and a
		woman who can’t sleep with the window open.
		Moreover, just as I am unsure of the difference between
		flora and fauna and flotsam and jetsam,
		I am quite sure that marriage is the alliance of two people
		one of whom never remembers birthdays and the other
		never forgetsam,
		And he refuses to believe there is a leak in the water pipe or
		the gas pipe and she is convinced she is about to asphyxiate
		or drown,
		And she says Quick get up and get my hairbrushes off the
		windowsill, it’s raining in, and he replies Oh they’re all right,
		it’s only raining straight down.
		That is why marriage is so much more interesting than divorce,
		Because it’s the only known example of the happy meeting of
		the immovable object and the irresistible force.
		So I hope husbands and wives will continue to debate and
		combat over everything debatable and combatable,
		Because I believe a little incompatibility is the spice of life,
		particularly if he has income and she is pattable.


	9. JUST KEEP QUIET AND NOBODY WILL NOTICE

		There is one thing that ought to be taught in all the colleges,
		Which is that people ought to be taught not to go around always making apologies.
		I don’t mean the kind of apologies people make when they run over you or borrow five dollars or step on your feet,
		Because I think that is sort of sweet;
		No, I object to one kind of apology alone,
		Which is when people spend their time and yours apologizing for everything they own.
		You go to their house for a meal,
		And they apologize because the anchovies aren’t caviar or the partridge is veal;
		They apologize privately for the crudeness of the other guests,
		And they apologize publicly for their wife’s housekeeping or their husband’s jests;
		If they give you a book by Dickens they apologize because it isn’t by Scott,
		And if they take you to the theater, they apologize for the acting and the dialogue and the plot;
		They contain more milk of human kindness than the most capacious diary can,
		But if you are from out of town they apologize for everything local and if you are a foreigner they apologize for everything American.
		I dread these apologizers even as I am depicting them,
		I shudder as I think of the hours that must be spend in contradicting them,
		Because you are very rude if you let them emerge from an argument victorious,
		And when they say something of theirs is awful, it is your duty to convince them politely that it is magnificent and glorious,
		And what particularly bores me with them,
		Is that half the time you have to politely contradict them when you rudely agree with them,
		So I think there is one rule every host and hostess ought to keep with the comb and nail file and bicarbonate and aromatic spirits on a handy shelf,
		Which is don’t spoil the denouement by telling the guests everything is terrible, but let them have the thrill of finding it out for themselves.


	10. MORE ABOUT PEOPLE

		When people aren’t asking questions 
		They’re making suggestions 
		And when they’re not doing one of those 
		They’re either looking over your shoulder or stepping on your toes 
		And then as if that weren’t enough to annoy you 
		They employ you. 
		Anybody at leisure 
		Incurs everybody’s displeasure. 
		It seems to be very irking 
		To people at work to see other people not working, 
		So they tell you that work is wonderful medicine, 
		Just look at Firestone and Ford and Edison, 
		And they lecture you till they’re out of breath or something 
		And then if you don’t succumb they starve you to death or something. 
		All of which results in a nasty quirk: 
		That if you don’t want to work you have to work to earn enough money so that you won’t have to work.


	11. MORNING PRAYER

		Now another day is breaking,
		Sleep was sweet and so is waking.
		Dear Lord, I promised you last night
		Never again to sulk or fight.
		Such vows are easier to keep
		When a child is sound asleep.
		Today, O Lord, for your dear sake,
		I’ll try to keep them when awake.


	12. NO, YOU BE A LONE EAGLE

		I find it very hard to be fair-minded
		About people who go around being air-minded.
		I just can’t see any fun
		In soaring up up up into the sun
		When the chances are still a fresh cool orchid to a paper geranium
		That you’ll unsoar down down down onto your (to you) invaluable
		  cranium.
		I know the constant refrain
		About how safer up in God’s trafficless heaven than in an automobile
		  or a train
		But . . .
		My God, have you ever taken a good look at a strut?
		Then that one about how you’re in Boston before you can say antidis-
		  establishmentarianism
		So that preferring to take five hours by rail is a pernicious example of
		  antiquarianism.
		At least when I get on the Boston train I have a good chance of landing
		  in the South Station
		And not in that part of the daily press which is reserved for victims of
		  aviation.
		Then, despite the assurance that aeroplanes are terribly comfortable I
		  notice that when you are railroading or automobiling
		You don’t have to take a paper bag along just in case of a funny feeling.
		It seems to me that no kind of depravity
		Brings such speedy retribution as ignoring the law of gravity.
		Therefore nobody could possibly indict me for perjury
		When I swear that I wish the Wright brothers had gone in for silver
		  fox farming or tree surgery.


	13. OH TO BE ODD!

		Hypochondriacs
		Spend the winter at the bottom of Florida and the summer on top of
		 the Adirondriacs.
		You go to Paris and live on champagne wine and cognac
		If you’re dipsomognac.
		If you’re a manic-depressive
		You don’t go anywhere where you won’t be cheered up, and people say
		 “There, there!“ if your bills are excessive.
		But you stick around and work day and night and night and day with
		 your nose to the sawmill.
		If you’re nawmill.


	14. OLD DR. VALENTINE TO HIS SON

		Your hopeless patients will live,
		Your healthy patients will die.
		I have only this word to give:
		Wonder, and find out why.


	15. REFLECTION ON BABIES

		A bit of talcum 
		Is always walcum.


	16. THE ANT

		The ant has made herself illustrious
		By constant industry industrious.
		So what? Would you be calm and placid
		If you were full of formic acid?


	17. THE COW

		The cow is of the bovine ilk;
		One end is moo, the other, milk.


	18. THE DUCK

		Behold the duck. 
		It does not cluck. 
		A cluck it lacks. 
		It quacks. 
		It is specially fond 
		Of a puddle or pond. 
		When it dines or sups, 
		It bottoms ups.


	19. THE OCTOPUS

		Tell me, O Octopus, I begs
		Is those things arms, or is they legs?
		I marvel at thee, Octopus;
		If I were thou, I’d call me Us.


	20. THE PEOPLE UPSTAIRS

		The people upstairs all practise ballet
		Their living room is a bowling alley
		Their bedroom is full of conducted tours.
		Their radio is louder than yours,
		They celebrate week-ends all the week.
		When they take a shower, your ceilings leak.
		They try to get their parties to mix
		By supplying their guests with Pogo sticks,
		And when their fun at last abates,
		They go to the bathroom on roller skates.
		I might love the people upstairs more
		If only they lived on another floor.


	21. THE PURIST

		I give you now Professor Twist,
		A conscientious scientist,
		Trustees exclaimed, “He never bungles!”
		And sent him off to distant jungles.
		Camped on a tropic riverside,
		One day he missed his loving bride.
		She had, the guide informed him later,
		Been eaten by an alligator.
		Professor Twist could not but smile.
		“You mean,” he said, “a crocodile.”


	22. TO MY VALENTINE

		More than a catbird hates a cat,
		Or a criminal hates a clue,
		Or the Axis hates the United States,
		That’s how much I love you.
		
		I love you more than a duck can swim,
		And more than a grapefruit squirts,
		I love you more than a gin rummy is a bore,
		And more than a toothache hurts.
		
		As a shipwrecked sailor hates the sea,
		Or a juggler hates a shove,
		As a hostess detests unexpected guests,
		That’s how much you I love.
		
		I love you more than a wasp can sting,
		And more than the subway jerks,
		I love you as much as a beggar needs a crutch,
		And more than a hangnail irks.
		
		I swear to you by the stars above,
		And below, if such there be,
		As the High Court loathes perjurious oathes,
		That’s how you’re loved by me.


	23. VERY LIKE A WHALE

		One thing that literature would be greatly the better for
		Would be a more restricted employment by the authors of simile and
		  metaphor.
		Authors of all races, be they Greeks, Romans, Teutons or Celts,
		Can’t seem just to say that anything is the thing it is but have to
		  go out of their way to say that it is like something else.
		What does it mean when we are told
		That that Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold?
		In the first place, George Gordon Byron had enough experience
		To know that it probably wasn’t just one Assyrian, it was a lot of
		  Assyrians.
		However, as too many arguments are apt to induce apoplexy and
		  thus hinder longevity.
		We’ll let it pass as one Assyrian for the sake of brevity.
		Now then, this particular Assyrian, the one whose cohorts were
		  gleaming in purple and gold,
		Just what does the poet mean when he says he came down like a
		  wold on the fold?
		In heaven and earth more than is dreamed of in our philosophy
		  there are great many things.
		But I don’t imagine that among them there is a wolf with purple
		  and gold cohorts or purple and gold anythings.
		No, no, Lord Byron, before I’ll believe that this Assyrian was
		  actually like a wolf I must have some kind of proof;
		Did he run on all fours and did he have a hairy tail and a big red
		  mouth and big white teeth and did he say Woof Woof?
		Frankly I think it is very unlikely, and all you were entitled to say,
		  at the very most,
		Was that the Assyrian cohorts came down like a lot of Assyrian
		  cohorts about to destroy the Hebrew host.
		But that wasn’t fancy enough for Lord Byron, oh dear me no, he
		  had to invent a lot of figures of speech and then interpolate them,
		With the result that whenever you mention Old Testament soldiers
		  to people they say Oh yes, they’re the ones that a lot of
		  wolves dressed up in gold and purple ate them.
		That’s the kind of thing that’s being done all the time by poets,
		  from Homer to Tennyson;
		They’re always comparing ladies to lilies and veal to venison,
		And they always say things like that the snow is a white blanket
		  after a winter storm.
		Oh it is, is it, all right then, you sleep under a six-inch blanket of
		  snow and I’ll sleep under a half-inch blanket of unpoetical
		  blanket material and we’ll see which one keeps warm,
		And after that maybe you’ll begin to comprehend dimly
		What I mean by too much metaphor and simile.


*** Pablo Neruda (1904 - 1973)

	1. A DOG HAS DIED

		My dog has died.
		I buried him in the garden
		next to a rusted old machine.
		
		Some day I’ll join him right there,
		but now he’s gone with his shaggy coat,
		his bad manners and his cold nose,
		and I, the materialist, who never believed
		in any promised heaven in the sky
		for any human being,
		I believe in a heaven I’ll never enter.
		Yes, I believe in a heaven for all dogdom
		where my dog waits for my arrival
		waving his fan-like tail in friendship.
		
		Ai, I’ll not speak of sadness here on earth,
		of having lost a companion
		who was never servile.
		His friendship for me, like that of a porcupine
		withholding its authority,
		was the friendship of a star, aloof,
		with no more intimacy than was called for,
		with no exaggerations:
		he never climbed all over my clothes
		filling me full of his hair or his mange,
		he never rubbed up against my knee
		like other dogs obsessed with sex.
		
		No, my dog used to gaze at me,
		paying me the attention I need,
		the attention required
		to make a vain person like me understand
		that, being a dog, he was wasting time,
		but, with those eyes so much purer than mine,
		he’d keep on gazing at me
		with a look that reserved for me alone
		all his sweet and shaggy life,
		always near me, never troubling me,
		and asking nothing.
		
		Ai, how many times have I envied his tail
		as we walked together on the shores of the sea
		in the lonely winter of Isla Negra
		where the wintering birds filled the sky
		and my hairy dog was jumping about
		full of the voltage of the sea’s movement:
		my wandering dog, sniffing away
		with his golden tail held high,
		face to face with the ocean’s spray.
		
		Joyful, joyful, joyful,
		as only dogs know how to be happy
		with only the autonomy
		of their shameless spirit.
		
		There are no good-byes for my dog who has died,
		and we don’t now and never did lie to each other.
		
		So now he’s gone and I buried him,
		and that’s all there is to it.


	2. DISCOVERERS

		From the north Almagro brought his wrinkled lightning,
		and over the territory, amid explosion and twilight,
		he bent day and night as over a chart.
		Shadow of thorns, shadow of thistle and wax
		the Spaniard united with his dry figure,
		watching the wounded strategies of earth.
		Night, snow and sand make the form
		of my slim fatherland,
		all silence is in its long line,
		all foam emerges from its marine beard,
		all coal fills it with mysterious kisses.
		Like an ember, gold burns in its fingers
		and silver illumines, like a green moon,
		its hardened shadow of grave planet.
		The Spaniard seated near the rose, one day,
		near the oil, near the wine, near the old sky,
		could not conceive this spot of angry stone
		rising from the dung of the marine eagle.


	3. EVERY DAY YOU PLAY

		You are here. Oh, you do not run away.
		You will answer me to the last cry.
		Curl round me as though you were frightened.
		Even so, a strange shadow once ran through your eyes.
		
		Now, now too, little one, you bring me honeysuckle,
		and even your breasts smell of it.
		While the sad wind goes slaughtering butterflies
		I love you, and my happiness bites the plum of your mouth.
		
		How you must have suffered getting accustomed to me,
		my savage, solitary soul, my name that sends them all running.
		So many times we have seen the morning star burn, kissing our eyes,
		and over our heads the gray light unwinds in turning fans.
		
		My words rained over you, stroking you.
		A long time I have loved the sunned mother-of-pearl of your body.
		Until I even believe that you own the universe.
		I will bring you happy flowers from the mountains, bluebells,
		dark hazels, and rustic baskets of kisses.
		I want to do with you what spring does with the cherry trees.


	4. FANTOM OF THE FREIGHTER

		Distance in flight above pipes of foam,
		Salt in ritual waves and regular ranks,
		And an odor and murmur of old ship,
		Of rotted wood and damaged ironwork,
		And tired machines that howl and weep
		Pushing the prow and kicking the sides,
		Mumbling lamentations, swallowing and swallowing distances,
		Making a noise of sour waters over the sour waters,
		Moving the old ship over the old waters.
		
		Inner storeholds, crepuscular tunnels
		Visited by intermittent daylight of the harbors:
		Bags, bags heaped up by a somber god
		Like grey animals, rounded and eyeless,
		With gentle grey ears,
		And worthy stomachs full of wheat or copra,
		Sensitive bellies of pregnant women,
		Meanly dressed in grey, patiently
		Waiting in the shadow of a dolorous cinema.
		
		Suddenly the waters outside
		Are heard passing, running like an opaque horse,
		With a noise of horses’ hooves in the water,
		Rapid, submerging themselves once more in the waters.
		Then there is nothing but time in the cabins,
		Time in the miserable solitary diningroom,
		Motionless and visible like a great sorrow.
		
		Odor of leather and cloth thickly worn out,
		And onions and oil and yet more,
		Odor of something floating in the corners of the ship,
		Odor of something nameless,
		That comes down the stairs like a wave of air,
		And traverses the corridors with its nonexistent body,
		And looks on with eyes preserved by death,
		
		It looks on with its colorless eyes that are sightless,
		Slow, and it passes trembling without substance or shadow,
		Sounds wrinkle it, things go through it,
		Its transparency makes the dirty chairs glisten
		Who is this fantom without a fantom’s body,
		With its steps light as nocturnal dust
		And its voice that only objects preserve?
		
		The furnishings travel full of its silent being
		Like little ships within the old ship,
		Freighted with its vague and disintegrated being:
		The wardrobes, the green tablecovers,
		The color of the curtains and the floor,
		Everything has suffered the slow emptiness of its hands
		And things have been worn out by its breath.
		
		It slips and slides, it descends, transparent,
		Air within cold air that flows over the ship,
		It leans on the railings with its hidden hands
		And looks at the bitter sea which flees behind the ship.
		Only the waters repel its influence,
		Its odor and color of forgotten fantom
		And cool and deep they unfold their dance
		Like lives of fire, like blood or perfume,
		They surge, new and strong, united and reunited.
		
		The waters, without wearing out, without custom or time,
		Green with quantity, skillful and cold,
		Touch the black stomach of the ship and wash its material,
		Its injured sides, its iron wrinkles,
		The living waters gnaw the hull of the ship,
		Traveling with broad banners of foam
		And their teeth of salt flying in drops.
		
		The fantom looks at the sea with its eyeless face:
		The circle of day, the coughing of the ship, a bird
		In the rounded and lonely equation of space;
		And it descends anew into the life of the ship,
		Falling upon the wood and dead time,
		Gliding into black kitchens and cabins,
		Slow with air and atmosphere and desolate space.


	5. FINALE

		Matilde, years or days   
		sleeping, feverish,   
		here or there,
		gazing off,
		twisting my spine,   
		bleeding true blood,   
		perhaps I awaken   
		or am lost, sleeping:
		hospital beds, foreign windows,
		white uniforms of the silent walkers,
		the clumsiness of feet.
		
		And then, these journeys   
		and my sea of renewal:   
		your head on the pillow,   
		your hands floating
		in the light, in my light,   
		over my earth.
		
		It was beautiful to live   
		when you lived!
		
		The world is bluer and of the earth   
		at night, when I sleep
		enormous, within your small hands.


	6. HORSEMAN IN RAIN

		Primordial waters: clover and oat striving, water-walls,
		A meshing of cords in the net of the night,
		In the barbarous weave of the damp, dropping water,
		A rending of water-drops, lamenting successions,
		Diagonal rage, cutting heaven.
		Steeped in aromas, smashing the water, interposing
		The roan of their gloss, like a foliage, between boulder and water,
		The horses gallop in water,
		Their vapor attending, in a lunatic milk,
		A stampede of doves that hardens, like water.
		Not day, but a cistern
		Of obdurate weather, green agitations,
		Where hooves join a landscape of haste
		With the lapse of the rain and the bestial aroma of horses.
		Blankets and pommels, clustering cloak-furs,
		Seedfalls of darkness
		Ablaze on the haunches of brimstone
		That beat the considering jungle.
		
		Beyond and beyond and beyond
		And beyond and beyond and beyond and beyoooooond:
		The horsemen demolish the rain, the horsemen
		Pass under the bittering hazelnut, the rain
		Weaves unperishing wheat in a shimmer of lustres.
		Here is water’s effulgence, confusion of lightning,
		To spill on the leaf, here, from the noise of the gallop,
		The water goes wounded to earth, without flight.
		The bridle reins dampen: branch-covered archways,
		Footfalls of footfalls, an herbage of darkness
		In splintering starshapes, moonlike, icelike, a cyclone of horses
		Riddled with points like an icicle prism
		And born out of furor, the innocent fingers brim over,
		The apple encompassing terror
		And the terrible banners of empire, are smitten.


	7. IF YOU FORGET ME

		I want you to know 
		one thing. 
		
		You know how this is: 
		if I look 
		at the crystal moon, at the red branch 
		of the slow autumn at my window, 
		if I touch 
		near the fire 
		the impalpable ash 
		or the wrinkled body of the log, 
		everything carries me to you, 
		as if everything that exists, 
		aromas, light, metals, 
		were little boats 
		that sail 
		toward those isles of yours that wait for me. 
		
		Well, now, 
		if little by little you stop loving me 
		I shall stop loving you little by little. 
		
		If suddenly 
		you forget me 
		do not look for me, 
		for I shall already have forgotten you. 
		
		If you think it long and mad, 
		the wind of banners 
		that passes through my life, 
		and you decide 
		to leave me at the shore 
		of the heart where I have roots, 
		remember 
		that on that day, 
		at that hour, 
		I shall lift my arms 
		and my roots will set off 
		to seek another land. 
		
		But 
		if each day, 
		each hour, 
		you feel that you are destined for me 
		with implacable sweetness, 
		if each day a flower 
		climbs up to your lips to seek me, 
		ah my love, ah my own, 
		in me all that fire is repeated, 
		in me nothing is extinguished or forgotten, 
		my love feeds on your love, beloved, 
		and as long as you live it will be in your arms 
		without leaving mine.


	8. LEVIATHAN

		Night of the brute, antarctic outlander,
		Nearing or passing me--an ice-field
		Displacing the darkness--one day
		I shall enter your walls, I shall rear
		On the sunken marine of your winter, your armory.
		
		Southward, there crackled a holocaust, black
		With your planet’s expulsion, the domains
		Of your silence that moved in the algae
		And jostled the lump of the ages.
		
		Then, form was, alone, was magnitude
		Sealed by a world’s agitation, wherein glided
		Your leather pre-eminence, mistrusting
		The gifts of its nature: tenderness, power.
		
		Ark of our passion, inflaming
		A hummock of dark, as with torches,
		When your blind blood was quickened
		An epoch of ocean still slept in its gardens,
		And in an immensity the disfiguring moon
		Divided its track with a magnet of phosphor.
		Life sputtered,
		The mother-medusa, blue in the flame,
		A tempest of multiple wombs,
		And increase grew whole in its purity
		Like the pompano’s pulse in the sea.
		
		Among waters, your congress
		Of mastheads and spars was disposed
		And your power of inviolate night
		Was shed on the roots in a deluge.
		Past expectancy’s islands, your continent
		Fled; dereliction and terror
		Made the loneliness tremble.
		Even so, terror mounted the globes
		Of the glacial moon, terror entered your flesh
		And struck at your solitude, the asylums
		Of dread where your lamp lay extinguished.
		With you was the night, a tempestuous slime
		That held you like pitch and enveloped you
		While your tail’s hurricano
		Spun the ice of a slumbering galaxy.
		
		O enormously wounded onel Fiery fountainhead,
		Lashing a ruin of thunders,
		On the harpoon’s periphery, stained
		In the blood-bath, bleeding your virtue away,
		The repose and the calm of the animal conduct you,
		A cyclone of fracturing crescents,
		To the black boats of blubber
		And the creatures of rancor and plague.
		
		Great mold among crystals, dead
		On a pole of the moon, heaven itself is encompassed,
		Pandemonium’s cloud, and laments there,
		And covers all ocean with blood.


	9. ODE TO A LARGE TUNA IN THE MARKET

		Here,   
		among the market vegetables,
		this torpedo
		from the ocean   
		depths,   
		a missile   
		that swam,
		now   
		lying in front of me
		dead.
		
		Surrounded
		by the earth’s green froth   
		--these lettuces,
		bunches of carrots--
		only you   
		lived through
		the sea’s truth, survived
		the unknown, the
		unfathomable
		darkness, the depths   
		of the sea,
		the great   
		abyss,
		_le grand abîme,_
		only you:   
		varnished
		black-pitched   
		witness
		to that deepest night.
		
		Only you:
		dark bullet
		barreled   
		from the depths,
		carrying   
		only   
		your   
		one wound,
		but resurgent,
		always renewed,
		locked into the current,
		fins fletched
		like wings
		in the torrent,
		in the coursing
		of
		the
		underwater
		dark,
		like a grieving arrow,
		sea-javelin, a nerveless   
		oiled harpoon.
		
		Dead
		in front of me,
		catafalqued king
		of my own ocean;
		once   
		sappy as a sprung fir
		in the green turmoil,
		once seed
		to sea-quake,
		tidal wave, now
		simply
		dead remains;
		in the whole market
		yours   
		was the only shape left
		with purpose or direction
		in this   
		jumbled ruin
		of nature;
		you are   
		a solitary man of war
		among these frail vegetables,
		your flanks and prow
		black   
		and slippery
		as if you were still
		a well-oiled ship of the wind,
		the only
		true
		machine
		of the sea: unflawed,
		undefiled,   
		navigating now
		the waters of death.


	10. ODE TO TOMATOES

		The street
		filled with tomatoes,
		midday,
		summer,
		light is
		halved
		like
		a
		tomato,
		its juice
		runs
		through the streets.
		
		In December,
		unabated,
		the tomato
		invades
		the kitchen,
		it enters at lunchtime,
		takes
		its ease
		on countertops,
		among glasses,
		butter dishes,
		blue saltcellars.
		
		It sheds
		its own light,
		benign majesty.


	11. OPEN SEA

		If, to my hands, from its havocs and bounties,
		The Sea might appoint me a ferment, a portion, a fruit,
		I would speak for that concord of distance, perspectives of steel,
		Evenings and airs of alerted extension
		Your power, like a language of whiteness, O Ocean,
		The spoilure and rending of columns,
		Into innocent essence brought low.
		
		Not yet that ultimate wave in the weight of its brine,
		Smashing on seacoast, conducing
		The peace of the sand that encircles a world.
		But power and volume concenter,
		Capacity ranges the waters,
		Unmoved, in the flowing aloneness, in a surfeit of lives:
		Time, it may be, or the goblet of motion’s entirety,
		Upgathered and brimless with death; original singlehood,
		Visceral greens
		In a charring totality.
		
		The drowned arm, uplifting,
		Carries the kiss of the salt in a droplet. From the torsoes of men,
		A humid perfume on the beaches,
		The soaked flower, retained;
		Your power in a semblance of squandering force,
		Undiminished, returned in a semblance of calm.
		
		The wave, giving way
		In a bow of identity, explosion of feathers,
		A trifle of spindrift, expends itself headlong
		And returns to its cause, unconsumed.
		
		And vigor recovers its origin.
		No more than a ruined excess you surrender, O Sea,
		Who unhusk what the cargo rejects,
		Whatever mobility frees from abundance
		Or the cluster of being dissevers.
		
		Farther than sea-surge your form is extended.
		
		Ardent and ordered, like a gesture of breathing
		On breast and its vesture, out of isolate being,
		Borne up into tissue of light,
		Your meadows arise on the billow
		And the flesh of a planet is bared.
		
		Substance of selfhood overflows into being.
		The crescent of silence is brimmed.
		
		Here is no crater’s dismemberment,
		In the cup of the headlands,
		Or pinnacle’s emptiness, vestiges, scars,
		Patrolling an air’s mutilation:
		The goblet is shaken with salt and with honey,
		Creation’s abysm of waters,
		And nothing is lacking, O Sea!
		
		For the petals of ocean contend with a planet’s pulsation.
		The undersea granaries tremble.
		Hazard is hung on the smooth of a wave--
		A swarming and swimming of schools
		And only the mesh of the netcord, ascending,
		Draws up a fish-scale’s extinction of lightning
		One wounded gradation of distance,
		In the crystal’s accomplished perfection.


	12. PARTY’S END

		I
		
		The first rains are here: it is raining today over March
		and the swallows that dance in the downpour;
		we have the ocean again on our table,
		all is as the wave wills,
		and will surely be so again: all
		
		is as it was: but I, one day made invisible,
		will relinquish all power of return
		in my arms, hands, feet, eyes, my human discernment,
		trapped by a shadow’s finality.
		
		
		II
		
		Among the revellers met at the feast,
		some move toward the shadows again, this one or that,
		as the power that unites us disposes: later,
		words, mouths, and roads go their separate ways,
		but the errand is always the same: each presses on
		toward the nothingness into which the divided are drawn.
		
		
		III
		
		Party’s end . . . Isla Negra soaks under the rains:
		it rains on a tempest of emptiness, on the spray,
		on the pole’s coruscations exploding in salt;
		all ebbs and delays, leaving only a glare on the sea.
		Where are we going? asks the drowning redundance of things.
		What am I? the seaweed inquires, silent till now,
		and is answered in wave after wave after wave:
		one rhythm creates and destroys and continues:
		truth lies in the bitter mobility.
		
		
		IV
		
		Those uninhabited poems, between heaven and autumn,
		poems without people, transportation expenses:
		for a moment, let no living creature enter my verses,
		no trace of a man on the sand’s empty reaches,
		no footprints, dead papers, distinguishing marks
		of the traveler-only
		the fog’s exaltation, the color of March, the sea-bird’s
		delirium, salt petrels, pelicans, pigeons,
		the infinite
		chill in the air,
		shown once, before meditation and dreaming begin,
		before time’s uses resume, extending themselves in the night,
		an ocean of solitude given for only a moment,
		mouth pressing mouth in a month of humidity, a soiled
		summer’s anguish, while I watch how the crystal expands,
		how the rock climbs its pitiless silence,
		how the ocean destroys itself without marring its energy.
		
		
		V
		
		We live out our lifetimes asking: How much?
		seeing How much? in the eyes of our mothers and fathers,
		their mouths and their hands: this and that
		for How much? How much for the earth, for a kilo of bread,
		for the windfall of grapes, for the shoes on our feet.
		How much, mister, how much does it take, slipping
		into our smiles for a moment, cocksure,
		while our fathers in patches and hand-me-downs, certain
		of nothing, entered the warehouses as one enters a terrible temple.
		Later, much farther away, nothing has changed.
		
		
		VI
		
		It displeases the esthete to edify: the poem with a moral
		that went out of fashion when the poem taught the man
		how to live like a man, leaving behind its violet
		cachet in the soul. I speak of the whithers and wherefores
		as I choose--from the throne to the oil-slick
		that bloodies the world, asking
		How much? while the grains of my anger grow greater
		with my How many? syllables speaking all the world’s languages:
		yes, I speak, I speak on; and will be, if need be, a cracked violin
		or a troubador wracked by the truth and the doubt of the world.
		
		
		VII 
		
		The brutal imperative, as the blood in a wound may be brutal
		or the gathering chill in the wind is made bearable
		for all our discomfiture, makes warriors of us, gives us the stance
		and inflection of fighters; but still, with unspeakable tenderness,
		the table, the spoon, and the chair call out to us:
		in the thick of the battle we wait for the cry of the crockery.
		But backward is nowhere! Having settled our loyalties,
		nothing can lower the balances
		but the weight of our reason bearing down on us one way,
		and the path we broke open with our common enlightenment:
		men move back and forth on our bridge of commitment.
		That is the unprepossessing pride of our lifetime,
		and its organized splendor.
		
		
		VIII 
		
		Party’s end.
		This is the rainy season,
		with the underground rivers of Chile on the move
		drilling delicate troughs of volcanoes,
		piercing the quartz and the gold, moving the silences.
		This is the mighty arcana of water barely known to us here;
		though we speak of the sea and name it by name: Cape Horn:
		the stain of mortality never mars its dominion,
		we can never implant our transactions,
		the mines, motors, flags of our species.
		Open-ended, the water shakes itself free:
		it moves while it cleanses and cleanses:
		it cleanses the stone and the sand, our wounds and utensils.
		It is never used up, like the bleeding away of the fire,
		it does not turn to cinder and ash.
		
		
		IX
		
		Night and the water are one; it washes the sky,
		enters our dreams with the immediate burst of its presence,
		night
		doggedly there, interrupted and starry,
		alone
		as it sweeps off the leavings
		of every dead day
		with the snowy
		device of its heraldry over us,
		and under us,
		between us,
		the net with the knots of its cordage: shadow and dream.
		Water or dream, truth’s nakedness,
		shadow and stone-
		we are these and continue to be:
		our nocturnes say nothing of light,
		we drink the pure darkness:
		our lot is to stand by the stones
		of the oven;
		when we bent toward the bread with our paddles,
		we drew out the darkness
		and were broken
		into
		our lives:
		it was night that divided us,
		gave us its wisdom by halves
		till we walked
		without faltering, pierced
		by the light of the stars.
		
		
		X
		
		Those threshed out of life, the dead with the delicate faces,
		whom we cherished, who burned
		in the firmament in a multiple silence
		and rippled the wheat with their dying:
		the seemingly dead bore off a part of ourselves,
		left us poised by a thread, aware of their menace,
		while the wheat was flailed finer and funer
		and the cycle of living resumed.
		
		All at once, the most preciously dead
		are gone from our table. We wait
		without ever quite waiting, as one waits for the dead,
		while she whom we cherished comes closer,
		behind every chair, and will not take her place at the table.
		Or unhappy Alberto, dead with his fiddle there,
		the fathers caved in on the grandfathers.
		
		
		XI
		
		Let us build an expendable day
		without winding the hours, counting
		only the salient clarity--that day
		of all days that came bearing oranges.
		The columns close on the niggling particulars,
		leaving their chewed scrap of paper
		spinning off in the sand,
		devoured by the winters.
		Not a leaf in the forest
		survives our recall, though its scent
		and vibration stay in the memory:
		in that forest I put forth my foliage
		and carry its sigh in my veins
		with no thought for the hour or the day.
		The years and the numbers betray us:
		month follows month in the vast of the tunnel,
		October and April clash like two lunatic stones,
		the apples rain into one basket,
		the silvery catch in one net,
		while night with a rapier’s precision
		cuts through day’s splendor--the day
		that is ours if we are there to retrieve it tomorrow.
		
		
		XII
		
		White spindrift, March on the Island, I see
		wave work against wave and splinter the whiteness,
		the ungratified cup of the ocean brimming over,
		the immovable sky slowly
		lengthen and part with the flight of pontifical birds.
		We come upon yellow,
		the month changes its color, the beard
		of the watery autumn grows long:
		but my name remains Pablo,
		I am just as I was,
		with my doubts, with my debts,
		with my loves,
		
		having a whole sea to myself with its
		personnel moving the waves,
		pummeled by storms that blow me
		toward Cloudcuckooland:
		I come and I go with the sea and the countries it grazes, I know
		the thorn’s languages,
		the bite of the obdurate fish,
		the chill of the latitudes,
		the blood on the coral, the taciturn
		night of the whale.
		I have pushed past the deltas, from country to country,
		the unbearable wastes of the world,
		and never found peace. I have always come back.
		What can I say without roots?
		
		
		XIII
		
		What can I say without touching my palms to the land?
		To whom shall I turn but the rain?
		I have never set foot in the countries I lived in,
		every port was a port of return:
		I have no postcards, no keepsakes of hair
		from important cathedrals: I have built what I could
		out of natural stone, like a native, open-handed,
		I have worked with my reason, unreason, my caprices,
		my fury, and poise: hour after hour
		I have touched the domains of the lion
		and the turbulent tower of bee:
		having seen what there was to be seen,
		having handled the clay and the loam, the spray and the rock,
		with those who remember my footprints and words,
		the tendrils of plants whose kisses remain on my mouth,
		I say: “Here is my place,” stripping myself down in the light
		and dropping my hands in the sea,
		until all is transparent again
		there under the earth, and my sleep can be tranquil.


	13. SEXUAL WATER

		Rolling in solitary drops,
		in gouts like teeth,
		in thick gobs of marmalade and blood,
		rolling in drops,
		the water pours down,
		in gouts like a blade,
		a lacerating river of glass,
		it pours down, gnawing,
		hammering the axle of symmetry, soldering the soul’s brazings,
		smashing abandoned objects, drenching what is dark.
		
		It is merely a gasp, damper than weeping,
		a liquid, a sweat, an oil without a name,
		a motion of stabbing,
		shaping, thickening,
		the water pours down
		in sluggish drops
		to its sea, to its juiceless ocean,
		to its wave without water.
		
		I see a summer stretched out, and a death-rattle growing from a barn,
		wine-cellars, locusts,
		crowds of people, palpitations,
		homes, little girls
		sleeping with hands on their hearts,
		dreaming of bandits, burnings,
		I see boats,
		I see trees of spinal cords, hackling like angry cats,
		I see blood, daggers and women’s stockings, and men’s hair,
		I see bedsteads, I see corridors where a virgin cries out,
		I see blankets and pipe-organs and hotels.
		
		I see private dreams,
		I let in the lagging days,
		and the beginnings, too, and the memories, too;
		like an eyelid horribly pried up,
		I stand watching.
		
		And, further, there is this sound:
		a red uproar of bones,
		a cleaving together of flesh,
		and legs, yellow as spikes of corn, splicing.
		I listen between the crackling of kisses,
		I listen, flailed between pantings and wailings.
		I stand watching, hearing,
		with half of my soul on the sea and with half of my soul on the earth,
		and with the two halves of my soul I watch the world.
		
		And even if I clap my eyes shut and dam my heart, thoroughly,
		I see a soft water wash down,
		in soft drops.
		It is like a hurricane of gelatin,
		a cascade of sperms and jellyfish.
		I see a clotted rainbow, flowing.
		I see its waters moving across my bones.


	14. SOLDIER ASLEEP

		Derelict there in the leafy encirclement,
		the soldier arrived. His weariness struck at him then,
		and he fell in the leaves and lianas
		at the foot of that Providence, the plumed and omnipotent God
		alone with His universe, still
		warm from the jungles.
		Godhead looked long
		at the warrior outlandishly born from the sea-water:
		stared long at those eyes, at the blood-clabbered beard
		and the sword, the black scintillation
		of armor, the weariness weighing
		like haze on the head
		of the bloody young man.
		How many zones
		in the darkness, till the God of the Feathers
		could be born and entwine on the wood
		and the roseate stone, the web of his volumel
		What a chaos of lunatic water,
		nocturnal ferocity, what ravening
		troughs for the light, unregenerate yet, what
		crazed fermentation of lives and destructions, what bran
		of fertility, before the decorum could come:
		the orders of plants and of clans,
		the cut stone disposed on the stone,
		the smoke of the ritual lamps,
		soil firm for the stance of a man,
		disposition of tribes
		and tribunes of terrestrial gods!
		
		All the flakes of the rock shook:
		it felt the descent of the Terror
		like a swarming of insects,
		and massing the might of its properties,
		sent rain to the roots,
		conferred with the motions of earth
		still unmoved and obscure in the stone
		of its cosmic investiture,
		unable to stir in a fang or a claw,
		a river, a temblor,
		a meteor’s hiss
		through the pit of its emperies:
		and remained in that place, like a silence, a stone immobility.
		while Beltrán of Córdoba slept on.


	15. SONNET

		I don’t love you as if you were a rose of salt, topaz,   
		or arrow of carnations that propagate fire:   
		I love you as one loves certain obscure things,   
		secretly, between the shadow and the soul.
		
		I love you as the plant that doesn’t bloom but carries   
		the light of those flowers, hidden, within itself,   
		and thanks to your love the tight aroma that arose   
		from the earth lives dimly in my body.
		
		I love you without knowing how, or when, or from where,   
		I love you directly without problems or pride:
		I love you like this because I don’t know any other way to love,
		except in this form in which I am not nor are you,   
		so close that your hand upon my chest is mine,   
		so close that your eyes close with my dreams.


	16. THE CHOSEN ONES

		And we, the dead, arrayed in time,
		scattered in arrogantly practical cemeteries
		or fallen into the charnel houses of poor Bolivians,
		we, the dead of 1925, ’26, ’33,
		1940, 1918, nineteen hundred and five,
		thousands of nineteen hundreds, in short,
		how goes it with us who died
		before this foolish millennium?
		
		I, Pedro of the High Plains, Pedro of the Seeds, Pedro Nobody,
		didn’t I have the right to the millennium and the resurrection?
		I want to see the resurrected so I can spit in their faces,
		the future generations about to be killed
		in airplanes, railroads, wars of hatred,
		those who barely had time to be born
		and present arms to the new age
		and who will end up dismembered,
		rotting away in the midst of revelry and wine!
		I, a dead man, want to leave my grave--and why not?
		
		Why should those who died before their time be forgotten?
		Everyone’s invited to the party!
		It’s one more year, one more century, with the dead and the living,
		and the balance sheets must be heeded, not only to lay out the life,
		but also the withered flowers, the rotted wreaths, and the silence,
		because silence has a right to the beauty and we, death’s delegates,
		we want to be there for a single flowering moment
		when the gates of future glory are opened.


	17. THE DICTATORS

		An odor stayed on in the canefields:
		Carrion, blood, and a nausea
		Of harrowing petals.
		Between coconut palms lay the graves, in their stilled
		Strangulation, their festering surfeit of bones.
		A finical satrap conversed
		With wineglasses, collars, and piping.
		In the palace, all flashed like a clockdial.
		The gloved laugh redoubled, a moment
		Spanning the passageways, meeting
		The newly-killed voices and the buried blue mouths. Out of sight,
		Lament was perpetual, and fell, like the plant and its pollen,
		Forcing a lightless increase in the blinded, big leaves.
		And bludgeon by bludgeon on the terrible waters,
		Scale over scale in the bog,
		The snout filled with silence and slime
		And vendetta was born.


	18. THE MEN

		I’m Ramón González Barbagelata from anywhere,    
		from Cucuy, from Paraná, from Rio Turbio, from Oruro,   
		from Maracaibo, from Parral, from Ovalle, from Loconmilla,    
		I’m the poor devil from the poor Third World,    
		I’m the third-class passenger installed, good God!    
		in the lavish whiteness of snow-covered mountains,    
		concealed among orchids of subtle idiosyncrasy.    
		
		I’ve arrived at this famous year 2000, and what do I get? 
		With what do I scratch myself? What do I have to do with    
		the three glorious zeros that flaunt themselves    
		over my very own zero, my own non-existence?    
		Pity that brave heart awaiting its call    
		or the man enfolded by warmer love,    
		nothing’s left today except my flimsy skeleton,    
		my eyes unhinged, confronting the era’s beginning.    
		
		The era’s beginning: are these ruined shacks,    
		these poor schools, these people still in rags and tatters,    
		this cloddish insecurity of my poor families,    
		is all this the day? the century’s beginning, the golden door?    
		
		Well, enough said, I, at least, discreet,    
		as in office, patched and pensive,    
		I proclaim the redundancy of the inaugural:    
		I’ve arrived here with all my baggage,    
		bad luck and worse jobs,    
		misery always waiting with open arms,    
		the mobilization of people piled up on top of each other,    
		and the manifold geography of hunger.


	19. THE POET

		That time, when I moved among happenings,
		In the midst of my mournful devotions, that time
		When I cherished a leaflet of quartz,
		At gaze, in a lifetime’s vocation.
		I ranged in the markets of avarice
		Where goodness is bought for a price, breathed the insensate
		Miasmas of envy, the inhuman
		Contention of masks and existences.
		I endured in the bog-dweller’s element; the lily
		That breaks on the water in a sudden
		Disturbance of bubbles and blossoms, devoured me.
		Whatever the foot sought, the spirit deflected,
		Or sheered toward the fang of the pit.
		So my poems took being, in travail
		Retrieved from the thorn, like a penance,
		Wrenched by a seizure of hands, out of solitude;
		Or I parted, for burial,
		The secretest fower in immodesty’s garden.
		Estranged to myself, like shadow on water
		That moves through a corridor’s fathoms,
		I sped through the exile of each man’s existence,
		This way and that, and so, to habitual loathing;
		For I saw that their being was this: to encompass
		One half of existence’s fulness, like fishes
		In an alien margin of ocean. And there,
		In immensity’s mire, I encountered their death:
		Death grazing the barriers,
		Death opening roadways and doorways.


	20. TONIGHT I CAN WRITE THE SADDEST LINES

		Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 
		
		Write, for example,‘The night is shattered 
		and the blue stars shiver in the distance.’ 
		
		The night wind revolves in the sky and sings. 
		
		Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 
		I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too. 
		
		Through nights like this one I held her in my arms 
		I kissed her again and again under the endless sky. 
		
		She loved me sometimes, and I loved her too. 
		How could one not have loved her great still eyes. 
		
		Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 
		To think that I do not have her. To feel that I have lost her. 
		
		To hear the immense night, still more immense without her. 
		And the verse falls to the soul like dew to the pasture. 
		
		What does it matter that my love could not keep her. 
		The night is shattered and she is not with me. 
		
		This is all. In the distance someone is singing. In the distance. 
		My soul is not satisfied that it has lost her. 
		
		My sight searches for her as though to go to her. 
		My heart looks for her, and she is not with me. 
		
		The same night whitening the same trees. 
		We, of that time, are no longer the same. 
		
		I no longer love her, that’s certain, but how I loved her. 
		My voice tried to find the wind to touch her hearing. 
		
		Another’s. She will be another’s. Like my kisses before. 
		Her voide. Her bright body. Her inifinite eyes. 
		
		I no longer love her, that’s certain, but maybe I love her. 
		Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
		
		Because through nights like this one I held her in my arms 
		my sould is not satisfied that it has lost her. 
		
		Though this be the last pain that she makes me suffer 
		and these the last verses that I write for her.


	21. WHITE THIGHS

		White thighs, hillocks of whiteness, oh woman’s body,
		you resemble the world in your attitude of surrender
		My peasant’s body savagely excavates you
		and makes the child leap from the earth’s depth,
		
		I was alone like a tunnel. The birds fled from me,
		and into me entered the night’s heavy invasion.
		To outlive me I framed you like an arm at the forge,
		like an arrow in my bow, like a stone in my sling.
		
		But falls the hour of vengeance and I love you.
		Body of flesh and moss and firm covetous milk.
		Oh the cups of your chest, oh eyes of absencel
		Oh roses of the pubis! Oh slow sad voice!
		
		Oh body of my woman, I shall persist in your gracefulness.
		My thirst, my desire unlimited, my uncertain road.
		Dark watercourses where eternal thirst follows,
		and weariness follows, and infinite sorrow.


	22. WIDOWER’S TANGO

		Oh Maligna, by this time you must have found the letter, wept with rage,
		and insulted the memory of my mother,
		calling her rotten bitch and mother of curs,
		and you must have drunk your afternoon tea, all by yourself, alone,
		gazing at my old shoes, empty now for ever,
		and you can’t remember my sicknesses, my nightly dreams, my meals.
		without cursing me aloud as though I were still there
		fussing about the tropics, the Coringhi coolies,
		the poisonous fevers that did me so much harm,
		and the frightful English, whom I detest still.
		
		Maligna, here’s the truth: what a huge night! what a solitary earth!
		I’ve gone back again to the lonely bedrooms,
		I can throw my trousers and shirts upon the floor;
		there are no clothes-hangers in my room, no pictures of anybody on the walls.
		How much of the darkness in my soul would I give to regain you,
		and how threatening seem to me now the names of the months,
		to eating cold meals in cafés, and once more,
		and how lugubrious a drum-sound the name of winter has!
		
		Later you will find buried near the coconut tree
		the knife that I hid for fear that you’d kill me,
		and now, suddenly, I should like to smell its kitchen steel
		used to the weight of your hand and the lustre of your foot:
		beneath the earth’s damp, among the deaf roots,
		the poor thing would know, of all human languages, only your name,
		and the thick earth does not comprehend your name
		composed of impenetrable heavenly substances.
		
		Just as it troubles me to think of the clear day of your legs
		stretched out like arrested and hard solar waters,
		and the swallow that sleeping and fying lives in your eyes,
		and the dog of madness that you house in your heart,
		so also I perceive the deaths existing between us from now on,
		and the air I breathe bears ashes and destruction,
		the long, lonely space that encircles me for ever.
		
		I would give this wind from the giant sea for your hoarse breathing
		heard in the long nights without admixture of oblivion,
		combining with the atmosphere like a whip with the hide of a horse.
		And to hear the sound of you, in darkness, at the back of the house,
		like one decanting a delicate, tremulous, silvery, reluctant honey,
		how many times over would I give this chorus of shadow that is mine,
		and the noise of useless swords that clash in my heart,
		and the dove of blood perching solitary upon my forehead
		invoking things gone, beings gone,
		substances strangely inseparable and lost.


	23. ’TIS THE MORROW FULL OF STORM

		’Tis the morrow full of storm
		in the heart of summer.
		
		The wandering hands of the wind shake the clouds
		like white handkerchiefs waved in farewell.
		
		Innumerable heart of the wind
		fluttering over our silence of love.
		
		Humming through the trees, heavenly music,
		like a tongue full of songs and wars.
		
		Wind that lifts the fallen leaves in robbery
		and turns the palpitating flight of the birds.
		
		Wind that throws them down in foamless waves
		and weightless shapes, and falling flames.
		
		Their volume of kisses breaks and goes under
		fought at the gate of the summer wind.


*** John Henry Newman (1801 - 1890)

	1. LEAD, KINDLY LIGHT

		Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,
		   Lead thou me on!
		The night is dark, and I am far from home,--
		   Lead thou me on!
		Keep thou my feet; I do not ask to see
		The distant scene,--one step enough for me.
		
		I was not ever thus, nor prayed that thou
		   Shouldst lead me on:
		I loved to choose and see my path, but now
		   Lead thou me on!
		I loved the garish days, and, spite of fears,
		Pride ruled my will: remember not past years.
		
		So long thy power hath blessed me, sure it still
		 Will lead me on;
		O’er moor and fen, o’er crag and torrent, till
		 The night is gone;
		And with the morn those angel faces smile
		Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.


	2. THE TRANCE OF TIME

		_Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
		Atque metus omnes, et inexorabile fatum
		Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari!_
		
		
		IN childhood, when with eager eyes
		The season-measured year I view’d,
		All garb’d in fairy guise,
		Pledged constancy of good.
		
		Spring sang of heaven; the summer flowers
		Bade me gaze on, and did not fade;
		Even suns o’er autumn’s bowers
		Heard my strong wish, and stay’d.
		
		They came and went, the short-lived four;
		Yet, as their varying dance they wove,
		To my young heart each bore
		Its own sure claim of love.
		
		Far different now;--the whirling year
		Vainly my dizzy eyes pursue;
		And its fair tints appear
		All blent in one dusk hue.
		
		Why dwell on rich autumnal lights,
		Spring-time, or winter’s social ring?
		Long days are fire-side nights,
		Brown autumn is fresh spring.
		
		Then what this world to thee, my heart?
		Its gifts nor feed thee nor can bless.
		Thou hast no owner’s part
		In all its fleetingness.
		
		The flame, the storm, the quaking ground,
		Earth’s joy, earth’s terror, nought is thine,
		Thou must but hear the sound
		Of the still voice divine.
		
		O priceless art! O princely state!
		E’en while by sense of change opprest,
		Within to antedate
		Heaven’s Age of fearless rest.


*** Alfred Noyes (1880 - 1958)

	1. ART

		I
		
		Yes! Beauty still rebels!
		Our dreams like clouds disperse:
		 She dwells
		In agate, marble, verse.
		
		No false constraint be thine!
		But, for right walking, choose
		 The fine,
		The strict cothurnus, Muse.
		
		Vainly ye seek to escape
		The toil! The yielding phrase
		 Ye shape
		Is clay, not chrysoprase.
		
		And all in vain ye scorn
		That seeming ease which ne’er
		 Was born
		Of aught but love and care.
		
		Take up the sculptor’s tool!
		Recall the gods that die
		 To rule
		In Parian o’er the sky.
		
		For Beauty still rebels!
		Our dreams like clouds disperse:
		 She dwells
		In agate, marble, verse.
		
		
		II
		
		When Beauty from the sea,
		With breasts of whiter rose
		 Than we
		Behold on earth, arose.
		
		Naked thro’ Time returned
		The Bliss of Heaven that day,
		 And burned
		The dross of earth away.
		
		Kings at her splendour quailed.
		For all his triple steel
		 She haled
		War at her chariot-wheel.
		
		The rose and lily bowed
		To cast, of odour sweet
		 A cloud
		Before her wandering feet.
		
		And from her radiant eyes
		There shone on soul and sense
		 The skies’
		Divine indifference.
		
		O, mortal memory fond!
		Slowly she passed away
		 Beyond
		The curling clouds of day.
		
		_Return_, we cry, _return_,
		Till in the sadder light
		 We learn
		That she was infinite.
		
		The Dream that from the sea
		With breasts of whiter rose
		 Than we
		Behold on earth, arose.
		
		
		III
		
		Take up the sculptor’s tool!
		Becall the dreams that die
		 To rule
		In Parian o’er the sky;
		And kings that not endure
		In bronze to re-ascend
		 Secure
		Until the world shall end.
		
		Poet, let passion sleep
		Till with the cosmic rhyme
		 You keep
		Eternal tone and time,
		
		By rule of hour and flower,
		By strength of stern restraint
		 And power
		To fail and not to faint.
		
		The task is hard to learn
		While all the songs of Spring
		 Return
		Along the blood and sing.
		
		Yet hear--from her deep skies,
		How Art, for all your pain,
		 Still cries
		_Ye must be born again!_
		
		Reject the wreath of rose,
		Take up the crown of thorn
		 That shows
		To-night a child is born.
		
		The far immortal face
		In chosen onyx fine
		 Enchase,
		Delicate line by line.
		
		Strive with Carrara, fight
		With Parian, till there steal
		 To light
		Apollo’s pure profile.
		
		Set the great lucid form
		Free from its marble tomb
		 To storm
		The heights of death and doom.
		
		Take up the sculptor’s tool!
		Recall the gods that die
		 To rule
		In Parian o’er the sky,


	2. ART, THE HERALD

		_“The voice of one crying in the wilderness”_
		
		
		I
		
		Beyond; beyond; and yet again beyond!
		What went ye out to seek, oh foolish-fond?
		 Is not the heart of all things here and now?
		Is not the circle infinite, and the centre
		Everywhere, if ye would but hear and enter?
		 Come; the porch bends and the great pillars bow.
		
		
		II
		
		Come; come and see the secret of the sun;
		The sorrow that holds the warring worlds in one;
		 The pain that holds Eternity in an hour;
		One God in every seed self-sacrificed,
		One star-eyed, star-crowned universal Christ,
		 Re-crucified in every wayside flower.


	3. SONG

		I
		
		When that I loved a maiden
		 My heaven was in her eyes,
		And when they bent above me
		 I knew no deeper skies;
		But when her heart forsook me
		 My spirit broke its bars,
		For grief beyond the sunset
		 And love beyond the stars.
		
		
		II
		
		When that I loved a maiden
		 She seemed the world to me:
		Now is my soul the universe,
		 My dreams the sky and sea:
		There is no heaven above me,
		 No glory binds or bars
		My grief beyond the sunset,
		 My love beyond the stars.
		
		
		III
		
		When that I loved a maiden
		 I worshipped where she trod;
		But, when she clove my heart, the cleft
		 Set free the imprisoned god:
		Then was I king of all the world,
		 My soul had burst its bars,
		For grief beyond the sunset
		 And love beyond the stars.


	4. THE EMPIRE BUILDERS

		Who are the Empire-builders? They
		 Whose desperate arrogance demands
		A self-reflecting power to sway
		 A hundred little selfless lands?
		Lord God of battles, ere we bow
		 To these and to their soulless lust,
		Let fall Thy thunders on us now
		 And strike us equal to the dust.
		
		Before the stars in heaven were made
		 Our great Commander led us forth;
		And now the embattled lines are laid
		 To East, to West, to South, to North;
		According as of old He planned
		 We take our station in the field,
		Nor dare to dream we understand
		 The splendour of the swords we wield.
		
		We know not what the Soul intends
		 That lives and moves behind our deeds;
		We wheel and march to glorious ends
		 Beyond the common soldier’s needs:
		And some are raised to high rewards,
		 And some by regiments are hurled
		To die upon the opposing swords
		 And sleep--forgotten by the world.
		
		And not where navies churn the foam,
		 Nor called to fields of fierce emprize,
		In many a country cottage-home
		 The Empire-builder lives and dies:
		Or through the roaring streets he goes
		 A lean and weary City slave,
		The conqueror of a thousand foes
		 Who walks, unheeded, to his grave.
		
		Leaders unknown of hopes forlorn
		 Go past us in the daily mart,
		With many a shadowy crown of thorn
		 And many a kingly broken heart:
		Though England’s banner overhead
		 Ever the secret signal flew,
		We only see its Cross is red
		 As children see the skies are blue.
		
		For all are Empire-builders here,
		 Whose hearts are true to heaven and home
		And, year by slow revolving year,
		 Fulfil the duties as they come;
		So simple seems the task, and yet
		 Many for this are crucified;
		Ay, and their brother-men forget
		 The simple wounds in palm and side.
		
		But he that to his home is true,
		 Where’er the tides of power may flow,
		Has built a kingdom great and new
		 Which Time nor Fate shall overthrow
		These are the Empire-builders, these
		 Annex where none shall say them nay
		Beyond the world’s uncharted seas
		 Realms that can never pass away.


	5. THE LITANY OF WAR

		Sandalphon, whose white wings to heaven upbear
		       The weight of human prayer,
		Stood silent in the still eternal Light
		       Of God, one dreadful night.
		His wings were clogged with blood and foul with mire,
		       His body seared with fire.
		“Hast thou no word for Me?“ the Master said.
		       The angel sank his head:
		
		“Word from the nations of the East and West,”
		       He moaned, “that blood is best.
		The patriot prayers of either half of earth,
		       Hear Thou, and judge their worth.
		Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
		       First, the first nation’s prayer:
		‘_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
		       Destroy our enemies, Lord!_’
		
		“Pure as the first, as passionate in trust
		       That their own cause is just;
		Puppets as fond in those dark hands of greed;
		       As fervent in their creed;
		As blindly moved, as utterly betrayed,
		       As urgent for Thine aid;
		Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear
		       The second nation’s prayer:
		‘_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
		       Destroy our enemies, Lord._’
		
		“Over their slaughtered children, one great cry
		       From either enemy!
		From either host, thigh-deep in filth and shame,
		       One prayer, one and the same;
		Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
		       From East and West, one prayer:
		‘_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
		       Destroy our enemies, Lord._‘”
		
		Then, on the Cross of His creative pain,
		       God bowed His head again.
		Then, East and West, over all seas and lands,
		       Out-stretched His piercèd hands.
		“And yet,“ Sandalphon whispered, “men deny
		       The Eternal Calvary.”


	6. THE MYSTIC

		With wounds out-reddening every moon-washed rose
		King Love went thro’ earth’s garden-close!
		 From that first gate of birth in the golden gloom,
		I traced Him. Thorns had frayed His garment’s hem,
		Ay, and His flesh! I marked, I followed them
		 Down to that threshold of--the tomb?
		
		And there Love vanished, yet I entered! Night
		And Doubt mocked at the dwindling light:
		 Strange claw-like hands flung me their shadowy hate.
		I clomb the dreadful stairways of desire
		Between a thousand eyes and wings of fire
		 And knocked upon the second Gate.
		
		The second Gate! When, like a warrior helmed,
		In battle on battle overwhelmed,
		 My soul lay stabbed by all the swords of sense,
		Blinded and stunned by stars and flowers and trees,
		Did I not struggle to my bended knees
		 And wrestle with Omnipotence?
		
		Did earth not flee before me, when the breath
		Of worship smote her with strange death,
		 Withered her gilded garment, broke her sword,
		Shattered her graven images and smote
		All her light sorrows thro’ the breast and throat
		 Whose death-cry crowned me God and Lord?
		
		Yea, God and Lord! Had tears not purged my sight?
		I saw the myriad gates of Light
		 Opening and shutting in each way-side flower,
		And like a warder in the gleam of each,
		Death, whispering in some strange eternal speech
		 To every passing hour.
		
		The second Gate? Was I not born to pass
		A million? Though the skies be brass
		 And the earth iron, shall I not win thro’ all?
		Shall I who made the infinite heavens my mark
		Shrink from this first wild horror of the dark,
		 These formless gulfs, these glooms that crawl?
		
		Never was mine that easy faithless hope
		Which makes all life one flowery slope
		 To heaven! Mine be the vast assaults of doom,
		Trumpets, defeats, red anguish, age-long strife,
		Ten million deaths, ten million gates to life,
		 The insurgent heart that bursts the tomb.
		
		Vain, vain, unutterably vain are all
		The sights and sounds that sink and fall,
		 The words and symbols of this fleeting breath:
		Shall I not drown the finite in the Whole,
		Cast off this body and complete my soul
		 Thro’ deaths beyond this gate of death?
		
		It will not open! Through the bars I see
		The glory and the mystery
		 Wind upward ever! The earth-dawn breaks! I bleed
		With beating here for entrance. Hark, O hark,
		Love, Love, return and give me the great Dark,
		 Which is the Light of Life indeed.


	7. THE OLD SCEPTIC

		I am weary of disbelieving: why should I wound my love
		 To pleasure a sophist’s pride in a graven image of truth?
		I will go back to my home, with the clouds and the stars above,
		 And the heaven I used to know, and the God of my buried youth.
		
		I will go back to the home where of old in my boyish pride
		 I pierced my father’s heart with a murmur of unbelief.
		He only looked in my face as I spoke, but his mute eyes cried
		 Night after night in my dreams; and he died in grief, in grief.
		
		Books? I have read the books, the books that we write ourselves,
		 Extolling our love of an abstract truth and our pride of debate:
		I will go back to the love of the cotter who sings as he delves,
		 To that childish infinite love and the God above fact and date.
		
		To that ignorant infinite God who colours the meaningless flowers,
		 To that lawless infinite Poet who crowns the law with the crime;
		To the Weaver who covers the world with a garment of wonderful hours,
		 And holds in His hand like threads the tales and the truths of time.
		
		Is the faith of the cotter so simple and narrow as this? Ah, well,
		 It is hardly so narrow as yours who daub and plaster with dyes
		The shining mirrors of heaven, the shadowy mirrors of hell,
		 And blot out the dark deep vision, if it seem to be framed with lies.
		
		No faith I hurl against you, no fact to freeze your sneers.
		 Only the doubt you taught me to weld in the fires of youth
		Leaps to my hand like the flaming sword of nineteen hundred years,
		 The sword of the high God’s answer, _O Pilate, what is truth?_
		
		Your laughter has killed more hearts than ever were pierced with swords,
		 Ever you daub new mirrors and turn the old to the wall;
		And more than blood is lost in the weary battle of words;
		 For creeds are many; but God is One, and contains them all.
		
		Ah, why should we strive or cry? Surely the end is close!
		 Hold by your little truths: deem your triumph complete!
		But nothing is true or false in the infinite heart of the rose;
		 And the earth is a little dust that clings to our travelling feet.
		
		I will go back to my home and look at the wayside flowers,
		 And hear from the wayside cabins the kind old hymns again,
		Where Christ holds out His arms in the quiet evening hours,
		 And the light of the chapel porches broods on the peaceful lane.
		
		And there I shall hear men praying the deep old foolish prayers,
		 And there I shall see, once more, the fond old faith confessed,
		And the strange old light on their faces who hear as a blind man hears,--
		_Come unto Me, ye weary, and I will give you rest._
		
		I will go back and believe in the deep old foolish tales,
		 And pray the simple prayers that I learned at my mother’s knee,
		Where the Sabbath tolls its peace thro’ the breathless mountain-vales,
		 And the sunset’s evening hymn hallows the listening sea.


	8. THE OPTIMIST

		Teach me to live and to forgive
		 The death that all must die
		Who pass in slumber through this heaven
		 Of earth and sea and sky;
		Who live by grace of Time and Space
		 At which their peace is priced;
		And cast their lots upon the robe
		 That wraps the cosmic Christ;
		
		Who cannot see the world-wide Tree
		 Where Love lies bleeding still;
		This universal cross of God
		 Our star-crowned Igdrasil.
		
		Teach me to live; I do not ask
		 For length of earthly days,
		Or that my heaven-appointed task
		 Should fall in pleasant ways;
		
		If in this hour of warmth and light
		 The last great knell were knolled;
		If Death should close mine eyes to-night
		 And all the tale be told;
		
		While I have lips to speak or sing
		 And power to draw this breath,
		Shall I not praise my Lord and King
		 Above all else, for death?
		
		When on a golden eve he drove
		 His keenest sorrow deep
		Deep in my heart, and called it love;
		 I did not wince or weep.
		
		A wild Hosanna shook the world
		 And wakened all the sky,
		As through a white and burning light
		 Her passionate face went by.
		
		When on a golden dawn he called
		 My best beloved away,
		I did not shrink or stand appalled
		 Before the hopeless day.
		
		The joy of that triumphant dearth
		 And anguish cannot die;
		The joy that casts aside this earth
		 For immortality.
		
		I would not change one word of doom
		 Upon the dreadful scroll,
		That gave her body to the tomb
		 And freed her fettered soul.
		
		For now each idle breeze can bring
		 The kiss I never seek;
		The nightingale has heard her sing,
		 The rose caressed her cheek.
		
		And every pang of every grief
		 That ruled my soul an hour,
		Has given new splendours to the leaf,
		 New glories to the flower;
		
		And melting earth into the heaven
		 Whose inmost heart is pain,
		Has drawn the veils apart and given
		 Her soul to mine again.


	9. THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

		I
		
		_In the beginning?_--Slowly grope we back
		       Along the narrowing track,
		Back to the deserts of the world’s pale prime,
		       The mire, the clay, the slime;
		And then . . . what then? Surely to something less;
		       Back, back, to Nothingness!
		
		
		II
		
		You dare not halt upon that dwindling way!
		       There is no gulf to stay
		Your footsteps to the last. Go back you must!
		       Far, far below the dust,
		Descend, descend! Grade by dissolving grade,
		       We follow, unafraid!
		Dissolve, dissolve this moving world of men
		       Into thin air--and then?
		
		
		III
		
		O pioneers, O warriors of the Light,
		       In that abysmal night,
		Will you have courage, then, to rise and tell
		       Earth of this miracle?
		Will you have courage, then, to bow the head,
		       And say, when all is said--
		
		“Out of this Nothingness arose our thought!
		       This blank abysmal Nought
		Woke, and brought forth that lighted City street,
		       Those towers, that armoured fleet?“ . . .
		
		
		IV
		
		When you have seen those vacant primal skies
		       Beyond the centuries.
		Watched the pale mists across their darkness flow,
		       As in a lantern-show,
		Weaving, by merest “chance,“ out of thin air,
		       Pageants of praise and prayer;
		Watched the great hills like clouds arise and set,
		       And one--named Olivet;
		When you have seen, as a shadow passing away,
		       One child clasp hands and pray;
		When you have seen emerge from that dark mire
		       One martyr, ringed with fire;
		Or, from that Nothingness, by special grace,
		       One woman’s love-lit face, ...
		
		
		V
		
		Will you have courage, then, to front that law
		       (From which your sophists draw
		Their only right to flout one human creed)
		       That nothing can proceed--
		Not even thought, not even love--from less
		       Than its own nothingness?
		The law is yours! But dare you waive your pride,
		       And kneel where you denied?
		The law is yours! Dare you re-kindle, then,
		       One faith for faithless men,
		And say you found, on that dark road you trod,
		       _In the beginning--GOD_?


*** Wilfred Owen (1893 - 1918)

	1. A TERRE

		   _(Being the philosophy of many Soldiers.)_
		
		Sit on the bed; I’m blind and three parts shell
		Be careful; can’t shake hands now; never shall.
		Both arms have mutinied against me--brutes.
		My fingers fidget like ten idle brats.
		
		I tried to peg out soldierly--no use!
		One dies of war like any old disease.
		This bandage feels like pennies on my eyes.
		I have my medals?--Discs to make eyes close.
		My glorious ribbons?--Ripped from my own back
		In scarlet shreds.  (That’s for your poetry book.)
		
		A short life and a merry one my brick!
		We used to say we’d hate to live dead old--
		Yet now . . .  I’d willingly be puffy bald
		And patriotic.  Buffers catch from boys
		At least the jokes hurled at them.  I suppose
		Little I’d ever teach a son but hitting
		Shooting war hunting all the arts of hurting.
		Well that’s what I learnt--that and making money.
		Your fifty years ahead seem none too many?
		Tell me how long I’ve got?  God!  For one year
		To help myself to nothing more than air!
		One Spring!  Is one too good to spare too long?
		Spring wind would work its own way to my lung
		And grow me legs as quick as lilac-shoots.
		My servant’s lamed but listen how he shouts!
		When I’m lugged out he’ll still be good for that.
		Here in this mummy-case you know I’ve thought
		How well I might have swept his floors for ever
		I’d ask no night off when the bustle’s over
		Enjoying so the dirt.  Who’s prejudiced
		Against a grimed hand when his own’s quite dust
		Less live than specks that in the sun-shafts turn
		Less warm than dust that mixes with arms’ tan?
		I’d love to be a sweep now black as Town
		Yes or a muckman.  Must I be his load?
		
		O Life Life let me breathe--a dug-out rat!
		Not worse than ours the existences rats lead--
		Nosing along at night down some safe vat
		They find a shell-proof home before they rot.
		Dead men may envy living mites in cheese
		Or good germs even.  Microbes have their joys
		And subdivide and never come to death
		Certainly flowers have the easiest time on earth.
		“I shall be one with nature herb and stone.”
		Shelley would tell me.  Shelley would be stunned;
		The dullest Tommy hugs that fancy now.
		“Pushing up daisies“ is their creed you know.
		To grain then go my fat to buds my sap
		For all the usefulness there is in soap.
		D’you think the Boche will ever stew man-soup?
		Some day no doubt if . . .
		                             Friend be very sure
		I shall be better off with plants that share
		More peaceably the meadow and the shower.
		Soft rains will touch me--as they could touch once
		And nothing but the sun shall make me ware.
		Your guns may crash around me.  I’ll not hear;
		Or if I wince I shall not know I wince.
		Don’t take my soul’s poor comfort for your jest.
		Soldiers may grow a soul when turned to fronds
		But here the thing’s best left at home with friends.
		
		My soul’s a little grief grappling your chest
		To climb your throat on sobs; easily chased
		On other sighs and wiped by fresher winds.
		
		Carry my crying spirit till it’s weaned
		To do without what blood remained these wounds.


	2. ANTHEM FOR DOOMED YOUTH

		What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?
		  Only the monstrous anger of the guns.
		  Only the stuttering rifles’ rapid rattle
		Can patter out their hasty orisons.
		No mockeries for them; no prayers nor bells
		Nor any voice of mourning save the choirs--
		The shrill demented choirs of wailing shells;
		And bugles calling for them from sad shires.
		
		What candles may be held to speed them all?
		  Not in the hands of boys but in their eyes
		Shall shine the holy glimmers of goodbyes.
		  The pallor of girls’ brows shall be their pall;
		Their flowers the tenderness of patient minds
		And each slow dusk a drawing-down of blinds.


	3. APOLOGIA PRO POEMATE MEO

		I too saw God through mud--
		   The mud that cracked on cheeks when wretches smiled.
		   War brought more glory to their eyes than blood
		   And gave their laughs more glee than shakes a child.
		
		Merry it was to laugh there--
		   Where death becomes absurd and life absurder.
		   For power was on us as we slashed bones bare
		   Not to feel sickness or remorse of murder.
		
		I too have dropped off fear--
		   Behind the barrage dead as my platoon
		   And sailed my spirit surging light and clear
		   Past the entanglement where hopes lay strewn;
		
		And witnessed exultation--
		   Faces that used to curse me scowl for scowl
		   Shine and lift up with passion of oblation
		   Seraphic for an hour; though they were foul.
		
		I have made fellowships--
		   Untold of happy lovers in old song.
		   For love is not the binding of fair lips
		   With the soft silk of eyes that look and long
		
		By Joy whose ribbon slips--
		   But wound with war’s hard wire whose stakes are strong;
		   Bound with the bandage of the arm that drips;
		   Knit in the welding of the rifle-thong.
		
		I have perceived much beauty
		   In the hoarse oaths that kept our courage straight;
		   Heard music in the silentness of duty;
		   Found peace where shell-storms spouted reddest spate.
		
		Nevertheless except you share
		   With them in hell the sorrowful dark of hell
		   Whose world is but the trembling of a flare
		   And heaven but as the highway for a shell
		
		You shall not hear their mirth:
		   You shall not come to think them well content
		   By any jest of mine.  These men are worth
		   Your tears:  You are not worth their merriment.


	4. DISABLED

		He sat in a wheeled chair waiting for dark
		And shivered in his ghastly suit of grey
		Legless sewn short at elbow. Through the park
		Voices of boys rang saddening like a hymn
		Voices of play and pleasure after day
		Till gathering sleep had mothered them from him.
		
		About this time Town used to swing so gay
		When glow-lamps budded in the light-blue trees
		And girls glanced lovelier as the air grew dim
		--In the old times before he threw away his knees.
		Now he will never feel again how slim
		Girls’ waists are or how warm their subtle hands
		All of them touch him like some queer disease.
		
		There was an artist silly for his face
		For it was younger than his youth last year.
		Now he is old; his back will never brace;
		He’s lost his colour very far from here
		Poured it down shell-holes till the veins ran dry
		And half his lifetime lapsed in the hot race
		And leap of purple spurted from his thigh.
		One time he liked a bloodsmear down his leg
		After the matches carried shoulder-high.
		It was after football when he’d drunk a peg
		He thought he’d better join. He wonders why . . .
		Someone had said he’d look a god in kilts.
		
		That’s why; and maybe too to please his Meg
		Aye that was it to please the giddy jilts
		He asked to join. He didn’t have to beg;
		Smiling they wrote his lie; aged nineteen years.
		Germans he scarcely thought of; and no fears
		Of Fear came yet. He thought of jewelled hilts
		For daggers in plaid socks; of smart salutes;
		And care of arms; and leave; and pay arrears;
		Esprit de corps; and hints for young recruits.
		And soon he was drafted out with drums and cheers.
		
		Some cheered him home but not as crowds cheer Goal.
		Only a solemn man who brought him fruits
		Thanked him; and then inquired about his soul.
		Now he will spend a few sick years in Institutes
		And do what things the rules consider wise
		And take whatever pity they may dole.
		To-night he noticed how the women’s eyes
		Passed from him to the strong men that were whole.
		How cold and late it is! Why don’t they come
		And put him into bed? Why don’t they come?


	5. EXPOSURE

		   I.
		
		Our brains ache in the merciless iced east winds that knife us . . .
		Wearied we keep awake because the night is silent . . .
		Low drooping flares confuse our memory of the salient . . .
		Worried by silence sentries whisper curious nervous
		       But nothing happens.
		
		Watching we hear the mad gusts tugging on the wire.
		Like twitching agonies of men among its brambles.
		Northward incessantly the flickering gunnery rumbles
		Far off like a dull rumour of some other war.
		       What are we doing here?
		
		The poignant misery of dawn begins to grow . . .
		We only know war lasts rain soaks and clouds sag stormy.
		Dawn massing in the east her melancholy army
		Attacks once more in ranks on shivering ranks of gray
		       But nothing happens.
		
		Sudden successive flights of bullets streak the silence.
		Less deadly than the air that shudders black with snow
		With sidelong flowing flakes that flock pause and renew
		We watch them wandering up and down the wind’s nonchalance
		       But nothing happens.
		
		
		   II.
		
		Pale flakes with lingering stealth come feeling for our faces--
		We cringe in holes back on forgotten dreams and stare snow-dazed
		Deep into grassier ditches.  So we drowse sun-dozed
		Littered with blossoms trickling where the blackbird fusses.
		       Is it that we are dying?
		
		Slowly our ghosts drag home:  glimpsing the sunk fires glozed
		With crusted dark-red jewels; crickets jingle there;
		For hours the innocent mice rejoice:  the house is theirs;
		Shutters and doors all closed:  on us the doors are closed--
		       We turn back to our dying.
		
		Since we believe not otherwise can kind fires burn;
		Nor ever suns smile true on child or field or fruit.
		For God’s invincible spring our love is made afraid;
		Therefore not loath we lie out here; therefore were born
		       For love of God seems dying.
		
		To-night His frost will fasten on this mud and us
		Shrivelling many hands and puckering foreheads crisp.
		The burying-party picks and shovels in their shaking grasp
		Pause over half-known faces.  All their eyes are ice
		       But nothing happens.


	6. FUTILITY

		Move him into the sun--
		Gently its touch awoke him once
		At home whispering of fields unsown.
		Always it woke him even in France
		Until this morning and this snow.
		If anything might rouse him now
		The kind old sun will know.
		
		Think how it wakes the seeds--
		Woke once the clays of a cold star.
		Are limbs so dear-achieved are sides
		Full-nerved--still warm--too hard to stir?
		Was it for this the clay grew tall?
		--O what made fatuous sunbeams toil
		To break earth’s sleep at all?


	7. GREATER LOVE

		Red lips are not so red
		  As the stained stones kissed by the English dead.
		Kindness of wooed and wooer
		Seems shame to their love pure.
		O Love your eyes lose lure
		  When I behold eyes blinded in my stead!
		
		Your slender attitude
		  Trembles not exquisite like limbs knife-skewed
		Rolling and rolling there
		Where God seems not to care;
		Till the fierce Love they bear
		  Cramps them in death’s extreme decrepitude.
		
		Your voice sings not so soft--
		  Though even as wind murmuring through raftered loft--
		Your dear voice is not dear
		Gentle and evening clear
		As theirs whom none now hear
		  Now earth has stopped their piteous mouths that coughed.
		
		Heart you were never hot
		  Nor large nor full like hearts made great with shot;
		And though your hand be pale
		Paler are all which trail
		Your cross through flame and hail:
		  Weep you may weep for you may touch them not.


	8. INSENSIBILITY

		   I.
		
		Happy are men who yet before they are killed
		Can let their veins run cold.
		Whom no compassion fleers
		Or makes their feet
		Sore on the alleys cobbled with their brothers.
		The front line withers
		But they are troops who fade not flowers
		For poets’ tearful fooling:
		Men gaps for filling
		Losses who might have fought
		Longer; but no one bothers.
		
		
		   II.
		
		And some cease feeling
		Even themselves or for themselves.
		Dullness best solves
		The tease and doubt of shelling
		And Chance’s strange arithmetic
		Comes simpler than the reckoning of their shilling.
		They keep no check on Armies’ decimation.
		
		
		   III.
		
		Happy are these who lose imagination:
		They have enough to carry with ammunition.
		Their spirit drags no pack.
		Their old wounds save with cold can not more ache.
		Having seen all things red
		Their eyes are rid
		Of the hurt of the colour of blood for ever.
		And terror’s first constriction over
		Their hearts remain small drawn.
		Their senses in some scorching cautery of battle
		Now long since ironed
		Can laugh among the dying unconcerned.
		
		
		   IV.
		
		Happy the soldier home with not a notion
		How somewhere every dawn some men attack
		And many sighs are drained.
		Happy the lad whose mind was never trained:
		His days are worth forgetting more than not.
		He sings along the march
		Which we march taciturn because of dusk
		The long forlorn relentless trend
		From larger day to huger night.
		
		
		   V.
		
		We wise who with a thought besmirch
		Blood over all our soul
		How should we see our task
		But through his blunt and lashless eyes?
		Alive he is not vital overmuch;
		Dying not mortal overmuch;
		Nor sad nor proud
		Nor curious at all.
		He cannot tell
		Old men’s placidity from his.
		
		
		   VI.
		
		But cursed are dullards whom no cannon stuns
		That they should be as stones.
		Wretched are they and mean
		With paucity that never was simplicity.
		By choice they made themselves immune
		To pity and whatever mourns in man
		Before the last sea and the hapless stars;
		Whatever mourns when many leave these shores;
		Whatever shares
		The eternal reciprocity of tears.


	9. MENTAL CASES

		Who are these?  Why sit they here in twilight?
		Wherefore rock they purgatorial shadows
		Drooping tongues from jaws that slob their relish
		Baring teeth that leer like skulls’ tongues wicked?
		Stroke on stroke of pain--but what slow panic
		Gouged these chasms round their fretted sockets?
		Ever from their hair and through their hand palms
		Misery swelters.  Surely we have perished
		Sleeping and walk hell; but who these hellish?
		
		--These are men whose minds the Dead have ravished.
		Memory fingers in their hair of murders
		Multitudinous murders they once witnessed.
		Wading sloughs of flesh these helpless wander
		Treading blood from lungs that had loved laughter.
		Always they must see these things and hear them
		Batter of guns and shatter of flying muscles
		Carnage incomparable and human squander
		Rucked too thick for these men’s extrication.
		
		Therefore still their eyeballs shrink tormented
		Back into their brains because on their sense
		Sunlight seems a bloodsmear; night comes blood-black;
		Dawn breaks open like a wound that bleeds afresh
		--Thus their heads wear this hilarious hideous
		Awful falseness of set-smiling corpses.
		--Thus their hands are plucking at each other;
		Picking at the rope-knouts of their scourging;
		Snatching after us who smote them brother
		Pawing us who dealt them war and madness.


	10. SPRING OFFENSIVE

		Halted against the shade of a last hill
		They fed and lying easy were at ease
		And finding comfortable chests and knees
		Carelessly slept.  But many there stood still
		To face the stark blank sky beyond the ridge
		Knowing their feet had come to the end of the world.
		
		Marvelling they stood and watched the long grass swirled
		By the May breeze murmurous with wasp and midge
		For though the summer oozed into their veins
		Like the injected drug for their bones’ pains
		Sharp on their souls hung the imminent line of grass
		Fearfully flashed the sky’s mysterious glass.
		
		Hour after hour they ponder the warm field--
		And the far valley behind where the buttercups
		Had blessed with gold their slow boots coming up
		Where even the little brambles would not yield
		But clutched and clung to them like sorrowing hands;
		They breathe like trees unstirred.
		
		Till like a cold gust thrilled the little word
		At which each body and its soul begird
		And tighten them for battle.  No alarms
		Of bugles no high flags no clamorous haste--
		Only a lift and flare of eyes that faced
		The sun like a friend with whom their love is done.
		O larger shone that smile against the sun--
		Mightier than his whose bounty these have spurned.
		
		So soon they topped the hill and raced together
		Over an open stretch of herb and heather
		Exposed.  And instantly the whole sky burned
		With fury against them; and soft sudden cups
		Opened in thousands for their blood; and the green slopes
		Chasmed and steepened sheer to infinite space.
		
		Of them who running on that last high place
		Leapt to swift unseen bullets or went up
		On the hot blast and fury of hell’s upsurge
		Or plunged and fell away past this world’s verge
		Some say God caught them even before they fell.
		
		But what say such as from existence’ brink
		Ventured but drave too swift to sink.
		The few who rushed in the body to enter hell
		And there out-fiending all its fiends and flames
		With superhuman inhumanities
		Long-famous glories immemorial shames--
		And crawling slowly back have by degrees
		Regained cool peaceful air in wonder--
		Why speak they not of comrades that went under?


	11. STRANGE MEETING

		It seemed that out of the battle I escaped
		Down some profound dull tunnel long since scooped
		Through granites which Titanic wars had groined.
		Yet also there encumbered sleepers groaned
		Too fast in thought or death to be bestirred.
		Then as I probed them one sprang up and stared
		With piteous recognition in fixed eyes
		Lifting distressful hands as if to bless.
		And by his smile I knew that sullen hall;
		With a thousand fears that vision’s face was grained;
		Yet no blood reached there from the upper ground
		And no guns thumped or down the flues made moan.
		“Strange friend“ I said “Here is no cause to mourn.”
		“None“ said the other “Save the undone years
		The hopelessness.  Whatever hope is yours
		Was my life also; I went hunting wild
		After the wildest beauty in the world
		Which lies not calm in eyes or braided hair
		But mocks the steady running of the hour
		And if it grieves grieves richlier than here.
		For by my glee might many men have laughed
		And of my weeping something has been left
		Which must die now.  I mean the truth untold
		The pity of war the pity war distilled.
		Now men will go content with what we spoiled.
		Or discontent boil bloody and be spilled.
		They will be swift with swiftness of the tigress
		None will break ranks though nations trek from progress.
		Courage was mine and I had mystery;
		Wisdom was mine and I had mastery;
		To miss the march of this retreating world
		Into vain citadels that are not walled.
		Then when much blood had clogged their chariot-wheels
		I would go up and wash them from sweet wells
		Even with truths that lie too deep for taint.
		I would have poured my spirit without stint
		But not through wounds; not on the cess of war.
		Foreheads of men have bled where no wounds were.
		I am the enemy you killed my friend.
		I knew you in this dark; for so you frowned
		Yesterday through me as you jabbed and killed.
		I parried; but my hands were loath and cold.
		Let us sleep now . . .”
		
		Earth’s wheels run oiled with blood.  Forget we that.
		Let us lie down and dig ourselves in thought.
		Beauty is yours and you have mastery
		Wisdom is mine and I have mystery.
		We two will stay behind and keep our troth.
		Let us forego men’s minds that are brute’s natures
		Let us not sup the blood which some say nurtures
		Be we not swift with swiftness of the tigress.
		Let us break ranks from those who trek from progress.
		Miss we the march of this retreating world
		Into old citadels that are not walled.
		Let us lie out and hold the open truth.
		Then when their blood hath clogged the chariot wheels
		We will go up and wash them from deep wells.
		What though we sink from men as pitchers falling
		Many shall raise us up to be their filling
		Even from wells we sunk too deep for war
		Even as One who bled where no wounds were.


	12. THE SEND-OFF

		Down the close darkening lanes they sang their way
		To the siding-shed
		And lined the train with faces grimly gay.
		
		Their breasts were stuck all white with wreath and spray
		As men’s are dead.
		
		Dull porters watched them and a casual tramp
		Stood staring hard
		Sorry to miss them from the upland camp.
		Then unmoved signals nodded and a lamp
		Winked to the guard.
		
		So secretly like wrongs hushed-up they went.
		They were not ours:
		We never heard to which front these were sent.
		
		Nor there if they yet mock what women meant
		Who gave them flowers.
		
		Shall they return to beatings of great bells
		In wild trainloads?
		A few a few too few for drums and yells
		May creep back silent to still village wells
		Up half-known roads.


	13. THE SHOW

		My soul looked down from a vague height with Death
		As unremembering how I rose or why
		And saw a sad land weak with sweats of dearth
		Gray cratered like the moon with hollow woe
		And fitted with great pocks and scabs of plaques.
		
		Across its beard that horror of harsh wire
		There moved thin caterpillars slowly uncoiled.
		It seemed they pushed themselves to be as plugs
		Of ditches where they writhed and shrivelled killed.
		
		By them had slimy paths been trailed and scraped
		Round myriad warts that might be little hills.
		
		From gloom’s last dregs these long-strung creatures crept
		And vanished out of dawn down hidden holes.
		
		(And smell came up from those foul openings
		As out of mouths or deep wounds deepening.)
		
		On dithering feet upgathered more and more
		Brown strings towards strings of gray with bristling spines
		All migrants from green fields intent on mire.
		
		Those that were gray of more abundant spawns
		Ramped on the rest and ate them and were eaten.
		
		I saw their bitten backs curve loop and straighten
		I watched those agonies curl lift and flatten.
		
		Whereat in terror what that sight might mean
		I reeled and shivered earthward like a feather.
		
		And Death fell with me like a deepening moan.
		And He picking a manner of worm which half had hid
		Its bruises in the earth but crawled no further
		Showed me its feet the feet of many men
		And the fresh-severed head of it my head.


*** Dorothy Parker (1893 - 1967)

	1. A DREAM LIES DEAD

		A dream lies dead here. May you softly go 
		Before this place, and turn away your eyes, 
		Nor seek to know the look of that which dies 
		Importuning Life for life. Walk not in woe, 
		But, for a little, let your step be slow.  
		And, of your mercy, be not sweetly wise 
		With words of hope and Spring and tenderer skies. 
		A dream lies dead; and this all mourners know:  
		
		Whenever one drifted petal leaves the tree--
		Though white of bloom as  it had been before 
		And proudly waitful of fecundity--
		One little loveliness can be no more; 
		And so must Beauty bow her imperfect head  
		Because a dream has joined the wistful dead!


	2. INTERIOR

		Her mind lives in a quiet room,
		A narrow room, and tall,
		With pretty lamps to quench the gloom
		And mottoes on the wall.
		
		Her mind lives tidily, apart
		From cold and noise and pain,
		And bolts the door against her heart,
		Out wailing in the rain.


	3. SYMPTOM RECITAL

		I do not like my state of mind;
		I’m bitter, querulous, unkind.
		I hate my legs, I hate my hands,
		I do not yearn for lovelier lands.
		I dread the dawn’s recurrent light;
		I hate to go to bed at night.
		I snoot at simple, earnest folk.
		I cannot take the gentlest joke.
		I find no peace in paint or type.
		My world is but a lot of tripe.
		I’m disillusioned, empty-breasted.
		For what I think, I’d be arrested.
		I am not sick, I am not well.
		My quondam dreams are shot to hell.
		My soul is crushed, my spirit sore;
		I do not like me any more.
		I cavil, quarrel, grumble, grouse.
		I ponder on the narrow house.
		I shudder at the thought of men . . .
		I’m due to fall in love again.


	4. THE RED DRESS

		I always saw, I always said
		If I were grown and free,
		I’d have a gown of reddest red
		As fine as you could see,
		
		To wear out walking, sleek and slow,
		Upon a Summer day,
		And there’d be one to see me so
		And flip the world away.
		
		And he would be a gallant one,
		With stars behind his eyes,
		And hair like metal in the sun,
		And lips too warm for lies.
		
		I always saw us, gay and good,
		High honored in the town.
		Now I am grown to womanhood . . .
		I have the silly gown.


*** Boris Pasternak (1890 - 1960)

	1. AUGUST

		This was its promise, held to faithfully:
		The early morning sun came in this way
		Until the angle of its saffron beam
		Between the curtains and the sofa lay,
		
		And with its ochre heat it spread across
		The village houses, and the nearby wood,
		Upon my bed and on my dampened pillow
		And to the corner where the bookcase stood.
		
		Then I recalled the reason why my pillow
		Had been so dampened by those tears that fell--
		I’d dreamt I saw you coming one by one
		Across the wood to wish me your farewell.
		
		You came in ones and twos, a straggling crowd;
		Then suddenly someone mentioned a word:
		It was the sixth of August, by Old Style,
		And the Transfiguration of Our Lord.
		
		For from Mount Tabor usually this day
		There comes a light without a flame to shine,
		And autumn draws all eyes upon itself
		As clear and unmistaken as a sign.
		
		But you came forward through the tiny, stripped,
		The pauperly and trembling alder grove,
		Into the graveyard’s coppice, russet-red,
		Which, like stamped gingerbread, lay there and glowed.
		
		And with the silence of those high treetops
		Was neighbour only the imposing sky
		And in the echoed crowing of the cocks
		The distances and distances rang by:
		
		There in the churchyard underneath the trees,
		Like some surveyor from the government
		Death gazed on my pale face to estimate
		How large a grave would suit my measurement.
		
		All those who stood there could distinctly hear
		A quiet voice emerge from where I lay:
		The voice was mine, my past; prophetic words
		That sounded now, unsullied by decay:
		
		‘Farewell, wonder of azure and of gold
		Surrounding the Transfiguration’s power:
		Assuage now with a woman’s last caress
		The bitterness of my predestined hour!
		
		‘Farewell timeless expanse of passing years!
		Farewell, woman who flung your challenge steeled
		Against the abyss of humiliations:
		For it is I who am your battlefield!
		
		‘Farewell, you span of open wings outspread,
		The voluntary obstinacy of flight,
		O figure of the world revealed in speech,
		Creative genius, wonder-working might!’


	2. AUTUMN

		I have allowed my family to scatter,
		All those who were my dearest to depart,
		And once again an age-long loneliness
		Comes in to fill all nature and my heart.
		
		Alone this cottage shelters me and you:
		The wood is an unpeopled wilderness
		And ways and footpaths wear, as in the song.
		Weeds almost overgrowing each recess;
		
		And where we sit together by ourselves
		The log walls gaze upon us mournfully.
		We gave no promise to leap obstacles,
		We shall yet face our end with honesty.
		
		At one we’ll sit, at three again we’ll rise,
		My book with me, your sewing in your hand,
		Nor with the dawning shall we realize
		When all our kissing shall have had an end.
		
		You leaves, more richly and more recklessly
		Rustle your dresses, spill yourselves away,
		And fill a past day’s cup of bitterness
		Still higher with the anguish of today!
		
		All this delight, devotion and desire!
		We’ll fling ourselves into September’s riot!
		Immure yourself within the autumn’s rustle
		Entirely: go crazy, or be quiet!
		
		How when you fall into my gentle arms
		Enrobed in that silk-tasselled dressing gown
		You shake the dress you wear away from you
		As only coppices shake their leaves down!--
		
		You are the blessing on my baneful way,
		When life has depths worse than disease can reach,
		And courage is the only root of beauty,
		And it is this that draws us each to each.


	3. EVE

		By water’s edge, quiet willows stand,
		And from the steep bank, high noon flings
		White fleecy clouds into the pond
		As if they were a fisher’s seines.
		
		The firmament sinks like a net,
		A crowd of sunburnt bathers dive
		With yells into the pond, and head
		For this elusive netlike sky.
		
		Some women from the water rise
		Under the scanty willows’ lee,
		And stepping on the sand, wring dry
		Their bathing costumes hurriedly.
		
		The coils of fabric twist and slide
		Like water-snakes, and nimbly roll,
		As if the dripping garments hide
		Beguiling serpents in their folds.
		
		0 woman, neither looks nor shape
		Will nonplus me or make me gloat.
		You, all of you, are like a lump
		In my excitement-stricken throat.
		
		You look as if hewn in the rough--
		A stray verse line dashed off ad lib.
		You make me think it is the truth--
		That you were made out of my rib.
		
		And instantly you broke away
		From my embrace, and moved apart,
		All fear, confusion, disarray--
		And missing beats of a man’s heart.


	4. FROM EARLY DAWN THE THIRTIETH OF APRIL

		From early dawn the thirtieth of April
		Is given up to children of the town,
		And caught in trying on the festive necklace,
		By dusk it only just is settling down.
		
		Like heaps of squashy berries under muslin
		The town emerges out of crimson gauze.
		Along the streets the boulevards are dragging
		Their twilight with them, like a rank of dwarves.
		
		The evening world is always eve and blossom,
		But this one with a sprouting of its own
		From May-day anniversaries will flower
		One day into a commune fully blown.
		
		For long it will remain a day of shifting,
		Pre-festive cleaning, fanciful decor,
		As once it used to be with Whitsun birches
		Or pan-Athenian fires long before.
		
		Just so they will go on, conveying actors
		To their assembly points; beat sand; just so
		Pull up towards illuminated ledges
		The plywood boards, the crimson calico.
		
		Just so in threes the sailors briskly walking
		Will skirt the grass in gardens and in parks,
		The moon at nightfall sink into the pavements
		Like a dead city or a burnt-out hearth.
		
		But with each year more splendid and more spreading
		The taut beginning of the rose will bloom,
		More clearly grow in health and sense of honour,
		Sincerity more visibly will loom.
		
		The living folksongs, customs and traditions
		Will ever spreading, many-petalled lay
		Their scent on fields and industries and meadows
		From early buddings on the first of May,
		
		Until the full fermented risen spirit
		Of ripened years will shoot up, like the smell
		Of humid centifolia. It will have to
		Reveal itself, it cannot help but tell.


	5. I HANG LIMP ON THE CREATOR’S PEN

		I hang limp on the Creator’s pen
		Like a large drop of lilac gloss-paint.
		
		Underneath are dykes’ secrets; the air
		From the railways is sodden and sticky,
		Of the fumes of coal and night fires reeking.
		But the moment night kills sunset’s glare,
		It turns pink itself, tinged with far flares,
		And the fence stands stiff, paradox-stricken.
		
		It keeps muttering: stop it till dawn.
		Let the dry whiting finally settle.
		Hard as nails is the worm-eaten ground,
		And the echo’s as keen as a skittle.
		
		Warm spring wind, spots of cheviot and mud,
		Early naileries’ hoots faraway,
		On the grater of cobble-stones road,
		As on radishes lavishly sprayed,
		Tears stand out clearly at break of day.
		
		Like an acrid drop of thick lead paint,
		I hang on to the Creator’s pen.


	6. JULY

		A ghost is roaming through the building,
		And shadows in the attic browse;
		Persistently intent on mischief
		A goblin roams about the house.
		
		He gets into your way, he fusses,
		You hear his footsteps overhead,
		He tears the napkin off the table
		And creeps in slippers to the bed.
		
		With feet unwiped he rushes headlong
		On gusts of draught into the hall
		And whirls the curtain, like a dancer,
		Towards the ceiling, up the wall.
		
		Who is this silly mischief-maker,
		This phantom and this double-face?
		He is our guest, our summer lodger,
		Who spends with us his holidays.
		
		Our house is taken in possession
		By him, while he enjoys a rest.
		July, with summer air and thunder--
		He is our temporary guest.
		
		July, who scatters from his pockets
		The fluff of blow-balls in a cloud,
		Who enters through the open window,
		Who chatters to himself aloud,
		
		Unkempt, untidy, absent-minded,
		Soaked through with smell of dill and rye,
		With linden-blossom, grass and beet-leaves,
		The meadow-scented month July.


	7. MARCH

		The sun is hotter than the top ledge in a steam bath;
		The ravine, crazed, is rampaging below.
		Spring--that corn-fed, husky milkmaid--
		Is busy at her chores with never a letup.
		
		The snow is wasting (pernicious anemia--
		See those branching veinlets of impotent blue?)
		Yet in the cowbarn life is burbling, steaming,
		And the tines of pitchforks simply glow with health.
		
		These days--these days, and these nights also!
		With eavesdrop thrumming its tattoos at noon,
		With icicles (cachectic!) hanging on to gables,
		And with the chattering of rills that never sleep!
		
		All doors are flung open--in stable and in cowbarn;
		Pigeons peck at oats fallen in the snow;
		And the culprit of all this and its life-begetter--
		The pile of manure--is pungent with ozone.


	8. MARY MAGDELENE

		People clean their homes before the feast.
		Stepping from the bustle of the street
		I go down before Thee on my knees
		And anoint with myrrh Thy holy feet.
		
		Groping round, I cannot find the shoes
		For the tears that well up with my sighs.
		My impatient tresses, breaking loose,
		Like a pall hang thick before my eyes.
		
		I take up Thy feet onto my lap,
		Wash them clean with hot tears from my eyes,
		In my hair Thy precious feet I wrap,
		And my string of pearls around them tie.
		
		I now see the future in detail,
		As if it were stopped in flight by Thee.
		Like a raving sibyl, I could tell
		What will happen, how it will all be.
		
		In the temple, veils will fall tomorrow,
		We shall form a frightened group apart,
		And the earth will shake-perhaps from sorrow
		And from pity for my tortured heart.
		
		Troops will then reform and march away
		To the thud of hoofs and heavy tread,
		And the cross will reach towards the sky
		Like a water-spout above our heads.
		
		By the cross, I’ll fall down on the ground,
		I shall bite my lips till I draw blood.
		On the cross, your arms will be spread out--
		Wide enough to hug the whole wide world.
		
		Who’s this for, this glory and this strife?
		Who’s this for, this torment and this might?
		Are there enough souls on earth, and lives?
		Are there enough cities, dales and heights?
		
		But three days-such days and nights will pass--
		They will fill me with such crushing dread
		That I’ll see the joyous truth, at last:
		I shall know Christ will rise from the dead.


	9. SPARROW HILLS

		My kisses across your breast, like water from a jug!
		They’ll have an end, and soon, our days of summer heat.
		Nor shall we every night rise up in trailing dust
		The hurdy-gurdy’s bellow, stamp and drag our feet.
		
		I’ve heard about old age. What ominous forebodings!
		That no wave will lift again to the stars its hands,
		That waters will speak no more; no god in the woods;
		No heart within the pools; no life in meadowlands.
		
		O rouse your soul! This frenzied day is yours to have!
		It is the world’s midday. Why don’t you use your eyes?
		Look, there’s thought upon high hills in seething bubbles
		Of heat, woodpeckers, cones and needles, clouds and skies.
		
		Here tracks of city trolleys stop, and further
		The pines alone must satisfy. Trams cannot pass.
		It is always Sunday there! Plucking little branches,
		There the clearing capers, slipping on the grass.
		
		And strewing sunrays, Whitsun, and rambling walks,
		The woods will have us say the world was always so:
		Conceived like that by forests, hinted to the meadows,
		And spilt by clouds as on a chintz design below.


	10. SPRING SHOWER

		Winked to the birdcherry, gulped amid tears,
		Splashed over carriages’ varnish, trees’ tremble.
		Full moon. The musicians are picking their way
		To the theatre. More and more people assemble.
		
		Puddles on stone. Like a throat overfilled
		With tears are the roses, deep with wet scalding
		Diamonds. Showers of gladness thrill,
		Eyelashes, stormclouds, and roses enfolding.
		
		The moon for the first time is casting in plaster
		An epic poem uncast till today:
		The cordons, the flutter of dresses, the speaker
		And people enraptured and carried away.
		
		Whose is the heart whose whole blood shot to glory
		Drained from the cheeks? We are held in his grip.
		The hands of Kerensky are squeezing together
		Into a bunch our aortas and lips.
		
		This is not night, not rain, not a chorus
		Of tearing acclaim for him, swelled to a roar--
		This is the blinding leap to the Forum
		From catacombs wanting an exit before.
		
		It is not roses, not Ups, not the roaring
		Crowd-it’s the surf on Theatre Square,
		Marking the end of the long sleep of Europe,
		Proud of her own reawakening here.


	11. WET PAINT

		‘Look out! Wet paint.’ My soul was blind,
		I have to pay the price,
		All marked with stains of calves and cheeks
		And hands and lips and eyes.
		
		I loved you more than luck or grief
		Because with you in sight
		The old and yellowed world became
		As white as painters’ white.
		
		I swear my friend, my gloom--it will
		One day still whiter gleam,
		Than lampshades, than a bandaged brow,
		Than a delirious dream.


	12. WINTER NIGHT

		It snowed and snowed, the whole world over,
		Snow swept the world from end to end.
		A candle burned on the table;
		A candle burned.
		
		As during summer midges swarm
		To beat their wings against a flame
		Out in the yard the snowflakes swarmed
		To beat against the window pane
		
		The blizzard sculptured on the glass
		Designs of arrows and of whorls.
		A candle burned on the table;
		A candle burned.
		
		Distorted shadows fell
		Upon the lighted ceiling:
		Shadows of crossed arms,of crossed legs--
		Of crossed destiny.
		
		Two tiny shoes fell to the floor
		And thudded.
		A candle on a nightstand shed wax tears
		Upon a dress.
		
		All things vanished within
		The snowy murk-white,hoary.
		A candle burned on the table;
		A candle burned.
		
		A corner draft fluttered the flame
		And the white fever of temptation
		Upswept its angel wings that cast
		A cruciform shadow
		
		It snowed hard throughout the month
		Of February, and almost constantly
		A candle burned on the table;
		A candle burned.


*** Charles Péguy (1873 - 1914)

	1. A LITTLE HOPE

		I am, God says, Master of three virtues.
		
		Faith is a faithful spouse.
		Charity is a mother burning with devotion.
		But hope is a very small girl.
		I am, God says, Master of three virtues.
		Charity is she who extends herself over the centuries.
		But my little hope
		is the one who each morning
		says Good Day to us.
		
		I am, God says, Master of three virtues.
		
		Faith it is who keeps watch down the ages;
		Charity it is who keeps watch down the ages.
		But little hope it is
		who goes to bed every evening,
		and who gets up each morning,
		having slept soundly through the night.
		
		I am, God says, the Master of Three Virtues.
		
		Faith is a soldier, a captain who defends a fortress.
		A town belonging to the King,
		On the marches of Gascony, on the marches of Lorraine.
		Charity is a doctor, a Little Sister of the poor,
		Who nurses the sick, who nurses the wounded,
		The poor subjects of the King,
		On the marches of Gascony, on the marches of Lorraine.
		But it is my little hope
		Who says good-day to the poor man and the orphan.
		
		I am, God says, the Lord of the Virtues.
		
		Faith is a church, a cathedral rooted in the soil of France
		Charity is a hospital, an alms-house which gathers up wretchedness of the world.
		But without hope it would be nothing but a cemetery.
		
		I am, God says, the Lord of the Virtues.
		
		It is Faith who watches through centuries of centuries.
		It is Charity who watches through centuries of centuries.
		But it is my little hope
		who lies down every evening
		and gets up every morning
		and really has very good nights.
		
		I am, God says, the Lord of that virtue.
		
		It is my little hope
		who goes to sleep every evening,
		in her child’s bed,
		after having said a good prayer,
		and who wakes every morning and gets up
		and says her prayers with new attention.
		
		I am, God says, Lord of the Three Virtues.
		
		Faith is a great tree, an oak rooted in the heart of France,
		And under the wings of that tree,
		Charity, my daughter Charity shelters all the distress of the world.
		And my little hope is only that little promise of a bud which shows itself at the very beginning of April.


	2. FREEDOM

		_God speaks:_
		
		When you love someone, you love him as he is.
		I alone am perfect.
		It is probably for that reason
		That I know what perfection is
		And that I demand less perfection of those poor people.
		I know how difficult it is.
		And how often, when they are struggling in their trials,
		How often do I wish and am I tempted to put my hand under their stomachs
		In order to hold them up with my big hand
		Just like a father teaching his son how to swim
		In the current of the river
		And who is divided between two ways of thinking.
		For on the one hand, if he holds him up all the time and if he holds him too much,
		The child will depend on this and will never learn how to swim.
		But if he doesn’t hold him up just at the right moment
		That child is bound to swallow more water than is healthy for him.
		In the same way, when I teach them how to swim amid their trials
		I too am divided by two ways of thinking.
		Because if I am always holding them up, if I hold them up too often,
		They will never learn how to swim by themselves.
		But if I don’t hold them up just at the right moment,
		Perhaps those poor children will swallow more water than is healthy for them.
		Such is the difficulty, and it is a great one.
		And such is the doubleness itself, the two faces of the problem.
		On the one hand, they must work out their salvation for themselves. That is the rule.
		It allows of no exception. Otherwise it would not be interesting. They would not be men.
		Now I want them to be manly, to be men, and to win by themselves
		Their spurs of knighthood.
		On the other hand, they must not swallow more water than is healthy for them,
		Having made a dive into the ingratitude of sin.
		Such is the mystery of man’s freedom, says God,
		And the mystery of my government towards him and towards his freedom.
		If I hold him up too much, he is no longer free
		And if I don’t hold him up sufficiently, I am endangering his salvation.
		Two goods in a sense almost equally precious.
		For salvation is of infinite price.
		But what kind of salvation would a salvation be that was not free?
		What would you call it?
		We want that salvation to be acquired by himself,
		Himself, man. To be procured by himself.
		To come, in a sense, from himself. Such is the secret,
		Such is the mystery of man’s freedom.
		Such is the price we set on man’s freedom.
		Because I myself am free, says God, and I have created man in my own image and likeness.
		Such is the mystery, such the secret, such the price
		Of all freedom.
		That freedom of that creature is the most beautiful reflection in this world
		Of the Creator’s freedom. That is why we are so attached to it,
		And set a proper price on it.
		A salvation that was not free, that was not, that did not come from a free man could in no wise be attractive to us. What would it amount to?
		What would it mean?
		What interest would such a salvation have to offer?
		A beatitude of slaves, a salvation of slaves, a slavish beatitude, how do you expect me to interested in that kind of thing? Does one care to be loved by slaves?
		If it were only a matter of proving my might, my might has no need of those slaves, my might is well enough known, it is sufficiently known that I am the Almighty.
		My might is manifest enough in all matter and in all events.
		My might is manifest enough in the sands of the sea and in the stars of heaven.
		It is not questioned, it is known, it is manifest enough in inanimate creation.
		It is manifest enough in the government,
		In the very event that is man.
		But in my creation which is endued with life, says God, I wanted something more.
		Infinitely better. Infinitely more. For I wanted that freedom.
		I created that very freedom. There are several degrees to my throne.
		When you once have known what it is to be loved freely, submission no longer has any taste.
		All the prostrations in the world
		Are not worth the beautiful upright attitude of a free man as he kneels. All the submission, all the dejection in the world
		Are not equal in value to the soaring up point,
		The beautiful straight soaring up of one single invocation
		From a love that is free.


	3. PRAYER OF CONFIDENCE

		When we sit down at the cross formed by two ways 
		And must choose regret along with remorse 
		And dual fate forces us to pick one course 
		And the keystone of two arches fixes our gaze,
		
		You alone, mistress of the secret, attest 
		To the downward slope where one road goes. 
		You know the other path that our steps chose, 
		As one chooses the cedar for a chest.
		
		And not through virtue, which we don’t possess. 
		And not for duty, which we do not love. 
		But, as carpenters find the center of 
		A board, to seek the center of wretchedness,
		
		And to approach the axis of distress, 
		And for the dumb need to feel the whole curse, 
		And to do whats harder and to suffer worse, 
		And to take the blow in all its fulness.
		
		Through that sleight-of-hand, that very artfulness, 
		Which will never make us happy anymore, 
		Let us, o queen, at least preserve our honor, 
		And along with it our simple tenderness.


	4. THE PASSION OF OUR LADY

		For the past three days she had been wandering, and following.
		She followed the people.
		She followed the events.
		She seemed to be following a funeral.
		But it was a living man’s funeral.--
		She followed like a follower.
		Like a servant.
		Like a weeper at a Roman funeral.--
		As if it had been her only occupation.
		To weep.--
		That is what he had done to his mother.
		Since the day when he had begun his mission.--
		You saw her everywhere.
		With the people and a little apart from the people.
		Under the porticoes, under the arcades, in drafty places.
		In the temples, in the palaces.
		In the streets.
		In the yards and in the back-yards.
		And she had also gone up to Calvary.
		She too had climbed up Calvary.
		A very steep hill.
		And she did not even feel that she was walking.
		She did not even feel that her feet were carrying her.--
		She too had gone up her Calvary.
		She too had gone up and up
		In the general confusion, lagging a little behind . . .
		She wept and wept under a big linen veil.
		A big blue veil . . .
		A little faded.--
		
		
		She wept as it will never be granted to a woman to weep.
		As it will never be asked
		Of a woman to weep on this earth.
		Never at any time.--
		What was very strange was that everyone respected her.
		People greatly respect the parents of the condemned.
		They even said:  Poor woman.
		And at the same time they struck at her son.
		Because man is like that.--
		The world is like that.
		Men are what they are and you never can change them.
		She did not know that, on the contrary, he had come to change man.
		That he had come to change the world.
		She followed and wept.
		Everybody respected her.
		Everybody pitied her.
		They said:  Poor woman.
		Because they weren’t perhaps really bad.
		They weren’t bad at heart.
		They fulfilled the Scriptures.--
		They honored, respected and admired her grief.
		They didn’t make her go away, they pushed her back only a little with special attentions
		Because she was the mother of the condemned.
		They thought: It’s the family of the condemned.
		They even said so in a low voice.
		They said it among themselves
		With a secret admiration.--
		She followed and wept, and didn’t understand very well.
		But she understood quite well that the government was against her boy.
		And that is a very bad business.--
		She understood that all the governments were together against her boy.
		The government of the Jews and the government of the Romans.
		The government of judges and the government of priests.
		The government of soldiers and the government of parsons.
		He could never get out of it.
		Certainly not.--
		What was strange was that all derision was heaped on him.
		Not on her at all.--
		There was only respect for her.
		For her grief.--
		They didn’t insult her.
		On the contrary.
		People even refrained from looking at her too much.
		All the more to respect her.
		So she too had gone up.
		Gone up with everybody else.
		Up to the very top of the hill.
		Without even being aware of it.
		Her legs had carried her and she did not even know it.
		She too had made the Way of the Cross.
		The fourteen stations of the Way of the Cross.
		Were there fourteen stations?
		Were there really fourteen stations?--
		She didn’t know for sure.
		She couldn’t remember.
		Yet she had not missed one.
		She was sure of that.
		But you can always make a mistake.
		In moments like that your head swims.
		Everybody was against him.
		Everybody wanted him to die.
		It is strange.
		People who are not usually together.
		The government and the people.
		That was awful luck.
		When you have someone for you and someone against you, sometimes you can get out of it.
		You can scramble out of it.
		But he wouldn’t.
		Certainly he wouldn’t.
		When you have everyone against you.
		But what had he done to everyone?
		
		I’ll tell you.
		He had saved the world.


	5. THE SURRENDER OF SLEEP

		I
		
		Children don’t even think about being tired.
		They run like little puppies. They make the trip twenty times.
		And, consequently, twenty times more than they needed to.
		What does it matter to them. They know well that at night
		(But they don’t even think about it)
		They will fall asleep
		In their bed or even at the table
		And that sleep is the end of everything.
		This is their secret, that is the secret to being indefatigable.
		Indefatigable as children.
		Indefatigable like the child Hope.
		And always to start over again in the morning.
		Children can’t walk, but they really know how to run.
		The child doesn’t even think, doesn’t know that he’ll sleep at night.
		That he’ll fall asleep at night. And yet it’s this sleep
		Always at hand, always available, always present,
		Always underneath, in full reserve,
		That of yesterday, and that of tomorrow, like good food for one’s being,
		Like a strengthening of being, like a reservoir of being,
		That’s inexhaustible. Always there.
		That of this morning and that of this evening
		That strengthens his legs.
		The sleep from before, the sleep from after
		It’s this same bottomless sleep
		As continuous as being itself
		Which passes from night to night, from one night to the next, which
		continues from one night to the next
		By passing over the days
		Leaving the days as days, like so many holes.
		It’s in this same sleep that children bury their whole being
		Which maintains, which creates for them every day new legs,
		Their brand new legs.
		And also that which is in their new legs: new souls.
		Their new souls, their fresh souls.
		Fresh in the morning, fresh at noon, fresh in the evening.
		Fresh like the roses of France.
		Their souls with the undrooping collars. This is the secret to being
		indefatigable.
		Just sleep. Why don’t people make use of it.
		I’ve given this secret to everyone, says God, I haven’t sold it.
		He who sleeps well, lives well. He who sleeps, prays.
		(He who works, prays too. But there’s time for everything. Both for
		sleep and for work.
		Work and sleep are like two brothers. And they get on very well
		together.
		And sleep leads to work just like work leads to sleep.
		He who works well sleeps well, he who sleeps well works well.)
		
		
		II
		
		There must be, says God, some relationship,
		There must be something going on
		Between the kingdom of France and this little Hope.
		There’s some secret there. They work too well together. And yet they
		tell me
		That, there are men who don’t sleep.
		I don’t like the man who doesn’t sleep, says God.
		Sleep is the friend of man.
		Sleep is the friend of God.
		Sleep may be my most beautiful creation.
		And I too rested on the seventh day.
		He whose heart is pure, sleeps. And he who sleeps has a pure heart.
		This is the great secret to being as indefatigable as a child.
		To have that strength in your legs that a child has.
		Those new legs, those new souls
		And to start over every morning, always new,
		Like the young, like the new
		Hope. Yes, they tell me that there are men
		Who work well and who sleep poorly.
		Who don’t sleep. What a lack of confidence in me.
		It’s almost worse than if they worked poorly but slept well.
		Than if they worked but didn’t sleep, because sloth
		Is no worse a sin than anxiety
		In fact, it’s even a less serious than anxiety
		And than despair and than a lack of confidence in me.
		I’m not talking, says God, about those men
		Who don’t work and who don’t sleep.
		Those men are sinners, it goes without saying. They get what they had
		coming to them. Great sinners. All they have to do is work.
		I’m talking about those who work and who don’t sleep.
		I pity them. I’m talking about those who work, and who thus
		In doing this are following my commandment, poor children.
		And who, on the other hand, don’t have the courage, don’t have the
		confidence, don’t sleep.
		I pity them. I hold it against them. A bit. They don’t trust me.
		As a child lays innocently in his mother’s arms, thus do they not lay.
		Innocently in the arms of my Providence.
		They have the courage to work. They don’t have the courage to do
		nothing.
		They possess the virtue of work. They don’t possess the virtue of doing
		nothing.
		Of relaxing. Of resting. Of sleeping.
		Unhappy people, they don’t know what’s good.
		They look after their affairs well during the day.
		But they don’t want to give them to me to look after during the night.
		As if I weren’t capable of looking after them for one night.
		He who doesn’t sleep is unfaithful to Hope.
		And that’s the greatest infidelity.
		Because it’s an infidelity to the greatest Faith.
		Poor children, they manage their affairs wisely during the day.
		But, come nightfall, they can’t resolve
		They can’t resign themselves to entrust their affairs to my wisdom
		They can’t allow me to govern their affairs for the space of one night.
		To take over the management and government of their affairs.
		As if I weren’t capable, I suppose, of looking after them a bit.
		Of watching over them.
		Of managing and governing and all the rest.
		I manage plenty of other affairs, poor people, I govern creation, surely
		that’s more difficult.
		Maybe you could, without much loss, leave your affairs in my hands,
		wise men.
		Surely I am as wise as you are.
		Perhaps you could hand them over to me for the space of a night.
		While you sleep
		At least
		And maybe tomorrow morning you won’t find them too badly
		damaged.
		Maybe tomorrow morning they won’t be any worse off.
		I’m probably still capable of guiding them a bit.
		I’m talking of those who work
		And who in this follow my commandment.
		And who don’t sleep, and who in this
		Reject all that’s good in my creation,
		Sleep, all that I have created good
		And who reject all the same my same commandment.
		What ingratitude these poor children have toward me
		To reject such a good,
		Such a beautiful commandment.
		These poor children are following human wisdom.
		Human wisdom says Never put off till tomorrow
		What you can do today.
		Whereas I tell you He who can put off till tomorrow
		Is he who is most pleasing to God.
		He who sleeps like a child
		Is he, too, who sleeps like my precious Hope.
		And I tell you Put off till tomorrow
		Those concerns and those worries that are eating at you today
		And that might devour you today.
		Put off till tomorrow those sobs that choke you
		When you see today’s misery.
		Those sobs that rise in you and strangle you.
		Put off till tomorrow those tears that fill your eyes and cover your face.
		That flood you. That fall down your cheeks. Those tears flowing from
		your eyes.
		Because between today and tomorrow, I, God may have passed by.
		Human wisdom says: Cursed is he who puts off till tomorrow.
		And I say Happy, happy is he who puts off till tomorrow.
		Happy is he who puts off. Which means Happy is he who hopes. And
		who sleeps.
		And I say on the contrary Cursed.
		Cursed is he who lies awake and doesn’t trust me. What a mistrusting
		of me. Cursed is he who lies awake.
		And who drags.
		Cursed is he who drags through the evenings and through the nights.
		Through the eve of evening and through the fall of night.
		Like a snail’s trail across these beautiful eves.
		My creatures.
		Like a slug’s trail across these beautiful nightfalls.
		My creatures, my creation.
		The thick remembrances of daily cares.
		The burning, the gnawing.
		The dirty tracks of our cares, the bitterness and the anxieties.
		The sorrows.
		The trails of slugs. Upon the flowers of my night.
		Truly I tell you that this offends
		My precious Hope.
		Who wouldn’t want to entrust me with the supervision of his night.
		As if I hadn’t proven myself.
		Who wouldn’t want to entrust me with the supervision of one of his
		nights.
		As if I were asking for more than one.
		Who, having surrendered his affairs in poor condition when he went to
		bed,
		Has not found them well when he woke up.
		Because I may have paid him a visit.
		
		
		III
		
		As the sea is the reservoir of water so night is the reservoir of being.
		It’s the time that I’ve reserved for myself. No matter what these feverish
		days may do.
		As in the open sea, in the middle of the night, they bathe in the
		fullness of night.
		It’s they that are scattered, it’s they that are fragmented.
		The days are the Sporades Islands and night is the open sea
		Upon which St. Paul sailed
		And the border that descends from night to day
		Is always a rising border
		A steep border, and the border that rises from the day toward the night
		Is always a descending border. In the depths of night.
		O night, my finest invention, my most noble creation of all.
		My most beautiful creature. Creature of the greatest Hope.
		You give the most substance of Hope.
		You are the instrument, you are the very substance and the
		dwelling-place of Hope.
		And also, (and thus), you are ultimately the creature of the greatest
		Charity.
		Because it’s you who gently rock the whole of Creation
		Into a restoring Sleep.
		As one lays a child in his little bed,
		As his mother lays him down and as his mother tucks him in
		Ad kisses him (She’s not afraid of waking him up.
		He’s sleeping so soundly.)
		As his mother tucks him in and laughs and kisses his forehead
		For pleasure.
		And he too laughs, he laughs in response while sleeping.
		So too, o night, dark-eyed mother, universal mother,
		Not only mother of children (it’s so easy)
		But even mother of men and of women, which is so difficult,
		It’s you, night, who put to bed the whole of Creation
		In a bed of a few hours
		(Awaiting.) In a bed of a few hours
		Image, feeble image, and promise and prefiguration of the bed of every
		hour.
		Anticipated realization. Promise kept in advance
		Awaiting the bed of every hour.
		In which I, the Father, will lay my creation.
		O Night, you are night. And all the days together
		Will never be day, they will never be anything but several days.
		Scattered. The days will never be anything but flashes.
		Uncertain flashes, and you, night, you are my great somber light.
		I congratulate myself for having made night. The days are isles and
		islands.
		That pierce and split the sea.
		But they have to rest in the deep sea.
		They’re forced to.
		And you too, days, you’re forced to as well.
		You have to rest in the deep night.
		And you, night, you are the deep sea
		Upon which St. Paul sailed, not that little lake in Galilee.
		Al the days are nothing but members
		Dismembered members. It’s the days that emerge, but even so they
		have to be anchored in the deep water.
		In the deep night. Night, my finest invention, it’s you who calm, it’s
		you who soothe, it’s you who bring rest
		To aching limbs
		All out of joint from the days work.
		It’s you who calm, it’s you who soothe, it’s you who bring rest
		To aching hearts
		To bruised bodies, to limbs bruised from work, to hearts bruised from
		work
		And from daily cares and sorrow.
		O Night, o my daughter Night, the most religious of all my daughters
		The most reverent.
		Of all my daughters, of all my creatures, the most abandoned into my
		hands.
		You glorify me in the Sleep even more than your Brother, Day, glorifies me
		in Work.
		Because in work man only glorifies me by his work.
		Whereas in sleep it is I who glorify myself by man’s surrender.
		And it’s more certain, and I know better how to go about it.
		Night, you are for man a more nourishing food than bread and wine.
		Because the man who eats and drinks, if he doesn’t sleep, will not
		profit from his nourishment.
		And it will sour and upset his stomach.
		But if he sleeps, the bread and wine will become his flesh and blood.
		For working. For praying. For sleeping.
		Night, you alone dress wounds.
		Aching hearts. All out of joint. All torn.
		O my dark-eyed daughter, of all my daughters you alone are, and can
		call yourself, my accomplice.
		You are in league with me, because you and me, me through you,
		Together we cause man to fall into the trap of my arms
		And we take him a bit by surprise.
		But one takes what one can get. If anyone knows, it’s me.
		Night, you are the beautiful creation
		Of my wisdom.
		Night, o my daughter Night, o my silent daughter
		At Rebecca’s well, at the well of the Samaritan woman
		It’s you who draw the deepest water
		From the deepest well
		O night who gently rocks all creatures
		Into a restoring sleep.
		O night who bathes all wounds
		In the only fresh water and in the only deep water
		At Rebecca’s well, drawn from the deepest well.
		Friend of children, friend and sister to the young Hope
		O night who dresses all wounds
		At the well of the Samaritan woman, you who draw, from the deepest
		well,
		The deepest prayer.
		O night, o my daughter Night, you who know how to keep silent, o
		my daughter of the beautiful mantle.
		You who confer rest and forgetfulness. You how issue a healing balm,
		And silence, and shadow
		O my starry night, I created you first.
		You who send to sleep, you who already enshroud in an eternal
		Darkness,
		All of my most restless creatures,
		The fiery steed, the industrious ant,
		And man, that monster of unrest.
		Night you succeed in quieting man
		That well of unrest.
		By himself more restless than all of creation put together.
		Man, that well of anxiety.
		Just as you quiet the water in the well.
		O my night with the glorious dress
		You gather children and the young Hope
		Into the folds of your dress
		Though men resist you.
		O my beautiful night, I created you first.
		And practically before first
		O silent one, draped with veils
		You who descend on earth as a foretaste
		You who scatter by hand, who pour out over the earth
		An initial peace
		Forerunner of eternal peace.
		An initial rest
		Forerunner of eternal rest.
		An initial soothing balm, an initial beatitude
		Forerunner of eternal beatitude.
		You who soothe, you who embalm, you who console.
		You who bind wounds and injured limbs.
		You who silence hearts, you who quiet bodies
		Who still aching hearts, aching bodies,
		Wrought with pain,
		Worn-out limbs, backs broken
		With weariness, with care, with (mortal) anxieties,
		With sorrow,
		You who administer balm to throats torn with bitterness
		A cooling balm
		O my noble-hearted daughter, I created you first
		Practically before first, my great-bosomed daughter
		As I knew well what I was doing.
		Surely, I knew what I was doing.
		You who lay the child in his mother’s arms
		The child, brightened with a shadow of sleep
		Laughing inwardly, laughing secretly because of his confidence in his
		mother.
		And in me,
		Laughing secretly out of the corner of his serious mouth
		You who lay the child, inwardly bursting, overflowing with innocence
		And with confidence
		In the arms of his mother
		You who used to lay the child Jesus every night
		In the arms of the Most Holy and Immaculate one.
		You who are the turn-sister of hope.
		O my daughter, first among all. You who even succeed,
		You who occasionally succeed,
		You who lay man in the arms of my Providence
		My maternal Providence
		O my daughter, glittering and dark, I salute you
		You who restore, you who nourish, you who give rest
		O silence of darkness
		Such a silence reigned before the creation of anxiety.
		Before the beginning of the reign of anxiety
		Such a silence will reign, now a silence of light,
		When all this anxiety will have been consummated,
		When all this anxiety will have been exhausted.
		Whey they will have drawn all the water from the well.
		After the consummation, after the exhaustion of all this anxiety
		Man’s anxiety.
		Thus, my daughter, you come early and you come late
		For in this reign of anxiety you recall, you commemorate, you
		practically reestablish,
		You practically recommence the former Serenity that existed
		When my spirit brooded over the waters.
		But, my starry daughter, my daughter of the dark mantle, you are also
		very much ahead of your time, you are also precocious.
		For you announce, for you represent, for you practically commence in
		advance, every night,
		My great Serenity of light
		Eternal.
		Night, you are holy; Night, you are great; Night, you are beautiful.
		Night of the great mantle.
		Night, I love you and I salute you and I glorify you and you are my
		great daughter and my creature.
		O beautiful night, night of the great mantle, my daughter of the starry
		mantle
		You remind me, myself, you remind me of the great silence that existed
		Before I had unlocked the firmament of ingratitude.
		And you proclaim, even to me, you herald to me the silence that will
		exist
		After the end of man’s reign, when I will have reclaimed my scepter.
		And sometimes I think about it ahead of time, because this man really
		makes a lot of noise.
		But above all, Night, you remind me of that night.
		And I will remember it eternally.
		The ninth hour had sounded. It was in the country of my people of
		Israel.
		It was all over. That enormous adventure.
		From the sixth hour to the ninth hour there had been a darkness
		covering the entire countryside.
		Everything was finished. Let’s not talk about it anymore. It hurts me to
		think about it.
		My son’s incredible descent among men.
		Into their midst.
		When you think of what they made of him.
		Those thirty years that he was a carpenter among men.
		Those three years that he was a sort of preacher among men.
		A priest.
		Those three days when he fell victim to men.
		Among men.
		Those three nights when he was dead in the midst of men.
		Dead among the dead.
		Through the centuries of centuries that he’s been a host among men.
		This incredible adventure was finished.
		The adventure that has tied my hands, God, for all eternity.
		The adventure by which my Son has tied my hands.
		Tying the hands of my justice eternally, untying the hands of my
		mercy for eternally.


*** Saint-John Perse (1887 - 1975)

	1. NOCTURNE

		Now! they are ripe, these fruits of a jealous fate. 
		From our dream grown, on our blood fed, and haunting the purple of our nights, 
		they are the fruits of long concern, 
		they are the fruits of long desire, 
		they were our most secret accomplices and, often verging upon avowal, 
		drew us to their ends out of the abyss of our nights . . .
		Praise to the first dawn, now they are ripe and beneath the purple, 
		these fruits of an imperious fate. 
		--We do not find our liking here.
		
		Sun of being, betrayal! 
		Where was the fraud, where was the offense? 
		Where was the fault and where the flaw, and the error, which is the error? 
		Shall we trace the theme back to its birth?
		Shall we relive the fever and the torment? . . . 
		Majesty of the rose, we are not among your adepts: our blood 
		goes to what is bitterer, our care to what is more severe, 
		our roads are uncertain, and eep is the night out of which our gods are torn. 
		Dog roses and black briars populate for us the shore of shipwreck.
		
		Now they are ripening, these fruits of another shore: 
		“Sun of being, shield me!“--turncoat’s words. 
		And those who have seen him pass will say: who was that man, and which his home? 
		Did he go alone at dawn to show the purple of this nights? . . . 
		Sun of being, Prince and Master? our works are scattered, 
		our tasks without honor and our grain without harvest: 
		the binder of sheaves awaits, at the evening’s ebb. 
		--Behold, they are dyed with our blood, these fruits of a stormy fate.
		
		At the gait of a binder of sheaves life goes, without hatred or ransom.


	2. SONG

		My horse stopped under the tree full of doves, 
		I whistle so pure that there are no promises 
		to their banks that all these rivers keep. 
		Living leaves in the morning are the image of glory . . .
		
		And it is not that a man is not sad, but rising before
		daybreak and standing cautiously in the trade of an old tree,
		leaning from the chin to the last star, he sees in the depths 
		of the sky great pure things which turn to pleasure.
		
		My horse stopped under the cooing tree, I whistle a purer whistle . . .
		And peace to those who are about to die, who have not seen this day.
		But from my brother the poet, we had news.
		He wrote one more very sweet thing. And some knew about it.


	3. THE BOOK

		And then what a wail in the mouth of the hearth, 
		a night of long rains on their march toward the city, 
		stirred in your heart the obscure birth of speech:
		“. . . Of a luminous exile--and more distant already 
		than the storm that is rolling--how can I, O Lord, 
		keep the ways that you opened?
		“. . . Will you leave me only this confusion of evening--having, 
		for so long a day, nourished me on the salt of your solitude,
		“witness of our silences, of your shadow, and of the great blasts of your voice?”
		
		--Thus you lamented in the confusion of evening. 
		But sitting by the window opposite the stretch of wall 
		across the way, having failed to resuscitate the lost splendor,
		you would open the Book, and letting your worn finger 
		wander among the prophecies, your gaze far away, 
		you awaited the moment of departure, 
		the rising of the great wind that would suddenly tear you away,
		like the typhoon, parting the clouds before your waiting eyes.


*** Fernando Pessoa (1888 - 1935)

	1. I KNOW

		I know, I alone
		How much it hurts, this heart
		With no faith nor law
		Nor melody nor thought.
		
		Only I, only I
		And none of this can I say
		Because feeling is like the sky--
		Seen, nothing in it to see.


	2. INSCRIPTIONS

		I
		
		We pass and dream. Earth smiles. Virtue is rare.
		Age, duty, gods weigh on our conscious bliss.
		Hope for the best and for the worst prepare.
		That sum of purposed wisdom speaks in this.
		
		
		II
		
		Me, Chloe, a maid, the mighty fates have given,
		Who was nought to them, to the peopled shades.
		Thus the gods will. My years were but twice seven.
		I am forgotten in my distant glades.
		
		
		III
		
		From my villa on the hill I long looked down
		Upon the muttering town;
		Then one day drew (life sight-sick, dull hope shed)
		My toga o’er my head
		(The simplest gesture being the greatest thing)
		Like a raised wing.
		
		
		IV
		
		Not Cecrops kept my bees. My olives bore
		Oil like the sun. My several herd lowed far.
		The breathing traveller rested by my door.
		The wet earth smells still; dead ray nostrils are.
		
		
		V
		
		I conquered. Far barbarians hear my name.
		Men were dice in my game,
		But to my throw myself did lesser come:
		I threw dice, Fate the sum.
		
		
		VI
		
		Some were as loved, some as prizes prized.
		A natural wife to the fed man my mate,
		I was sufficient to whom I sufficed.
		I moved, slept, bore and aged without a fate.
		
		
		VII
		
		I put by pleasure like an alien bowl.
		Stern, separate, mine, I looked towards where gods seem.
		From behind me the common shadow stole.
		Dreaming that I slept not, I slept my dream.
		
		
		VIII
		
		Scarce five years passed ere I passed too.
		Death came and took the child he found.
		No god spared, or fate smiled at, so
		Small hands, clutching so little round.
		
		
		IX
		
		There is a silence where the town was old.
		Grass grows where not a memory lies below.
		We that dined loud are sand. The tale is told.
		The far hoofs hush. The inn’s last light doth go.
		
		
		X
		
		We, that both lie here, loved. This denies us.
		My lost hand crumbles where her breasts’ lack is.
		Love’s known, each lover is anonymous.
		We both felt fair. Kiss, for that was our kiss.
		
		
		XI
		
		I for my city’s want fought far and fell.
		I could not tell
		What she did want, that knew she wanted me.
		Her walls be free,
		Her speech keep such as I spoke, and men die,
		That she die not, as I.
		
		
		XII
		
		Life lived us, not we life. We, as bees sip,
		Looked, talked and had. Trees grow as we did last.
		We loved the gods but as we see a ship.
		Never aware of being aware, we passed.
		
		
		XIII
		
		The work is done. The hammer is laid down.
		The artisans, that built the slow-grown town,
		Have been succeeded by those who still built.
		All this is something lack-of-something screening.
		The thought whole has no meaning
		But lies by Time’s wall like a pitcher spilt.
		
		
		XIV
		
		This covers me, that erst had the blue sky.
		This soil treads me, that once I trod. My hand
		Put these inscriptions here, half knowing why;
		Last, and hence seeing all, of the passing band.


*** Sándor Petőfi (1823 - 1849)

	1. AT THE END OF SEPTEMBER

		In the valley the flowers are still blooming,
		The poplars are still green by the windows,
		But do you see Winter is already looming?
		There is snow on the peak where the wind blows.
		My young heart is freshly filled with Summer blossom,
		While Spring is also in full bloom in there,
		But my dark hair is greying into Autumn
		And begins to show the hoarfrost of Winter.
		The flowers wither, time runs so fast . . .
		Come my beloved wife, sit on my side,
		Come and put your head on my chest,
		As you will on my mound in the graveyard.
		If I die too soon one day, oh, tell me,
		Will you cry and spread a shroud on me in tears?
		Will a new lover make you forget me,
		And convince you to abandon my name with ease?
		
		When you throw away the veil of the widow,
		Place it on my wooden cross as a dark banner,
		I’ll emerge from the sepulchral world below,
		Take it down with me and keep it forever,
		To dry up the tears I shed from my sobs
		For you who so easily forgot,
		And to bandage my wounded heart that still throbs
		And loves you even there, no matter what!


	2. FAREWELL TO CELIBACY

		I leave you now, my oldest friend
		Celibacy, I must say farewell.
		You were my comrade for twenty-five years,
		I can’t go without goodbye, I know it well.
		
		Don’t be mad at me, who, even though your
		Follower, will leave you suddenly,
		I shared my adolescence with you,
		I want my manhood only for me.
		
		I loved you, perhaps like nobody else,
		When you warned me, I obeyed.
		I went wherever the banner of
		Romantic adventures you swayed.
		
		You took me far away to many places;
		I got tired, now I need a rest.
		My bed will be my lover’s two arms
		And my white pillow will be her two soft breasts. 
		
		My young pals are smiling,
		A sneer going from lip to lip
		And they pass me by showing pity . . .
		Sour grapes, I say, isn’t it?
		
		Indeed I am very deplorable,
		Really worthy of all the compassion,
		Because I cannot roam night after night
		Filthier than filthy taverns, with passion.
		
		I am not allowed to love more than one,
		The one who also loves only me.
		Not like their fantastic lovers
		Who loved many hundreds easily.
		
		Farewell my friend, Celibacy!
		You can be angry or you can laugh,
		I am now turning my back on you
		The pleasures you gave me were more than enough.
		
		Get new followers with your colorful banner
		Somewhere else,--me, you can forget.
		All I need now is a white banner
		And that will be my young wife’s bonnet.


	3. I DREAMED SOMETHING BEAUTIFUL

		I dreamed something beautiful,
		I dreamed and woke up suddenly.
		Why did you wake me up so soon?
		Why did you have to bother me?
		Happiness in my life is not real,
		At least in my dream it does appear.
		Why did you have to disturb?
		Oh my dear God, oh my dear God,
		Why am I not allowed
		To dream of pleasure in this world?
		You told me that you don’t love me
		But I could not believe it.
		Don’t tell me again, don’t tell me.
		Without saying I know you mean it.
		And when I am aware that my face
		In your heart has no more place:
		Stay or leave? You want me close,
		Perhaps only to please your eyes
		Watching how I agonize
		From the torment that you cause.
		Oh, girl, you are so cruel,
		Just let me get away.
		We have to part forever
		And go on our own way.
		I would fly from you like dust
		When there is wind, fly it must
		To places man can never see
		But I cannot move this boulder,
		My sadness, that is on my shoulder
		And weighs on me so heavily.
		Poor me, I say goodbye to you,
		Awful words I have to say.
		Why don’t they die on my lips
		As they come out, right away?
		I cannot just yet say goodbye,
		Let me hold your hand for a while,
		Your hand that destroyed my happiness
		And tore my future apart,
		Forever breaking my heart,
		To cover it with tears and kisses.
		My tears or my kisses, which is
		Burning your hand more intensely?
		Both tears and kisses can become hot
		And burn your hand immensely,
		Because they both came to life
		Together with my fervent love
		In my burning heart, to ascend
		From this glowing, hot volcano,
		Like pious pilgrims who well know
		That they will die on your hand.
		There is only one thing I ask,
		Don’t fear, it is not that you love me,
		Only a little solace that
		You will keep me in your memory.
		How long will I stay in there?
		How long will you remember?
		If only until you can find
		Someone whose heart throbs for you
		And loves you as much as I do,
		Then I’ll stay forever in your mind!
		But I do not wish that you
		Should not find somebody true
		Like me. If I would have that wish,
		I would not really love you.
		I want you to live happily,
		Pick some leaves from any tree,
		Pick those with a fresh fragrance,
		Weave together young green leaves,
		Then, when old, toss out the dry wreath
		That once was my remembrance.


	4. I LOVE YOU MY DARLING

		I love you my darling,
		I love your slim body,
		Your ivory forehead,
		Your hair like ebony,
		Your sparkling dark eyes
		And your rosy cheeks,
		Your tender, soft hands
		And your sweet, full lips.
		I love your soul
		That can fly so high
		And the mountain-lake depth
		Of your warm heart.
		I love you when you’re smiling
		Because you are glad,
		Or with tears in your eyes 
		Because you are sad.
		I love your virtues
		Shining so bright
		And also your faults
		That are never in sight.
		I love you my darling,
		I love you truly
		As much as one can love,
		Deeply, strongly, fully.
		You are everything,
		There’s no life without you,
		You enmesh all my thoughts
		Steadfast, through and through.
		You are all my feelings
		Awake or asleep,
		You are always present
		In my every heart beat.
		I would relinquish 
		All the glory for you
		And, if you wanted,
		Regain it all anew.
		I have no wish
		And no will either
		Because what you want
		Is also my desire.
		No sacrifice is too small
		Of any measure
		If it would give you 
		Even a small pleasure.
		If you would lose something
		Small but it would cause pain
		It would hurt me as well,
		I would feel the same.
		I love you my darling,
		I love you even more,
		I love you like no one
		Has loved you before.
		I love you my darling
		So that it could kill me.
		I am all in one
		Who can love you dearly:
		Husband. son and father
		Or your older brother,
		I am all those and, 
		Most of all, your lover.
		At the same time
		You are also my life,
		Mother, daughter, sister,
		Lover and my wife!
		I love you with my heart,
		I love you with my soul,
		I love you with dreamy,
		Crazy love and more! . . .
		And if one deserves
		A praise or a prize
		For all what I said,
		Those of any size,
		The praise and the prize
		Whatever may be,
		You deserve it all,
		You alone--not me.
		You deserve it all
		Because the love I feel
		
		I learned from you.
		
		You made it all real!


	5. MAN

		Nothing in the world is more ridiculous
		Than man, because he is so presumptuous.
		Just as if he wanted to plow the sky
		With his nose, he always keeps it so high.
		You think that it is the world that is faulty?
		Haughty man, after all what makes you so haughty? 
		
		What do you think is shorter than a blink?
		Your life, my friend, is not even a wink.
		It comes and runs away in an instant,
		It keeps the pillow of your cradle in one hand
		While the cover of your coffin its other hand is holding.
		Haughty man, after all what makes you so haughty?
		
		What can you accomplish in a fleeting glance?
		Conquer nations and people perchance?
		You know what those are who can be conquered?
		Nothing but pitifully weak and coward.
		Ruling them brings only shame, not glory.
		Haughty man, after all what makes you so haughty?
		
		And what is the big name and glory you found?
		It dies with you as you descend into the ground,
		Or, as a guard dog it goes to your grave
		And for a few centuries it will keep it safe.
		But from famine and thirst it will perish slowly.
		Haughty man, after all what makes you so haughty?
		
		Your glory, your name how long will stay?
		The country where you belong will also decay,
		The place where your people have lived since who knows when
		Was once a sea and may become the same again.
		The whole world may end up as a vast void only.
		Haughty man, after all what makes you so haughty?


*** Sylvia Plath (1932 - 1963)

	1. CROSSING THE WATER

		Black lake, black boat, two black, cut-paper people.
		Where do the black trees go that drink here?
		Their shadows must cover Canada.
		
		A little light is filtering from the water flowers.
		Their leaves do not wish us to hurry:
		They are round and flat and full of dark advice.
		
		Cold worlds shake from the oar.
		The spirit of blackness is in us, it is in the fishes.
		A snag is lifting a valedictory, pale hand;
		
		Stars open among the lilies.
		Are you not blinded by such expressionless sirens?
		This is the silence of astounded souls.


	2. ELM

		I know the bottom, she says. I know it with my great tap root:   
		It is what you fear.
		I do not fear it: I have been there.
		
		Is it the sea you hear in me,   
		Its dissatisfactions?
		Or the voice of nothing, that was your madness?
		
		Love is a shadow.
		How you lie and cry after it
		Listen: these are its hooves: it has gone off, like a horse.
		
		All night I shall gallop thus, impetuously,
		Till your head is a stone, your pillow a little turf,   
		Echoing, echoing.
		
		Or shall I bring you the sound of poisons?   
		This is rain now, this big hush.
		And this is the fruit of it: tin-white, like arsenic.
		
		I have suffered the atrocity of sunsets.   
		Scorched to the root
		My red filaments burn and stand, a hand of wires.
		
		Now I break up in pieces that fly about like clubs.   
		A wind of such violence
		Will tolerate no bystanding: I must shriek.
		
		The moon, also, is merciless: she would drag me   
		Cruelly, being barren.
		Her radiance scathes me. Or perhaps I have caught her.
		
		I let her go. I let her go
		Diminished and flat, as after radical surgery.   
		How your bad dreams possess and endow me.
		
		I am inhabited by a cry.   
		Nightly it flaps out
		Looking, with its hooks, for something to love.
		
		I am terrified by this dark thing   
		That sleeps in me;
		All day I feel its soft, feathery turnings, its malignity.
		
		Clouds pass and disperse.
		Are those the faces of love, those pale irretrievables?   
		Is it for such I agitate my heart?
		
		I am incapable of more knowledge.   
		What is this, this face
		So murderous in its strangle of branches?--
		
		Its snaky acids hiss.
		It petrifies the will. These are the isolate, slow faults   
		That kill, that kill, that kill.


	3. MONOLOGUE AT 3 AM

		Better that every fiber crack
		and fury make head,
		blood drenching vivid
		couch, carpet, floor
		and the snake-figured almanac
		vouching you are
		a million green counties from here,
		
		than to sit mute, twitching so
		under prickling stars,
		with stare, with curse
		blackening the time
		goodbyes were said, trains let go,
		and I, great magnanimous fool, thus wrenched from
		my one kingdom.


	4. MORNING SONG

		Love set you going like a fat gold watch.
		The midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry   
		Took its place among the elements.
		
		Our voices echo, magnifying your arrival. New statue.
		In a drafty museum, your nakedness
		Shadows our safety. We stand round blankly as walls.
		
		I’m no more your mother
		Than the cloud that distills a mirror to reflect its own slow
		Effacement at the wind’s hand.
		
		All night your moth-breath
		Flickers among the flat pink roses. I wake to listen:
		A far sea moves in my ear.
		
		One cry, and I stumble from bed, cow-heavy and floral
		In my Victorian nightgown.
		Your mouth opens clean as a cat’s. The window square
		
		Whitens and swallows its dull stars. And now you try
		Your handful of notes;
		The clear vowels rise like balloons.


	5. MUSSEL HUNTER AT ROCK HARBOR

		I came before the water--
		Colorists came to get the
		Good of the Cape light that scours
		Sand grit to sided crystal
		And buffs and sleeks the blunt hulls
		Of the three fishing smacks beached
		On the bank of the river’s
		
		Backtracking tail. I’d come for
		Free fish-bait: the blue mussels
		Clumped like bulbs at the grassroot
		Margin of the tidal pools.
		Dawn tide stood dead low. I smelt
		Mud stench, shell guts, gulls’ leavings;
		Heard a queer crusty scrabble
		
		Cease, and I neared the silenced
		Edge of a cratered pool-bed.
		The mussels hung dull blue and
		Conspicuous, yet it seemed
		A sly world’s hinges had swung
		Shut against me. All held still.
		Though I counted scant seconds,
		
		Enough ages lapsed to win
		Confidence of safe-conduct
		In the wary other world
		Eyeing me. Grass put forth claws,
		Small mud knobs, nudged from under,
		Displaced their domes as tiny
		Knights might doff their casques. The crabs
		
		Inched from their pygmy burrows
		And from the trench-dug mud, all Camouflaged in mottled mail
		Of browns and greens. Each wore one
		Claw swollen to a shield large
		As itself--no fiddler’s arm
		Grown Gargantuan by trade,
		
		But grown grimly, and grimly
		Borne, for a use beyond my
		Guessing of it. Sibilant
		Mass-motived hordes, they sidled
		Out in a converging stream
		Toward the pool-mouth, perhaps to
		Meet the thin and sluggish thread
		
		Of sea retracing its tide--
		Way up the river-basin.
		Or to avoid me. They moved
		Obliquely with a dry-wet
		Sound, with a glittery wisp
		And trickle. Could they feel mud
		Pleasurable under claws
		
		As I could between bare toes?
		That question ended it--I
		Stood shut out, for once, for all,
		Puzzling the passage of their
		Absolutely alien
		Order as I might puzzle
		At the clear tail of Halley’s
		
		Comet coolly giving my
		Orbit the go-by, made known
		By a family name it
		Knew nothing of. So the crabs
		Went about their business, which
		Wasn’t fiddling, and I filled
		A big handkerchief with blue
		
		Mussels. From what the crabs saw,
		If they could see, I was one
		Two-legged mussel-picker.
		High on the airy thatching
		Of the dense grasses I found
		The husk of a fiddler-crab,
		Intact, strangely strayed above
		
		His world of mud--green color
		And innards bleached out blown off
		Somewhere by much sun and wind;
		There was no telling if he’d
		Died recluse of suicide
		Or headstrong Columbus crab.
		The crab-face, etched and set there,
		
		Grimaced as skulls grimace: it
		Had an Oriental look,
		A samurai death mask done
		On a tiger tooth, less for
		Art’s sake than God’s. Far from sea--
		Where red-freckled crab-backs, claws
		And whole crabs, dead, their soggy
		
		Bellies pallid and upturned,
		Perform their shambling waltzes
		On the waves’ dissolving turn
		And return, losing themselves
		Bit by bit to their friendly
		Element--this relic saved
		Face, to face the bald-faced sun.


	6. POPPIES IN OCTOBER

		Even the sun-clouds this morning cannot manage such skirts.
		Nor the woman in the ambulance
		Whose red heart blooms through her coat so astoundingly –
		
		A gift, a love gift
		Utterly unasked for
		By a sky
		
		Palely and flamily
		Igniting its carbon monoxides, by eyes
		Dulled to a halt under bowlers.
		
		Oh my God, what am I
		That these late mouths should cry open
		In a forest of frosts, in a dawn of cornflowers.


	7. THE APPLICANT

		First, are you our sort of a person?
		Do you wear
		A glass eye, false teeth or a crutch,
		A brace or a hook,
		Rubber breasts or a rubber crotch,
		
		Stitches to show something’s missing? No, no? Then
		How can we give you a thing?
		Stop crying.
		Open your hand.
		Empty? Empty. Here is a hand
		
		To fill it and willing
		To bring teacups and roll away headaches
		And do whatever you tell it.
		Will you marry it?
		It is guaranteed
		
		To thumb shut your eyes at the end
		And dissolve of sorrow.
		We make new stock from the salt.
		I notice you are stark naked.
		How about this suit--
		
		Black and stiff, but not a bad fit.
		Will you marry it?
		It is waterproof, shatterproof, proof
		Against fire and bombs through the roof.
		Believe me, they’ll bury you in it.
		
		Now your head, excuse me, is empty.
		I have the ticket for that.
		Come here, sweetie, out of the closet.
		Well, what do you think of _that?_
		Naked as paper to start
		
		But in twenty-five years she’ll be silver,
		In fifty, gold.
		A living doll, everywhere you look.
		It can sew, it can cook,
		It can talk, talk, talk.
		
		It works, there is nothing wrong with it.
		You have a hole, it’s a poultice.
		You have an eye, it’s an image.
		My boy, it’s your last resort.
		Will you marry it, marry it, marry it.


	8. THE COLOSSUS

		I shall never get you put together entirely,
		Pieced, glued, and properly jointed.
		Mule-bray, pig-grunt and bawdy cackles
		Proceed from your great lips.
		It’s worse than a barnyard.
		
		Perhaps you consider yourself an oracle,
		Mouthpiece of the dead, or of some god or other.
		Thirty years now I have labored
		To dredge the silt from your throat.
		I am none the wiser.
		
		Scaling little ladders with glue pots and pails of lysol
		I crawl like an ant in mourning
		Over the weedy acres of your brow
		To mend the immense skull plates and clear
		The bald, white tumuli of your eyes.
		
		A blue sky out of the Oresteia
		Arches above us. O father, all by yourself
		You are pithy and historical as the Roman Forum.
		I open my lunch on a hill of black cypress.
		Your fluted bones and acanthine hair are littered
		
		In their old anarchy to the horizon-line.
		It would take more than a lightning-stroke
		To create such a ruin.
		Nights, I squat in the cornucopia
		Of your left ear, out of the wind,
		
		Counting the red stars and those of plum-color.
		The sun rises under the pillar of your tongue.
		My hours are married to shadow.
		No longer do I listen for the scrape of a keel
		On the blank stones of the landing.


	9. THE EVERLASTING MONDAY

		Thou shalt have an everlasting
		Monday and stand in the moon.
		
		The moon’s man stands in his shell,
		Bent under a bundle
		Of sticks. The light falls chalk and cold
		Upon our bedspread.
		His teeth are chattering among the leprous
		Peaks and craters of those extinct volcanoes.
		
		He also against black frost
		Would pick sticks, would not rest
		Until his own lit room outshone
		Sunday’s ghost of sun;
		Now works his hell of Mondays in the moon’s ball,
		Fireless, seven chill seas chained to his ankle.


	10. TULIPS

		The tulips are too excitable, it is winter here.
		Look how white everything is, how quiet, how snowed-in.   
		I am learning peacefulness, lying by myself quietly
		As the light lies on these white walls, this bed, these hands.   
		I am nobody; I have nothing to do with explosions.   
		I have given my name and my day-clothes up to the nurses   
		And my history to the anesthetist and my body to surgeons.
		
		They have propped my head between the pillow and the sheet-cuff   
		Like an eye between two white lids that will not shut.
		Stupid pupil, it has to take everything in.
		The nurses pass and pass, they are no trouble,
		They pass the way gulls pass inland in their white caps,
		Doing things with their hands, one just the same as another,   
		So it is impossible to tell how many there are.
		
		My body is a pebble to them, they tend it as water
		Tends to the pebbles it must run over, smoothing them gently.
		They bring me numbness in their bright needles, they bring me sleep.   
		Now I have lost myself I am sick of baggage——
		My patent leather overnight case like a black pillbox,   
		My husband and child smiling out of the family photo;   
		Their smiles catch onto my skin, little smiling hooks.
		
		I have let things slip, a thirty-year-old cargo boat   
		stubbornly hanging on to my name and address.
		They have swabbed me clear of my loving associations.   
		Scared and bare on the green plastic-pillowed trolley   
		I watched my teaset, my bureaus of linen, my books   
		Sink out of sight, and the water went over my head.   
		I am a nun now, I have never been so pure.
		
		I didn’t want any flowers, I only wanted
		To lie with my hands turned up and be utterly empty.
		How free it is, you have no idea how free——
		The peacefulness is so big it dazes you,
		And it asks nothing, a name tag, a few trinkets.
		It is what the dead close on, finally; I imagine them   
		Shutting their mouths on it, like a Communion tablet.   
		
		The tulips are too red in the first place, they hurt me.
		Even through the gift paper I could hear them breathe   
		Lightly, through their white swaddlings, like an awful baby.   
		Their redness talks to my wound, it corresponds.
		They are subtle : they seem to float, though they weigh me down,   
		Upsetting me with their sudden tongues and their color,   
		A dozen red lead sinkers round my neck.
		
		Nobody watched me before, now I am watched.   
		The tulips turn to me, and the window behind me
		Where once a day the light slowly widens and slowly thins,   
		And I see myself, flat, ridiculous, a cut-paper shadow   
		Between the eye of the sun and the eyes of the tulips,   
		And I have no face, I have wanted to efface myself.   
		The vivid tulips eat my oxygen.
		
		Before they came the air was calm enough,
		Coming and going, breath by breath, without any fuss.   
		Then the tulips filled it up like a loud noise.
		Now the air snags and eddies round them the way a river   
		Snags and eddies round a sunken rust-red engine.   
		They concentrate my attention, that was happy   
		Playing and resting without committing itself.
		
		The walls, also, seem to be warming themselves.
		The tulips should be behind bars like dangerous animals;   
		They are opening like the mouth of some great African cat,   
		And I am aware of my heart: it opens and closes
		Its bowl of red blooms out of sheer love of me.
		The water I taste is warm and salt, like the sea,
		And comes from a country far away as health.


	11. WAKING IN WINTER

		I can taste the tin of the sky -- the real tin thing.
		Winter dawn is the color of metal,
		The trees stiffen into place like burnt nerves.
		All night I have dreamed of destruction, annihilations --
		An assembly-line of cut throats, and you and I
		Inching off in the gray Chevrolet, drinking the green
		Poison of stilled lawns, the little clapboard gravestones,
		Noiseless, on rubber wheels, on the way to the sea resort.
		
		How the balconies echoed! How the sun lit up
		The skulls, the unbuckled bones facing the view!
		Space! Space! The bed linen was giving out entirely.
		Cot legs melted in terrible attitudes, and the nurses --
		Each nurse patched her soul to a wound and disappeared.
		The deathly guests had not been satisfied
		With the rooms, or the smiles, or the beautiful rubber plants,
		Or the sea, Hushing their peeled sense like Old Mother Morphia.


	12. WINTER TREES

		The wet dawn inks are doing their blue dissolve.
		On their blotter of fog the trees
		Seem a botanical drawing.
		Memories growing, ring on ring,
		A series of weddings.
		
		Knowing neither abortions nor bitchery,
		Truer than women,
		They seed so effortlessly!
		Tasting the winds, that are footless,
		Waist-deep in history.
		
		Full of wings, otherworldliness.
		In this, they are Ledas.
		O mother of leaves and sweetness
		Who are these pietas?
		The shadows of ringdoves chanting, but chasing nothing.


	13. YOU’RE

		Clownlike, happiest on your hands,   
		Feet to the stars, and moon-skulled,   
		Gilled like a fish. A common-sense   
		Thumbs-down on the dodo’s mode.   
		Wrapped up in yourself like a spool,   
		Trawling your dark as owls do.   
		Mute as a turnip from the Fourth   
		Of July to All Fools’ Day,
		O high-riser, my little loaf.
		
		Vague as fog and looked for like mail.   
		Farther off than Australia.
		Bent-backed Atlas, our traveled prawn.   
		Snug as a bud and at home   
		Like a sprat in a pickle jug.   
		A creel of eels, all ripples.   
		Jumpy as a Mexican bean.   
		Right, like a well-done sum.   
		A clean slate, with your own face on.


*** Joseph Mary Plunkett (1887 - 1916)

	1. HEAVEN IN HELL

		If the dread all-seeing stars, 
		Ringed Saturn and ruddy Mars 
		And their companions all the seven, 
		That play before the lord of Heaven, 
		Each blossoming nebula and all 
		The constellations, were to fall 
		Low at my feet and worship me, 
		Endow me with all sovranty 
		Of their wide kingdom of the blue-- 
		Yet I would not believe that you 
		Could love me--If besides the nine 
		Encircling legions all-divine 
		Should, chanting, teach me that my worth 
		Outshone the souls of men on earth 
		And seraphs in Heaven, and as well 
		That glittering demons deep in Hell 
		Fled at my frown, obeyed my word-- 
		If every flower and beast and bird 
		In God’s great earth and splendid sea 
		Should live and love and fight, for me 
		And my sweet singing and sad art-- 
		Yet could I not conceive your heart 
		Stooping to mine, nor your wild eyes 
		Unveiling their deep ecstasies, 
		Your tenebrous hair sweep near my lips, 
		Your eyelids bring your soul eclipse 
		For fear that I should be made blind 
		By love’s bright image in your mind. 
		You are the Standard of high Heaven, 
		The Banner brave towards which I’ve striven 
		To force my way--To seize and hold 
		The citadel of the city of gold 
		I must attain the Flag of love 
		Blazoned with the eternal Dove. 
		
		Once Immortality, a babe, 
		Played with the Future’s astrolabe 
		And marked a destiny thereon 
		More splendid than the morning sun 
		Leaping to glory from the earth: 
		More wondrous than the wonder-birth 
		Of the white moon from darkest rock; 
		More strange than should the sun unlock 
		His leashes and let slip the stars; 
		More desperate than the clanging wars 
		Twixt Hell and Heaven; still more great 
		Than any favourable fate; 
		But beyond all things beautiful, 
		Beyond Mortality’s foot-rule 
		Of loveliness, and little words-- 
		Sometimes, at twilit eve, when birds 
		Lapse from dream-silence into song, 
		Sometimes when Thunder’s rolling note 
		Reverberates from his iron throat, 
		They speak of such high mysteries 
		But no one can interpret these-- 
		All of this dim and deep design 
		If I should choose, its crown were mine 
		To win or lose by my sole hand 
		And heart. I chose, and joined the band 
		Of Heaven’s adventurers that seek 
		To climb the never-conquered peak 
		In solitude by their sole might. 
		In the dark innocence of night 
		I fought unknown inhuman foes 
		And left them in their battle-throes, 
		Hacked a way through them and advanced 
		To where the stars of morning danced 
		In your high honour, there I stood 
		To see you, till the morning-flood 
		Burst from the sky--but your sunrise 
		Striking my unaccustomed eyes 
		Smote them to darkness, and I turned 
		And stumbled towards the night. There burned 
		In heart and eyes a drunken flame 
		That sang and clamoured out your name, 
		And woke a madness in my head. 
		The enemies I had left for dead 
		Surrounded me with gibbering cries 
		And mocked me for my blinded eyes. 
		I curst them till they rose in rage 
		And flung me down a battle-gage 
		To fight them on the floors of Hell 
		Where solely they’re assailable. 
		I took the challenge straightaway 
		And leaped--and that was yesterday 
		Or was last year, but every hour 
		For weary years to break their power 
		Still must I fight, but now a gleam 
		Of hope comes to me like a dream, 
		To-day, though dimly, I do see, 
		My vision has come back to me. 
		And I have learnt in deepest Hell 
		I with terror-twisted eyes 
		Have watched you play in Paradise, 
		Tortured and torn by demons seven 
		Have kept my heart’s gaze fixed on Heaven, 
		Save when the smoky mists of blood 
		Have blinded me with their fell flood. 
		My desert heart all desolate 
		Lit with the mirage of your hate 
		I searched, my vision held above, 
		For green oasis of your love. 
		My heart’s dry desert, hot and wide, 
		Bounded by flames on every side, 
		So dim and old no song can tell, 
		Covers the tombs where dead kings dwell: 
		Now demons dance upon their tombs, 
		Shut with the seals of lasting dooms, 
		For them until the world be riven 
		No hope of Hell, no fear of Heaven. 
		But I, alas! am torn between 
		The things unseen and the things seen, 
		I alone of the souls I know 
		In Hell and Heaven am high and low, 
		High in Heaven and low in Hell: 
		From pit and peak inaccessible 
		To all but Satan and seraphim 
		My song gains power and grows more grim. 
		
		Only the straining of my vision 
		Toward the playing-fields elysian 
		Where you with starry comrades fling 
		Your fervours over eye and wing, 
		With deep and happy subtlety 
		Flavouring the wine-bag of the bee; 
		Thrones, principalities and powers 
		Showering with Eden-flowers: 
		With Michael’s sword and Raphael’s lute 
		Slaying and singing, making bruit 
		Of lovely laughter with your lips 
		Sounding as where the honey drips 
		At reaping-time by rippling brooks 
		Twining between the barley-stocks: 
		Only your shape that holds my sight, 
		Your ways that fill it with delight, 
		Your steps that blossom where you’ve trod, 
		Your laughter like the breath of God, 
		And all the braveries that extol 
		The living sword that is your soul: 
		Only your passion-haunted eyes 
		Interpreting your mysteries: 
		These are to me and my desire 
		For pillar of cloud and pillar of fire, 
		A gleam and gloom of Heaven, in Hell 
		A high continuous miracle.


	2. I LOVE YOU WITH MY EVERY BREATH

		I love you with my every breath, 
		I make you songs like thunder birds, 
		Give you my life--you give me death 
		And stab me with your dreadful words. 
		
		You laid my head against your heart 
		Last night, my lips upon your breast 
		And now you say that we must part 
		For fear your heart should be oppressed: 
		
		You cannot go against the world 
		For my sake only--thus your phrase, 
		But I--God’s beauty is unfurled 
		In your gold hair, and in your gaze 
		
		The wisdom of God’s bride--each soul 
		That shares his love, and yours and mine, 
		Two lovers share your aureole 
		And one is mortal, one divine: 
		
		One came on earth that you might know 
		His love for you--that you deny, 
		Now you give me this equal blow: 
		One died for you, and one will die.


	3. I SAW THE SUN AT MIDNIGHT

		I saw the Sun at midnight, rising red, 
		Deep-hued yet glowing, heavy with the stain 
		Of blood-compassion, and I saw It gain 
		Swiftly in size and growing till It spread 
		Over the stars; the heavens bowed their head 
		As from Its heart slow dripped a crimson rain, 
		Then a great tremor shook It, as of pain--
		The night fell, moaning, as It hung there dead. 
		
		O Sun, O Christ, O bleeding Heart of flame! 
		Thou givest Thine agony as our life’s worth, 
		And makest it infinite, lest we have dearth 
		Of rights wherewith to call upon Thy Name; 
		Thou pawnest Heaven as a pledge for Earth 
		And for our glory sufferest all shame.


	4. INITIATION

		Our lips can only stammer, yet we chant 
		High things of God. We do not hope to praise 
		The splendour and the glory of his ways, 
		Nor light up Heaven with our low descant: 
		But we will follow thee, his hierophant 
		Filling with secret canticles the days 
		To shadow forth in symbols for their gaze 
		What crowns and thrones await his militant. 
		
		For all his beauty showered on the earth 
		Is summed in thee, O thou most perfect flower; 
		His dew has filled thy chalice, and his power 
		Blows forth the fragrance of thy mystic worth: 
		White blossom of his Tree, behold the hour! 
		Fear not! thy fruit is Love’s most lovely birth.


*** Edgar Allan Poe (1809 - 1849)

	1. A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM

		TAKE this kiss upon the brow!
		And, in parting from you now,
		Thus much let me avow--
		You are not wrong, who deem
		That my days have been a dream;
		Yet if hope has flown away
		In a night, or in a day,
		In a vision, or in none,
		Is it therefore the less gone?
		All that we see or seem
		Is but a dream within a dream.
		
		I stand amid the roar
		Of a surf-tormented shore,
		And I hold within my hand
		Grains of the golden sand--
		How few! yet how they creep
		Through my fingers to the deep,
		While I weep--while I weep!
		O God! can I not grasp
		Them with a tighter clasp?
		O God! can I not save
		One from the pitiless wave?
		Is all that we see or seem
		But a dream within a dream?


	2. ANNABEL LEE

		It was many and many a year ago,
		In a kingdom by the sea,
		That a maiden there lived whom you may know
		By the name of Annabel Lee;
		And this maiden she lived with no other thought
		Than to love and be loved by me.
		
		I was a child and she was a child,
		In this kingdom by the sea;
		But we loved with a love that was more than love--
		I and my Annabel Lee;
		With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
		Coveted her and me.
		
		And this was the reason that, long ago,
		In this kingdom by the sea,
		A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
		My beautiful Annabel Lee;
		So that her highborn kinsman came
		And bore her away from me,
		To shut her up in a sepulchre
		In this kingdom by the sea.
		
		The angels, not half so happy in heaven,
		Went envying her and me--
		Yes!--that was the reason (as all men know,
		In this kingdom by the sea)
		That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
		Chilling and killing my Annabel Lee.
		
		But our love it was stronger by far than the love
		Of those who were older than we--
		Of many far wiser than we--
		And neither the angels in heaven above,
		Nor the demons down under the sea,
		Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
		Of the beautiful Annabel Lee.
		
		For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
		Of the beautiful Annabel Lee;
		And the stars never rise but I feel the bright eyes
		Of the beautiful Annabel Lee;
		And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side
		Of my darling--my darling--my life and my bride,
		In the sepulchre there by the sea,
		In her tomb by the sounding sea.


	3. ELDORADO

		Gaily bedight, 
		  A gallant knight, 
		In sunshine and in shadow,   
		  Had journeyed long,   
		  Singing a song, 
		In search of Eldorado. 
		
		  But he grew old-- 
		  This knight so bold--   
		And o’er his heart a shadow--   
		  Fell as he found 
		  No spot of ground 
		That looked like Eldorado. 
		
		  And, as his strength   
		  Failed him at length, 
		He met a pilgrim shadow--   
		  ‘Shadow,’ said he,   
		  ‘Where can it be-- 
		This land of Eldorado?’ 
		
		  ‘Over the Mountains 
		  Of the Moon, 
		Down the Valley of the Shadow,   
		  Ride, boldly ride,’ 
		  The shade replied,-- 
		‘If you seek for Eldorado!’


	4. ISRAFEL

		_And the angel Israfel, whose heart-strings are a lute, and who has the sweetest voice of all God’s creatures._ --KORAN
		
		In Heaven a spirit doth dwell
		  “Whose heart-strings are a lute”;   
		None sing so wildly well
		As the angel Israfel,
		And the giddy stars (so legends tell),   
		Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell   
		  Of his voice, all mute.
		
		Tottering above
		  In her highest noon,
		  The enamoured moon
		Blushes with love,
		  While, to listen, the red levin   
		  (With the rapid Pleiads, even,   
		  Which were seven,)
		  Pauses in Heaven.
		
		And they say (the starry choir   
		  And the other listening things)   
		That Israfeli’s fire
		Is owing to that lyre
		  By which he sits and sings--
		The trembling living wire
		  Of those unusual strings.
		
		But the skies that angel trod,
		  Where deep thoughts are a duty,   
		Where Love’s a grown-up God,
		  Where the Houri glances are   
		Imbued with all the beauty
		  Which we worship in a star.
		
		Therefore, thou art not wrong,   
		  Israfeli, who despisest
		An unimpassioned song;
		To thee the laurels belong,
		  Best bard, because the wisest!   
		Merrily live, and long!
		
		The ecstasies above
		  With thy burning measures suit--
		Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,
		  With the fervour of thy lute--
		  Well may the stars be mute!
		
		Yes, Heaven is thine; but this
		  Is a world of sweets and sours;
		  Our flowers are merely-flowers,   
		And the shadow of thy perfect bliss
		  Is the sunshine of ours.
		
		If I could dwell
		Where Israfel
		  Hath dwelt, and he where I,
		He might not sing so wildly well
		  A mortal melody,
		While a bolder note than this might swell   
		  From my lyre within the sky.


	5. LENORE

		Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!
		Let the bell toll!-- a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river;
		And, Guy de Vere, hast thou no tear?-- weep now or nevermore!
		See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!
		Come! let the burial rite be read-- the funeral song be sung!--
		An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young--
		A dirge for her the doubly dead in that she died so young.
		“Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,
		And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her-- that she died!
		How shall the ritual, then, be read?-- the requiem how be sung
		By you- by yours, the evil eye,-- by yours, the slanderous tongue
		That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?”
		Peccavimus; but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
		Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong.
		The sweet Lenore hath “gone before,“ with Hope, that flew beside,
		Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy
		bride.
		For her, the fair and debonair, that now so lowly lies,
		The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes
		The life still there, upon her hair-- the death upon her eyes.
		“Avaunt! avaunt! from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven--
		From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven--
		From grief and groan, to a golden throne, beside the King of
		Heaven!
		Let no bell toll, then,-- lest her soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
		Should catch the note as it doth float up from the damned Earth!
		And I!-- to-night my heart is light!-- no dirge will I upraise,
		But waft the angel on her flight with a Paean of old days!”


	6. SANCTA MARIA

		Sancta Maria! turn thine eyes--
		Upon the sinner’s sacrifice,
		Of fervent prayer and humble love,
		From thy holy throne above.
		At morn; at noon; at twilight dim--
		Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
		In joy and woe; in good and ill--
		Mother of God, be with me still!
		When the Hours flew brightly by,
		And not a cloud obscured the sky,
		My soul, lest it should truant be,
		Thy grace did guide to thine and thee;
		Now, when storms of Fate o’ercast
		Darkly my Present and my Past,
		Let my Future radiant shine
		With sweet hopes of thee and thine!


	7. THE BELLS

		I
		
		Hear the sledges with the bells--
		Silver bells!
		What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
		How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
		In the icy air of night!
		While the stars that oversprinkle
		All the heavens, seem to twinkle
		With a crystalline delight;
		Keeping time, time, time,
		In a sort of Runic rhyme,
		To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells
		From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
		Bells, bells, bells--
		From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.
		
		
		II
		
		Hear the mellow wedding bells,
		Golden bells!
		What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!
		Through the balmy air of night
		How they ring out their delight!
		From the molten-golden notes,
		And an in tune,
		What a liquid ditty floats
		To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats
		On the moon!
		Oh, from out the sounding cells,
		What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!
		How it swells!
		How it dwells
		On the Future! how it tells
		Of the rapture that impels
		To the swinging and the ringing
		Of the bells, bells, bells,
		Of the bells, bells, bells,bells,
		Bells, bells, bells--
		To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!
		
		
		III
		
		Hear the loud alarum bells--
		Brazen bells!
		What a tale of terror, now, their turbulency tells!
		In the startled ear of night
		How they scream out their affright!
		Too much horrified to speak,
		They can only shriek, shriek,
		Out of tune,
		In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
		In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire,
		Leaping higher, higher, higher,
		With a desperate desire,
		And a resolute endeavor,
		Now-- now to sit or never,
		By the side of the pale-faced moon.
		Oh, the bells, bells, bells!
		What a tale their terror tells
		Of Despair!
		How they clang, and clash, and roar!
		What a horror they outpour
		On the bosom of the palpitating air!
		Yet the ear it fully knows,
		By the twanging,
		And the clanging,
		How the danger ebbs and flows:
		Yet the ear distinctly tells,
		In the jangling,
		And the wrangling,
		How the danger sinks and swells,
		By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells--
		Of the bells--
		Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
		Bells, bells, bells--
		In the clamor and the clangor of the bells!
		
		
		IV
		
		Hear the tolling of the bells--
		Iron Bells!
		What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!
		In the silence of the night,
		How we shiver with affright
		At the melancholy menace of their tone!
		For every sound that floats
		From the rust within their throats
		Is a groan.
		And the people-- ah, the people--
		They that dwell up in the steeple,
		All Alone
		And who, tolling, tolling, tolling,
		In that muffled monotone,
		Feel a glory in so rolling
		On the human heart a stone-
		They are neither man nor woman-
		They are neither brute nor human-
		They are Ghouls:
		And their king it is who tolls;
		And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
		Rolls
		A paean from the bells!
		And his merry bosom swells
		With the paean of the bells!
		And he dances, and he yells;
		Keeping time, time, time,
		In a sort of Runic rhyme,
		To the paean of the bells--
		Of the bells:
		Keeping time, time, time,
		In a sort of Runic rhyme,
		To the throbbing of the bells--
		Of the bells, bells, bells--
		To the sobbing of the bells;
		Keeping time, time, time,
		As he knells, knells, knells,
		In a happy Runic rhyme,
		To the rolling of the bells--
		Of the bells, bells, bells:
		To the tolling of the bells,
		Of the bells, bells, bells, bells--
		Bells, bells, bells-
		To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.


	8. THE CITY IN THE SEA

		Lo! Death has reared himself a throne
		In a strange city lying alone
		Far down within the dim West,
		Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best
		Have gone to their eternal rest.
		There shrines and palaces and towers
		(Time-eaten towers that tremble not!)
		Resemble nothing that is ours.
		Around, by lifting winds forgot,
		Resignedly beneath the sky
		The melancholy waters lie.
		No rays from the holy heaven come down
		On the long night-time of that town;
		But light from out the lurid sea
		Streams up the turrets silently--
		Gleams up the pinnacles far and free--
		Up domes--up spires--up kingly halls--
		Up fanes--up Babylon-like walls--
		Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers
		Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers--
		Up many and many a marvellous shrine
		Whose wreathed friezes intertwine
		The viol, the violet, and the vine.
		Resignedly beneath the sky
		The melancholy waters lie.
		So blend the turrets and shadows there
		That all seem pendulous in air,
		While from a proud tower in the town
		Death looks gigantically down.
		There open fanes and gaping graves
		Yawn level with the luminous waves;
		But not the riches there that lie
		In each idol’s diamond eye--
		Not the gaily-jewelled dead
		Tempt the waters from their bed;
		For no ripples curl, alas!
		Along that wilderness of glass--
		No swellings tell that winds may be
		Upon some far-off happier sea--
		No heavings hint that winds have been
		On seas less hideously serene.
		But lo, a stir is in the air!
		The wave--there is a movement there!
		As if the towers had thrust aside,
		In slightly sinking, the dull tide--
		As if their tops had feebly given
		A void within the filmy Heaven.
		The waves have now a redder glow--
		The hours are breathing faint and low--
		And when, amid no earthly moans,
		Down, down that town shall settle hence,
		Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,
		Shall do it reverence.


	9. THE CONQUEROR WORM

		Lo! ‘tis a gala night
		Within the lonesome latter years.
		An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
		In veils, and drowned in tears,
		Sit in a theatre to see
		A play of hopes and fears
		While the orchestra breathes fitfully
		The music of the spheres.
		Mimes, in the form of God on high,
		Mutter and mumble low,
		And hither and thither fly;
		Mere puppets they, who come and go
		At bidding of vast formless things
		That shift the scenery to and fro,
		Flapping from out their condor wings
		Invisible Woe.
		That motley drama--oh, be sure
		It shall not be forgot!
		With its Phantom chased for evermore
		By a crowd that seize it not,
		Through a circle that ever returneth in
		To the self-same spot;
		And much of Madness, and more of Sin,
		And Horror the soul of the plot.
		But see amid the mimic rout
		A crawling shape intrude:
		A blood-red thing that writhes from out
		The scenic solitude!
		It writhes--it writhes!--with mortal pangs
		The mimes become its food,
		And seraphs sob at vermin fangs
		In human gore imbued.
		Out--out are the lights--out all!
		And over each quivering form
		The curtain, a funeral pall,
		Comes down with the rush of a storm,
		While the angels, all pallid and wan,
		Uprising, unveiling, affirm
		That the play is the tragedy, ``Man,‘’
		And the hero, the Conqueror Worm.


	10. THE FOREST REVERIE

		‘Tis said that when
		The hands of men
		Tamed this primeval wood,
		And hoary trees with groans of woe,
		Like warriors by an unknown foe,
		Were in their strength subdued,
		The virgin Earth Gave instant birth
		To springs that ne’er did flow
		That in the sun Did rivulets run,
		And all around rare flowers did blow
		The wild rose pale Perfumed the gale
		And the queenly lily adown the dale
		(Whom the sun and the dew
		And the winds did woo),
		With the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew.
		So when in tears
		The love of years
		Is wasted like the snow,
		And the fine fibrils of its life
		By the rude wrong of instant strife
		Are broken at a blow
		Within the heart
		Do springs upstart
		Of which it doth now know,
		And strange, sweet dreams,
		Like silent streams
		That from new fountains overflow,
		With the earlier tide
		Of rivers glide
		Deep in the heart whose hope has died--
		Quenching the fires its ashes hide,--
		Its ashes, whence will spring and grow
		Sweet flowers, ere long,
		The rare and radiant flowers of song!


	11. THE HAUNTED PALACE

		I
		
		In the greenest of our valleys,
		By good angels tenanted,
		Once fair and stately palace --
		Radiant palace --reared its head.
		In the monarch Thought’s dominion --
		It stood there!
		Never seraph spread a pinion
		Over fabric half so fair.
		
		
		II
		
		Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
		On its roof did float and flow;
		(This --all this --was in the olden
		Time long ago)
		And every gentle air that dallied,
		In that sweet day,
		Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
		A winged odour went away.
		
		
		III
		
		Wanderers in that happy valley
		Through two luminous windows saw
		Spirits moving musically
		To a lute’s well-tuned law,
		Round about a throne, where sitting
		(Porphyrogene!)
		In state his glory well befitting,
		The ruler of the realm was seen.
		
		
		IV
		
		And all with pearl and ruby glowing
		Was the fair palace door,
		Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing
		And sparkling evermore,
		A troop of Echoes whose sweet duty
		Was but to sing,
		In voices of surpassing beauty,
		The wit and wisdom of their king.
		
		
		V
		
		But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
		Assailed the monarch’s high estate;
		(Ah, let us mourn, for never morrow
		Shall dawn upon him, desolate!)
		And, round about his home, the glory
		That blushed and bloomed
		Is but a dim-remembered story
		Of the old time entombed.
		
		
		VI
		
		And travellers now within that valley,
		Through the red-litten windows, see
		Vast forms that move fantastically
		To a discordant melody;
		While, like a rapid ghastly river,
		Through the pale door,
		A hideous throng rush out forever,
		And laugh --but smile no more.


	12. THE RAVEN

		Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
		Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore--
		   While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
		As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
		“’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door--
		           Only this and nothing more.”
		
		   Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December;
		And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
		   Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
		   From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
		For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
		           Nameless here for evermore.
		
		   And the silken, sad, uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
		Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
		   So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
		   “’Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door--
		Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
		           This it is and nothing more.”
		
		   Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
		“Sir,” said I, “or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
		   But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
		   And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
		That I scarce was sure I heard you”--here I opened wide the door;--
		           Darkness there and nothing more.
		
		   Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
		Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
		   But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token,
		   And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, “Lenore?”
		This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, “Lenore!”--
		           Merely this and nothing more.
		
		   Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
		Soon again I heard a tapping somewhat louder than before.
		   “Surely,” said I, “surely that is something at my window lattice;
		     Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
		Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;--
		           ’Tis the wind and nothing more!”
		
		   Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
		In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore;
		   Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he;
		   But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
		Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
		           Perched, and sat, and nothing more.
		
		Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
		By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
		“Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou,” I said, “art sure no craven,
		Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore--
		Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night’s Plutonian shore!”
		           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
		
		   Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
		Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
		   For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
		   Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
		Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
		           With such name as “Nevermore.”
		
		   But the Raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only
		That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
		   Nothing farther then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
		   Till I scarcely more than muttered “Other friends have flown before--
		On the morrow he will leave me, as my Hopes have flown before.”
		           Then the bird said “Nevermore.”
		
		   Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
		“Doubtless,” said I, “what it utters is its only stock and store
		   Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
		   Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
		Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
		           Of ‘Never--nevermore’.”
		
		   But the Raven still beguiling all my fancy into smiling,
		Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird, and bust and door;
		   Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
		   Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
		What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
		           Meant in croaking “Nevermore.”
		
		   This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
		To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom’s core;
		   This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
		   On the cushion’s velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o’er,
		But whose velvet-violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o’er,
		           She shall press, ah, nevermore!
		
		   Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
		Swung by Seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
		   “Wretch,” I cried, “thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
		   Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore;
		Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe and forget this lost Lenore!”
		           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
		
		   “Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
		Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
		   Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
		   On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
		Is there--is there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!”
		           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
		
		   “Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!
		By that Heaven that bends above us--by that God we both adore--
		   Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
		   It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
		Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore.”
		           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
		
		   “Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!” I shrieked, upstarting--
		“Get thee back into the tempest and the Night’s Plutonian shore!
		   Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
		   Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
		Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!”
		           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
		
		   And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
		On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
		   And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon’s that is dreaming,
		   And the lamp-light o’er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
		And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
		           Shall be lifted--nevermore!


	13. THE VALLEY OF UNREST

		_Once_ it smiled a silent dell 
		Where the people did not dwell; 
		They had gone unto the wars, 
		Trusting to the mild-eyed stars, 
		Nightly, from their azure towers, 
		To keep watch above the flowers, 
		In the midst of which all day 
		The red sun-light lazily lay. 
		Now each visitor shall confess 
		The sad valley’s restlessness. 
		Nothing there is motionless-- 
		Nothing save the airs that brood 
		Over the magic solitude. 
		Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees 
		That palpitate like the chill seas 
		Around the misty Hebrides! 
		Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven 
		That rustle through the unquiet Heaven 
		Uneasily, from morn till even, 
		Over the violets there that lie 
		In myriad types of the human eye-- 
		Over the lilies there that wave 
		And weep above a nameless grave! 
		They wave:--from out their fragrant tops 
		External dews come down in drops. 
		They weep:--from off their delicate stems 
		Perennial tears descend in gems. 


	14. TO ONE IN PARADISE

		Thou wast that all to me, love, 
		For which my soul did pine-- 
		A green isle in the sea, love, 
		A fountain and a shrine, 
		All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers, 
		And all the flowers were mine. 
		
		Ah, dream too bright to last! 
		Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise 
		But to be overcast! 
		A voice from out the Future cries, 
		“On! on!”--but o’er the Past 
		(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies 
		Mute, motionless, aghast! 
		
		For, alas! alas! with me 
		The light of Life is o’er! 
		No more--no more--no more-- 
		(Such language holds the solemn sea 
		To the sands upon the shore) 
		Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree, 
		Or the stricken eagle soar! 
		
		And all my days are trances, 
		And all my nightly dreams 
		Are where thy grey eye glances, 
		And where thy footstep gleams-- 
		In what ethereal dances, 
		By what eternal streams. 


*** Alexander Pope (1688 - 1744)

	1. ODE ON SOLITUDE

		Happy the man, whose wish and care 
		  A few paternal acres bound, 
		Content to breathe his native air, 
		                           In his own ground. 
		
		Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread, 
		  Whose flocks supply him with attire, 
		Whose trees in summer yield him shade, 
		                           In winter fire. 
		
		Blest, who can unconcernedly find 
		  Hours, days, and years slide soft away, 
		In health of body, peace of mind, 
		                           Quiet by day, 
		
		Sound sleep by night; study and ease, 
		  Together mixed; sweet recreation; 
		And innocence, which most does please, 
		                           With meditation. 
		
		Thus let me live, unseen, unknown; 
		  Thus unlamented let me die; 
		Steal from the world, and not a stone 
		                           Tell where I lie.


	2. SUMMER

		See what delights in sylvan scenes appear!
		Descending Gods have found Elysium here.
		In woods bright Venus with Adonis stray’d,
		And chaste Diana haunts the forest shade.
		Come lovely nymph, and bless the silent hours,
		When swains from shearing seek their nightly bow’rs;
		When weary reapers quit the sultry field,
		And crown’d with corn, their thanks to Ceres yield.
		This harmless grove no lurking viper hides,
		But in my breast the serpent Love abides.
		Here bees from blossoms sip the rosy dew,
		But your Alexis knows no sweets but you.
		Oh deign to visit our forsaken seats,
		The mossy fountains, and the green retreats!
		Where-e’er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade,
		Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade,
		Where-e’er you tread, the blushing flow’rs shall rise,
		And all things flourish where you turn your eyes.
		Oh! How I long with you to pass my days,
		Invoke the muses, and resound your praise;
		Your praise the birds shall chant in ev’ry grove,
		And winds shall waft it to the pow’rs above.
		But wou’d you sing, and rival Orpheus’ strain,
		The wond’ring forests soon shou’d dance again,
		The moving mountains hear the pow’rful call,
		And headlong streams hang list’ning in their fall!
		But see, the shepherds shun the noon-day heat,
		The lowing herds to murm’ring brooks retreat,
		To closer shades the panting flocks remove,
		Ye Gods! And is there no relief for Love?
		But soon the sun with milder rays descends
		To the cool ocean, where his journey ends;
		On me Love’s fiercer flames for every prey,
		By night he scorches, as he burns by day.


	3. THE RIDDLE OF THE WORLD

		Know then thyself, presume not God to scan
		The proper study of Mankind is Man.
		Placed on this isthmus of a middle state,
		A Being darkly wise, and rudely great:
		With too much knowledge for the Sceptic side,
		With too much weakness for the Stoic’s pride,
		He hangs between; in doubt to act, or rest;
		In doubt to deem himself a God, or Beast;
		In doubt his mind and body to prefer;
		Born but to die, and reas’ning but to err;
		Whether he thinks to little, or too much;
		Chaos of Thought and Passion, all confus’d;
		Still by himself, abus’d or disabus’d;
		Created half to rise and half to fall;
		Great Lord of all things, yet a prey to all,
		Sole judge of truth, in endless error hurl’d;
		The glory, jest and riddle of the world.


*** Ezra Pound (1885 - 1972)

	1. A VIRGINAL

		No, no! Go from me. I have left her lately.
		I will not spoil my sheath with lesser brightness,   
		For my surrounding air hath a new lightness;
		Slight are her arms, yet they have bound me straitly   
		And left me cloaked as with a gauze of æther;   
		As with sweet leaves; as with subtle clearness.   
		Oh, I have picked up magic in her nearness
		To sheathe me half in half the things that sheathe her.   
		No, no! Go from me. I have still the flavour,   
		Soft as spring wind that’s come from birchen bowers.   
		Green come the shoots, aye April in the branches,
		As winter’s wound with her sleight hand she staunches,   
		Hath of the trees a likeness of the savour:
		As white their bark, so white this lady’s hours.


	2. AND THE DAYS ARE NOT FULL ENOUGH

		And the days are not full enough
		And the nights are not full enough
		And life slips by like a field mouse
		Not shaking the grass


	3. BALLAD FOR GLOOM

		For God, our God is a gallant foe 
		That playeth behind the veil. 
		
		I have loved my God as a child at heart 
		That seeketh deep bosoms for rest, 
		I have loved my God as a maid to man--
		But lo, this thing is best: 
		
		To love your God as a gallant foe that plays behind the veil; 
		To meet your God as the night winds meet beyond Arcturus’ pale. 
		
		I have played with God for a woman, 
		I have staked with my God for truth, 
		I have lost to my God as a man, clear-eyed-- 
		His dice be not of ruth. 
		
		For I am made as a naked blade, 
		But hear ye this thing in sooth: 
		
		Who loseth to God as man to man 
		Shall win at the turn of the game. 
		I have drawn my blade where the lightnings meet 
		But the ending is the same: 
		Who loseth to God as the sword blades lose 
		Shall win at the end of the game. 
		
		For God, our God is a gallant foe that playeth behind the veil. 
		Whom God deigns not to overthrow hath need of triple mail.


	4. CANTO I

		And then went down to the ship,
		Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and
		We set up mast and sail on that swart ship,
		Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also
		Heavy with weeping, and winds from sternward
		Bore us out onward with bellying canvas,
		Circe’s this craft, the trim-coifed goddess.
		Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller,
		Thus with stretched sail, we went over sea till day’s end.
		Sun to his slumber, shadows o’er all the ocean,
		Came we then to the bounds of deepest water,
		To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities
		Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever
		With glitter of sun-rays
		Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven
		Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.
		The ocean flowing backward, came we then to the place
		Aforesaid by Circe.
		Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus,
		And drawing sword from my hip
		I dug the ell-square pitkin;
		Poured we libations unto each the dead,
		First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white flour.
		Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death’s-heads;
		As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best
		For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods,
		A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.
		Dark blood flowed in the fosse,
		Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides
		Of youths and of the old who had borne much;
		Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender,
		Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads,
		Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,
		These many crowded about me; with shouting,
		Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts;
		Slaughtered the herds, sheep slain of bronze;
		Poured ointment, cried to the gods,
		To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine;
		Unsheathed the narrow sword,
		I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead,
		Till I should hear Tiresias.
		But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor,
		Unburied, cast on the wide earth,
		Limbs that we left in the house of Circe,
		Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other.
		Pitiful spirit.   And I cried in hurried speech:
		“Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast?
		“Cam’st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?”
		             And he in heavy speech:
		“Ill fate and abundant wine.    I slept in Circe’s ingle.
		“Going down the long ladder unguarded,
		“I fell against the buttress,
		“Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus.
		“But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied,
		“Heap up mine arms, be tomb by sea-bord, and inscribed:
		“A man of no fortune, and with a name to come. 
		“And set my oar up, that I swung mid fellows.”
		
		And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban,
		Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first:
		“A second time? why? man of ill star,
		“Facing the sunless dead and this joyless region?
		“Stand from the fosse, leave me my bloody bever
		“For soothsay.”
		              And I stepped back,
		And he strong with the blood, said then: “Odysseus
		“Shalt return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas,
		“Lose all companions.”  And then Anticlea came.
		Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus,
		In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.
		And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outward and away
		And unto Circe.
		             Venerandam,
		In the Cretan’s phrase, with the golden crown, Aphrodite,
		Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, orichalchi, with golden
		Girdles and breast bands, thou with dark eyelids
		Bearing the golden bough of Argicida. So that: 


	5. CANTO III

		I sat on the Dogana’s steps
		For the gondolas cost too much, that year,
		And there were not “those girls”, there was one face,
		And the Buccentoro twenty yards off, howling, “Stretti”,
		And the lit cross-beams, that year, in the Morosini,
		And peacocks in Koré’s house, or there may have been.
		             Gods float in the azure air,
		Bright gods and Tuscan, back before dew was shed.
		Light: and the first light, before ever dew was fallen.
		Panisks, and from the oak, dryas,
		And from the apple, mælid,
		Through all the wood, and the leaves are full of voices,
		A-whisper, and the clouds bowe over the lake,
		And there are gods upon them,
		And in the water, the almond-white swimmers,
		The silvery water glazes the upturned nipple,
		               As Poggio has remarked.
		Green veins in the turquoise,
		Or, the gray steps lead up under the cedars.
		
		My Cid rode up to Burgos,
		Up to the studded gate between two towers,
		Beat with his lance butt, and the child came out,
		Una niña de nueve años,
		To the little gallery over the gate, between the towers,
		Reading the writ, voce tinnula:
		That no man speak to, feed, help Ruy Diaz,
		On pain to have his heart out, set on a pike spike
		And both his eyes torn out, and all his goods sequestered,
		“And here, Myo Cid, are the seals,
		The big seal and the writing.”
		And he came down from Bivar, Myo Cid,
		With no hawks left there on their perches,
		And no clothes there in the presses,
		And left his trunk with Raquel and Vidas,
		That big box of sand, with the pawn-brokers,
		To get pay for his menie;
		Breaking his way to Valencia.
		Ignez de Castro murdered, and a wall
		Here stripped, here made to stand.
		Drear waste, the pigment flakes from the stone,
		Or plaster flakes, Mantegna painted the wall.
		Silk tatters, “Nec Spe Nec Metu.”


	6. CANTO IV

		Palace in smoky light,
		Troy but a heap of smouldering boundary-stones,
		ANAXIFORMINGES! Aurunculeia!
		Hear me. Cadmus of Golden Prows!
		The silver mirrors catch the bright stones and flare,
		Dawn, to our waking, drifts in the green cool light;
		Dew-haze blurrs, in the grass, pale ankles moving.
		Beat, beat, whirr, thud, in the soft turf under the apple trees,
		Choros nympharum, goat-foot with the pale foot alternate;
		Crescent of blue-shot waters, green-gold in the shallows,
		A black cock crows in the sea-foam;
		
		And by the curved carved foot of the couch,
		             claw-foot and lion head, an old man seated
		Speaking in the low drone: ...
		                                           “Ityn!
		“Et ter flebiliter. Ityn, Ityn!
		“And she went toward the window and cast her down,
		         “All the while, the while, swallows crying:
		“Ityn!”
		
		““_It is Cabestan’s heart in the dish._”
		““_It is Cabestan’s heart in the dish?_”
		““_No other taste shall change this._”
		
		And she went toward the window,
		                             the slim white stone bar
		Making a double arch;
		Firm even fingers held to the firm pale stone;
		Swung for a moment,
		                   and the wind out of Rhodez
		Caught in the full of her sleeve.
		... the swallows crying:
		“Ityn! Ityn!”
		
		         Actaeon....
		             And a valley,
		The valley is thick with leaves, with leaves, the trees,
		The sunlight glitters, glitters a-top,
		Like a fish-scale roof,
		         Like the church-roof in Poictiers
		If it were gold.
		               Beneath it, beneath it
		Not a ray, not a slivver, not a spare disk of sunlight
		Flaking the black, soft water;
		Bathing the body of nymphs, of nymphs, and Diana,
		Nymphs, white-gathered about her, and the air, air,
		Shaking, air alight with the goddess
		             fanning their hair in the dark,
		Lifting, lifting and waffing:
		Ivory dipping in silver,
		             Shadow’d, o’ershadow’d
		
		Ivory dipping in silver,
		Not a splotch, not a lost shatter of sunlight.
		Then Actaeon: Vidal,
		Vidal. It is old Vidal speaking,
		             stumbling along in the wood,
		Not a patch, not a lost shimmer of sunlight,
		             the pale hair of the goddess.
		
		The dogs leap on Actaeon,
		       “Hither, hither, Actaeon,”
		Spotted stag of the wood;
		Gold, gold, a sheaf of hair,
		         Thick like a wheat swath,
		Blaze, blaze in the sun,
		         The dogs leap on Actaeon.
		
		Stumbling, stumbling along in the wood,
		Muttering, muttering Ovid:
		     “Pergusa ... pool ... pool ... Gargaphia,
		“Pool, pool of Salmacis.”
		       The empty armour shakes as the cygnet moves.
		Thus the light rains, thus pours, _e lo soleils plovil_,
		The liquid, and rushing crystal
		                       whirls up the bright brown sand.
		Ply over ply, thin glitter of water;
		Brook film bearing white petals
		 (“The pines of Takasago grow with pines of Isé”)
		       “Behold the Tree of the Visages.”
		The forked tips flaming as if with lotus,
		       Ply over ply
		The shallow eddying fluid
		                         beneath the knees of the gods.
		
		Torches melt in the glare
		       Set flame of the corner cook-stall,
		Blue agate casing the sky, a sputter of resin;
		The saffron sandal petals the narrow foot, Hymenaeus!
		       Io Hymen, Io Hymenaee! Aurunculeia!
		The scarlet flower is cast on the blanch-white stone,
		Armaracus, Hill of Urania’s Son.
		       Meanwhile So-Gioku:
		“This wind, sire, is the king’s wind,
		       this wind is wind of the palace
		Shaking imperial water-jets.”
		       And Ran-Ti, opening his collar:
		“This wind roars in the earth’s bag,
		                       it lays the water with rushes;
		“No wind is the king’s wind.
		       Let every cow keep her calf.”
		“This wind is held in gauze curtains....”
		       “No wind is the king’s....”
		
		The camel drivers sit in the turn of the stairs,
		       look down to Ecbatan of plotted streets,
		“Danae! Danae!
		       What wind is the king’s?”
		Smoke hangs on the stream,
		The peach-trees shed bright leaves in the water,
		Sound drifts in the evening haze,
		       The barge scrapes at the ford.
		Gilt rafters above black water;
		                           three steps in an open field
		Gray stone-posts leading nowhither.
		
		The Spanish poppies swim in an air of glass.
		Père Henri Jacques still seeks the sennin on Rokku.
		                                   Polhonac,
		As Gyges on Thracian platter, set the feast;
		Cabestan, Terreus.
		       It is Cabestan’s heart in the dish.
		Vidal, tracked out with dogs ... for glamour of Loba;
		Upon the gilded tower in Ecbatan
		       Lay the god’s bride, lay ever
		Waiting the golden rain.
		       Et saave!
		But to-day, Garonne is thick like paint, beyond Dorada,
		The worm of the Procession bores in the soup of the crowd
		The blue thin voices against the crash of the crowd
		       Et “Salve regina.”
		
		In trellises
		 Wound over with small flowers, beyond Adige
		In the but half-used room, thin film of images,
		         (by Stefano)
		Age of unbodied gods, the vitreous fragile images
		Thin as the locust’s wing
		Haunting the mind ... as of Guido ...
		Thin as the locust’s wing. The Centaur’s heel
		Plants in the earth-loam.


	7. CANTO V

		Great bulk, huge mass, thesaurus;
		Ecbatan, the clock ticks and fades out;
		The bride awaiting the god’s touch; Ecbatan,
		City of patterned streets; again the vision:
		Down in the viae stradae, toga’d the crowd, and arm’d,
		Rushing on populous business, and from parapets
		Looked down--I looked, and thought: at North
		Was Egypt, and the celestial Nile, blue-deep, cutting low barren land,
		Old men and camels working the water-wheels;
		       Measureless seas and stars,
		Iamblichus’ light, the souls ascending,
		Sparks, like a partridge covey,
		       From the “ciocco,” brand struck in the game,
		“Et omniformis”:
		       Air, fire, the pale soft light.
		Topaz, I manage, and three sorts of blue;
		                               but on the barb of time.
		The fire? always, and the vision always,
		Ear dull, perhaps, with the vision, flitting
		And fading at will. Weaving with points of gold,
		Gold-yellow, saffron ...
		                   the Roman shoe, Aurunculeia’s
		And come shuffling feet, and cries “Da nuces!
		“Nuces” praise and Hymenaeus “brings the girl to her man,”
		Titter of sound about me, always
		                           and from Hesperus ...
		Hush of the older song: “Fades light from seacrest.
		
		“And in Lydia walks with pair’d women
		“Peerless among the pairs, and that once in Sardis
		“In satieties ...
		         “Fades the light from the sea, and many things
		“Are set abroad and brought to mind of thee,”
		And the vinestocks lie untended, new leaves come to the shoots,
		North wind nips on the bough, and seas in heart
		Toss up chill crests,
		       And the vine stocks lie untended
		And many things are set abroad and brought to mind
		Of thee, Atthis, unfruitful.
		       The talks ran long in the night.
		
		And from Mauleon, fresh with a new earned grade,
		In maze of approaching rain-steps, Poicebot--
		The air was full of women. And Savairic Mauleon
		Gave him his land and knight’s fee, and he wed the woman.
		Came lust of travel on him, of _romerya_;
		And out of England a knight with slow-lifting eyelids
		_Lei fassa furar a del_, put glamour upon her ...
		   And left her an eight months gone.
		       Came lust of woman upon him,
		Poicebot, now on North road from Spain
		(Sea-change, a grey in the water)
		       And in small house by town’s edge
		Found a woman, changed and familiar face,
		Hard night, and parting at morning.
		       And Pieire won the singing,
		Song or land on the throw, Pieire de Maensac,
		       and was dreitz hom
		And had De Tierci’s wife and with the war they made,
		Troy in Auvergnat.
		
		While Menelaus piled up the church at port
		He kept Tyndarida. Dauphin stood with de Maensac.
		John Borgia is bathed at last.
		       (Clock-tick pierces the vision)
		Tiber, dark with the cloak, wet cat, gleaming in patches.
		Click of the hooves, through garbage,
		Clutching the greasy stone. “And the cloak floated”
		Slander is up betimes.
		       But Varchi of Florence,
		Steeped in a different year, and pondering Brutus,
		Then
		       SIGA MAL AUTHIS DEUTERON!
		“Dog-eye!!” (to Alessandro)
		       “Whether for Love of Florence,” Varchi leaves it,
		Saying, “I saw the man, came up with him at Venice,
		“I, one wanting the facts,
		“And no mean labour.
		       Or for a privy spite?”
		           Good Varchi leaves it,
		But: “I saw the man. _Se pia?_
		“_O empia?_ For Lorenzaccio had thought of stroke in the open
		“But uncertain (for the Duke went never unguarded) ...
		“And would have thrown him from wall
		“Yet feared this might not end him, or lest Alessandro
		“Know not by whom death came,
		       O si credesse
		“If when the foot slipped, when death came upon him,
		“Lest cousin Duke Alessandro think he had fallen alone
		“No friend to aid him in falling.”
		       _Caina attende._
		As beneath my feet a lake, was ice in seeming.
		
		And all of this, runs Varchi, dreamed out before hand
		In Perugia, caught in the star-maze by Del Carmine,
		Cast on a natal paper, set with an exegesis, told,
		All told to Alessandro, told thrice over,
		Who held his death for a doom.
		In abuleia.
		         But Don Lorenzino
		“Whether for love of Florence ... but:
		         “O si morisse, credesse caduto da se.”
		                   SIGA, SIGA!
		The wet cloak floats on the surface,
		Schiavoni, caught on the wood-barge,
		Gives out the afterbirth, Giovanni Borgia
		Trails out no more at night, where Barabello
		Prods the Pope’s elephant, and gets no crown, where Mozarello
		Takes the Calabrian roadway, and for ending
		Is smothered beneath a mule,
		                           a poet’s ending,
		Down a stale well-hole, oh a poet’s ending. “Sanazarro
		“Alone out of all the court was faithful to him”
		For the gossip of Naples’ trouble drifts to North,
		Fracastor (lightning was midwife) Cotta, and Ser D’Alviano,
		Al poco giorno ed al gran cerchio d’ombra,
		Talk the talks out with Navighero,
		Burner of yearly Martials,
		                   (The slavelet is mourned in vain)
		And the next comer
		                 says “were nine wounds,
		“Four men, white horse with a double rider,”
		The hooves clink and slick on the cobbles ...
		Schiavoni ... the cloak floats on the water,
		“Sink the thing,” splash wakes Schiavoni;
		Tiber catching the nap, the moonlit velvet,
		Wet cat, gleaming in patches.
		         “Se pia,” Varchi,
		“O empia, ma risoluto
		“E terribile deliberazione”
		         Both sayings run in the wind,
		Ma si morisse!


	8. CANTO VI

		“The tale of thy deeds Odysseus!” and Tolosan
		Ground rents, sold by Guillaume, ninth duke of Aquitaine;
		Till Louis is wed with Eleanor; the wheel ...
		(“Conrad, the wheel turns and in the end turns ill”)
		And Acre and boy’s love ... for her uncle was
		Commandant at Acre, she was pleased with him;
		And Louis, French King, was jealous of days unshared
		This pair had had together in years gone;
		And he drives on for Zion, as “God wills”
		To find, in six weeks time, the Queen’s scarf is
		Twisted a-top the casque of Saladin.
		“For Sandbrueil’s ransom.” But the pouch-mouths add,
		“She went out hunting, and the palm-tufts
		“Give shade above mottled columns, and she rode back late,
		“Late, latish, yet perhaps it was not too late.”
		Then France again, and to be rid of her
		To brush his antlers: Poictiers, Aquitaine!
		And Adelaide Castilla wears the crown.
		Eleanor down water-butt, dethroned, debased, unqueen’d.
		         Unqueen’d five rare long months,
		And face sand-red, pitch gait, Harry Plantagenet,
		The sputter in place of speech,
		But King, about to be, King Louis! takes a queen.
		“E quand lo reis Louis lo entendit
		                                 mout er fasché”
		And yet Gisors, in six years thence,
		Was Marguerite’s. And Harry _joven_
		In pledge for all his life and life of all his heirs
		Shall have Gisors and Vexis and Neauphal, Neufchastel;
		But if no issue, Gisors shall revert
		And Vexis and Neufchastel and Neauphal to the French crown.
		   “_Si tuit li dol el plor el marrimen
		Del mon_ were set together they would seem but light
		Against the death of the young English King,
		Harry the Young is dead and all men mourn, a song,
		Mourn all good courtiers, fighters, cantadors.”
		And still Old Harry keeps grip on Gisors
		And Neufchastel and Neauphal and Vexis;
		And two years war, and never two years go by
		         but come new forays, and “The wheel
		“Turns, Conrad, turns, and in the end toward ill.”
		And Richard and Alix span the gap, Gisors,
		And Eleanor and Richard face the King,
		For the fourth family time Plantagenet
		Faces his dam and whelps, ... and holds Gisors,
		Now Alix’ dowry, against Philippe-Auguste
		(Louis’ by Adelaide, wood-lost, then crowned at Etampe)
		And never two years sans war.
		                                         And Zion still
		Bleating away to Eastward, the lost lamb,
		Damned city (was only Frederic knew
		The true worth of, and patched with Malek Kamel
		The sane and sensible peace to bait the world
		And set all camps disgruntled with all leaders.
		“Damn’d atheists!” alike Mahomet growls,
		And Christ grutches more sullen for Sicilian sense
		Than does Mahound on Malek.)
		                           The bright coat
		Is more to the era, and in Messina’s beach-way
		Des Barres and Richard split the reed-lances
		And the coat is torn.
		         (Moving in heavy air: Henry and Saladin.)
		(The serpent coils in the crowd.)
		The letters run: Tancred to Richard:
		
		         That the French King is
		         More against thee, than is his will to me
		         Good and in faith; and moves against your safety.
		
		Richard to Tancred:
		
		         That our pact stands firm,
		         And, for these slanders, that I think you lie.
		
		Proofs, and in writing:
		
		         And if Bourgogne say they were not
		         Deliver’d by hand and his,
		         Let him move sword against me and my word.
		
		Richard to Philip: silence, with a tone.
		
		Richard to Flanders: the subjoined and precedent.
		
		Philip a silence; and then, “Lies and turned lies
		“For that he will fail Alix
		“Affianced, and Sister to Ourself.”
		Richard: “My father’s bed-piece! A Plantagenet
		“Mewls on the covers, with a nose like his, already.”
		
		Then:
		
		   In the Name
		   Of Father and of Son Triune and Indivisible
		   Philip of France by Goddes Grace
		   To all men presents that our noble brother
		   Richard of England engaged by mutual oath
		             (a sacred covenant applicable to both)
		   Need _not_ wed Alix but whomso he choose
		   We cede him Gisors Neauphal and Vexis
		   And to the heirs male of his house
		   Cahors and Querci Richard’s the abbeys ours
		   Of Figeac and Souillac St. Gilles left still in peace
		   Alix returns to France.
		                     Made in Messina in
		   The year 1190 of the Incarnation of the Word.
		
		Reed lances broken, a cloak torn by Des Barres
		Do turn King Richard from the holy wars.
		                   And “God aid Conrad
		“For man’s aid comes slow,” Aye tarries upon the road,
		En Bertrans cantat.
		
		                   And before all this
		By Correze, Malemort
		A young man walks, at church with galleried porch
		By river-marsh, pacing,
		He was come from Ventadorn; and Eleanor turning on thirty years,
		Domna jauzionda, and he says to her
		                   “My lady of Ventadorn
		“Is shut by Eblis in, and will not hawk nor hunt
		“Nor get her free in the air,
		                   nor watch fish rise to bait
		“Nor the glare-wing’d flies alight in the creek’s edge
		“Save in my absence, Madame.
		                   ‘_Que la lauzeta mover_,’
		“Send word, I ask you, to Eblis,
		                   you have seen that maker
		“And finder of songs, so far afield as this
		“That he may free her,
		                   who sheds such light in the air.”


	9. CANTO VII

		Eleanor (she spoiled in a British climate)
		‘Ελανδρος and Ελέπτολις, and poor old Homer
		blind, blind as a bat,
		Ear, ear for the sea-surge--; rattle of old men’s voices;
		And then the phantom Rome, marble narrow for seats
		         “Si pulvis nullus....”
		In chatter above the circus, “Nullum excute tamen.”
		Then: file and candles, e li mestiers ecoutes;
		Scene--for the battle only,--but still scene,
		Pennons and standards y cavals armatz,
		Not mere succession of strokes, sightless narration,
		To Dante’s “ciocco,” the brand struck in the game.
		Un peu moisi, plancher plus bas que le jardin.
		Contre le lambris, fauteuil de paille,
		Un vieux piano, et sous le baromètre ...
		The old men’s voices--beneath the columns of false marble,
		And the walls tinted discreet, the modish, darkish green-blue,
		Discreeter gilding, and the panelled wood
		Not present, but suggested, for the leasehold is
		Touched with an imprecision ... about three squares;
		The house a shade too solid, and the art
		A shade off action, paintings a shade too thick.
		And the great domed head, _con gli occhi onesti e tardi_
		Moves before me, phantom with weighted motion,
		_Grave incessu_, drinking the tone of things,
		And the old voice lifts itself
		                   weaving an endless sentence.
		We also made ghostly visits, and the stair
		That knew us, found us again on the turn of it,
		Knocking at empty rooms, seeking a buried beauty;
		And the sun-tanned gracious and well-formed fingers
		Lift no latch of bent bronze, no Empire handle
		Twists for the knocker’s fall; no voice to answer.
		A strange concierge, in place of the gouty-footed.
		Sceptic against all this one seeks the living,
		Stubborn against the fact. The wilted flowers
		Brushed out a seven year since, of no effect.
		Damn the partition! Paper, dark brown and stretched,
		Flimsy and damned partition.
		       Ione, dead the long year,
		My lintel, and Liu Ch’e’s lintel.
		Time blacked out with the rubber.
		       The Elysée carries a name on
		And the bus behind me gives me a date for peg;
		Low ceiling and the Erard and silver,
		These are in “time.” Four chairs, the bow-front dresser,
		The pannier of the desk, cloth top sunk in.
		       “Beer-bottle on the statue’s pediment!
		“That, Fritz, is the era, to-day against the past,
		“Contemporary.” And the passion endures.
		Against their action, aromas; rooms, against chronicles.
		Smaragdos, chrysolitos, De Gama wore striped pants in Africa
		And “Mountains of the sea gave birth to troops,”
		
		Le vieux commode en acajou:
		       beer bottles of various strata.
		But is she as dead as Tyro? In seven years?
		Έλέναυς, έλανδρος, έλέπτολις,
		The sea runs in the beach-groove, shaking the floated pebbles,
		Eleanor!
		       The scarlet curtain throws a less scarlet shadow;
		Lamplight at Buovilla, e quel remir,
		       And all that day
		Nicea moved before me
		And the cold gray air troubled her not
		For all her naked beauty, bit not the tropic skin,
		And the long slender feet lit on the curb’s marge
		And her moving height went before me,
		       We alone having being.
		
		And all that day, another day:
		       Thin husks I had known as men,
		Dry casques of departed locusts
		       speaking a shell of speech ...
		Propped between chairs and table ...
		Words like the locust-shells, moved by no inner being,
		       A dryness calling for death.
		Another day, between walls of a sham Mycenian,
		“Toc” sphinxes, sham-Memphis columns,
		And beneath the jazz a cortex, a stiffness or stillness;
		       The older shell, varnished to lemon colour,
		Brown-yellow wood, and the no colour plaster,
		Dry professorial talk ...
		       now stilling the ill beat music,
		House expulsed by this house, but not extinguished.
		       Square even shoulders and the satin skin,
		Gone cheeks of the dancing woman,
		       Still the old dead dry talk, gassed out
		It is ten years gone, makes stiff about her a glass,
		A petrification of air.
		       The old room of the tawdry class asserts itself.
		The young men, never!
		       Only the husk of talk.
		O voi che siete in piccioletta barca,
		Dido choked up with sobs for her Sicheus
		Lies heavy in my arms, dead weight
		         Drowning with tears, new Eros,
		And the life goes on, mooning upon bare hills;
		Flame leaps from the hand, the rain is listless,
		Yet drinks the thirst from our lips,
		         solid as echo,
		Passion to breed a form in shimmer of rain-blurr;
		But Eros drowned, drowned, heavy-half dead with tears
		         For dead Sicheus.
		Life to make mock of motion:
		For the husks, before me, move,
		         The words rattle: shells given out by shells.
		
		The live man, out of lands and prisons,
		         shakes the dry pods,
		Probes for old wills and friendships, and the big locust-casques
		Bend to the tawdry table,
		Lift up their spoons to mouths, put forks in cutlets,
		And make sound like the sound of voices.
		         Lorenzaccio
		Being more live than they, more full of flames and voices.
		Ma si morisse!
		         Credesse caduto da se, ma si morisse.
		And the tall indifference moves,
		         a more living shell,
		Drift in the air of fate, dry phantom, but intact,
		O Alessandro, chief and thrice warned, watcher,
		         Eternal watcher of things,
		Of things, of men, of passions.
		         Eyes floating in dry, dark air;
		E biondo, with glass-gray iris, with an even side-fall of hair
		The stiff, still features.


	10. ENVOI

		_Go, dumb-born book,
		Tell her that sang me once that song of Lawes;
		Hadst thou but song
		As thou hast subjects known,
		Then were there cause in thee that should condone
		Even my faults that heavy upon me lie
		And build her glories their longevity._
		
		_Tell her that sheds
		Such treasure in the air,
		Reeking naught else but that her graces give
		Life to the moment,
		I would bid them live
		As roses might, in magic amber laid,
		Red overwrought with orange and all made
		One substance and one colour
		Braving time._
		
		_Tell her that goes
		With song upon her lips
		But sings not out the song, nor knows
		The maker of it, some other mouth,
		May be as fair as hers,
		Might, in new ages, gain her worshippers,
		When our two dusts with Waller’s shall be laid,
		Siftings on siftings in oblivion,
		Till change hath broken down
		All things save Beauty alone._


	11. FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS

		Come, my songs, let us express our baser passions.
		Let us express our envy for the man with a steady job and no worry about the future.
		You are very idle, my songs,
		I fear you will come to a bad end.
		You stand about the streets, You loiter at the corners and bus-stops,
		You do next to nothing at all.
		
		You do not even express our inner nobilitys,
		You will come to a very bad end.
		
		And I? I have gone half-cracked.
		I have talked to you so much that I almost see you about me,
		Insolent little beasts! Shameless! Devoid of clothing!
		
		But you, newest song of the lot,
		You are not old enough to have done much mischief.
		I will get you a green coat out of China
		With dragons worked upon it.
		I will get you the scarlet silk trousers
		From the statue of the infant Christ at Santa Maria Novella;
		Lest they say we are lacking in taste,
		Or that there is no caste in this family.


	12. IN DURANCE

		I am homesick after mine own kind,
		Oh I know that there are folk about me,
		      friendly faces,
		But I am homesick after mine own kind.
		
		“These sell our pictures! Oh well,
		They reach me not, touch me some edge or that,
		But reach me not and all my life’s become
		One flame, that reaches not beyond
		My heart’s own hearth,
		Or hides among the ashes there for thee.
		“Thee?” Oh, “Thee” is who cometh first
		Out of mine own soul-kin,
		For I am homesick after mine own kind
		And ordinary people touch me not.
		                                                And I am homesick
		After mine own kind that know, and feel
		And have some breath for beauty and the arts.
		
		Aye, I am wistful for my kin of the spirit
		And have none about me save in the shadows
		When come they, surging of power, “DAEMON,“
		“Quasi KALOUN.“ S.T. says Beauty is most that, a
		      “calling to the soul.”
		Well then, so call they, the swirlers out of the mist
		      of my soul,
		They that come mewards, bearing old magic.
		
		But for all that, I am homesick after mine own kind
		And would meet kindred even as I am,
		Flesh-shrouded bearing the secret.
		“All they that with strange sadness”
		Have the earth in mockery, and are kind to all,
		My fellows, aye I know the glory
		Of th’ unbounded ones, but ye, that hide
		As I hide most the while
		And burst forth to the windows only whiles or whiles
		For love, or hope, or beauty or for power,
		Then smoulder, with the lids half closed
		And are untouched by echoes of the world.
		Oh ye, my fellows: with the seas between us some be,
		Purple and sapphire for the silver shafts
		Of sun and spray all shattered at the bows;
		And some the hills hold off,
		The little hills to east of us, though here we
		Have damp and plain to be our shutting in.
		
		And yet my soul sings “Up!” and we are one.
		Yea thou, and Thou, and THOU, and all my kin
		To whom my breast and arms are ever warm,
		For that I love ye as the wind the trees
		That holds their blossoms and their leaves in cure
		And calls the utmost singing from the boughs
		That ‘thout him, save the aspen, were as dumb
		Still shade, and bade no whisper speak the birds of
		      how
		“Beyond, beyond, beyond, there lies . . . ”


	13. NICOTINE

		_Hymn to the Dope_
		
		Goddess of the murmuring courts,
		Nicotine, my Nicotine,
		Houri of the mystic sports,
		trailing-robed in gabardine,
		Gliding where the breath hath glided,
		Hidden sylph of filmy veils,
		Truth behind the dream is veiléd
		E’en as thou art, smiling ever, ever gliding,
		Wraith of wraiths, dim lights dividing
		Purple, grey, and shadow green
		Goddess, Dream-grace, Nicotine.
		
		Goddess of the shadow’s lights,
		Nicotine, my Nicotine,
		Some would set old Earth to rights,
		Thou I none such ween.
		Veils of shade our dream dividing,
		Houris dancing, intergliding,
		Wraith of wraiths and dream of faces,
		Silent guardian of the old unhallowed places,
		Utter symbol of all old sweet druidings,
		Mem’ry of witched wold and green,
		Nicotine, my Nicotine:
		
		Neath the shadows of thy weaving
		Dreams that need no undeceiving,
		Loves that longer hold me not,
		Dreams I dream not any more,
		Fragrance of old sweet forgotten places,
		Smiles of dream-lit, flit-by faces
		All as perfume Arab-sweet
		Deck the high road to thy feet
		
		As were Godiva’s coming fated
		And all the April’s blush belated
		Were lain before her, carpeting
		The stones of Coventry with spring,
		So thou my mist-enwreathéd queen,
		Nicotine, white Nicotine,
		Riding engloried in they hair
		Mak’st by-road of our dreams
		Thy thorough-fare.


	14. THE CHOICE

		It is true that you say the gods are more use to you
		than fairies,
		But for all that I have seen you on a high, white, noble
		horse,
		Like some strange queen in a story,
		It is odd that you should be covered with long robes
		and trailing tendrils and flowers;
		It is odd that you should be changing your face and
		resembling some other woman to plague me;
		It is odd that you should be hiding yourself in the cloud
		of beautiful women, who do not concern me.
		
		And I, who follow every seed-leaf upon the wind!
		They will say that I deserve this.


	15. THE GARDEN

		En robe de parade. Samain
		
		Like a skein of loose silk blown against a wall
		She walks by the railing of a path in Kensington Gardens,
		And she is dying piece-meal
		Of a sort of emotional anaemia.
		
		And round about there is a rabble
		Of the filthy, sturdy, unkillable infants of the very poor.
		They shall inherit the earth.
		
		In her is the end of breeding.
		Her boredom is exquisite and excessive.
		She would like some one to speak to her,
		And is almost afraid that I
		Twill commit that indiscretion.


	16. THE LOGICAL CONCLUSION

		When earth’s last thesis is copied
		From the theses that went before,
		When idea from fact has departed
		And bare-boned factlets shall bore,
		When all joy shall have fled from study
		And scholarship reign supreme;
		When truth shall “baaa“ on the hill crests
		And no one shall dare to dream;
		
		When all the good poems have been buried
		With comment annoted in full
		And art shall bow down in homage
		To scholarship’s zinc-plated bull,
		When there shall be nothing to research
		But the notes of annoted notes,
		And Baalam’s ass shall inquire
		The price of imported oats;
		
		Then no one shall tell him the answer
		For each shall know the one fact
		That lies in the special ass-ignment
		From which he is making his tract.
		So the ass shall sigh uninstructed
		While each in his separate book
		Shall grind for the love of grinding
		And only the devil shall look.


	17. THE RIVER-MERCHANT’S WIFE

		While my hair was still cut straight across my forehead
		I played about the front gate, pulling flowers.
		You came by on bamboo stilts, playing horse,
		You walked about my seat, playing with blue plums.
		And we went on living in the village of Chōkan:
		Two small people, without dislike or suspicion.
		
		At fourteen I married My Lord you.
		I never laughed, being bashful.
		Lowering my head, I looked at the wall.
		Called to, a thousand times, I never looked back.
		
		At fifteen I stopped scowling,
		I desired my dust to be mingled with yours
		Forever and forever, and forever.
		Why should I climb the look out?
		
		At sixteen you departed
		You went into far Ku-tō-en, by the river of swirling eddies,
		And you have been gone five months.
		The monkeys make sorrowful noise overhead.
		
		You dragged your feet when you went out.
		By the gate now, the moss is grown, the different mosses,
		Too deep to clear them away!
		The leaves fall early this autumn, in wind.
		The paired butterflies are already yellow with August
		Over the grass in the West garden;
		They hurt me.
		I grow older.
		If you are coming down through the narrows of the river Kiang,
		Please let me know beforehand,
		And I will come out to meet you
		As far as Chō-fū-Sa.


	18. THE SEAFARER

		May I for my own self song’s truth reckon, 
		Journey’s jargon, how I in harsh days 
		Hardship endured oft. 
		Bitter breast-cares have I abided, 
		Known on my keel many a care’s hold, 
		And dire sea-surge, and there I oft spent 
		Narrow nightwatch nigh the ship’s head 
		While she tossed close to cliffs. Coldly afflicted, 
		My feet were by frost benumbed. 
		Chill its chains are; chafing sighs 
		Hew my heart round and hunger begot 
		Mere-weary mood. Lest man know not 
		That he on dry land loveliest liveth, 
		List how I, care-wretched, on ice-cold sea, 
		Weathered the winter, wretched outcast 
		Deprived of my kinsmen; 
		Hung with hard ice-flakes, where hail-scur flew, 
		There I heard naught save the harsh sea 
		And ice-cold wave, at whiles the swan cries, 
		Did for my games the gannet’s clamour, 
		Sea-fowls, loudness was for me laughter, 
		The mews’ singing all my mead-drink. 
		Storms, on the stone-cliffs beaten, fell on the stern 
		In icy feathers; full oft the eagle screamed 
		With spray on his pinion. 
		Not any protector 
		May make merry man faring needy. 
		This he little believes, who aye in winsome life 
		Abides ‘mid burghers some heavy business, 
		Wealthy and wine-flushed, how I weary oft 
		Must bide above brine. 
		Neareth nightshade, snoweth from north, 
		Frost froze the land, hail fell on earth then 
		Corn of the coldest. Nathless there knocketh now 
		The heart’s thought that I on high streams 
		The salt-wavy tumult traverse alone. 
		Moaneth alway my mind’s lust 
		That I fare forth, that I afar hence 
		Seek out a foreign fastness. 
		For this there’s no mood-lofty man over earth’s midst, 
		Not though he be given his good, but will have in his youth greed; 
		Nor his deed to the daring, nor his king to the faithful 
		But shall have his sorrow for sea-fare 
		Whatever his lord will. 
		He hath not heart for harping, nor in ring-having 
		Nor winsomeness to wife, nor world’s delight 
		Nor any whit else save the wave’s slash, 
		Yet longing comes upon him to fare forth on the water. 
		Bosque taketh blossom, cometh beauty of berries, 
		Fields to fairness, land fares brisker, 
		All this admonisheth man eager of mood, 
		The heart turns to travel so that he then thinks 
		On flood-ways to be far departing. 
		Cuckoo calleth with gloomy crying, 
		He singeth summerward, bodeth sorrow, 
		The bitter heart’s blood. Burgher knows not — 
		He the prosperous man — what some perform 
		Where wandering them widest draweth. 
		So that but now my heart burst from my breast-lock, 
		My mood ‘mid the mere-flood, 
		Over the whale’s acre, would wander wide. 
		On earth’s shelter cometh oft to me, 
		Eager and ready, the crying lone-flyer, 
		Whets for the whale-path the heart irresistibly, 
		O’er tracks of ocean; seeing that anyhow 
		My lord deems to me this dead life 
		On loan and on land, I believe not 
		That any earth-weal eternal standeth 
		Save there be somewhat calamitous 
		That, ere a man’s tide go, turn it to twain. 
		Disease or oldness or sword-hate 
		Beats out the breath from doom-gripped body. 
		And for this, every earl whatever, for those speaking after — 
		Laud of the living, boasteth some last word, 
		That he will work ere he pass onward, 
		Frame on the fair earth ‘gainst foes his malice, 
		Daring ado, ... 
		So that all men shall honour him after 
		And his laud beyond them remain ‘mid the English, 
		Aye, for ever, a lasting life’s-blast, 
		Delight mid the doughty. 
		Days little durable, 
		And all arrogance of earthen riches, 
		There come now no kings nor Cæsars 
		Nor gold-giving lords like those gone. 
		Howe’er in mirth most magnified, 
		Whoe’er lived in life most lordliest, 
		Drear all this excellence, delights undurable! 
		Waneth the watch, but the world holdeth. 
		Tomb hideth trouble. The blade is layed low. 
		Earthly glory ageth and seareth. 
		No man at all going the earth’s gait, 
		But age fares against him, his face paleth, 
		Grey-haired he groaneth, knows gone companions, 
		Lordly men are to earth o’ergiven, 
		Nor may he then the flesh-cover, whose life ceaseth, 
		Nor eat the sweet nor feel the sorry, 
		Nor stir hand nor think in mid heart, 
		And though he strew the grave with gold, 
		His born brothers, their buried bodies 
		Be an unlikely treasure hoard. 


	19. THE TREE

		I stood still and was a tree amid the wood,
		Knowing the truth of things unseen before;
		Of Daphne and the laurel bow
		And that god-feasting couple old
		that grew elm-oak amid the wold.
		‘Twas not until the gods had been
		Kindly entreated, and been brought within
		Unto the hearth of their heart’s home
		That they might do this wonder thing;
		Nathless I have been a tree amid the wood
		And many a new thing understood
		That was rank folly to my head before.


*** Dun Karm Psaila (1871 - 1961)

	1. AN EVENING HYMN

		See how the night approaches,
		Boding a time of rest;
		Heaven is decked in crimson
		Sun’s setting in the west.
		Stars will soon make their entrance
		Filling, up high, the skies,
		Soon will the living slumber,
		All noise is hushed, and dies.
		
		_You, Lord, indwell the daybreak,
		An endless morn you fill,
		Yet we know night. So keep us,
		Make our hearts whole and still._
		
		See how the day is ended,
		Layers of work and rest,
		Shattered, at times, by sorrow,
		Sometimes with pleasure blest.
		Father so rich in mercy,
		All things come from your trove,
		You wish to see creation
		Enthralled with but your love.
		
		_You, Lord, indwell the daybreak,
		An endless morn you fill,
		Yet we know night. So keep us,
		Make our hearts whole and still._
		
		Sustain and clothe the needy,
		Stand by them, Lord, today,
		Comfort them, who are weeping,
		The tired, with rest, repay.
		Beckon the sinner, gently,
		Who wronged you and his kin,
		Let none lie down in anguish
		A fear of doom within.
		
		_You, Lord, indwell the daybreak,
		An endless morn you fill,
		Yet we know night. So keep us,
		Make our hearts whole and still._


	2. IN FRONT OF THE IMAGE OF OUR LADY

		So beautiful I was when I saw you once
		In a dream, in the happiness of my youth;
		I was asleep alone in a small, secluded bed,
		And you came down from heaven and sat down with me.
		
		Good morning, sunrise, together,
		They are not as sweet as roses on your cheeks;
		Exceed all the glare of the heavens, o Blessed,
		The resin shone from your eyeballs.
		
		A rose that blooms in the dawn of May
		You look like a smile on your face, tender,
		At the time you are with me, my dear boy,
		The great Redeemer, who suffered and died for us.
		
		His eyes are broken in a sleepy, restful sleep
		Jesus on your chest his little head,
		From your heart to your heart the goodness of heaven rejoices . . .
		With you the angels with reverence look on with envy.
		
		Blessed be the hand that drew you! 
		She stole the stars, the beauty of the garden roses,
		And with all your liberty, O full of gratitude,
		Queen of Heaven, sweet Madonna.
		
		I was so beautiful, I remember very well,
		When in the dream of childhood I saw you;
		Of your eyes, of your mouth was this sweetness;
		And I’m in love with my mother’s name.


	3. TO MY CANARY

		What was it that made us meet in this house so peaceful?
		You probably do not know, yellow bird;
		Nor do you know, when I go out
		For work in the morning, the door I close behind me,
		The keys I lock it, and I start to walk,
		And not a single breath is heard, until
		I turn the keys again and I come in.
		It’s better you do not know; that way no part
		In my life will you take, and between the days and nights
		You will live your life without any sorrows.
		
		As the light begins to shimmer, I see you awake,
		Bird of yellow hue, and your little head
		Comes out from under your wings where you shelter it
		From the night, when the sun sets and you go silent
		And prepare to sleep. Hastily you rest your chest
		On the rod near the other and clean yourself,
		Go down to nibble some seeds and instantly in the sweetness
		Of your voice, you begin to play inside my ears
		Which is soothed all the more. Fiddling and jumping
		Between a melody and another, you grab your thin nails, 
		on the metal that holds you as you come and go
		Up to your rod without tiring.  The pace
		Of your chest and wings, the look, the melody,
		Show that everything about you is tranquility and strength.
		With pristine innocence you look at me
		When I come close to  know you. You recognize me,
		Understand me too well; and for that you like me,
		Without showing any arrogance, I open the door
		Of your cage to give you food and water
		And with a full shout, as if you want to praise me
		As a favour for thinking of you, you sing to me 
		When I close the door and I hang your cage again
		In that part of the house where the cold cannot hurt you
		And only a little sunlight visits you. Futelessly I approach,
		Sometimes quiet on the tip of my toes
		To catch you asleep or idle from your rising
		To your setting sun, no rest and no
		Fatigue can get to you. What a splendid life,
		Living without thinking what has gone by, and what
		Jealousies and fights are going on outside your house!
		
		But I’m not jealous of you, yellow bird,
		Even though I like your life. Higher
		Than the life of this world is my hope.
		I know that a lot of times the bread I eat
		Is wet with tears, and instead of the word,
		Sometimes without my wanting, a sob comes out,
		For where I planted the rose bloomed in masses
		Thorns and petals, and whom with his pure love
		Could console me, ended in the grave before me.
		But I know the tears planted in the world
		Spring happiness in the heavens, and after this
		Dream we call life, comes
		The resurrection from death into the light of eternity.
		
		Such life we live then, yellow bird:
		You, tranquil in yourself and with my love;
		I, with the hope that God planted in my heart.


*** Alexander Pushkin (1799 - 1837)

	1. A PRESENTIMENT

		The clouds again are o’er me
		Have gathered in the stillness;
		Again me with misfortune
		Envious fate now threatens.
		Will I keep my defiance?
		Will I bring against her
		The firmness and patience
		Of my youthful pride?
		
		Wearied by a stormy life
		I await the storm fretless
		Perhaps once more safe again
		A harbor shall I find . . .
		But I feel the parting nigh
		Unavoidable fearful hour
		To press thy hand for the last time
		I haste to thee my angel.
		
		Angel gentle angel calm
		Gently tell me: fare thee well.
		Be thou grieved: thy tender gaze
		Either drop or to me raise.
		The memory of thee now shall
		To my soul replace
		The strength the pride and the hope
		The daring of my former days!


	2. DEATH-THOUGHTS

		Whether I roam along the noisy streets
		Whether I enter the peopled temple
		Whether I sit by thoughtless youth
		Haunt my thoughts me everywhere.
		
		I say Swiftly go the years by:
		However great our number now
		Must all descend the eternal vaults--
		Already struck has some one’s hour.
		
		And if I gaze upon the lonely oak
		I think: the patriarch of the woods
		Will survive my passing age
		As he survived my father’s age.
		
		And if a tender babe I fondle
		Already I mutter Fare thee well!
		I yield my place to thee. For me
		‘T is time to decay to bloom for thee
		
		Every year thus every day
		With death my thought I join
		Of coming death the day
		I seek among them to divine.
		
		Where will Fortune send me death?
		In battle? In wanderings or on the waves
		Or shall the valley neighboring
		Receive my chilled dust?
		
		But tho’ the unfeeling body
		Can everywhere alike decay
		Still I my birthland nigh
		Would have my body lie.
		
		Let near the entrance to my grave
		Cheerful youth be in play engaged
		And let indifferent creation
		With beauty shine there eternally.


	3. DESPAIR

		Dear my friend we are now parted
		My soul’s asleep; I grieve in silence.
		Gleams the day behind the mountain blue
		Or rises the night with moon autumnal--
		Still thee I seek my far off friend
		Thee alone remember I everywhere
		Thee alone in restless sleep I see.
		Pauses my mind unwittingly thee I call;
		Listens mine ear then thy voice I hear.
		
		And thou my lyre my despair dost share
		Of sick my soul companion thou!
		Hollow is and sad the sound of thy string
		Grief’s sound alone hast not forgot . . .
		Faithful lyre with me grieve thou!
		Let thine easy note and careless
		Sing of love mine and despair
		And while listening to thy singing
		May thoughtfully the maidens sigh!


	4. ELEGY

		Happy who to himself confess
		His passion dares without terror;
		Happy who in fate uncertain
		By modest hope is fondled;
		Happy who by foggy moonbeams
		Is led to midnight joyful
		And with faithful key who gently
		The door unlocks of his beloved.
		
		But for me in sad my life
		No joy there is of secret pleasure;
		Hope’s early flower faded is
		By struggle withered is life’s flower.
		Youth away flies melancholy
		And droop with me life’s roses;
		But by Love tho’ long forgot
		Forget Love’s tears I cannot.


	5. HOME-SICKNESS

		Mayhap not long am destined I
		In exile peaceful to remain
		Of dear days of yore to sigh
		And rustic muse in quiet
		With spirit calm to follow.
		
		But even far in foreign land
		In thought forever roam I shall
		Around Trimountain mine:
		By meadows river by its hills
		By garden linden nigh the house.
		
		Thus when darkens day the clear
		Alone from depths of grave
		Spirit home-longing
		Into the native hall flies
		To espy the loved ones with tender glance.


	6. IN AN ALBUM

		The name of me what is it to thee
		Die it shall like the grievous sound
		Of wave playing on distant shore
		As sound of night in forest dark.
		
		Upon the sheet of memory
		Its traces dead leave it shall
		Inscriptions-like of grave-yard
		In some foreign tongue.
		
		What is in it? Long ago forgotten
		In tumultuous waves and fresh
		To thy soul not give it shall
		Pure memories and tender.
		
		But on sad days in calmness
		Do pronounce it sadly;
		Say then: I do remember thee--
		On earth one heart is where yet I live!


	7. INSANITY

		God grant I grow not insane:
		No better the stick and beggar’s bag:
		No better toil and hunger bear.
		
		Not that I upon my reason
		Such value place; not that I
		Would fain not lose it.
		
		If freedom to me they would leave
		How I would lasciviously
		   For the gloomy forest rush!
		
		In hot delirium I would sing
		And unconscious would remain
		With ravings wondrous and chaotic.
		
		And listen would I to the waves
		And gaze I would full of bliss
		   Into the empty heavens.
		
		And free and strong then would I be
		Like a storm the fields updigging
		   Forest-trees uprooting.
		
		But here’s the trouble: if crazy once
		A fright thou art like pestilence
		   And locked up now shalt thou be.
		
		To a chain thee fool they ‘ll fasten
		And through the gate a circus beast
		Thee to nettle the people come.
		
		And at night not hear shall I
		Clear the voice of nightingale
		   Nor the forest’s hollow sound
		
		But cries alone of companions mine
		And the scolding guards of night
		   And a whizzing of chains a ringing.


	8. INSPIRING LOVE

		The moment wondrous I remember
		Thou before me didst appear
		Like a flashing apparition
		Like a spirit of beauty pure.
		
		‘Mid sorrows of hopeless grief
		‘Mid tumults of noiseful bustle
		Rang long to me thy tender voice
		Came dreams to me of thy lovely features.
		
		Went by the years. The storm’s rebellious rush
		The former dreams had scattered
		And I forgot thy tender voice
		I forgot thy heavenly features.
		
		In the desert in prison’s darkness
		Quietly my days were dragging;
		No reverence nor inspiration
		Nor tears nor life nor love.
		
		But at last awakes my soul:
		And again didst thou appear:
		Like a flashing apparition
		Like a spirit of beauty pure.
		
		And enraptured beats my heart
		And risen are for it again
		Both reverence and inspiration
		And life and tears and love.


	9. INVOCATION

		Oh if true it is that by night
		When resting are the living
		And from the sky the rays of moon
		Along the stones of church-yard glide;
		O if true it is that emptied then
		Are the quiet graves
		I call thy shade I wait my Lila
		Come hither come hither my friend to me!
		
		Appear O shade of my beloved
		As thou before our parting wert:
		Pale cold like a wintry day
		Disfigured by thy struggle of death
		Come like unto a distant star
		Or like a fearful apparition
		‘T is all the same: Come hither come hither
		
		And I call thee not in order
		To reproach him whose wickedness
		My friend hath slain.
		Nor to fathom the grave’s mysteries
		Nor because at times I’m worn
		With gnawing doubt . . . but I sadly
		Wish to say that still I love thee
		That wholly thine I am: hither come O hither!


	10. LOVE’S DEBT

		For the shores of thy distant home
		Thou hast forsaken the foreign land;
		In a memorable sad hour
		I before thee cried long.
		Tho’ cold my hands were growing
		Thee back to hold they tried;
		And begged of thee my parting groan
		The gnawing weariness not to break.
		
		But from my bitter kisses thou
		Thy lips away hast torn;
		From the land of exile dreary
		Calling me to another land.
		Thou saidst: on the day of meeting
		Beneath a sky forever blue
		Olives’ shade beneath love’s kisses
		Again my friend we shall unite.
		
		But where alas! the vaults of sky
		Shining are with glimmer blue
		Where ‘neath the rocks the waters slumber--
		With last sleep art sleeping thou.
		And beauty thine and sufferings
		In the urnal grave have disappeared--
		But the kiss of meeting is also gone . . .
		But still I wait: thou art my debtor! . . .


	11. MY DEMON

		In those days when new to me were
		Of existence all impressions:--
		The maiden’s glances the forests’ whisper
		The song of nightingale at night;
		When the sentiments elevated
		Of Freedom glory and of love
		And of art the inspiration
		Stirred deeply so my blood:--
		My hopeful hours and joyful
		With melancholy sudden dark’ning
		A certain evil spirit then
		Began in secret me to visit.
		Grievous were our meetings
		His smile and his wonderful glance
		His speeches these so stinging
		Cold poison poured into my soul.
		Providence with slander
		Inexhaustible he tempted;
		Of Beauty as a dream he spake
		And inspiration he despised;
		Nor love nor freedom trusted he
		On life with scorn he looked--
		And nought in all nature
		To bless he ever wished.


	12. MY MUSE

		In the days of my youth she was fond of me
		And the seven-stemmed flute she handed me.
		To me with smile she listened; and already gently
		Along the openings echoing of the woods
		Was playing I with fingers tender:
		Both hymns solemn god-inspired
		And peaceful song of Phrygian shepherd.
		From morn till night in oak’s dumb shadow
		To the strange maid’s teaching intent I listened;
		And with sparing reward me gladdening
		Tossing back her curls from her forehead dear
		From my hands the flute herself she took.
		Now filled the wood was with breath divine
		And the heart with holy enchantment filled.


	13. REGRET

		Not ye regret I of spring my years
		In dreams gone by of hopeless love;
		Not ye regret I O mysteries of nights.
		By songstress passionate celebrated;
		
		Not ye regret I O my faithless friends
		Nor crowns of feasts nor cups of circle
		Nor ye regret I O traitresses young--
		To pleasures melancholy stranger am I.
		
		But where are ye O moments tender
		Of young my hopes of heartfelt peace?
		The former heat and grace of inspiration?
		Come again O ye of spring my years!


	14. REMINISCENCE

		When noisy day to mortals quiet grows
		And upon the city’s silent walls
		Night’s shadow half-transparent lies
		And Sleep of daily toils reward--
		Then for me are dragging in the silence
		Of wearying wakefulness the hours.
		In the sloth of night more scorching burn
		My heart’s serpents’ gnawing fangs;
		Boil my thoughts; my soul with grief oppressed
		Full of reveries sad is thronged.
		Before me memory in silence
		Its lengthy roll unfolds.
		And with disgust my life I reading
		Tremble I and curse it.
		Bitterly I moan and bitterly my tears I shed
		But wash away the lines of grief I cannot.
		
		In laziness in senseless feasts
		In the craziness of ruinous license
		In thraldom poverty and homeless deserts
		My wasted years there I behold.
		Of friends again I hear the treacherous greeting
		Games amid of love and wine.
		To the heart again insults brings
		Irrepressible the cold world.
		No joy for me--and calmly before me
		Of visions young two now rise:
		Two tender shades two angels me
		Given by fate in the days of yore.
		But both have wings and flaming swords
		And they watch-- . . . and both are vengeant
		And both to me speak with death tongue
		Of Eternity’s mysteries and of the grave.


	15. RESURRECTION

		With sleepy brush the barbarian artist
		The master’s painting blackens;
		And thoughtlessly his wicked drawing
		Over it he is daubing.
		
		But in years the foreign colors
		Peal off an aged layer:
		The work of genius is ‘gain before us
		With former beauty out it comes.
		
		Thus my failings vanish too
		From my wearied soul
		And again within it visions rise
		Of my early purer days.


	16. SPANISH LOVE-SONG

		       Evening Zephyr
		       Waves the ether.
		       Murmurs
		       Rushes
		       The Guadalquivir.
		
		Now the golden moon has risen
		Quiet... Tshoo ... guitar’s now heard....
		Now the Spanish girl young
		O’er the balcony has leaned.
		
		       Evening Zephyr
		       Waves the ether.
		       Murmurs
		       Rushes
		       The Guadalquivir.
		
		Drop thy mantle angel gentle
		And appear as fair as day!
		Thro’ the iron balustrade
		Put thy wondrous tender foot!
		
		       Evening Zephyr
		       Waves the ether.
		       Murmurs
		       Rushes
		       The Guadalquivir.


	17. THE ANGEL

		At the gates of Eden a tender angel
		With drooping head was shining;
		A demon gloomy and rebellious
		Over hell’s abyss was flying.
		
		The Spirit of Denial the Spirit of Doubt
		The Spirit of Purity espied;
		And a tender warmth unwittingly
		Now first to know it learned he.
		
		Adieu he spake thee I saw:
		Not in vain hast thou shone before me;
		Not all in the world have I hated
		Not all in the world have I scorned.


	18. THE AWAKING

		Ye dreams ye dreams
		Where is your sweetness?
		Where thou where thou
		O joy of night?
		Disappeared has it
		The joyous dream;
		And solitary
		In darkness deep
		I awaken.
		Round my bed
		Is silent night.
		At once are cooled
		At once are fled
		All in a crowd
		The dreams of Love--
		Still with longing
		The soul is filled
		And grasps of sleep
		The memory.
		O Love O Love
		O hear my prayer:
		Again send me
		Those visions thine
		And on the morrow
		Raptured anew
		Let me die
		Without awaking!


	19. THE BARD

		Have ye heard in the woods the nightly voice
		Of the bard of love of the bard of his grief?
		When the fields in the morning hour were still
		The flute’s sad sound and simple
		             Have ye heard?
		
		Have ye met in the desert darkness of the forest
		The bard of love the bard of his grief?
		Was it a track of tears was it a smile
		Or a quiet glance filled with melancholy
		             Have ye met?
		
		Have ye sighed listening to the calm voice
		Of the bard of love of the bard of grief?
		When in the woods the youth ye saw
		And met the glance of his dulled eyes
		             Have ye sighed?


	20. THE BIRDLET

		God’s birdlet knows
		Nor care nor toil;
		Nor weaves it painfully
		An everlasting nest.
		Thro’ the long night on the twig it slumbers;
		When rises the red sun
		Birdie listens to the voice of God
		And it starts and it sings.
		When Spring Nature’s Beauty
		And the burning summer have passed
		And the fog and the rain
		By the late fall are brought
		Men are wearied men are grieved
		But birdie flies into distant lands
		Into warm climes beyond the blue sea:
		Flies away until the spring.


	21. THE BLACK SHAWL

		I gaze demented on the black shawl
		And my cold soul is torn by grief.
		
		When young I was and full of trust
		I passionately loved a young Greek girl.
		
		The charming maid she fondled me
		But soon I lived the black day to see.
		
		Once as were gathered my jolly guests
		A detested Jew knocked at my door.
		
		Thou art feasting (he whispered) with friends
		But betrayed thou art by thy Greek maid.
		
		Moneys I gave him and curses
		And called my servant the faithful.
		
		We went: I flew on the wings of my steed;
		And tender mercy was silent in me.
		
		Her threshold no sooner I espied
		Dark grew my eyes and my strength departed.
		
		The distant chamber I enter alone
		An Armenian embraces my faithless maid.
		
		Darkness around me; flashed the dagger;
		To interrupt his kiss the wretch had no time.
		
		And long I trampled the headless corpse--
		And silent and pale at the maid I stared.
		
		I remember her prayers her flowing blood
		But perished the girl and with her my love.
		
		The shawl I took from the head now dead
		And wiped in silence the bleeding steel.
		
		When came the darkness of eve my serf
		Threw their bodies into the Danube’s billows--
		
		Since then I kiss no charming eyes
		Since then I know no cheerful days.
		
		I gaze demented on the black shawl
		And my cold soul is torn by grief.


	22. THE BURNT LETTER

		Good-bye love-letter good-bye! ‘T is her command . . .
		How long I waited how long my hand
		To the fire my joys to yield was loath! . . .
		But eno’ the hour has come: burn letter of my love!
		I am ready: listens more my soul to nought.
		Now the greedy flame thy sheets shall lick . . .
		A minute! . . . they crackle they blaze . . . a light smoke
		Curls and is lost with prayer mine.
		Now the finger’s faithful imprint losing
		Burns the melted wax . . . O Heavens!
		Done it is! curled in are the dark sheets;
		Upon their ashes light the lines adored
		Are gleaming . . . My breast is heavy. Ashes dear
		In my sorrowful lot but poor consolation
		Remain for aye with me on my weary breast . . .


	23. THE CLOUD

		O last cloud of the scattered storm
		Alone thou sailest along the azure clear;
		Alone thou bringest the shadow sombre
		Alone thou marrest the joyful day.
		
		Thou but recently had’st encircled the sky
		When sternly the lightning was winding about thee;
		Thou gavest forth mysterious thunder
		With rain hast watered the parched earth.
		
		Enough! Hie thyself: thy time hath passed:
		Earth is refreshed; the storm hath fled;
		And the breeze fondling the trees’ leaves
		Forth thee chases from the quieted heavens!


	24. THE COSSAK

		Once at midnight hour
		Darkness thro’ and fog
		Quiet by the river
		Rode a Cossak brave.
		
		Black his cap upon his ear
		Dust-covered is his coat
		By his knee the pistols hang
		And nigh the ground his sword.
		
		The faithful steed rein not feeling
		Is walking slowly on
		(Long its mane is and is waving)
		Ever further it keeps on.
		
		Now before him two--three huts:
		Broken is the fence;
		To the village here the road
		To the forest there.
		
		“Not in forest maid is found”
		Dennis thinks the brave.
		“To their chambers went the maids;
		Are gone for the night.”
		
		The son of Don he pulls the rein
		And the spur he strikes:
		Like an arrow rushed the steed--
		To the huts he turned.
		
		In the clouds the distant sky
		Was silvering the moon;
		A Beauty-Maid in melancholy
		By the window sits.
		
		Espies the brave the Beauty-Maid
		Beats his heart within:
		Gently steed to left to left--
		Under the window now is he.
		
		“Darker growing is the night
		And hidden is the moon;
		Quick my darling do come out
		Water give my steed.”
		
		“No not unto a man so young;
		Right fearful’t is to go;
		Fearful’t is my house to leave
		And water give thy steed.”
		
		“Have no fear O Beauty-Maid
		And friendship close with me“--
		“Brings danger night to Beauty-Maids”
		“Fear me not O joy of mine!
		
		“Trust me dear thy fear is vain
		Away with terror groundless!
		Time thou losest precious
		Fear not O my darling!
		
		Mount my steed; with thee I will
		To distant regions gallop;
		Blest with me be thou shalt
		Heaven with mate is everywhere.”
		
		And the maid? Over she bends
		Her fear is overcome
		Bashfully to ride consents
		And the Cossak happy is.
		
		Off they dart away they fly;
		Are loving one another.
		Faithful he for two brief weeks
		Forsook her on the third.


	25. THE DROWNED

		Into the hut the children run
		In haste they called their father:
		“Papa papa oh our nets
		Out a corpse have dragged.”
		“Ye lie ye lie ye little devils”
		Upon them father grumbled.
		“I declare those wicked brats!
		Corpse now too have they must!
		
		“Down will come the court ‘Give answer!’
		And for an age no rest from it.
		But what to do? Heigh wife there
		My coat give me must get there somehow . . .
		Now where’s the corpse?“--“Here papa here!”
		And in truth along the river
		Where is spread the moistened net
		Upon the sand is seen the corpse.
		
		Disfigured terribly the corpse is
		Is blue and all is swollen.
		Is it a hapless sorrower
		Who ruined has his sinful soul
		Or by the waves a fisher taken
		Or some fellow drunkard
		Or by robbers stripped perchance
		Trader some unbusinesslike?
		
		To the peasant what is this?
		About he looks and hastens . . .
		Seizes he the body drowned
		By the feet to water drags it
		And from the shore the winding
		Off he pushes it with oar
		Downward ‘gain floats the corpse
		And grave and cross still is seeking.
		
		And long the dead among the waves
		As if living swinging floated;
		With his eyes the peasant him
		Homeward going followed.
		“Ye little dogs now follow me
		Each of you a cake shall have;
		But look ye out and hold your tongues!
		Else a thrashing shall ye have.”
		
		At night the wind to blow began
		Full of waves became the river;
		Out the light was already going
		In the peasant’s smoky hut.
		The children sleep; the mother slumbers.
		On the oven husband lies.
		Howls the storm; a sudden knocking
		He hears of some one at the window.
		
		“Who’s there?“--“Ope the door I say!”
		“Time eno’; what is the matter?
		Wherefore comes tramp at night?
		By the devil art hither brought!
		Wherefore with you should I bother?
		Crowded my house and dark is.”
		So saying he with lazy hand
		Open throws the window.
		
		Rolls the moon from behind the clouds--
		And now? A naked man before him stands;
		From his beard a stream is flowing
		His glance is fixed and is open.
		All about him is frightful dumbness
		And his hands are dropped down;
		And to the puffed-out swollen body
		Black crabs are fastened.
		
		The peasant quickly shuts the window;
		He recognized his naked guest
		Is terror-struck. “May you burst!”
		Out he whispered and trembled.
		In great confusion now his thoughts are
		And all night he shakes in fever;
		And till the morrow still the knocking
		‘S heard on the window and at the gates.
		
		Report there was among the people:
		Saying since then every year
		Waiting is the hapless peasant
		For his guest on the appointed day.
		In the morning the weather changes
		And at night the storm arrives
		And the dead man is ever knocking
		By the window and at the gates.


	26. THE GYPSIES

		Over the wooded banks
		In the hour of evening quiet
		Under the tents are song and bustle
		And the fires are scattered.
		
		Thee I greet O happy race!
		I recognize thy blazes
		I myself at other times
		These tents would have followed.
		
		With the early rays to-morrow
		Shall disappear your freedom’s trace
		Go you will--but not with you
		Longer go shall the bard of you.
		
		He alas the changing lodgings
		And the pranks of days of yore
		Has forgot for rural comforts
		And for the quiet of a home.


	27. THE NIGHTINGALE

		In silent gardens in the spring in the darkness of the night
		Sings above the rose from the east the nightingale;
		But dear rose neither feeling has nor listens it
		But under its lover’s hymn waveth it and slumbers.
		
		Dost thou not sing thus to beauty cold?
		Reflect O bard whither art thou striding?
		She neither listens nor the bard she feels.
		Thou gazest? Bloom she does; thou callest?--
		     Answer none she gives!


	28. THE NORTH WIND

		Why O wrathful north wind thou
		The marshy shrub dost downward bend?
		Why thus in the distant sky-vault
		Wrathfully the cloud dost chase?
		
		The black clouds but recently
		Had spread the whole heavens o’er
		The oak on hill top but recently
		In beauty wondrous itself was priding.
		
		Thou hast risen and up hast played
		With terror resounded and with splendor--
		And away are driven the stormy clouds;
		Down is hurled the mighty oak.
		
		Let now then the sun’s clear face
		With joy henceforth ever shine
		With the clouds now the zephyr play
		And the bush in quiet sway.


	29. THE OUTCAST

		On a rainy autumn evening
		Into desert places went a maid;
		And the secret fruit of unhappy love
		In her trembling hands she held.
		All was still: the hills and the woods
		Asleep in the darkness of the night.
		And her searching glances
		In terror about she cast.
		
		And on this babe the innocent
		Her glance she paused with a sigh:
		Asleep thou art my child my grief.
		Thou knowest not my sadness.
		Thine eyes will ope and tho’ with longing
		To my breast shalt no more cling.
		No kiss for thee to-morrow
		From thine unhappy mother.
		
		Beckon in vain for her thou wilt
		My everlasting shame my guilt!
		Me forget thou shalt for aye
		But thee forget shall not I.
		Shelter thou shalt receive from strangers
		Who ‘ll say: Thou art none of ours!
		Thou wilt ask Where are my parents?
		But for thee no kin is found!
		
		Hapless one! With heart filled with sorrow
		Lonely amid thy mates
		Thy spirit sullen to the end
		Thou shalt behold fondling mothers.
		A lonely wanderer everywhere
		Cursing thy fate at all times
		Thou the bitter reproach shalt hear....
		Forgive me oh forgive me then!
		
		Asleep! let me then O hapless one
		To my bosom press thee once for all.
		A law unjust and terrible
		Thee and me to sorrow dooms.
		While the years have not yet chased
		The guiltless joy of thy days
		Sleep my darling let no griefs bitter
		Mar thy childhood’s quiet life!
		
		But lo! behind the woods near by
		The moon brings a hut to light.
		Forlorn pale and trembling
		To the doors nigh she came.
		She stooped and gently laid she down
		The babe on the threshold strange.
		In terror away her eyes she turned
		And in the dark night disappeared.


	30. THE PROPHET

		Tormented by the thirst for the spirit
		I was dragging myself in a sombre desert
		And a six-winged seraph appeared
		Unto me on the parting of the roads.
		With fingers as light as a dream
		Mine eyes he touched:
		And mine eyes opened wise
		Like the eyes of a frightened eagle;
		He touched mine ears
		And they filled with din and ringing.
		And I heard the trembling of the heavens
		And the flight of the angel’s wings
		And the creeping of the polyps in the sea
		And the growth of the vine in the valley.
		And he took hold of my lips
		And out he tore my sinful tongue
		With its empty and false speech.
		And the fang of the wise serpent
		Between my terrified lips he placed
		With bloody hand.
		And ope he cut with sword my breast
		And out he took my trembling heart
		And a coal with flaming blaze
		Into the opened breast he shoved.
		Like a corpse I lay in the desert.
		And the voice of God unto me called:
		Arise O prophet and listen and guide.
		Be thou filled with my will
		And going over land and sea
		Fire with the word the hearts of men!


	31. THE ROUSSALKA

		By a lake once in forest darkness
		A monk his soul was saving
		Ever in stern occupation
		Of prayer fast and labor.
		Already with slackened shovel
		The aged man his grave was digging
		And only for death in peace and quiet
		To his saintly patrons prayed he.
		
		Once in summer at the threshold
		Of his drooping little hut
		To God was praying the hermit.
		Darker grew the forest.
		Over the lake was rising fog.
		And in the clouds the reddish moon
		Was gently rolling along the sky.
		Upon the waters the hermit gazed.
		
		He looks and fears and knows not why
		Himself he cannot understand . . .
		Now he sees: the waves are seething
		And suddenly again are quiet . . .
		
		Suddenly . . . as light as shade of night
		As white as early snow of hills
		Out cometh a woman naked
		And on the shore herself she seats.
		
		Upon the aged monk she gazes
		And she combs her moistened tresses--
		The holy monk with terror trembles
		Upon her charms still he gazes;
		With her hand to him she beckons
		And her head she’s quickly nodding....
		And suddenly like a falling star
		The dreamy wave she vanished under.
		
		The sober monk all night he slept not
		And all day he prayed not
		The shadow unwittingly before him
		Of the wondrous maid he ever sees.
		Again the forest is clad in darkness
		Along the clouds the moon is sailing.
		Again the maid above the water
		Pale and splendent there she sits.
		
		Gaze her eyes nods her head
		Throws kisses and she’s sporting
		The wave she sprinkles and she frolics;
		Child-like weeping now and laughing;
		
		Sobbing tender--the monk she calls:
		Monk O monk to me to me!
		Into the waves transparent she dashes;
		And again is all in silence deep.
		
		But on the third day the roused hermit
		The enchanted shores nigh sitting was
		And the beautiful maid he awaited.
		Upon the trees were falling shades....
		Night at last by dawn was chased--
		And nowhere monk could be found
		His beard alone the gray one
		In the water the boys could see.


	32. THE WINTER-ROAD

		Breaking thro’ the waving fogs
		Forth the moon is coming
		And on the gloomy acres
		She gloomy light is shedding.
		
		Along the wintry cheerless road
		Flies the rapid troika
		The little bell monotonous
		Wearily is tinkling.
		
		A certain homefulness is heard
		In the driver’s lengthy lays:
		Now light-hearted carelessness
		Now low-spirited sadness.
		
		Neither light nor a dark hut . . .
		Only snow and silence . . .
		Striped mileposts are alone
		The travellers who meet us.
		
		Sad I feel and weary . . . On the morrow Nina
		To my beloved I returning
		Forget myself shall by the fire
		And scarce eno’ at her shall gaze.
		
		Loudly of my watch the spring
		Its measured circle is completing
		And us the parter of the wearied
		Midnight not shall separate.
		
		Sad I’m Nina; my journey’s weary;
		Slumbering now my driver is quiet
		The little bell is monotonous
		And darkened now is the moon’s face.


	33. WINTER EVENING

		The storm the sky with darkness covers
		The snowy whirlings twisting;
		Like a beast wild now is howling
		Like an infant now is crying;
		Over the aged roof now sudden
		In the straw it rustling is;
		Like a traveller now belated
		For entrance at our window knocking.
		
		With melancholy and with darkness
		Our little aged hut is filled
		Why in silence then thou sittest
		By the window wife old mine?
		Or by the howling storms art
		Wearied thou O companion mine?
		Or perchance art slumbering
		By the rustling spindle soothed?
		
		Let us drink O kindly friend
		Of my poverty and youth
		Away with grief--where is the cup?
		Joy it shall bring to our heart.
		
		A song now sing me how the bird
		Beyond the sea in quiet lived;
		A song now sing me how the maiden
		In the morning for water went.
		
		The storm the sky with darkness covers
		The snowy whirlings twisting;
		Like a beast wild now is howling
		Like an infant now is crying.
		Let us drink O kindly friend
		Of my poverty and youth
		Away with grief--where is the cup
		Joy it shall bring to our heart!


	34. WINTER MORNING

		Frost and sun--the day is wondrous!
		Thou still art slumbering charming friend.
		‘Tis time O Beauty to awaken:
		Ope thine eyes now in sweetness closed
		To meet the Northern Dawn of Morning
		Thyself a north-star do thou appear!
		
		Last night remember the storm scolded
		And darkness floated in the clouded sky;
		Like a yellow clouded spot
		Thro’ the clouds the moon was gleaming--
		And melancholy thou wert sitting--
		But now . . . thro’ the window cast a look:
		
		Stretched beneath the heavens blue
		Carpet-like magnificent
		In the sun the snow is sparkling;
		Dark alone is the wood transparent
		And thro’ the hoar gleams green the fir
		And under the ice the rivulet sparkles.
		
		Entire is lighted with diamond splendor
		Thy chamber . . . with merry crackle
		The wood is crackling in the oven.
		To meditation invites the sofa.
		But know you? In the sleigh not order why
		The brownish mare to harness?
		
		Over the morning snow we gliding
		Trust we shall my friend ourselves
		To the speed of impatient steed;
		Visit we shall the fields forsaken
		The woods dense but recently
		And the banks so dear to me.


*** Salvatore Quasimodo (1901 - 1968)

	1. ENEMY OF DEATH

		You should not have
		ripped out your image
		taken from us, from the world,
		a portion of beauty.
		What can we do
		we enemies of death,
		bent to your feet of rose,
		your breast of violet?
		Not a word, not a scrap
		of your last day, a No
		to earth’s things, a No
		to our dull human record.
		The sad moon in summer,
		the dragging anchor, took
		your dreams, hills, trees,
		light, waters, darkness,
		not dim thoughts but truths,
		severed from the mind
		that suddenly decided,
		time and all future evil.
		Now you are shut
		behind heavy doors
		enemy of death.
		
		Who cries?
		You have blown out beauty
		with a breath, torn her,
		dealt her the death-wound,
		without a tear
		for her insensate shadow’s
		spreading over us.
		Destroyed solitude,
		and beauty, failed.
		You have signalled
		into the dark,
		inscribed your name in air,
		your No
		to everything that crowds here
		and beyond the wind.
		I know what you were
		looking for in your new dress.
		I understand the unanswered question.
		Neither for you nor us, a reply.
		Oh, flowers and moss,
		Oh, enemy of death.


	2. IMITATION OF JOY

		Where the trees render
		the evening yet more abandoned,
		how indolently
		your last footstep vanishes
		that appears with the flower
		of the lime, and insists on its fate.
		You search for reason in affection,
		you experience silence in life.
		Another outcome reveals to me
		mirrored time. It grieves
		like death, beauty now
		flashes like lightning in other faces.
		I have lost every innocence,
		even in this voice that survives
		to imitate joy.


	3. NOSTALGIA AND REGRET

		Now the day breaks
		night is done and the moon
		slowly dissolved in serene air
		sets in the canals.
		September is so alive in this country
		of plains, the meadows are green
		as in the southern valleys in spring.
		I have left my companions,
		I have hidden my heart behind ancient walls,
		to be alone, to remember.
		Since you are further off than the moon,
		now the day breaks
		and the horses’ hooves beat on the stones.


	4. SUDDENLY IT’S EVENING

		Everyone is alone at the heart of the earth,
		pierced by a ray of sunshine;
		and suddenly it’s evening.


	5. WIND AT TINDARI

		Tindari, I know you
		mild between broad hills, overhanging the waters
		of the god’s sweet islands.
		Today, you confront me
		and penetrate my heart.
		
		I climb airy peaks, precipices,
		following the wind in the pines,
		and the crowd of them, lightly accompanying me,
		fly off into the air,
		wave of love and sound,
		and you take me to you,
		you from whom I wrongly gathered
		evil, and fear of shadow, silence
		--refuge of sweetness, once certain--
		and death of spirit.
		
		It is unknown to you, that country
		where each day I go deep
		to nourish secret syllables:
		a different light bares you, behind the windows
		clothed in night,
		and another joy than mine
		rests on your breast.
		
		Exile is harsh
		and the search, for harmony, ending in you,
		changes today
		to a precocious anxiousness for death,
		and every love is a shield against sadness,
		a silent stair in the gloom,
		where you station me
		to break my bitter bread.
		
		Return, serene Tindari,
		stir me, sweet friend,
		to raise myself to the sky from the rock,
		so that I might shape fear, for those who do not know
		what deep wind has searched me.


*** John Crowe Ransom (1888 - 1974)

	1. BELLS FOR JOHN WHITESIDE’S DAUGHTER

		There was such speed in her little body,   
		And such lightness in her footfall,   
		It is no wonder her brown study
		Astonishes us all.
		
		Her wars were bruited in our high window.   
		We looked among orchard trees and beyond   
		Where she took arms against her shadow,   
		Or harried unto the pond
		
		The lazy geese, like a snow cloud
		Dripping their snow on the green grass,   
		Tricking and stopping, sleepy and proud,   
		Who cried in goose, Alas,
		
		For the tireless heart within the little   
		Lady with rod that made them rise
		From their noon apple-dreams and scuttle   
		Goose-fashion under the skies!
		
		But now go the bells, and we are ready,   
		In one house we are sternly stopped
		To say we are vexed at her brown study,   
		Lying so primly propped.


	2. BLUE GIRLS

		Twirling your blue skirts, travelling the sward
		Under the towers of your seminary,
		Go listen to your teachers old and contrary
		Without believing a word.
		
		Tie the white fillets then about your hair
		And think no more of what will come to pass
		Than bluebirds that go walking on the grass
		And chattering on the air.
		
		Practice your beauty, blue girls, before it fail;
		And I will cry with my loud lips and publish
		Beauty which all our power shall never establish,
		It is so frail.
		
		For I could tell you a story which is true;
		I know a woman with a terrible tongue,
		Blear eyes fallen from blue,
		All her perfections tarnished--yet it is not long
		Since she was lovelier than any of you.


	3. NECROLOGICAL

		The friar had said his paternosters duly
		And scourged his limbs, and afterwards would have slept;
		But with much riddling his head became unruly,
		He arose, from the quiet monastery he crept.
		
		Dawn lightened the place where the battle had been won.
		The people were dead--it is easy he thought to die--
		These dead remained, but the living were all gone,
		Gone with the wailing trumps of victory.
		
		The dead men wore no raiment against the air,
		Bartholomew’s men had spoiled them where they fell;
		In defeat the heroes’ bodies were whitely bare,
		The field was white like meads of asphodel.
		
		Not all were white; some gory and fabulous
		Whom the sword had pierced and then the grey wolf eaten;
		But the brother reasoned that heroes’ flesh was thus.
		Flesh fails, and the postured bones lie weather-beaten.
		
		The lords of chivalry lay prone and shattered.
		The gentle and the bodyguard of yeomen;
		Bartholomew’s stroke went home--but little it mattered,
		Bartholomew went to be stricken of other foemen.
		
		Beneath the blue ogive of the firmament
		Was a dead warrior, clutching whose mighty knees
		Was a leman, who with her flame had warmed his tent,
		For him enduring all men’s pleasantries.
		
		Close by the sable stream that purged the plain
		Lay the white stallion and his rider thrown,
		The great beast had spilled there his little brain,
		And the little groin of the knight was spilled by a stone.
		
		The youth possessed him then of a crooked blade
		Deep in the belly of a lugubrious wight;
		He fingered it well, and it was cunningly made;
		But strange apparatus was if for a Carmelite.
		
		Then he sat upon a hill and bowed his head
		As under a riddle, and in deep surmise
		So still that he likened himself unto those dead
		Whom the kites of Heaven solicited with sweet cries.


	4. PAINTED HEAD

		By dark severance the apparition head
		Smiles from the air a capital on no
		Column or a Platonic perhaps head
		On a canvas sky depending from nothing;
		
		Stirs up an old illusion of grandeur
		By tickling the instinct of heads to be
		Absolute and to try decapitation
		And to play truant from the body bush;
		
		But too happy and beautiful for those sorts
		Of head (homekeeping heads are happiest)
		Discovers maybe thirty unwidowed years
		Of not dishonoring the faithful stem;
		
		Is nameless and has authored for the evil
		Historian headhunters neither book
		Nor state and is therefore distinct from tart
		Heads with crowns and guilty gallery heads;
		
		Wherefore the extravagant device of art
		Unhousing by abstraction this once head
		Was capital irony by a loving hand
		That knew the no treason of a head like this;
		
		Makes repentance in an unlovely head
		For having vinegarly traduced the flesh
		Till, the hurt flesh recusing, the hard egg
		Is shrunken to its own deathlike surface;
		
		And an image thus. The body bears the head
		(So hardly one they terribly are two)
		Feeds and obeys and unto please what end?
		Not to the glory of tyrant head but to
		
		The estate of body. Beauty is of body.
		The flesh contouring shallowly on a head
		Is a rock-garden needing body’s love
		And best bodiness to colorify
		
		The big blue birds sitting and sea-shell cats
		And caves, and on the iron acropolis
		To spread the hyacinthine hair and rear
		The olive garden for the nightingales.


	5. PRELUDE TO AN EVENING

		Do not enforce the tired wolf
		Dragging his infected wound homeward
		To sit tonight with the warm children
		Naming the pretty kings of France.
		
		The images of the invaded mind
		Being as the monsters in the dreams
		Of your most brief enchanted headful,
		Suppose a miracle of confusion:
		
		That dreamed and undreamt become each other
		And mix the night and day of your mind;
		And it does not matter your twice crying
		From mouth unbeautied against the pillow
		
		To avert the gun of the same old soldier;
		For cry, cock-crow, or the iron bell
		Can crack the sleep-sense of outrage,
		Annihilate phantoms who were nothing.
		
		But now, by our perverse supposal,
		There is a drift of fog on your mornings;
		You in your peignoir, dainty at your orange cup,
		Feel poising round the sunny room
		
		Invisible evil, deprived and bold.
		All day the clock will metronome
		Your gallant fear; the needles clicking,
		The heels detonating the stair’s cavern
		
		Freshening the water in the blue bowls
		For the buck berries, with not all your love,
		You shall he listening for the low wind,
		The warning sibilance of pines.
		
		You like a waning moon, and I accusing
		Our too banded Eumenides,
		While you pronounce Noes wanderingly
		And smooth the heads of the hungry children.


	6. WINTER REMEMBERED

		Two evils, monstrous either one apart,
		Possessed me, and were long and loath at going:
		A cry of Absence, Absence, in the heart,
		And in the wood the furious winter blowing.
		
		Think not, when fire was bright upon my bricks,
		And past the tight boards hardly a wind could enter,
		I glowed like them, the simple burning sticks,
		Far from my cause, my proper heat and center.
		
		Better to walk forth in the frozen air
		And wash my wound in the snows; that would be healing;
		Because my heart would throb less painful there,
		Being caked with cold, and past the smart of feeling.
		
		And where I walked, the murderous winter blast
		Would have this body bowed, these eyeballs streaming,
		And though I think this heart’s blood froze not fast
		It ran too small to spare one drop for dreaming.
		
		Dear love, these fingers that had known your touch,
		And tied our separate forces first together,
		Were ten poor idiot fingers not worth much,
		Ten frozen parsnips hanging in the weather.


*** Rainer Maria Rilke (1875 - 1926)

	1. AUTUMN

		The leaves fall fall as from far
		Like distant gardens withered in the heavens;
		They fall with slow and lingering descent.
		
		And in the nights the heavy Earth too falls
		From out the stars into the Solitude.
		
		Thus all doth fall. This hand of mine must fall
		And lo! the other one:--it is the law.
		But there is One who holds this falling
		Infinitely softly in His hands.


	2. AUTUMNAL DAY

		Lord! It is time. So great was Summer’s glow:
		Thy shadows lay upon the dials’ faces
		And o’er wide spaces let thy tempests blow.
		
		Command to ripen the last fruits of thine
		Give to them two more burning days and press
		The last sweetness into the heavy wine.
		
		He who has now no house will ne’er build one
		Who is alone will now remain alone;
		He will awake will read will letters write
		Through the long day and in the lonely night;
		And restless solitary he will rove
		Where the leaves rustle wind-blown in the grove.


	3. DEATH

		Before us great Death stands
		Our fate held close within his quiet hands.
		When with proud joy we lift Life’s red wine
		To drink deep of the mystic shining cup
		And ecstasy through all our being leaps--
		Death bows his head and weeps.


	4. EARLY APOLLO

		As when at times there breaks through branches bare
		A morning vibrant with the breath of spring
		About this poet-head a splendour rare
		Transforms it almost to a mortal thing.
		
		There is as yet no shadow in his glance
		Too cool his temples for the laurel’s glow;
		But later o’er those marble brows perchance
		A rose-garden with bushes tall will grow
		
		And single petals one by one will fall
		O’er the still mouth and break its silent thrall
		--The mouth that trembles with a dawning smile
		As though a song were rising there the while.


	5. EVENING

		The bleak fields are asleep
		My heart alone wakes;
		The evening in the harbour
		Down his red sails takes.
		
		Night guardian of dreams
		Now wanders through the land;
		The moon a lily white
		Blossoms within her hand.


	6. GROWING BLIND

		Among all the others there sat a guest
		Who sipped her tea as if one apart
		And she held her cup not quite like the rest;
		Once she smiled so it pierced one’s heart.
		
		When the group of people arose at last
		And laughed and talked in a merry tone
		As lingeringly through the rooms they passed
		I saw that she followed alone.
		
		Tense and still like one who to sing must rise
		Before a throng on a festal night
		She lifted her head and her bright glad eyes
		Were like pools which reflected light.
		
		She followed on slowly after the last
		As though some object must be passed by
		And yet as if were it once but passed
		She would no longer walk but fly.


	7. IN APRIL

		Again the woods are odorous the lark
		Lifts on upsoaring wings the heaven gray
		That hung above the tree-tops veiled and dark
		Where branches bare disclosed the empty day.
		
		After long rainy afternoons an hour
		Comes with its shafts of golden light and flings
		Them at the windows in a radiant shower
		And rain drops beat the panes like timorous wings.
		
		Then all is still. The stones are crooned to sleep
		By the soft sound of rain that slowly dies;
		And cradled in the branches hidden deep
		In each bright bud a slumbering silence lies.


	8. INITIATION

		Whosoever thou art! Out in the evening roam
		Out from thy room thou know’st in every part
		And far in the dim distance leave thy home
		Whosoever thou art.
		Lift thine eyes which lingering see
		The shadows on the foot-worn threshold fall
		Lift thine eyes slowly to the great dark tree
		That stands against heaven solitary tall
		And thou hast visioned Life its meanings rise
		Like words that in the silence clearer grow;
		As they unfold before thy will to know
		Gently withdraw thine eyes--


	9. LAMENT

		Oh! All things are long passed away and far.
		A light is shining but the distant star
		From which it still comes to me has been dead
		A thousand years . . . In the dim phantom boat
		That glided past some ghastly thing was said.
		A clock just struck within some house remote.
		Which house?--I long to still my beating heart.
		Beneath the sky’s vast dome I long to pray . . .
		Of all the stars there must be far away
		A single star which still exists apart.
		And I believe that I should know the one
		Which has alone endured and which alone
		Like a white City that all space commands
		At the ray’s end in the high heaven stands.


	10. LOVE SONG

		When my soul touches yours a great chord sings!
		How shall I tune it then to other things?
		O! That some spot in darkness could be found
		That does not vibrate whene’er your depths sound.
		But everything that touches you and me
		Welds us as played strings sound one melody.
		Where is the instrument whence the sounds flow?
		And whose the master-hand that holds the bow?
		O! Sweet song--


	11. MAIDEN MELANCHOLY

		A young knight comes into my mind
		As from some myth of old.
		
		He came! You felt yourself entwined
		As a great storm would round you wind.
		He went! A blessing undefined
		Seemed left as when church-bells declined
		And left you wrapt in prayer.
		You fain would cry aloud--but bind
		Your scarf about you and tear-blind
		Weep softly in its fold.
		
		A young knight comes into my mind
		Full armored forth to fare.
		
		His smile was luminously kind
		Like glint of ivory enshrined
		Like a home longing undivined
		Like Christmas snows where dark ways wind
		Like sea-pearls about turquoise twined
		Like moonlight silver when combined
		With a loved book’s rare gold.


	12. MAIDENS

		I
		
		Others must by a long dark way
		Stray to the mystic bards
		Or ask some one who has heard them sing
		Or touch the magic chords.
		Only the maidens question not
		The bridges that lead to Dream;
		Their luminous smiles are like strands of pearls
		On a silver vase agleam.
		
		The maidens’ doors of Life lead out
		Where the song of the poet soars
		And out beyond to the great world--
		To the world beyond the doors.
		
		
		II
		
		Maidens the poets learn from you to tell
		How solitary and remote you are
		As night is lighted by one high bright star
		They draw light from the distance where you dwell.
		
		For poet you must always maiden be
		Even though his eyes the woman in you wake
		Wedding brocade your fragile wrists would break
		Mysterious elusive from him flee.
		
		Within his garden let him wait alone
		Where benches stand expectant in the shade
		Within the chamber where the lyre was played
		Where he received you as the eternal One.
		
		Go! It grows dark--your voice and form no more
		His senses seek; he now no longer sees
		A white robe fluttering under dark beech trees
		Along the pathway where it gleamed before.
		
		He loves the long paths where no footfalls ring
		And he loves much the silent chamber where
		Like a soft whisper through the quiet air
		He hears your voice far distant vanishing.
		
		The softly stealing echo comes again
		From crowds of men whom wearily he shuns;
		And many see you there--so his thought runs--
		And tenderest memories are pierced with pain.


	13. MAIDENS AT CONFIRMATION

		The white veiled maids to confirmation go
		Through deep green garden paths they slowly wind;
		Their childhood they are leaving now behind:
		The future will be different they know.
		
		Oh! Will it come? They wait--It must come soon!
		The next long hour slowly strikes at last
		The whole house stirs again the feast is past
		And sadly passes by the afternoon . . .
		
		Like resurrection were the garments white
		The wreathed procession walked through trees arched wide
		Into the church as cool as silk inside
		With long aisles of tall candles flaming bright:
		The lights all shone like jewels rich and rare
		To solemn eyes that watched them gleam and flare.
		
		Then through the silence the great song rose high
		Up to the vaulted dome like clouds it soared
		Then luminously gently down it poured--
		Over white veils like rain it seemed to die.
		
		The wind through the white garments softly stirred
		And they grew vari-coloured in each fold
		And each fold hidden blossoms seemed to hold
		And flowers and stars and fluting notes of bird
		And dim quaint figures shimmering like gold
		Seemed to come forth from distant myths of old.
		
		Outside the day was one of green and blue
		With touches of a luminous glowing red
		Across the quiet pond the small waves sped.
		Beyond the city gardens hidden from view
		Sent odors of sweet blossoms on the breeze
		And singing sounded through the far off trees.
		
		It was as though garlands crowned everything
		And all things were touched softly by the sun;
		And many windows opened one by one
		And the light trembled on them glistening.


	14. MARY VIRGIN

		How came how came from out thy night
		Mary so much light
		And so much gloom:
		Who was thy bridegroom?
		
		Thou callest thou callest and thou hast forgot
		That thou the same art not
		Who came to me
		In thy Virginity.
		
		I am still so blossoming so young.
		How shall I go on tiptoe
		From childhood to Annunciation
		Through the dim twilight
		Into thy Garden.


	15. MUSIC

		What play you O Boy? Through the garden it stole
		Like wandering steps like a whisper--then mute;
		What play you O Boy? Lo! your gypsying soul
		Is caught and held fast in the pipes of Pan’s flute.
		
		And what conjure you? Imprisoned is the song
		It lingers and longs in the reeds where it lies;
		Your young life is strong but how much more strong
		Is the longing that through your music sighs.
		
		Let your flute be still and your soul float through
		Waves of sound formless as waves of the sea
		For here your song lived and it wisely grew
		Before it was forced into melody.
		
		Its wings beat gently its note no more calls
		Its flight has been spent by you dreaming Boy!
		Now it no longer steals over my walls--
		But in my garden I’d woo it to joy.


	16. OFFERING

		My body glows in every vein and blooms
		To fullest flower since I first knew thee
		My walk unconscious pride and power assumes;
		Who art thou then--thou who awaitest me?
		
		When from the past I draw myself the while
		I lose old traits as leaves of autumn fall;
		I only know the radiance of thy smile
		Like the soft gleam of stars transforming all.
		
		Through childhood’s years I wandered unaware
		Of shimmering visions my thoughts now arrests
		To offer thee as on an altar fair
		That’s lighted by the bright flame of thy hair
		And wreathéd by the blossoms of thy breasts.


	17. PRESAGING

		I am like a flag unfurled in space
		I scent the oncoming winds and must bend with them
		While the things beneath are not yet stirring
		While doors close gently and there is silence in the chimneys
		And the windows do not yet tremble and the dust is still heavy--
		Then I feel the storm and am vibrant like the sea
		And expand and withdraw into myself
		And thrust myself forth and am alone in the great storm.


	18. REMEMBRANCE

		Expectant and waiting you muse
		On the great rare thing which alone
		To enhance your life you would choose:
		The awakening of the stone
		The deeps where yourself you would lose.
		
		In the dusk of the shelves embossed
		Shine the volumes in gold and browns
		And you think of countries once crossed
		Of pictures of shimmering gowns
		Of the women that you have lost.
		
		And it comes to you then at last--
		And you rise for you are aware
		Of a year in the far off past
		With its wonder and fear and prayer.


	19. SILENT HOUR

		Whoever weeps somewhere out in the world
		Weeps without cause in the world
		Weeps over me.
		
		Whoever laughs somewhere out in the night
		Laughs without cause in the night
		Laughs at me.
		
		Whoever wanders somewhere in the world
		Wanders in vain in the world
		Wanders to me.
		
		Whoever dies somewhere in the world
		Dies without cause in the world
		Looks at me.


	20. SOLITUDE

		Solitude is like a rain
		That from the sea at dusk begins to rise;
		It floats remote across the far-off plain
		Upward into its dwelling-place the skies
		Then o’er the town it slowly sinks again.
		Like rain it softly falls at that dim hour
		When ghostly lanes turn toward the shadowy morn;
		When bodies weighed with satiate passion’s power
		Sad disappointed from each other turn;
		When men with quiet hatred burning deep
		Together in a common bed must sleep--
		Through the gray phantom shadows of the dawn
		Lo! Solitude floats down the river wan . . .


	21. SONG OF THE STATUE

		Who so loveth me that he
		Will give his precious life for me?
		I shall be set free from the stone
		If some one drowns for me in the sea
		I shall have life life of my own--
		For life I ache.
		
		I long for the singing blood
		The stone is so still and cold.
		I dream of life life is good.
		Will no one love me and be bold
		And me awake?
		
		--
		
		I weep and weep alone
		Weep always for my stone.
		What joy is my blood to me
		If it ripens like red wine?
		It cannot call back from the sea
		The life that was given for mine
		Given for Love’s sake.


	22. THE ANGELS

		They all have tired mouths
		And luminous illimitable souls;
		And a longing (as if for sin)
		Trembles at times through their dreams.
		
		They all resemble one another
		In God’s garden they are silent
		Like many many intervals
		In His mighty melody.
		
		But when they spread their wings
		They awaken the winds
		That stir as though God
		With His far-reaching master hands
		Turned the pages of the dark book of Beginning.


	23. THE BOOK OF A MONK’S LIFE

		I live my life in circles that grow wide
		And endlessly unroll
		I may not reach the last but on I glide
		Strong pinioned toward my goal.
		
		About the old tower dark against the sky
		The beat of my wings hums
		I circle about God sweep far and high
		On through milleniums.
		
		Am I a bird that skims the clouds along
		Or am I a wild storm or a great song?
		
		
		Many have painted her. But there was one
		Who drew his radiant colours from the sun.
		Mysteriously glowing through a background dim
		When he was suffering she came to him
		And all the heavy pain within his heart
		Rose in his hands and stole into his art.
		His canvas is the beautiful bright veil
		Through which her sorrow shines. There where the
		Texture o’er her sad lips is closely drawn
		A trembling smile softly begins to dawn ...
		Though angels with seven candles light the place
		You cannot read the secret of her face.
		
		
		In cassocks clad I have had many brothers
		In southern cloisters where the laurel grows
		They paint Madonnas like fair human mothers
		And I dream of young Titians and of others
		In which the God with shining radiance glows.
		
		But though my vigil constantly I keep
		My God is dark--like woven texture flowing
		A hundred drinking roots all intertwined;
		I only know that from His warmth I’m growing.
		More I know not: my roots lie hidden deep
		My branches only are swayed by the wind.
		
		
		Thou Anxious One! And dost thou then not hear
		Against thee all my surging senses sing?
		About thy face in circles drawing near
		My thought floats like a fluttering white wing.
		
		Dost thou not see before thee stands my soul
		In silence wrapt my Springtime’s prayer to pray?
		But when thy glance rests on me then my whole
		Being quickens and blooms like trees in May.
		
		When thou art dreaming then I am thy Dream
		But when thou art awake I am thy Will
		Potent with splendour radiant and sublime
		Expanding like far space star-lit and still
		Into the distant mystic realm of Time.
		
		
		I love my life’s dark hours
		In which my senses quicken and grow deep
		While as from faint incense of faded flowers
		Or letters old I magically steep
		Myself in days gone by: again I give
		Myself unto the past:--again I live.
		
		Out of my dark hours wisdom dawns apace
		Infinite Life unrolls its boundless space ...
		
		Then I am shaken as a sweeping storm
		Shakes a ripe tree that grows above a grave
		‘Round whose cold clay the roots twine fast and warm--
		And Youth’s fair visions that glowed bright and brave
		Dreams that were closely cherished and for long
		Are lost once more in sadness and in song.


	24. THE BOOK OF PILGRIMAGE

		By day Thou are the Legend and the Dream
		That like a whisper floats about all men
		The deep and brooding stillnesses which seem
		After the hour has struck to close again.
		
		And when the day with drowsy gesture bends
		And sinks to sleep beneath the evening skies
		As from each roof a tower of smoke ascends--
		So does Thy Realm my God around me rise.
		
		
		All those who seek Thee tempt Thee
		And those who find would bind Thee
		To gesture and to form.
		
		But I would comprehend Thee
		As the wide Earth unfolds Thee.
		Thou growest with my maturity
		Thou Art in calm and storm.
		
		I ask of Thee no vanity
		To evidence and prove Thee.
		Thou Wert in eons old.
		
		Perform no miracles for me
		But justify Thy laws to me
		Which as the years pass by me.
		All soundlessly unfold.
		
		
		In a house was one who arose from the feast
		And went forth to wander in distant lands
		Because there was somewhere far off in the East
		A spot which he sought where a great Church stands.
		And ever his children when breaking their bread
		Thought of him and rose up and blessed him as dead.
		
		In another house was the one who had died
		Who still sat at table and drank from the glass
		And ever within the walls did abide--
		For out of the house he could no more pass.
		And his children set forth to seek for the spot
		Where stands the great Church which he forgot.
		
		
		Extinguish my eyes I still can see you
		Close my ears I can hear your footsteps fall
		And without feet I still can follow you
		And without voice I still can to you call.
		Break off my arms and I can embrace you
		Enfold you with my heart as with a hand.
		Hold my heart my brain will take fire of you
		As flax ignites from a lit fire-brand--
		And flame will sweep in a swift rushing flood
		Through all the singing currents of my blood.
		
		
		In the deep nights I dig for you O Treasure!
		To seek you over the wide world I roam
		For all abundance is but meager measure
		Of your bright beauty which is yet to come.
		
		Over the road to you the leaves are blowing
		Few follow it the way is long and steep.
		You dwell in solitude--Oh does your glowing
		Heart in some far off valley lie asleep?
		
		My bloody hands with digging bruised I’ve lifted
		Spread like a tree I stretch them in the air
		To find you before day to night has drifted;
		I reach out into space to seek you there . . .
		
		Then as though with a swift impatient gesture
		Flashing from distant stars on sweeping wing
		You come and over earth a magic vesture
		Steals gently as the rain falls in the spring.


	25. THE BOOK OF POVERTY AND DEATH

		Her mouth is like the mouth of a fine bust
		That cannot utter sound nor breathe nor kiss
		But that had once from Life received all this
		Which shaped its subtle curves and ever must
		From fullness of past knowledge dwell alone
		A thing apart a parable in stone.
		
		
		Alone Thou wanderest through space
		Profound One with the hidden face;
		Thou art Poverty’s great rose
		The eternal metamorphose
		Of gold into the light of sun.
		
		Thou art the mystic homeless One;
		Into the world Thou never came
		Too mighty Thou too great to name;
		Voice of the storm Song that the wild wind sings
		Thou Harp that shatters those who play Thy strings!
		
		
		A watcher of Thy spaces make me
		Make me a listener at Thy stone
		Give to me vision and then wake me
		Upon Thy oceans all alone.
		Thy rivers’ courses let me follow
		Where they leap the crags in their flight
		And where at dusk in caverns hollow
		They croon to music of the night.
		Send me far into Thy barren land
		Where the snow clouds the wild wind drives
		Where monasteries like gray shrouds stand--
		August symbols of unlived lives.
		There pilgrims climb slowly one by one
		And behind them a blind man goes:
		With him I will walk till day is done
		Up the pathway that no one knows ...


	26. THE BOY

		I wish I might become like one of these
		Who in the night on horses wild astride
		With torches flaming out like loosened hair
		On to the chase through the great swift wind ride.
		I wish to stand as on a boat and dare
		The sweeping storm mighty like flag unrolled
		In darkness but with helmet made of gold
		That shimmers restlessly. And in a row
		Behind me in the dark ten men that glow
		With helmets that are restless too like mine
		Now old and dull now clear as glass they shine.
		One stands by me and blows a blast apace
		On his great flashing trumpet and the sound
		Shrieks through the vast black solitude around
		Through which as through a wild mad dream we race.
		The houses fall behind us on their knees
		Before us bend the streets and them we gain
		The great squares yieled to us and them we seize--
		And on our steeds rush like the roar of rain.


	27. THE BRIDE

		Call me Beloved! Call aloud to me!
		Thy bride her vigil at the window keeps;
		The evening wanes to dusk the dimness creeps
		Down empty alleys of the old plane-tree.
		
		O! Let thy voice enfold me close about
		Or from this dark house lonely and remote
		Through deep blue gardens where gray shadows float
		I will pour forth my soul with hands stretched out . . .


	28. THE PANTHER

		His weary glance from passing by the bars
		Has grown into a dazed and vacant stare;
		It seems to him there are a thousand bars
		And out beyond those bars the empty air.
		
		The pad of his strong feet that ceaseless sound
		Of supple tread behind the iron bands
		Is like a dance of strength circling around
		While in the circle stunned a great will stands.
		
		But there are times the pupils of his eyes
		Dilate the strong limbs stand alert apart
		Tense with the flood of visions that arise
		Only to sink and die within his heart.


	29. THE SPANISH DANCER

		As a lit match first flickers in the hands
		Before it flames and darts out from all sides
		Bright twitching tongues so ringed by growing bands
		Of spectators--she quivering glowing stands
		Poised tensely for the dance--then forward glides
		
		And suddenly becomes a flaming torch.
		Her bright hair flames her burning glances scorch
		And with a daring art at her command
		Her whole robe blazes like a fire-brand
		From which is stretched each naked arm awake
		Gleaming and rattling like a frightened snake.
		
		And then as though the fire fainter grows
		She gathers up the flame--again it glows
		As with proud gesture and imperious air
		She flings it to the earth; and it lies there
		Furiously flickering and crackling still--
		Then haughtily victorious but with sweet
		Swift smile of greeting she puts forth her will
		And stamps the flames out with her small firm feet.


	30. THE TOMB OF A YOUNG GIRL

		We still remember! The same as of yore
		All that has happened once again must be.
		As grows a lemon-tree upon the shore--
		It was like that--your light small breasts you bore
		And his blood’s current coursed like the wild sea.
		
		That god--
		         who was the wanderer the slim
		Despoiler of fair women; he--the wise--
		But sweet and glowing as your thoughts of him
		Who cast a shadow over your young limb
		While bending like your arched brows o’er your eyes.


	31. THE WOMAN WHO LOVES

		Ah yes! I long for you. To you I glide
		And lose myself--for to you I belong.
		The hope that hitherto I have denied
		Imperious comes to me as from your side
		Serious unfaltering and swift and strong.
		
		Those times: the times when I was quite alone
		By memories wrapt that whispered to me low
		My silence was the quiet of a stone
		Over which rippling murmuring waters flow.
		
		But in these weeks of the awakening Spring
		Something within me has been freed--something
		That in the past dark years unconscious lay
		Which rises now within me and commands
		And gives my poor warm life into your hands
		Who know not what I was that Yesterday.


*** Arthur Rimbaud (1854 - 1891)

	1. LIVES

		I
		
		     Oh! the huge avenues of the holy land, the terraces of the temple! What has happened to the 
		brahmin who taught me the Proverbs? From then and from there I can still see even the old 
		women! I remember silvery hours and sun near rivers, the hand of the country on my shoulder, and 
		our caresses as we stood in the fiery fields.--A flight of red pigeons thunders around my thoughts
		--In exile here I had a stage on which to perform the dramatic masterpieces of all literatures. I 
		might tell you about unheard-of wealth. I follow the story of the treasures you found. I see the next 
		chapter! My wisdom is as neglected as chaos is. What is my void, compared with the stupefaction 
		awaiting you?
		
		
		II
		
		     I am a far more deserving inventor than all those who went before me; a musician, in fact, who 
		found something resembling the key of love. At present, a noble from a meager countryside with a 
		dark sky I try to feel emotion over the memory of mendicant childhood, over my apprenticeship 
		when I arrived wearing wooden shoes, polemics, five or six widowings, and a few wild escapades 
		when my strong head kept me from rising to the same pitch as my comrades. I don’t miss what I 
		once possessed of divine happiness: the calm of this despondent countryside gives a new vigor to 
		my terrible scepticism. But since this scepticism can no longer be put into effect, and since I am 
		now given over to a new worry--I expect to become a very wicked fool.
		
		
		III
		
		     In an attic where at the age of twelve I was locked up, I knew the world and illustrated the 
		human comedy. In a wine cellar I learned history. At some night celebration, in a northern city, I 
		met all the wives of former painters. In an old back street in Paris I was taught the classical sciences.
		In a magnificent palace, surrounded by all the Orient, I finished my long work and spent my 
		celebrated retirement. I have invigorated my blood. I am released from my duty. I must not even 
		think of that any longer. I am really from beyond the tomb, and without work.


	2. NOVEL

		I
		
		We aren’t serious when we’re seventeen.
		--One fine evening, to hell with beer and lemonade,
		Noisy cafés with their shining lamps!
		We walk under the green linden trees of the park
		
		The lindens smell good in the good June evenings!
		At times the air is so scented that we close our eyes.
		The wind laden with sounds--the town isn’t far--
		Has the smell of grapevines and beer . . .
		
		
		II
		
		--There you can see a very small patch
		Of dark blue, framed by a little branch,
		Pinned up by a naughty star, that melts
		In gentle quivers, small and very white . . .
		
		Night in June! Seventeen years old! --We are overcome by it all
		The sap is champagne and goes to our head . . .
		We talked a lot and feel a kiss on our lips
		Trembling there like a small insect . . .
		
		
		III
		
		Our wild heart moves through novels like Robinson Crusoe,
		--When, in the light of a pale street lamp,
		A girl goes by attractive and charming
		Under the shadow of her father’s terrible collar . . .
		
		And as she finds you incredibly naïve,
		While clicking her little boots,
		She turns abruptly and in a lively way . . .
		--Then _cavatinas_ die on your lips . . .
		
		
		IV
		
		You are in love. Occupied until the month of August.
		You are in love. --Your sonnets make Her laugh.
		All your friends go off, you are ridiculous.
		--Then one evening the girl you worship deigned to write to you . . . !
		
		--That evening, . . . --you return to the bright cafés,
		You ask for beer or lemonade . . .
		--We’re not serious when we are seventeen
		And when we have green linden trees in the park.


	3. THE DRUNKEN BOAT

		As I was going down impassive Rivers,
		I no longer felt myself guided by haulers:
		Yelping redskins had taken them as targets
		And had nailed them naked to colored stakes.
		
		I was indifferent to all crews,
		The bearer of Flemish wheat or English cottons
		When with my haulers this uproar stopped
		The Rivers let me go where I wanted.
		
		Into the furious lashing of the tides
		More heedless than children’s brains the other winter
		I ran! And loosened Peninsulas
		Have not undergone a more triumphant hubbub
		
		The storm blessed my sea vigils
		Lighter than a cork I danced on the waves
		That are called eternal rollers of victims,
		Ten nights, without missing the stupid eye of the lighthouses!
		
		Sweeter than the flesh of hard apples is to children
		The green water penetrated my hull of fir
		And washed me of spots of blue wine
		And vomit, scattering rudder and grappling-hook
		
		And from then on I bathed in the Poem
		Of the Sea, infused with stars and lactescent,
		Devouring the azure verses; where, like a pale elated
		Piece of flotsam, a pensive drowned figure sometimes sinks;
		
		Where, suddenly dyeing the blueness, delirium
		And slow rhythms under the streaking of daylight,
		Stronger than alcohol, vaster than our lyres,
		The bitter redness of love ferments!
		
		I know the skies bursting with lightning, and the waterspouts
		And the surf and the currents; I know the evening,
		And dawn as exalted as a flock of doves
		And at times I have seen what man thought he saw!
		
		I have seen the low sun spotted with mystic horrors,
		Lighting up, with long violet clots,
		Resembling actors of very ancient dramas,
		The waves rolling far off their quivering of shutters!
		
		I have dreamed of the green night with dazzled snows
		A kiss slowly rising to the eyes of the sea,
		The circulation of unknown saps,
		And the yellow and blue awakening of singing phosphorous!
		
		I followed during pregnant months the swell,
		Like hysterical cows, in its assault on the reefs,
		Without dreaming that the luminous feet of the Marys
		Could constrain the snout of the wheezing Oceans!
		
		I struck against, you know, unbelievable Floridas
		Mingling with flowers panthers’ eyes and human
		Skin! Rainbows stretched like bridal reins
		Under the horizon of the seas to greenish herds!
		
		I have seen enormous swamps ferment, fish-traps
		Where a whole Leviathan rots in the rushes!
		Avalanches of water in the midst of a calm,
		And the distances cataracting toward the abyss!
		
		Glaciers, suns of silver, nacreous waves, skies of embers!
		Hideous strands at the end of brown gulfs
		Where giant serpents devoured by bedbugs
		Fall down from gnarled trees with black scent!
		
		I should have liked to show children those sunfish
		Of the blue wave, the fish of gold, the singing fish.
		--Foam of flowers rocked my drifting
		And ineffable winds winged me at times.
		
		At times a martyr weary of poles and zones,
		The sea, whose sob created my gentle roll,
		Brought up to me her dark flowers with yellow suckers
		And I remained, like a woman on her knees...
		
		Resembling an island tossing on my sides the quarrels
		And droppings of noisy birds with yellow eyes
		And I sailed on, when through my fragile ropes
		Drowned men sank backward to sleep!
		
		Now I, a boat lost in the foliage of caves,
		Thrown by the storm into the birdless air
		I whose water-drunk carcass would not have been rescued
		By the Monitors and the Hanseatic sailboats;
		
		Free, smoking, topped with violet fog,
		I who pierced the reddening sky like a wall,
		Bearing, delicious jam for good poets
		Lichens of sunlight and mucus of azure,
		
		Who ran, spotted with small electric moons,
		A wild plank, escorted by black seahorses,
		When Julys beat down with blows of cudgels
		The ultramarine skies with burning funnels;
		
		I, who trembled, hearing at fifty leagues off
		The moaning of the Behemoths in heat and the thick Maelstroms,
		Eternal spinner of the blue immobility
		I miss Europe with its ancient parapets!
		
		I have seen sidereal archipelagos! and islands
		Whose delirious skies are open to the sea-wanderer:
		--Is it in these bottomless nights that you sleep and exile yourself,
		Million golden birds, o future Vigor? --
		
		But, in truth, I have wept too much! Dawns are heartbreaking.
		Every moon is atrocious and every sun bitter.
		Acrid love has swollen me with intoxicating torpor
		O let my keel burst! O let me go into the sea!
		
		If I want a water of Europe, it is the black
		Cold puddle where in the sweet-smelling twilight
		A squatting child full of sadness releases
		A boat as fragile as a May butterfly.
		
		No longer can I, bathed in your languor, o waves,
		Follow in the wake of the cotton boats,
		Nor cross through the pride of flags and flames,
		Nor swim under the terrible eyes of prison ships.


*** Yiannis Ritsos (1909 - 1990)

	1. EPILOGUE

		Please cherish my memory--he said. I walked for thousand
		miles on end without bread and without water, along rocks and through
		thorns I walked, to fetch you bread, water and roses.
		I was always faithful to beauty. With fair mind I gave out
		all my fortune. I did not keep my lot. I am poor. With a tiny lily from
		the fields I brightened our harshest nights. Please cherish my memory.
		And forgive this last sorrow of mine:
		I would like--once again--to reap a ripe corn with the
		slender sickle moon. To stand at the threshold, to stare away
		and to chew with my front teeth the wheat
		admiring and blessing this world that I leave behind,
		admiring also Him who climbs up the hill in the
		golden rain of a sinking sun. There is a purple square patch in his
		left sleeve. It is not easy to see. It was this, more than anything else,
		that I wanted to show you.
		And probably, more than anything else, it would be worth
		remembering me for this.


	2. ON A DAY IN MAY YOU LEFT ME

		On a day in May you left me, on that May day I lost you,
		in springtime you loved so well, my son, when you went upstairs,
		
		To the sun-drenched roof and looked out and your eyes never had
		their lill of drinking in the light of the whole wide world at large.
		
		With your manly voice so sweet and so warm, you recounted
		as many things as all the pebbles strewn along the seashore.
		
		My son, you told me that all these wonderful things will be ours,
		but now your light has died out, our brightness and fire are gone.


	3. WHERE DID MY BOY FLY AWAY?

		Son, my flesh and blood. marrow of my bones, heart of my own heart,
		sparrow of my tiny courtyard, flower of my loneliness.
		
		Where did my boy fly away? Where’s he gone? Where’s he leaving me?
		The bird-cage is empty now, not a drop of water in the font.
		
		What ever made your dear eyes close and you are blind to my tears?
		How are you frozen in your tracks and deaf to my bitter words?


*** Edwin Arlington Robinson (1869 - 1935)

	1. DISCOVERY

		We told of him as one who should have soared 
		And seen for us the devastating light 
		Whereof there is not either day or night, 
		And shared with us the glamour of the Word 
		That fell once upon Amos to record
		For men at ease in Zion, when the sight 
		Of ills obscured aggrieved him and the might 
		Of Hamath was a warning of the Lord. 
		
		Assured somehow that he would make us wise, 
		Our pleasure was to wait; and our surprise
		Was hard when we confessed the dry return 
		Of his regret. For we were still to learn 
		That earth has not a school where we may go 
		For wisdom, or for more than we may know.


	2. LATE SUMMER

		Confused, he found her lavishing feminine 
		Gold upon clay, and found her inscrutable; 
		And yet she smiled. Why, then, should horrors 
		Be as they were, without end, her playthings? 
		
		And why were dead years hungrily telling her
		Lies of the dead, who told them again to her? 
		If now she knew, there might be kindness 
		Clamoring yet where a faith lay stifled. 
		
		A little faith in him, and the ruinous 
		Past would be for time to annihilate,
		And wash out, like a tide that washes 
		Out of the sand what a child has drawn there. 
		
		God, what a shining handful of happiness, 
		Made out of days and out of eternities, 
		Were now the pulsing end of patience--
		Could he but have what a ghost had stolen! 
		
		What was a man before him, or ten of them, 
		While he was here alive who could answer them, 
		And in their teeth fling confirmations 
		Harder than agates against an egg-shell?
		
		But now the man was dead, and would come again 
		Never, though she might honor ineffably 
		The flimsy wraith of him she conjured 
		Out of a dream with his wand of absence. 
		
		And if the truth were now but a mummery,
		Meriting pride’s implacable irony, 
		So much the worse for pride. Moreover, 
		Save her or fail, there was conscience always. 
		
		Meanwhile, a few misgivings of innocence, 
		Imploring to be sheltered and credited,
		Were not amiss when she revealed them. 
		Whether she struggled or not, he saw them. 
		
		Also, he saw that while she was hearing him 
		Her eyes had more and more of the past in them; 
		And while he told what cautious honor
		Told him was all he had best be sure of, 
		
		He wondered once or twice, inadvertently, 
		Where shifting winds were driving his argosies, 
		Long anchored and as long unladen, 
		Over the foam for the golden chances.
		
		“If men were not for killing so carelessly, 
		And women were for wiser endurances,” 
		He said, “we might have yet a world here 
		Fitter for Truth to be seen abroad in; 
		
		“If Truth were not so strange in her nakedness,
		And we were less forbidden to look at it, 
		We might not have to look.” He stared then 
		Down at the sand where the tide threw forward 
		
		Its cold, unconquered lines, that unceasingly 
		Foamed against hope, and fell. He was calm enough,
		Although he knew he might be silenced 
		Out of all calm; and the night was coming. 
		
		“I climb for you the peak of his infamy 
		That you may choose your fall if you cling to it. 
		No more for me unless you say more.
		All you have left of a dream defends you: 
		
		“The truth may be as evil an augury 
		As it was needful now for the two of us. 
		We cannot have the dead between us. 
		Tell me to go, and I go.”--She pondered:
		
		“What you believe is right for the two of us 
		Makes it as right that you are not one of us. 
		If this be needful truth you tell me, 
		Spare me, and let me have lies hereafter.” 
		
		She gazed away where shadows were covering
		The whole cold ocean’s healing indifference. 
		No ship was coming. When the darkness 
		Fell, she was there, and alone, still gazing.


	3. MONADNOCK THROUGH THE TREES

		Before there was in Egypt any sound 
		Of those who reared a more prodigious means 
		For the self-heavy sleep of kings and queens 
		Than hitherto had mocked the most renowned,--
		Unvisioned here and waiting to be found,
		Alone, amid remote and older scenes, 
		You loomed above ancestral evergreens 
		Before there were the first of us around. 
		
		And when the last of us, if we know how, 
		See farther from ourselves than we do now,
		Assured with other sight than heretofore 
		That we have done our mortal best and worst,--
		Your calm will be the same as when the first 
		Assyrians went howling south to war.


	4. RICHARD CORY

		Whenever Richard Cory went down town, 
		We people on the pavement looked at him: 
		He was a gentleman from sole to crown, 
		Clean favored, and imperially slim. 
		
		And he was always quietly arrayed, 
		And he was always human when he talked; 
		But still he fluttered pulses when he said, 
		‘Good-morning,’ and he glittered when he walked. 
		
		And he was rich--yes, richer than a king--
		And admirably schooled in every grace: 
		In fine, we thought that he was everything 
		To make us wish that we were in his place. 
		
		So on we worked, and waited for the light, 
		And went without the meat, and cursed the bread; 
		And Richard Cory, one calm summer night, 
		Went home and put a bullet through his head.


	5. STAFFORD’S CABIN

		Once there was a cabin here, and once there was a man; 
		And something happened here before my memory began. 
		Time has made the two of them the fuel of one flame 
		And all we have of them is now a legend and a name. 
		
		All I have to say is what an old man said to me,
		And that would seem to be as much as there will ever be. 
		“Fifty years ago it was we found it where it sat.”--
		And forty years ago it was old Archibald said that. 
		
		“An apple tree that’s yet alive saw something, I suppose, 
		Of what it was that happened there, and what no mortal knows.
		Some one on the mountain heard far off a master shriek, 
		And then there was a light that showed the way for men to seek. 
		
		“We found it in the morning with an iron bar behind, 
		And there were chains around it; but no search could ever find, 
		Either in the ashes that were left, or anywhere,
		A sign to tell of who or what had been with Stafford there. 
		
		“Stafford was a likely man with ideas of his own--
		Though I could never like the kind that likes to live alone; 
		And when you met, you found his eyes were always on your shoes, 
		As if they did the talking when he asked you for the news.
		
		“That’s all, my son. Were I to talk for half a hundred years 
		I’d never clear away from there the cloud that never clears. 
		We buried what was left of it,—the bar, too, and the chains; 
		And only for the apple tree there’s nothing that remains.” 
		
		Forty years ago it was I heard the old man say,
		“That’s all, my son.”--And here again I find the place to-day, 
		Deserted and told only by the tree that knows the most, 
		And overgrown with golden-rod as if there were no ghost.


	6. THE GARDEN

		There is a fenceless garden overgrown 
		With buds and blossoms and all sorts of leaves; 
		And once, among the roses and the sheaves, 
		The Gardener and I were there alone. 
		He led me to the plot where I had thrown
		The fennel of my days on wasted ground, 
		And in that riot of sad weeds I found 
		The fruitage of a life that was my own. 
		
		My life! Ah, yes, there was my life, indeed! 
		And there were all the lives of humankind;
		And they were like a book that I could read, 
		Whose every leaf, miraculously signed, 
		Outrolled itself from Thought’s eternal seed. 
		Love-rooted in God’s garden of the mind.


	7. THE GIFT OF GOD

		Blessed with a joy that only she
		Of all alive shall ever know,
		She wears a proud humility
		For what it was that willed it so--
		That her degree should be so great
		Among the favoured of the Lord
		That she may scarcely bear the weight
		Of her bewildering reward.
		
		As one apart, immune, alone,
		Or featured for the shining ones,
		And like to none that she has known
		Of other women’s other sons--
		The firm fruition of her need,
		He shines anointed; and he blurs
		Her vision, till it seems indeed
		A sacrilege to call him hers.
		
		She fears a little for so much
		Of what is best, and hardly dares
		To think of him as one to touch
		With aches, indignities, and cares;
		She sees him rather at the goal,
		Still shining; and her dream foretells
		The proper shining of a soul
		Where nothing ordinary dwells.
		
		Perchance a canvass of the town
		Would find him far from flags and shouts,
		And leave him only the renown
		Of many smiles and many doubts;
		Perchance the crude and common tongue
		Would havoc strangely with his worth;
		But she, with innocence unwrung,
		Would read his name around the earth.
		
		And others, knowing how this youth
		Would shine, if love could make him great,
		When caught and tortured for the truth
		Would only writhe and hesitate;
		While she, arranging for his days
		What centuries could not fulfil,
		Transmutes him with her faith and praise,
		And has him shining where she will.
		
		She crowns him with her gratefulness,
		And says again that life is good;
		And should the gift of God be less
		In him than in her motherhood,
		His fame, though vague, will not be small
		As upward through her dream he fares,
		Half clouded with a crimson fall
		Of roses thrown on marble stairs.


	8. THE HOUSE ON THE HILL

		They are all gone away, 
		The house is shut and still, 
		There is nothing more to say. 
		
		Through broken walls and gray 
		The winds blow bleak and shrill: 
		They are all gone away. 
		
		Nor is there one today 
		To speak them good or ill: 
		There is nothing more to say. 
		
		Why is it then we stray 
		Around the sunken sill? 
		They are all gone away. 
		
		And our poor fancy-play 
		For them is wasted skill: 
		There is nothing more to say. 
		
		There is ruin and decay 
		In the House on the Hill 
		They are all gone away, 
		There is nothing more to say.


	9. THE PITY OF THE LEAVES

		Vengeful across the cold November moors, 
		Loud with ancestral shame there came the bleak 
		Sad wind that shrieked, and answered with a shriek, 
		Reverberant through lonely corridors. 
		The old man heard it; and he heard, perforce,
		Words out of lips that were no more to speak--
		Words of the past that shook the old man’s cheek 
		Like dead, remembered footsteps on old floors. 
		
		And then there were the leaves that plagued him so! 
		The brown, thin leaves that on the stones outside
		Skipped with a freezing whisper. Now and then 
		They stopped, and stayed there--just to let him know 
		How dead they were; but if the old man cried, 
		They fluttered off like withered souls of men.


*** Mary Robinson (1757 - 1800)

	1. DEBORAH’S PARROT

		‘Twas in a little western town
		  An ancient Maiden dwelt:
		Her name was MISS, or MISTRESS, Brown,
		  Or DEBORAH, or DEBBY:  She
		  Was doom’d a Spinster pure to be,
		For soft delights her breast ne’er felt:
		Yet, she had watchful Ears and Eyes
		  For ev’ry youthful neighbour,
		And never did she cease to labour
		A tripping female to surprize.
		
		And why was she so wond’rous pure,
		So stiff, so solemn--so demure?
		Why did she watch with so much care
		The roving youth, the wand’ring fair?
		The tattler, Fame, has said that she
		A Spinster’s life had long detested,
		But ‘twas her quiet destiny,
		  Never to be molested !--
		And had Miss DEBBY’S form been grac’d,
		Fame adds,--She had not been so chaste;--
		But since for frailty she would roam,
		She ne’er was taught--to look at home .
		
		Miss DEBBY was of mien demure
		  And blush’d, like any maid !
		She could not saucy man endure
		  Lest she should be betray’d!
		She never fail’d at dance or fair
		To watch the wily lurcher’s snare;
		At Church, she was a model Godly!
		Though sometimes she had other eyes
		Than those, uplifted to the skies,
		  Leering most oddly!
		And Scandal, ever busy, thought
		She rarely practic’d--what she taught.
		
		Her dress was always stiff brocade,
		  With laces broad and dear;
		Fine Cobwebs !  that would thinly shade
		  Her shrivell’d cheek of sallow hue,
		While, like a Spider, her keen eye,
		  Which never shed soft pity’s tear,
		Small holes in others geer could spy,
		And microscopic follies, prying view.
		And sorely vex’d was ev’ry simple thing
		That wander’d near her never-tiring sting!
		
		Miss DEBBY had a PARROT, who,
		  If Fame speaks true,
		Could prate, and tell what neighbours did,
		And yet the saucy rogue was never chid!
		Sometimes, he talk’d of roving Spouses
		Who wander’d from their quiet houses:
		Sometimes, he call’d a Spinster pure
		By names, that Virtue can’t indure!
		And sometimes told an ancient Dame
		Such tales as made her blush with shame!
		Then gabbled how a giddy Miss
		Would give the boist’rous Squire a kiss!
		But chiefly he was taught to cry,
		Who with the Parson toy’d? O fie! ”
		
		This little joke, Miss DEBBY taught him,
		To vex a young and pretty neighbour;
		But by her scandal-zealous labour
		  To shame she brought him!
		For, the Old PARROT, like his teacher
		Was but a false and canting preacher,
		And many a gamesome pair had sworn
		Such lessons were not to be borne.
		
		At last, Miss DEBBY sore was flouted
		And by her angry neighbours scouted;
		She never knew one hour of rest,
		Of ev’ry Saucy Boor, the jest:
		The young despis’d her, and the Sage
		Look’d back on Time’s impartial page;
		They knew that youth was giv’n to prove
		  The season of extatic joy,
		That none but Cynics would destroy,
		  The early buds of Love.
		They also knew that DEBBY sigh’d
		For charms that envious Time deny’d;
		That she was vex’d with jealous Spleen
		That Hymen pass’d her by, unseen.
		
		For though the Spinster’s wealth was known,
		Gold will not purchase Love--alone .
		She, and her PARROT, now were thought
		The torments of their little Sphere;
		He, because mischievously taught,
		And She, because a maid austere !--
		In short, she deem’d it wise to leave
		A Place, where none remain’d, to grieve.
		
		Soon, to a distant town remov’d,
		  Miss DEBBY’S gold an husband bought;
		And all she had her PARROT taught,
		(Her PARROT now no more belov’d,)
		Was quite forgotten. But, alas!
		As Fate would have it come to pass,
		Her Spouse was giv’n to jealous rage,
		For, both in Person and in Age ,
		He was the partner of his love,
		Ordain’d her second Self to prove!
		
		One day, Old JENKINS had been out
		  With merry friends to dine,
		And, freely talking, had, no doubt
		  Been also free with wine.
		One said, of all the wanton gay
		In the whole parish search it round,
		None like the PARSON could be found,
		  Where a frail Maid was in the way.
		Another thought the Parson sure
		To win the heart of maid or wife;
		And would have freely pledg’d his life
		That young, or old, or rich or poor
		  None could defy
		The magic of his roving eye!
		
		JENKINS went home, but all the night
		  He dream’d of this strange tale!
		Yet, bless’d his stars ! with proud delight,
		  His partner was not young, nor frail.
		Next morning, at the breakfast table.
		The PARROT, loud as he was able,
		Was heard repeatedly to cry,
		Who with the Parson toy’d? O fie!”
		
		Old JENKINS listen’d, and grew pale,
		  The PARROT then, more loudly scream’d,
		And MISTRESS JENKINS heard the tale
		  And much alarm’d she seem’d!
		Trembling she tried to stop his breath,
		Her lips and cheek as pale as death!
		The more she trembled, still the more
		Old JENKINS view’d her o’er and o’er;
		And now her yellow cheek was spread
		With blushes of the deepest red.
		
		And now again the PARROT’S Tale
		Made his old Tutoress doubly pale;
		For cowardice and guilt, they say
		  Are the twin brothers of the soul;
		So MISTRESS JENKINS, her dismay
		  Could not controul!
		While the accuser, now grown bold,
		Thrice o’er, the tale of mischief told.
		
		Now JENKINS from the table rose,
		“Who with the Parson toy’d? ” he cried.
		“So MISTRESS FRAILTY, you must play,
		“And sport, your wanton hours away.
		“And with your gold, a pretty joke,
		“You thought to buy a pleasant cloak;
		“A screen to hide your shame--but know
		“I will not blind to ruin go.--
		“I am no modern Spouse , dy’e see,
		“Gold will not gild disgrace, with me!”
		Some say he seiz’d his fearful bride,
		  And came to blows!
		Day after day, the contest dire
		Augmented, with resistless ire!
		And many a drubbing DEBBY bought
		For mischief, she her PARROT taught!
		
		Thus, SLANDER turns against its maker;
		  And if this little Story reaches
		  A SPINSTER, who her PARROT teaches,
		Let her a better task pursue,
		And here, the certain VENGEANCE view
		  Which surely will, in TIME, O’ERTAKE HER.


	2. LONDON’S SUMMER MORNING

		Who has not waked to list the busy sounds 
		Of summer’s morning, in the sultry smoke 
		Of noisy London? On the pavement hot 
		The sooty chimney-boy, with dingy face 
		And tattered covering, shrilly bawls his trade, 
		Rousing the sleepy housemaid. At the door 
		The milk-pail rattles, and the tinkling bell 
		Proclaims the dustman’s office; while the street 
		Is lost in clouds impervious. Now begins 
		The din of hackney-coaches, waggons, carts; 
		While tinmen’s shops, and noisy trunk-makers, 
		Knife-grinders, coopers, squeaking cork-cutters, 
		Fruit-barrows, and the hunger-giving cries 
		Of vegetable-vendors, fill the air. 
		Now every shop displays its varied trade, 
		And the fresh-sprinkled pavement cools the feet 
		Of early walkers. At the private door 
		The ruddy housemaid twirls the busy mop, 
		Annoying the smart ’prentice, or neat girl, 
		Tripping with band-box lightly. Now the sun 
		Darts burning splendor on the glittering pane, 
		Save where the canvas awning throws a shade 
		On the gay merchandise. Now, spruce and trim, 
		In shops (where beauty smiles with industry) 
		Sits the smart damsel; while the passenger 
		Peeps through the window, watching every charm. 
		Now pastry dainties catch the eye minute 
		Of humming insects, while the limy snare 
		Waits to enthrall them. Now the lamp-lighter 
		Mounts the tall ladder, nimbly venturous, 
		To trim the half-filled lamps, while at his feet 
		The pot-boy yells discordant! All along 
		The sultry pavement, the old-clothes-man cries 
		In tone monotonous, while sidelong views 
		The area for his traffic: now the bag 
		Is slyly opened, and the half-worn suit 
		(Sometimes the pilfered treasure of the base 
		Domestic spoiler), for one half its worth, 
		Sinks in the green abyss. The porter now 
		Bears his huge load along the burning way; 
		And the poor poet wakes from busy dreams, 
		To paint the summer morning.


	3. THE SNOWDROP

		The snowdrop, Winter’s timid child,
		Awakes to life, bedew’d with tears;
		And flings around its fragrance mild,
		And where no rival flow’rets bloom,
		Amid the bare and chilling gloom,
		A beauteous gem appears!
		
		All weak and wan, with head inclined,
		Its parent breast the drifted snow; 
		It trembles while the ruthless wind
		Bends its slim form; the tempest lours,
		Its emerald eye drops crystal showers
		On its cold bed below.
		
		Poor flower! on thee the sunny beam,
		No touch of genial warmth bestows;
		Except to thaw the icy stream,
		Whose little current purls along
		Thy fair and glossy charms among,
		And whelms thee as it flows.
		
		The night-breeze tears thy silky dress,
		Which deck’d, with silvery lustre shone;
		The morn returns, not thee to bless,
		The gaudy crocus flaunts its pride,
		And triumphs where its rival died,
		Unshelter’d and unknown!
		
		No sunny beam shall gild thy grave,
		No bird of pity thee deplore;
		There shall no spreading branches wave;
		For Spring shall all her gems unfold,
		And revel ‘mid her buds of gold,
		When thou art seen no more!
		
		Where’er I find thee, gentle flower,
		Thou still art sweet and dear to me;
		For I have known the cheerless hour,
		Have seen the sunbeams cold and pale, 
		Have felt the chilling wintry gale,
		And wept and shrunk like thee!


*** Theodore Roethke (1908 - 1963)

	1. I KNEW A WOMAN

		I knew a woman, lovely in her bones, 
		When small birds sighed, she would sigh back at them; 
		Ah, when she moved, she moved more ways than one: 
		The shapes a bright container can contain! 
		Of her choice virtues only gods should speak, 
		Or English poets who grew up on Greek 
		(I’d have them sing in a chorus, cheek to cheek). 
		
		How well her wishes went! She stroked my chin, 
		She taught me Turn, and Counter-turn, and Stand; 
		She taught me Touch, that undulant white skin; 
		I nibbled meekly from her proferred hand; 
		She was the sickle; I, poor I, the rake, 
		Coming behind her for her pretty sake 
		(But what prodigious mowing we did make). 
		
		Love likes a gander, and adores a goose: 
		Her full lips pursed, the errant notes to sieze; 
		She played it quick, she played it light and loose; 
		My eyes, they dazzled at her flowing knees; 
		Her several parts could keep a pure repose, 
		Or one hip quiver with a mobile nose 
		(She moved in circles, and those circles moved). 
		
		Let seed be grass, and grass turn into hay: 
		I’m martyr to a motion not my own; 
		What’s freedom for? To know eternity. 
		I swear she cast a shadow white as stone. 
		But who would count eternity in days? 
		These old bones live to learn her wanton ways: 
		(I measure time by how a body sways).


	2. MOSS GATHERING

		To loosen with all ten fingers held wide and limber
		And lift up a patch, dark-green, the kind for lining cemetery baskets,
		Thick and cushiony, like an old-fashioned doormat, 
		The crumbling small hollow sticks on the underside mixed with roots, 
		And wintergreen berries and leaves still stuck to the top,--
		That was moss-gathering. 
		
		But something always went out of me when I dug loose those carpets 
		Of green, or plunged to my elbows in the spongy yellowish moss of the marshes:
		And afterwards I always felt mean, jogging back over the logging road, 
		As if I had broken the natural order of things in that swampland;
		Disturbed some rhythm, old and of vast importance,
		By pulling off flesh from the living planet;
		As if I had committed, against the whole scheme of life, a desecration. 


	3. MY PAPA’S WALTZ

		The whiskey on your breath   
		Could make a small boy dizzy;   
		But I hung on like death:   
		Such waltzing was not easy.
		
		We romped until the pans   
		Slid from the kitchen shelf;   
		My mother’s countenance   
		Could not unfrown itself.
		
		The hand that held my wrist   
		Was battered on one knuckle;   
		At every step you missed
		My right ear scraped a buckle.
		
		You beat time on my head   
		With a palm caked hard by dirt,   
		Then waltzed me off to bed   
		Still clinging to your shirt.


	4. ROOT CELLAR

		Nothing would sleep in that cellar, dank as a ditch,
		Bulbs broke out of boxes hunting for chinks in the dark,
		Shoots dangled and drooped,
		Lolling obscenely from mildewed crates,
		Hung down long yellow evil necks, like tropical snakes.
		And what a congress of stinks!
		Roots ripe as old bait,
		Pulpy stems, rank, silo-rich,
		Leaf-mold, manure, lime, piled against slippery planks.
		Nothing would give up life:
		Even the dirt kept breathing a small breath.


*** Christina Rossetti (1830 - 1894)

	1. A CANDLEMAS DIALOGUE

		“Love brought Me down; and cannot love make thee
		Carol for joy to Me?
		Hear cheerful robin carol from his tree
		Who owes not half to Me
		I won for thee.”
		
		“Yea Lord I hear his carol’s wordless voice;
		And well may he rejoice
		Who hath not heard of death’s discordant noise.
		So might I too rejoice
		With such a voice.”
		
		“True thou hast compassed death; but hast not thou
		The tree of life’s own bough?
		Am I not Life and Resurrection now?
		My Cross balm-bearing bough
		For such as thou?”
		
		“Ah me Thy Cross!--but that seems far away;
		Thy Cradle-song to-day
		I too would raise and worship Thee and pray:
		Not empty Lord to-day
		Send me away.”
		
		“If thou wilt not go empty spend thy store;
		And I will give thee more
		Yea make thee ten times richer than before.
		Give more and give yet more
		Out of thy store.”
		
		“Because Thou givest me Thyself I will
		Thy blessed word fulfil
		Give with both hands and hoard by giving still;
		Thy pleasure to fulfil
		And work Thy Will.”


	2. A PROCESSIONAL OF CREATION

		 All.
		
		I All-Creation sing my song of praise
		To God Who made me and vouchsafes my days
		And sends me forth by multitudinous ways.
		
		 Seraph.
		
		I like my Brethren burn eternally
		With love of Him Who is Love and loveth me;
		The Holy Holy Holy Unity.
		
		
		 Cherub.
		
		I with my Brethren gaze eternally
		On Him Who is Wisdom and Who knoweth me;
		The Holy Holy Holy Trinity.
		
		
		 All Angels.
		
		We rule we serve we work we store His treasure
		Whose vessels are we brimmed with strength and pleasure;
		Our joys fulfil yea overfill our measure.
		
		
		 Heavens.
		
		We float before the Presence Infinite
		We cluster round the Throne in our delight
		Revolving and rejoicing in God’s sight.
		
		
		 Firmament.
		
		I blue and beautiful and framed of air
		At sunrise and at sunset grow most fair;
		His glory by my glories I declare.
		
		
		 Powers.
		
		We Powers are powers because He makes us strong;
		Wherefore we roll all rolling orbs along
		We move all moving things and sing our song.
		
		
		 Sun.
		
		I blaze to Him in mine engarlanding
		Of rays I flame His whole burnt-offering
		While as a bridegroom I rejoice and sing.
		
		
		 Moon.
		
		I follow and am fair and do His Will;
		Through all my changes I am faithful still
		Full-orbed or strait His mandate to fulfil.
		
		
		 Stars.
		
		We Star-hosts numerous innumerous
		Throng space with energy untumultuous
		And work His Will Whose eye beholdeth us.
		
		
		 Galaxies and Nebulæ.
		
		No thing is far or near; and therefore we
		Float neither far nor near; but where we be
		Weave dances round the Throne perpetually.
		
		
		 Comets and Meteors.
		
		Our lights dart here and there whirl to and fro
		We flash and vanish we die down and glow;
		All doing His Will Who bids us do it so.
		
		
		 Showers.
		
		We give ourselves; and be we great or small
		Thus are we made like Him Who giveth all
		Like Him Whose gracious pleasure bids us fall.
		
		
		 Dews.
		
		We give ourselves in silent secret ways
		Spending and spent in silence full of grace;
		And thus are made like God and show His praise.
		
		
		 Winds.
		
		We sift the air and winnow all the earth;
		And God Who poised our weights and weighs our worth
		Accepts the worship of our solemn mirth.
		
		
		 Fire.
		
		My power and strength are His Who fashioned me
		Ordained me image of His Jealousy
		Forged me His weapon fierce exceedingly.
		
		
		 Heat.
		
		I glow unto His glory and do good:
		I glow and bring to life both bud and brood;
		I glow and ripen harvest-crops for food.
		
		
		 Winter and Summer.
		
		Our wealth and joys and beauties celebrate
		His wealth of beauty Who sustains our state
		Before Whose changelessness we alternate.
		
		
		 Spring and Autumn.
		
		I hope--
		         And I remember--
		
		                           We give place
		Either to other with contented grace
		Acceptable and lovely all our days.
		
		
		 Frost.
		
		I make the unstable stable binding fast
		The world of waters prone to ripple past:
		Thus praise I God Whose mercies I forecast.
		
		
		 Cold.
		
		I rouse and goad the slothful apt to nod
		I stir and urge the laggards with my rod:
		My praise is not of men yet I praise God.
		
		
		 Snow.
		
		My whiteness shadoweth Him Who is most fair
		All spotless: yea my whiteness which I wear
		Exalts His Purity beyond compare.
		
		
		 Vapors.
		
		We darken sun and moon and blot the day
		The good Will of our Maker to obey:
		Till to the glory of God we pass away.
		
		
		 Night.
		
		Moon and all stars I don for diadem
		To make me fair: I cast myself and them
		Before His feet Who knows us gem from gem.
		
		
		 Day.
		
		I shout before Him in my plenitude
		Of light and warmth of hope and wealth and food;
		Ascribing all good to the Only Good.
		
		
		 Light and Darkness.
		
		I am God’s dwelling-place--
		                             And also I
		Make His pavilion--
		                     Lo we bide and fly
		Exulting in the Will of God Most High.
		
		
		 Lightning and Thunder.
		
		We indivisible flash forth His Fame
		We thunder forth the glory of His Name
		In harmony of resonance and flame.
		
		
		 Clouds.
		
		Sweet is our store exhaled from sea or river:
		We wear a rainbow praising God the Giver
		Because His mercy is for ever and ever.
		
		
		 Earth.
		
		I rest in Him rejoicing: resting so
		And so rejoicing in that I am low;
		Yet known of Him and following on to know.
		
		
		 Mountains.
		
		Our heights which laud Him sink abased before
		Him higher than the highest evermore:
		God higher than the highest we adore.
		
		
		 Hills.
		
		We green-tops praise Him and we fruitful heads
		Whereon the sunshine and the dew He sheds:
		We green-tops praise Him rising from out beds.
		
		
		 Green Things.
		
		We all green things we blossoms bright or dim
		Trees bushes brushwood corn and grasses slim
		We lift our many-favored lauds to Him.
		
		
		 Rose--Lily--Violet.
		
		I praise Him on my thorn which I adorn--
		And I amid my world of thistle and thorn--
		And I within my veil where I am born.
		
		
		 Apple--Citron--Pomegranate.
		
		We Apple-blossom Citron Pomegranate
		We clothed of God without our toil and fret
		We offer fatness where His Throne is set.
		
		
		 Vine--Cedar--Palm.
		
		I proffer Him my sweetness who am sweet--
		I bow my strength in fragrance at His feet--
		I wave myself before His Judgment Seat.
		
		
		 Medicinal Herbs.
		
		I bring refreshment--
		                     I bring ease and calm--
		I lavish strength and healing--
		                               I am balm--
		We work His pitiful Will and chant our psalm.
		
		
		 A Spring.
		
		Clear my pure fountain clear and pure my rill
		My fountain and mine outflow deep and still
		I set His semblance forth and do His Will.
		
		
		 Sea.
		
		To-day I praise God with a sparkling face
		My thousand thousand waves all uttering praise:
		To-morrow I commit me to His Grace.
		
		
		 Floods.
		
		We spring and swell meandering to and fro
		From height to depth from depth to depth we flow
		We fertilize the world and praise Him so.
		
		
		 Whales and Sea Mammals.
		
		We Whales and Monsters gambol in His sight
		Rejoicing every day and every night
		Safe in the tender keeping of His Might.
		
		
		 Fishes.
		
		Our fashions and our colors and our speeds
		Set forth His praise Who framed us and Who feeds
		Who knows our number and regards our needs.
		
		
		 Birds.
		
		Winged Angels of this visible world we fly
		To sing God’s praises in the lofty sky;
		We scale the height to praise our Lord most High.
		
		
		 Eagle and Dove.
		
		I the sun-gazing Eagle--
		                         I the Dove
		With plumes of softness and a note of love--
		We praise by divers gifts One God above.
		
		
		 Beasts and Cattle.
		
		We forest Beasts--
		                   We Beasts of hill or cave--
		We border-loving Creatures of the wave--
		We praise our King with voices deep and grave.
		
		
		 Small Animals.
		
		God forms us weak and small but pours out all
		We need and notes us while we stand or fall:
		Wherefore we praise Him weak and safe and small.
		
		
		 Lamb.
		
		I praise my loving Lord Who maketh me
		His type by harmless sweet simplicity:
		Yet He the Lamb of lambs incomparably.
		
		
		 Lion.
		
		I praise the Lion of the Royal Race
		Strongest in fight and swiftest in the chase:
		With all my might I leap and lavish praise.
		
		
		 All Men.
		
		All creatures sing around us and we sing:
		We bring our own selves as our offering
		Our very selves we render to our King.
		
		
		 Israel.
		
		Flock of our Shepherd’s pasture and His fold
		Purchased and well-beloved from days of old
		We tell His praise which still remains untold.
		
		
		 Priests.
		
		We free-will Shepherds tend His sheep and feed;
		We follow Him while caring for their need;
		We follow praising Him and them we lead.
		
		
		 Servants of God.
		
		We love God for He loves us; we are free
		In serving Him who serve Him willingly:
		As kings we reign and praise His Majesty.
		
		
		 Holy and Humble Persons.
		
		All humble souls he calls and sanctifies;
		All holy souls He calls to make them wise;
		Accepting all His free-will sacrifice.
		
		
		 Babes.
		
		He maketh me--
		               And me--
		                         And me--
		                                 To be
		His blessed little ones around His knee
		Who praise Him by mere love confidingly.
		
		
		 Women.
		
		God makes our service love and makes our wage
		Love: so we wend on patient pilgrimage
		Extolling Him by love from age to age.
		
		
		 Men.
		
		God gives us power to rule: He gives us power
		To rule ourselves and prune the exuberant flower
		Of youth and worship Him hour after hour.
		
		
		 Spirits and Souls--
		
		Lo in the hidden world we chant our chant
		To Him Who fills us that we nothing want
		To Him Whose bounty leaves our craving scant.
		
		
		 of Babes--
		
		With milky mouths we praise God from the breast
		Called home betimes to rest the perfect rest
		By love and joy fufilling His behest.
		
		
		 of Women--
		
		We praise His Will which made us what He would
		His Will which fashioned us and called us good
		His Will our plenary beatitude.
		
		 of Men.
		
		We praise His Will Who bore with us so long
		Who out of weakness wrought us swift and strong
		Champions of right and putters-down of wrong.
		
		
		 All.
		
		Let everything that hath or hath not breath
		Let days and endless days let life and death
		Praise God praise God praise God His creature saith.


	3. ADVENT

		This Advent moon shines cold and clear
		 These Advent nights are long;
		Our lamps have burned year after year
		 And still their flame is strong.
		“Watchman what of the night?“ we cry
		 Heart-sick with hope deferred:
		“No speaking signs are in the sky”
		 Is still the watchman’s word.
		
		The Porter watches at the gate
		 The servants watch within;
		The watch is long betimes and late
		 The prize is slow to win.
		“Watchman what of the night?“ but still
		 His answer sounds the same:
		“No daybreak tops the utmost hill
		 Nor pale our lamps of flame.”
		
		One to another hear them speak
		 The patient virgins wise:
		“Surely He is not far to seek“--
		 “All night we watch and rise.”
		“The days are evil looking back
		 The coming days are dim;
		Yet count we not His promise slack
		 But watch and wait for Him.”
		
		One with another soul with soul
		 They kindle fire from fire:
		“Friends watch us who have touched the goal.”
		 “They urge us come up higher.”
		“With them shall rest our waysore feet
		 With them is built our home
		With Christ.“ “They sweet but He most sweet
		 Sweeter than honeycomb.”
		
		There no more parting no more pain
		 The distant ones brought near
		The lost so long are found again
		 Long lost but longer dear:
		Eye hath not seen ear hath not heard
		 Nor heart conceived that rest
		With them our good things long deferred
		 With Jesus Christ our Best.
		
		We weep because the night is long
		 We laugh for day shall rise
		We sing a slow contented song
		 And knock at Paradise.
		Weeping we hold Him fast Who wept
		 For us--we hold Him fast;
		And will not let Him go except
		 He bless us first or last.
		
		Weeping we hold Him fast to-night;
		 We will not let Him go
		Till daybreak smite our wearied sight
		 And summer smite the snow:
		Then figs shall bud and dove with dove
		 Shall coo the livelong day;
		Then He shall say “Arise My love
		 My fair one come away.”


	4. ALL SAINTS

		They are flocking from the East
		And the West
		They are flocking from the North
		And the South
		Every moment setting forth
		From realm of snake or lion
		Swamp or sand
		Ice or burning;
		Greatest and least
		Palm in hand
		And praise in mouth
		They are flocking up the path
		To their rest
		Up the path that hath
		No returning.
		
		Up the steeps of Zion
		They are mounting
		Coming coming
		Throngs beyond man’s counting;
		With a sound
		Like innumerable bees
		Swarming humming
		Where flowering trees
		Many-tinted
		Many-scented
		All alike abound
		With honey--
		With a swell
		Like a blast upswaying unrestrainable
		From a shadowed dell
		To the hill-tops sunny--
		With a thunder
		Like the ocean when in strength
		Breadth and length
		It sets to shore;
		More and more
		Waves on waves redoubled pour
		Leaping flashing to the shore
		(Unlike the under
		Drain of ebb that loseth ground
		For all its roar.)
		
		They are thronging
		From the East and West
		From the North and South
		Saints are thronging loving longing
		To their land
		Of rest
		Palm in hand
		And praise in mouth.


	5. ASCENSION DAY

		_“A Cloud received Him out of their sight.”_
		
		When Christ went up to Heaven the Apostles stayed
		Gazing at Heaven with souls and wills on fire
		Their hearts on flight along the track He made
		Winged by desire.
		
		Their silence spake: “Lord why not follow Thee?
		Home is not home without Thy Blessed Face
		Life is not life. Remember Lord and see
		Look back embrace.
		
		“Earth is one desert waste of banishment
		Life is one long-drawn anguish of decay.
		Where Thou wert wont to go we also went:
		Why not today?”
		
		Nevertheless a cloud cut off their gaze:
		They tarry to build up Jerusalem
		Watching for Him while thro’ the appointed days
		He watches them.
		
		They do His Will and doing it rejoice
		Patiently glad to spend and to be spent:
		Still He speaks to them still they hear His Voice
		And are content.
		
		For as a cloud received Him from their sight
		So with a cloud will He return ere long:
		Therefore they stand on guard by day by night
		Strenuous and strong.
		
		They do they dare they beyond seven times seven
		Forgive they cry God’s mighty word aloud:
		Yet sometimes haply lift tired eyes to Heaven–
		“Is that His cloud?”


	6. EPIPHANY

		“Lord Babe, if Thou art He
		We sought for patiently,
		Where is Thy court?
		Hither may prophecy and star resort;
		Men heed not their report.”--
		“Bow down and worship, righteous man:
		This Infant of a span
		Is He man sought for since the world began!”--
		“Then, Lord, accept my gold, too base a thing
		For Thee, of all kings King.”--
		
		“Lord Babe, despite Thy youth
		I hold Thee of a truth
		Both Good and Great:
		But wherefore dost Thou keep so mean a state,
		Low-lying desolate?”--
		“Bow down and worship, righteous seer:
		The Lord our God is here
		Approachable, Who bids us all draw near.”--
		“Wherefore to Thee I offer frankincense,
		Thou Sole Omnipotence.”--
		
		“But I have only brought
		Myrrh; no wise afterthought
		Instructed me
		To gather pearls or gems, or choice to see
		Coral or ivory.”--
		“Not least thine offering proves thee wise:
		For myrrh means sacrifice,
		And He that lives, this Same is He that dies.”--
		“Then here is myrrh: alas! yea, woe is me
		That myrrh befitteth Thee.”--
		
		Myrrh, frankincense, and gold:
		And lo! from wintry fold
		Good-will doth bring
		A Lamb, the innocent likeness of this King
		Whom stars and seraphs sing:
		And lo! the bird of love, a Dove
		Flutters and coos above:
		And Dove and Lamb and Babe agree in love:--
		Come all mankind, come all creation hither,
		Come, worship Christ together.


	7. EPIPHANYTIDE

		Trembling before Thee we fall down to adore Thee, 
		Shamefaced and trembling we lift our eyes to Thee: 
		O First and with the last! annul our ruined past, 
		Rebuild us to Thy glory, set us free 
		From sin and from sorrow to fall down and worship Thee. 
		
		Full of pity view us, stretch Thy sceptre to us, 
		Bid us live that we may give ourselves to Thee: 
		O faithful Lord and True! stand up for us and do, 
		Make us lovely, make us new, set us free--
		Heart and soul and spirit--to bring all and worship Thee.


	8. GOBLIN MARKET

		Morning and evening 
		Maids heard the goblins cry: 
		“Come buy our orchard fruits 
		Come buy come buy: 
		Apples and quinces 
		Lemons and oranges 
		Plump unpeck’d cherries 
		Melons and raspberries 
		Bloom-down-cheek’d peaches 
		Swart-headed mulberries 
		Wild free-born cranberries 
		Crab-apples dewberries 
		Pine-apples blackberries 
		Apricots strawberries;-- 
		All ripe together 
		In summer weather-- 
		Morns that pass by 
		Fair eves that fly; 
		Come buy come buy: 
		Our grapes fresh from the vine 
		Pomegranates full and fine 
		Dates and sharp bullaces 
		Rare pears and greengages 
		Damsons and bilberries 
		Taste them and try: 
		Currants and gooseberries 
		Bright-fire-like barberries 
		Figs to fill your mouth 
		Citrons from the South 
		Sweet to tongue and sound to eye; 
		Come buy come buy.” 
		
		Evening by evening 
		Among the brookside rushes 
		Laura bow’d her head to hear 
		Lizzie veil’d her blushes: 
		Crouching close together 
		In the cooling weather 
		With clasping arms and cautioning lips 
		With tingling cheeks and finger tips. 
		“Lie close” Laura said 
		Pricking up her golden head: 
		“We must not look at goblin men 
		We must not buy their fruits: 
		Who knows upon what soil they fed 
		Their hungry thirsty roots?” 
		“Come buy” call the goblins 
		Hobbling down the glen. 
		
		“Oh” cried Lizzie “Laura Laura 
		You should not peep at goblin men.” 
		Lizzie cover’d up her eyes 
		Cover’d close lest they should look; 
		Laura rear’d her glossy head 
		And whisper’d like the restless brook: 
		“Look Lizzie look Lizzie 
		Down the glen tramp little men. 
		One hauls a basket 
		One bears a plate 
		One lugs a golden dish 
		Of many pounds weight. 
		How fair the vine must grow 
		Whose grapes are so luscious; 
		How warm the wind must blow 
		Through those fruit bushes.” 
		“No” said Lizzie “No no no; 
		Their offers should not charm us 
		Their evil gifts would harm us.” 
		She thrust a dimpled finger 
		In each ear shut eyes and ran: 
		Curious Laura chose to linger 
		Wondering at each merchant man. 
		One had a cat’s face 
		One whisk’d a tail 
		One tramp’d at a rat’s pace 
		One crawl’d like a snail 
		One like a wombat prowl’d obtuse and furry 
		One like a ratel tumbled hurry skurry. 
		She heard a voice like voice of doves 
		Cooing all together: 
		They sounded kind and full of loves 
		In the pleasant weather. 
		
		Laura stretch’d her gleaming neck 
		Like a rush-imbedded swan 
		Like a lily from the beck 
		Like a moonlit poplar branch 
		Like a vessel at the launch 
		When its last restraint is gone. 
		
		Backwards up the mossy glen 
		Turn’d and troop’d the goblin men 
		With their shrill repeated cry 
		“Come buy come buy.” 
		When they reach’d where Laura was 
		They stood stock still upon the moss 
		Leering at each other 
		Brother with queer brother; 
		Signalling each other 
		Brother with sly brother. 
		One set his basket down 
		One rear’d his plate; 
		One began to weave a crown 
		Of tendrils leaves and rough nuts brown 
		(Men sell not such in any town); 
		One heav’d the golden weight 
		Of dish and fruit to offer her: 
		“Come buy come buy” was still their cry. 
		Laura stared but did not stir 
		Long’d but had no money: 
		The whisk-tail’d merchant bade her taste 
		In tones as smooth as honey 
		The cat-faced purr’d 
		The rat-faced spoke a word 
		Of welcome and the snail-paced even was heard; 
		One parrot-voiced and jolly 
		Cried “Pretty Goblin” still for “Pretty Polly;”-- 
		One whistled like a bird. 
		
		But sweet-tooth Laura spoke in haste: 
		“Good folk I have no coin; 
		To take were to purloin: 
		I have no copper in my purse 
		I have no silver either 
		And all my gold is on the furze 
		That shakes in windy weather 
		Above the rusty heather.” 
		“You have much gold upon your head” 
		They answer’d all together: 
		“Buy from us with a golden curl.” 
		She clipp’d a precious golden lock 
		She dropp’d a tear more rare than pearl 
		Then suck’d their fruit globes fair or red: 
		Sweeter than honey from the rock 
		Stronger than man-rejoicing wine 
		Clearer than water flow’d that juice; 
		She never tasted such before 
		How should it cloy with length of use? 
		She suck’d and suck’d and suck’d the more 
		Fruits which that unknown orchard bore; 
		She suck’d until her lips were sore; 
		Then flung the emptied rinds away 
		But gather’d up one kernel stone 
		And knew not was it night or day 
		As she turn’d home alone. 
		
		Lizzie met her at the gate 
		Full of wise upbraidings: 
		“Dear you should not stay so late 
		Twilight is not good for maidens; 
		Should not loiter in the glen 
		In the haunts of goblin men. 
		Do you not remember Jeanie 
		How she met them in the moonlight 
		Took their gifts both choice and many 
		Ate their fruits and wore their flowers 
		Pluck’d from bowers 
		Where summer ripens at all hours? 
		But ever in the noonlight 
		She pined and pined away; 
		Sought them by night and day 
		Found them no more but dwindled and grew grey; 
		Then fell with the first snow 
		While to this day no grass will grow 
		Where she lies low: 
		I planted daisies there a year ago 
		That never blow. 
		You should not loiter so.” 
		“Nay hush” said Laura: 
		“Nay hush my sister: 
		I ate and ate my fill 
		Yet my mouth waters still; 
		To-morrow night I will 
		Buy more;” and kiss’d her: 
		“Have done with sorrow; 
		I’ll bring you plums to-morrow 
		Fresh on their mother twigs 
		Cherries worth getting; 
		You cannot think what figs 
		My teeth have met in 
		What melons icy-cold 
		Piled on a dish of gold 
		Too huge for me to hold 
		What peaches with a velvet nap 
		Pellucid grapes without one seed: 
		Odorous indeed must be the mead 
		Whereon they grow and pure the wave they drink 
		With lilies at the brink 
		And sugar-sweet their sap.” 
		
		Golden head by golden head 
		Like two pigeons in one nest 
		Folded in each other’s wings 
		They lay down in their curtain’d bed: 
		Like two blossoms on one stem 
		Like two flakes of new-fall’n snow 
		Like two wands of ivory 
		Tipp’d with gold for awful kings. 
		Moon and stars gaz’d in at them 
		Wind sang to them lullaby 
		Lumbering owls forbore to fly 
		Not a bat flapp’d to and fro 
		Round their rest: 
		Cheek to cheek and breast to breast 
		Lock’d together in one nest. 
		
		Early in the morning 
		When the first cock crow’d his warning 
		Neat like bees as sweet and busy 
		Laura rose with Lizzie: 
		Fetch’d in honey milk’d the cows 
		Air’d and set to rights the house 
		Kneaded cakes of whitest wheat 
		Cakes for dainty mouths to eat 
		Next churn’d butter whipp’d up cream 
		Fed their poultry sat and sew’d; 
		Talk’d as modest maidens should: 
		Lizzie with an open heart 
		Laura in an absent dream 
		One content one sick in part; 
		One warbling for the mere bright day’s delight 
		One longing for the night. 
		
		At length slow evening came: 
		They went with pitchers to the reedy brook; 
		Lizzie most placid in her look 
		Laura most like a leaping flame. 
		They drew the gurgling water from its deep; 
		Lizzie pluck’d purple and rich golden flags 
		Then turning homeward said: “The sunset flushes 
		Those furthest loftiest crags; 
		Come Laura not another maiden lags. 
		No wilful squirrel wags 
		The beasts and birds are fast asleep.” 
		But Laura loiter’d still among the rushes 
		And said the bank was steep. 
		
		And said the hour was early still 
		The dew not fall’n the wind not chill; 
		Listening ever but not catching 
		The customary cry 
		“Come buy come buy” 
		With its iterated jingle 
		Of sugar-baited words: 
		Not for all her watching 
		Once discerning even one goblin 
		Racing whisking tumbling hobbling; 
		Let alone the herds 
		That used to tramp along the glen 
		In groups or single 
		Of brisk fruit-merchant men. 
		
		Till Lizzie urged “O Laura come; 
		I hear the fruit-call but I dare not look: 
		You should not loiter longer at this brook: 
		Come with me home. 
		The stars rise the moon bends her arc 
		Each glowworm winks her spark 
		Let us get home before the night grows dark: 
		For clouds may gather 
		Though this is summer weather 
		Put out the lights and drench us through; 
		Then if we lost our way what should we do?” 
		
		Laura turn’d cold as stone 
		To find her sister heard that cry alone 
		That goblin cry 
		“Come buy our fruits come buy.” 
		Must she then buy no more such dainty fruit? 
		Must she no more such succous pasture find 
		Gone deaf and blind? 
		Her tree of life droop’d from the root: 
		She said not one word in her heart’s sore ache; 
		But peering thro’ the dimness nought discerning 
		Trudg’d home her pitcher dripping all the way; 
		So crept to bed and lay 
		Silent till Lizzie slept; 
		Then sat up in a passionate yearning 
		And gnash’d her teeth for baulk’d desire and wept 
		As if her heart would break. 
		
		Day after day night after night 
		Laura kept watch in vain 
		In sullen silence of exceeding pain. 
		She never caught again the goblin cry: 
		“Come buy come buy;”-- 
		She never spied the goblin men 
		Hawking their fruits along the glen: 
		But when the noon wax’d bright 
		Her hair grew thin and grey; 
		She dwindled as the fair full moon doth turn 
		To swift decay and burn 
		Her fire away. 
		
		One day remembering her kernel-stone 
		She set it by a wall that faced the south; 
		Dew’d it with tears hoped for a root 
		Watch’d for a waxing shoot 
		But there came none; 
		It never saw the sun 
		It never felt the trickling moisture run: 
		While with sunk eyes and faded mouth 
		She dream’d of melons as a traveller sees 
		False waves in desert drouth 
		With shade of leaf-crown’d trees 
		And burns the thirstier in the sandful breeze. 
		
		She no more swept the house 
		Tended the fowls or cows 
		Fetch’d honey kneaded cakes of wheat 
		Brought water from the brook: 
		But sat down listless in the chimney-nook 
		And would not eat. 
		
		Tender Lizzie could not bear 
		To watch her sister’s cankerous care 
		Yet not to share. 
		She night and morning 
		Caught the goblins’ cry: 
		“Come buy our orchard fruits 
		Come buy come buy;”-- 
		Beside the brook along the glen 
		She heard the tramp of goblin men 
		The yoke and stir 
		Poor Laura could not hear; 
		Long’d to buy fruit to comfort her 
		But fear’d to pay too dear. 
		She thought of Jeanie in her grave 
		Who should have been a bride; 
		But who for joys brides hope to have 
		Fell sick and died 
		In her gay prime 
		In earliest winter time 
		With the first glazing rime 
		With the first snow-fall of crisp winter time. 
		
		Till Laura dwindling 
		Seem’d knocking at Death’s door: 
		Then Lizzie weigh’d no more 
		Better and worse; 
		But put a silver penny in her purse 
		Kiss’d Laura cross’d the heath with clumps of furze 
		At twilight halted by the brook: 
		And for the first time in her life 
		Began to listen and look. 
		
		Laugh’d every goblin 
		When they spied her peeping: 
		Came towards her hobbling 
		Flying running leaping 
		Puffing and blowing 
		Chuckling clapping crowing 
		Clucking and gobbling 
		Mopping and mowing 
		Full of airs and graces 
		Pulling wry faces 
		Demure grimaces 
		Cat-like and rat-like 
		Ratel- and wombat-like 
		Snail-paced in a hurry 
		Parrot-voiced and whistler 
		Helter skelter hurry skurry 
		Chattering like magpies 
		Fluttering like pigeons 
		Gliding like fishes-- 
		Hugg’d her and kiss’d her: 
		Squeez’d and caress’d her: 
		Stretch’d up their dishes 
		Panniers and plates: 
		“Look at our apples 
		Russet and dun 
		Bob at our cherries 
		Bite at our peaches 
		Citrons and dates 
		Grapes for the asking 
		Pears red with basking 
		Out in the sun 
		Plums on their twigs; 
		Pluck them and suck them 
		Pomegranates figs.”-- 
		
		“Good folk” said Lizzie 
		Mindful of Jeanie: 
		“Give me much and many: -- 
		Held out her apron 
		Toss’d them her penny. 
		“Nay take a seat with us 
		Honour and eat with us” 
		They answer’d grinning: 
		“Our feast is but beginning. 
		Night yet is early 
		Warm and dew-pearly 
		Wakeful and starry: 
		Such fruits as these 
		No man can carry: 
		Half their bloom would fly 
		Half their dew would dry 
		Half their flavour would pass by. 
		Sit down and feast with us 
		Be welcome guest with us 
		Cheer you and rest with us.”-- 
		“Thank you” said Lizzie: “But one waits 
		At home alone for me: 
		So without further parleying 
		If you will not sell me any 
		Of your fruits though much and many 
		Give me back my silver penny 
		I toss’d you for a fee.”-- 
		They began to scratch their pates 
		No longer wagging purring 
		But visibly demurring 
		Grunting and snarling. 
		One call’d her proud 
		Cross-grain’d uncivil; 
		Their tones wax’d loud 
		Their looks were evil. 
		Lashing their tails 
		They trod and hustled her 
		Elbow’d and jostled her 
		Claw’d with their nails 
		Barking mewing hissing mocking 
		Tore her gown and soil’d her stocking 
		Twitch’d her hair out by the roots 
		Stamp’d upon her tender feet 
		Held her hands and squeez’d their fruits 
		Against her mouth to make her eat. 
		
		White and golden Lizzie stood 
		Like a lily in a flood-- 
		Like a rock of blue-vein’d stone 
		Lash’d by tides obstreperously-- 
		Like a beacon left alone 
		In a hoary roaring sea 
		Sending up a golden fire-- 
		Like a fruit-crown’d orange-tree 
		White with blossoms honey-sweet 
		Sore beset by wasp and bee-- 
		Like a royal virgin town 
		Topp’d with gilded dome and spire 
		Close beleaguer’d by a fleet 
		Mad to tug her standard down. 
		
		One may lead a horse to water 
		Twenty cannot make him drink. 
		Though the goblins cuff’d and caught her 
		Coax’d and fought her 
		Bullied and besought her 
		Scratch’d her pinch’d her black as ink 
		Kick’d and knock’d her 
		Maul’d and mock’d her 
		Lizzie utter’d not a word; 
		Would not open lip from lip 
		Lest they should cram a mouthful in: 
		But laugh’d in heart to feel the drip 
		Of juice that syrupp’d all her face 
		And lodg’d in dimples of her chin 
		And streak’d her neck which quaked like curd. 
		At last the evil people 
		Worn out by her resistance 
		Flung back her penny kick’d their fruit 
		Along whichever road they took 
		Not leaving root or stone or shoot; 
		Some writh’d into the ground 
		Some div’d into the brook 
		With ring and ripple 
		Some scudded on the gale without a sound 
		Some vanish’d in the distance. 
		
		In a smart ache tingle 
		Lizzie went her way; 
		Knew not was it night or day; 
		Sprang up the bank tore thro’ the furze 
		Threaded copse and dingle 
		And heard her penny jingle 
		Bouncing in her purse-- 
		Its bounce was music to her ear. 
		She ran and ran 
		As if she fear’d some goblin man 
		Dogg’d her with gibe or curse 
		Or something worse: 
		But not one goblin scurried after 
		Nor was she prick’d by fear; 
		The kind heart made her windy-paced 
		That urged her home quite out of breath with haste 
		And inward laughter. 
		
		She cried “Laura” up the garden 
		“Did you miss me? 
		Come and kiss me. 
		Never mind my bruises 
		Hug me kiss me suck my juices 
		Squeez’d from goblin fruits for you 
		Goblin pulp and goblin dew. 
		Eat me drink me love me; 
		Laura make much of me; 
		For your sake I have braved the glen 
		And had to do with goblin merchant men.” 
		
		Laura started from her chair 
		Flung her arms up in the air 
		Clutch’d her hair: 
		“Lizzie Lizzie have you tasted 
		For my sake the fruit forbidden? 
		Must your light like mine be hidden 
		Your young life like mine be wasted 
		Undone in mine undoing 
		And ruin’d in my ruin 
		Thirsty canker’d goblin-ridden?”-- 
		She clung about her sister 
		Kiss’d and kiss’d and kiss’d her: 
		Tears once again 
		Refresh’d her shrunken eyes 
		Dropping like rain 
		After long sultry drouth; 
		Shaking with aguish fear and pain 
		She kiss’d and kiss’d her with a hungry mouth. 
		
		Her lips began to scorch 
		That juice was wormwood to her tongue 
		She loath’d the feast: 
		Writhing as one possess’d she leap’d and sung 
		Rent all her robe and wrung 
		Her hands in lamentable haste 
		And beat her breast. 
		Her locks stream’d like the torch 
		Borne by a racer at full speed 
		Or like the mane of horses in their flight 
		Or like an eagle when she stems the light 
		Straight toward the sun 
		Or like a caged thing freed 
		Or like a flying flag when armies run. 
		
		Swift fire spread through her veins knock’d at her heart 
		Met the fire smouldering there 
		And overbore its lesser flame; 
		She gorged on bitterness without a name: 
		Ah! fool to choose such part 
		Of soul-consuming care! 
		Sense fail’d in the mortal strife: 
		Like the watch-tower of a town 
		Which an earthquake shatters down 
		Like a lightning-stricken mast 
		Like a wind-uprooted tree 
		Spun about 
		Like a foam-topp’d waterspout 
		Cast down headlong in the sea 
		She fell at last; 
		Pleasure past and anguish past 
		Is it death or is it life? 
		
		Life out of death. 
		That night long Lizzie watch’d by her 
		Counted her pulse’s flagging stir 
		Felt for her breath 
		Held water to her lips and cool’d her face 
		With tears and fanning leaves: 
		But when the first birds chirp’d about their eaves 
		And early reapers plodded to the place 
		Of golden sheaves 
		And dew-wet grass 
		Bow’d in the morning winds so brisk to pass 
		And new buds with new day 
		Open’d of cup-like lilies on the stream 
		Laura awoke as from a dream 
		Laugh’d in the innocent old way 
		Hugg’d Lizzie but not twice or thrice; 
		Her gleaming locks show’d not one thread of grey 
		Her breath was sweet as May 
		And light danced in her eyes. 
		
		Days weeks months years 
		Afterwards when both were wives 
		With children of their own; 
		Their mother-hearts beset with fears 
		Their lives bound up in tender lives; 
		Laura would call the little ones 
		And tell them of her early prime 
		Those pleasant days long gone 
		Of not-returning time: 
		Would talk about the haunted glen 
		The wicked quaint fruit-merchant men 
		Their fruits like honey to the throat 
		But poison in the blood; 
		(Men sell not such in any town): 
		Would tell them how her sister stood 
		In deadly peril to do her good 
		And win the fiery antidote: 
		Then joining hands to little hands 
		Would bid them cling together 
		“For there is no friend like a sister 
		In calm or stormy weather; 
		To cheer one on the tedious way 
		To fetch one if one goes astray 
		To lift one if one totters down 
		To strengthen whilst one stands.”


	9. GOOD FRIDAY

		Am I a stone and not a sheep
		 That I can stand O Christ beneath Thy Cross
		 To number drop by drop Thy Blood’s slow loss
		And yet not weep?
		
		Not so those women loved
		 Who with exceeding grief lamented Thee;
		 Not so fallen Peter weeping bitterly;
		Not so the thief was moved;
		
		Not so the Sun and Moon
		 Which hid their faces in a starless sky
		 A horror of great darkness at broad noon--
		I only I.
		
		Yet give not o’er
		 But seek Thy sheep true Shepherd of the flock;
		Greater than Moses turn and look once more
		 And smite a rock.


	10. IF THOU SAYEST BEHOLD WE KNEW IT NOT

		         --_Proverbs xxiv. 11 12._
		
		I
		
		I have done I know not what--what have I done?
		 My brother’s blood my brother’s soul doth cry:
		 And I find no defence find no reply
		No courage more to run this race I run
		Not knowing what I have done have left undone;
		 Ah me these awful unknown hours that fly
		 Fruitless it may be fleeting fruitless by
		Rank with death-savor underneath the sun.
		For what avails it that I did not know
		 The deed I did? what profits me the plea
		That had I known I had not wronged him so?
		   Lord Jesus Christ my God him pity Thou;
		 Lord if it may be pity also me:
		   In judgment pity and in death and now.
		
		
		II
		
		Thou Who hast borne all burdens bear our load
		 Bear Thou our load whatever load it be;
		 Our guilt our shame our helpless misery
		Bear Thou Who only canst O God my God.
		 Seek us and find us for we cannot Thee
		Or seek or find or hold or cleave unto:
		We cannot do or undo; Lord undo
		 Our self-undoing for Thine is the key
		Of all we are not though we might have been.
		 Dear Lord if ever mercy moved Thy mind
		   If so be love of us can move Thee yet
		If still the nail-prints in Thy Hands are seen
		   Remember us--yea how shouldst Thou forget?
		 Remember us for good and seek and find.
		
		
		III
		
		Each soul I might have succored may have slain
		 All souls shall face me at the last Appeal
		 That great last moment poised for woe or weal
		That final moment for man’s bliss or bane.
		Vanity of vanities yea all is vain
		 Which then will not avail or help or heal:
		 Disfeatured faces worn-out knees that kneel
		Will more avail than strength or beauty then.
		Lord by Thy Passion--when Thy Face was marred
		 In sight of earth and hell tumultuous
		   And Thy heart failed in Thee like melting wax
		And Thy Blood dropped more precious than the nard--
		   Lord for Thy sake not ours supply our lacks
		 For Thine own sake not ours Christ pity us.


	11. IN THE BLEAK MIDWINTER

		In the bleak midwinter frosty wind made moan
		Earth stood hard as iron water like a stone;
		Snow had fallen snow on snow snow on snow
		In the bleak midwinter long ago.
		
		Our God Heaven cannot hold Him nor earth sustain;
		Heaven and earth shall flee away when He comes to reign.
		In the bleak midwinter a stable place sufficed
		The Lord God Almighty Jesus Christ.
		
		Enough for Him whom cherubim worship night and day
		Breastful of milk and a mangerful of hay;
		Enough for Him whom angels fall before
		The ox and ass and camel which adore.
		
		Angels and archangels may have gathered there
		Cherubim and seraphim thronged the air;
		But His mother only in her maiden bliss
		Worshipped the beloved with a kiss.
		
		What can I give Him poor as I am?
		If I were a shepherd I would bring a lamb;
		If I were a Wise Man I would do my part;
		Yet what I can I give Him: give my heart.


	12. LOVE CAME DOWN AT CHRISTMAS

		Love came down at Christmas,
		Love all lovely, Love Divine,
		Love was born at Christmas,
		Star and Angels gave the sign.
		
		Worship we the Godhead,
		Love Incarnate, Love Divine,
		Worship we our Jesus,
		But wherewith for sacred sign?
		
		Love shall be our token,
		Love be yours and love be mine,
		Love to God and all men,
		Love for plea and gift and sign.


	13. MY SECRET

		 I tell my secret? No indeed not I:
		Perhaps some day who knows?
		But not to-day; it froze and blows and snows
		And you’re too curious: fie!
		You want to hear it? well:
		Only my secret’s mine and I won’t tell.
		
		 Or after all perhaps there’s none:
		Suppose there is no secret after all
		But only just my fun.
		To-day’s a nipping day a biting day;
		In which one wants a shawl
		A veil a cloak and other wraps:
		I cannot ope to every one who taps
		And let the draughts come whistling through my hall;
		Come bounding and surrounding me
		Come buffeting astounding me
		Nipping and clipping through my wraps and all.
		I wear my mask for warmth: who ever shows
		His nose to Russian snows
		To be pecked at by every wind that blows?
		You would not peck? I thank you for good-will
		Believe but leave that truth untested still.
		
		 Spring’s an expansive time: yet I don’t trust
		March with its peck of dust
		Nor April with its rainbow-crowned brief showers
		Nor even May whose flowers
		One frost may wither through the sunless hours.
		
		 Perhaps some languid summer day
		When drowsy birds sing less and less
		And golden fruit is ripening to excess
		If there’s not too much sun nor too much cloud
		And the warm wind is neither still nor loud
		Perhaps my secret I may say
		Or you may guess.


	14. OLD AND NEW YEAR DITTIES

		I
		
		New Year met me somewhat sad:
		 Old Year leaves me tired
		Stripped of favorite things I had
		 Balked of much desired:
		Yet farther on my road to-day
		God willing farther on my way.
		
		New Year coming on apace
		 What have you to give me?
		Bring you scathe or bring you grace
		Face me with an honest face;
		 You shall not deceive me:
		Be it good or ill be it what you will
		It needs shall help me on my road
		My rugged way to heaven please God.
		
		
		II
		
		Watch with me men women and children dear
		You whom I love for whom I hope and fear
		Watch with me this last vigil of the year.
		Some hug their business some their pleasure-scheme;
		Some seize the vacant hour to sleep or dream;
		Heart locked in heart some kneel and watch apart.
		
		Watch with me blessed spirits who delight
		All through the holy night to walk in white
		Or take your ease after the long-drawn fight.
		I know not if they watch with me: I know
		They count this eve of resurrection slow
		And cry “How long?“ with urgent utterance strong.
		
		Watch with me Jesus in my loneliness:
		Though others say me nay yet say Thou yes;
		Though others pass me by stop Thou to bless.
		Yea Thou dost stop with me this vigil night;
		To-night of pain to-morrow of delight:
		I Love am Thine; Thou Lord my God art mine.
		
		
		III
		
		Passing away saith the World passing away:
		Chances beauty and youth sapped day by day:
		Thy life never continueth in one stay.
		Is the eye waxen dim is the dark hair changing to gray
		That hath won neither laurel nor bay?
		I shall clothe myself in Spring and bud in May:
		Thou root-stricken shalt not rebuild thy decay
		On my bosom for aye.
		Then I answered: Yea.
		
		Passing away saith my Soul passing away:
		With its burden of fear and hope of labor and play;
		Hearken what the past doth witness and say:
		Rust in thy gold a moth is in thine array
		A canker is in thy bud thy leaf must decay.
		At midnight at cock-crow at morning one certain day
		Lo the Bridegroom shall come and shall not delay:
		Watch thou and pray.
		Then I answered: Yea.
		
		Passing away saith my God passing away:
		Winter passeth after the long delay:
		New grapes on the vine new figs on the tender spray
		Turtle calleth turtle in Heaven’s May.
		Though I tarry wait for Me trust Me watch and pray.
		Arise come away night is past and lo it is day
		My love My sister My spouse thou shalt hear Me say.
		Then I answered: Yea.


	15. REMEMBER

		Remember me when I am gone away
		 Gone far away into the silent land;
		 When you can no more hold me by the hand
		Nor I half turn to go yet turning stay.
		Remember me when no more day by day
		 You tell me of our future that you planned:
		 Only remember me; you understand
		It will be late to counsel then or pray.
		Yet if you should forget me for a while
		 And afterwards remember do not grieve:
		 For if the darkness and corruption leave
		 A vestige of the thoughts that once I had
		Better by far you should forget and smile
		 Than that you should remember and be sad.


	16. SHUT OUT

		The door was shut. I looked between
		 Its iron bars; and saw it lie
		 My garden mine beneath the sky
		Pied with all flowers bedewed and green:
		
		From bough to bough the song-birds crossed
		 From flower to flower the moths and bees;
		 With all its nests and stately trees
		It had been mine and it was lost.
		
		A shadowless spirit kept the gate
		 Blank and unchanging like the grave.
		 I peering through said: “Let me have
		Some buds to cheer my outcast state.”
		
		He answered not. “Or give me then
		 But one small twig from shrub or tree;
		 And bid my home remember me
		Until I come to it again.”
		
		The spirit was silent; but he took
		 Mortar and stone to build a wall;
		 He left no loophole great or small
		Through which my straining eyes might look:
		
		So now I sit here quite alone
		 Blinded with tears; nor grieve for that
		 For naught is left worth looking at
		Since my delightful land is gone.
		
		A violet bed is budding near
		 Wherein a lark has made her nest:
		 And good they are but not the best;
		And dear they are but not so dear.


	17. THE THREE ENEMIES

		       _The Flesh_
		
		“Sweet thou art pale.”
		           “More pale to see
		Christ hung upon the cruel tree
		And bore His Father’s wrath for me.”
		
		“Sweet thou art sad.”
		           “Beneath a rod
		More heavy Christ for my sake trod
		The winepress of the wrath of God.”
		
		“Sweet thou art weary.”
		           “Not so Christ:
		Whose mighty love of me sufficed
		For Strength Salvation Eucharist.”
		
		“Sweet thou art footsore.”
		           “If I bleed
		His feet have bled: yea in my need
		His Heart once bled for mine indeed.”
		
		
		       _The World_
		
		“Sweet thou art young.”
		           “So He was young
		Who for my sake in silence hung
		Upon the Cross with Passion wrung.”
		
		“Look thou art fair.”
		           “He was more fair
		Than men Who deigned for me to wear
		A visage marred beyond compare.”
		
		“And thou hast riches.”
		           “Daily bread:
		All else is His; Who living dead
		For me lacked where to lay His Head.”
		
		“And life is sweet.”
		           “It was not so
		To Him Whose Cup did overflow
		With mine unutterable woe.”
		
		
		       _The Devil_
		
		“Thou drinkest deep.”
		           “When Christ would sup
		He drained the dregs from out my cup:
		So how should I be lifted up?”
		
		“Thou shalt win Glory.”
		           “In the skies
		Lord Jesus cover up mine eyes
		Lest they should look on vanities.”
		
		“Thou shalt have Knowledge.”
		           “Helpless dust
		In Thee O Lord I put my trust:
		Answer Thou for me Wise and Just.”
		
		“And Might.”
		           “Get thee behind me. Lord
		Who hast redeemed and not abhorred
		My soul O keep it by Thy Word.”


	18. TWICE

		I took my heart in my hand
		 (O my love O my love)
		I said: Let me fall or stand
		 Let me live or die
		But this once hear me speak
		 (O my love O my love);
		Yet a woman’s words are weak:
		 You should speak not I.
		
		You took my heart in your hand
		 With a friendly smile
		With a critical eye you scanned
		 Then set it down
		And said: It is still unripe
		 Better wait awhile;
		Wait while the skylarks pipe
		 Till the corn grows brown.
		
		As you set it down it broke--
		 Broke but I did not wince;
		I smiled at the speech you spoke
		 At your judgment that I heard:
		But I have not often smiled
		 Since then nor questioned since
		Nor cared for corn-flowers wild
		 Nor sung with the singing bird.
		
		I take my heart in my hand
		 O my God O my God
		My broken heart in my hand:
		 Thou hast seen judge Thou.
		My hope was written on sand
		 O my God O my God;
		Now let Thy judgment stand--
		 Yea judge me now.
		
		This contemned of a man
		 This marred one heedless day
		This heart take Thou to scan
		 Both within and without:
		Refine with fire its gold
		 Purge Thou its dross away--
		Yea hold it in Thy hold
		 Whence none can pluck it out.
		
		I take my heart in my hand--
		 I shall not die but live--
		Before Thy face I stand;
		 I for Thou callest such:
		All that I have I bring
		 All that I am I give
		Smile Thou and I shall sing
		 But shall not question much.


	19. WHEN I AM DEAD MY DEAREST

		When I am dead my dearest
		 Sing no sad songs for me;
		Plant thou no roses at my head
		 Nor shady cypress-tree:
		Be the green grass above me
		 With showers and dewdrops wet;
		And if thou wilt remember
		 And if thou wilt forget.
		
		I shall not see the shadows
		 I shall not feel the rain;
		I shall not hear the nightingale
		 Sing on as if in pain:
		And dreaming through the twilight
		 That doth not rise nor set
		Haply I may remember
		 And haply may forget.


*** Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828 - 1882)

	1. A LAST CONFESSION

		Our Lombard country-girls along the coast
		Wear daggers in their garters: for they know
		That they might hate another girl to death
		Or meet a German lover. Such a knife
		I bought her, with a hilt of horn and pearl.
		Father, you cannot know of all my thoughts
		That day in going to meet her,--that last day
		For the last time, she said;--of all the love
		And all the hopeless hope that she might change
		And go back with me. Ah! and everywhere,
		At places we both knew along the road,
		Some fresh shape of herself as once she was
		Grew present at my side; until it seemed--
		So close they gathered round me--they would all
		Be with me when I reached the spot at last,
		To plead my cause with her against herself
		So changed. O Father, if you knew all this
		You cannot know, then you would know too, Father,
		And only then, if God can pardon me.
		What can be told I’ll tell, if you will hear.
		I passed a village-fair upon my road,
		And thought, being empty-handed, I would take
		Some little present: such might prove, I said,
		Either a pledge between us, or (God help me!)
		A parting gift. And there it was I bought
		The knife I spoke of, such as women wear.
		That day, some three hours afterwards, I found
		For certain, it must be a parting gift.
		And, standing silent now at last, I looked
		Into her scornful face; and heard the sea
		Still trying hard to din into my ears
		Some speech it knew which still might change her heart,
		If only it could make me understand.
		One moment thus. Another, and her face
		Seemed further off than the last line of sea,
		So that I thought, if now she were to speak
		I could not hear her. Then again I knew
		All, as we stood together on the sand
		At Iglio, in the first thin shade o’ the hills.
		“Take it,” I said, and held it out to her,
		While the hilt glanced within my trembling hold;
		“Take it and keep it for my sake,” I said.
		Her neck unbent not, neither did her eyes
		Move, nor her foot left beating of the sand;
		Only she put it by from her and laughed.
		Father, you hear my speech and not her laugh;
		But God heard that. Will God remember all?
		It was another laugh than the sweet sound
		Which rose from her sweet childish heart, that day
		Eleven years before, when first I found her
		Alone upon the hill-side; and her curls
		Shook down in the warm grass as she looked up
		Out of her curls in my eyes bent to hers.
		She might have served a painter to pourtray
		That heavenly child which in the latter days
		Shall walk between the lion and the lamb.
		I had been for nights in hiding, worn and sick
		And hardly fed; and so her words at first
		Seemed fiftul like the talking of the trees
		And voices in the air that knew my name.
		And I remember that I sat me down
		Upon the slope with her, and thought the world
		Must be all over or had never been,
		We seemed there so alone. And soon she told me
		Her parents both were gone away from her.
		I thought perhaps she meant that they had died;
		But when I asked her this, she looked again
		Into my face and said that yestereve
		They kissed her long, and wept and made her weep,
		And gave her all the bread they had with them,
		And then had gone together up the hill
		Where we were sitting now, and had walked on
		Into the great red light; “and so,” she said,
		“I have come up here too; and when this evening
		They step out of the light as they stepped in,
		I shall be here to kiss them.” And she laughed.
		Then I bethought me suddenly of the famine;
		And how the church-steps throughout all the town,
		When last I had been there a month ago,
		Swarmed with starved folk; and how the bread was weighed
		By Austrians armed; and women that I knew
		For wives and mothers walked the public street,
		Saying aloud that if their husbands feared
		To snatch the children’s food, themselves would stay
		Till they had earned it there. So then this child
		Was piteous to me; for all told me then
		Her parents must have left her to God’s chance,
		To man’s or to the Church’s charity,
		Because of the great famine, rather than
		To watch her growing thin between their knees.
		With that, God took my mother’s voice and spoke,
		And sights and sounds came back and things long since,
		And all my childhood found me on the hills;
		And so I took her with me.
		I was young.
		Scarce man then, Father: but the cause which gave
		The wounds I die of now had brought me then
		Some wounds already; and I lived alone,
		As any hiding hunted man must live.
		It was no easy thing to keep a child
		In safety; for herself it was not safe,
		And doubled my own danger: but I knew
		That God would help me.
		Yet a little while
		Pardon me, Father, if I pause. I think
		I have been speaking to you of some matters
		There was no need to speak of, have I not?
		You do not know how clearly those things stood
		Within my mind, which I have spoken of,
		Nor how they strove for utterance. Life all past
		Is like the sky when the sun sets in it,
		Clearest where furthest off.
		I told you how
		She scorned my parting gift and laughed. And yet
		A woman’s laugh’s another thing sometimes:
		I think they laugh in Heaven. I know last night
		I dreamed I saw into the garden of God,
		Where women walked whose painted images
		I have seen with candles round them in the church.
		They bent this way and that, one to another,
		Playing: and over the long golden hair
		Of each there floated like a ring of fire
		Which when she stooped stooped with her, and when she rose
		Rose with her. Then a breeze flew in among them,
		As if a window had been opened in heaven
		For God to give His blessing from, before
		This world of ours should set; (for in my dream
		I thought our world was setting, and the sun
		Flared, a spent taper; ) and beneath that gust
		The rings of light quivered like forest-leaves.
		Then all the blessed maidens who were there
		Stood up together, as it were a voice
		That called them; and they threw their tresses back,
		And smote their palms, and all laughed up at once,
		For the strong heavenly joy they had in them
		To hear God bless the world. Wherewith I woke:
		And looking round, I saw as usual
		That she was standing there with her long locks
		Pressed to her side; and her laugh ended theirs.
		For always when I see her now, she laughs.
		And yet her childish laughter haunts me too,
		The life of this dead terror; as in days
		When she, a child, dwelt with me. I must tell
		Something of those days yet before the end.
		I brought her from the city--one such day
		When she was still a merry loving child,--
		The earliest gift I mind my giving her;
		A little image of a flying Love
		Made of our coloured glass-ware, in his hands
		A dart of gilded metal and a torch.
		And him she kissed and me, and fain would know
		Why were his poor eyes blindfold, why the wings
		And why the arrow. What I knew I told
		Of Venus and of Cupid,--strange old tales.
		And when she heard that he could rule the loves
		Of men and women, still she shook her head
		And wondered; and, “Nay, nay,” she murmured still,
		“So strong, and he a younger child than I!”
		And then she’d have me fix him on the wall
		Fronting her little bed; and then again
		She needs must fix him there herself, because
		I gave him to her and she loved him so,
		And he should make her love me better yet,
		If women loved the more, the more they grew.
		But the fit place upon the wall was high
		For her, and so I held her in my arms:
		And each time that the heavy pruning-hook
		I gave her for a hammer slipped away
		As it would often, still she laughed and laughed
		And kissed and kissed me. But amid her mirth,
		Just as she hung the image on the nail,
		It slipped and all its fragments strewed the ground:
		And as it fell she screamed, for in her hand
		The dart had entered deeply and drawn blood.
		And so her laughter turned to tears: and “Oh!”
		I said, the while I bandaged the small hand,--
		“That I should be the first to make you bleed,
		Who love and love and love you!”--kissing still
		The fingers till I got her safe to bed.
		And still she sobbed,--“not for the pain at all,”
		She said, “but for the Love, the poor good Love
		You gave me.” So she cried herself to sleep.
		Another later thing comes back to me.
		‘Twas in those hardest foulest days of all,
		When still from his shut palace, sitting clean
		Above the splash of blood, old Metternich
		(May his soul die, and never-dying worms
		Feast on its pain for ever! ) used to thin
		His year’s doomed hundreds daintily, each month
		Thirties and fifties. This time, as I think,
		Was when his thrift forbad the poor to take
		That evil brackish salt which the dry rocks
		Keep all through winter when the sea draws in.
		The first I heard of it was a chance shot
		In the street here and there, and on the stones
		A stumbling clatter as of horse hemmed round.
		Then, when she saw me hurry out of doors,
		My gun slung at my shoulder and my knife
		Stuck in my girdle, she smoothed down my hair
		And laughed to see me look so brave, and leaped
		Up to my neck and kissed me. She was still
		A child; and yet that kiss was on my lips
		So hot all day where the smoke shut us in.
		For now, being always with her, the first love
		I had--the father’s, brother’s love--was changed,
		I think, in somewise; like a holy thought
		Which is a prayer before one knows of it.
		The first time I perceived this, I remember,
		Was once when after hunting I came home
		Weary, and she brought food and fruit for me,
		And sat down at my feet upon the floor
		Leaning against my side. But when I felt
		Her sweet head reach from that low seat of hers
		So high as to be laid upon my heart,
		I turned and looked upon my darling there
		And marked for the first time how tall she was;
		And my heart beat with so much violence
		Under her cheek, I thought she could not choose
		But wonder at it soon and ask me why;
		And so I bade her rise and eat with me.
		And when, remembering all and counting back
		The time, I made out fourteen years for her
		And told her so, she gazed at me with eyes
		As of the sky and sea on a grey day,
		And drew her long hands through her hair, and asked me
		If she was not a woman; and then laughed:
		And as she stooped in laughing, I could see
		Beneath the growing throat the breasts half-globed
		Like folded lilies deepset in the stream.
		Yes, let me think of her as then; for so
		Her image, Father, is not like the sights
		Which come when you are gone. She had a mouth
		Made to bring death to life,--the underlip
		Sucked in, as if it strove to kiss itself.
		Her face was pearly pale, as when one stoops
		Over wan water; and the dark crisped hair
		And the hair’s shadow made it paler still:--
		Deep-serried locks, the dimness of the cloud
		Where the moon’s gaze is set in eddying gloom.
		Her body bore her neck as the tree’s stem
		Bears the top branch; and as the branch sustains
		The flower of the year’s pride, her high neck bore
		That face made wonderful with night and day.
		Her voice was swift, yet ever the last words
		Fell lingeringly; and rounded finger-tips
		She had, that clung a little where they touched
		And then were gone o’ the instant. Her great eyes,
		That sometimes turned half dizzily beneath
		The passionate lids, as faint, when she would speak,
		Had also in them hidden springs of mirth,
		Which under the dark lashes evermore
		Shook to her laugh, as when a bird flies low
		Between the water and the willow-leaves,
		And the shade quivers till he wins the light.
		I was a moody comrade to her then,
		For all the love I bore her. Italy,
		The weeping desolate mother, long has claimed
		Her sons’ strong arms to lean on, and their hands
		To lop the poisonous thicket from her path,
		Cleaving her way to light. And from her need
		Had grown the fashion of my whole poor life
		Which I was proud to yield her, as my father
		Had yielded his. And this had come to be
		A game to play, a love to clasp, a hate
		To wreak, all things together that a man
		Needs for his blood to ripen; till at times
		All else seemed shadows, and I wondered still
		To see such life pass muster and be deemed
		Time’s bodily substance. In those hours, no doubt,
		To the young girl my eyes were like my soul,--
		Dark wells of death-in-life that yearned for day.
		Sig.
		And though she ruled me always, I remember
		That once when I was thus and she still kept
		Leaping about the place and laughing, I
		Did almost chide her; whereupon she knelt
		And putting her two hands into my breast
		Sang me a song. Are these tears in my eyes?
		‘Tis long since I have wept for anything.
		I thought that song forgotten out of mind;
		And now, just as I spoke of it, it came
		All back. It is but a rude thing, ill rhymed,
		Such as a blind man chaunts and his dog hears
		Holding the platter, when the children run
		To merrier sport and leave him. Thus it goes:--
		La bella donna*
		Piangendo disse:
		“Come son fisse
		Le stelle in cielo!
		Quel fiato anelo
		Dello stanco sole,
		Quanto m’ assonna!
		E la luna, macchiata
		Come uno specchio
		Logoro e vecchio,--
		Faccia affannata,
		Che cosa vuole?
		“Chè stelle, luna, e sole,
		Ciascun m’ annoja
		E m’ annojano insieme;
		Non me ne preme
		Nè ci prendo gioja.
		E veramente,
		Che le spalle sien franche
		E la braccia bianche
		She wept, sweet lady,
		And said in weeping:
		“What spell is keeping
		The stars so steady?
		Why does the power
		Of the sun’s noon-hour
		To sleep so move me?
		And the moon in heaven,
		Stained where she passes
		As a worn-out glass is,--
		Wearily driven,
		Why walks she above me?
		“Stars, moon, and sun too,
		I’m tired of either
		And all together!
		Whom speak they unto
		That I should listen?
		For very surely,
		Though my arms and shoulders
		Dazzle beholders,
		And my eyes glisten,
		All’s nothing purely!
		What are words said for
		At all about them,
		If he they are made for
		Can do without them?”
		She laughed, sweet lady,
		And said in laughing:
		“His hand clings half in
		My own already!
		Oh! do you love me?
		Oh! speak of passion
		In no new fashion,
		No loud inveighings,
		But the old sayings
		You once said of me.
		“You said: ‘As summer,
		Through boughs grown brittle,
		Comes back a little
		Ere frosts benumb her,--
		So bring’st thou to me
		All leaves and flowers,
		Though autumn’s gloomy
		To-day in the bowers.’
		“Oh! does he love me,
		When my voice teaches
		The very speeches
		He then spoke of me?
		Alas! what flavour
		Still with me lingers?”
		(But she laughed as my kisses
		Glowed in her fingers
		With love’s old blisses.)
		“Oh! what one favour
		Remains to woo him,
		Whose whole poor savour
		Belongs not to him?”
		E il seno caldo e tondo,
		Non mi fa niente.
		Che cosa al mondo
		Posso più far di questi
		Se non piacciono a te, come dicesti?”
		La donna rise
		E riprese ridendo:--
		“Questa mano che prendo
		È dunque mia?
		Tu m’ ami dunque?
		Dimmelo ancora,
		Non in modo qualunque,
		Ma le parole
		Belle e precise
		Che dicesti pria.
		‘Siccome suole
		La state talora
		(Dicesti) un qualche istante
		Tornare innanzi inverno,
		Così tu fai ch’ io scerno
		Le foglie tutte quante,
		Ben ch’ io certo tenessi
		Per passato l’ autunno.’
		“Eccolo il mio alunno!
		Io debbo insegnargli
		Quei cari detti istessi
		Ch’ ei mi disse una volta!
		Oimè! Che cosa dargli,”
		(Ma ridea piano piano
		Dei baci in sulla mano,)
		“Ch’ ei non m’abbia da lungo tempo tolta?”
		That I should sing upon this bed!--with you
		To listen, and such words still left to say!
		Yet was it I that sang? The voice seemed hers,
		As on the very day she sang to me;
		When, having done, she took out of my hand
		Something that I had played with all the while
		And laid it down beyond my reach; and so
		Turning my face round till it fronted hers,--
		“Weeping or laughing, which was best?” she said.
		But these are foolish tales. How should I show
		The heart that glowed then with love’s heat, each day
		More and more brightly?--when for long years now
		The very flame that flew about the heart,
		And gave it fiery wings, has come to be
		The lapping blaze of hell’s environment
		Whose tongues all bid the molten heart despair.
		Yet one more thing comes back on me to-night
		Which I may tell you: for it bore my soul
		Dread firstlings of the brood that rend it now.
		It chanced that in our last year’s wanderings
		We dwelt at Monza, far away from home,
		If home we had: and in the Duomo there
		I sometimes entered with her when she prayed.
		An image of Our Lady stands there, wrought
		In marble by some great Italian hand
		In the great days when she and Italy
		Sat on one throne together: and to her
		And to none else my loved one told her heart.
		She was a woman then; and as she knelt,--
		Her sweet brow in the sweet brow’s shadow there,--
		They seemed two kindred forms whereby our land
		(Whose work still serves the world for miracle)
		Made manifest herself in womanhood.
		Father, the day I speak of was the first
		For weeks that I had borne her company
		Into the Duomo; and those weeks had been
		Much troubled, for then first the glimpses came
		Of some impenetrable restlessness
		Growing in her to make her changed and cold.
		And as we entered there that day, I bent
		My eyes on the fair Image, and I said
		Within my heart, “Oh turn her heart to me!”
		And so I left her to her prayers, and went
		To gaze upon the pride of Monza’s shrine,
		Where in the sacristy the light still falls
		Upon the Iron Crown of Italy,
		On whose crowned heads the day has closed, nor yet
		The daybreak gilds another head to crown.
		But coming back, I wondered when I saw
		That the sweet Lady of her prayers now stood
		Alone without her; until further off,
		Before some new Madonna gaily decked,
		Tinselled and gewgawed, a slight German toy,
		I saw her kneel, still praying. At my step
		She rose, and side by side we left the church.
		I was much moved, and sharply questioned her
		Of her transferred devotion; but she seemed
		Stubborn and heedless; till she lightly laughed
		And said: “The old Madonna? Aye indeed,
		She had my old thoughts,--this one has my new.”
		Then silent to the soul I held my way:
		And from the fountains of the public place
		Unto the pigeon-haunted pinnacles,
		Bright wings and water winnowed the bright air;
		And stately with her laugh’s subsiding smile
		She went, with clear-swayed waist and towering neck
		And hands held light before her; and the face
		Which long had made a day in my life’s night
		Was night in day to me; as all men’s eyes
		Turned on her beauty, and she seemed to tread
		Beyond my heart to the world made for her.
		Ah there! my wounds will snatch my sense again:
		The pain comes billowing on like a full cloud
		Of thunder, and the flash that breaks from it
		Leaves my brain burning. That’s the wound he gave,
		The Austrian whose white coat I still made match
		With his white face, only the two grew red
		As suits his trade. The devil makes them wear
		White for a livery, that the blood may show
		Braver that brings them to him. So he looks
		Sheer o’er the field and knows his own at once.
		Give me a draught of water in that cup;
		My voice feels thick; perhaps you do not hear;
		But you must hear. If you mistake my words
		And so absolve me, I am sure the blessing
		Will burn my soul. If you mistake my words
		And so absolve me, Father, the great sin
		Is yours, not mine: mark this: your soul shall burn
		With mine for it. I have seen pictures where
		Souls burned with Latin shriekings in their mouths:
		Shall my end be as theirs? Nay, but I know
		‘Tis you shall shriek in Latin. Some bell rings,
		Rings through my brain: it strikes the hour in hell.
		You see I cannot, Father; I have tried,
		But cannot, as you see. These twenty times
		Beginning, I have come to the same point
		And stopped. Beyond, there are but broken words
		Which will not let you understand my tale.
		It is that then we have her with us here,
		As when she wrung her hair out in my dream
		To-night, till all the darkness reeked of it.
		Her hair is always wet, for she has kept
		Its tresses wrapped about her side for years;
		And when she wrung them round over the floor,
		I heard the blood between her fingers hiss;
		So that I sat up in my bed and screamed
		Once and again; and once to once, she laughed.
		Look that you turn not now,--she’s at your back:
		Gather your robe up, Father, and keep close,
		Or she’ll sit down on it and send you mad.
		At Iglio in the first thin shade o’ the hills
		The sand is black and red. The black was black
		When what was spilt that day sank into it,
		And the red scarcely darkened. There I stood
		This night with her, and saw the sand the same.
		What would you have me tell you? Father, father,
		How shall I make you know? You have not known
		The dreadful soul of woman, who one day
		Forgets the old and takes the new to heart,
		Forgets what man remembers, and therewith
		Forgets the man. Nor can I clearly tell
		How the change happened between her and me.
		Her eyes looked on me from an emptied heart
		When most my heart was full of her; and still
		In every corner of myself I sought
		To find what service failed her; and no less
		Than in the good time past, there all was hers.
		What do you love? Your Heaven? Conceive it spread
		For one first year of all eternity
		All round you with all joys and gifts of God;
		And then when most your soul is blent with it
		And all yields song together,--then it stands
		O’ the sudden like a pool that once gave back
		Your image, but now drowns it and is clear
		Again,--or like a sun bewitched, that burns
		Your shadow from you, and still shines in sight.
		How could you bear it? Would you not cry out,
		Among those eyes grown blind to you, those ears
		That hear no more your voice you hear the same,--
		“God! what is left but hell for company,
		But hell, hell, hell?”--until the name so breathed
		Whirled with hot wind and sucked you down in fire?
		Even so I stood the day her empty heart
		Left her place empty in our home, while yet
		I knew not why she went nor where she went
		Nor how to reach her: so I stood the day
		When to my prayers at last one sight of her
		Was granted, and I looked on heaven made pale
		With scorn, and heard heaven mock me in that laugh.
		O sweet, long sweet! Was that some ghost of you,
		Even as your ghost that haunts me now,--twin shapes
		Of fear and hatred? May I find you yet
		Mine when death wakes? Ah! be it even in flame,
		We may have sweetness yet, if you but say
		As once in childish sorrow: “Not my pain,
		My pain was nothing: oh your poor poor love,
		Your broken love!”
		My Father, have I not
		Yet told you the last things of that last day
		On which I went to meet her by the sea?
		O God, O God! but I must tell you all.
		Midway upon my journey, when I stopped
		To buy the dagger at the village fair,
		I saw two cursed rats about the place
		I knew for spies--blood-sellers both. That day
		Was not yet over; for three hours to come
		I prized my life: and so I looked around
		For safety. A poor painted mountebank
		Was playing tricks and shouting in a crowd.
		I knew he must have heard my name, so I
		Pushed past and whispered to him who I was,
		And of my danger. Straight he hustled me
		Into his booth, as it were in the trick,
		And brought me out next minute with my face
		All smeared in patches and a zany’s gown;
		And there I handed him his cups and balls
		And swung the sand-bags round to clear the ring
		For half an hour. The spies came once and looked;
		And while they stopped, and made all sights and sounds
		Sharp to my startled senses, I remember
		A woman laughed above me. I looked up
		And saw where a brown-shouldered harlot leaned
		Half through a tavern window thick with vine.
		Some man had come behind her in the room
		And caught her by her arms, and she had turned
		With that coarse empty laugh on him, as now
		He munched her neck with kisses, while the vine
		Crawled in her back.
		And three hours afterwards,
		When she that I had run all risks to meet
		Laughed as I told you, my life burned to death
		Within me, for I thought it like the laugh
		Heard at the fair. She had not left me long;
		But all she might have changed to, or might change to,
		(I know nought since--she never speaks a word--)
		Seemed in that laugh. Have I not told you yet,
		Not told you all this time what happened, Father,
		When I had offered her the little knife,
		And bade her keep it for my sake that loved her,
		And she had laughed? Have I not told you yet?
		“Take it,” I said to her the second time,
		“Take it and keep it.” And then came a fire
		That burnt my hand; and then the fire was blood,
		And sea and sky were blood and fire, and all
		The day was one red blindness; till it seemed,
		Within the whirling brain’s eclipse, that she
		Or I or all things bled or burned to death.
		And then I found her laid against my feet
		And knew that I had stabbed her, and saw still
		Her look in falling. For she took the knife
		Deep in her heart, even as I bade her then,
		And fell; and her stiff bodice scooped the sand
		Into her bosom.
		And she keeps it, see,
		Do you not see she keeps it?--there, beneath
		Wet fingers and wet tresses, in her heart.
		For look you, when she stirs her hand, it shows
		The little hilt of horn and pearl,--even such
		A dagger as our women of the coast
		Twist in their garters.
		Father, I have done:
		And from her side now she unwinds the thick
		Dark hair; all round her side it is wet through,
		But, like the sand at Iglio, does not change.
		Now you may see the dagger clearly. Father,
		I have told all: tell me at once what hope
		Can reach me still. For now she draws it out
		Slowly, and only smiles as yet: look, Father,
		She scarcely smiles: but I shall hear her laugh
		Soon, when she shows the crimson steel to God.


	2. INSOMNIA

		Thin are the night-skirts left behind
		By daybreak hours that onward creep,
		And thin, alas! the shred of sleep
		That wavers with the spirit’s wind:
		But in half-dreams that shift and roll
		And still remember and forget,
		My soul this hour has drawn your soul
		A little nearer yet.
		
		Our lives, most dear, are never near,
		Our thoughts are never far apart,
		Though all that draws us heart to heart
		Seems fainter now and now more clear.
		To-night Love claims his full control,
		And with desire and with regret
		My soul this hour has drawn your soul
		A little nearer yet.
		
		Is there a home where heavy earth
		Melts to bright air that breathes no pain,
		Where water leaves no thirst again
		And springing fire is Love’s new birth?
		If faith long bound to one true goal
		May there at length its hope beget,
		My soul that hour shall draw your soul
		For ever nearer yet.


	3. SILENT NOON

		Your hands lie open in the long fresh grass,--
		  The finger-points look through like rosy blooms:
		  Your eyes smile peace. The pasture gleams and glooms
		‘Neath billowing skies that scatter and amass.
		All round our nest, far as the eye can pass,
		  Are golden kingcup fields with silver edge
		  Where the cow-parsley skirts the hawthorn-hedge.
		‘Tis visible silence, still as the hour-glass.
		
		Deep in the sun-searched growths the dragon-fly
		Hangs like a blue thread loosened from the sky:--
		  So this wing’d hour is dropt to us from above.
		Oh! clasp we to our hearts, for deathless dower,
		This close-companioned inarticulate hour
		  When twofold silence was the song of love.


	4. SUDDEN LIGHT

		I have been here before,
		But when or how I cannot tell:
		I know the grass beyond the door,
		The sweet keen smell,
		The sighing sound, the lights around the shore.
		
		You have been mine before,--
		How long ago I may not know:
		But just when at that swallow’s soar
		Your neck turn’d so,
		Some veil did fall,--I knew it all of yore.
		
		Has this been thus before?
		And shall not thus time’s eddying flight
		Still with our lives our love restore
		In death’s despite,
		And day and night yield one delight once more?


	5. THE CLOUD CONFINES

		The day is dark and the night
		        To him that would search their heart;
		        No lips of cloud that will part
		Nor morning song in the light:
		        Only, gazing alone,
		        To him wild shadows are shown,
		        Deep under deep unknown
		And height above unknown height.
		               Still we say as we go,
		                       “Strange to think by the way,
		               Whatever there is to know,
		                       That shall we know one day.”
		
		The Past is over and fled;
		        Nam’d new, we name it the old;
		        Thereof some tale hath been told,
		But no word comes from the dead;
		        Whether at all they be,
		        Or whether as bond or free,
		        Or whether they too were we,
		Or by what spell they have sped.
		               Still we say as we go,
		                       “Strange to think by the way,
		               Whatever there is to know,
		                       That shall we know one day.”
		
		What of the heart of hate
		        That beats in thy breast, O Time?
		        Red strife from the furthest prime,
		And anguish of fierce debate;
		        War that shatters her slain,
		        And peace that grinds them as grain,
		        And eyes fix’d ever in vain
		On the pitiless eyes of Fate.
		               Still we say as we go,
		                       “Strange to think by the way,
		               Whatever there is to know,
		                       That shall we know one day.”
		
		What of the heart of love
		        That bleeds in thy breast, O Man?i
		        Thy kisses snatch’d ‘neath the ban
		Of fangs that mock them above;
		        Thy bells prolong’d unto knells,
		        Thy hope that a breath dispels,
		        Thy bitter forlorn farewells
		And the empty echoes thereof?
		               Still we say as we go,
		                       “Strange to think by the way,
		               Whatever there is to know,
		                       That shall we know one day.”
		
		The sky leans dumb on the sea,
		        Aweary with all its wings;
		        And oh! the song the sea sings
		Is dark everlastingly.
		        Our past is clean forgot,
		        Our present is and is not,
		        Our future’s a seal’d seedplot,
		And what betwixt them are we?i
		               We who say as we go,
		                       “Strange to think by the way,
		               Whatever there is to know,
		                          That shall we know one day.”


	6. THE HONEYSUCKLE

		I PLUCKED a honeysuckle where
		    The hedge on high is quick with thorn,
		    And climbing for the prize, was torn,
		And fouled my feet in quag-water;
		    And by the thorns and by the wind
		    The blossom that I took was thinn’d,
		And yet I found it sweet and fair.
		Thence to a richer growth I came,
		    Where, nursed in mellow intercourse,
		The honeysuckles sprang by scores,
		Not harried like my single stem,
		    All virgin lamps of scent and dew.
		    So from my hand that first I threw,
		Yet plucked not any more of them.


	7. THE ORCHARD-PIT

		Piled deep below the screening apple-branch
		They lie with bitter apples in their hands:
		And some are only ancient bones that blanch,
		And some had ships that last year’s wind did launch,
		And some were yesterday the lords of lands.
		
		In the soft dell, among the apple-trees,
		High up above the hidden pit she stands,
		And there for ever sings, who gave to these,
		That lie below, her magic hour of ease,
		And those her apples holden in their hands.
		
		This in my dreams is shown me; and her hair
		Crosses my lips and draws my burning breath;
		Her song spreads golden wings upon the air,
		Life’s eyes are gleaming from her forehead fair,
		And from her breasts the ravishing eyes of Death.
		
		Men say to me that sleep hath many dreams,
		Yet I knew never but this dream alone:
		There, from a dried-up channel, once the stream’s,
		The glen slopes up; even such in sleep it seems
		As to my waking sight the place well known.
		
		My love I call her, and she loves me well:
		But I love her as in the maelstrom’s cup
		The whirled stone loves the leaf inseparable
		That clings to it round all the circling swell,
		And that the same last eddy swallows up.


*** Rumi (1207 - 1273)

	1. BECAUSE I CANNOT SLEEP

		Because I cannot sleep
		I make music at night.
		I am troubled by the one
		whose face has the color of spring flowers.
		I have neither sleep nor patience,
		neither a good reputation nor disgrace.
		A thousand robes of wisdom are gone.
		All my good manners have moved a thousand miles away.
		The heart and the mind are left angry with each other.
		The stars and the moon are envious of each other.
		Because of this alienation the physical universe
		is getting tighter and tighter.
		The moon says, “How long will I remain
		suspended without a sun?”
		Without Love’s jewel inside of me,
		let the bazaar of my existence be destroyed stone by stone.
		O Love, You who have been called by a thousand names,
		You who know how to pour the wine
		into the chalice of the body,
		You who give culture to a thousand cultures,
		You who are faceless but have a thousand faces,
		O Love, You who shape the faces
		of Turks, Europeans, and Zanzibaris,
		give me a glass from Your bottle,
		or a handful of being from Your Branch.
		Remove the cork once more.
		Then we’ll see a thousand chiefs prostrate themselves,
		and a circle of ecstatic troubadours will play.
		Then the addict will be freed of craving.
		and will be resurrected,
		and stand in awe till Judgement Day.


	2. DID I NOT SAY TO YOU

		Did I not say to you, “Go not there, for I am your friend; in this
		mirage of annihilation I am the fountain of life?”
		
		Even though in anger you depart a hundred thousand years
		from me, in the end you will come to me, for I am your goal.
		
		Did I not say to you, “Be not content with worldly forms, for I
		am the fashioner of the tabernacle of your contentment?”
		
		Did I not say to you, “I am the sea and you are a single fish;
		go not to dry land, for I am your crystal sea?”
		
		Did I not say to you, “Go not like birds to the snare; come, for
		I am the power of flight and your wings and feet?”
		
		Did I not say to you, “They will waylay you and make you
		cold, for I am the fire and warmth and heat of your desire?”
		
		Did I not say to you, “They will implant in you ugly qualities
		so that you will forget that I am the source of purity to you?”
		
		Did I not say to you, “Do not say from what direction the servant’s 
		affairs come into order?” I am the Creator without directions.
		
		If you are the lamp of the heart, know where the road is to the house; 
		and if you are godlike of attribute, know that I am your Master.


	3. THE BREEZE AT DAWN

		The breeze at dawn has secrets to tell you.
		Don’t go back to sleep.
		
		You must ask for what you really want.
		Don’t go back to sleep.
		
		People are going back and forth across the doorsill
		where the two worlds touch.
		
		The door is round and open.
		Don’t go back to sleep.


*** Carl Sandburg (1878 - 1967)

	1. A DREAM GIRL

		You will come one day in a waver of love,
		Tender as dew, impetuous as rain,
		The tan of the sun will be on your skin,
		The purr of the breeze in your murmuring speech,
		You will pose with a hill-flower grace.
		
		You will come, with your slim, expressive arms,
		A poise of the head no sculptor has caught
		And nuances spoken with shoulder and neck,
		Your face in pass-and-repass of moods
		As many as skies in delicate change
		Of cloud and blue and flimmering sun.
		
		Yet,
		You may not come, O girl of a dream,
		We may but pass as the world goes by
		And take from a look of eyes into eyes,
		A film of hope and a memoried day.


	2. A FATHER TO HIS SON

		A father sees his son nearing manhood. 
		What shall he tell that son? 
		‘Life is hard; be steel; be a rock.‘ 
		And this might stand him for the storms 
		and serve him for humdrum monotony 
		and guide him among sudden betrayals 
		and tighten him for slack moments. 
		‘Life is a soft loam; be gentle; go easy.‘ 
		And this too might serve him. 
		Brutes have been gentled where lashes failed. 
		The growth of a frail flower in a path up 
		has sometimes shattered and split a rock. 
		A tough will counts. So does desire. 
		So does a rich soft wanting. 
		Without rich wanting nothing arrives. 
		Tell him too much money has killed men 
		and left them dead years before burial: 
		the quest of lucre beyond a few easy needs 
		has twisted good enough men 
		sometimes into dry thwarted worms. 
		Tell him time as a stuff can be wasted. 
		Tell him to be a fool every so often 
		and to have no shame over having been a fool 
		yet learning something out of every folly 
		hoping to repeat none of the cheap follies 
		thus arriving at intimate understanding 
		of a world numbering many fools. 
		Tell him to be alone often and get at himself 
		and above all tell himself no lies about himself 
		whatever the white lies and protective fronts 
		he may use against other people. 
		Tell him solitude is creative if he is strong 
		and the final decisions are made in silent rooms. 
		Tell him to be different from other people 
		if it comes natural and easy being different. 
		Let him have lazy days seeking his deeper motives. 
		Let him seek deep for where he is born natural. 
		Then he may understand Shakespeare 
		and the Wright brothers, Pasteur, Pavlov, 
		Michael Faraday and free imaginations 
		Bringing changes into a world resenting change. 
		He will be lonely enough 
		to have time for the work 
		he knows as his own.


	3. ARITHMETIC

		Arithmetic is where numbers fly like pigeons in and out of your 
		   head. 
		Arithmetic tell you how many you lose or win if you know how 
		   many you had before you lost or won. 
		Arithmetic is seven eleven all good children go to heaven--or five 
		   six bundle of sticks. 
		Arithmetic is numbers you squeeze from your head to your hand 
		   to your pencil to your paper till you get the answer. 
		Arithmetic is where the answer is right and everything is nice and 
		   you can look out of the window and see the blue sky--or the 
		   answer is wrong and you have to start all over and try again 
		   and see how it comes out this time. 
		If you take a number and double it and double it again and then 
		   double it a few more times, the number gets bigger and bigger 
		   and goes higher and higher and only arithmetic can tell you 
		   what the number is when you decide to quit doubling. 
		Arithmetic is where you have to multiply--and you carry the 
		   multiplication table in your head and hope you won’t lose it. 
		If you have two animal crackers, one good and one bad, and you 
		   eat one and a striped zebra with streaks all over him eats the 
		   other, how many animal crackers will you have if somebody 
		   offers you five six seven and you say No no no and you say 
		   Nay nay nay and you say Nix nix nix? 
		If you ask your mother for one fried egg for breakfast and she 
		   gives you two fried eggs and you eat both of them, who is 
		   better in arithmetic, you or your mother?


	4. AUTUMN MOVEMENT

		I cried over beautiful things knowing no beautiful thing lasts. 
		
		The field of cornflower yellow is a scarf at the neck of the copper 
		  sunburned woman, the mother of the year, the taker of seeds. 
		
		The northwest wind comes and the yellow is torn full of holes, 
		  new beautiful things come in the first spit of snow on the northwest wind, 
		  and the old things go, not one lasts.


	5. CHICAGO

		Hog Butcher for the World,
		Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat,
		Player with Railroads and the Nation’s Freight Handler;
		Stormy, husky, brawling,
		City of the Big Shoulders;
		
		They tell me you are wicked and I believe them, for I have seen your
		painted women under the gas lamps luring the farm boys.
		And they tell me you are crooked and I answer: Yes, it is true I have
		seen the gunman kill and go free to kill again.
		And they tell me you are brutal and my reply is: On the faces of women
		and children I have seen the marks of wanton hunger.
		And having answered so I turn once more to those who sneer at this my
		city, and I give them back the sneer and say to them:
		Come and show me another city with lifted head singing so proud to be
		alive and coarse and strong and cunning.
		Flinging magnetic curses amid the toil of piling job on job, here is a tall
		bold slugger set vivid against the little soft cities;
		Fierce as a dog with tongue lapping for action, cunning as a savage pitted
		against the wilderness,
		Bareheaded,
		Shoveling,
		Wrecking,
		Planning,
		Bulding, breaking, rebuilding,
		Under the smoke, dust all over his mouth, laughing with white teeth,
		Under the terrible burden of destiny laughing as a young man laughs,
		Laughing even as an ignorant fighter laughs who has never lost a battle,
		Bragging and laughing that under his wrist is the pulse, and under his
		ribs the heart of the people,
		Laughing!
		Laughing the stormy, husky, brawling laughter of Youth, half-naked,
		sweating, pround to be Hog Butcher, Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat,
		Player with Railroads and Freight Handler to the Nation.


	6. FOG

		THE fog comes
		on little cat feet.
		
		It sits looking
		over harbor and city
		on silent haunches
		and then moves on.


	7. GOVERNMENT

		The Government--I heard about the Government and I went out 
		    to find it. I said I would look closely at it when I saw it.
		Then I saw a policeman dragging a drunken man to the callaboose. 
		    It was the Government in action.
		I saw a ward alderman slip into an office one morning and talk with 
		    a judge. Later in the day the judge dismissed a case against a 
		    pickpocket who was a live ward worker for the alderman. Again 
		    I saw this was the Government, doing things.
		I saw militiamen level their rifles at a crowd of workingmen who 
		    were trying to get other workingmen to stay away from a shop 
		    where there was a strike on. Government in action.
		
		Everywhere I saw that Government is a thing made of men, that 
		    Government has blood and bones, it is many mouths whispering 
		    into many ears, sending telegrams, aiming rifles, writing orders, 
		    saying “yes” and “no.”
		
		Government dies as the men who form it die and are laid away in 
		    their graves and the new Government that comes after is human, 
		    made of heartbeats of blood, ambitions, lusts, and money running 
		    through it all, money paid and money taken, and money covered     
		    up and spoken of with hushed voices.
		A Government is just as secret and mysterious and sensitive as any 
		    human sinner carrying a load of germs, traditions and corpuscles 
		    handed down from fathers and mothers away back.


	8. PERSONALITY

		YOU have loved forty women, but you have only one thumb.
		You have led a hundred secret lives, but you mark only
		    one thumb.
		You go round the world and fight in a thousand wars and
		    win all the world’s honors, but when you come back
		    home the print of the one thumb your mother gave
		    you is the same print of thumb you had in the old
		    home when your mother kissed you and said good-by.
		Out of the whirling womb of time come millions of men
		and their feet crowd the earth and they cut one anothers’
		    throats for room to stand and among them all
		    are not two thumbs alike.
		Somewhere is a Great God of Thumbs who can tell the
		    inside story of this.


	9. THE ROAD AND THE END

		I SHALL foot it
		Down the roadway in the dusk,
		Where shapes of hunger wander
		And the fugitives of pain go by.
		I shall foot it
		In the silence of the morning,
		See the night slur into dawn,
		Hear the slow great winds arise
		Where tall trees flank the way
		And shoulder toward the sky.
		
		The broken boulders by the road
		Shall not commemorate my ruin.
		Regret shall be the gravel under foot.
		I shall watch for
		Slim birds swift of wing
		That go where wind and ranks of thunder
		Drive the wild processionals of rain.
		
		The dust of the traveled road
		Shall touch my hands and face.


	10. WHO AM I?

		My head knocks against the stars. 
		My feet are on the hilltops. 
		My finger-tips are in the valleys and shores of universal life. 
		Down in the sounding foam of primal things I reach my hands and play with pebbles of destiny. 
		I have been to hell and back many times. 
		I know all about heaven, for I have talked with God. 
		I dabble in the blood and guts of the terrible. 
		I know the passionate seizure of beauty 
		And the marvelous rebellion of man at all signs reading “Keep Off.“ 
		
		My name is Truth and I am the most elusive captive in the universe.


*** George Santayana (1863 - 1952)

	1. CAPE COD

		The low sandy beach and the thin scrub pine,
		The wide reach of bay and the long sky line,--
		O, I am sick for home!
		
		The salt, salt smell of the thick sea air,
		And the smooth round stones that the ebbtides wear,--
		When will the good ship come?
		
		The wretched stumps all charred and burned,
		And the deep soft rut where the cartwheel turned,--
		Why is the world so old?
		
		The lapping wave, and the broad gray sky
		Where the cawing crows and the slow gulls fly,
		Where are the dead untold?
		
		The thin, slant willows by the flooded bog,
		The huge stranded hulk and the floating log,
		Sorrow with life began!
		
		And among the dark pines, and along the flat shore,
		O the wind, and the wind, for evermore!
		What will become of man?


	2. I WOULD I MIGHT FORGET THAN I AM I

		I would I might forget that I am I,
		And break the heavy chain that binds me fast,
		Whose links about myself my deeds have cast.
		What in the body’s tomb doth buried lie
		Is boundless; ’tis the spirit of the sky,
		Lord of the future, guardian of the past,
		And soon must forth, to know his own at last.
		In his large life to live, I fain would die.
		Happy the dumb beast, hungering for food,
		But calling not his suffering his own;
		Blessèd the angel, gazing on all good,
		But knowing not he sits upon a throne;
		Wretched the mortal, pondering his mood,
		And doomed to know his aching heart alone.


	3. MIDNIGHT

		The dank earth reeks with three days’ rain,
		The phantom trees are dark and still,
		Above the darkness and the hill
		The tardy moon shines out again.
		O heavy lethargy of pain!
		O shadows of forgotten ill!
		
		My parrot lips, when I was young,
		To prove and to disprove were bold.
		The mighty world has tied my tongue,
		And in dull custom growing old
		I leave the burning truth untold
		And the heart’s anguish all unsung.
		
		Youth dies in man’s benumbed soul,
		Maid bows to woman’s broken life,
		A thousand leagues of silence roll
		Between the husband and the wife.
		The spirit faints with inward strife
		And lonely gazing at the pole.
		
		But how should reptiles pine for wings
		Or a parched desert know its dearth?
		Immortal is the soul that sings
		The sorrow of her mortal birth.
		O cruel beauty of the earth!
		O love’s unutterable stings!


*** Siegfried Sassoon (1886 - 1967)

	1. ATTACK

		At dawn the ridge emerges massed and dun
		In the wild purple of the glowering sun,
		Smouldering through spouts of drifting smoke that shroud
		The menacing scarred slope; and, one by one,
		Tanks creep and topple forward to the wire.
		The barrage roars and lifts. Then, clumsily bowed
		With bombs and guns and shovels and battle-gear,
		Men jostle and climb to meet the bristling fire.
		Lines of grey, muttering faces, masked with fear,
		They leave their trenches, going over the top,
		While time ticks blank and busy on their wrists,
		And hope, with furtive eyes and grappling fists,
		Flounders in mud. O Jesu, make it stop!


	2. MEMORY

		When I was young my heart and head were light,
		And I was gay and feckless as a colt
		Out in the fields, with morning in the may,
		Wind on the grass, wings in the orchard bloom.
		O thrilling sweet, my joy, when life was free
		And all the paths led on from hawthorn-time
		Across the carolling meadows into June.
		
		But now my heart is heavy-laden. I sit
		Burning my dreams away beside the fire:
		For death has made me wise and bitter and strong;
		And I am rich in all that I have lost.
		O starshine on the fields of long-ago,
		Bring me the darkness and the nightingale;
		Dim wealds of vanished summer, peace of home,
		And silence; and the faces of my friends.


	3. THE DEATH BED

		He drowsed and was aware of silence heaped
		Round him, unshaken as the steadfast walls;
		Aqueous like floating rays of amber light,
		Soaring and quivering in the wings of sleep.
		Silence and safety; and his mortal shore
		Lipped by the inward, moonless waves of death.
		
		Someone was holding water to his mouth.
		He swallowed, unresisting; moaned and dropped
		Through crimson gloom to darkness; and forgot
		The opiate throb and ache that was his wound.
		Water--calm, sliding green above the weir.
		Water--a sky-lit alley for his boat,
		Bird-voiced, and bordered with reflected flowers
		And shaken hues of summer; drifting down,
		He dipped contented oars, and sighed, and slept.
		
		Night, with a gust of wind, was in the ward,
		Blowing the curtain to a glimmering curve.
		Night. He was blind; he could not see the stars
		Glinting among the wraiths of wandering cloud;
		Queer blots of colour, purple, scarlet, green,
		Flickered and faded in his drowning eyes.
		
		Rain--he could hear it rustling through the dark;
		Fragrance and passionless music woven as one;
		Warm rain on drooping roses; pattering showers
		That soak the woods; not the harsh rain that sweeps
		Behind the thunder, but a trickling peace,
		Gently and slowly washing life away.
		
		He stirred, shifting his body; then the pain
		Leapt like a prowling beast, and gripped and tore
		His groping dreams with grinding claws and fangs.
		But someone was beside him; soon he lay
		Shuddering because that evil thing had passed.
		And death, who’d stepped toward him, paused and stared.
		
		Light many lamps and gather round his bed.
		Lend him your eyes, warm blood, and will to live.
		Speak to him; rouse him; you may save him yet.
		He’s young; he hated War; how should he die
		When cruel old campaigners win safe through?
		
		But death replied: ‘I choose him.’ So he went,
		And there was silence in the summer night;
		Silence and safety; and the veils of sleep.
		Then, far away, the thudding of the guns.


	4. THE HERO

		‘Jack fell as he’d have wished,’ the mother said,
		And folded up the letter that she’d read.
		‘The Colonel writes so nicely.’ Something broke
		In the tired voice that quavered to a choke.
		She half looked up. ‘We mothers are so proud
		Of our dead soldiers.’ Then her face was bowed.
		
		Quietly the Brother Officer went out.
		He’d told the poor old dear some gallant lies
		That she would nourish all her days, no doubt
		For while he coughed and mumbled, her weak eyes
		Had shone with gentle triumph, brimmed with joy,
		Because he’d been so brave, her glorious boy.
		
		He thought how ‘Jack’, cold-footed, useless swine,
		Had panicked down the trench that night the mine
		Went up at Wicked Corner; how he’d tried
		To get sent home, and how, at last, he died,
		Blown to small bits. And no one seemed to care
		Except that lonely woman with white hair.


	5. THE LAST MEETING

		I
		
		Because the night was falling warm and still
		Upon a golden day at April’s end,
		I thought; I will go up the hill once more
		To find the face of him that I have lost,
		And speak with him before his ghost has flown
		Far from the earth that might not keep him long.
		
		So down the road I went, pausing to see
		How slow the dusk drew on, and how the folk
		Loitered about their doorways, well-content
		With the fine weather and the waxing year.
		The miller’s house, that glimmered with grey walls,
		Turned me aside; and for a while I leaned
		Along the tottering rail beside the bridge
		To watch the dripping mill-wheel green with damp.
		The miller peered at me with shadowed eyes
		And pallid face: I could not hear his voice
		For sound of the weir’s plunging. He was old.
		His days went round with the unhurrying wheel.
		
		Moving along the street, each side I saw
		The humble, kindly folk in lamp-lit rooms;
		Children at table; simple, homely wives;
		Strong, grizzled men; and soldiers back from war,
		Scaring the gaping elders with loud talk.
		
		Soon all the jumbled roofs were down the hill,
		And I was turning up the grassy lane
		That goes to the big, empty house that stands
		Above the town, half-hid by towering trees.
		I looked below and saw the glinting lights:
		I heard the treble cries of bustling life,
		And mirth, and scolding; and the grind of wheels.
		An engine whistled, piercing-shrill, and called
		High echoes from the sombre slopes afar;
		Then a long line of trucks began to move.
		
		It was quite still; the columned chestnuts stood
		Dark in their noble canopies of leaves.
		I thought: ‘A little longer I’ll delay,
		And then he’ll be more glad to hear my feet,
		And with low laughter ask me why I’m late.
		The place will be too dim to show his eyes,
		But he will loom above me like a tree,
		With lifted arms and body tall and strong.’
		
		There stood the empty house; a ghostly hulk
		Becalmed and huge, massed in the mantling dark,
		As builders left it when quick-shattering war
		Leapt upon France and called her men to fight.
		Lightly along the terraces I trod,
		Crunching the rubble till I found the door
		That gaped in twilight, framing inward gloom.
		An owl flew out from under the high eaves
		To vanish secretly among the firs,
		Where lofty boughs netted the gleam of stars.
		I stumbled in; the dusty floors were strewn
		With cumbering piles of planks and props and beams;
		Tall windows gapped the walls; the place was free
		To every searching gust and jousting gale;
		But now they slept; I was afraid to speak,
		And heavily the shadows crowded in.
		
		I called him, once; then listened: nothing moved:
		Only my thumping heart beat out the time.
		Whispering his name, I groped from room to room.
		
		Quite empty was that house; it could not hold
		His human ghost, remembered in the love
		That strove in vain to be companioned still.
		
		
		II
		
		Blindly I sought the woods that I had known
		So beautiful with morning when I came
		Amazed with spring that wove the hazel twigs
		With misty raiment of awakening green.
		I found a holy dimness, and the peace
		Of sanctuary, austerely built of trees,
		And wonder stooping from the tranquil sky.
		
		Ah! but there was no need to call his name.
		He was beside me now, as swift as light.
		I knew him crushed to earth in scentless flowers,
		And lifted in the rapture of dark pines.
		‘For now,’ he said, ‘my spirit has more eyes
		Than heaven has stars; and they are lit by love.
		My body is the magic of the world,
		And dawn and sunset flame with my spilt blood.
		My breath is the great wind, and I am filled
		With molten power and surge of the bright waves
		That chant my doom along the ocean’s edge.
		
		‘Look in the faces of the flowers and find
		The innocence that shrives me; stoop to the stream
		That you may share the wisdom of my peace.
		For talking water travels undismayed.
		The luminous willows lean to it with tales
		Of the young earth; and swallows dip their wings
		Where showering hawthorn strews the lanes of light.
		
		‘I can remember summer in one thought
		Of wind-swept green, and deeps of melting blue,
		And scent of limes in bloom; and I can hear
		Distinct the early mower in the grass,
		Whetting his blade along some morn of June.
		
		‘For I was born to the round world’s delight,
		And knowledge of enfolding motherhood,
		Whose tenderness, that shines through constant toil,
		Gathers the naked children to her knees.
		In death I can remember how she came
		To kiss me while I slept; still I can share
		The glee of childhood; and the fleeting gloom
		When all my flowers were washed with rain of tears.
		
		‘I triumph in the choruses of birds,
		Bursting like April buds in gyres of song.
		My meditations are the blaze of noon
		On silent woods, where glory burns the leaves.
		I have shared breathless vigils; I have slaked
		The thirst of my desires in bounteous rain
		Pouring and splashing downward through the dark.
		Loud storm has roused me with its winking glare,
		And voice of doom that crackles overhead.
		I have been tired and watchful, craving rest,
		Till the slow-footed hours have touched my brows
		And laid me on the breast of sundering sleep.’
		
		
		III
		
		I know that he is lost among the stars,
		And may return no more but in their light.
		Though his hushed voice may call me in the stir
		Of whispering trees, I shall not understand.
		Men may not speak with stillness; and the joy
		Of brooks that leap and tumble down green hills
		Is faster than their feet; and all their thoughts
		Can win no meaning from the talk of birds.
		
		My heart is fooled with fancies, being wise;
		For fancy is the gleaming of wet flowers
		When the hid sun looks forth with golden stare.
		Thus, when I find new loveliness to praise,
		And things long-known shine out in sudden grace,
		Then will I think: ‘He moves before me now.’
		So he will never come but in delight,
		And, as it was in life, his name shall be
		Wonder awaking in a summer dawn,
		And youth, that dying, touched my lips to song.


	6. THE TROOPS

		Dim, gradual thinning of the shapeless gloom
		Shudders to drizzling daybreak that reveals
		Disconsolate men who stamp their sodden boots
		And turn dulled, sunken faces to the sky
		Haggard and hopeless. They, who have beaten down
		The stale despair of night, must now renew
		Their desolation in the truce of dawn,
		Murdering the livid hours that grope for peace.
		
		Yet these, who cling to life with stubborn hands,
		Can grin through storms of death and find a gap
		In the clawed, cruel tangles of his defence.
		They march from safety, and the bird-sung joy
		Of grass-green thickets, to the land where all
		Is ruin, and nothing blossoms but the sky
		That hastens over them where they endure
		Sad, smoking, flat horizons, reeking woods,
		And foundered trench-lines volleying doom for doom.
		
		O my brave brown companions, when your souls
		Flock silently away, and the eyeless dead
		Shame the wild beast of battle on the ridge,
		Death will stand grieving in that field of war
		Since your unvanquished hardihood is spent.
		And through some mooned Valhalla there will pass
		Battalions and battalions, scarred from hell;
		The unreturning army that was youth;
		The legions who have suffered and are dust.


	7. THRUSHES

		Tossed on the glittering air they soar and skim,
		Whose voices make the emptiness of light
		A windy palace. Quavering from the brim
		Of dawn, and bold with song at edge of night,
		They clutch their leafy pinnacles and sing
		Scornful of man, and from his toils aloof
		Whose heart’s a haunted woodland whispering;
		Whose thoughts return on tempest-baffled wing;
		Who hears the cry of God in everything,
		And storms the gate of nothingness for proof.


*** Dorothy Sayers (1893 - 1957)

	1. A MAN GREATLY GIFTED

		YOU are the song that a jester sang,
		Gambolling down the woods alone,
		  When a wide, low, yellow moon
		  Stared into the dusk of June;
		
		And here and there, among the trees,
		Where sudden foxgloves showed like ghosts,
		  The tiny streams, from edge to edge
		  Slipped, smothered by the mossy ledge.
		
		The shadow dodged between the stems
		Fantastically lengthening,
		  And like a silly, sweet guitar,
		  The little bells were all a-jar.
		
		O music swifter than a sword,
		Sharper than scent of spikenard,
		  Thus carelessly, to left and right
		  Tossed by a jester in the night!


	2. ALMA MATER

		_“Far beneath
		My holier passion, in their eyes and ears
		Enchantment vast but foolish lingereth.”_
		
			--H. G. Dixey: Sonnet on Oxford.
		
		_“Die Zauberin war ehrlich gegen den Ritter,” fuhr der Alte fort, “sie sagte ihm gleich voraus, wenn er die reizende Herzogin nach seiner Veste Troja entfuehre, muesse es das sein und seiner Burg und seines ganzen Stammes Untergang werden, aber zehn Jahre lang koenne er sich in Troja vertheidigen, und Helens suesser Liebe froh sein.”
		
		“Und er nahm es an, oder er war ein Tropf!” rief der Jeungling._
		
			--De la Motte Fouqué: Sintram.
		
		WHEN Aphrodite offered a brief bliss
		  To the Idalian shepherd-boy,
		He chose ten rapturous years of Helen’s kiss,
		  And then, the sack of Troy.
		
		Think you that through the beating hours of night
		  It set no spur to his desire
		To see in fancy the appalling light
		  Of Ilion in fire?
		
		Or that he panted not to snatch at joy,
		  Made sharp by pain and eager fear,
		Knowing, each kiss drove on the fate of Troy
		  And brought destruction near?
		
		Love’s exile in Elysium, he knew well
		  That fear and haste bear bitter fruits,
		That love left insecure’s a tree of hell,
		  Snake-bitten at the roots.
		
		Therefore, the while he called on Helen’s name,
		  And watched with apprehensive eye
		To catch the first avenging glare of flame,
		  His soul was like to die:--
		
		“Ah, Helen! Helen! Helen! thy white breast
		  And gold hair heaped in shining bands,--
		Would I might lay me quietly to rest
		  In thy enfolding hands,
		
		“Lie still, and watch thine eyes grow dark with love,
		  And feel thy kiss upon my brow,
		And think no more, nor ever stir nor move,
		  Nor count the time, as now.
		
		“O happy lovers that can sleep, nor know
		  What term is set them by the Fates!
		I slumber not, nor shall, until the foe
		  Strike upon Ilion gates.
		
		“How should I so let slip the precious time
		  The gods mete out so meagrely?
		Each word we speak rings like a dreadful chime,
		  Marking the hours that flee.
		
		“Years, months and weeks and days and moments pass,
		  Moments pile up to days and years,
		And every fragile hour of joy, alas!
		  Breaks with its weight of tears.
		
		“High up beyond the beaker’s foaming brim
		  I seek the purple wine to pour;
		My hand shakes frenzied at the flooded rim,
		  The wine spills on the floor.
		
		“Helen, dear spouse! how many things there were
		  To say to thee and hear again,
		Long vows of love, and worship, and sweet prayer--
		  But now, all speech is vain,
		
		“For my tongue stammers and my sense is gone,
		  Thinking how soon the time is sped;--
		I try to speak a thousand words in one,
		  And all is left unsaid.
		
		“Helen, close-girded with immortal spells
		  Of beauty and of ancient power,
		Let the gods slay me on thy breast! How else
		  Shall I behold the hour
		
		“Foretold, foreseen, that to thy former home,
		  To other arms and other lips,
		Shall drive thee over the unheeding foam
		  In the thin Grecian ships?
		
		“Ah! Helen, Helen, Helen!--will that day
		  Break on thine eyelids peacefully?
		Can Menelaus comfort thee?--He may;
		  But what is there for me?”
		
		So, ere the towers of Ilion fell in smoke,
		  Like some dear dream that breaks and flies,
		And fierce Pelides through the breaches broke,
		  In grief did Paris rise
		
		To follow fate out to the bitter close,
		  Feeling the nearness of the end,
		And saw, amid the press of angry foes,
		  Death as his only friend.
		
		But calm-eyed Helen, to her former home
		  Passed with the tall Achaean ships
		Unheeding, over the unheeding foam,
		  To other arms and lips.
		
		Such was the story that the captives told
		  To young Idaeus, in the years
		When that great tale of Troy was growing old,
		  A babble in men’s ears.
		
		He answered: “While the sack of Troy went by,
		  I, a weak babe on Helen’s breast,
		Passed from my father’s hand unwittingly,
		  Duke Menelaus’ guest.
		
		“Since then, to manhood grown, I’ve served in war,
		  And crossed the ocean’s level plain,
		But ever came, from journeying afar
		  To Helen home again.
		
		“Helen, my mother, with the sea-deep eyes
		  And brow unmarred by any fold,
		Crowned with unending beauty Hera-wise
		  And everlasting gold;
		
		“Helen, my mother, whom I greatly love--
		  Nowise for that majestic grace,
		The changeless beauty of the seed of Jove
		  Set godlike on thy face;
		
		“The songs men made, the tears men shed for thee,
		  The fire that vexed my father so--
		A very foolishness they seem to me
		  That look on thee, and know
		
		“Only thy mother-breast and gentle arms
		  That wont to shield me from affright,
		The voice that sang to quiet my alarms
		  At the dread fall of night;
		
		“The eyes that watched my going when I bore
		  Across the stinging ocean-wrack,
		The tender smile that greeted me on shore
		  When the glad ships came back.
		
		“Art thou that one for whom full many a pyre
		  Reeked up along the war-worn coast?
		That maddened Menelaus and my sire?
		  For whom the Danaean host
		
		“Went out to die? for whom old Priam’s town
		  Bore ten long years of siege and stress,
		Until her god-built citadel fell down
		  Ruined to nothingness?
		
		“What kind of love is this, that rends and slays
		  And drags high beauty in the dust,
		That makes unfruitful even joyous days
		  By unappeasable lust?
		
		“O happy, holy as the soundless morn
		  Setting grey feet upon the sea,
		Wet with soft, drenching dews, and perfumes borne
		  On cool winds quietly,
		
		“Comes love like mine upon the fretful heart,
		  A strong refreshment to the soul;
		Love that makes mad has only found a part,
		  But I have known the whole.”
		
		Then Helen, lifting up her eyes, wherein
		  The secrets of the years held place,
		Spake, looking seaward: “How shall I begin
		  To show thee those old days?
		
		“Not yet, young son Idaeus, canst thou tell
		  How many ways there be of love,--
		Love is a tree whose roots take hold of hell,
		  That flowers before high Jove.
		
		“I was begot by heaven out of earth,
		  Travail of earth and joy of heaven,
		And in the slow unfolding of my birth
		  Came power; and I was given
		
		“To man at length, to be a burning brand
		  And a Promethean fire to be,--
		Look upon me, my son, and understand
		  Why men were slain for me.
		
		“Paris, my bridegroom, happy and unknown
		  From Ida’s pleasant hill-slopes came;
		I taught him love, and left him overthrown--
		  The world shall know his name.
		
		“If now the second time his choice were made
		  Of loveless peace and love-made woe,
		Think’st thou the balance would be overweighed
		  And he would let love go?
		
		“Nay, with each trembling moment of delight,
		  Each precious kiss and passionate,
		Snatched, saved, and hoarded jealously, despite
		  Man’s wrath and heaven’s hate--
		
		“Short glimpses of a glory that the years
		  Hold not in store for mortal men,
		Although their eyes, strained through a mist of tears,
		  Behold it now and then--
		
		“With these he never could be wholly sad
		  In his great, hallowed town of Troy,
		Where passion quickened and made him more than glad
		  With greater things than joy.
		
		“Wonder not, therefore, that I have no tears
		  For those that loved me and are dead,
		I garner up the loves of all the years
		  A coronal for my head.
		
		“High o’er the cloud-blue arches, and the dome
		  Of those celestial palaces
		Where age-long Zeus built up his mighty home,
		  The hall of judgment is.
		
		“There Time the Titan ceaselessly doth guard,
		  With leaden and relentless mace,
		The sleep of young Eternity, his ward,
		  The last of Saturn’s race;
		
		“Who when he wakes, to his full stature grown,
		  And lays his hand upon the door,
		Almighty Zeus shall shudder from his throne,
		  And Time shall be no more;
		
		“Who, from the swinging bowls of love and pain,
		  Poised on the balance of despair,
		Shall pour the undiminished draughts of gain
		  For hero souls to share.
		
		“Then first, then only, judged and justified
		  By perfect working of God’s thought,
		I too may die, when time and chance have died,
		  And pass away to naught;
		
		“Not blamed, nor blameless, but the tool of fate,
		  And seed of lovers unafraid,
		Useless, when once they are regenerate
		  Who made me, whom I made.
		
		“Hell of tall cities, hell of stately ships,
		  Hell of all men and their desire,
		I hold love’s life between my bitter lips,
		  Ruined about by fire.
		
		“O Father Zeus, father of gods and men,
		  That madest love and madest joy,
		Set Helen in the citadel, and then
		  Do what thou wilt with Troy!”
		
		She spake and ceased. Idaeus, doubtfully,
		  Leaning on that beloved breast
		Smiled in her eyes, while over the dim sea
		  The sun went down to rest.


	3. BYZANTINE

		_Jesus Christ, the same yesterday
		and to-day and for ever._
		
		I SIT within My Father’s house, the Lord God crucified,
		My feet upon the altar-stone set straitly side by side,
		My knees are mighty to uphold, My hands outstretched to bless,
		My eyelids are immutable to judge unrighteousness.
		
		What though the bitter winds of war lay waste the house of prayer?
		They cannot shake My quiet robe nor stir My folded hair,
		I wrestled in Gethsemane, I cried and I was slain,
		Never, for any strife of men, to strive nor cry again.
		
		I sit within My Father’s house, with changeless face to see
		The shames and sins that turned away My Father’s face from Me;
		Be not amazed for all these things, I bore them long ago
		That am from everlasting God, and was and shall be so.


	4. CAROL

		O know you how Queen Mary sits
		  In heaven’s highest bowers,
		Tall lilies in her garden-beds,
		  Set round with gilly-flowers?
		
		And know you how Queen Mary sits
		  With rings upon her hands,
		While the seven blessed Virgins bind
		  Her hair in golden bands?
		
		And when the Lord will comfort her
		  For her seven swords of pain,
		He comes to stand beside her knee,
		  A little child again.


	5. CHRIST THE COMPANION

		WHEN I’ve thrown my books aside, being petulant and weary,
		And have turned down the gas, and the firelight has sufficed,
		When my brain’s too stiff for prayer, and too indolent for theory,
		Will You come and play with me, big Brother Christ?
		
		Will You slip behind the book-case? Will you stir the window-curtain,
		Peeping from the shadow with Your eyes like flame?
		Set me staring at the alcove where the flicker’s so uncertain,
		Then suddenly, at my elbow, leap up, catch me, call my name?
		
		Or take the great arm-chair, help me set the chestnuts roasting,
		And tell me quiet stories, while the brown skins pop,
		Of wayfarers and merchantmen and tramp of Roman hosting,
		And how Joseph dwelt with Mary in the carpenter’s shop?
		
		When I drift away in dozing, will You softly light the candles
		And touch the piano with Your kind, strong fingers,
		Set stern fugues of Bach and stately themes of Handel’s
		Stalking through the corners where the last disquiet lingers?
		
		And when we say good-night, and You kiss me on the landing,
		Will You promise faithfully and make a solemn tryst:
		You’ll be just at hand if wanted, close by here where we are standing,
		And be down in time for breakfast, big Brother Christ?


	6. EPITAPH FOR A YOUNG MUSICIAN

		HERE was a man for whom time held the chance,
		  If he had lived, of failure or success:
		  Failure of fame, which is a sore distress,
		The world’s applause, maybe, or tolerance.
		
		But God smote England in her dalliance,
		  And like his fellows, neither more nor less,
		      Here was a man.
		
		So when death caught him in the haphazard dance,
		  And robbed him of occasion to transgress,
		  He lost the chance of failure; perfectness
		Was his alone. Stranger, rest here thy glance,
		      Here was a man.


	7. HARVEST

		As we walked through the merry, merry meads,
		  All in the month of May,
		’Twas you that wore the gown of green,
		  And I the gown of grey;
		For you I wept, for you I sighed,
		For you I very nearly died--
		Hey, fol the diddle diddle day,
		  Hey, fol the dero day.
		
		But now as we come harvesting
		  When the leaves are growing old,
		It’s you that wear the gown of grey
		  And I the gown of gold,
		For me you weep, for me you sigh,
		For me I think that you will die--
		Hey, fol the diddle diddle day,
		  Hey, fol the dero day.


	8. IN CONTEMPLATION OF SUDDEN DEATH

		LORD, if this night my journey end,
		I thank Thee first for many a friend,
		The sturdy and unquestioned piers
		That run beneath my bridge of years.
		
		And next, for all the love I gave
		To things and men this side the grave,
		Wisely or not, since I can prove
		There always is much good in love.
		
		Next, for the power thou gavest me
		To view the whole world mirthfully,
		For laughter, paraclete of pain,
		Like April suns across the rain.
		
		Also that, being not too wise
		To do things foolish in men’s eyes,
		I gained experience by this,
		And saw life somewhat as it is.
		
		Next, for the joy of labour done
		And burdens shouldered in the sun;
		Nor less, for shame of labour lost,
		And meekness born of a barren boast.
		
		For every fair and useless thing
		That bids men pause from labouring
		To look and find the larkspur blue
		And marigolds of a different hue;
		
		For eyes to see and ears to hear,
		For tongue to speak and thews to bear,
		For hands to handle, feet to go,
		For life, I give Thee thanks also.
		
		For all things merry, quaint and strange,
		For sound and silence, strength, and change,
		And last, for death, which only gives
		Value to every thing that lives;
		
		For these, good Lord that madest me,
		I praise Thy name; since, verily,
		I of my joy have had no dearth
		Though this night were my last on earth.


	9. MATTER OF BRITTANY

		DRAW to the fire, and let us weave a web
		  Of sounds and splendours intertwined--
		    Of warriors riding two by two
		    In silken surcoats stitched with blue,
		    To seek and strive the whole world through
		  For a scarlet fruit with silver rind;
		Of unsteered ships that drift for miles on miles
		Amid the creeks of myriad magic isles
		Over enchanted seas, that leave at ebb
		  A beach of glittering gold behind.
		
		Hark! how the rain is rippling over the roofs
		  And knocking hard on the window-pane!
		    It rattles down the gutter-spout
		    And beats the laurel-leaves about;
		    So let us tell of a kempy stout
		  With bells upon his bridle-rein--
		How, as he rode beneath the chattering boughs,
		He clashed the iron visor over his brows,
		Hearing upon his heel the hurried hoofs
		  Of Breunor, Breuse or Agravaine.
		
		Of names like dusky jewels wedged in gold
		  The tale shall cherish goodly store,
		    Of Lionel and Lamorak
		    And of Sir Lancelot du Lak,
		    And him that bore upon his back
		  Arms for the Lady Lyonor;
		Persant, Perimones and Pertolepe,
		And Arthur laid in Avalon asleep,
		Dinas and Dinadan and Bors the bold,
		  And many a mighty warrior more.
		
		And grimly crouched in every woodland way
		  A dragon with his emerald eyes
		    Shall sit and blink on passing knights;
		    In the deep dells, old eremites,
		    Victors once of a thousand fights,
		  Shall sing their masses at sunrise;
		And weary men shall stumble unaware
		On damsels dancing in a garden fair,
		And there, like Meraugis of Portlesguez,
		  Dance, cheated of their memories.
		
		To towns where we shall feast at Pentecost,
		  Carlion or Kynke Kenadon,
		    Each day shall come a faery dame,
		    Or else a giant with eyes of flame
		    Shall bid to the beheading game
		  Knights that the king sets store upon;
		And some shall find, at hour of day’s decline,
		The house beside the fountain and the pine,
		And learning much of marvel from their host,
		  Shall hasten greatly to begone.
		
		Some, by the help of charmèd steeds shall--just--
		  Leap through the whirling barriers
		    That guard about the pleasant bower
		    Where every moment is an hour,
		    And with an elfin paramour
		  Drowse and dream for a hundred years,
		But setting foot again on Middle Earth,
		Or tasting wheaten bread in hour of dearth,
		Shall crumble to a little cloud of dust
		  Blown by the wind across the furze.
		
		Or sometimes through the arches of the wood
		  The sad Good Friday bells will ring
		    Loud in the ear of Percivale,
		    Through many a year of ban and bale
		    Yet questing after the Sangraal
		  For comfort of the Fisher King;
		And suddenly across a vault of stars
		Shall drive a network of enchanted spars,
		And Lancelot and Galahad the good
		  Behold the ship of hallowing.
		
		And first of all I’ll tell the tale to you,
		  And you shall tell the next to me:
		    How gentle Enid made complaint
		    While riding with her lord Geraint,
		    Or how the merry Irish Saint
		  Went ever westward oversea;
		While your dim shadow moving on the wall
		Might be Sir Tristram’s, as he harped in hall
		Before Iseult of Ireland, always true,
		  Or white Iseult of Brittany.


	10. PIPES

		I sat beside the river
		    when the summer sun was bright,
		And blew brave music
		    as loudly as I might,
		On the sweet, hollow Pan-pipes--
		    they were my delight.
		
		On the bare, black mountain
		    where the storm had stripped the ground,
		I breathed a broken melody
		    quite softly; and I found
		That all my pipes were shattered
		    with the shrillness of the sound.
		
		God keep the river
		    and God keep the reeds--
		I am for the City
		    full of men’s deeds,
		To build a great organ
		    for my new needs.


	11. RECKONING

		I said to the devil one day,
		“What is the price that a man must pay?
		What is the end of shameful desire?”
		    He answered: “Hell-fire.”
		
		“You sell sin for a song,” I said,
		“And the day of reckoning is far ahead;”
		Nor knew that, even when he threatens hell-fire,
		    The devil is a liar.
		
		For the bitter end of shame
		Is not any sort of fire or flame,
		But the chill of a scorn too sick for laughter,
		    Here, not hereafter.


	12. RONDEL

		TO-MORROW, yes, those songs will break my heart,
		  But I am only very glad to-night,
		  Thrilling with fear and labour and delight
		To go thus gaily robed and play my part;
		
		Joy goes up with a shout--quick laughters dart
		  Between the choruses that ring and smite--
		To-morrow, yes, those songs will break my heart,
		  But I am only very glad to-night;
		
		Glad of the music and the jocund art
		  That flings us all together; very bright
		  Through the warm darkness streams the candle-light,
		More mirthfully our farewell songs upstart.
		To-morrow, yes--those songs will break my heart.


	13. SNAP-DRAGONS

		I have the streets in mind
		And the yellow sun,--
		    Lad, you are left behind,--
		    All that is done.
		
		Snap-dragons on the wall
		Were homely to see,--
		    What was it after all
		    But vanity?
		
		Snap-dragons on the wall
		In my garden too,--
		    There is little to recall
		    For me and you.
		
		Dead blossoms adrift
		Are falling away,--
		    You never gave me a gift
		    Would last for a day.
		
		Swift is darkness--swift
		The death of a flower,--
		    I never gave you a gift
		    Would last for an hour.
		
		Gone is the level light
		From the wide lands,--
		    I would be glad to-night
		    Of the touch of your hands.


	14. SYMBOL

		I found him in the church-yard,
		  My brother who had died,
		With white lilies above him,
		  And a hemlock by his side.
		
		Men plant the lilies
		  In token of God’s grace,
		But the green and deadly hemlock,
		  He grows in his own place.
		
		With the sick lily-odour
		  I was all faint within,
		It was like a sweet and a seemly lie
		  To cover the reek of sin.
		
		And truth goes trim and decent
		  In a rich man’s funeral,
		But rich men will turn rotten,
		  And so shall we all.
		
		Now the sour smell of the hemlock
		  Is honest on the breath,
		It is like the after-taste of sin,
		  And the foretaste of death.


	15. THE ELDER KNIGHT

		I
		
		I HAVE met you foot to foot, I have fought you face to face,
		I have held my own against you and lost no inch of place,
		    And you shall never see
		    How you have broken me.
		
		You sheathed your sword in the dawn, and you smiled with careless eyes,
		Saying “Merrily struck, my son, I think you may have your prize.”
		    Nor saw how each hard breath
		    Was painfully snatched from death.
		
		I held my head like a rock; I offered to joust again,
		Though I shook, and my palsied hand could hardly cling to the rein;
		    Did you curse my insolence
		    And over-confidence?
		
		You have ridden, lusty and fresh, to the morrow’s tournament;
		I am buffeted, beaten, sick at the heart and spent.--
		    Yet, as God my speed be
		    I will fight you again if need be.
		
		
		II
		
		A white cloud running under the moon
		  And three stars over the poplar-trees,
		Night deepens into her lambent noon;
		  God holds the world between His knees;
		Yesterday it was washed with the rain,
		But now it is clean and clear again.
		
		Your hands were strong to buffet me,
		  But, when my plume was in the dust,
		Most kind for comfort verily;
		  Success rides blown with restless lust;
		Herein is all the peace of heaven:
		To know we have failed and are forgiven.
		
		The brown, rain-scented garden beds
		  Are waiting for the next year’s roses;
		The poplars wag mysterious heads,
		  For the pleasant secret each discloses
		To his neighbour, makes them nod, and nod--
		So safe is the world on the knees of God.
		
		
		III
		
		I have the road before me; never again
		  Will I be angry at the practised thrust
		That flicked my fingers from the lordly rein
		  To scratch and scrabble among the rolling dust.
		
		I never will be angry--though your spear
		  Bit through the pauldron, shattered the camail,
		Before I crossed a steed, through many a year
		  Battle on battle taught you how to fail.
		
		Can you remember how the morning star
		  Winked through the chapel window, when the day
		Called you from vigil to delights of war
		  With such loud jollity, you could not pray?
		
		Pray now, Lord Lancelot; your hands are hard
		  With the rough hilts; great power is in your eyes,
		Great confidence; you are not newly scarred,
		  And conquer gravely now without surprise.
		
		Pray now, my master; you have still the joy
		  Of work done perfectly; remember not
		The dizzying bliss that smote you when, a boy,
		  You faced some better man, Lord Lancelot.
		
		Pray now--and look not on my radiant face,
		  Breaking victorious from the bloody grips--
		Too young to speak in quiet prayer or praise
		  For the strong laughter bubbling to my lips.
		
		Angry? because I scarce know how to stand,
		  Gasping and reeling against the gates of death,
		While, with the shaft yet whole within your hand,
		  You smile at me with undisordered breath?
		
		Not I--not I that have the dawn and dew,
		  Wind, and the golden shore, and silver foam--
		I that here pass and bid good-bye to you--
		  For I ride forward--you are going home.
		
		Truly I am your debtor for this hour
		  Of rough and tumble--debtor for some good tricks
		Of tourney-craft;-- yet see how, flower on flower,
		  The hedgerows blossom! How the perfumes mix
		
		Of field and forest!--I must hasten on--
		  The clover scent blows like a flag unfurled:
		When you are dead, or aged and alone,
		  I shall be foremost knight in all the world--
		
		My world, not yours, beneath the morning’s gold,
		  My hazardous world, where skies and seas are blue;
		Here is my hand. Maybe, when I am old,
		  I shall remember you, and pray for you.


	16. THE GATES OF PARADISE

		_FROM the grave-bed and the winding sheet
		Is a long way for dead feet,
		A dark road for dead eyes,
		That leads to the gates of Paradise._
		
		When Judas’ soul went through the night,
		  To knock on Hades gate,
		His way was over the whin-pricked moor,
		  And the noise of the wind was great.
		
		He had no lantern to his feet,
		  Nor candle in his hand,
		Such as God gives to every man
		  That dies at the time planned.
		
		The angels sit in highest Heaven
		  And trim the lamps of God,
		And all day long make lights for those
		  That travel death’s dim road.
		
		
		And when the cross is on thy breast,
		  The chrism on thine eyes,
		Thy angel will bear down thy light
		  Out of the starry skies
		And thou therewith shalt walk by night
		  Safely to Paradise.
		
		But whoso doth so deadly sin
		  To cast his life away,
		Finding his lamp not lit betimes
		  Walks through the midnight grey.
		
		For a long night and half a day
		  Did Judas walk alone
		Through the utter dark, for in that place
		  Is neither sun nor moon.
		
		For a long night and half a day
		  Did Judas vainly seek
		To reach the gates of Paradise,
		  The salt tears on his cheek.
		
		With that he saw a candle gleam
		  Borne by a hasty man,
		And Judas caught him by the cloak
		  So swiftly as he ran.
		
		
		“O let me walk with thee, kind friend--
		  I grope, I fail, I fall,
		I have no lamp nor candle-light
		  And the night is over all.”
		
		“Full gladly, so thou make good speed,
		  I run to keep the tryst,
		That was given to me at the gates of Hell,
		  By sweet King Jesus Christ.”
		
		“I am the thief whom God forgave,
		  On Calvary’s bitter tree,
		For ‘To-night,’ He said, ‘thou shalt rest thine head
		  In Paradise, with Me.’”
		
		“And I am the man that sinned such a sin
		  As the world remembers not,
		That sold for a price the Lord of Life--
		  Judas Iscariot.”
		
		“Now God forbid, thou damnèd wretch,
		  That ever this should be,
		That I should tryst with Jesus Christ,
		  In the company of thee.”
		
		
		The first robber went his way,
		  And Judas walked alone,
		Mirk, mirk was the black midnight,
		  The heavy wind made moan.
		
		Right so there came a second man
		  Was walking by the road:
		“O brother, let me share thy light
		  As far as Hell’s abode.”
		
		“Now well I fear, my brother dear,
		  Thou never wilt walk with me--
		I am that thief which railed on Christ
		  All on His bitter tree.”
		
		“I cast shame on King Jesus then,
		  Wearing His painful crown,
		And scorn upon His Royal Head,
		  Whence the pale sweat dripped down.”
		
		“O rudd-red were the five blest wounds
		  Where nails and spear went in,
		A thousand, thousand years of Purgatory fire
		  Never can cleanse my sin.”
		
		
		“Why never, I ween,” said Judas then
		  “Did two such sinners meet;
		I sold King Christ to the bloody Jews
		  That pierced His Hands and Feet.”
		
		“Art thou that man,” quoth the robber,
		  “Most cursed under skies?
		God do so to me if I go with thee
		  To the gates of Paradise!”
		
		The second robber went his way,
		  And Judas walked alone,
		Till he was aware of a grey man,
		  That sat upon a stone,
		And the lamp he had in his right hand
		  Shone brighter than the moon.
		
		“Come hither, come hither, thou darkling man,
		  And bear me company,
		This lamp I hold will give us light,
		  Enough for thee and me.”
		
		Judas walks with the grey-clad man,
		  And fear is in his heart:
		“Speak yet again, thou man in grey
		  And tell me what thou art.”
		
		
		“I bought a burden of deadly sin,
		  And needs must pay the price,
		I bear it hither in my hand
		  To the gates of Paradise.”
		
		“Sin cannot lie upon thy heart
		  So heavy as on mine.”
		“Nay, sinner, whosoe’er thou art,
		  ’Tis a heavier load than thine.”
		He hath not askèd Judas’ name,
		  And Judas makes no sign.
		
		“If sin is heavy on thy heart,
		  And I must bear its weight,
		It is fit that we should go together
		  To tryst at Hades gate.”
		
		
		Judas walked with the grey-clad man
		  And feared to tell his name,
		He clasped his hand in the barren land,
		  Bright burned the lanthorn’s flame,
		Brotherliwise and hand in hand,
		  To Paradise they came.
		
		Satan looked out from Hades gate,
		  His hand upon the key,
		“Good souls, before I let you in,
		  First tell me who ye be.”
		
		“We be two men that died of late
		  And come to keep Hell’s tryst,
		This is Judas Iscariot,
		  And I am Jesus Christ.”


	17. THE LAST SONG

		The roadways of the blessed land
		  Are set with poplar trees,
		And when we ride beneath the morn
		The glad ears of the bearded corn
		  Are brushed against our knees.
		
		Look long. To-morrow we shall stand
		  Thronged in the dreadful street,
		And bloody hands of men o’erborne
		  Will clutch us by the feet.


	18. WAR-TIME

		The splendour of the year, no less
		Is on thy loveliness,
		The light in no less glory falls
		On thy unchanging walls
		Now, than in other days;
		No sorrow can displace
		The ordered beauty of thy face;
		Yet thou dost watch the water-ways
		For thy lost lovers, with a grave and panoplied distress;
		
		Like Iseult looking over-sea
		With wan face wearily
		Under the coils of braided gold
		Resplendent fold on fold,
		And girded queenliwise
		With jewels of rich price,
		With vair, and scarlet of fine dyes,
		But still with shadow-haunted eyes
		Straining to Tristram hard bested in far-off Brittany.


	19. WOMANLINESS

		The Master of the house came and sat him down to dine,
		And I served him on my bended knees with bread and meat and wine,
		With a peacock stuffed with peaches, in his pride for all to see,
		And the name of that resplendent dish was “Golden Flattery.”
		
		I served him with the bread of Toil, with meat of Strength and Sense,
		All on a fair white napkin of utter Reverence,
		With every course I brought him a gay and gilded cup
		Where God’s good wine of Laughter unceasing bubbled up.
		
		And well I know the banquet was all the heart could wish,
		For I served the Love I bore him as the salt with every dish,
		As salt to the meat, and as savour to the wine
		When my great Lord Paramount sat down to dine.


*** Delmore Schwartz (1913 - 1966)

	1. CALMLY WE WALK THROUGH THIS APRIL’S DAY

		Calmly we walk through this April’s day,
		Metropolitan poetry here and there,
		In the park sit pauper and rentier,
		The screaming children, the motor-car
		Fugitive about us, running away,
		Between the worker and the millionaire
		Number provides all distances,
		It is Nineteen Thirty-Seven now,
		Many great dears are taken away,
		What will become of you and me
		(This is the school in which we learn...)
		Besides the photo and the memory?
		(...that time is the fire in which we burn.)
		
		(This is the school in which we learn...)
		What is the self amid this blaze?
		What am I now that I was then
		Which I shall suffer and act again,
		The theodicy I wrote in my high school days
		Restored all life from infancy,
		The children shouting are bright as they run
		(This is the school in which they learn . . .)
		Ravished entirely in their passing play!
		(...that time is the fire in which they burn.)
		
		Avid its rush, that reeling blaze!
		Where is my father and Eleanor?
		Not where are they now, dead seven years,
		But what they were then?
		No more? No more?
		From Nineteen-Fourteen to the present day,
		Bert Spira and Rhoda consume, consume
		Not where they are now (where are they now?)
		But what they were then, both beautiful;
		
		Each minute bursts in the burning room,
		The great globe reels in the solar fire,
		Spinning the trivial and unique away.
		(How all things flash! How all things flare!)
		What am I now that I was then?
		May memory restore again and again
		The smallest color of the smallest day:
		Time is the school in which we learn,
		Time is the fire in which we burn.


	2. CAMBRIDGE, SPRING 1937

		At last the air fragrant, the bird’s bubbling whistle
		Succinct in the unknown unsettled trees:
		O little Charles, beside the Georgian colleges
		And milltown New England; at last the wind soft,
		The sky unmoving, and the dead look
		Of factory windows separate, at last,
		From windows gray and wet:
		for now the sunlight
		Thrashes its wet shellac on brickwalk and gutter,
		White splinters streak midmorning and doorstep,
		Winter passes as the lighted streetcar
		Moves at midnight, one scene of the past,
		Droll and unreal, stiff, stilted and hooded.


	3. FAITHFUL TO YOUR COMMANDS, O CONSCIOUSNESS

		Faithful to your commands, o consciousness, o
		
		Beating wings, I studied
		
		the roses and the muses of reality,
		
		the deceptions and the deceptive elation of the redness of the growing morning,
		
		and all the greened and thomed variety of the vines of error, which begin by promising
		
		Everything and more than everything, and then suddenly,
		
		At the height of noon seem to rise to the peak or dune-like moon of no return
		
		So that everything is or seems to have become nothing, or of no genuine importance:
		
		And it is not that the departure of hope or its sleep has made it inconceivable
		
		That anything should be or should have been important:
		
		It is the belief that hope itself was not, from the beginning,
		before believing, the most important of all beliefs.


	4. FOR THE ONE WHO WOULD TAKE MAN’S LIFE IN HIS HANDS

		Tiger Christ unsheathed his sword,
		Threw it down, became a lamb.
		Swift spat upon the species, but
		Took two women to his heart.
		Samson who was strong as death
		Paid his strength to kiss a slut.
		Othello that stiff warrior
		Was broken by a woman’s heart.
		Troy burned for a sea-tax, also for
		Possession of a charming whore.
		What do all examples show?
		What must the finished murderer know?
		
		You cannot sit on bayonets,
		Nor can you eat among the dead.
		When all are killed, you are alone,
		A vacuum comes where hate has fed.
		Murder’s fruit is silent stone,
		The gun increases poverty.
		With what do these examples shine?
		The soldier turned to girls and wine.
		Love is the tact of every good,
		The only warmth, the only peace.
		
		“What have I said?” asked Socrates.
		“Affirmed extremes, cried yes and no,
		Taken all parts, denied myself,
		Praised the caress, extolled the blow,
		Soldier and lover quite deranged
		Until their motions are exchanged.
		-What do all examples show?
		What can any actor know?
		The contradiction in every act,
		The infinite task of the human heart.”


	5. IN THE NAKED BED, IN PLATO’S CAVE

		In the naked bed, in Plato’s cave,
		Reflected headlights slowly slid the wall,
		Carpenters hammered under the shaded window,
		Wind troubled the window curtains all night long,
		A fleet of trucks strained uphill, grinding,
		Their freights covered, as usual.
		The ceiling lightened again, the slanting diagram
		Slid slowly forth.
		Hearing the milkman’s clop,
		his striving up the stair, the bottle’s chink,
		I rose from bed, lit a cigarette,
		And walked to the window. The stony street
		Displayed the stillness in which buildings stand,
		The street-lamp’s vigil and the horse’s patience.
		The winter sky’s pure capital
		Turned me back to bed with exhausted eyes.
		
		Strangeness grew in the motionless air. The loose
		Film grayed. Shaking wagons, hooves’ waterfalls,
		Sounded far off, increasing, louder and nearer.
		A car coughed, starting. Morning softly
		Melting the air, lifted the half-covered chair
		From underseas, kindled the looking-glass,
		Distinguished the dresser and the white wall.
		The bird called tentatively, whistled, called,
		Bubbled and whistled, so! Perplexed, still wet
		With sleep, affectionate, hungry and cold. So, so,
		O son of man, the ignorant night, the travail
		Of early morning, the mystery of the beginning
		Again and again,
		while history is unforgiven.


	6. NEWS OF THE GOLD WORLD OF MAY

		News of the Gold World of May in Holland Michigan:
		“Wooden shoes will clatter again
		on freshly scrubbed streets--”
		
		The tulip will arise and reign again from awnings and
		windows
		of all colors and forms
		its vine, verve and valentine curves
		
		upon the city streets, the public grounds
		and private lawns
		(wherever it is conceivable
		that a bulb might take root
		and the two lips, softly curved, come up
		possessed by the skilled love and will of a ballerina.)
		
		The citizens will dance in folk dances.
		They will thump, they will pump,
		thudding and shoving
		elbow and thigh,
		bumping and laughing, like barrels and bells.
		
		Vast fields of tulips in full bloom,
		the reproduction of a miniature Dutch village,
		part of a gigantic flower show.


	7. SPRING

		Spring has returned! Everything has returned!
		The earth, just like a schoolgirl, memorizes
		Poems, so many poems. ... Look, she has learned
		So many famous poems, she has earned so many prizes!
		
		Teacher was strict. We delighted in the white
		Of the old man’s beard, bright like the snow’s:
		Now we may ask which names are wrong, or right
		For “blue,” for “apple,” for “ripe.” She knows, she knows!
		
		Lucky earth, let out of school, now you must play
		Hide-and-seek with all the children every day:
		You must hide that we may seek you: we will! We will!
		
		The happiest child will hold you. She knows all the things
		You taught her: the word for “hope,” and for “believe,”
		Are still upon her tongue. She sings and sings and sings.


	8. THE FIRST NIGHT OF FALL AND FALLING RAIN

		The common rain had come again
		Slanting and colorless, pale and anonymous,
		Fainting falling in the first evening
		Of the first perception of the actual fall,
		The long and late light had slowly gathered up
		A sooty wood of clouded sky, dim and distant more and
		more
		Until, at dusk, the very sense of selfhood waned,
		A weakening nothing halted, diminished or denied or set
		aside,
		Neither tea, nor, after an hour, whiskey,
		Ice and then a pleasant glow, a burning,
		And the first leaping wood fire
		Since a cold night in May, too long ago to be more than
		Merely a cold and vivid memory.
		Staring, empty, and without thought
		Beyond the rising mists of the emotion of causeless
		sadness,
		How suddenly all consciousness leaped in spontaneous
		gladness,
		Knowing without thinking how the falling rain (outside, all
		over)
		In slow sustained consistent vibration all over outside
		Tapping window, streaking roof,
		running down runnel and drain
		Waking a sense, once more, of all that lived outside of us,
		Beyond emotion, for beyond the swollen
		distorted shadows and lights
		Of the toy town and the vanity fair
		of waking consciousness!


	9. THE HEAVY BEAR WHO GOES WITH ME

		_“the withness of the body”_ --Whitehead
		
		The heavy bear who goes with me,
		A manifold honey to smear his face,
		Clumsy and lumbering here and there,
		The central ton of every place,
		The hungry beating brutish one
		In love with candy, anger, and sleep,
		Crazy factotum, dishevelling all,
		Climbs the building, kicks the football,
		Boxes his brother in the hate-ridden city.
		
		Breathing at my side, that heavy animal,
		That heavy bear who sleeps with me,
		Howls in his sleep for a world of sugar,
		A sweetness intimate as the water’s clasp,
		Howls in his sleep because the tight-rope
		Trembles and shows the darkness beneath.
		--The strutting show-off is terrified,
		Dressed in his dress-suit, bulging his pants,
		Trembles to think that his quivering meat
		Must finally wince to nothing at all.
		
		That inescapable animal walks with me,
		Has followed me since the black womb held,
		Moves where I move, distorting my gesture,
		A caricature, a swollen shadow,
		A stupid clown of the spirit’s motive,
		Perplexes and affronts with his own darkness,
		The secret life of belly and bone,
		Opaque, too near, my private, yet unknown,
		Stretches to embrace the very dear
		With whom I would walk without him near,
		Touches her grossly, although a word
		Would bare my heart and make me clear,
		Stumbles, flounders, and strives to be fed
		Dragging me with him in his mouthing care,
		Amid the hundred million of his kind,
		the scrimmage of appetite everywhere.


*** Jaroslav Seifert (1901 - 1986)

	1. A SONG AT THE END

		Listen: about little Hendele.
		She came back to me yesterday
		and she was twenty-four already.
		And as graceful as Shulamite.
		
		She wore an ash-gray squirrel fur
		and a pert little cap
		and round her neck she’d tied a scarf
		the colour of pale smoke.
		
		Hendele, how well this suits you!
		I thought that you were dead
		and meanwhile you have grown more beautiful.
		I am glad you’ve come!
		
		How wrong you are, dear friend!
		I’ve been dead twenty years,
		and very well you know it.
		I’ve only come to meet you.


	2. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER

		All night rain lashed the windows.
		I couldn’t go to sleep.
		So I switched on the light
		and wrote a letter.
		
		If love could fly,
		as of course it can’t,
		and didn’t so often stay close to the ground,
		it would be delightful to be enveloped
		in its breeze.
		
		But like infuriated bees
		jealous kisses swarm down upon
		the sweetness of the female body
		and an impatient hand grasps
		whatever it can reach,
		and desire does not flag.
		Even death might be without terror
		at the moment of exultation.
		
		But who has ever calculated
		how much love goes
		into one pair of open arms!
		
		Letters to women
		I always sent by pigeon post.
		My conscience is clear.
		I never entrusted them to sparrowhawks
		or goshawks.
		
		Under my pen the verses dance no longer
		and like a tear in the corner of an eye
		the word hangs back.
		And all my life, at its end,
		is now only a fast journey on a train:
		
		I’m standing by the window of the carriage
		and day after day
		speeds back into yesterday
		to join the black mists of sorrow.
		At times I helplessly catch hold
		of the emergency brake.
		
		Perhaps I shall once more catch sight
		of a woman’s smile,
		trapped like a torn-off flower
		on the lashes of her eyes.
		Perhaps I may still be allowed
		to send those eyes at least one kiss
		before they’re lost to me in the dark.
		
		Perhaps once more I shall even see
		a slender ankle
		chiselled like a gem
		out of warm tenderness,
		so that I might once more
		half choke with longing.
		
		How much is there that man must leave behind
		as the train inexorably approaches
		Lethe Station
		with its plantations of shimmering asphodels
		amidst whose perfume everything is forgotten.
		Including human love.
		
		That is the final stop:
		the train goes no further.


	3. STRUGGLE WITH THE ANGEL

		God knows who first thought up
		that gloomy image
		and spoke of the dead
		as living shades
		straying about amongst us.
		
		And yet those shades are really here--
		you can’t miss them.
		Over the years I’ve gathered around me
		a numerous cluster.
		But it is I amidst them all
		who is straying.
		
		They’re dark
		and their muteness keeps time
		with my muteness
		when the evening’s closing in
		and I’m alone.
		Now and again they stay my writing hand
		when I’m not right,
		and blow away an evil thought
		that’s painful.
		
		Some of them are so dim
		and faded
		I’m losing sight of them in the distance.
		One of the shades, however, is rose-red
		and weeps.
		In every person’s life
		there comes a moment
		when everything suddenly goes black before his eyes
		and he longs passionately to take in his hands
		a smiling head.
		His heart wants to be tied
		to another heart,
		even by deep stitches,
		while his lips desire nothing more
		than to touch down on the spots where
		the midnight raven settled on Pallas Athene
		when uninvited it flew in to visit
		a melancholy poet.
		
		It is called love.
		All right,
		perhaps that’s what it is!
		But only rarely does it last for long,
		let alone unto death
		as in the case of swans.
		Often loves succeed each other
		like suits of cards in your hand.
		
		Sometimes it’s just a tremor of delight,
		more often long and bitter pain.
		At other times all sighs and tears.
		And sometimes even boredom.
		That’s the saddest kind.
		
		Some time in the past I saw a rose-red shade.
		It stood by the entrance to a house
		facing Prague’s railway station,
		eternally swathed in smoke.
		
		We used to sit there by the window.
		I held her delicate hands
		and talked of love.
		I’m good at that!
		She’s long been dead.
		The red lights were winking
		down by the track.
		
		As soon as the wind sprang up a little
		it blew away the grey veil
		and the rails glistened
		like the strings of some monstrous piano.
		At times you could also hear the whistle of steam
		and the puffing of engines
		as they carried off people’s wretched longings
		from the grimy platforms
		to all possible destinations.
		Sometimes they also carried away the dead
		returning to their homes
		and to their cemeteries.
		
		Now I know why it hurts so
		to tear hand from hand,
		lips from lips,
		when the stitches tear
		and the guard slams shut
		the last carriage door.
		
		Love’s an eternal struggle with the angel.
		From dawn to night.
		Without mercy.
		The opponent is often stronger.
		But woe to him
		who doesn’t realize
		that his angel has no wings
		and will not bless.


*** William Shakespeare (1564 - 1616)

	1. SONNET NO. 104

		To me fair friend you never can be old
		For as you were when first your eye I ey’d
		Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
		Have from the forests shook three summers’ pride
		Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn’d
		In process of the seasons have I seen
		Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn’d
		Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
		Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand
		Steal from his figure and no pace perceiv’d;
		So your sweet hue which methinks still doth stand
		Hath motion and mine eye may be deceiv’d:
		 For fear of which hear this thou age unbred:
		 Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.


	2. SONNET NO. 106

		When in the chronicle of wasted time
		I see descriptions of the fairest wights
		And beauty making beautiful old rime
		In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights
		Then in the blazon of sweet beauty’s best
		Of hand of foot of lip of eye of brow
		I see their antique pen would have express’d
		Even such a beauty as you master now.
		So all their praises are but prophecies
		Of this our time all you prefiguring;
		And for they looked but with divining eyes
		They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
		 For we which now behold these present days
		 Have eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise.


	3. SONNET NO. 116

		Let me not to the marriage of true minds
		Admit impediments. Love is not love
		Which alters when it alteration finds
		Or bends with the remover to remove:
		O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
		That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
		It is the star to every wandering bark
		Whose worth’s unknown although his height be taken.
		Love’s not Time’s fool though rosy lips and cheeks
		Within his bending sickle’s compass come;
		Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks
		But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
		 If this be error and upon me prov’d
		 I never writ nor no man ever lov’d.


	4. SONNET NO. 130

		My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;
		Coral is far more red than her lips red:
		If snow be white why then her breasts are dun;
		If hairs be wires black wires grow on her head.
		I have seen roses damask’d red and white
		But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
		And in some perfumes is there more delight
		Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
		I love to hear her speak yet well I know
		That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
		I grant I never saw a goddess go--
		My mistress when she walks treads on the ground:
		 And yet by heaven I think my love as rare
		 As any she belied with false compare.


	5. SONNET NO. 134

		So now I have confess’d that he is thine
		And I my self am mortgag’d to thy will
		Myself I’ll forfeit so that other mine
		Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
		But thou wilt not nor he will not be free
		For thou art covetous and he is kind;
		He learn’d but surety-like to write for me
		Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
		The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take
		Thou usurer that putt’st forth all to use
		And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
		So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
		 Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
		 He pays the whole and yet am I not free.


	6. SONNET NO. 138

		When my love swears that she is made of truth
		I do believe her though I know she lies
		That she might think me some untutor’d youth
		Unlearned in the world’s false subtleties.
		Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young
		Although she knows my days are past the best
		Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
		On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
		But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
		And wherefore say not I that I am old?
		O! love’s best habit is in seeming trust
		And age in love loves not to have years told:
		 Therefore I lie with her and she with me
		 And in our faults by lies we flatter’d be.


	7. SONNET NO. 18

		Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?
		Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
		Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May
		And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:
		Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines
		And often is his gold complexion dimm’d
		And every fair from fair sometime declines
		By chance or nature’s changing course untrimm’d:
		But thy eternal summer shall not fade
		Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st
		Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade
		When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st
		 So long as men can breathe or eyes can see
		 So long lives this and this gives life to thee.


	8. SONNET NO. 24

		Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath stell’d
		Thy beauty’s form in table of my heart;
		My body is the frame wherein ’tis held
		And perspective it is best painter’s art.
		For through the painter must you see his skill
		To find where your true image pictur’d lies
		Which in my bosom’s shop is hanging still
		That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
		Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
		Mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me
		Are windows to my breast where-through the sun
		Delights to peep to gaze therein on thee;
		 Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
		 They draw but what they see know not the heart.


	9. SONNET NO. 29

		When, in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes,
		I all alone beweep my outcast state,
		And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
		And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
		Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
		Featur’d like him, like him with friends possess’d,
		Desiring this man’s art and that man’s scope,
		With what I most enjoy contented least;
		Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
		Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
		Like to the lark at break of day arising
		From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate;
		For thy sweet love remember’d such wealth brings
		That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


	10. SONNET NO. 98

		From you have I been absent in the spring
		When proud-pied April dress’d in all his trim
		Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing
		That heavy Saturn laugh’d and leap’d with him.
		Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
		Of different flowers in odour and in hue
		Could make me any summer’s story tell
		Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
		Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white
		Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
		They were but sweet but figures of delight
		Drawn after you you pattern of all those.
		 Yet seem’d it winter still and you away
		 As with your shadow I with these did play.


*** Karl Shapiro (1913 - 2000)

	1. AUTO WRECK

		Its quick soft silver bell beating, beating,
		And down the dark one ruby flare
		Pulsing out red light like an artery,
		The ambulance at top speed floating down
		Past beacons and illuminated clocks
		Wings in a heavy curve, dips down,
		And brakes speed, entering the crowd.
		The doors leap open, emptying light;
		Stretchers are laid out, the mangled lifted
		And stowed into the little hospital.
		Then the bell, breaking the hush, tolls once.
		And the ambulance with its terrible cargo
		Rocking, slightly rocking, moves away,
		As the doors, an afterthought, are closed.
		
		We are deranged, walking among the cops
		Who sweep glass and are large and composed.
		One is still making notes under the light.
		One with a bucket douches ponds of blood
		Into the street and gutter.
		One hangs lanterns on the wrecks that cling,
		Empty husks of locusts, to iron poles.
		
		Our throats were tight as tourniquets,
		Our feet were bound with splints, but now,
		Like convalescents intimate and gauche,
		We speak through sickly smiles and warn
		With the stubborn saw of common sense,
		The grim joke and the banal resolution.
		The traffic moves around with care,
		But we remain, touching a wound
		That opens to our richest horror.
		Already old, the question _Who shall die?_
		Becomes unspoken _Who is innocent?_
		
		For death in war is done by hands;
		Suicide has cause and stillbirth, logic;
		And cancer, simple as a flower, blooms.
		But this invites the occult mind,
		Cancels our physics with a sneer,
		And spatters all we knew of denouement
		Across the expedient and wicked stones.


	2. GOING TO SCHOOL

		What shall I teach in the vivid afternoon 
		With the sun warming the blackboard and a slip 
		Of cloud catching my eye? 
		Only the cones and sections of the moon. 
		Out of some flaking page of scholarship, 
		Only some foolish heresy 
		To counteract the authority of prose. 
		The ink runs freely and the dry chalk flows 
		Into the silent night of seven slates 
		Where I create the universe as if 
		It grew out of some old rabbinic glyph 
		Or hung upon the necessity of Yeats. 
		
		O dry imaginations, drink this dust 
		That grays the room and powders my coat sleeve, 
		For in this shaft of light 
		I dance upon the intellectual crust 
		Of our own age and hold this make-believe 
		Like holy-work before your sight. 
		This is the list of books that time has burned, 
		These are the lines that only poets have learned, 
		The frame of dreams, the symbols that dilate; 
		Yet when I turn from this dark exercise 
		I meet your bright and world-considering eyes 
		That build and build and never can create.


	3. OCTOBER 1

			That season when the leaf deserts the bole
			And half-dead see-saws through the October air
			Falling face-downward on the walks to print
			The decalcomania of its little soul--
			Hardly has the milkman’s sleepy horse
			On wooden shoes echoed across the blocks
			When with its back jaws open like a dredge
		The van comes lumbering up the curb to someone’s door and knocks.
		
			And four black genii muscular and shy
			Holding their shy caps enter the first room
			Where someone hurriedly surrenders up
			The thickset chair, the mirror half awry,
			Then to their burdens stoop without a sound.
			One with his bare hands rends apart the bed,
			One stuffs the china-barrel with stale print,
		Two bear the sofa toward the door with dark funereal tread.
		
			The corner lamp, the safety eye of night,
			Enveloped in the sun blinks and goes blind
			And soon the early risers pick their way
			Through kitchenware and pillows bolt upright.
			The bureau on the sidewalk with bare back
			And wrinkling veneer is most disgraced,
			The sketch of Paris suffers in the wind;
		Only the bike, its nose against the wall, does not show haste.
		
			Two hours--the movers mop their necks and look,
			Filing through dust and echoes back and forth.
			The halls are hollow and all the floors are cleared
			Bare to the last board, to the most secret nook;
			But on the street a small chaos survives
			That slowly now the leviathan ingests,
			And schoolboys and stenographers stare at
		The truck, the house, the husband in his hat who stands and rests.
		
			He turns with miserable expectant face
			And for the last time enters. On the wall
			A picture-stain spreads from the nail-hole down.
			Each object live and dead has left its trace.
			He leaves his key; but as he quickly goes
			This question comes behind: Did someone die?
			Is someone rich or poor, better or worse?
		What shall uproot a house and bring this care into his eye?


	4. SCYROS

		_snuffle and snif and handkerchief_
		
			The doctor punched my vein
			The captain called me Cain
		Upon my belly sat the sow of fear
			With coins on either eye
			The President came by
		And whispered to the lords what none could hear
		
			High over where the storm
			Stood steadfast cruciform
		The golden eagle sank in wounded wheels
			White negroes laughing still
			Crept fiercely on Brazil
		Turning the navies upward on their keels
		
			Now one by one the trees
			Stripped to their naked knees
		To dance upon the heaps of shrunken dead
			The roof of England fell
			Great Paris tolled her bell
		And China staunched her milk and wept for bread
		
			No island singly lay
			But lost its name that day
		The Ainu dived across the plunging sands
			From dawn to dawn to dawn
			King George’s birds came on
		Strafing the tulips from his children’s hands
		
			Thus in the classic sea
			Southeast from Thessaly
		The dynamited mermen washed ashore
			And tritons dressed in steel
			Trolled heads with rod and reel
		And dredged potatoes from the Aegean floor
		
			Hot is the sky and green
			Where Germans have been seen
		The moon leaks metal on the Atlantic fields
			Pink boys in birthday shrouds
			Loop lightly through the clouds
		Or coast the peaks of Finland on their shields
		
			That prophet year by year
			Lay still but could not hear
		Where scholars tapped to find his new remains
			Gog and Magog ate pork
			In vertical New York
		And war began next Monday on the Danes


	5. THE LEG

		Among the iodoform, in twilight sleep,
		_What have I lost?_ he first inquires,
		Peers in the middle distance where a pain,
		Ghost of a nurse, hastily moves, and day,
		Her blinding presence pressing in his eyes
		And now his ears. They are handling him
		With rubber hands. He wants to get up.
		
		One day beside some flowers near his nose
		He will be thinking, _When will I look at it?_
		And pain, still in the middle distance, will reply,
		_At what?_ and he will know it’s gone,
		O where! and begin to tremble and cry.
		He will begin to cry as a child cries
		Whose puppy is mangled under a screaming wheel.
		
		Later, as if deliberately, his fingers
		Begin to explore the stump. He learns a shape
		That is comfortable and tucked in like a sock.
		This has a sense of humor, this can despise
		The finest surgical limb, the dignity of limping,
		The nonsense of wheel-chairs. Now he smiles to the wall:
		The amputation becomes an acquisition.
		
		For the leg is wondering where he is (all is not lost)
		And surely he has a duty to the leg;
		He is its injury, the leg is his orphan,
		He must cultivate the mind of the leg,
		Pray for the part that is missing, pray for peace
		In the image of man, pray, pray for its safety,
		And after a little it will die quietly.
		
		The body, what is it, Father, but a sign
		To love the force that grows us, to give back
		What in Thy palm is senselessness and mud?
		Knead, knead the substance of our understanding
		Which must be beautiful in flesh to walk,
		That if Thou take me angrily in hand
		And hurl me to the shark, I shall not die.


	6. WAITRESS

		Whoever with the compasses of his eyes
		Is plotting the voyage of your steady shape
		As you come laden through the room and back
		And rounding your even bottom like a Cape
		Crooks his first finger, whistles through his lip
		Till you arrive, all motion, like a ship,
		
		He is my friend--consider his dark pangs
		And love of Niger, naked indigence,
		Dance him the menu of a poem and squirm
		Deep in the juke-box jungle, green and dense.
		Surely he files his teeth, punctures his nose,
		Carves out the god and takes off all his clothes.
		
		For once, the token on the table’s edge
		Sufficing, proudly and with hair unpinned
		You mounted the blueplate, stretched out and grinned
		Like Christmas fish and turkey pink and skinned,
		Eyes on the half-shell, loin with parsley stuck,
		Thigh bones and ribs and little toes to suck.
		
		I speak to you, ports of the northern myth,
		This dame is carved and eaten. One by one,
		God knows what hour, her different parts go home,
		Lastly her pants, and day or night is done;
		But on the restaurant the sign of fear
		Reddens and blazes--“English spoken here.”


	7. WINTER IN CALIFORNIA

		It is winter in California, and outside
		Is like the interior of a florist shop:
		A chilled and moisture-laden crop
		Of pink camellias lines the path; and what
		Rare roses for a banquet or a bride,
		So multitudinous that they seem a glut!
		
		A line of snails crosses the golf-green lawn
		From the rosebushes to the ivy bed;
		An arsenic compound is distributed
		For them. The gardener will rake up the shells
		And leave in a corner of the patio
		The little mound of empty shells, like skulls.
		
		By noon the fog is burnt off by the sun
		And the world’s immensest sky opens a page
		For the exercise of a future age;
		Now jet planes draw straight lines, parabolas,
		And x’s, which the wind, before they’re done,
		Erases leisurely or pulls to fuzz.
		
		It is winter in the valley of the vine.
		The vineyards crucified on stakes suggest
		War cemeteries, but the fruit is pressed,
		The redwood vats are brimming in the shed,
		And on the sidings stand tank cars of wine,
		For which bright juice a billion grapes have bled.
		
		And skiers from the snow line driving home
		Descend through almond orchards, olive farms.
		Fig tree and palm tree--everything that warms
		The imagination of the wintertime.
		If the walls were older one would think of Rome:
		If the land were stonier one would think of Spain.
		
		But this land grows the oldest living things,
		Trees that were young when Pharoahs ruled the world,
		Trees whose new leaves are only just unfurled.
		Beautiful they are not; they oppress the heart
		With gigantism and with immortal wings;
		And yet one feels the sumptuousness of this dirt.
		
		It is raining in California, a straight rain
		Cleaning the heavy oranges on the bough,
		Filling the gardens till the gardens flow,
		Shining the olives, tiling the gleaming tile,
		Waxing the dark camellia leaves more green,
		Flooding the daylong valleys like the Nile.


*** Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792 - 1822)

	1. A LAMENT

		O world! O life! O time!
		On whose last steps I climb,
		Trembling at that where I had stood before;
		When will return the glory of your prime?
		No more--Oh, never more!
		
		Out of the day and night
		A joy has taken flight;
		Fresh spring, and summer, and winter hoar,
		Move my faint heart with grief, but with delight
		No more--Oh, never more!


	2. ART THOU PALE FOR WEARINESS

		Art thou pale for weariness
		Of climbing heaven and gazing on the earth,
		Wandering companionless
		Among the stars that have a different birth,
		And ever changing, like a joyless eye
		That finds no object worth its constancy?


	3. LOVE’S PHILOSOPHY

		The fountains mingle with the river
		  And the rivers with the ocean,
		The winds of heaven mix for ever
		  With a sweet emotion;
		Nothing in the world is single;
		  All things by a law divine
		In one spirit meet and mingle.
		  Why not I with thine?--
		
		See the mountains kiss high heaven
		  And the waves clasp one another;
		No sister-flower would be forgiven
		  If it disdained its brother;
		And the sunlight clasps the earth
		  And the moonbeams kiss the sea:
		What is all this sweet work worth
		  If thou kiss not me?


	4. MUSIC WHEN SOFT VOICES DIE

		Music, when soft voices die,
		Vibrates in the memory--
		Odours, when sweet violets sicken,
		Live within the sense they quicken.
		
		Rose leaves, when the rose is dead,
		Are heaped for the belovèd’s bed;
		And so thy thoughts, when thou art gone,
		Love itself shall slumber on.


	5. MUTABILITY

		The flower that smiles to-day
		         To-morrow dies;
		All that we wish to stay
		         Tempts and then flies.
		What is this world’s delight?
		Lightning that mocks the night,
		         Brief even as bright.
		
		  Virtue, how frail it is!
		         Friendship how rare!
		Love, how it sells poor bliss
		         For proud despair!
		But we, though soon they fall,
		Survive their joy, and all
		         Which ours we call.
		
		  Whilst skies are blue and bright,
		         Whilst flowers are gay,
		Whilst eyes that change ere night
		         Make glad the day;
		Whilst yet the calm hours creep,
		Dream thou--and from thy sleep
		         Then wake to weep.


	6. OZYMANDIAS

		I met a traveller from an antique land,
		Who said--“Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
		Stand in the desert. . . . Near them, on the sand,
		Half sunk a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
		And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
		Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
		Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
		The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed;
		And on the pedestal, these words appear:
		My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings;
		Look on my Works, ye Mighty, and despair!
		Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
		Of that colossal Wreck, boundless and bare
		The lone and level sands stretch far away.”


	7. STANZAS WRITTEN IN DEJECTION, NEAR NAPLES

		The sun is warm, the sky is clear,
		        The waves are dancing fast and bright,
		     Blue isles and snowy mountains wear
		     The purple noon’s transparent might,
		        The breath of the moist earth is light,
		     Around its unexpanded buds;
		        Like many a voice of one delight,
		     The winds, the birds, the ocean floods,
		The City’s voice itself, is soft like Solitude’s.
		
		        I see the Deep’s untrampled floor
		        With green and purple seaweeds strown;
		     I see the waves upon the shore,
		     Like light dissolved in star-showers, thrown:
		        I sit upon the sands alone,--
		     The lightning of the noontide ocean
		        Is flashing round me, and a tone
		     Arises from its measured motion,
		How sweet! did any heart now share in my emotion.
		
		        Alas! I have nor hope nor health,
		        Nor peace within nor calm around,
		     Nor that content surpassing wealth
		     The sage in meditation found,
		        And walked with inward glory crowned--
		     Nor fame, nor power, nor love, nor leisure.
		        Others I see whom these surround--
		     Smiling they live, and call life pleasure;
		To me that cup has been dealt in another measure.
		
		        Yet now despair itself is mild,
		        Even as the winds and waters are;
		     I could lie down like a tired child,
		     And weep away the life of care
		        Which I have borne and yet must bear,
		     Till death like sleep might steal on me,
		        And I might feel in the warm air
		     My cheek grow cold, and hear the sea
		Breathe o’er my dying brain its last monotony.
		
		        Some might lament that I were cold,
		        As I, when this sweet day is gone,
		     Which my lost heart, too soon grown old,
		     Insults with this untimely moan;
		        They might lament--for I am one
		     Whom men love not,--and yet regret,
		        Unlike this day, which, when the sun
		     Shall on its stainless glory set,
		Will linger, though enjoyed, like joy in memory yet.


	8. THE QUESTION

		I dreamed that, as I wandered by the way,
		Bare Winter suddenly was changed to Spring,
		And gentle odours led my steps astray,
		Mixed with a sound of waters murmuring
		Along a shelving bank of turf, which lay
		Under a copse, and hardly dared to fling
		Its green arms round the bosom of the stream,
		But kissed it and then fled, as thou mightest in dream.
		
		There grew pied wind-flowers and violets,
		Daisies, those pearled Arcturi of the earth,
		The constellated flower that never sets;
		Faint oxlips; tender bluebells, at whose birth
		The sod scarce heaved; and that tall flower that wets--
		Like a child, half in tenderness and mirth--
		Its mother’s face with Heaven’s collected tears,
		When the low wind, its playmate’s voice, it hears.
		
		And in the warm hedge grew lush eglantine,
		Green cowbind and the moonlight-coloured may,
		And cherry-blossoms, and white cups, whose wine
		Was the bright dew, yet drained not by the day;
		And wild roses, and ivy serpentine,
		With its dark buds and leaves, wandering astray;
		And flowers azure, black, and streaked with gold,
		Fairer than any wakened eyes behold.
		
		And nearer to the river’s trembling edge
		There grew broad flag-flowers, purple pranked with white,
		And starry river buds among the sedge,
		And floating water-lilies, broad and bright,
		Which lit the oak that overhung the hedge
		With moonlight beams of their own watery light;
		And bulrushes, and reeds of such deep green
		As soothed the dazzled eye with sober sheen.
		
		Methought that of these visionary flowers
		I made a nosegay, bound in such a way
		That the same hues, which in their natural bowers
		Were mingled or opposed, the like array
		Kept these imprisoned children of the Hours
		Within my hand,--and then, elate and gay,
		I hastened to the spot whence I had come,
		That I might there present it!--Oh! to whom?


	9. TIME LONG PAST

		Like the ghost of a dear friend dead
		Is Time long past.
		A tone which is now forever fled,
		A hope which is now forever past,
		A love so sweet it could not last,
		Was Time long past.
		
		There were sweet dreams in the night
		Of Time long past:
		And, was it sadness or delight,
		Each day a shadow onward cast
		Which made us wish it yet might last--
		That Time long past.
		
		There is regret, almost remorse,
		For Time long past.
		‘Tis like a child’s belovèd corse
		A father watches, till at last
		Beauty is like remembrance, cast
		From Time long past.


*** Charles Simic (1938 - )

	1. AGAINST WINTER

		The truth is dark under your eyelids.
		What are you going to do about it?
		The birds are silent; there’s no one to ask.
		All day long you’ll squint at the gray sky.
		When the wind blows you’ll shiver like straw.
		
		A meek little lamb you grew your wool
		Till they came after you with huge shears.
		Flies hovered over open mouth,
		Then they, too, flew off like the leaves,
		The bare branches reached after them in vain.
		
		Winter coming. Like the last heroic soldier
		Of a defeated army, you’ll stay at your post,
		Head bared to the first snow flake.
		Till a neighbor comes to yell at you,
		You’re crazier than the weather, Charlie.


	2. CLOUDS GATHERING

		It seemed the kind of life we wanted.
		Wild strawberries and cream in the morning.
		Sunlight in every room.
		The two of us walking by the sea naked.
		
		Some evenings, however, we found ourselves
		Unsure of what comes next.
		Like tragic actors in a theater on fire,
		With birds circling over our heads,
		The dark pines strangely still,
		Each rock we stepped on bloodied by the sunset.
		
		We were back on our terrace sipping wine.
		Why always this hint of an unhappy ending?
		Clouds of almost human appearance
		Gathering on the horizon, but the rest lovely
		With the air so mild and the sea untroubled.
		
		The night suddenly upon us, a starless night.
		You lighting a candle, carrying it naked
		Into our bedroom and blowing it out quickly.
		The dark pines and grasses strangely still.


	3. EYES FASTENED WITH PINS

		How much death works,
		No one knows what a long
		Day he puts in. The little
		Wife always alone
		Ironing death’s laundry.
		The beautiful daughters
		Setting death’s supper table.
		The neighbors playing
		Pinochle in the backyard
		Or just sitting on the steps
		Drinking beer. Death,
		Meanwhile, in a strange
		Part of town looking for
		Someone with a bad cough,
		But the address somehow wrong,
		Even death can’t figure it out
		Among all the locked doors . . .
		And the rain beginning to fall.
		Long windy night ahead.
		Death with not even a newspaper
		To cover his head, not even
		A dime to call the one pining away,
		Undressing slowly, sleepily,
		And stretching naked
		On death’s side of the bed.


	4. INNER MAN

		It isn’t the body
		That’s a stranger.
		It’s someone else.
		
		We poke the same
		Ugly mug
		At the world.
		When I scratch
		He scratches too.
		
		There are women
		Who claim to have held him.
		A dog
		Follows me about.
		It might be his.
		
		If I’m quiet, he’s quieter.
		So I forget him.
		Yet, as I bend down
		To tie my shoelaces,
		He’s standing up.
		
		We caste a single shadow.
		Whose shadow?
		
		I’d like to say:
		“He was un the beginning
		And he’ll be in the end,”
		But one can’t be sure.
		
		At night
		As I sit
		Shuffling the cards of our silence,
		I say to him:
		
		“Though you utter
		Every one of my words,
		You are a stranger.
		It’s time you spoke.”


	5. THE BATHER

		Where the path to the lake twists out of sight,
		A puff of dust, the kind bare feet make running,
		Is what I saw in the dying light,
		Night swooping down everywhere else.
		
		A low branch heavy with leaves
		Swaying momentarily where the shade
		Lay thickest, some late bather
		Disrobing right there for a quick dip--
		
		(Or my solitude playing a trick on me?)
		Pinned hair coming undone, soon to float
		As she turns on her back, letting
		The dozy current take her as it wishes
		
		Beyond the last drooping branch
		To where the sky opens
		Black as the water under her white arms,
		In the deepening night, deepening hush,
		
		The treetops like charred paper edges,
		Even the insects oddly reclusive
		While I strained to hear a splash,
		Or glimpse her running back to her clothes . . .
		
		And when I did not; I just sat there.
		The rare rush of wind in the leaves
		Still fooling me now and then,
		Until the chill made me go in.


	6. THE INITIATE

		St. John of the Cross wore dark glasses
		As he passed me on the street.
		St. Theresa of Avila, beautiful and grave,
		Turned her back on me.
		
		“Soulmate,“ they hissed. “It’s high time.”
		
		I was a blind child, a wind-up toy . . .
		I was one of death’s juggling red balls
		On a certain street corner
		Where they peddle things out of suitcases.
		
		The city like a huge cinema
		With lights dimmed.
		The performance already started.
		
		So many blurred faces in a complicated plot.
		
		The great secret which kept eluding me: knowing who I am . . .
		
		The Redeemer and the Virgin,
		Their eyes wide open in the empty church
		Where the killer came to hide himself . . .
		
		The new snow on the sidewalk bore footprints
		That could have been made by bare feet.
		Some unknown penitent guiding me.
		In truth, I didn’t know where I was going.
		My feet were frozen,
		My stomach growled.
		
		Four young hoods blocking my way.
		Three deadpan, one smiling crazily.
		
		I let them have my black raincoat.
		
		Thinking constantly of the Divine Love
		and the Absolute had disfigured me.
		People mistook me for someone else.
		I heard voices after me calling out unknown names.
		“I’m searching for someone to sell my soul to,”
		The drunk who followed me whispered,
		While appraising me from head to foot.
		
		At the address I had been given.
		The building had large X’s over its windows.
		I knocked but no one came to open.
		By and by a black girl joined me on the steps.
		She banged at the door till her fist hurt.
		
		Her name was Alma, a propitious sign.
		She knew someone who solved life’s riddles
		In a voice of an ancient Sumerian queen.
		We had a long talk about that
		While shivering and stamping our wet feet.
		
		It was necessary to stay calm, I explained,
		Even with the earth trembling,
		And to continue to watch oneself
		As if one were a complete stranger.
		
		Once in Chicago, for instance,
		I caught sight of a man in a shaving mirror
		Who had my naked shoulders and face,
		But whose eyes terrified me!
		Two hard staring, all-knowing eyes!
		
		After we parted, the night, the cold, and the endless walking
		Brought on a kind of ecstasy.
		I went as if pursued, trying to warm myself.
		
		There was the East River; there was the Hudson.
		Their waters shone like oil in sanctuary lamps.
		
		Something supreme was occurring
		For which there will never be any words.
		
		The sky was full of racing clouds and tall buildings,
		Whirling and whirling silently.
		
		In that whole city you could hear a pin drop.
		Believe me.
		I thought I heard a pin drop and I went looking for it.


	7. THIS MORNING

		Enter without knocking, hard-working ant.
		I’m just sitting here mulling over
		What to do this dark, overcast day?
		It was a night of the radio turned down low,
		Fitful sleep, vague, troubling dreams.
		I woke up lovesick and confused.
		I thought I heard Estella in the garden singing
		And some bird answering her,
		But it was the rain. Dark tree tops swaying
		And whispering. “Come to me my desire,”
		I said. And she came to me by and by,
		Her breath smelling of mint, her tongue
		Wetting my cheek, and then she vanished.
		Slowly day came, a gray streak of daylight
		To bathe my hands and face in.
		Hours passed, and then you crawled
		Under the door, and stopped before me.
		You visit the same tailors the mourners do,
		Mr. Ant. I like the silence between us,
		The quiet--that holy state even the rain
		Knows about. Listen to her begin to fall,
		As if with eyes closed,
		Muting each drop in her wild-beating heart.


*** Edith Sitwell (1887 - 1964)

	1. BY THE LAKE

		ACROSS the flat and the pastel snow
		Two people go . . . . ‘And do you remember
		When last we wandered this shore?’ . . . ‘Ah no!
		For it is cold-hearted December.’
		‘Dead, the leaves that like asses’s ears hung on the trees
		When last we wandered and squandered joy here;
		Now Midas your husband will listen for these
		Whispers--these tears for joy’s bier.’
		And as they walk, they seem tall pagodas;
		And all the ropes let down from the cloud
		Ring the hard cold bell-buds upon the trees--codas
		Of overtones, ecstasies, grown for love’s shroud


	2. STILL FALLS THE RAIN

		Still falls the Rain--
		Dark as the world of man, black as our loss--
		Blind as the nineteen hundred and forty nails
		Upon the Cross.
		
		Still falls the Rain
		With a sound like the pulse of the heart that is changed to the hammer-beat
		In the Potter’s Field, and the sound of the impious feet
		
		On the Tomb:
		Still falls the Rain
		
		In the Field of Blood where the small hopes breed and the human brain
		Nurtures its greed, that worm with the brow of Cain.
		
		Still falls the Rain
		At the feet of the Starved Man hung upon the Cross.
		Christ that each day, each night, nails there, have mercy on us--
		On Dives and on Lazarus:
		Under the Rain the sore and the gold are as one.
		
		Still falls the Rain--
		Still falls the Blood from the Starved Man’s wounded Side:
		He bears in His Heart all wounds,--those of the light that died,
		The last faint spark
		In the self-murdered heart, the wounds of the sad uncomprehending dark,
		The wounds of the baited bear--
		The blind and weeping bear whom the keepers beat
		On his helpless flesh . . . the tears of the hunted hare.
		
		Still falls the Rain--
		Then-- O Ile leape up to my God: who pulles me doune--
		See, see where Christ’s blood streames in the firmament:
		It flows from the Brow we nailed upon the tree
		
		Deep to the dying, to the thirsting heart
		That holds the fires of the world,--dark-smirched with pain
		As Caesar’s laurel crown.
		
		Then sounds the voice of One who like the heart of man
		Was once a child who among beasts has lain--
		“Still do I love, still shed my innocent light, my Blood, for thee.”


	3. WHEN COLD DECEMBER

		WHEN cold December
		Froze to grisamber
		The jangling bells on the sweet rose-trees--
		Then fading slow
		And furred is the snow
		As the almond’s sweet husk--
		And smelling like musk.
		The snow amygdaline
		Under the eglantine
		Where the bristling stars shine
		Like a gilt porcupine--
		The snow confesses
		The little Princesses
		On their small chioppines
		Dance under the orpines.
		See the casuistries
		Of their slant fluttering eyes--
		Gilt as the zodiac
		(Dancing Herodiac).
		Only the snow slides
		Like gilded myrrh--
		From the rose-branches--hides
		Rose-roots that stir.


*** Kenneth Slessor (1901 - 1971)

	1. BEACH BURIAL

		Softly and humbly to the Gulf of Arabs
		The convoys of dead sailors come;
		At night they sway and wander in the waters far under,
		But morning rolls them in the foam.
		
		Between the sob and clubbing of gunfire
		Someone, it seems, has time for this,
		To pluck them from the shallows and bury them in burrows
		And tread the sand upon their nakedness;
		
		And each cross, the driven stake of tidewood,
		Bears the last signature of men,
		Written with such perplexity, with such bewildered pity,
		The words choke as they begin--
		
		“Unknown seaman”--the ghostly pencil
		Wavers and fades, the purple drips,
		The breath of wet season has washed their inscriptions
		As blue as drowned men’s lips,
		
		Dead seamen, gone in search of the same landfall,
		Whether as ememies they fought,
		Or fought with us, or neither; the sand joins them together,
		Enlisted on the other front.


	2. FIVE BELLS

		Time that is moved by little fidget wheels
		Is not my time, the flood that does not flow.
		Between the double and the single bell
		Of a ship’s hour, between a round of bells
		From the dark warship riding there below,
		I have lived many lives, and this one life
		Of Joe, long dead, who lives between five bells.
		
		Deep and dissolving verticals of light
		Ferry the falls of moonshine down. Five bells
		Coldly rung out in a machine’s voice. Night and water
		Pour to one rip of darkness, the Harbour floats
		In the air, the Cross hangs upside-down in water.
		
		Why do I think of you, dead man, why thieve
		These profitless lodgings from the flukes of thought
		Anchored in Time? You have gone from earth,
		Gone even from the meaning of a name;
		Yet something’s there, yet something forms its lips
		And hits and cries against the ports of space,
		Beating their sides to make its fury heard.
		
		Are you shouting at me, dead man, squeezing your face
		In agonies of speech on speechless panes?
		Cry louder, beat the windows, bawl your name!
		
		But I hear nothing, nothing...only bells,
		Five bells, the bumpkin calculus of Time.
		Your echoes die, your voice is dowsed by Life,
		There’s not a mouth can fly the pygmy strait -
		Nothing except the memory of some bones
		Long shoved away, and sucked away, in mud;
		And unimportant things you might have done,
		Or once I thought you did; but you forgot,
		And all have now forgotten - looks and words
		And slops of beer; your coat with buttons off,
		Your gaunt chin and pricked eye, and raging tales
		Of Irish kings and English perfidy,
		And dirtier perfidy of publicans
		Groaning to God from Darlinghurst.
		Five bells.
		
		Then I saw the road, I heard the thunder
		Tumble, and felt the talons of the rain
		The night we came to Moorebank in slab-dark,
		So dark you bore no body, had no face,
		But a sheer voice that rattled out of air
		(As now you’d cry if I could break the glass),
		A voice that spoke beside me in the bush,
		Loud for a breath or bitten off by wind,
		Of Milton, melons, and the Rights of Man,
		And blowing flutes, and how Tahitian girls
		Are brown and angry-tongued, and Sydney girls
		Are white and angry-tongued, or so you’d found.
		But all I heard was words that didn’t join
		So Milton became melons, melons girls,
		And fifty mouths, it seemed, were out that night,
		And in each tree an Ear was bending down,
		Or something that had just run, gone behind the grass,
		When blank and bone-white, like a maniac’s thought,
		The naphtha-flash of lightning slit the sky,
		Knifing the dark with deathly photographs.
		There’s not so many with so poor a purse
		Or fierce a need, must fare by night like that,
		Five miles in darkness on a country track,
		But when you do, that’s what you think.
		Five bells.
		
		In Melbourne, your appetite had gone,
		Your angers too; they had been leeched away
		By the soft archery of summer rains
		And the sponge-paws of wetness, the slow damp
		That stuck the leaves of living, snailed the mind,
		And showed your bones, that had been sharp with rage,
		The sodden ectasies of rectitude.
		I thought of what you’d written in faint ink,
		Your journal with the sawn-off lock, that stayed behind
		With other things you left, all without use,
		All without meaning now, except a sign
		That someone had been living who now was dead:
		“At Labassa. Room 6 x 8
		On top of the tower; because of this, very dark
		And cold in winter. Everything has been stowed
		Into this room--500 books all shapes
		And colours, dealt across the floor
		And over sills and on the laps of chairs;
		Guns, photoes of many differant things
		And differant curioes that I obtained...”
		
		In Sydney, by the spent aquarium-flare
		Of penny gaslight on pink wallpaper,
		We argued about blowing up the world,
		But you were living backward, so each night
		You crept a moment closer to the breast,
		And they were living, all of them, those frames
		And shapes of flesh that had perplexed your youth,
		And most your father, the old man gone blind,
		With fingers always round a fiddle’s neck,
		That graveyard mason whose fair monuments
		And tablets cut with dreams of piety
		Rest on the bosoms of a thousand men
		Staked bone by bone, in quiet astonishment
		At cargoes they had never thought to bear,
		These funeral-cakes of sweet and sculptured stone.
		
		Where have you gone? The tide is over you,
		The turn of midnight water’s over you,
		As Time is over you, and mystery,
		And memory, the flood that does not flow.
		You have no suburb, like those easier dead
		In private berths of dissolution laid--
		The tide goes over, the waves ride over you
		And let their shadows down like shining hair,
		But they are Water; and the sea-pinks bend
		Like lilies in your teeth, but they are Weed;
		And you are only part of an Idea.
		I felt the wet push its black thumb-balls in,
		The night you died, I felt your eardrums crack,
		And the short agony, the longer dream,
		The Nothing that was neither long nor short;
		But I was bound, and could not go that way,
		But I was blind, and could not feel your hand.
		If I could find an answer, could only find
		Your meaning, or could say why you were here
		Who now are gone, what purpose gave you breath
		Or seized it back, might I not hear your voice?
		
		I looked out my window in the dark
		At waves with diamond quills and combs of light
		That arched their mackerel-backs and smacked the sand
		In the moon’s drench, that straight enormous glaze,
		And ships far off asleep, and Harbour-buoys
		Tossing their fireballs wearily each to each,
		And tried to hear your voice, but all I heard
		Was a boat’s whistle, and the scraping squeal
		Of seabirds’ voices far away, and bells,
		Five bells. Five bells coldly ringing out.
		Five bells.


	3. MANGROVES

		These black bush-waters, heavy with crusted boughs
		Like plumes above dead captains, wake the mind . . .
		Uncounted kissing, unremembered vows,
		Nights long forgotten, moons too dark to find,
		Or stars too cold . . . all quick things that have fled
		Whilst these old bubbles uprise in older stone,
		Return like pale dead faces of children dead,
		Staring unfelt through doors for ever unknown.
		
		O silent ones that drink these timeless pools,
		Eternal brothers, bending so deeply over,
		Your branches tremble above my tears again...
		And even my songs are stolen from some old lover
		Who cried beneath your leaves like other fools,
		While still they whisper “in vain . . .
		in vain . . . in vain . . .”


	4. WILD GRAPES

		The old orchard, full of smoking air,
		Full of sour marsh and broken boughs, is there,
		But kept no more by vanished Mulligans,
		Or Hartigans, long drowned in earth themselves,
		Who gave this bitter fruit their care.
		
		Here’s where the cherries grew that birds forgot,
		And apples bright as dogstars; now there is not
		An apple or a cherry; only grapes,
		But wild ones, Isabella grapes they’re called,
		Small, pointed, black, like boughs of musket-shot.
		
		Eating their flesh, half-savage with black fur.
		Acid and gipsy-sweet, I thought of her,
		Isabella, the dead girl, who has lingered on
		Defiantly when all have gone away,
		In an old orchard where swallows never stir.
		
		Isabella grapes, outlaws of a strange bough,
		That in their harsh sweetness remind me somehow
		Of dark hair swinging and silver pins,
		A girl half-fierce, half-melting, as these grapes,
		Kissed here--or killed here--but who remembers now?


	5. WINTER DAWN

		At five I wake, rise, rub on the smoking pane
		A port to see—water breathing in the air,
		Boughs broken. The sun comes up in a golden stain,
		Floats like a glassy sea-fruit. There is mist everywhere,
		White and humid, and the Harbour is like plated stone,
		Dull flakes of ice. One light drips out alone,
		One bead of winter-red, smouldering in the steam,
		Quietly over the roof-tops—another window
		Touched with a crystal fire in the sun’s gullies,
		One lonely star of the morning, where no stars gleam.
		
		Far away on the rim of this great misty cup,
		The sun gilds the dead suburbs as he rises up,
		Diamonds the wind-cocks, makes glitter the crusted spikes
		On moss-drowned gables. Now the tiles drip scarlet-wet,
		Swim like birds’ paving-stones, and sunlight strikes
		Their watery mirrors with a moister rivulet,
		Acid and cold. Here lie those mummied Kings,
		Men sleeping in houses, embalmed in stony coffins,
		Till the Last Trumpet calls their galleries up,
		And the suburbs rise with distant murmurings.
		
		O buried dolls, O men sleeping invisible there,
		I stare above your mounds of stone, lean down,
		Marooned and lonely in this bitter air,
		And in one moment deny your frozen town,
		Renounce your bodies—earth falls in clouds away,
		Stones lose their meaning, substance is lost in clay,
		Roofs fade, and that small smoking forgotten heap,
		The city, dissolves to a shell of bricks and paper,
		Empty, without purpose, a thing not comprehended,
		A broken tomb, where ghosts unknown sleep.
		
		And the least crystal weed, shaken with frost,
		The furred herbs of silver, the daisies round-eyed and tart,
		Painted in antic china, the smallest night-flower tossed
		Like a bright penny on the lawn, stirs more my heart,
		Strikes deeper this morning air, than mortal towers
		Dried to a common blindness, fainter than flowers,
		Fordone, extinguished, as the vapours break,
		And dead in the dawn. O Sun that kills with life,
		And brings to breath all silent things—O Dawn,
		Waken me with old earth, keep me awake!


*** Clark Ashton Smith (1893 - 1961)

	1. APOLOGIA

		O gentlest love, I have not played
		For you upon the lute of jade;
		Nor on that fabulous bassoon
		Wrought from the horns of minotaurs,
		And set with subtly changing spars
		And lucid metals of the moon--
		
		The thing my childish fingers found
		Cast on a god-frequented ground,
		And unto whose compelling note
		Sprang the brown dryad from her tree,
		And palest vampires came to me
		With limbs more sweet than trodden lote.
		
		I have not made such melodies
		As call the philtered sorceries:
		But I will weave, some autumn day,
		A song to make your beauty mine—
		Wrought not with mystical design
		And chords of passionate dismay.
		
		For I will tell, with wonted words,
		A tale of two that autumn birds
		Had led beneath oblivious skies,
		Who plucked the wilding asters rare,
		And peered from grasses like your hair
		To distance blue as your blue eyes.


	2. REMEMBERED LIGHT

		The years are a falling of snow,
		Slow, but without cessation,
		On hills and mountains and flowers and worlds that were;
		But snow and the crawling night in which it fell
		May be washed away in one swifter hour of flame.
		Thus it was that some slant of sunset
		In the chasms of piled cloud--
		Transient mountains that made a new horizon,
		Uplifting the west to fantastic pinnacles--
		Smote warm in a buried realm of the spirit,
		Till the snows of forgetfulness were gone.
		
		Clear in the vistas of memory,
		The peaks of a world long unremembered,
		Soared further than clouds, but fell not,
		Based on hills that shook not nor melted
		With that burden enormous, hardly to be believed.
		Rent with stupendous chasms,
		Full of an umber twilight,
		I beheld that larger world.
		
		Bright was the twilight, sharp like ethereal wine
		Above, but low in the clefts it thickened,
		Dull as with duskier tincture.


	3. THE HASHISH-EATER

		Bow down: I am the emperor of dreams;
		I crown me with the million-colored sun
		Of secret worlds incredible, and take
		Their trailing skies for vestment when I soar,
		Throned on the mounting zenith, and illume
		The spaceward-flown horizons infinite.
		Like rampant monsters roaring for their glut,
		The fiery-crested oceans rise and rise,
		By jealous moons maleficently urged
		To follow me for ever; mountains horned
		With peaks of sharpest adamant, and mawed
		With sulphur-lit volcanoes lava-langued,
		Usurp the skies with thunder, but in vain;
		And continents of serpent-shapen trees,
		With slimy trunks that lengthen league by league,
		Pursue my flight through ages spurned to fire
		By that supreme ascendance; sorcerers,
		And evil kings, predominanthly armed
		With scrolls of fulvous dragon-skin whereon
		Are worm-like runes of ever-twisting flame,
		Would stay me; and the sirens of the stars,
		With foam-like songs from silver fragrance wrought,
		Would lure me to their crystal reefs; and moons
		Where viper-eyed, senescent devils dwell,
		With antic gnomes abominably wise,
		Heave up their icy horns across my way.
		But naught deters me from the goal ordained
		By suns and eons and immortal wars,
		And sung by moons and motes; the goal whose name
		Is all the secret of forgotten glyphs
		By sinful gods in torrid rubies writ
		For ending of a brazen book; the goal
		Whereat my soaring ecstasy may stand
		In amplest heavens multiplied to hold
		My hordes of thunder-vested avatars,
		And Promethèan armies of my thought,
		That brandish claspèd levins. There I call
		My memories, intolerably clad
		In light the peaks of paradise may wear,
		And lead the Armageddon of my dreams
		Whose instant shout of triumph is become
		Immensity’s own music: for their feet
		Are founded on innumerable worlds,
		Remote in alien epochs, and their arms
		Upraised, are columns potent to exalt
		With ease ineffable the countless thrones
		Of all the gods that are or gods to be,
		And bear the seats of Asmodai and Set
		Above the seventh paradise.
		
		Supreme
		In culminant omniscience manifold,
		And served by senses multitudinous,
		Far-posted on the shifting walls of time,
		With eyes that roam the star-unwinnowed fields
		Of utter night and chaos, I convoke
		The Babel of their visions, and attend
		At once their myriad witness. I behold
		In Ombos, where the fallen Titans dwell,
		With mountain-builded walls, and gulfs for moat,
		The secret cleft that cunning dwarves have dug
		Beneath an alp-like buttress; and I list,
		Too late, the clam of adamantine gongs
		Dinned by their drowsy guardians, whose feet
		Have fell the wasp-like sting of little knives
		Embrued With slobber of the basilisk
		Or the pail Juice of wounded upas. In
		Some red Antarean garden-world, I see
		The sacred flower with lips of purple flesh,
		And silver-Lashed, vermilion-lidded eyes
		Of torpid azure; whom his furtive priests
		At moonless eve in terror seek to slay
		With bubbling grails of sacrificial blood
		That hide a hueless poison. And I read
		Upon the tongue of a forgotten sphinx,
		The annulling word a spiteful demon wrote
		In gall of slain chimeras; and I know
		What pentacles the lunar wizards use,
		That once allured the gulf-returning roc,
		With ten great wings of furlèd storm, to pause
		Midmost an alabaster mount; and there,
		With boulder-weighted webs of dragons’ gut
		Uplift by cranes a captive giant built,
		They wound the monstrous, moonquake-throbbing bird,
		And plucked from off his saber-taloned feet
		Uranian sapphires fast in frozen blood,
		And amethysts from Mars. I lean to read
		With slant-lipped mages, in an evil star,
		The monstrous archives of a war that ran
		Through wasted eons, and the prophecy
		Of wars renewed, which shall commemorate
		Some enmity of wivern-headed kings
		Even to the brink of time. I know the blooms
		Of bluish fungus, freaked with mercury,
		That bloat within the creators of the moon,
		And in one still, selenic and fetor; and I know
		What clammy blossoms, blanched and cavern-grown,
		Are proffered to their gods in Uranus
		By mole-eyed peoples; and the livid seed
		Of some black fruit a king in Saturn ate,
		Which, cast upon his tinkling palace-floor,
		Took root between the burnished flags, and now
		Hath mounted and become a hellish tree,
		Whose lithe and hairy branches, lined with mouths,
		Net like a hundred ropes his lurching throne,
		And strain at starting pillars. I behold
		The slowly-thronging corals that usurp
		Some harbour of a million-masted sea,
		And sun them on the league-long wharves of gold--
		Bulks of enormous crimson, kraken-limbed
		And kraken-headed, lifting up as crowns
		The octiremes of perished emperors,
		And galleys fraught with royal gems, that sailed
		From a sea-fled haven.
		
		Swifter and stranger grow
		The visions: now a mighty city looms,
		Hewn from a hill of purest cinnabar
		To domes and turrets like a sunrise thronged
		With tier on tier of captive moons, half-drowned
		In shifting erubescence. But whose hands
		Were sculptors of its doors, and columns wrought
		To semblance of prodigious blooms of old,
		No eremite hath lingered there to say,
		And no man comes to learn: for long ago
		A prophet came, warning its timid king
		Against the plague of lichens that had crept
		Across subverted empires, and the sand
		Of wastes that cyclopean mountains ward;
		Which, slow and ineluctable, would come
		To take his fiery bastions and his fanes,
		And quench his domes with greenish tetter. Now
		I see a host of naked gents, armed
		With horns of behemoth and unicorn,
		Who wander, blinded by the clinging spells
		O hostile wizardry, and stagger on
		To forests where the very leaves have eyes,
		And ebonies like wrathful dragons roar
		To teaks a-chuckle in the loathly gloom;
		Where coiled lianas lean, with serried fangs,
		From writhing palms with swollen boles that moan;
		Where leeches of a scarlet moss have sucked
		The eyes of some dead monster, and have crawled
		To bask upon his azure-spotted spine;
		Where hydra-throated blossoms hiss and sing,
		Or yawn with mouths that drip a sluggish dew
		Whose touch is death and slow corrosion. Then
		I watch a war of pygmies, met by night,
		With pitter of their drums of parrot’s hide,
		On plains with no horizon, where a god
		Might lose his way for centuries; and there,
		In wreathèd light and fulgors all convolved,
		A rout of green, enormous moons ascend,
		With rays that like a shivering venom run
		On inch-long swords of lizard-fang.
		
		Surveyed
		From this my throne, as from a central sun,
		The pageantries of worlds and cycles pass;
		Forgotten splendors, dream by dream, unfold
		Like tapestry, and vanish; violet suns,
		Or suns of changeful iridescence, bring
		Their rays about me like the colored lights
		Imploring priests might lift to glorify
		The face of some averted god; the songs
		Of mystic poets in a purple world
		Ascend to me in music that is made
		From unconceivèd perfumes and the pulse
		Of love ineffable; the lute-players
		Whose lutes are strung with gold of the utmost moon,
		Call forth delicious languors, never known
		Save to their golden kings; the sorcerers
		Of hooded stars inscrutable to God,
		Surrender me their demon-wrested scrolls,
		lnscribed with lore of monstrous alchemies
		And awful transformations.
		
		If I will
		I am at once the vision and the seer,
		And mingle with my ever-streaming pomps,
		And still abide their suzerain: I am
		The neophyte who serves a nameless god,
		Within whose fane the fanes of Hecatompylos
		Were arks the Titan worshippers might bear,
		Or flags to pave the threshold; or I am
		The god himself, who calls the fleeing clouds
		Into the nave where suns might congregate
		And veils the darkling mountain of his face
		With fold on solemn fold; for whom the priests
		Amass their monthly hecatomb of gems
		Opals that are a camel-cumbering load,
		And monstrous alabraundines, won from war
		With realms of hostile serpents; which arise,
		Combustible, in vapors many-hued
		And myrrh-excelling perfumes. It is I,
		The king, who holds with scepter-dropping hand
		The helm of some great barge of orichalchum,
		Sailing upon an amethystine sea
		To isles of timeless summer: for the snows
		Of Hyperborean winter, and their winds,
		Sleep in his jewel-builded capital,
		Nor any charm of flame-wrought wizardry,
		Nor conjured suns may rout them; so he fees,
		With captive kings to urge his serried oars,
		Hopeful of dales where amaranthine dawn
		Hath never left the faintly sighing lote
		And lisping moly. Firm of heart, I fare
		Impanoplied with azure diamond,
		As hero of a quest Achernar lights,
		To deserts filled with ever-wandering flames
		That feed upon the sullen marl, and soar
		To wrap the slopes of mountains, and to leap
		With tongues intolerably lengthening
		That lick the blenchèd heavens. But there lives
		(Secure as in a garden walled from wind)
		A lonely flower by a placid well,
		Midmost the flaring tumult of the flames,
		That roar as roars a storm-possessed sea,
		Impacable for ever; and within
		That simple grail the blossom lifts, there lies
		One drop of an incomparable dew
		Which heals the parchèd weariness of kings,
		And cures the wound of wisdom. I am page
		To an emperor who reigns ten thousand years,
		And through his labyrinthine palace-rooms,
		Through courts and colonnades and balconies
		Wherein immensity itself is mazed,
		I seek the golden gorget he hath lost,
		On which, in sapphires fine as orris-seed,
		Are writ the names of his conniving stars
		And friendly planets. Roaming thus, I hear
		Like demon tears incessant, through dark ages,
		The drip of sullen clepsydrae; and once
		In every lustrum, hear the brazen clocks
		Innumerably clang with such a sound
		As brazen hammers make, by devils dinned
		On tombs of all the dead; and nevermore
		I find the gorget, but at length I find
		A sealèd room whose nameless prisoner
		Moans with a nameless torture, and would turn
		To hell’s red rack as to a lilied couch
		From that whereon they stretched him; and I find,
		Prostrate upon a lotus-painted floor,
		The loveliest of all beloved slaves
		My emperor hath, and from her pulseless side
		A serpent rises, whiter than the root
		Of some venefic bloom in darkness grown,
		And gazes up with green-lit eyes that seem
		Like drops of cold, congealing poison.
		
		Hark!
		What word was whispered in a tongue unknown,
		In crypts of some impenetrable world?
		Whose is the dark, dethroning secrecy
		I cannot share, though I am king of suns,
		And king therewith of strong eternity,
		Whose gnomons with their swords of shadow guard
		My gates, and slay the intruder? Silence loads
		The wind of ether, and the worlds are still
		To hear the word that flees mine audience.
		In simultaneous ruin, al my dreams
		Fall like a rack of fuming vapors raised
		To semblance by a necromant, and leave
		Spirit and sense unthinkably alone
		Above a universe of shrouded stars
		And suns that wander, cowled with sullen gloom,
		Like witches to a Sabbath. . . . Fear is born
		In crypts below the nadir, and hath crawled
		Reaching the floor of space, and waits for wings
		To lift it upward like a hellish worm
		Fain for the flesh of cherubim. Red orbs
		And eyes that gleam remotely as the stars,
		But are not eyes of suns or galaxies,
		Gather and throng to the base of darkness; flame
		Behind some black, abysmal curtain burns,
		Implacable, and fanned to whitest wrath
		By raisèd wings that flail the whiffled gloom,
		And make a brief and broken wind that moans
		As one who rides a throbbing rack. There is
		A Thing that crouches, worlds and years remote,
		Whose horns a demon sharpens, rasping forth
		A note to shatter the donjon-keeps of time,
		Or crack the sphere of crystal. All is dark
		For ages, and my toiling heart-suspends
		Its clamor as within the clutch of death
		Tightening with tense, hermetic rigors. Then,
		In one enormous, million-flashing flame,
		The stars unveil, the suns remove their cowls,
		And beam to their responding planets; time
		Is mine once more, and armies of its dreams
		Rally to that insuperable throne
		Firmed on the zenith.
		
		Once again I seek
		The meads of shining moly I had found
		In some anterior vision, by a stream
		No cloud hath ever tarnished; where the sun,
		A gold Narcissus, loiters evermore
		Above his golden image. But I find
		A corpse the ebbing water will not keep,
		With eyes like sapphires that have lain in hell|
		And felt the hissing coals; and all the flowers
		About me turn to hooded serpents, swayed
		By flutes of devils in lascivious dance
		Meet for the nod of Satan, when he reigns
		Above the raging Sabbath, and is wooed
		By sarabands of witches. But I turn
		To mountains guarding with their horns of snow
		The source of that befoulèd rill, and seek
		A pinnacle where none but eagles climb,
		And they with failing pennons. But in vain
		I flee, for on that pylon of the sky
		Some curse hath turned the unprinted snow to flame--
		Red fires that curl and cluster to my tread,
		Trying the summit’s narrow cirque. And now
		I see a silver python far beneath--
		Vast as a river that a fiend hath witched
		And forced to flow reverted in its course
		To mountains whence it issued. Rapidly
		It winds from slope to crumbling slope, and fills
		Ravines and chasmal gorges, till the crags
		Totter with coil on coil incumbent. Soon
		It hath entwined the pinnacle I keep,
		And gapes with a fanged, unfathomable maw
		Wherein Great Typhon and Enceladus
		Were orts of daily glut. But I am gone,
		For at my call a hippogriff hath come,
		And firm between his thunder-beating wings
		I mount the sheer cerulean walls of noon
		And see the earth, a spurnèd pebble, fall--
		Lost in the fields of nether stars--and seek
		A planet where the outwearied wings of time
		Might pause and furl for respite, or the plumes
		Of death be stayed, and loiter in reprieve
		Above some deathless lily: for therein
		Beauty hath found an avatar of flowers--
		Blossoms that clothe it as a colored flame
		From peak to peak, from pole to sullen pole,
		And turn the skies to perfume. There I find
		A lonely castle, calm, and unbeset
		Save by the purple spears of amaranth,
		And leafing iris tender-sworded. Walls
		Of flushèd marble, wonderful with rose,
		And domes like golden bubbles, and minarets
		That take the clouds as coronal-these are mine,
		For voiceless looms the peaceful barbican,
		And the heavy-teethed portcullis hangs aloft
		To grin a welcome. So I leave awhile
		My hippogriff to crop the magic meads,
		And pass into a court the lilies hold,
		And tread them to a fragrance that pursues
		To win the portico, whose columns, carved
		Of lazuli and amber, mock the palms
		Of bright Aidennic forests-capitalled
		With fronds of stone fretted to airy lace,
		Enfolding drupes that seem as tawny clusters
		Of breasts of unknown houris; and convolved
		With vines of shut and shadowy-leavèd flowers
		Like the dropt lids of women that endure
		Some loin-dissolving ecstasy. Through doors
		Enlaid with lilies twined luxuriously,
		I enter, dazed and blinded with the sun,
		And hear, in gloom that changing colors cloud,
		A chuckle sharp as crepitating ice
		Upheaved and cloven by shoulders of the damned
		Who strive in Antenora. When my eyes
		Undazzle, and the cloud of color fades,
		I find me in a monster-guarded room,
		Where marble apes with wings of griffins crowd
		On walls an evil sculptor wrought, and beasts
		Wherein the sloth and vampire-bat unite,
		Pendulous by their toes of tarnished bronze,
		Usurp the shadowy interval of lamps
		That hang from ebon arches. Like a ripple
		Borne by the wind from pool to sluggish pool
		In fields where wide Cocytus flows his bound,
		A crackling smile around that circle runs,
		And all the stone-wrought gibbons stare at me
		With eyes that turn to glowing coals. A fear
		That found no name in Babel, flings me on,
		Breathless and faint with horror, to a hall
		Within whose weary, self-reverting round,
		The languid curtains, heavier than palls,
		Unnumerably depict a weary king
		Who fain would cool his jewel-crusted hands
		In lakes of emerald evening, or the field
		Of dreamless poppies pure with rain. I flee
		Onward, and all the shadowy curtains shake
		With tremors of a silken-sighing mirth,
		And whispers of the innumerable king,
		Breathing a tale of ancient pestilence
		Whose very words are vile contagion. Then
		I reach a room where caryatids,
		Carved in the form of voluptuous Titan women,
		Surround a throne flowering ebony
		Where creeps a vine of crystal. On the throne
		There lolls a wan, enormous Worm, whose bulk,
		Tumid with all the rottenness of kings,
		Overflows its arms with fold on creasèd fold
		Obscenely bloating. Open-mouthed he leans,
		And from his fulvous throat a score of tongues,
		Depending like to wreaths of torpid vipers,
		Drivel with phosphorescent slime, that runs
		Down all his length of soft and monstrous folds,
		And creeping among the flowers of ebony,
		Lends them the life of tiny serpents. Now,
		Ere the Horror ope those red and lashless slits
		Of eyes that draw the gnat and midge, I turn
		And follow down a dusty hall, whose gloom,
		Lined by the statues with their mighty limbs,
		Ends in golden-roofèd balcony
		Sphering the flowered horizon.
		
		Ere my heart
		Hath hushed the panic tumult of its pulses,
		I listen, from beyond the horizon’s rim,
		A mutter faint as when the far simoom,
		Mounting from unknown deserts, opens forth,
		Wide as the waste, those wings of torrid night
		That shake the doom of cities from their folds,
		And musters in its van a thousand winds
		That, with disrooted palms for besoms, rise,
		And sweep the sands to fury. As the storm,
		Approaching, mounts and loudens to the ears
		Of them that toil in fields of sesame,
		So grows the mutter, and a shadow creeps
		Above the gold horizon like a dawn
		Of darkness climbing zenith-ward. They come,
		The Sabaoth of retribution, drawn
		From all dread spheres that knew my trespassing,
		And led by vengeful fiends and dire alastors
		That owned my sway aforetime! Cockatrice,
		Chimera, martichoras, behemoth,
		Geryon, and sphinx, and hydra, on my ken
		Arise as might some Afrit-builded city
		Consummate in the lifting of a lash
		With thunderous domes and sounding obelisks
		And towers of night and fire alternate! Wings
		Of white-hot stone along the hissing wind
		Bear up the huge and furnace-hearted beasts
		Of hells beyond Rutilicus; and things
		Whose lightless length would mete the gyre of moons--
		Born from the caverns of a dying sun
		Uncoil to the very zenith, half-disclosed
		From gulfs below the horizon; octopi
		Like blazing moons with countless arms of fire,
		Climb from the seas of ever-surging flame
		That roll and roar through planets unconsumed,
		Beating on coasts of unknown metals; beasts
		That range the mighty worlds of Alioth rise,
		Afforesting the heavens with mulitudinous horns
		Amid whose maze the winds are lost; and borne
		On cliff-like brows of plunging scolopendras,
		The shell-wrought towers of ocean-witches loom;
		And griffin-mounted gods, and demons throned
		On-sable dragons, and the cockodrills
		That bear the spleenful pygmies on their backs;
		And blue-faced wizards from the worlds of Saiph,
		On whom Titanic scorpions fawn; and armies
		That move with fronts reverted from the foe,
		And strike athwart their shoulders at the shapes
		The shields reflect in crystal; and eidola
		Fashioned within unfathomable caves
		By hands of eyeless peoples; and the blind
		Worm-shapen monsters of a sunless world,
		With krakens from the ultimate abyss,
		And Demogorgons of the outer dark,
		Arising, shout with dire multisonous clamors,
		And threatening me with dooms ineffable
		In words whereat the heavens leap to flame,
		Advance upon the enchanted palace. Falling
		For league on league before, their shadows light
		And eat like fire the arnaranthine meads,
		Leaving an ashen desert. In the palace
		I hear the apes of marble shriek and howl,
		And all the women-shapen columns moan,
		Babbling with terror. In my tenfold fear,
		A monstrous dread unnamed in any hall,
		I rise, and flee with the fleeing wind for wings,
		And in a trice the wizard palace reefs,
		And spring to a single tower of flame,
		Goes out, and leaves nor shard nor ember! Flown
		Beyond the world upon that fleeing wind
		I reach the gulf’s irrespirable verge,
		Where fads the strongest storm for breath, and fall,
		Supportless, through the nadir-plungèd gloom,
		Beyond the scope and vision of the sun,
		To other skies and systems.
		
		In a world
		Deep-wooded with the multi-colored fungi
		That soar to semblance of fantastic palms,
		I fall as falls the meteor-stone, and break
		A score of trunks to atom powder. Unharmed
		I rise, and through the illimitable woods,
		Among the trees of flimsy opal, roam,
		And see their tops that clamber hour by hour
		To touch the suns of iris. Things unseen,
		Whose charnel breath informs the tideless air
		With spreading pools of fetor, follow me,
		Elusive past the ever-changing palms;
		And pittering moths with wide and ashen wings
		Flit on before, and insects ember-hued,
		Descending, hurtle through the gorgeous gloom
		And quench themselves in crumbling thickets. Heard
		Far off, the gong-like roar of beasts unknown
		Resounds at measured intervals of time,
		Shaking the riper trees to dust, that falls
		In clouds of acrid perfume, stifling me
		Beneath an irised pall.
		
		Now the palmettoes
		Grow far apart, and lessen momently
		To shrubs a dwarf might topple. Over them
		I see an empty desert, all ablaze
		With ametrysts and rubies, and the dust
		Of garnets or carnelians. On I roam,
		Treading the gorgeous grit, that dazzles me
		With leaping waves of endless rutilance,
		Whereby the air is turned to a crimson gloom
		Through which I wander blind as any Kobold;
		Till underfoot the grinding sands give place
		To stone or metal, with a massive ring
		More welcome to mine ears than golden bells
		Or tinkle of silver fountains. When the gloom
		Of crimson lifts, I stand upon the edge
		Of a broad black plain of adamant that reaches,
		Level as windless water, to the verge
		Of all the world; and through the sable plain
		A hundred streams of shattered marble run,
		And streams of broken steel, and streams of bronze,
		Like to the ruin of all the wars of time,
		To plunge with clangor of timeless cataracts
		Adown the gulfs eternal.
		
		So I follow
		Between a river of steel and a river of bronze,
		With ripples loud and tuneless as the clash
		Of a million lutes; and come to the precipice
		From which they fall, and make the mighty sound
		Of a million swords that meet a million shields,
		Or din of spears and armour in the wars
		Of half the worlds and eons. Far beneath
		They fall, through gulfs and cycles of the void,
		And vanish like a stream of broken stars
		into the nether darkness; nor the gods
		Of any sun, nor demons of the gulf,
		Will dare to know what everlasting sea
		Is fed thereby, and mounts forevermore
		In one unebbing tide.
		
		What nimbus-cloud
		Or night of sudden and supreme eclipse,
		Is on the suns opal? At my side
		The rivers run with a wan and ghostly gleam
		Through darkness falling as the night that falls
		From spheres extinguished. Turning, I behold
		Betwixt the sable desert and the suns,
		The poisèd wings of all the dragon-rout,
		Far-flown in black occlusion thousand-fold
		Through stars, and deeps, and devastated worlds,
		Upon my trail of terror! Griffins, rocs,
		And sluggish, dark chimeras, heavy-winged
		After the ravin of dispeopled lands,
		And harpies, and the vulture-birds of hell,
		Hot from abominable feasts, and fain
		To cool their beaks and talons in my blood--
		All, all have gathered, and the wingless rear,
		With rank on rank of foul, colossal Worms,
		Makes horrent now the horizon. From the wan
		I hear the shriek of wyvers, loud and shrill
		As tempests in a broken fane, and roar
		Of sphinxes, like relentless toll of bells
		From towers infernal. Cloud on hellish cloud
		They arch the zenith, and a dreadful wind
		Falls from them like the wind before the storm,
		And in the wind my riven garment streams
		And flutters in the face of all the void,
		Even as flows a flaffing spirit, lost
		On the pit s undying tempest. Louder grows
		The thunder of the streams of stone and bronze--
		Redoubled with the roar of torrent wings
		Inseparable mingled. Scarce I keep
		My footing in the gulfward winds of fear,
		And mighty thunders beating to the void
		In sea-like waves incessant; and would flee
		With them, and prove the nadir-founded night
		Where fall the streams of ruin. But when I reach
		The verge, and seek through sun-defeating gloom
		To measure with my gaze the dread descent,
		I see a tiny star within the depths--
		A light that stays me while the wings of doom
		Convene their thickening thousands: for the star
		increases, taking to its hueless orb,
		With all the speed of horror-changèd dreams,
		The light as of a million million moons;
		And floating up through gulfs and glooms eclipsed
		It grows and grows, a huge white eyeless Face
		That fills the void and fills the universe,
		And bloats against the limits of the world
		With lips of flame that open . . .


	4. THE STAR-TREADER

		I
		
		A voice cried to me in a dawn of dreams,
		Saying, “Make haste: the webs of death and birth
		Are brushed away, and all the threads of earth
		Wear to the breaking; spaceward gleams
		Thine ancient pathway of the suns,
		Whose flame is part of thee;
		And the deep gulfs abide coevally
		Whose darkness runs
		Through all thy spirit’s mystery.
		Go forth, and tread unharmed the blaze
		Of stars wherethrough thou camest in old days;
		Pierce without fear each vast
		Whose hugeness crushed thee not within the past.
		A hand strikes off the chains of Time,
		A hand swings back the door of years;
		Now fall earth’s bonds of gladness and of tears,
		And opens the strait dream to space sublime”
		
		
		II
		
		Who rides a dream, what hand shall stay !
		What eye shall note or measure mete
		His passage on a purpose fleet,
		The thread and weaving of his way !
		It caught me from the clasping world,
		And swept beyond the brink of Sense,
		My soul was flung, and poised, and whirled
		Like to a planet chained and hurled
		With solar lightning strong and tense.
		Swift as communicated rays
		That leap from severed suns a gloom
		Within whose waste no suns illume,
		The winged dream fulfilled its ways.
		Through years reversed and lit again
		I followed that unending chain
		Wherein the suns are links of light;
		Retraced through lineal, ordered spheres
		The twisting of the threads of years
		In weavings wrought of noon and night;
		Through stars and deeps I watched the dream unroll,
		Those folds that form the raiment of the soul.
		
		
		III
		
		Enkindling dawns of memory,
		Each sun had radiance to relume
		A sealed, disused, and darkened room
		Within the soul’s immensity.
		Their alien ciphers shown and lit,
		I understood what each had writ
		Upon my spirit’s scroll;
		Again I wore mine ancient lives,
		And knew the freedom and the gyves
		That formed and marked my soul.
		
		
		IV
		
		I delved in each forgotten mind,
		The units that had builded me,
		Whose deepnesses before were blind
		And formless as infinity--
		Knowing again each former world--
		From planet unto planet whirled
		Through gulfs that mightily divide
		Like to an intervital sleep.
		One world I found, where souls abide
		Like winds that rest upon a rose;
		Thereto they creep
		To loose all burden of old woes.
		And one there was, a garden-close
		Whose blooms are grown of ancient sin
		And death the sap that wells and flows:
		The spirits weep that dwelt therein.
		And one I knew, where chords of pain
		With stridors fill the Senses’ lyre;
		And one, where Beauty’s olden chain
		Is forged anew with stranger loveliness,
		In flame-soft links of never-quenched desire
		And ineluctable duress.
		
		
		V
		
		Where no terrestrial dreams had trod
		My vision entered undismayed,
		And Life her hidden realms displayed
		To me as to a curious god.
		Where colored suns of systems triplicate
		Bestow on planets weird, ineffable,
		Green light that orbs them like an outer sea,
		And large auroral noons that alternate
		With skies like sunset held without abate,
		Life’s touch renewed incomprehensibly
		The strains of mirth and grief’s harmonious spell.
		Dead passions like to stars relit
		Shone in the gloom of ways forgot;
		Where crownless gods in darkness sit
		The day was full on altars hot.
		I heard--enisled in those melodic seas--
		The central music of the Pleiades,
		And to Alcyone my soul
		Swayed with the stars that own her song’s control.
		Unchallenged, glad, I trod, a revenant
		In worlds Edenic longly lost;
		Or dwelt in spheres that sing to those,
		Through space no light has crossed,
		Diverse as Hell’s mad antiphone uptossed
		To Heaven’s angelic chant.
		
		
		VI
		
		What vasts the dream went out to find !
		I seemed beyond the world’s recall
		In gulfs where darkness is a wall
		To render strong Antares blind !
		In unimagined spheres I found
		The sequence of my being’s round--
		Some life where firstling meed of Song,
		The strange imperishable leaf,
		Was placed on brows that starry Grief
		Had crowned, and. Pain anointed long;
		Some avatar where Love
		Sang like the last great star at morn
		Ere the pale orb of Death filled all its sky;
		Some life in fresher years unworn
		Upon a world whereof
		Peace was a robe like to the calms that lie
		On pools aglow with latter spring:
		There Time’s pellucid surface took
		Clear image of all things, nor shook
		Till the black cleaving of Oblivion’s wing;
		Some earlier awakening
		In pristine years, when giant strife
		Of forces darkly whirled
		First forged the thing called Life--
		Hot from the furnace of the suns--
		Upon the anvil of a world.
		
		
		VII
		
		Thus knew I those anterior ones
		Whose lives in mine were blent;
		Till, lo! my dream, that held a night
		Where Rigel sends no message of his might,
		Was emptied of the trodden stars,
		And dwindled to the sun’s extent--
		The brain’s familiar prison-bars,
		And raiment of the sorrow and the mirth
		Wrought by the shuttles intricate of earth.


*** W. D. Snodgrass (1926 - 2009)

	1. A LOCKED HOUSE

		As we drove back, crossing the hill, 
		The house still 
		Hidden in the trees, I always thought--
		A fool’s fear—that it might have caught 
		Fire, someone could have broken in. 
		As if things must have been 
		Too good here. Still, we always found 
		It locked tight, safe and sound. 
		
		I mentioned that, once, as a joke; 
		No doubt we spoke 
		Of the absurdity 
		To fear some dour god’s jealousy 
		Of our good fortune. From the farm 
		Next door, our neighbors saw no harm 
		Came to the things we cared for here. 
		What did we have to fear? 
		
		Maybe I should have thought: all 
		Such things rot, fall--
		Barns, houses, furniture. 
		We two are stronger than we were 
		Apart; we’ve grown 
		Together. Everything we own 
		Can burn; we know what counts—some such 
		Idea. We said as much. 
		
		We’d watched friends driven to betray; 
		Felt that love drained away 
		Some self they need. 
		We’d said love, like a growth, can feed 
		On hate we turn in and disguise; 
		We warned ourselves. That you might despise 
		Me—hate all we both loved best--
		None of us ever guessed. 
		
		The house still stands, locked, as it stood 
		Untouched a good 
		Two years after you went. 
		Some things passed in the settlement; 
		Some things slipped away. Enough’s left 
		That I come back sometimes. The theft 
		And vandalism were our own. 
		Maybe we should have known.


	2. AFTER EXPERIENCE

		After experience taught me that all the ordinary 
		Surroundings of social life are futile and vain; 
		
		I’m going to show you something very 
		Ugly: someday, it might save your life. 
		
		Seeing that none of the things I feared contain 
		In themselves anything either good or bad 
		
		What if you get caught without a knife; 
		Nothing—even a loop of piano wire; 
		
		Excepting only in the effect they had 
		Upon my mind, I resolved to inquire 
		
		Take the first two fingers of this hand; 
		Fork them out—kind of a “V for Victory”--
		
		Whether there might be something whose discovery 
		Would grant me supreme, unending happiness. 
		
		And jam them into the eyes of your enemy. 
		You have to do this hard. Very hard. Then press 
		
		No virtue can be thought to have priority 
		Over this endeavor to preserve one’s being. 
		
		Both fingers down around the cheekbone 
		And setting your foot high into the chest 
		
		No man can desire to act rightly, to be blessed, 
		To live rightly, without simultaneously 
		
		You must call up every strength you own 
		And you can rip off the whole facial mask. 
		
		Wishing to be, to act, to live. He must ask 
		First, in other words, to actually exist. 
		
		
		And you, whiner, who wastes your time 
		Dawdling over the remorseless earth, 
		What evil, what unspeakable crime 
		Have you made your life worth?


	3. APRIL INVENTORY

		The green catalpa tree has turned 
		All white; the cherry blooms once more. 
		In one whole year I haven’t learned 
		A blessed thing they pay you for. 
		The blossoms snow down in my hair; 
		The trees and I will soon be bare. 
		
		The trees have more than I to spare. 
		The sleek, expensive girls I teach, 
		Younger and pinker every year, 
		Bloom gradually out of reach. 
		The pear tree lets its petals drop 
		Like dandruff on a tabletop. 
		
		The girls have grown so young by now 
		I have to nudge myself to stare. 
		This year they smile and mind me how 
		My teeth are falling with my hair. 
		In thirty years I may not get 
		Younger, shrewder, or out of debt. 
		
		The tenth time, just a year ago, 
		I made myself a little list 
		Of all the things I’d ought to know, 
		Then told my parents, analyst, 
		And everyone who’s trusted me 
		I’d be substantial, presently. 
		
		I haven’t read one book about 
		A book or memorized one plot. 
		Or found a mind I did not doubt. 
		I learned one date.And then forgot. 
		And one by one the solid scholars 
		Get the degrees, the jobs, the dollars. 
		
		And smile above their starchy collars. 
		I taught my classes Whitehead’s notions; 
		One lovely girl, a song of Mahler’s. 
		Lacking a source-book or promotions, 
		I showed one child the colors of 
		A luna moth and how to love. 
		
		I taught myself to name my name, 
		To bark back, loosen love and crying; 
		To ease my woman so she came, 
		To ease an old man who was dying. 
		I have not learned how often I 
		Can win, can love, but choose to die. 
		
		I have not learned there is a lie 
		Love shall be blonder, slimmer, younger; 
		That my equivocating eye 
		Loves only by my body’s hunger; 
		That I have forces true to feel, 
		Or that the lovely world is real. 
		
		While scholars speak authority 
		And wear their ulcers on their sleeves, 
		My eyes in spectacles shall see 
		These trees procure and spend their leaves. 
		There is a value underneath 
		The gold and silver in my teeth. 
		
		Though trees turn bare and girls turn wives, 
		We shall afford our costly seasons; 
		There is a gentleness survives 
		That will outspeak and has its reasons. 
		There is a loveliness exists, 
		Preserves us, not for specialists.


	4. HEART’S NEEDLE

		I
		
		Child of my winter, born 
		When the new fallen soldiers froze 
		In Asia’s steep ravines and fouled the snows, 
		When I was torn 
		
		By love I could not still, 
		By fear that silenced my cramped mind 
		To that cold war where, lost, I could not find 
		My peace in my will, 
		
		All those days we could keep 
		Your mind a landscape of new snow 
		Where the chilled tenant-farmer finds, below, 
		His fields asleep 
		
		In their smooth covering, white 
		As quilts to warm the resting bed 
		Of birth or pain, spotless as paper spread 
		For me to write, 
		
		And thinks: Here lies my land 
		Unmarked by agony, the lean foot 
		Of the weasel tracking, the thick trapper’s boot; 
		And I have planned 
		
		My chances to restrain 
		The torments of demented summer or 
		Increase the deepening harvest here before 
		It snows again. 
		
		
		II
		
		Late April and you are three; today 
		We dug your garden in the yard. 
		To curb the damage of your play, 
		Strange dogs at night and the moles tunneling, 
		Four slender sticks of lath stand guard 
		Uplifting their thin string. 
		
		So you were the first to tramp it down. 
		And after the earth was sifted close 
		You brought your watering can to drown 
		All earth and us. But these mixed seeds are pressed 
		With light loam in their steadfast rows. 
		Child, we’ve done our best. 
		
		Someone will have to weed and spread 
		The young sprouts. Sprinkle them in the hour 
		When shadow falls across their bed. 
		You should try to look at them every day 
		Because when they come to full flower 
		I will be away. 
		
		
		III
		
		The child between them on the street 
		Comes to a puddle, lifts his feet 
		And hangs on their hands. They start 
		At the Jive weight and lurch together, 
		Recoil to swing him through the weather, 
		Stiffen and pull apart. 
		
		We read of cold war soldiers that 
		Never gained ground, gave none, but sat 
		Tight in their chill trenches. 
		Pain seeps up from some cavity 
		Through the ranked teeth in sympathy; 
		The whole jaw grinds and clenches 
		
		Till something somewhere has to give. 
		It’s better the poor soldiers live 
		In someone else’s hands 
		Than drop where helpless powers fall 
		On crops and barns, on towns where all 
		Will burn. And no man stands. 
		
		For good, they sever and divide 
		Their won and lost land. On each side 
		Prisoners are returned 
		Excepting a few unknown names. 
		The peasant plods back and reclaims 
		His fields that strangers burned 
		
		And nobody seems very pleased. 
		It’s best. Still, what must not be seized 
		Clenches the empty fist. 
		I tugged your hand, once, when I hated 
		Things less: a mere game dislocated 
		The radius of your wrist. 
		
		Love’s wishbone, child, although I’ve gone 
		As men must and let you be drawn 
		Off to appease another, 
		It may help that a Chinese play 
		Or Solomon himself might say 
		I am your real mother. 
		
		
		IV. 
		
		No one can tell you why 
		the season will not wait; 
		the night I told you I 
		must leave, you wept a fearful rate 
		to stay up late. 
		
		Now that it’s turning Fan, 
		we go to take our walk 
		among municipal 
		flowers, to steal one off its stalk, 
		to try and talk. 
		
		We huff like windy giants 
		scattering with our breath 
		gray-headed dandelions; 
		Spring is the cold wind’s aftermath. 
		The poet saith. 
		
		But the asters, too, are gray, 
		ghost-gray. Last night’s cold 
		is sending on their way 
		petunias and dwarf marigold, 
		hunched sick and old. 
		
		Like nerves caught in a graph, 
		the morning-glory vines 
		frost has erased by half 
		still scrawl across their rigid twines. 
		Like broken lines 
		
		of verses I can’t make. 
		In its unraveling loom 
		we find a flower to take, 
		with some late buds that might still bloom, 
		back to your room. 
		
		Night comes and the stiff dew. 
		I’m told a friend’s child cried 
		because a cricket, who 
		had minstreled every night outside 
		her window, died. 
		
		
		V. 
		
		Winter again and it is snowing; 
		Although you are still three, 
		You are already growing 
		Strange to me. 
		
		You chatter about new playmates, sing 
		Strange songs; you do not know 
		Hey ding-a-ding-a-ding 
		Or where I go 
		
		Or when I sang for bedtime, Fox 
		Went out on a chilly night, 
		Before I went for walks 
		And did not write; 
		
		You never mind the squalls and storms 
		That are renewed long since; 
		Outside, the thick snow swarms 
		Into my prints 
		
		And swirls out by warehouses, sealed, 
		Dark cowbarns, huddled, still, 
		Beyond to the blank field, 
		The fox’s hill 
		
		Where he backtracks and sees the paw, 
		Gnawed off, he cannot feel; 
		Conceded to the jaw 
		Of toothed, blue steel. 
		
		
		VI
		
		Easter has come around 
		again; the river is rising 
		over the thawed ground 
		and the banksides. When you come you bring 
		an egg dyed lavender. 
		We shout along our bank to hear 
		our voices returning from the hills to meet us. 
		We need the landscape to repeat us. 
		
		You Jived on this bank first. 
		While nine months filled your term, we knew 
		how your lungs, immersed 
		in the womb, miraculously grew 
		their useless folds till 
		the fierce, cold air rushed in to fill 
		them out like bushes thick with leaves. You took your hour, 
		caught breath, and cried with your full lung power. 
		
		Over the stagnant bight 
		we see the hungry bank swallow 
		flaunting his free flight 
		still; we sink in mud to follow 
		the killdeer from the grass 
		that hides her nest. That March there was 
		rain; the rivers rose; you could hear killdeers flying 
		all night over the mudflats crying. 
		
		You bring back how the red--
		winged blackbird shrieked, slapping frail wings, 
		diving at my head— 
		I saw where her tough nest, cradled, swings 
		in tall reeds that must sway 
		with the winds blowing every way. 
		If you recall much, you recall this place. You still 
		live nearby—on the opposite hill. 
		
		After the sharp windstorm 
		of July Fourth, all that summer 
		through the gentle, warm 
		afternoons, we heard great chain saws chirr 
		like iron locusts. Crews 
		of roughneck boys swarmed to cut loose 
		branches wrenched in the shattering wind, to hack free 
		all the torn limbs that could sap the tree. 
		
		In the debris lay 
		starlings, dead. Near the park’s birdrun 
		we surprised one day 
		a proud, tan-spatted, buff-brown pigeon. 
		In my hands she flapped so 
		fearfully that I let her go. 
		Her keeper came. And we helped snarl her in a net. 
		You bring things I’d as soon forget. 
		
		You raise into my head 
		a Fall night that I came once more 
		to sit on your bed; 
		sweat beads stood out on your arms and fore- 
		head and you wheezed for breath, 
		for help, like some child caught beneath 
		its comfortable wooly blankets, drowning there. 
		Your lungs caught and would not take the air. 
		
		Of all things, only we 
		have power to choose that we should die; 
		nothing else is free 
		in this world to refuse it. Yet I, 
		who say this, could not raise 
		myself from bed how many days 
		to the thieving world. Child, I have another wife, 
		another child. We try to choose our life. 
		
		
		VII
		
		Here in the scuffled dust 
		is our ground of play. 
		I lift you on your swing and must 
		shove you away, 
		see you return again, 
		drive you off again, then 
		
		stand quiet till you come. 
		You, though you climb 
		higher, farther from me, longer, 
		will fall back to me stronger. 
		Bad penny, pendulum, 
		you keep my constant time 
		
		to bob in blue July 
		where fat goldfinches fly 
		over the glittering, fecund 
		reach of our growing lands. 
		Once more now, this second, 
		I hold you in my hands. 
		
		
		XIII
		
		I thumped on you the best I could 
		which was no use; 
		you would not tolerate your food 
		until the sweet, fresh milk was soured 
		with lemon juice. 
		
		That puffed you up like a fine yeast. 
		The first June in your yard 
		like some squat Nero at a feast 
		you sat and chewed on white, sweet clover. 
		That is over. 
		
		When you were old enough to walk 
		we went to feed 
		the rabbits in the park milkweed; 
		saw the paired monkeys, under lock, 
		consume each other’s salt. 
		
		Going home we watched the slow 
		stars follow us down Heaven’s vault. 
		You said, let’s catch one that comes low, 
		pull off its skin 
		and cook it for our dinner. 
		
		As absentee bread-winner, 
		I seldom got you such cuisine; 
		we ate in local restaurants 
		or bought what lunches we could pack 
		in a brown sack 
		
		with stale, dry bread to toss for ducks 
		on the green-scummed lagoons, 
		crackers for porcupine and fox, 
		life-savers for the footpad coons 
		to scour and rinse, 
		
		snatch after in their muddy pail 
		and stare into their paws. 
		When I moved next door to the jail 
		I learned to fry 
		omelettes and griddle cakes so I 
		
		could set you supper at my table. 
		As I built back from helplessness, 
		when I grew able, 
		the only possible answer was 
		you had to come here less. 
		
		This Hallowe’en you come one week. 
		You masquerade 
		as a vermilion, sleek, 
		fat, crosseyed fox in the parade 
		or, where grim jackolanterns leer, 
		
		go with your bag from door to door 
		foraging for treats. How queer: 
		when you take off your mask 
		my neighbors must forget and ask 
		whose child you are. 
		
		Of course you lose your appetite, 
		whine and won’t touch your plate; 
		as local law 
		I set your place on an orange crate 
		in your own room for days. At night 
		
		you lie asleep there on the bed 
		and grate your jaw. 
		Assuredly your father’s crimes 
		are visited 
		on you. You visit me sometimes. 
		
		The time’s up. Now our pumpkin sees 
		me bringing your suitcase. 
		He holds his grin; 
		the forehead shrivels, sinking in. 
		You break this year’s first crust of snow 
		
		off the runningboard to eat. 
		We manage, though for days 
		I crave sweets when you leave and know 
		they rot my teeth. Indeed our sweet 
		foods leave us cavities. 
		
		
		IX. 
		
		I get numb and go in 
		though the dry ground will not hold 
		the few dry swirls of snow 
		and it must not be very cold. 
		A friend asks how you’ve been 
		and I don’t know 
		
		or see much right to ask. 
		Or what use it could be to know. 
		In three months since you came 
		the leaves have fallen and the snow; 
		your pictures pinned above my desk 
		seem much the same. 
		
		Somehow I come to find 
		myself upstairs in the third floor 
		museum’s halls, 
		walking to kill my time once more 
		among the enduring and resigned 
		stuffed animals, 
		
		where, through a century’s 
		caprice, displacement and 
		known treachery between 
		its wars, they hear some old command 
		and in their peaceable kingdoms freeze 
		to this still scene, 
		
		Nature Morte. Here 
		by the door, its guardian, 
		the patchwork dodo stands 
		where you and your stepsister ran 
		laughing and pointing. Here, last year, 
		you pulled my hands 
		
		and had your first, worst quarrel, 
		so toys were put up on your shelves. 
		Here in the first glass cage 
		the little bobcats arch themselves, 
		still practicing their snarl 
		of constant rage. 
		
		The bison, here, immense, 
		shoves at his calf, brow to brow, 
		and looks it in the eye 
		to see what is it thinking now. 
		I forced you to obedience; 
		I don’t know why. 
		
		Still the lean lioness 
		beyond them, on her jutting ledge 
		of shale and desert shrub, 
		stands watching always at the edge, 
		stands hard and tanned and envious 
		above her cub; 
		
		with horns locked in tan heather, 
		two great Olympian Elk stand bound, 
		fixed in their lasting hate 
		till hunger brings them both to ground. 
		Whom equal weakness binds together 
		none shall separate. 
		
		Yet separate in the ocean 
		of broken ice, the white bear reels 
		beyond the leathery groups 
		of scattered, drab Arctic seals 
		arrested here in violent motion 
		like Napoleon’s troops. 
		
		Our states have stood so long 
		At war, shaken with hate and dread, 
		they are paralyzed at bay; 
		once we were out of reach, we said, 
		we would grow reasonable and strong. 
		Some other day. 
		
		Like the cold men of Rome, 
		we have won costly fields to sow 
		in salt, our only seed. 
		Nothing but injury will grow. 
		I write you only the bitter poems 
		that you can’t read. 
		
		Onan who would not breed 
		a child to take his brother’s bread 
		and be his brother’s birth, 
		rose up and left his lawful bed, 
		went out and spilled his seed 
		in the cold earth. 
		
		I stand by the unborn, 
		by putty-colored children curled 
		in jars of alcohol, 
		that waken to no other world, 
		unchanging, where no eye shall mourn. 
		I see the caul 
		
		that wrapped a kitten, dead. 
		I see the branching, doubled throat 
		of a two-headed foal; 
		I see the hydrocephalic goat; 
		here is the curled and swollen head, 
		there, the burst skull; 
		
		skin of a limbless calf; 
		a horse’s foetus, mummified; 
		mounted and joined forever, 
		the Siamese twin dogs that ride 
		belly to belly, half and half, 
		that none shall sever. 
		
		I walk among the growths, 
		by gangrenous tissue, goiter, cysts, 
		by fistulas and cancers, 
		where the malignancy man loathes 
		is held suspended and persists. 
		And I don’t know the answers. 
		
		The window’s turning white. 
		The world moves like a diseased heart 
		packed with ice and snow. 
		Three months now we have been apart 
		less than a mile. I cannot fight 
		or let you go. 
		10 
		
		The vicious winter finally yields 
		the green winter wheat; 
		the farmer, tired in the tired fields 
		he dare not leave will eat. 
		
		Once more the runs come fresh; prevailing 
		piglets, stout as jugs, 
		harry their old sow to the railing 
		to ease her swollen dugs 
		
		and game colts trail the herded mares 
		that circle the pasture courses; 
		our seasons bring us back once more 
		like merry-go-round horses. 
		
		With crocus mouths, perennial hungers, 
		into the park Spring comes; 
		we roast hot dogs on old coat hangers 
		and feed the swan bread crumbs, 
		
		pay our respects to the peacocks, rabbits, 
		and leathery Canada goose 
		who took, last Fall, our tame white habits 
		and now will not turn loose. 
		
		In full regalia, the pheasant cocks 
		march past their dubious hens; 
		the porcupine and the lean, red fox 
		trot around bachelor pens 
		
		and the miniature painted train 
		wails on its oval track: 
		you said, I’m going to Pennsylvania! 
		and waved. And you’ve come back. 
		
		If I loved you, they said, I’d leave 
		and find my own affairs. 
		Well, once again this April, we’ve 
		come around to the bears; 
		
		punished and cared for, behind bars, 
		the coons on bread and water 
		stretch thin black fingers after ours. 
		And you are still my daughter.


*** Gary Snyder (1930 - )

	1. AFTER WORK

		The shack and a few trees
		float in the blowing fog
		
		I pull out your blouse,
		warm my cold hands
		on your breasts.
		you laugh and shudder
		peeling garlic by the
		hot iron stove.
		bring in the axe, the rake,
		the wood
		
		we’ll lean on the wall
		against each other
		stew simmering on the fire
		as it grows dark
		drinking wine.


	2. DECEMBER AT YASE

		You said, that October,
		In the tall dry grass by the orchard
		When you chose to be free,
		“Again someday, maybe ten years.”
		
		After college I saw you
		One time. You were strange,
		And I was obsessed with a plan.
		
		Now ten years and more have
		Gone by: I’ve always known
		where you were--
		I might have gone to you
		Hoping to win your love back.
		You still are single.
		
		I didn’t.
		I thought I must make it alone. I
		Have done that.
		
		Only in dream, like this dawn,
		Does the grave, awed intensity
		Of our young love
		Return to my mind, to my flesh.
		
		We had what the others
		All crave and seek for;
		We left it behind at nineteen.
		
		I feel ancient, as though I had
		Lived many lives.
		
		And may never now know
		If I am a fool
		Or have done what my
		karma demands.


	3. SPRING

		Beating asphalt into highway potholes
		pickup truck we’d loaded
		road repair stock shed & yard
		a day so hot the asphalt went in soft.
		pipe and steel plate tamper
		took turns at by hand
		then drive the truck rear wheel
		a few times back and forth across the fill--
		finish it off with bitchmo around the edge.
		
		the foreman said let’s get a drink
		& drove through the woods and flower fields
		shovels clattering in back
		into a black grove by a cliff
		a rocked in pool
		feeding a fern ravine
		tin can to drink
		numbing the hand and cramping in the gut
		surging through the fingers from below
		& dark here--
		let’s get back to the truck
		get back on the job.


	4. THERE ARE THOSE WHO LOVE TO GET DIRTY

		There are those who love to get dirty
		and fix things.
		They drink coffee at dawn,
		beer after work,
		
		And those who stay clean,
		just appreciate things,
		At breakfast they have milk
		and juice at night.
		
		There are those who do both,
		they drink tea.


*** Robert Southey (1774 - 1843)

	1. AFTER BLENHEIM

		It was a summer evening; 
		Old Kaspar’s work was done, 
		And he before his cottage door 
		Was sitting in the sun; 
		And by him sported on the green 
		His little grandchild Wilhelmine. 
		
		She saw her brother Peterkin 
		Roll something large and round, 
		Which he beside the rivulet 
		In playing there had found. 
		He came to ask what he had found, 
		That was so large, and smooth, and round. 
		
		Old Kaspar took it from the boy, 
		Who stood expectant by; 
		And then the old man shook his head, 
		And with a natural sigh, 
		“‘Tis some poor fellow’s skull,” said he, 
		“Who fell in the great victory. 
		
		“I find them in the garden, 
		For there’s many here about; 
		And often, when I go to plow, 
		The plowshare turns them out; 
		For many thousand men,” said he, 
		“Were slain in that great victory.” 
		
		“Now tell us what ‘twas all about,” 
		Young Peterkin, he cries; 
		And little Wilhelmine looks up 
		With wonder-waiting eyes; 
		“Now tell us all about the war, 
		And what they fought each other for.” 
		
		“It was the English,” Kaspar cried, 
		“Who put the French to rout; 
		But what they fought each other for, 
		I could not well make out; 
		But everybody said,” quoth he, 
		“That ‘twas a famous victory. 
		
		“My father lived at Blenheim then, 
		Yon little stream hard by; 
		They burnt his dwelling to the ground, 
		And he was forced to fly; 
		So with his wife and child he fled, 
		Nor had he where to rest his head. 
		
		“With fire and sword the country round 
		Was wasted far and wide, 
		And many a childing mother then, 
		And new-born baby, died; 
		But things like that, you know, must be 
		At every famous victory. 
		
		“They say it was a shocking sight 
		After the field was won; 
		For many thousand bodies here 
		Lay rotting in the sun; 
		But things like that, you know, must be 
		After a famous victory. 
		
		“Great praise the Duke of Marlboro’ won, 
		And our good Prince Eugene.” 
		“Why, ‘twas a very wicked thing!” 
		Said little Wilhelmine. 
		“Nay, nay, my little girl,” quoth he; 
		“It was a famous victory. 
		
		“And everybody praised the Duke 
		Who this great fight did win.” 
		“But what good came of it at last?” 
		Quoth little Peterkin. 
		“Why, that I cannot tell,” said he; 
		“But ‘twas a famous victory.”


	2. INCHCAPE ROCK

		No stir in the air, no stir in the sea,
		The Ship was still as she could be;
		Her sails from heaven received no motion,
		Her keel was steady in the ocean.
		
		Without either sign or sound of their shock,
		The waves flow’d over the Inchcape Rock;
		So little they rose, so little they fell,
		They did not move the Inchcape Bell.
		
		The worthy Abbot of Aberbrothok
		Had placed that bell on the Inchcape Rock;
		On a buoy in the storm it floated and swung,
		And over the waves its warning rung.
		
		When the Rock was hid by the surge’s swell,
		The Mariners heard the warning Bell;
		And then they knew the perilous Rock,
		And blest the Abbot of Aberbrothok
		
		The Sun in the heaven was shining gay,
		All things were joyful on that day;
		The sea-birds scream’d as they wheel’d round,
		And there was joyaunce in their sound.
		
		The buoy of the Inchcpe Bell was seen
		A darker speck on the ocean green;
		Sir Ralph the Rover walk’d his deck,
		And fix’d his eye on the darker speck.
		
		He felt the cheering power of spring,
		It made him whistle, it made him sing;
		His heart was mirthful to excess,
		But the Rover’s mirth was wickedness.
		
		His eye was on the Inchcape Float;
		Quoth he, “My men, put out the boat,
		And row me to the Inchcape Rock,
		And I’ll plague the Abbot of Aberbrothok.”
		
		The boat is lower’d, the boatmen row,
		And to the Inchcape Rock they go;
		Sir Ralph bent over from the boat,
		And he cut the bell from the Inchcape Float.
		
		Down sank the Bell with a gurgling sound,
		The bubbles rose and burst around;
		Quoth Sir Ralph, “The next who comes to the Rock,
		Won’t bless the Abbot of Aberbrothok.”
		
		Sir Ralph the Rover sail’d away,
		He scour’d the seas for many a day;
		And now grown rich with plunder’d store,
		He steers his course for Scotland’s shore.
		
		So thick a haze o’erspreads the sky,
		They cannot see the sun on high;
		The wind hath blown a gale all day,
		At evening it hath died away.
		
		On the deck the Rover takes his stand,
		So dark it is they see no land.
		Quoth Sir Ralph, “It will be lighter soon,
		For there is the dawn of the rising Moon.”
		
		“Canst hear,” said one, “the breakers roar?
		For methinks we should be near the shore.”
		“Now, where we are I cannot tell,
		But I wish we could hear the Inchcape Bell.”
		
		They hear no sound, the swell is strong,
		Though the wind hath fallen they drift along;
		Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock,
		“Oh Christ! It is the Inchcape Rock!”
		
		Sir Ralph the Rover tore his hair,
		He curst himself in his despair;
		The waves rush in on every side,
		The ship is sinking beneath the tide.
		
		But even is his dying fear,
		One dreadful sound could the Rover hear;
		A sound as if with the Inchcape Bell,
		The Devil below was ringing his knell.


	3. MY DAYS AMONG THE DEAD ARE PAST

		My days among the Dead are past;
		   Around me I behold,
		Where’er these casual eyes are cast,
		   The mighty minds of old;
		My never-failing friends are they,
		With whom I converse day by day.
		
		With them I take delight in weal,
		   And seek relief in woe;
		And while I understand and feel
		   How much to them I owe,
		My cheeks have often been bedew’d
		With tears of thoughtful gratitude.
		
		My thoughts are with the Dead, with them
		   I live in long-past years,
		Their virtues love, their faults condemn,
		   Partake their hopes and fears,
		And from their lessons seek and find
		Instruction with an humble mind.
		
		My hopes are with the Dead, anon
		   My place with them will be,
		And I with them shall travel on
		   Through all Futurity;
		Yet leaving here a name, I trust,
		That will not perish in the dust.


	4. THE OLD MAN’S COMFORTS

		You are old, Father William, the young man cried,
		   The few locks which are left you are grey;
		You are hale, Father William, a hearty old man,
		   Now tell me the reason I pray.
		
		In the days of my youth, Father William replied,
		   I remember’d that youth would fly fast,
		And abused not my health and my vigour at first
		   That I never might need them at last.
		
		You are old, Father William, the young man cried,
		   And pleasures with youth pass away,
		And yet you lament not the days that are gone,
		   Now tell me the reason I pray.
		
		In the days of my youth, Father William replied,
		   I remember’d that youth could not last;
		I thought of the future whatever I did,
		   That I never might grieve for the past.
		
		You are old, Father William, the young man cried,
		   And life must be hastening away;
		You are chearful, and love to converse upon death!
		   Now tell me the reason I pray.
		
		I am chearful, young man, Father William replied,
		   Let the cause thy attention engage;
		In the days of my youth I remember’d my God!
		   And He hath not forgotten my age.


*** Robert Southwell (1561 - 1595)

	1. A CHILD MY CHOICE

		Let folly praise that fancy loves, I praise and love that Child
		Whose heart no thought, whose tongue no word, whose hand no deed defiled.
		
		I praise Him most, I love Him best, all praise and love is His;
		While Him I love, in Him I live, and cannot live amiss.
		
		Love’s sweetest mark, laud’s highest theme, man’s most desired light,
		To love Him life, to leave Him death, to live in Him delight.
		
		He mine by gift, I His by debt, thus each to other due;
		First friend He was, best friend He is, all times will try Him true.
		
		Though young, yet wise; though small, yet strong; though man, yet God He is:
		As wise, He knows; as strong, He can; as God, He loves to bless.
		
		His knowledge rules, His strength defends, His love doth cherish all;
		His birth our joy, His life our light, His death our end of thrall.
		
		Alas! He weeps, He sighs, He pants, yet do His angels sing;
		Out of His tears, His sighs and throbs, doth bud a joyful spring.
		
		Almighty Babe, whose tender arms can force all foes to fly,
		Correct my faults, protect my life, direct me when I die!


	2. A VALE OF TEARS

		A vale there is, enwrapt with dreadful shades,
		    Which thick of mourning pines shrouds from the sun,
		Where hanging cliffs yield short and dumpish glades,
		    And snowy flood with broken streams doth run.
		
		Where eye-room is from rock to cloudy sky,
		    From thence to dales with stony ruins strew’d,
		Then to the crushèd water’s frothy fry,
		    Which tumbleth from the tops where snow is thaw’d.
		
		Where ears of other sound can have no choice,
		    But various blust’ring of the stubborn wind
		In trees, in caves, in straits with divers noise;
		    Which now doth hiss, now howl, now roar by kind.
		
		Where waters wrestle with encount’ring stones,
		    That break their streams, and turn them into foam,
		The hollow clouds full fraught with thund’ring groans,
		    With hideous thumps discharge their pregnant womb.
		
		And in the horror of this fearful quire
		    Consists the music of this doleful place;
		All pleasant birds from thence their tunes retire,
		    Where none but heavy notes have any grace.
		
		Resort there is of none but pilgrim wights,
		    That pass with trembling foot and panting heart;
		With terror cast in cold and shivering frights,
		    They judge the place to terror framed by art.
		
		Yet nature’s work it is, of art untouch’d,
		    So strait indeed, so vast unto the eye,
		With such disorder’d order strangely couch’d,
		    And with such pleasing horror low and high,
		
		That who it views must needs remain aghast,
		    Much at the work, more at the Maker’s might;
		And muse how nature such a plot could cast
		    Where nothing seemeth wrong, yet nothing right.
		
		A place for mated mindes, an only bower
		    Where everything do soothe a dumpish mood;
		Earth lies forlorn, the cloudy sky doth lower,
		    The wind here weeps, here sighs, here cries aloud.
		
		The struggling flood between the marble groans,
		    Then roaring beats upon the craggy sides;
		A little off, amidst the pebble stones,
		    With bubbling streams and purling noise it glides.
		
		The pines thick set, high grown and ever green,
		    Still clothe the place with sad and mourning veil;
		Here gaping cliff, there mossy plain is seen,
		    Here hope doth spring, and there again doth quail.
		
		Huge massy stones that hang by tickle stays,
		    Still threaten fall, and seem to hang in fear;
		Some wither’d trees, ashamed of their decays,
		    Bereft of green are forced gray coats to wear.
		
		Here crystal springs crept out of secret vein,
		    Straight find some envious hole that hides their grace;
		Here searèd tufts lament the want of rain,
		    There thunder-wrack gives terror to the place.
		
		All pangs and heavy passions here may find
		    A thousand motives suiting to their griefs,
		To feed the sorrows of their troubled mind,
		    And chase away dame Pleasure’s vain reliefs.
		
		To plaining thoughts this vale a rest may be,
		    To which from worldly joys they may retire;
		Where sorrow springs from water, stone and tree;
		    Where everything with mourners doth conspire.
		
		Sit here, my soul, main streams of tears afloat,
		    Here all thy sinful foils alone recount;
		Of solemn tunes make thou the doleful note,
		    That, by thy ditties, dolour may amount.
		
		When echo shall repeat thy painful cries,
		    Think that the very stones thy sins bewray,
		And now accuse thee with their sad replies,
		    As heaven and earth shall in the latter day.
		
		Let former faults be fuel of thy fire,
		    For grief in limbeck of thy heart to still
		Thy pensive thoughts and dumps of thy desire,
		    And vapour tears up to thy eyes at will.
		
		Let tears to tunes, and pains to plaints be press’d,
		    And let this be the burden of thy song,--
		Come, deep remorse, possess my sinful breast;
		    Delights, adieu!  I harbour’d you too long.


	3. CONTENT AND RICH

		I dwell in Grace’s court,
		Enriched with Virtue’s rights;
		Faith guides my wit, Love leads my will,
		Hope all my mind delights.
		
		In lowly vales I mount
		To pleasure’s highest pitch;
		My silly shroud true honour brings;
		My poor estate is rich.
		
		My conscience is my crown,
		Contented thoughts my rest;
		My heart is happy in itself;
		My bliss is in my breast.
		
		Enough, I reckon wealth; 
		That mean, the surest lot, 
		That lies too high for base contempt,
		Too low for envy’s shot.
		
		My wishes are but few
		All easy to fulfil;
		I make the limits of my power
		The bounds unto my will.
		
		I fear no care for gold;
		Well-doing is my wealth;
		My mind to me an empire is,
		While grace affordeth health.
		
		I clip high-climbing thoughts,
		The wings of swelling pride;
		Their fall is worst that from the heigh
		Of greatest honour slide.
		
		Since sails of largest size
		The storm doth soonest tear;
		I bear so low and small a sail
		As freeth me from fear.
		
		I wrestle not with rage,
		While fury’s flame doth burn;
		It is in vain to stop the stream
		Until the tide doth turn.
		
		But when the flame is out,
		And ebbing wrath doth end,
		I turn a late enraged foe
		Into a quiet friend.
		
		And, taught with often proof,
		A temper’d calm I find
		To be most solace to itself,
		Best cure for angry mind.
		
		Spare diet is my fare,
		My clothes more fit than fine;
		I know I feed and clothe a foe,
		That pamper’d would repine.
		
		I envy not their hap
		Whom favour doth advance;
		I take no pleasure in their pain
		That have less happy chance.
		
		To rise by others’ fall
		I deem a losing gain;
		All states with others’ ruin built,
		To ruin run amain.
		
		No change of fortune’s calm
		Can cast my comforts down;
		When fortune smiles, I smile to think
		How quickly she will frown.
		
		And when, in froward mood,
		She prov’d an angry foe;
		Small gain I found to let her come,--
		Less loss to let her go.


	4. LOOK HOME

		Retired thoughts enjoy their own delights,
		As beauty doth in self-beholding eye;
		Man’s mind a mirror is of heavenly sights,
		A brief wherein all marvels summed lie,
		Of fairest forms and sweetest shapes the store,
		Most graceful all, yet thought may grace them more.
		
		The mind a creature is, yet can create,
		To nature’s patterns adding higher skill;
		Of finest works with better could the state
		If force of wit had equal power of will.
		Device of man in working hath no end,
		What thought can think, another thought can mend.
		
		Man’s soul of endless beauty image is,
		Drawn by the work of endless skill and might;
		This skillful might gave many sparks of bliss
		And, to discern this bliss, a native light;
		To frame God’s image as his worths required
		His might, his skill, his word and will conspired.
		
		All that he had his image should present,
		All that it should present it could afford,
		To that he could afford his will was bent,
		His will was followed with performing word.
		Let this suffice, by this conceive the rest,
		He should, he could, he would, he did, the best.


	5. LOVE’S GARDEN GRIEF

		Vain loves avaunt! infamous is your pleasure,
		    Your joys deceit;
		Your jewels jests, and worthless trash your treasure,
		    Fools’ common bait.
		Your palace is a prison that allureth
		To sweet mishap, and rest that pain procureth.
		
		Your garden grief hedged in with thorns of envy
		    And stakes of strife;
		Your allies error gravel’d with jealousy
		    And cares of life;
		Your branches seats enwrapp’d with shades of sadness;
		Your arbours breed rough fits of raging madness.
		
		Your beds are sown with seeds of all iniquity
		    And poisoning weeds,
		Whose stalks ill thoughts, whose leaves words full of vanity,
		    Whose fruits misdeeds;
		Whose sap is sin, whose force and operation,
		To banish grace, and work the soul’s damnation.
		
		Your trees are dismal plants of pining corrosives,
		    Whose root is ruth,
		Whose bark is bale, whose timber stubborn fantasies,
		    Whose pith untruth;
		On which in lieu of birds whose voice delighteth,
		Of guilty conscience screeching note affrighteth.
		
		Your coolest summer gales are scalding sighings,
		    Your showers are tears;
		Your sweetest smell the stench of sinful living,
		    Your favours fears;
		Your gard’ner Satan, all you reap is misery,
		Your gain remorse and loss of all felicity.


	6. MAN’S CIVIL WAR

		MY hovering thoughts would fly to heaven
		  And quiet nestle in the sky,
		Fain would my ship in Virtue’s shore
		  Without remove at anchor lie.
		
		But mounting thoughts are haled down
		  With heavy poise of mortal load,
		And blustring storms deny my ship
		  In Virtue’s haven secure abode.
		
		When inward eye to heavenly sights
		  Doth draw my longing heart’s desire,
		The world with jesses of delights
		  Would to her perch my thoughts retire,
		
		Fon Fancy trains to Pleasure’s lure,
		  Though Reason stiffly do repine;
		Though Wisdom woo me to the saint,
		  Yet Sense would win me to the shrine.
		
		Where Reason loathes, there Fancy loves,
		  And overrules the captive will;
		Foes senses are to Virtue’s lore,
		  They draw the wit their wish to fill.
		
		Need craves consent of soul to sense,
		  Yet divers bents breed civil fray;
		Hard hap where halves must disagree,
		  Or truce halves the whole betray!
		
		O cruel fight! where fighting friend
		  With love doth kill a favoring foe,
		Where peace with sense is war with God,
		  And self-delight the seed of woe!
		
		Dame Pleasure’s drugs are steeped in sin,
		  Their sugared taste doth breed annoy;
		O fickle sense! beware her gin,
		  Sell not thy soul to brittle joy!


	7. NEW HEAVEN, NEW WAR

		Come to your heaven, you heavenly choirs, 
		Earth hath the heaven of your desires; 
		Remove your dwelling to your God, 
		A stall is now his best abode; 
		Sith men their homage do deny, 
		Come, Angels, all their fault supply.
		
		His chilling cold doth heat require, 
		Come, Seraphins, in lieu of fire; 
		This little Ark no cover hath, 
		Let Cherubs’ wings his body swath; 
		Come, Raphael, this Babe must eat, 
		Provide our little Tobie meat.
		
		Let Gabriel be now his groom, 
		That first took up his earthly room; 
		Let Michael stand in his defence, 
		Whom love hath link’d to feeble sense; 
		Let Graces rock when he doth cry, 
		Let Angels sing his lullaby.
		
		The same you saw in heavenly seat, 
		Is he that now sucks Mary’s teat; 
		Agonize your King a mortal wight, 
		His borrowed weed lets not your sight; 
		Come, kiss the manger where he lies, 
		That is your bliss above the skies.
		
		This little Babe so few days old, 
		Is come to rifle Satan’s fold; 
		All hell doth at his presence quake, 
		Though he himself for cold do shake; 
		For in this weak, unarmed wise, 
		The gates of hell he will surprise.
		
		With tears he fights and wins the field, 
		His naked breast stands for a shield; 
		His battering shot are babish cries, 
		His arrows made of weeping eyes, 
		His martial ensigns cold and need, 
		And feeble flesh his warrior’s steed.
		
		His camp is pitched in a stall, 
		His bulwark but a broken wall; 
		The crib his trench, hay stalks his stakes, 
		Of shepherds he his muster makes; 
		And thus as sure his foe to wound, 
		The Angels’ trumps alarum sound.
		
		My soul with Christ join thou in fight, 
		Stick to the tents that he hath dight; 
		Within his crib is surest ward, 
		This little Babe will be thy guard; 
		If thou wilt foil thy foes with joy, 
		Then flit not from the heavenly boy.


	8. THE BURNING BABE

		As I in hoary winter’s night stood shivering in the snow,
		Surpris’d I was with sudden heat which made my heart to glow;
		And lifting up a fearful eye to view what fire was near,
		A pretty Babe all burning bright did in the air appear;
		Who, scorched with excessive heat, such floods of tears did shed
		As though his floods should quench his flames which with his tears were fed.
		“Alas!” quoth he, “but newly born, in fiery heats I fry,
		Yet none approach to warm their hearts or feel my fire but I!
		
		My faultless breast the furnace is, the fuel wounding thorns,
		Love is the fire, and sighs the smoke, the ashes shame and scorns;
		The fuel Justice layeth on, and Mercy blows the coals,
		The metal in this furnace wrought are men’s defiled souls,
		For which, as now on fire I am to work them to their good,
		So will I melt into a bath to wash them in my blood.”
		
		With this he vanish’d out of sight and swiftly shrunk away,
		And straight I called unto mind that it was Christmas day.


	9. THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST

		Behold the father is his daughter’s son,
		The bird that built the nest is hatched therein,
		The old of years an hour hath not outrun,
		Eternal life to live doth now begin,
		The Word is dumb, the mirth of heaven doth weep,
		Might feeble is, and force doth faintly creep.
		
		O dying souls, behold your living spring;
		O dazzled eyes, behold your sun of grace;
		Dull ears, attend what word this Word doth bring;
		Up, heavy hearts, with joy your joy embrace.
		From death, from dark, from deafness, from despairs
		This life, this light, this Word, this joy repairs.
		
		Gift better than himself God doth not know;
		Gift better than his God no man can see.
		This gift doth here the giver given bestow;
		Gift to this gift let each receiver be.
		God is my gift, himself he freely gave me;
		God’s gift am I, and none but God shall have me.
		
		Man altered was by sin from man to beast;
		Beast’s food is hay, hay is all mortal flesh.
		Now God is flesh and lies in manger pressed
		As hay, the brutest sinner to refresh.
		O happy field wherein that fodder grew,
		Whose taste doth us from beasts to men renew.


	10. THE VIRGIN MARY TO CHRIST ON THE CROSS

		What mist hath dimm’d that glorious face?
		What seas of grief my sun doth toss?
		The golden rays of heavenly grace
		Lies now eclipsèd on the cross.
		
		Jesus, my love, my Son, my God,
		Behold Thy mother wash’d in tears:
		Thy bloody wounds be made a rod
		To chasten these my later years.
		
		You cruel Jews, come work your ire
		Upon this worthless flesh of mine,
		And kindle not eternal fire
		By wounding Him who is divine.
		
		Thou messenger that didst impart
		His first descent into my womb,
		Come help me now to cleave my heart,
		That there I may my Son entomb.
		
		You angels, all that present were
		To show His birth with harmony,
		Why are you not now ready here,
		To make a mourning symphony?
		
		The cause I know you wail alone,
		And shed your tears in secrecy,
		Lest I should movèd be to moan,
		By force of heavy company.
		
		But wail, my soul, thy comfort dies,
		My woful womb, lament thy fruit;
		My heart give tears unto mine eyes,
		Let sorrow string my heavy lute.


	11. TIMES GO BY TERMS

		THE lopped tree in time may grow again,
		   Most naked plants renew both fruit and flower;
		The sorriest wight may find release of pain,
		   The driest soil suck in some moistening shower.
		       Times go by turns, and chances change by course,
		       From foul to fair, from better hap to worse.
		
		The sea of Fortune doth not ever flow, 
		   She draws her favours to the lowest ebb.
		Her tides hath equal times to come and go,
		   Her loom doth weave the fine and coarsest web.
		       No joy so great but runneth to an end,
		       No hap so hard but may in fine amend.
		
		Not always fall of leaf, nor ever spring,
		   No endless night, yet not eternal day;
		The saddest birds a season find to sing,
		   The roughest storm a calm may soon allay.
		       Thus, with succeeding turns, God tempereth all,
		       That man may hope to rise, yet fear to fall.
		
		A chance may win that by mischance was lost;
		   The net, that holds no great, takes little fish;
		In some things all, in all things none are crossed;
		   Few all they need, but none have all they wish.
		       Unmeddled joys here to no man befall;
		       Who least, hath some; who most, hath never all.


*** Stephen Spender (1909 - 1995)

	1. A STOPWATCH AND AN ORDNANCE MAP

		A stopwatch and an ordnance map. 
		At five a man fell to the ground 
		And the watch flew off his wrist 
		Like a moon struck from the earth 
		Marking a blank time that stares 
		On the tides of change beneath. 
		All under the olive trees. 
		A stopwatch and an ordnance map. 
		He stayed faithfully in that place 
		From his living comrade split 
		By dividers of the bullet 
		Opening wide the distances 
		Of his final loneliness. 
		
		All under the olive trees. 
		A stopwatch and an ordnance map. 
		And the bones are fixed at five 
		Under the moon’s timelessness; 
		But another who lives on 
		Wears within his heart forever 
		Space split open by the bullet. 
		All under the olive trees.


	2. DAYBREAK

		At Dawn she lay with her profile at that angle 
		Which, when she sleeps, seems the carved face of an angel. 
		Her hair a harp, the hand of a breeze follows 
		And plays, against the white cloud of the pillows. 
		Then, in a flush of rose, she woke, and her eyes that opened 
		Swam in blue through her rose flesh that dawned. 
		From her dew of lips, the drop of one word 
		Fell like the first of fountains: murmured 
		‘Darling’, upon my ears the song of the first bird. 
		‘My dream becomes my dream,‘ she said, ‘come true. 
		I waken from you to my dream of you.‘ 
		Oh, my own wakened dream then dared assume 
		The audacity of her sleep. Our dreams 
		Poured into each other’s arms, like streams.


	3. I THINK CONTINUALLY

		I think continually of those who were truly great. 
		Who, from the womb, remembered the soul’s history 
		Through corridors of light where the hours are suns 
		Endless and singing. Whose lovely ambition 
		Was that their lips, still touched with fire, 
		Should tell of the Spirit clothed from head to foot in song. 
		And who hoarded from the Spring branches 
		The desires falling across their bodies like blossoms. 
		
		What is precious is never to forget 
		The essential delight of the blood drawn from ageless springs 
		Breaking through rocks in worlds before our earth. 
		Never to deny its pleasure in the morning simple light 
		Nor its grave evening demand for love. 
		Never to allow gradually the traffic to smother 
		With noise and fog the flowering of the spirit. 
		
		Near the snow, near the sun, in the highest fields 
		See how these names are feted by the waving grass 
		And by the streamers of white cloud 
		And whispers of wind in the listening sky. 
		The names of those who in their lives fought for life 
		Who wore at their hearts the fire’s centre. 
		Born of the sun they travelled a short while towards the sun, 
		And left the vivid air signed with their honour.


	4. ON THE PILOTS WHO DESTROYED GERMANY

		I stood on a roof top and they wove their cage 
		Their murmuring throbbing cage, in the air of blue crystal. 
		I saw them gleam above the town like diamond bolts 
		Conjoining invisible struts of wire, 
		Carrying through the sky their geometric cage 
		Woven by senses delicate as a shoal of flashing fish. 
		
		They went. They left a silence in our streets below 
		Which boys gone to schoolroom leave in their playground. 
		A silence of asphalt, of privet hedge, of staring wall. 
		In the glass emptied sky their diamonds had scratched 
		Long curving finest whitest lines. 
		These the day soon melted into satin ribbons 
		Falling over heaven’s terraces near the golden sun. 
		
		Oh that April morning they carried my will 
		Exalted expanding singing in their aeriel cage. 
		They carried my will. They dropped it on a German town. 
		My will expanded and tall buildings fell down. 
		
		Then, when die ribbons faded and the sky forgot, 
		And April was concerned with building nests and being hot 
		I began to remember the lost names and faces. 
		
		Now I tie the ribbons torn down from those terraces 
		Around the most hidden image in my lines, 
		And my life, which never paid the price of their wounds, 
		Turns thoughts over and over like a propellor 
		Assumes their guilt, honours, repents, prays for them.


	5. THREE SUMMER DAYS

		On the first summer day I lay in the valley. 
		Above rocks the sky sealed my eyes with a leaf 
		The grass licked my skin. The flowers bound my nostrils 
		With scented cotton threads. The soil invited 
		My hands and feet to grow down and have roots. 
		Bees and grass-hoppers drummed over 
		Crepitations of thirst rising from dry stones, 
		And the ants rearranged my ceaseless thoughts 
		Into different patterns for ever the same. 
		Then the blue wind fell out of the air 
		And the sun hammered down till I became of wood 
		Glistening brown beginning to warp. 
		
		On the second summer day I climbed through the forest’s 
		Huge tent pegged to the mountain-side by roots. 
		My direction was cancelled by that great sum of trees. 
		Here darkness lay under the leaves in a war 
		Against light, which occasionally penetrated 
		Splintering spears through several interstices 
		And dropping white clanging shields on the soil. 
		Silence was stitched through with thinnest pine needles 
		And bird songs were stifled behind a hot hedge. 
		My feet became as heavy as logs. 
		I drank up all the air of the forest. 
		My mind changed to amber transfixed with dead flies. 
		
		On the third summer day I sprang from the forest 
		Into the wonder of a white snow-tide. 
		Alone with the sun’s wild whispering wheel, 
		Grinding seeds of secret light on frozen fields, 
		Every burden fell from me, the forest from my back, 
		The valley dwindled to bewildering visions 
		Seen through torn shreds of the sailing clouds. 
		Above the snowfield one rock against the sky 
		Shaped out of pure silence a naked tune 
		Like a violin when the tune forsakes the instrument 
		And the pure sound flies through the ears’ gate 
		And a whole sky floods the pool of one mind.


	6. ULTIMA RATIO REGUM

		The guns spell money’s ultimate reason 
		In letters of lead on the spring hillside. 
		But the boy lying dead under the olive trees 
		Was too young and too silly 
		To have been notable to their important eye. 
		He was a better target for a kiss. 
		
		When he lived, tall factory hooters never summoned him. 
		Nor did restaurant plate-glass doors revolve to wave him in. 
		His name never appeared in the papers. 
		The world maintained its traditional wall 
		Round the dead with their gold sunk deep as a well, 
		Whilst his life, intangible as a Stock Exchange rumour, drifted outside. 
		
		O too lightly he threw down his cap 
		One day when the breeze threw petals from the trees. 
		The unflowering wall sprouted with guns, 
		Machine-gun anger quickly scythed the grasses; 
		Flags and leaves fell from hands and branches; 
		The tweed cap rotted in the nettles. 
		
		Consider his life which was valueless 
		In terms of employment, hotel ledgers, news files. 
		Consider. One bullet in ten thousand kills a man. 
		Ask. Was so much expenditure justified 
		On the death of one so young and so silly 
		Lying under the olive tree, O world, O death?


*** Carl Spitteler (1845 - 1924)

	1. PUBERTY

		On the upland, high above the village,
		Under hazel-branches lay the goatherd,
		Crossed his hands behind his neck for pillow,
		Pulled his straw-hat farther down for sunshade.
		But the straw-hat could not stop the golden
		Trickle of the sunbeams through its meshes.
		
		To himself the poor boy murmured sadly
		“Oh, to catch that glitter in my fingers,
		Tie it in my handkerchief and hasten
		Down into the village to the goldsmith!
		He would surely pay a thousand dollars--
		Then I’d buy a pair of spurs, a pony,
		Ride him to the manse, and knock so loudly
		(Using my new whip) that Fraulein Anna
		Eagerly would run to find her mother,
		Say: ‘Dear mother, hurry to the cellar,
		Bring a flask of ruby wine, the finest, 
		Set a fowl to roast within the oven;
		For a stranger soldierly and haughty
		Has arrived--he must have come to woo me.’
		
		Ah, but not the bottle, nor the chicken,
		Would I touch, however fine and tender;
		Nothing but herself, but Fraulein Anna!
		Her I’d set upon the pony, clasping
		Both my arms around her, and would gallop
		All along the street, along the village,
		Up the hill, and stop at Friedli’s hostel--
		Then we would be married in the autumn.”
		
		Thus the poor boy communed with his fancies;
		Then remembering all, and sighing deeply
		Thought: “The fool you are with your fool-stories!
		You will live and you will die a goatherd,
		Penniless and barefoot and a no-one.
		Anna would not look at you an instant.”
		
		Hark--the goats were bleating, at the tethers
		Dragging, and in circles wildly leaping;
		And in single file along the footpath
		Came two fine young ladies from the city.
		And the first one, calling to the second,
		Cried: ‘We are in luck! You see the boy there
		Stretched beneath a hazel-bough? His forehead’s
		All a mass of curls, his mouth is rosy,
		Rosy too his cheeks, and soft for kissing!’
		Saying so, she ran across the meadow,
		Stooped above the boy, while her companion
		Curtain-wise her petticoats extended.
		Then on the mouth and cheeks the first one kissed him--
		Ten or twelve times kissed the startled youngster.
		
		After that they altered their arrangements;
		While the first assumed the part of curtain,
		She who came the second took her kisses.
		Then they threw their arms round one another,
		Danced into the wood, and singing vanished.
		
		But the boy lay still among the grasses,
		Qualms of conscience, pangs of shame, upon him:
		“Curse thee for a faithless wanton fellow,
		Faithless to the loved, the peerless lady!
		On thee have the lips of stranger feasted,
		Sinner! And thyself hast likewise feasted!
		Never now of gracious Fraulein Anna
		Canst thou front the pure angelic beauty--
		As the burrowing mole before the sunlight
		Thou shalt flinch before that face from heaven.”
		
		But when evening bells began to tinkle
		And the boy, despairing, broken-hearted,
		Homeward slunk, his goat behind him dragging,
		Lo! Upon the path appeared the pastor,
		Then the pastor’s wife, and then--confound it!--
		Last of all herself, his Fraulein Anna.
		Wonders never cease, though--for the pastor
		Took him by the chin, and asked him kindly
		“How’s the weather? And the Paternosters?”
		And the pastor’s lady stroked his lovelocks,
		And his Fraulein Anna very sweetly
		Looked behind, and whispered to her mother:
		“Hasn’t he grown manly and good looking?”


	2. THE HIKER

		Downy flakes whisper softly from the sky.
		A hiker climbs over firn and ice.
		The snow woman follows him with treacherous steps:
		
		“Hold still, my dear, and take me with you!
		The evening is near and the summit is far away.
		I’d be happy to play you a little song just to keep you entertained.”
		
		She puts the green shawm on her lip,
		She rejoiced at flowers and Lenz and Mai.
		He listened, cheeks wet with tears,
		Then he ticked the box and drew for bass.
		
		And darker clouds the twilight snow.
		She crept to his side on a cunning toe:
		“Stop! let me shine for you, you are wandering astray!
		I’ll tell you a friendly fairy tale.”
		
		A traffic light she drew from her robe:
		The homeland shines before his eyes,
		The hill, the garden, being a parent
		In the blissful golden glow of youth.
		
		He swayed. Already he shortens the measure of his steps,
		Then he ticked the box and drew for bass.
		
		And it storms and it rummages with storm power,
		White night yawns from the howling rock.
		His will failed, his knee sank.
		There she sat on a stone bench.
		
		“It’s comfortable here; come, sit down!
		I really know how to caress.
		And slumber lures you and a dream laughs at you:
		There is room on my warm bosom.”
		
		She looked so lovely, she nodded so sweetly,
		as if the sky wanted to open up to him.
		He staggers towards her in a staggering run
		and fell at her feet--never got up again.


	3. THE LITTLE BELL’S COMPLAINT

		The little bell once sadly
		The organ thus addressed:
		“Your pipes’ rich store of changes
		Wakes envy in my breast
		You’ve countless ways of telling
		All that your soul can learn;
		And what you learn, we feel it,
		And when you feel, we yearn.
		But I, though grief and pity
		May rend my heart in twain,
		Can only tinkle sweetly,
		Again, and yet again.
		My deepest self is longing
		Once to ring out of tune.
		Who’ll teach me how to jangle?
		That were a bitter boon!”


*** William Stafford (1914 - 1993)

	1. FOR MY YOUNG FRIENDS WHO ARE AFRAID

		There is a country to cross you will
		find in the corner of your eye, in
		the quick slip of your foot--air far
		down, a snap that might have caught.
		And maybe for you, for me, a high, passing
		voice that finds its way by being
		afraid. That country is there, for us,
		carried as it is crossed. What you fear
		will not go away: it will take you into
		yourself and bless you and keep you.
		That’s the world, and we all live there.


	2. JUST THINKING

		Got up on a cool morning. Leaned out a window.
		No cloud, no wind. Air that flowers held
		for awhile. Some dove somewhere.
		
		Been on probation most of my life. And
		the rest of my life been condemned. So these moments
		count for a lot--peace, you know.
		
		Let the bucket of memory down into the well,
		bring it up. Cool, cool minutes. No one
		stirring, no plans. Just being there.
		
		This is what the whole thing is about.


	3. REMEMBERING MOUNTAIN MEN

		I put my foot in cold water
		and hold it there: early mornings
		they had to wade through broken ice
		to find the traps in the deep channel
		with their hands, drag up the chains and
		the drowned beaver. The slow current
		of the life below tugs at me all day.
		When I dream at night, they save a place for me,
		no matter how small, somewhere by the fire.


	4. SECURITY

		Tomorrow will have an island. Before night
		I always find it. Then on to the next island.
		These places hidden in the day separate
		and come forward if you beckon.
		But you have to know they are there before they exist.
		
		Some time there will be a tomorrow without any island.
		So far, I haven’t let that happen, but after
		I’m gone others may become faithless and careless.
		Before them will tumble the wide unbroken sea,
		and without any hope they will stare at the horizon.
		
		So to you, Friend, I confide my secret:
		to be a discoverer you hold close whatever
		you find, and after a while you decide
		what it is. Then, secure in where you have been,
		you turn to the open sea and let go.


	5. THINKING FOR BERKY

		In the late night listening from bed
		I have joined the ambulance or the patrol
		screaming toward some drama, the kind of end
		that Berky must have some day, if she isn’t dead.
		
		The wildest of all, her father and mother cruel,
		farming out there beyond the old stone quarry
		where high school lovers parked their lurching cars,
		Berky learned to love in that dark school.
		
		Early her face was turned away from home
		toward any hardworking place; but still her soul,
		with terrible things to do, was alive, looking out
		for the rescue that--surely, some day--would have to come.
		
		Windiest nights, Berky, I have thought for you,
		and no matter how lucky I’ve been I’ve touched wood.
		There are things not solved in our town though tomorrow came:
		there are things time passing can never make come true.
		
		We live in an occupied country, misunderstood;
		justice will take us millions of intricate moves.
		Sirens will hunt down Berky, you survivors in your beds
		listening through the night, so far and good.


	6. THIS LIFE

		We would climb the highest dune,
		from there to gaze and come down:
		the ocean was performing;
		we contributed our climb.
		
		Waves leapfrogged and came
		straight out of the storm.
		What should our gaze mean?
		Kit waited for me to decide.
		
		Standing on such a hill,
		what would you tell your child?
		That was an absolute vista.
		Those waves raced far, and cold.
		
		“How far could you swim, Daddy,
		in such a storm?”
		“As far as was needed,” I said,
		and as I talked, I swam.


*** Gertrude Stein (1874 - 1946)

	1. SUSIE ASADO

		Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea.
		      Susie Asado.
		Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea.
		      Susie Asado.
		Susie Asado which is a told tray sure.
		A lean on the shoe this means slips slips hers.
		When the ancient light grey is clean it is yellow, it is a silver seller.
		This is a please this is a please there are the saids to jelly. These are the wets these say the sets to leave a crown to Incy.
		Incy is short for incubus.
		A pot. A pot is a beginning of a rare bit of trees. Trees tremble, the old vats are in bobbles, bobbles which shade and shove and render clean, render clean must.   
		      Drink pups.   
		Drink pups drink pups lease a sash hold, see it shine and a bobolink has pins. It shows a nail.
		What is a nail. A nail is unison.
		Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea.


	2. THE WORK

		Not fierce and tender but sweet.
		This is our impression of the soldiers.
		We call our machine Aunt Pauline.
		Fasten it fat, that is us, we say Aunt Pauline.
		When we left Paris we had rain.
		Not snow now nor that in between.
		We did have snow then.
		Now we are bold.
		We are accustomed to it.
		All the weights are measures.
		By this we mean we know how much oil we use for the machine.
		
		                                                 *          *          *
		
		Hurrah for America.
		Here we met a Captain and take him part way.
		A day’s sun.
		Is this Miss.
		Yes indeed our mat.
		We meant by this that we were always meeting people and that it was
		pleasant.
		We can thank you.
		We thank you.
		Soldiers of course spoke to us.
		Come together.
		Come to me there now.
		They read on our van American Committee in aid of French wounded.
		All of it is bit.
		Bitter.
		This is the way they say we do help.
		In the meaning of bright.
		Bright not light.
		This comforts them when they speak to me. I often discuss America with them and what we hope to do. They listen well and say we hope so too.
		We all do.
		
		                                                 *          *          *
		
		This is apropros of the birthplace of Maréchal Joffre. We visited it and we have sent postal cards of it. The committee will be pleased.
		It is not a bother to be a soldier.
		I think kindly of that bother.
		Can you say lapse.
		Then think about it.
		Indeed it is yet.
		We are so pleased.
		With the flag.
		With the flag of sets.
		Sets of color.
		Do you like flags.
		Blue flags smell sweetly.
		Blue flags in a whirl.
		We did this we had ribbon of the American flag and we cut it up and we gave each soldier one with a pin and they pinned it on and we were pleased and we received a charming letter from a telephonist at the front who heard from a friend in Perpignan that we were giving this bit of ribbon and he asked for some and we sent them and we hope that they are all living.
		The wind blows.
		And the automobile goes.
		Can you guess boards.
		Wood.
		Naturally we think about wind because this country of Rousillon is the windiest corner in France. Also it is a great wine country.
		
		                                                 *          *          *
		
		This is apropos of the fact that I always ask where they come from and then I am ashamed to say I don’t know all the Departments but I am learning them.
		In the meantime.
		In the meantime we are useful.
		That is what I mean to say.
		In the meantime can you have beds. This means that knowing the number
		of beds you begin to know the hospital.
		Kindly call a brother.
		What is a cure.
		I speak french.
		What one means.
		I can call it in time.
		By the way where are fish.
		They all love fishing.
		In that case are there any wonders.
		Many wonders are women.
		I could almost say that that was apropos of my cranking my machine.
		And men too.
		We smile.
		In the way sentences.
		He does not feel as we do.
		But he did have the coat.
		He blushed a little.
		This is sometimes when they can’t quite help themselves and they want to help us.
		We do not understand the weather. That astonishes me.
		Camellias in Perpignan.
		Camellias finish when roses begin.
		Thank you in smiles.
		In this way we go on. So far we have had no troubles yet and yet we do need material.
		It is astonishing that those who have fought so hard and so well should pick yellow irises and fish in a stream.
		And then a pansy.
		I did not ask for it.
		It smells.
		A sweet smell.
		With acacia.
		Call it locusts.
		Call it me.
		I finish by saying that the french soldier is the person we should all help.


*** Wallace Stevens (1879 - 1955)

	1. ANECDOTE OF THE JAR

		I placed a jar in Tennessee,
		And round it was, upon a hill.
		It made the slovenly wilderness
		Surround that hill.
		
		The wilderness rose up to it,
		And sprawled around, no longer wild.
		The jar was round upon the ground
		And tall and of a port in air.
		
		It took dominion everywhere.
		The jar was gray and bare.
		It did not give of bird or bush,
		Like nothing else in Tennessee.


	2. DISILLUSIONMENT OF TEN O’CLOCK

		The houses are haunted   
		By white night-gowns.   
		None are green,
		Or purple with green rings,   
		Or green with yellow rings,   
		Or yellow with blue rings.   
		None of them are strange,   
		With socks of lace
		And beaded ceintures.
		People are not going
		To dream of baboons and periwinkles.   
		Only, here and there, an old sailor,   
		Drunk and asleep in his boots,   
		Catches tigers
		In red weather.


	3. OF MERE BEING

		The palm at the end of the mind,
		Beyond the last thought, rises
		In the bronze decor,
		
		A gold-feathered bird
		Sings in the palm, without human meaning,
		Without human feeling, a foreign song.
		
		You know then that it is not the reason
		That makes us happy or unhappy.
		The bird sings. Its feathers shine.
		
		The palm stands on the edge of space.
		The wind moves slowly in the branches.
		The bird’s fire-fangled feathers dangle down.


	4. SUNDAY MORNING

			I.
		
		Complacencies of the peignoir, and late 
		Coffee and oranges in a sunny chair, 
		And the green freedom of a cockatoo 
		Upon a rug mingle to dissipate 
		The holy hush of ancient sacrifice. 
		She dreams a little, and she feels the dark 
		Encroachment of that old catastrophe, 
		As a calm darkens among water-lights. 
		The pungent oranges and bright, green wings 
		Seem things in some procession of the dead, 
		Winding across wide water, without sound. 
		The day is like wide water, without sound, 
		Stilled for the passing of her dreaming feet 
		Over the seas, to silent Palestine, 
		Dominion of the blood and sepulchre. 
		
		
			II.
		
		Why should she give her bounty to the dead? 
		What is divinity if it can come 
		Only in silent shadows and in dreams? 
		Shall she not find in comforts of the sun, 
		In pungent fruit and bright, green wings, or else 
		In any balm or beauty of the earth, 
		Things to be cherished like the thought of heaven? 
		Divinity must live within herself: 
		Passions of rain, or moods in falling snow; 
		Grievings in loneliness, or unsubdued 
		Elations when the forest blooms; gusty 
		Emotions on wet roads on autumn nights; 
		All pleasures and all pains, remembering 
		The bough of summer and the winter branch. 
		These are the measures destined for her soul. 
		
		
			III .
		
		Jove in the clouds had his inhuman birth. 
		No mother suckled him, no sweet land gave 
		Large-mannered motions to his mythy mind. 
		He moved among us, as a muttering king, 
		Magnificent, would move among his hinds, 
		Until our blood, commingling, virginal, 
		With heaven, brought such requital to desire 
		The very hinds discerned it, in a star. 
		Shall our blood fail? Or shall it come to be 
		The blood of paradise? And shall the earth 
		Seem all of paradise that we shall know? 
		The sky will be much friendlier then than now, 
		A part of labor and a part of pain, 
		And next in glory to enduring love, 
		Not this dividing and indifferent blue. 
		
		
			IV.
		
		She says, “I am content when wakened birds, 
		Before they fly, test the reality 
		Of misty fields, by their sweet questionings; 
		But when the birds are gone, and their warm fields 
		Return no more, where, then, is paradise?” 
		There is not any haunt of prophecy, 
		Nor any old chimera of the grave, 
		Neither the golden underground, nor isle 
		Melodious, where spirits gat them home, 
		Nor visionary south, nor cloudy palm 
		Remote on heaven’s hill, that has endured 
		As April’s green endures; or will endure 
		Like her remembrance of awakened birds, 
		Or her desire for June and evening, tipped 
		By the consummation of the swallow’s wings. 
		
		
			V.
		
		She says, “But in contentment I still feel 
		The need of some imperishable bliss.” 
		Death is the mother of beauty; hence from her, 
		Alone, shall come fulfilment to our dreams 
		And our desires. Although she strews the leaves 
		Of sure obliteration on our paths, 
		The path sick sorrow took, the many paths 
		Where triumph rang its brassy phrase, or love 
		Whispered a little out of tenderness, 
		She makes the willow shiver in the sun 
		For maidens who were wont to sit and gaze 
		Upon the grass, relinquished to their feet. 
		She causes boys to pile new plums and pears 
		On disregarded plate. The maidens taste 
		And stray impassioned in the littering leaves. 
		
		
			VI.
		
		Is there no change of death in paradise? 
		Does ripe fruit never fall? Or do the boughs 
		Hang always heavy in that perfect sky, 
		Unchanging, yet so like our perishing earth, 
		With rivers like our own that seek for seas 
		They never find, the same receding shores 
		That never touch with inarticulate pang? 
		Why set the pear upon those river-banks 
		Or spice the shores with odors of the plum? 
		Alas, that they should wear our colors there, 
		The silken weavings of our afternoons, 
		And pick the strings of our insipid lutes! 
		Death is the mother of beauty, mystical, 
		Within whose burning bosom we devise 
		Our earthly mothers waiting, sleeplessly. 
		
		
			VII.
		
		Supple and turbulent, a ring of men 
		Shall chant in orgy on a summer morn 
		Their boisterous devotion to the sun, 
		Not as a god, but as a god might be, 
		Naked among them, like a savage source. 
		Their chant shall be a chant of paradise, 
		Out of their blood, returning to the sky; 
		And in their chant shall enter, voice by voice, 
		The windy lake wherein their lord delights, 
		The trees, like serafin, and echoing hills, 
		That choir among themselves long afterward. 
		They shall know well the heavenly fellowship 
		Of men that perish and of summer morn. 
		And whence they came and whither they shall go 
		The dew upon their feet shall manifest. 
		
		
			VIII.
		
		She hears, upon that water without sound, 
		A voice that cries, “The tomb in Palestine 
		Is not the porch of spirits lingering. 
		It is the grave of Jesus, where he lay.” 
		We live in an old chaos of the sun, 
		Or old dependency of day and night, 
		Or island solitude, unsponsored, free, 
		Of that wide water, inescapable. 
		Deer walk upon our mountains, and the quail 
		Whistle about us their spontaneous cries; 
		Sweet berries ripen in the wilderness; 
		And, in the isolation of the sky, 
		At evening, casual flocks of pigeons make 
		Ambiguous undulations as they sink, 
		Downward to darkness, on extended wings.


	5. THE AURORAS OF AUTUMN

			I.
		
		This is where the serpent lives, the bodiless. 
		His head is air. Beneath his tip at night 
		Eyes open and fix on us in every sky. 
		
		Or is this another wriggling out of the egg, 
		Another image at the end of the cave, 
		Another bodiless for the body’s slough? 
		
		This is where the serpent lives. This is his nest, 
		These fields, these hills, these tinted distances, 
		And the pines above and along and beside the sea. 
		
		This is form gulping after formlessness, 
		Skin flashing to wished-for disappearances 
		And the serpent body flashing without the skin. 
		
		This is the height emerging and its base 
		These lights may finally attain a pole 
		In the midmost midnight and find the serpent there, 
		
		In another nest, the master of the maze 
		Of body and air and forms and images, 
		Relentlessly in possession of happiness. 
		
		This is his poison: that we should disbelieve 
		Even that. His meditations in the ferns, 
		When he moved so slightly to make sure of sun, 
		
		Made us no less as sure. We saw in his head, 
		Black beaded on the rock, the flecked animal, 
		The moving grass, the Indian in his glade. 
		
		
			II. 
		
		Farewell to an idea . . . A cabin stands, 
		Deserted, on a beach. It is white, 
		As by a custom or according to 
		
		An ancestral theme or as a consequence 
		Of an infinite course. The flowers against the wall 
		Are white, a little dried, a kind of mark 
		
		Reminding, trying to remind, of a white 
		That was different, something else, last year 
		Or before, not the white of an aging afternoon, 
		
		Whether fresher or duller, whether of winter cloud 
		Or of winter sky, from horizon to horizon. 
		The wind is blowing the sand across the floor. 
		
		Here, being visible is being white, 
		Is being of the solid of white, the accomplishment 
		Of an extremist in an exercise . . . 
		
		The season changes. A cold wind chills the beach. 
		The long lines of it grow longer, emptier, 
		A darkness gathers though it does not fall 
		
		And the whiteness grows less vivid on the wall. 
		The man who is walking turns blankly on the sand. 
		He observes how the north is always enlarging the change, 
		
		With its frigid brilliances, its blue-red sweeps 
		And gusts of great enkindlings, its polar green, 
		The color of ice and fire and solitude. 
		
		
			III.
		
		Farewell to an idea . . . The mother’s face, 
		The purpose of the poem, fills the room. 
		They are together, here, and it is warm, 
		
		With none of the prescience of oncoming dreams. 
		It is evening. The house is evening, half dissolved. 
		Only the half they can never possess remains, 
		
		Still-starred. It is the mother they possess, 
		Who gives transparence to their present peace. 
		She makes that gentler that can gentle be. 
		
		And yet she too is dissolved, she is destroyed. 
		She gives transparence. But she has grown old. 
		The necklace is a carving not a kiss. 
		
		The soft hands are a motion not a touch. 
		The house will crumble and the books will burn. 
		They are at ease in a shelter of the mind 
		
		And the house is of the mind and they and time, 
		Together, all together. Boreal night 
		Will look like frost as it approaches them 
		
		And to the mother as she falls asleep 
		And as they say good-night, good-night. Upstairs 
		The windows will be lighted, not the rooms. 
		
		A wind will spread its windy grandeurs round 
		And knock like a rifle-butt against the door. 
		The wind will command them with invincible sound. 
		
		
			IV.
		
		Farewell to an idea . . . The cancellings, 
		The negations are never final. The father sits 
		In space, wherever he sits, of bleak regard, 
		
		As one that is strong in the bushes of his eyes. 
		He says no to no and yes to yes. He says yes 
		To no; and in saying yes he says farewell. 
		
		He measures the velocities of change. 
		He leaps from heaven to heaven more rapidly 
		Than bad angels leap from heaven to hell in flames. 
		
		But now he sits in quiet and green-a-day. 
		He assumes the great speeds of space and flutters them 
		From cloud to cloudless, cloudless to keen clear 
		
		In flights of eye and ear, the highest eye 
		And the lowest ear, the deep ear that discerns, 
		At evening, things that attend it until it hears 
		
		The supernatural preludes of its own, 
		At the moment when the angelic eye defines 
		Its actors approaching, in company, in their masks. 
		
		Master O master seated by the fire 
		And yet in space and motionless and yet 
		Of motion the ever-brightening origin, 
		
		Profound, and yet the king and yet the crown, 
		Look at this present throne. What company, 
		In masks, can choir it with the naked wind? 
		
		
			V. 
		
		The mother invites humanity to her house 
		And table. The father fetches tellers of tales 
		And musicians who mute much, muse much, on the tales. 
		
		The father fetches negresses to dance, 
		Among the children, like curious ripenesses 
		Of pattern in the dance’s ripening. 
		
		For these the musicians make insidious tones, 
		Clawing the sing-song of their instruments. 
		The children laugh and jangle a tinny time. 
		
		The father fetches pageants out of air, 
		Scenes of the theatre, vistas and blocks of woods 
		And curtains like a naive pretence of sleep. 
		
		Among these the musicians strike the instinctive poem. 
		The father fetches his unherded herds, 
		Of barbarous tongue, slavered and panting halves 
		
		Of breath, obedient to his trumpet’s touch. 
		This then is Chatillon or as you please. 
		We stand in the tumult of a festival. 
		
		What festival? This loud, disordered mooch? 
		These hospitaliers? These brute-like guests? 
		These musicians dubbing at a tragedy, 
		
		A-dub, a-dub, which is made up of this: 
		That there are no lines to speak? There is no play. 
		Or, the persons act one merely by being here. 
		
		
			VI.
		
		It is a theatre floating through the clouds, 
		Itself a cloud, although of misted rock 
		And mountains running like water, wave on wave, 
		
		Through waves of light. It is of cloud transformed 
		To cloud transformed again, idly, the way 
		A season changes color to no end, 
		
		Except the lavishing of itself in change, 
		As light changes yellow into gold and gold 
		To its opal elements and fire’s delight, 
		
		Splashed wide-wise because it likes magnificence 
		And the solemn pleasures of magnificent space 
		The cloud drifts idly through half-thought-of forms. 
		
		The theatre is filled with flying birds, 
		Wild wedges, as of a volcano’s smoke, palm-eyed 
		And vanishing, a web in a corridor 
		
		Or massive portico. A capitol, 
		It may be, is emerging or has just 
		Collapsed. The denouement has to be postponed . . . 
		
		This is nothing until in a single man contained, 
		Nothing until this named thing nameless is 
		And is destroyed. He opens the door of his house 
		
		On flames. The scholar of one candle sees 
		An Arctic effulgence flaring on the frame 
		Of everything he is. And he feels afraid.
		
		
			VII.
		
		Is there an imagination that sits enthroned 
		As grim as it is benevolent, the just 
		And the unjust, which in the midst of summer stops 
		
		To imagine winter? When the leaves are dead, 
		Does it take its place in the north and enfold itself, 
		Goat-leaper, crystalled and luminous, sitting 
		
		In highest night? And do these heavens adorn 
		And proclaim it, the white creator of black, jetted 
		By extinguishings, even of planets as may be, 
		
		Even of earth, even of sight, in snow, 
		Except as needed by way of majesty, 
		In the sky, as crown and diamond cabala?
		
		It leaps through us, through all our heavens leaps, 
		Extinguishing our planets, one by one, 
		Leaving, of where we were and looked, of where 
		
		We knew each other and of each other thought, 
		A shivering residue, chilled and foregone, 
		Except for that crown and mystical cabala. 
		
		But it dare not leap by chance in its own dark. 
		It must change from destiny to slight caprice. 
		And thus its jetted tragedy, its stele 
		
		And shape and mournful making move to find 
		What must unmake it and, at last, what can, 
		Say, a flippant communication under the moon. 
		
		
			VIII.
		
		There may be always a time of innocence. 
		There is never a place. Or if there is no time, 
		If it is not a thing of time, nor of place, 
		
		Existing in the idea of it, alone, 
		In the sense against calamity, it is not 
		Less real. For the oldest and coldest philosopher, 
		
		There is or may be a time of innocence 
		As pure principle. Its nature is its end, 
		That it should be, and yet not be, a thing 
		
		That pinches the pity of the pitiful man, 
		Like a book at evening beautiful but untrue, 
		Like a book on rising beautiful and true. 
		
		
		It is like a thing of ether that exists 
		Almost as predicate. But it exists, 
		It exists, it is visible, it is, it is. 
		
		So, then, these lights are not a spell of light, 
		A saying out of a cloud, but innocence. 
		An innocence of the earth and no false sign 
		
		Or symbol of malice. That we partake thereof, 
		Lie down like children in this holiness, 
		As if, awake, we lay in the quiet of sleep, 
		
		As if the innocent mother sang in the dark 
		Of the room and on an accordion, half-heard, 
		Created the time and place in which we breathed . . . 
		
		
			IX.
		
		And of each other thought—in the idiom 
		Of the work, in the idiom of an innocent earth, 
		Not of the enigma of the guilty dream. 
		
		We were as Danes in Denmark all day long 
		And knew each other well, hale-hearted landsmen, 
		For whom the outlandish was another day 
		
		Of the week, queerer than Sunday. We thought alike 
		And that made brothers of us in a home 
		In which we fed on being brothers, fed 
		
		And fattened as on a decorous honeycomb. 
		This drama that we live—We lay sticky with sleep. 
		This sense of the activity of fate—-
		
		The rendezvous, when she came alone, 
		By her coming became a freedom of the two, 
		An isolation which only the two could share. 
		
		Shall we be found hanging in the trees next spring? 
		Of what disaster in this the imminence: 
		Bare limbs, bare trees and a wind as sharp as salt? 
		
		The stars are putting on their glittering belts. 
		They throw around their shoulders cloaks that flash 
		Like a great shadow’s last embellishment. 
		
		It may come tomorrow in the simplest word, 
		Almost as part of innocence, almost, 
		Almost as the tenderest and the truest part. 
		
		
			X.
		
		An unhappy people in a happy world--
		Read, rabbi, the phases of this difference. 
		An unhappy people in an unhappy world--
		
		Here are too many mirrors for misery. 
		A happy people in an unhappy world--
		It cannot be. There’s nothing there to roll 
		
		On the expressive tongue, the finding fang. 
		A happy people in a happy world--
		Buffo! A ball, an opera, a bar. 
		
		Turn back to where we were when we began: 
		An unhappy people in a happy world. 
		Now, solemnize the secretive syllables. 
		
		Read to the congregation, for today 
		And for tomorrow, this extremity, 
		This contrivance of the spectre of the spheres, 
		
		Contriving balance to contrive a whole, 
		The vital, the never-failing genius, 
		Fulfilling his meditations, great and small. 
		
		In these unhappy he meditates a whole, 
		The full of fortune and the full of fate, 
		As if he lived all lives, that he might know, 
		
		In hall harridan, not hushful paradise, 
		To a haggling of wind and weather, by these lights 
		Like a blaze of summer straw, in winter’s nick.


	6. THE EMPEROR OF ICE-CREAM

		Call the roller of big cigars,
		The muscular one, and bid him whip
		In kitchen cups concupiscent curds.
		Let the wenches dawdle in such dress
		As they are used to wear, and let the boys
		Bring flowers in last month’s newspapers.
		Let be be finale of seem.
		The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream.
		
		Take from the dresser of deal.
		Lacking the three glass knobs, that sheet
		On which she embroidered fantails once
		And spread it so as to cover her face.
		If her horny feet protrude, they come
		To show how cold she is, and dumb.
		Let the lamp affix its beam.
		The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream.


	7. THE IDEA OF ORDER AT KEY WEST

		She sang beyond the genius of the sea.   
		The water never formed to mind or voice,   
		Like a body wholly body, fluttering
		Its empty sleeves; and yet its mimic motion   
		Made constant cry, caused constantly a cry,   
		That was not ours although we understood,   
		Inhuman, of the veritable ocean.
		
		The sea was not a mask. No more was she.   
		The song and water were not medleyed sound   
		Even if what she sang was what she heard,   
		Since what she sang was uttered word by word.
		It may be that in all her phrases stirred   
		The grinding water and the gasping wind;   
		But it was she and not the sea we heard.
		
		For she was the maker of the song she sang.   
		The ever-hooded, tragic-gestured sea
		Was merely a place by which she walked to sing.   
		Whose spirit is this? we said, because we knew   
		It was the spirit that we sought and knew   
		That we should ask this often as she sang.
		
		If it was only the dark voice of the sea   
		That rose, or even colored by many waves;   
		If it was only the outer voice of sky
		And cloud, of the sunken coral water-walled,   
		However clear, it would have been deep air,   
		The heaving speech of air, a summer sound   
		Repeated in a summer without end
		And sound alone. But it was more than that,   
		More even than her voice, and ours, among
		The meaningless plungings of water and the wind,   
		Theatrical distances, bronze shadows heaped   
		On high horizons, mountainous atmospheres   
		Of sky and sea.
		
		                          It was her voice that made   
		The sky acutest at its vanishing.   
		She measured to the hour its solitude.   
		She was the single artificer of the world
		In which she sang. And when she sang, the sea,   
		Whatever self it had, became the self
		That was her song, for she was the maker. Then we,   
		As we beheld her striding there alone,
		Knew that there never was a world for her   
		Except the one she sang and, singing, made.
		
		Ramon Fernandez, tell me, if you know,   
		Why, when the singing ended and we turned   
		Toward the town, tell why the glassy lights,   
		The lights in the fishing boats at anchor there,   
		As the night descended, tilting in the air,   
		Mastered the night and portioned out the sea,   
		Fixing emblazoned zones and fiery poles,   
		Arranging, deepening, enchanting night.
		
		Oh! Blessed rage for order, pale Ramon,   
		The maker’s rage to order words of the sea,   
		Words of the fragrant portals, dimly-starred,   
		And of ourselves and of our origins,
		In ghostlier demarcations, keener sounds.


	8. THE SNOW MAN

		One must have a mind of winter
		To regard the frost and the boughs
		Of the pine-trees crusted with snow;
		
		And have been cold a long time
		To behold the junipers shagged with ice,
		The spruces rough in the distant glitter
		
		Of the January sun; and not to think
		Of any misery in the sound of the wind,
		In the sound of a few leaves,
		
		Which is the sound of the land
		Full of the same wind
		That is blowing in the same bare place
		
		For the listener, who listens in the snow,
		And, nothing himself, beholds
		Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is.


	9. THE WIND SHIFTS

		This is how the wind shifts:
		Like the thoughts of an old human,
		Who still thinks eagerly
		And despairingly.
		The wind shifts like this:
		Like a human without illusions,
		Who still feels irrational things within her.
		The wind shifts like this:
		Like humans approaching proudly,
		Like humans approaching angrily.
		This is how the wind shifts:
		Like a human, heavy and heavy,
		Who does not care.


	10. THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A BLACKBIRD

			I.
		
		Among twenty snowy mountains,   
		The only moving thing   
		Was the eye of the blackbird. 
		 
		
			II.
		
		I was of three minds,   
		Like a tree   
		In which there are three blackbirds.  
		
		
			III.
		
		The blackbird whirled in the autumn winds.   
		It was a small part of the pantomime.   
		
		
			IV.
		
		A man and a woman   
		Are one.   
		A man and a woman and a blackbird   
		Are one.  
		
		
			V.
		
		I do not know which to prefer,   
		The beauty of inflections   
		Or the beauty of innuendoes,   
		The blackbird whistling   
		Or just after.   
		
		
			VI.
		
		Icicles filled the long window   
		With barbaric glass.   
		The shadow of the blackbird   
		Crossed it, to and fro.   
		The mood   
		Traced in the shadow   
		An indecipherable cause.  
		
		
			VII.
		
		O thin men of Haddam,   
		Why do you imagine golden birds?   
		Do you not see how the blackbird   
		Walks around the feet   
		Of the women about you? 
		 
		
			VIII.
		
		I know noble accents   
		And lucid, inescapable rhythms;   
		But I know, too,   
		That the blackbird is involved   
		In what I know.   
		
		
			IX.
		
		When the blackbird flew out of sight,   
		It marked the edge   
		Of one of many circles.   
		
		
			X.
		
		At the sight of blackbirds   
		Flying in a green light,   
		Even the bawds of euphony   
		Would cry out sharply.   
		
		
			XI.
		
		He rode over Connecticut   
		In a glass coach.   
		Once, a fear pierced him,   
		In that he mistook   
		The shadow of his equipage   
		For blackbirds.   
		
		
			XII.
		
		The river is moving.   
		The blackbird must be flying. 
		 
		
			XIII.
		
		It was evening all afternoon.   
		It was snowing   
		And it was going to snow.   
		The blackbird sat   
		In the cedar-limbs.


*** Robert Louis Stevenson (1850 - 1894)

	1. AUTUMN FIRES

		In the other gardens
		And all up the vale,
		From the autumn bonfires
		See the smoke trail!
		
		Pleasant summer over
		And all the summer flowers,
		The red fire blazes,
		The grey smoke towers.
		
		Sing a song of seasons!
		Something bright in all!
		Flowers in the summer,
		Fires in the fall!


	2. BED IN SUMMER

		In winter I get up at night 
		And dress by yellow candle-light. 
		In summer, quite the other way, 
		I have to go to bed by day. 
		
		I have to go to bed and see 
		The birds still hopping on the tree, 
		Or hear the grown-up people’s feet 
		Still going past me in the street. 
		
		And does it not seem hard to you, 
		When all the sky is clear and blue, 
		And I should like so much to play, 
		To have to go to bed by day?


	3. COME, HERE IS ADIEU TO THE CITY

		Come, here is adieu to the city
		And hurrah for the country again.
		The broad road lies before me
		Watered with last night’s rain.
		The timbered country woos me
		With many a high and bough;
		And again in the shining fallows
		The ploughman follows the plough.
		
		The whole year’s sweat and study,
		And the whole year’s sowing time,
		Comes now to the perfect harvest,
		And ripens now into rhyme.
		For we that sow in the Autumn,
		We reap our grain in the Spring,
		And we that go sowing and weeping
		Return to reap and sing.


	4. REQUIEM

		Under the wide and starry sky,
		Dig the grave and let me lie.
		 Glad did I live and gladly die,
		And I laid me down with a will.
		
		This be the verse you grave for me:
		_Here he lies where he longed to be;
		Home is the sailor, home from sea,
		 And the hunter home from the hill._


	5. SPRING SONG

		The air was full of sun and birds,
		The fresh air sparkled clearly.
		Remembrance wakened in my heart
		And I knew I loved her dearly.
		
		The fallows and the leafless trees
		And all my spirit tingled.
		My earliest thought of love, and Spring’s
		First puff of perfume mingled.
		
		In my still heart the thoughts awoke,
		Came lone by lone together--
		Say, birds and Sun and Spring, is Love
		A mere affair of weather?


	6. WINTERTIME

		Late lies the wintry sun a-bed,   
		A frosty, fiery sleepy-head;   
		Blinks but an hour or two; and then,   
		A blood-red orange, sets again.   
		   
		Before the stars have left the skies, 
		At morning in the dark I rise;   
		And shivering in my nakedness,   
		By the cold candle, bathe and dress.   
		   
		Close by the jolly fire I sit   
		To warm my frozen bones a bit; 
		Or with a reindeer-sled, explore   
		The colder countries round the door.   
		   
		When to go out, my nurse doth wrap   
		Me in my comforter and cap;   
		The cold wind burns my face, and blows 
		Its frosty pepper up my nose.   
		   
		Black are my steps on silver sod;   
		Thick blows my frosty breath abroad;   
		And tree and house, and hill and lake,   
		Are frosted like a wedding-cake.


*** Trumbull Stickney (1874 - 1904)

	1. IN THE PAST

		There lies a somnolent lake
		Under a noiseless sky,
		Where never the mornings break
		Nor the evenings die.
		
		Mad flakes of colour 
		Whirl on its even face
		Iridescent and streaked with pallour;
		And, warding the silent place,
		
		The rocks rise sheer and gray
		From the sedgeless brink to the sky
		Dull-lit with the light of pale half-day
		Thro’ a void space and dry.
		
		And the hours lag dead in the air 
		With a sense of coming eternity
		To the heart of the lonely boatman there:
		That boatman am I,
		
		I, in my lonely boat,
		A waif on the somnolent lake,
		Watching the colours creep and float
		With the sinuous track of a snake.
		
		Now I lean o’er the side
		And lazy shades in the water see,
		Lapped in the sweep of a sluggish tide
		Crawled in from the living sea;
		
		And next I fix mine eyes,
		So long that the heart declines,
		On the changeless face of the open skies
		Where no star shines;
		
		And now to the rocks I turn,
		To the rocks, around
		That lie like walls of a circling sun
		Wherein lie bound
		
		The waters that feel my powerless strength
		And meet my homeless oar
		Labouring over their ashen length
		Never to find a shore.
		
		But the gleam still skims
		At times on the somnolent lake,
		And a light there is that swims
		With the whirl of a snake;
		
		And tho’ dead be the hours i’ the air,
		And dayless the sky,
		The heart is alive of the boatman there:
		That boatman am I.


	2. LEAVE HIM NOW QUIET BY THE WAY

		Leave him now quiet by the way 
		To rest apart. 
		I know what draws him to the dust alway 
		And churns him in the builder’s lime: 
		He has the fright of time. 
		
		I heard it knocking in his breast 
		A minute since; 
		His human eyes did wince, 
		He stubborned like the massive slaughter beast 
		And as a thing o’erwhelmed with sound 
		Stood bolted to the ground. 
		
		Leave him, for rest alone can cure-- 
		If cure there be-- 
		This waif upon the sea. 
		He is of those who slanted the great door 
		And listened--wretched little lad-- 
		To what they said.


	3. MAN STOOD ALONE

		And, the last day being come, Man stood alone 
		Ere sunrise on the world’s dismantled verge, 
		Awaiting how from everywhere should urge 
		The Coming of the Lord. And, behold, none 
		
		Did come,--but indistinct from every realm 
		Of earth and air and water, growing more 
		And louder, shriller, heavier, a roar 
		Up the dun atmosphere did overwhelm 
		
		His ears; and as he looked affrighted round 
		Every manner of beast innumerable 
		All thro’ the shadows crying grew, until 
		The wailing was like grass upon the ground. 
		
		Asudden then within his human side 
		Their anguish, since the goad he wielded first, 
		And, since he gave them not to drink, their thirst, 
		Darted compressed and vital.--As he died, 
		
		Low in the East now lighting gorgeously 
		He saw the last sea-serpent iris-mailed 
		Which, with a spear transfixèd, yet availed 
		To pluck the sun down into the dead sea.


	4. MNEMOSYNE

		It’s autumn in the country I remember. 
		How warm a wind blew here about the ways! 
		And shadows on the hillside lay to slumber
		During the long sun-sweetened summer-days. 
		It’s cold abroad the country I remember. 
		The swallows veering skimmed the golden grain
		At midday with a wing aslant and limber; 
		And yellow cattle browsed upon the plain. 
		It’s empty down the country I remember. 
		
		I had a sister lovely in my sight: 
		Her hair was dark, her eyes were very sombre; 
		We sang together in the woods at night. 
		
		It’s lonely in the country I remember. 
		
		The babble of our children fills my ears, 
		And on our hearth I stare the perished ember
		To flames that show all starry thro’ my tears. 
		
		It’s dark about the country I remember.
		
		There are the mountains where I lived. The path
		Is slushed with cattle-tracks and fallen timber, 
		The stumps are twisted by the tempests’ wrath.
		
		But that I knew these places are my own, 
		I’d ask how came such wretchedness to cumber
		The earth, and I to people it alone.


*** Elizabeth Drew Stoddard (1823 - 1902)

	1. A BABY SONG

		Come, white angels, to baby and me;
		     Touch his blue eyes with the image of sleep,
		     In his surprise he will cease to weep;
		Hush, child, the angels are coming to thee!
		
		Come, white doves, to baby and me;
		     Softly whirr in the silent air,
		     Flutter about his golden hair:
		Hark, child, the doves are cooing to thee!
		
		Come, white lilies, to baby and me;
		     Drowsily nod before his eyes,
		     So full of wonder, so round and wise:
		Hist, child, the lily-bells tinkle for thee!
		
		Come, white moon, to baby and me;
		     Gently glide o’er the ocean of sleep,
		     Silver the waves of its shadowy deep:
		Sleep, child, and the whitest of dreams to thee.


	2. A SUMMER NIGHT

		I feel the breath of the summer night,
		            Aromatic fire:
		The trees, the vines, the flowers are astir
		            With tender desire.
		
		The white moths flutter about the lamp,
		            Enamoured with light;
		And a thousand creates softly sing
		            A song to the night!
		
		But I am alone, and how can I sing
		            Praises to thee?
		Come, Night! unveil the beautiful soul
		            That waiteth for me.


	3. AUTUMN

		No melancholy days are these!
		     Not where the maple changing stands,
		Not in the shade of fluttering oaks,
		            Nor in the bands
		
		Of twisting vines and sturdy shrubs,
		     Scarlet and yellow, green and brown,
		Falling, or swinging on their stalks,
		            Is Sorrow’s crown.
		
		The sparkling fields of dewy grass,
		     Woodpaths and roadsides decked with flowers,
		Starred asters and the goldenrod,
		            Date Autumn’s hours.
		
		The shining banks of snowy clouds,
		     Steadfast in the aerial blue,
		The silent, shimmering, silver sea,
		            To Joy are true.
		
		My spirit in this happy air
		     Can thus embrace the dying year,
		And with it wrap me in a shroud
		            As bright and clear!


	4. BEFORE THE MIRROR

		Now like the Lady of Shalott, 
		   I dwell within an empty room, 
		And through the day and through the night 
		   I sit before an ancient loom. 
		
		And like the Lady of Shalott 
		   I look into a mirror wide, 
		Where shadows come, and shadows go, 
		   And ply my shuttle as they glide. 
		
		Not as she wove the yellow wool, 
		   Ulysses’ wife, Penelope; 
		By day a queen among her maids, 
		   But in the night a woman, she, 
		
		Who, creeping from her lonely couch, 
		   Unraveled all the slender woof; 
		Or, with a torch, she climbed the towers, 
		   To fire the fagots on the roof! 
		
		But weaving with a steady hand 
		   The shadows, whether false or true, 
		I put aside a doubt which asks 
		   ‘Among these phantoms what are you?’ 
		
		For not with altar, tomb, or urn, 
		   Or long-haired Greek with hollow shield, 
		Or dark-prowed ship with banks of oars, 
		   Or banquet in the tented field; 
		
		Or Norman knight in armor clad, 
		   Waiting a foe where four roads meet; 
		Or hawk and hound in bosky dell, 
		   Where dame and page in secret greet; 
		
		Or rose and lily, bud and flower, 
		   My web is broidered. Nothing bright 
		Is woven here: the shadows grow 
		   Still darker in the mirror’s light! 
		
		And as my web grows darker too, 
		   Accursed seems this empty room; 
		For still I must forever weave 
		   These phantoms by this ancient loom.


	5. CHRISTMAS COMES AGAIN

		Let me be merry now, ’t is time;
		     The season is at hand
		For Christmas rhyme and Christmas chime,
		     Close up, and form the band.
		
		The winter fires still burn as bright,
		     The lamp-light is as clear,
		And since the dead are out of sight,
		     What hinders Christmas cheer?
		
		Why think or speak of that abyss
		     In which lies all my Past?
		High festival I need not miss,
		     While song and jest shall last.
		
		We’ll clink and drink on Christmas Eve,
		     Our ghosts can feel no wrong;
		They revelled ere they took their leave--
		     Hearken, my Soldier’s Song:
		
		“The morning air doth coldly pass,
		Comrades, to the saddle spring;
		The night more bitter cold will bring
		Ere dying--ere dying.
		Sweetheart, come, the parting glass;
		Glass and sabre, clash, clash, clash,
		Ere dying--ere dying.
		Stirrup-cup and stirrup-kiss--
		Do you hope the foe we’ll miss,
		Sweetheart, for this loving kiss,
		Ere dying--ere dying?”
		
		The feasts and revels of the year
		     Do ghosts remember long?
		Even in memory come they here?
		     Listen, my Sailor’s song:
		
		“O my hearties. yo heave ho!
		Anchor’s up in Jolly Bay--
		Hey!
		Pipes and swipes, hob and nob--
		Hey!
		Mermaid Bess and Dolphin Meg,
		Paddle over Jolly Bay--
		Hey!
		Tars, haul in for Christmas Day,
		For round the ’varsal deep we go;
		Never church, never bell,
		For to tell
		Of Christmas Day.
		Yo heave ho, my hearties O!
		Haul in, mates, here we lay--
		Hey!”
		
		His sword is rusting in its sheath,
		     His flag furled on the wall;
		We’ll twine them with a holly-wreath,
		     With green leaves cover all.
		
		So clink and drink when falls the eve;
		     But, comrades, hide from me
		Their graves--I would not see them heave
		     Beside me, like the sea.
		
		Let not my brothers come again,
		     As men dead in their prime;
		Then hold my hands, forget my pain,
		     And strike the Christmas chime.


	6. MARCH

		Ho, wind of March, speed over sea,
		     From mountains where the snows lie deep
		     The cruel glaciers threatening creep,
		And witness this, my jubilee!
		
		Roar from the surf of boreal isles,
		     Roar from the hidden, jagged steeps,
		     Where the destroyer never sleeps;
		Ring through the iceberg’s Gothic piles!
		
		Voyage through space with your wild train,
		     Harping its shrillest, searching tone,
		     Or wailing deep its ancient moan,
		And learn how impotent your reign.
		
		Then hover by this garden bed,
		     With all your willful power, behold,
		     Just breaking from the leafy mould,
		My little primrose lift its head!


	7. NAMELESS PAIN

		I should be happy with my lot: 
		A wife and mother--is it not 
		Enough for me to be content? 
		What other blessing could be sent? 
		
		A quiet house, and homely ways, 
		That make each day like other days; 
		I only see Time’s shadow now 
		Darken the hair on baby’s brow! 
		
		No world’s work ever comes to me, 
		No beggar brings his misery; 
		I have no power, no healing art 
		With bruised soul or broken heart. 
		
		I read the poets of the age, 
		’Tis lotus-eating in a cage; 
		I study Art, but Art is dead 
		To one who clamors to be fed 
		
		With milk from Nature’s rugged breast, 
		Who longs for Labor’s lusty rest. 
		O foolish wish! I still should pine 
		If any other lot were mine.


	8. NOVEMBER

		Much have I spoken of the faded leaf;	
		    Long have I listened to the wailing wind,	
		And watched it ploughing through the heavy clouds,	
		    For autumn charms my melancholy mind.	
		 
		When autumn comes, the poets sing a dirge:
		    The year must perish; all the flowers are dead;	
		The sheaves are gathered; and the mottled quail	
		    Runs in the stubble, but the lark has fled!	
		 
		Still, autumn ushers in the Christmas cheer,	
		    The holly-berries and the ivy-tree:
		They weave a chaplet for the Old Year’s bier,	
		    These waiting mourners do not sing for me!	
		 
		I find sweet peace in depths of autumn woods,	
		    Where grow the ragged ferns and roughened moss;	
		The naked, silent trees have taught me this,--
		    The loss of beauty is not always loss!


	9. ONE MORN I LEFT HIM IN HIS BED

		One morn I left him in his bed; 
		A moment after some one said, 
		‘Your child is dying--he is dead.’ 
		
		We made him ready for his rest, 
		Flowers in his hair, and on his breast 
		His little hands together prest. 
		
		We sailed by night across the sea; 
		So, floating from the world were we, 
		Apart from sympathy, we Three. 
		
		The wild sea moaned, the black clouds spread 
		Moving shadows on its bed, 
		But one of us lay midship dead. 
		
		I saw his coffin sliding down 
		The yellow sand in yonder town, 
		Where I put on my sorrow’s crown. 
		
		And we returned; in this drear place 
		Never to see him face to face, 
		I thrust aside the living race. 
		
		Mothers, who mourn with me today, 
		Oh, understand me, when I say, 
		I cannot weep, I cannot pray; 
		
		I gaze upon a hidden store, 
		His books, his toys, the clothes he wore, 
		And cry, ‘Once more, to me, once more!’ 
		
		Then take, from me, this simple verse, 
		That you may know what I rehearse-- 
		A grief--your and my Universe!


	10. THE WIFE SPEAKS

		Husband, today could you and I behold 
		The sun that brought us to our bridal morn 
		Rising so splendid in the winter sky 
		(We though fair spring returned), when we were wed; 
		Could the shades vanish from these fifteen years, 
		Which stand like columns guarding the approach 
		To that great temple of the double soul 
		That is as one--would you turn back, my dear, 
		And, for the sake of Love’s mysterious dream, 
		As old as Adam and as sweet as Eve, 
		Take me, as I took you, and once more go 
		Towards that goal which none of us have reached? 
		Contesting battles which but prove a loss, 
		The victor vanquished by the wounded one; 
		Teaching each other sacrifice of self, 
		True immolation to the marriage bond; 
		Learning the joys of birth, the woe of death, 
		Leaving in chaos all the hopes of life--
		Heart-broken, yet with courage pressing on 
		For fame and fortune, artists needing both? 
		Or, would you rather--I will acquiesce-- 
		Since we must choose what is, and are grown gray, 
		Stay in life’s desert, watch our setting sun, 
		Calm as those statues in Egyptian sands, 
		Hand clasping hand, with patience and with peace, 
		Wait for a future which contains no past?


*** Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837 - 1909)

	1. A FORSAKEN GARDEN

		In a coign of the cliff between lowland and highland, 
		      At the sea-down’s edge between windward and lee, 
		Walled round with rocks as an inland island, 
		      The ghost of a garden fronts the sea. 
		A girdle of brushwood and thorn encloses 
		      The steep square slope of the blossomless bed 
		Where the weeds that grew green from the graves of its roses 
		              Now lie dead. 
		
		The fields fall southward, abrupt and broken, 
		      To the low last edge of the long lone land. 
		If a step should sound or a word be spoken, 
		      Would a ghost not rise at the strange guest’s hand? 
		So long have the grey bare walks lain guestless, 
		      Through branches and briars if a man make way, 
		He shall find no life but the sea-wind’s, restless 
		              Night and day. 
		
		The dense hard passage is blind and stifled 
		      That crawls by a track none turn to climb 
		To the strait waste place that the years have rifled 
		      Of all but the thorns that are touched not of time. 
		The thorns he spares when the rose is taken; 
		      The rocks are left when he wastes the plain. 
		The wind that wanders, the weeds wind-shaken, 
		              These remain. 
		
		Not a flower to be pressed of the foot that falls not; 
		      As the heart of a dead man the seed-plots are dry; 
		From the thicket of thorns whence the nightingale calls not, 
		      Could she call, there were never a rose to reply. 
		Over the meadows that blossom and wither 
		      Rings but the note of a sea-bird’s song; 
		Only the sun and the rain come hither 
		              All year long. 
		
		The sun burns sere and the rain dishevels 
		      One gaunt bleak blossom of scentless breath. 
		Only the wind here hovers and revels 
		      In a round where life seems barren as death. 
		Here there was laughing of old, there was weeping, 
		      Haply, of lovers none ever will know, 
		Whose eyes went seaward a hundred sleeping 
		              Years ago. 
		
		Heart handfast in heart as they stood, “Look thither,” 
		      Did he whisper? “look forth from the flowers to the sea; 
		For the foam-flowers endure when the rose-blossoms wither, 
		      And men that love lightly may die—but we?” 
		And the same wind sang and the same waves whitened, 
		      And or ever the garden’s last petals were shed, 
		In the lips that had whispered, the eyes that had lightened, 
		              Love was dead. 
		
		Or they loved their life through, and then went whither? 
		      And were one to the end—but what end who knows? 
		Love deep as the sea as a rose must wither, 
		      As the rose-red seaweed that mocks the rose. 
		Shall the dead take thought for the dead to love them? 
		      What love was ever as deep as a grave? 
		They are loveless now as the grass above them 
		              Or the wave. 
		
		All are at one now, roses and lovers, 
		      Not known of the cliffs and the fields and the sea. 
		Not a breath of the time that has been hovers 
		      In the air now soft with a summer to be. 
		Not a breath shall there sweeten the seasons hereafter 
		      Of the flowers or the lovers that laugh now or weep, 
		When as they that are free now of weeping and laughter 
		              We shall sleep. 
		
		Here death may deal not again for ever; 
		      Here change may come not till all change end. 
		From the graves they have made they shall rise up never, 
		      Who have left nought living to ravage and rend. 
		Earth, stones, and thorns of the wild ground growing, 
		      While the sun and the rain live, these shall be; 
		Till a last wind’s breath upon all these blowing 
		              Roll the sea. 
		
		Till the slow sea rise and the sheer cliff crumble, 
		      Till terrace and meadow the deep gulfs drink, 
		Till the strength of the waves of the high tides humble 
		      The fields that lessen, the rocks that shrink, 
		Here now in his triumph where all things falter, 
		      Stretched out on the spoils that his own hand spread, 
		As a god self-slain on his own strange altar, 
		              Death lies dead. 


	2. A LEAVE-TAKING

		Let us go hence, my songs; she will not hear. 
		Let us go hence together without fear; 
		Keep silence now, for singing-time is over, 
		And over all old things and all things dear. 
		She loves not you nor me as all we love her. 
		Yea, though we sang as angels in her ear, 
		        She would not hear. 
		
		Let us rise up and part; she will not know. 
		Let us go seaward as the great winds go, 
		Full of blown sand and foam; what help is here? 
		There is no help, for all these things are so, 
		And all the world is bitter as a tear. 
		And how these things are, though ye strove to show, 
		        She would not know. 
		
		Let us go home and hence; she will not weep. 
		We gave love many dreams and days to keep, 
		Flowers without scent, and fruits that would not grow, 
		Saying ‘If thou wilt, thrust in thy sickle and reap.’ 
		All is reaped now; no grass is left to mow; 
		And we that sowed, though all we fell on sleep, 
		        She would not weep. 
		
		Let us go hence and rest; she will not love. 
		She shall not hear us if we sing hereof, 
		Nor see love’s ways, how sore they are and steep. 
		Come hence, let be, lie still; it is enough. 
		Love is a barren sea, bitter and deep; 
		And though she saw all heaven in flower above, 
		        She would not love. 
		
		Let us give up, go down; she will not care. 
		Though all the stars made gold of all the air, 
		And the sea moving saw before it move 
		One moon-flower making all the foam-flowers fair; 
		Though all those waves went over us, and drove 
		Deep down the stifling lips and drowning hair, 
		        She would not care. 
		
		Let us go hence, go hence; she will not see. 
		Sing all once more together; surely she, 
		She too, remembering days and words that were, 
		Will turn a little toward us, sighing; but we, 
		We are hence, we are gone, as though we had not been there. 
		Nay, and though all men seeing had pity on me, 
		        She would not see. 


	3. A MATCH

		IF love were what the rose is,	
		 And I were like the leaf,	
		Our lives would grow together	
		In sad or singing weather,	
		Blown fields or flowerful closes,	        
		 Green pleasure or gray grief;	
		If love were what the rose is,	
		 And I were like the leaf.	
		
		If I were what the words are,	
		 And love were like the tune,	        
		With double sound and single	
		Delight our lips would mingle,	
		With kisses glad as birds are	
		 That get sweet rain at noon;	
		If I were what the words are,	        
		 And love were like the tune.	
		
		If you were life, my darling,	
		 And I your love were death,	
		We’d shine and snow together	
		Ere March made sweet the weather	        
		With daffodil and starling	
		 And hours of fruitful breath;	
		If you were life, my darling,	
		 And I your love were death.	
		
		If you were thrall to sorrow,	        
		 And I were page to joy,	
		We’d play for lives and seasons	
		With loving looks and treasons	
		And tears of night and morrow	
		 And laughs of maid and boy;	        
		If you were thrall to sorrow,	
		 And I were page to joy.	
		
		If you were April’s lady,	
		 And I were lord in May,	
		We’d throw with leaves for hours	        
		And draw for days with flowers,	
		Till day like night were shady	
		 And night were bright like day;	
		If you were April’s lady,	
		 And I were lord in May.	        
		
		If you were queen of pleasure,	
		 And I were king of pain,	
		We’d hunt down love together,	
		Pluck out his flying-feather,	
		And teach his feet a measure,	        
		 And find his mouth a rein;	
		If you were queen of pleasure,	
		 And I were king of pain.


	4. THE GARDEN OF PROSERPINE

		Here, where the world is quiet; 
		        Here, where all trouble seems 
		Dead winds’ and spent waves’ riot 
		        In doubtful dreams of dreams; 
		I watch the green field growing 
		For reaping folk and sowing, 
		For harvest-time and mowing, 
		        A sleepy world of streams. 
		
		I am tired of tears and laughter, 
		        And men that laugh and weep; 
		Of what may come hereafter 
		        For men that sow to reap: 
		I am weary of days and hours, 
		Blown buds of barren flowers, 
		Desires and dreams and powers 
		        And everything but sleep. 
		
		Here life has death for neighbour, 
		        And far from eye or ear 
		Wan waves and wet winds labour, 
		        Weak ships and spirits steer; 
		They drive adrift, and whither 
		They wot not who make thither; 
		But no such winds blow hither, 
		        And no such things grow here. 
		
		No growth of moor or coppice, 
		        No heather-flower or vine, 
		But bloomless buds of poppies, 
		        Green grapes of Proserpine, 
		Pale beds of blowing rushes 
		Where no leaf blooms or blushes 
		Save this whereout she crushes 
		        For dead men deadly wine. 
		
		Pale, without name or number, 
		        In fruitless fields of corn, 
		They bow themselves and slumber 
		        All night till light is born; 
		And like a soul belated, 
		In hell and heaven unmated, 
		By cloud and mist abated 
		        Comes out of darkness morn. 
		
		Though one were strong as seven, 
		        He too with death shall dwell, 
		Nor wake with wings in heaven, 
		        Nor weep for pains in hell; 
		Though one were fair as roses, 
		His beauty clouds and closes; 
		And well though love reposes, 
		        In the end it is not well. 
		
		Pale, beyond porch and portal, 
		        Crowned with calm leaves, she stands 
		Who gathers all things mortal 
		        With cold immortal hands; 
		Her languid lips are sweeter 
		Than love’s who fears to greet her 
		To men that mix and meet her 
		        From many times and lands. 
		
		She waits for each and other, 
		        She waits for all men born; 
		Forgets the earth her mother, 
		           The life of fruits and corn; 
		And spring and seed and swallow 
		Take wing for her and follow 
		Where summer song rings hollow 
		        And flowers are put to scorn. 
		
		There go the loves that wither, 
		        The old loves with wearier wings; 
		And all dead years draw thither, 
		        And all disastrous things; 
		Dead dreams of days forsaken, 
		Blind buds that snows have shaken, 
		Wild leaves that winds have taken, 
		        Red strays of ruined springs. 
		
		We are not sure of sorrow, 
		        And joy was never sure; 
		To-day will die to-morrow; 
		        Time stoops to no man’s lure; 
		And love, grown faint and fretful, 
		With lips but half regretful 
		Sighs, and with eyes forgetful 
		        Weeps that no loves endure. 
		
		From too much love of living, 
		        From hope and fear set free, 
		We thank with brief thanksgiving 
		        Whatever gods may be 
		That no life lives for ever; 
		That dead men rise up never; 
		That even the weariest river 
		        Winds somewhere safe to sea. 
		
		Then star nor sun shall waken, 
		        Nor any change of light: 
		Nor sound of waters shaken, 
		        Nor any sound or sight: 
		Nor wintry leaves nor vernal, 
		Nor days nor things diurnal; 
		Only the sleep eternal 
		        In an eternal night. 


*** Wisława Szymborska (1923 - 2012)

	1. CHILDREN OF OUR AGE

		We are children of our age,
		it’s a political age.
		
		All day long, all through the night,
		all affairs--yours, ours, theirs--
		are political affairs.
		
		Whether you like it or not,
		your genes have a political past,
		your skin, a political cast,
		your eyes, a political slant.
		
		Whatever you say reverberates,
		whatever you don’t say speaks for itself.
		So either way you’re talking politics.
		
		Even when you take to the woods,
		you’re taking political steps
		on political grounds.
		
		Apolitical poems are also political,
		and above us shines a moon
		no longer purely lunar.
		To be or not to be, that is the question.
		And though it troubles the digestion
		it’s a question, as always, of politics.
		
		To acquire a political meaning
		you don’t even have to be human.
		Raw material will do,
		or protein feed, or crude oil,
		
		or a conference table whose shape
		was quarreled over for months;
		Should we arbitrate life and death
		at a round table or a square one?
		
		Meanwhile, people perished,
		animals died,
		houses burned,
		and the fields ran wild
		just as in times immemorial
		and less political.


	2. GOING HOME

		He came home. Said nothing.
		It was clear, though, that something had gone wrong.
		He lay down fully dressed.
		Pulled the blanket over his head.
		Tucked up his knees.
		He’s nearly forty, but not at the moment.
		He exists just as he did inside his mother’s womb,
		clad in seven walls of skin, in sheltered darkness.
		Tomorrow he’ll give a lecture
		on homeostasis in metagalactic cosmonautics.
		For now, though, he has curled up and gone to sleep.


	3. HUNGER CAMP AT JASLO

		Write it. Write. In ordinary ink
		on ordinary paper: they were given no food,
		they all died of hunger. “All. How many?
		It’s a big meadow. How much grass
		for each one?” Write: I don’t know.
		History counts its skeletons in round numbers.
		A thousand and one remains a thousand,
		as though the one had never existed:
		an imaginary embryo, an empty cradle,
		an ABC never read,
		air that laughs, cries, grows,
		emptiness running down steps toward the garden,
		nobody’s place in the line.
		
		We stand in the meadow where it became flesh,
		and the meadow is silent as a false witness.
		Sunny. Green. Nearby, a forest
		with wood for chewing and water under the bark-
		every day a full ration of the view
		until you go blind. Overhead, a bird-
		the shadow of its life-giving wings
		brushed their lips. Their jaws opened.
		Teeth clacked against teeth.
		At night, the sickle moon shone in the sky
		and reaped wheat for their bread.
		Hands came floating from blackened icons,
		empty cups in their fingers.
		On a spit of barbed wire,
		a man was turning.
		They sang with their mouths full of earth.
		“A lovely song of how war strikes straight
		at the heart.” Write: how silent.
		“Yes.”


	4. IDENTIFICATION

		It’s good you came--she says.
		You heard a plane crashed on Thursday?
		Well so they came to see me
		about it.
		The story is he was on the passenger list.
		So what, he might have changed his mind.
		They gave me some pills so I wouldn’t fall apart.
		Then they showed me I don’t know who.
		All black, burned except one hand.
		A scrap of shirt, a watch, a wedding ring.
		I got furious, that can’t be him.
		He wouldn’t do that to me, look like that.
		The stores are bursting with those shirts.
		The watch is just a regular old watch.
		And our names on that ring,
		they’re only the most ordinary names.
		It’s good you came. Sit here beside me.
		He really was supposed to get back Thursday.
		But we’ve got so many Thursdays left this year.
		I’ll put the kettle on for tea.
		I’ll wash my hair, then what,
		try to wake up from all this.
		It’s good you came, since it was cold there,
		and him just in some rubber sleeping bag,
		him, I mean, you know, that unlucky man.
		I’ll put the Thursday on, wash the tea,
		since our names are completely ordinary.


	5. IN PRAISE OF FEELING BAD ABOUT YOURSELF

		The buzzard never says it is to blame.
		The panther wouldn’t know what scruples mean.
		When the piranha strikes, it feels no shame.
		If snakes had hands, they’d claim their hands were clean.
		
		A jackal doesn’t understand remorse.
		Lions and lice don’t waver in their course.
		Why should they, when they know they’re right?
		
		Though hearts of killer whales may weigh a ton,
		in every other way they’re light.
		
		On this third planet of the sun
		among the signs of bestiality
		a clear conscience is Number One.


	6. ON DEATH, WITHOUT EXAGGERATION

		It can’t take a joke,
		find a star, make a bridge.
		It knows nothing about weaving, mining, farming,
		building ships, or baking cakes.
		
		In our planning for tomorrow,
		it has the final word,
		which is always beside the point.
		
		It can’t even get the things done
		that are part of its trade:
		dig a grave,
		make a coffin,
		clean up after itself.
		
		Preoccupied with killing,
		it does the job awkwardly,
		without system or skill.
		As though each of us were its first kill.
		
		Oh, it has its triumphs,
		but look at its countless defeats,
		missed blows,
		and repeat attempts!
		
		Sometimes it isn’t strong enough
		to swat a fly from the air.
		Many are the caterpillars
		that have outcrawled it.
		
		All those bulbs, pods,
		tentacles, fins, tracheae,
		nuptial plumage, and winter fur
		show that it has fallen behind
		with its halfhearted work.
		
		Ill will won’t help
		and even our lending a hand with wars and coups d’etat
		is so far not enough.
		
		Hearts beat inside eggs.
		Babies’ skeletons grow.
		Seeds, hard at work, sprout their first tiny pair of leaves
		and sometimes even tall trees fall away.
		
		Whoever claims that it’s omnipotent
		is himself living proof
		that it’s not.
		
		There’s no life
		that couldn’t be immortal
		if only for a moment.
		
		Death
		always arrives by that very moment too late.
		
		In vain it tugs at the knob
		of the invisible door.
		As far as you’ve come
		can’t be undone.


	7. THE END AND THE BEGINNING

		After every war
		someone has to clean up.
		Things won’t
		straighten themselves up, after all.
		
		Someone has to push the rubble
		to the side of the road,
		so the corpse-filled wagons
		can pass.
		
		Someone has to get mired
		in scum and ashes,
		sofa springs,
		splintered glass,
		and bloody rags.
		
		Someone has to drag in a girder
		to prop up a wall.
		Someone has to glaze a window,
		rehang a door.
		
		Photogenic it’s not,
		and takes years.
		All the cameras have left
		for another war.
		
		We’ll need the bridges back,
		and new railway stations.
		Sleeves will go ragged
		from rolling them up.
		
		Someone, broom in hand,
		still recalls the way it was.
		Someone else listens
		and nods with unsevered head.
		But already there are those nearby
		starting to mill about
		who will find it dull.
		
		From out of the bushes
		sometimes someone still unearths
		rusted-out arguments
		and carries them to the garbage pile.
		
		Those who knew
		what was going on here
		must make way for
		those who know little.
		And less than little.
		And finally as little as nothing.
		
		In the grass that has overgrown
		causes and effects,
		someone must be stretched out
		blade of grass in his mouth
		gazing at the clouds.


	8. THE ONION

		The onion, now that’s something else
		its innards don’t exist
		nothing but pure onionhood
		fills this devout onionist
		oniony on the inside
		onionesque it appears
		it follows its own daimonion
		without our human tears
		
		our skin is just a coverup
		for the land where none dare to go
		an internal inferno
		the anathema of anatomy
		in an onion there’s only onion
		from its top to it’s toe
		onionymous monomania
		unanimous omninudity
		
		at peace, at peace
		internally at rest
		inside it, there’s a smaller one
		of undiminished worth
		the second holds a third one
		the third contains a fourth
		a centripetal fugue
		polypony compressed
		
		nature’s rotundest tummy
		its greatest success story
		the onion drapes itself in it’s
		own aureoles of glory
		we hold veins, nerves, and fat
		secretions’ secret sections
		not for us such idiotic
		onionoid perfections.


	9. UNDER ONE SMALL STAR

		My apologies to chance for calling it necessity.
		My apologies to necessity if I’m mistaken, after all.
		Please, don’t be angry, happiness, that I take you as my due.
		May my dead be patient with the way my memories fade.
		My apologies to time for all the world I overlook each second.
		My apologies to past loves for thinking that the latest is the first.
		Forgive me, distant wars, for bringing flowers home.
		Forgive me, open wounds, for pricking my finger.
		I apologize for my record of minuets to those who cry from the depths.
		I apologize to those who wait in railway stations for being asleep today at five a.m.
		Pardon me, hounded hope, for laughing from time to time.
		Pardon me, deserts, that I don’t rush to you bearing a spoonful of water.
		And you, falcon, unchanging year after year, always in the same cage,
		your gaze always fixed on the same point in space,
		forgive me, even if it turns out you were stuffed.
		My apologies to the felled tree for the table’s four legs.
		My apologies to great questions for small answers.
		Truth, please don’t pay me much attention.
		Dignity, please be magnanimous.
		Bear with me, O mystery of existence, as I pluck the occasional thread from your train.
		Soul, don’t take offense that I’ve only got you now and then.
		My apologies to everything that I can’t be everywhere at once.
		My apologies to everyone that I can’t be each woman and each man.
		I know I won’t be justified as long as I live,
		since I myself stand in my own way.
		Don’t bear me ill will, speech, that I borrow weighty words,
		then labor heavily so that they may seem light.


	10. UTOPIA

		Island where all becomes clear.
		Solid ground beneath your feet.
		
		The only roads are those that offer access.
		
		Bushes bend beneath the weight of proofs.
		
		The Tree of Valid Supposition grows here
		with branches disentangled since time immemorial.
		
		The Tree of Understanding, dazzling straight and simple.
		sprouts by the spring called Now I Get It.
		
		The thicker the woods, the vaster the vista:
		the Valley of Obviously.
		
		If any doubts arise, the wind dispels them instantly.
		
		Echoes stir unsummoned
		and eagerly explain all the secrets of the worlds.
		
		On the right a cave where Meaning lies.
		
		On the left the Lake of Deep Conviction.
		Truth breaks from the bottom and bobs to the surface.
		
		Unshakable Confidence towers over the valley.
		Its peak offers an excellent view of the Essence of Things.
		
		For all its charms, the island is uninhabited,
		and the faint footprints scattered on its beaches
		turn without exception to the sea.
		
		As if all you can do here is leave
		and plunge, never to return, into the depths.
		
		Into unfathomable life.


*** Galaktion Tabidze (1892 - 1959)

	1. BLUE HORSES

		Like snowdrifts of mist gilded in sunset,
		the shore was sun-lit in eternity’s realm.
		No promise in sight, nothing to look at,
		Only the quiet--nomadic and numb.
		Only the quiet: the cold, rampant storm
		of eternity’s realm holding nothing but grief.
		Eyes covered in ash, you lie prone in your tomb,
		lying in heaven, and still your soul grieves.
		Through a thin forest of disfigured faces
		each barren day races: hurrying, gone.
		I’ve terrible visions of my blue stallions
		bearing your coffin, as the world looks on.
		And seconds race by. I am not concerned:
		those immortal linens won’t shine with your tears.
		The tortures that churned in you died--all illusions
		of night: a burning soul howling with prayer.
		At wildfire’s rate, like a swift turn of fate,
		my blue horses dart with a thunderous roar!
		There are no bouquets, no calm reveries,
		only your new home--this grave’s sepulcher.
		Who’ll remember your face? Who’ll speak your name?
		If you moan, who’ll come? Who’ll hear you whisper?
		There’s no one for solace upon those strange shores,
		where cryptic chimeras sleep, darkly twisted.
		Nothing could block out the light from this chamber:
		from only dry numbers, still, desert winds rise!
		Through a thin forest of disfigured faces
		each barren day surges then, hurrying, dies.
		In the mist’s rampant storm, eternity’s realm,
		In heaven or tomb, by dark curse deplored:
		at a hurricane’s rate, like a swift turn of fate,
		my blue horses dart with a thunderous roar!


	2. THE FIELDS

		Swaying, a slender figure appears
		walking alone, sickle in hand,
		singing a song, her voice is the pasture
		at village’s edge, where an old outpost stands.
		The song is a soulful hymn of farewell
		sung to a row of cranes facing the sea,
		while the sun, like a spider is closing itself
		in the delicate criss-crossing thicket of trees.
		But what does the soul know of slavery? Nothing!
		The rustle and braying of sheep fill the streets:
		a young village virgin and flock are returning.
		And the Virgin will soon return to the huts.


	3. THE WIND BLOWS

		Blowing wind, blowing wind, blowing wind,
		In the breeze flying leaves night through . . .
		Group of trees, troop of trees roundly swaying, 
		Where are you, where are you, where are you?
		
		Falling rain, falling snow, falling snow, 
		How to find, when to find never know! 
		Pure of yours image rolls tired my mind
		Everyday, every step, every time! 
		
		Drizzling sky misty thoughts on the field . . .
		Blowing wind, blowing wind, blowing wind!


	4. UNCERTAINTY

		There is inside your heart
		a bitter, brutal death,
		a place of deep upset
		where the lyre cannot breathe.
		
		Once a boiling fire,
		now your blood is frozen.
		And your eye has no tear,
		your heart--no compassion.
		
		And when asked: “What occured,
		what does your heart yearn for?”
		He raises his arms skyward
		yet gives to men no answer.


	5. YOU’RE THIRTEEN

		You’re thirteen and you’ve ensnared
		a graying lover’s evil dreams.
		Line up thirteen bullets here:
		I’ll kill myself thirteen times.
		
		Another thirteen years go by,
		soon you’ll arrive at twenty-six.
		The tallest iris gets the scythe:
		time and poem mourn their necks.
		
		How hastily youth slips away--
		remorseless wishes of the lion.
		And everything glows tenderly
		when Autumn sunlight’s pouring in.


*** Rabindranath Tagore (1861 - 1941)

	1. ENDLESS TIME

		Time is endless in thy hands, my lord. 
		There is none to count thy minutes. 
		
		Days and nights pass and ages bloom and fade like flowers. 
		Thou knowest how to wait. 
		
		Thy centuries follow each other perfecting a small wild flower. 
		
		We have no time to lose, 
		and having no time we must scramble for a chance. 
		We are too poor to be late. 
		
		And thus it is that time goes by 
		while I give it to every querulous man who claims it, 
		and thine altar is empty of all offerings to the last. 
		
		At the end of the day I hasten in fear lest thy gate be shut; 
		but I find that yet there is time.


	2. ONE DAY IN SPRING

		One day in spring, a woman came
		In my lonely woods,
		In the lovely form of the Beloved.
		Came, to give to my songs, melodies,
		To give to my dreams, sweetness.
		Suddenly a wild wave
		Broke over my heart’s shores
		And drowned all language.
		To my lips no name came,
		She stood beneath the tree, turned,
		Glanced at my face, made sad with pain,
		And with quick steps, came and sat by me.
		Taking my hands in hers, she said:
		‘You do not know me, nor I you--
		I wonder how this could be?’
		I said:
		‘We two shall build, a bridge for ever
		Between two beings, each to the other unknown,
		This eager wonder is at the heart of things.’
		
		The cry that is in my heart is also the cry of her heart;
		The thread with which she binds me binds her too.
		Her have I sought everywhere,
		Her have I worshipped within me,
		Hidden in that worship she has sought me too.
		Crossing the wide oceans, she came to steal my heart.
		She forgot to return, having lost her own.
		Her own charms play traitor to her,
		She spreads her net, knowing not
		Whether she will catch or be caught.


	3. WAITING

		The song I came to sing 
		remains unsung to this day. 
		I have spent my days in stringing 
		and in unstringing my instrument. 
		
		The time has not come true, 
		the words have not been rightly set; 
		only there is the agony 
		of wishing in my heart . . .
		
		I have not seen his face, 
		nor have I listened to his voice; 
		only I have heard his gentle footsteps 
		from the road before my house . . .
		
		But the lamp has not been lit 
		and I cannot ask him into my house; 
		I live in the hope of meeting with him; 
		but this meeting is not yet.


*** Allen Tate (1899 - 1979)

	1. ODE TO THE CONFEDERATE DEAD

		Row after row with strict impunity
		The headstones yield their names to the element,
		The wind whirrs without recollection;
		In the riven troughs the splayed leaves
		Pile up, of nature the casual sacrament
		To the seasonal eternity of death;
		Then driven by the fierce scrutiny
		Of heaven to their election in the vast breath,
		They sough the rumour of mortality.
		
		Autumn is desolation in the plot
		Of a thousand acres where these memories grow
		From the inexhaustible bodies that are not 
		Dead, but feed the grass row after rich row.
		Think of the autumns that have come and gone!--
		Ambitious November with the humors of the year,
		With a particular zeal for every slab,
		Staining the uncomfortable angels that rot
		On the slabs, a wing chipped here, an arm there:
		The brute curiosity of an angel’s stare
		Turns you, like them, to stone,
		Transforms the heaving air
		Till plunged to a heavier world below
		You shift your sea-space blindly
		Heaving, turning like the blind crab.
		
		    _Dazed by the wind, only the wind
		    The leaves flying, plunge_
		
		You know who have waited by the wall
		The twilight certainty of an animal,
		Those midnight restitutions of the blood
		You know--the immitigable pines, the smoky frieze
		Of the sky, the sudden call: you know the rage,
		The cold pool left by the mounting flood,
		Of muted Zeno and Parmenides.
		You who have waited for the angry resolution
		Of those desires that should be yours tomorrow,
		You know the unimportant shrift of death
		And praise the vision
		And praise the arrogant circumstance
		Of those who fall
		Rank upon rank, hurried beyond decision--
		Here by the sagging gate, stopped by the wall. 
		
		    _Seeing, seeing only the leaves
		    Flying, plunge and expire_
		
		Turn your eyes to the immoderate past,
		Turn to the inscrutable infantry rising
		Demons out of the earth they will not last.
		Stonewall, Stonewall, and the sunken fields of hemp,
		Shiloh, Antietam, Malvern Hill, Bull Run.
		Lost in that orient of the thick and fast
		You will curse the setting sun.
		
		    _Cursing only the leaves crying
		    Like an old man in a storm_
		
		You hear the shout, the crazy hemlocks point
		With troubled fingers to the silence which
		Smothers you, a mummy, in time.
		
		                              The hound bitch
		Toothless and dying, in a musty cellar
		Hears the wind only.
		    
		                   Now that the salt of their blood
		Stiffens the saltier oblivion of the sea,
		Seals the malignant purity of the flood,
		What shall we who count our days and bow
		Our heads with a commemorial woe
		In the ribboned coats of grim felicity,
		What shall we say of the bones, unclean,
		Whose verdurous anonymity will grow?
		The ragged arms, the ragged heads and eyes
		Lost in these acres of the insane green?
		The gray lean spiders come, they come and go;
		In a tangle of willows without light
		The singular screech-owl’s tight
		Invisible lyric seeds the mind
		With the furious murmur of their chivalry.
		
		    _We shall say only the leaves
		    Flying, plunge and expire_
		
		We shall say only the leaves whispering
		In the improbable mist of nightfall
		That flies on multiple wing:
		Night is the beginning and the end
		And in between the ends of distraction
		Waits mute speculation, the patient curse
		That stones the eyes, or like the jaguar leaps
		For his own image in a jungle pool, his victim.
		
		What shall we say who have knowledge 
		Carried to the heart?  Shall we take the act
		To the grave?  Shall we, more hopeful, set up the grave
		In the house?  The ravenous grave?
		
		                                  Leave now
		The shut gate and the decomposing wall:
		The gentle serpent, green in the mulberry bush, 
		Riots with his tongue through the hush--
		Sentinel of the grave who counts us all!


	2. THE MEDITERRANEAN

		_Quen das finem, rex magne, dolorum?_
		
		Where we went in the boat was a long bay
		a slingshot wide, walled in by towering stone--
		Peaked margin of antiquity’s delay,
		And we went there out of time’s monotone:
		
		Where we went in the black hull no light moved
		But a gull white-winged along the feckless wave,
		The breeze, unseen but fierce as a body loved,
		That boat drove onward like a willing slave:
		
		Where we went in the small ship the seaweed
		Parted and gave to us the murmuring shore
		And we made feast and in our secret need
		Devoured the very plates Aeneas bore:
		
		Where derelict you see through the low twilight
		The green coast that you, thunder-tossed, would win,
		Drop sail, and hastening to drink all night
		Eat dish and bowl--to take that sweet land in!
		
		Where we feasted and caroused on the sandless
		Pebbles, affecting our day of piracy,
		What prophecy of eaten plates could landless
		Wanderers fulfil by the ancient sea?
		
		We for that time might taste the famous age
		Eternal here yet hidden from our eyes
		When lust of power undid its stuffless rage;
		They, in a wineskin, bore earth’s paradise.
		
		Let us lie down once more by the breathing side
		Of Ocean, where our live forefathers sleep
		As if the Known Sea still were a month wide--
		Atlantis howls but is no longer steep!
		
		What country shall we conquer, what fair land
		Unman our conquest and locate our blood?
		We’ve cracked the hemispheres with careless hand!
		Now, from the Gates of Hercules we flood
		
		Westward, westward till the barbarous brine
		Whelms us to the tired land where tasseling corn,
		Fat beans, grapes sweeter than muscadine
		Rot on the vine: in that land were we born.


*** James Tate (1943 - 2015)

	1. FUCK THE ASTRONAUTS

		I
		
		Eventually we must combine nightmares
		an angel smoking a cigarette on the steps
		of the last national bank, said to me.
		I put her out with my thumb. I don’t need that
		cheap talk I’ve got my own problems.
		It was sad, exciting, and horrible.
		It was exciting, horrible, and sad.
		It was horrible, sad, and exciting.
		It was inviting, mad, and deplorable.
		It was adorable, glad, and enticing.
		Eventually we must smoke a thumb
		cheap talk I’ve got my own angel
		on the steps of the problems the bank
		said to me I don’t need that.
		I will take this one window
		with its sooty maps and scratches
		so that my dreams will remember
		one another and so that my eyes will not
		become blinded by the new world.
		
		
		II
		
		The flames don’t dance or slither.
		They have painted the room green.
		Beautiful and naked, the wives
		are sleeping before the fire.
		Now it is out. The men have
		returned to the shacks,
		slaved creatures from the forest
		floor across their white
		stationwagons. That just about
		does it, says the other,
		dumping her bucket
		over her head. Well, I guess
		we got everything, says one,
		feeling around in the mud,
		as if for a child.
		Now they remember they want
		that mud, who can’t remember
		what they got up for.
		They parcel it out: when
		they are drunk enough
		they go into town with
		a bucket of mud, saying
		we can slice it up into
		windmills like a bloated cow. 
		Later, they paint the insides
		of the shack black,
		and sit sucking eggs all night,
		they want something real, useful,
		but there isn’t anything.
		
		
		III
		
		I will engineer the sunrise
		they have disassembled our shadows
		our echoes are erased from the walls
		your nipples are the skeletons of olives
		your nipples are an oriental delight
		your nipples blow away like cigarette papers
		your nipples are the mouths of mutes
		so I am not here any longer
		skein of lightning
		memory’s dark ink in your last smile
		where the stars have swallowed their train schedule
		where the stars have drowned in their dark petticoats
		like a sock of hamburger
		receiving the lightning
		into his clitoris
		red on red the prisoner
		confesses his waltz
		through the corkscrew lightning
		nevermind the lightning
		in your teeth let’s waltz
		I am the hashish pinball machine
		that rapes a piano.


	2. IT HAPPENS LIKE THIS

		I was outside St. Cecelia’s Rectory
		smoking a cigarette when a goat appeared beside me.
		It was mostly black and white, with a little reddish
		brown here and there. When I started to walk away,
		it followed. I was amused and delighted, but wondered
		what the laws were on this kind of thing. There’s
		a leash law for dogs, but what about goats? People
		smiled at me and admired the goat. “It’s not my goat,”
		I explained. “It’s the town’s goat. I’m just taking
		my turn caring for it.” “I didn’t know we had a goat,”
		one of them said. “I wonder when my turn is.” “Soon,”
		I said. “Be patient. Your time is coming.” The goat
		stayed by my side. It stopped when I stopped. It looked
		up at me and I stared into its eyes. I felt he knew
		everything essential about me. We walked on. A police-
		man on his beat looked us over. “That’s a mighty
		fine goat you got there,” he said, stopping to admire.
		“It’s the town’s goat,” I said. “His family goes back
		three-hundred years with us,” I said, “from the beginning.”
		The officer leaned forward to touch him, then stopped
		and looked up at me. “Mind if I pat him?” he asked.
		“Touching this goat will change your life,” I said.
		“It’s your decision.” He thought real hard for a minute,
		and then stood up and said, “What’s his name?” “He’s
		called the Prince of Peace,” I said. “God! This town
		is like a fairy tale. Everywhere you turn there’s mystery 
		and wonder. And I’m just a child playing cops and robbers
		forever. Please forgive me if I cry.” “We forgive you,
		Officer,” I said. “And we understand why you, more than
		anybody, should never touch the Prince.” The goat and
		I walked on. It was getting dark and we were beginning
		to wonder where we would spend the night.


	3. SUCCESS COMES TO COW CREEK

		I sit on the tracks, 
		a hundred feet from
		earth, fifty from the
		water. Gerald is
		inching toward me
		as grim, slow, and
		determined as a
		season, because he
		has no trade and wants 
		none. It’s been nine months 
		since I last listened 
		to his fate, but I
		know what he will say:
		he’s the fire hydrant
		of the underdog.
		
		When he reaches my
		point above the creek,
		he sits down without
		salutation, and
		spits profoundly out
		past the edge, and peeks
		for meaning in the
		ripple it brings. He
		scowls. He speaks: when you 
		walk down any street 
		you see nothing but
		coagulations
		of shit and vomit,
		and I’m sick of it.
		I suggest suicide;
		he prefers murder, 
		and spits again for 
		the sake of all the 
		great devout losers.
		
		A conductor’s horn 
		concerto breaks the 
		air, and we, two doomed 
		pennies on the track, 
		shove off and somersault 
		like anesthetized 
		fleas, ruffling the 
		ideal locomotive 
		poised on the water 
		with our light, dry bodies. 
		Gerald shouts 
		terrifically as
		he sails downstream like 
		a young man with a 
		destination. I 
		swim toward shore as 
		fast as my boots will 
		allow; as always, 
		neglecting to drown.


	4. THE LIST OF FAMOUS HATS

		Napoleon’s hat is an obvious choice I guess to list as a famous hat, but that’s not the hat I have in 
		mind. That was his hat for show. I am thinking of his private bathing cap, which in all honesty 
		wasn’t much different than the one any jerk might buy at a corner drugstore now, except for two 
		minor eccentricities. The first one isn’t even funny: Simply it was a white rubber bathing cap, but 
		too small. Napoleon led such a hectic life ever since his childhood, even farther back than that, that 
		he never had a chance to buy a new bathing cap and still as a grown-up--well, he didn’t really grow 
		that much, but his head did: He was a pinhead at birth, and he used, until his death really, the same 
		little tiny bathing cap that he was born in, and this meant that later it was very painful to him and 
		gave him many headaches, as if he needed more. So, he had to vaseline his skull like crazy to even 
		get the thing on. The second eccentricity was that it was a tricorn bathing cap. Scholars like to 
		make a lot out of this, and it would be easy to do. My theory is simple-minded to be sure: that 
		beneath his public head there was another head and it was a pyramid or something.


	5. THE LOST PILOT

		_for my father, 1922--1944_
		
		Your face did not rot 
		like the others--the co-pilot, 
		for example, I saw him
		
		yesterday. His face is corn-
		mush: his wife and daughter, 
		the poor ignorant people, stare
		
		as if he will compose soon. 
		He was more wronged than Job. 
		But your face did not rot
		
		like the others--it grew dark, 
		and hard like ebony; 
		the features progressed in their
		
		distinction. If I could cajole 
		you to come back for an evening, 
		down from your compulsive
		
		orbiting, I would touch you, 
		read your face as Dallas, 
		your hoodlum gunner, now,
		
		with the blistered eyes, reads 
		his braille editions. I would 
		touch your face as a disinterested
		
		scholar touches an original page. 
		However frightening, I would 
		discover you, and I would not
		
		turn you in; I would not make 
		you face your wife, or Dallas,
		or the co-pilot, Jim. You
		
		could return to your crazy 
		orbiting, and I would not try 
		to fully understand what
		
		it means to you. All I know 
		is this: when I see you, 
		as I have seen you at least
		
		once every year of my life, 
		spin across the wilds of the sky 
		like a tiny, African god,
		
		I feel dead. I feel as if I were 
		the residue of a stranger’s life, 
		that I should pursue you.
		
		My head cocked toward the sky, 
		I cannot get off the ground, 
		and, you, passing over again,
		
		fast, perfect, and unwilling 
		to tell me that you are doing 
		well, or that it was mistake
		
		that placed you in that world, 
		and me in this; or that misfortune 
		placed these worlds in us.


	6. THE WRONG WAY HOME

		All night a door floated down the river.
		It tried to remember little incidents of pleasure
		from its former life, like the time the lovers
		leaned against it kissing for hours
		and whispering those famous words.
		Later, there were harsh words and a shoe
		was thrown and the door was slammed.
		Comings and goings by the thousands,
		the early mornings and late nights, years, years.
		O they’ve got big plans, they’ll make a bundle.
		The door was an island that swayed in its sleep.
		The moon turned the doorknob just slightly,
		burned its fingers and ran,
		and still the door said nothing and slept.
		At least that’s what they like to say,
		the little fishes and so on.
		Far away, a bell rang, and then a shot was fired.


*** Edward Taylor (1642 - 1729)

	1. GOD’S DETERMINATIONS TOUCHING HIS ELECT

		Infinity, when all things it beheld
		In Nothing, and of Nothing all did build,
		Upon what base was fixed the lath wherein
		He turned this globe and rigalled it so trim?
		Who blew the bellows of His furnace vast?
		Or held the mold wherein the world was cast?
		Who laid its cornerstone? Or whose command?
		Where stand the pillars upon which it stands?
		Who laced and filleted the earth so fine,
		With rivers like green ribbons smaragdine?
		Who made the seas its selvedge and it locks
		Like a quilt ball within a silver box?
		Who spread its canopy? Or curtains spun?
		Who in this bowling alley bowled the sun?
		Who made it always when it rises set,
		To go at once both down, and up to get?
		Who the curtain rods made for this tapestry?
		Who hung the twinkling lanterns in the sky?
		Who? Who did this? Or who is He? Why, know
		It’s only Might Almighty this did do.
		His hand hath made this noble work which stands,
		His glorious handiwork not made by hands.
		Who spake all things from nothing; and with ease.
		Can speak all things to nothing, if He please.
		Whose little finger at His pleasure can
		Out mete ten thousand worlds with half a span:
		Whose Might Almighty can by half a looks
		Root up the rocks and rock the hills by the roots.
		Can take this mighty world up in His hand,
		And shake it like a squitchen or a wand.
		Whose single frown will make the heavens shake
		Like as an aspen-leaf the wind makes quake.
		Oh, what a might is this Whose single frown
		Doth shake the world as it would shake it down?
		Which All on Nothing fet, from Nothing, All:
		Hath All on Nothing set, lts Nothing fall.
		Gave All to nothing-man indeed, whereby
		Through nothing-man all might him glorify.
		In Nothing then embossed the brightest gem
		More precious than all preciousness in them.
		But nothing-man did throw down all by sin:
		And darkened that lightsome gem in him.
		That now his brightest diamond is grown
		Darker by far than any coal-pit stone.


	2. I AM THE LIVING BREAD

		I kening through Astronomy Divine
		  The Worlds bright Battlement, wherein I spy
		A Golden Path my Pensill cannot line,
		  From that bright Throne unto my Threshold ly.
		  And while my puzzled thoughts about it pore
		  I finde the Bread of Life in’t at my doore.
		
		When that this Bird of Paradise put in
		  This Wicker Cage (my Corps) to tweedle praise
		Had peckt the Fruite forbad: and so did fling
		  Away its Food; and lost its golden dayes;
		  It fell into Celestiall Famine sore:
		  And never could attain a morsell more.
		
		Alas! alas! Poore Bird, what wilt thou doe?
		  The Creatures field no food for Souls e’re gave.
		And if thou knock at Angells dores they show
		  An Empty Barrell: they no soul bread have.
		  Alas! Poore Bird, the Worlds White Loafe is done
		  And cannot yield thee here the smallest Crumb.
		
		In this sad state, Gods Tender Bowells run
		  Out streams of Grace: And he to end all strife
		The Purest Wheate in Heaven, his deare-dear Son
		  Grinds, and kneads up into this Bread of Life.
		  Which Bread of Life from Heaven down came and stands
		  Disht on thy Table up by Angells Hands.
		
		Did God mould up this Bread in Heaven, and bake,
		  Which from his Table came, and to thine goeth?
		Doth he bespeake thee thus, This Soule Bread take.
		  Come Eate thy fill of this thy Gods White Loafe?
		  Its Food too fine for Angells, yet come, take
		  And Eate thy fill. Its Heavens Sugar Cake.
		
		What Grace is this knead in this Loafe? This thing
		  Souls are but petty things it to admire.
		Yee Angells, help: This fill would to the brim
		  Heav’ns whelm’d-down Chrystall meele Bowle, yea and higher.
		  This Bread of Life dropt in thy mouth, doth Cry.
		  Eate, Eate me, Soul, and thou shalt never dy.


*** Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809 - 1892)

	1. BREAK, BREAK, BREAK

		Break, break, break,
		        On thy cold gray stones, O Sea!
		And I would that my tongue could utter
		        The thoughts that arise in me.
		
		O, well for the fisherman’s boy,
		        That he shouts with his sister at play!
		O, well for the sailor lad,
		        That he sings in his boat on the bay!
		
		And the stately ships go on
		        To their haven under the hill;
		But O for the touch of a vanish’d hand,
		        And the sound of a voice that is still!
		
		Break, break, break
		        At the foot of thy crags, O Sea!
		But the tender grace of a day that is dead
		        Will never come back to me.


	2. CROSSING THE BAR

		Sunset and evening star,
		     And one clear call for me!
		And may there be no moaning of the bar,
		     When I put out to sea,
		
		  But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
		     Too full for sound and foam,
		When that which drew from out the boundless deep
		     Turns again home.
		
		  Twilight and evening bell,
		     And after that the dark!
		And may there be no sadness of farewell,
		     When I embark;
		
		  For tho’ from out our bourne of Time and Place
		     The flood may bear me far,
		I hope to see my Pilot face to face
		     When I have crost the bar.


	3. LATE, LATE, SO LATE

		Late, late, so late! and dark the night and chill!
		Late, late, so late! but we can enter still.
		Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.
		
		No light had we: for that we do repent;
		And learning this, the bridegroom will relent.
		Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.
		
		No light: so late! and dark and chill the night!
		O, let us in, that we may find the light!
		Too late, too late: ye cannot enter now.
		
		Have we not heard the bridegroom is so sweet?
		O, let us in, tho’ late, to kiss his feet!
		No, no, too late! ye cannot enter now.”


	4. MARRIAGE MORNING

		Light, so low upon earth, 
		  You send a flash to the sun. 
		Here is the golden close of love, 
		  All my wooing is done. 
		Oh, all the woods and the meadows, 
		  Woods, where we hid from the wet, 
		Stiles where we stayed to be kind, 
		  Meadows in which we met! 
		Light, so low in the vale 
		  You flash and lighten afar, 
		For this is the golden morning of love, 
		  And you are his morning star. 
		Flash, I am coming, I come, 
		  By meadow and stile and wood, 
		Oh, lighten into my eyes and my heart, 
		  Into my heart and my blood! 
		Heart, are you great enough 
		  For a love that never tires? 
		O heart, are you great enough for love? 
		  I have heard of thorns and briers. 
		Over the thorns and briers, 
		  Over the meadows and stiles, 
		Over the world to the end of it 
		  Flash of a million miles. 


	5. RING OUT, WILD BELLS

		Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
		The flying cloud, the frosty light:
		The year is dying in the night;
		Ring out, wild bells, and let him die . . .
		
		Ring out false pride in place and blood,
		The civic slander and the spite;
		Ring in the love of truth and right,
		Ring in the common love of good.
		
		Ring out old shapes of foul disease;
		Ring out the narrowing lust of gold;
		Ring out the thousand wars of old,
		Ring in the thousand years of peace.
		
		Ring in the valiant man and free,
		The larger heart, the kindlier hand;
		Ring out the darkness of the land,
		Ring in the Christ that is to be.


	6. ST. AGNES’ EVE

		Deep on the convent-roof the snows 
		Are sparkling to the moon: 
		My breath to heaven like vapour goes; 
		May my soul follow soon! 
		The shadows of the convent-towers 
		Slant down the snowy sward, 
		Still creeping with the creeping hours 
		That lead me to my Lord: 
		Make Thou my spirit pure and clear 
		As are the frosty skies, 
		Or this first snowdrop of the year 
		That in my bosom lies. 
		
		As these white robes are soil’d and dark, 
		To yonder shining ground; 
		As this pale taper’s earthly spark, 
		To yonder argent round; 
		So shows my soul before the Lamb, 
		My spirit before Thee; 
		So in mine earthly house I am, 
		To that I hope to be. 
		Break up the heavens, O Lord! and far, 
		Thro’ all yon starlight keen, 
		Draw me, thy bride, a glittering star, 
		In raiment white and clean. 
		
		He lifts me to the golden doors; 
		The flashes come and go; 
		All heaven bursts her starry floors, 
		And strows her lights below, 
		And deepens on and up! the gates 
		Roll back, and far within 
		For me the Heavenly Bridegroom waits, 
		To make me pure of sin. 
		The sabbaths of Eternity, 
		One sabbath deep and wide-- 
		A light upon the shining sea-- 
		The Bridegroom with his bride!


	7. THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE

		Half a league, half a league,
		Half a league onward,
		All in the valley of Death
		  Rode the six hundred.
		“Forward, the Light Brigade!
		Charge for the guns!” he said.
		Into the valley of Death
		  Rode the six hundred.
		
		“Forward, the Light Brigade!”
		Was there a man dismayed?
		Not though the soldier knew
		  Someone had blundered.
		  Theirs not to make reply,
		  Theirs not to reason why,
		  Theirs but to do and die.
		  Into the valley of Death
		  Rode the six hundred.
		
		Cannon to right of them,
		Cannon to left of them,
		Cannon in front of them
		  Volleyed and thundered;
		Stormed at with shot and shell,
		Boldly they rode and well,
		Into the jaws of Death,
		Into the mouth of hell
		  Rode the six hundred.
		
		Flashed all their sabres bare,
		Flashed as they turned in air
		Sabring the gunners there,
		Charging an army, while
		  All the world wondered.
		Plunged in the battery-smoke
		Right through the line they broke;
		Cossack and Russian
		Reeled from the sabre stroke
		  Shattered and sundered.
		Then they rode back, but not
		  Not the six hundred.
		
		Cannon to right of them,
		Cannon to left of them,
		Cannon behind them
		  Volleyed and thundered;
		Stormed at with shot and shell,
		While horse and hero fell.
		They that had fought so well
		Came through the jaws of Death,
		Back from the mouth of hell,
		All that was left of them,
		  Left of six hundred.
		
		When can their glory fade?
		O the wild charge they made!
		  All the world wondered.
		Honour the charge they made!
		Honour the Light Brigade,
		  Noble six hundred!


	8. THE EAGLE

		He clasps the crag with crooked hands;
		Close to the sun in lonely lands,
		Ring’d with the azure world, he stands.
		
		The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls;
		He watches from his mountain walls,
		And like a thunderbolt he falls.


	9. THE MILLER’S DAUGHTER

		It is the miller’s daughter,
		 And she is grown so dear, so dear,
		That I would be the jewel
		 That trembles in her ear:
		For hid in ringlets day and night,
		I’d touch her neck so warm and white.
		
		And I would be the girdle
		 About her dainty dainty waist,
		And her heart would beat against me,
		 In sorrow and in rest:
		And I should know if it beat right,
		I’d clasp it round so close and tight.
		
		And I would be the necklace,
		 And all day long to fall and rise
		Upon her balmy bosom,
		 With her laughter or her sighs,
		And I would lie so light, so light,
		I scarce should be unclasp’d at night.


	10. ULYSSES

		It little profits that an idle king, 
		By this still hearth, among these barren crags, 
		Match’d with an aged wife, I mete and dole 
		Unequal laws unto a savage race, 
		That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me. 
		I cannot rest from travel: I will drink 
		Life to the lees: All times I have enjoy’d 
		Greatly, have suffer’d greatly, both with those 
		That loved me, and alone, on shore, and when 
		Thro’ scudding drifts the rainy Hyades 
		Vext the dim sea: I am become a name; 
		For always roaming with a hungry heart 
		Much have I seen and known; cities of men 
		And manners, climates, councils, governments, 
		Myself not least, but honour’d of them all; 
		And drunk delight of battle with my peers, 
		Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy. 
		I am a part of all that I have met; 
		Yet all experience is an arch wherethro’ 
		Gleams that untravell’d world whose margin fades 
		For ever and forever when I move. 
		How dull it is to pause, to make an end, 
		To rust unburnish’d, not to shine in use! 
		As tho’ to breathe were life! Life piled on life 
		Were all too little, and of one to me 
		Little remains: but every hour is saved 
		From that eternal silence, something more, 
		A bringer of new things; and vile it were 
		For some three suns to store and hoard myself, 
		And this gray spirit yearning in desire 
		To follow knowledge like a sinking star, 
		Beyond the utmost bound of human thought. 
		
		        This is my son, mine own Telemachus, 
		To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle,--
		Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil 
		This labour, by slow prudence to make mild 
		A rugged people, and thro’ soft degrees 
		Subdue them to the useful and the good. 
		Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere 
		Of common duties, decent not to fail 
		In offices of tenderness, and pay 
		Meet adoration to my household gods, 
		When I am gone. He works his work, I mine. 
		
		        There lies the port; the vessel puffs her sail: 
		There gloom the dark, broad seas. My mariners, 
		Souls that have toil’d, and wrought, and thought with me--
		That ever with a frolic welcome took 
		The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed 
		Free hearts, free foreheads--you and I are old; 
		Old age hath yet his honour and his toil; 
		Death closes all: but something ere the end, 
		Some work of noble note, may yet be done, 
		Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods. 
		The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks: 
		The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep 
		Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends, 
		‘T is not too late to seek a newer world. 
		Push off, and sitting well in order smite 
		The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds 
		To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths 
		Of all the western stars, until I die. 
		It may be that the gulfs will wash us down: 
		It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, 
		And see the great Achilles, whom we knew. 
		Tho’ much is taken, much abides; and tho’ 
		We are not now that strength which in old days 
		Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are; 
		One equal temper of heroic hearts, 
		Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will 
		To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.


*** Dylan Thomas (1915 - 1953)

	1. DO NOT GO GENTLE INTO THAT GOOD NIGHT

		Do not go gentle into that good night,
		Old age should burn and rave at close of day;
		Rage, rage against the dying of the light.
		
		Though wise men at their end know dark is right,
		Because their words had forked no lightning they
		Do not go gentle into that good night.
		
		Good men, the last wave by, crying how bright
		Their frail deeds might have danced in a green bay,
		Rage, rage against the dying of the light.
		
		Wild men who caught and sang the sun in flight,
		And learn, too late, they grieved it on its way,
		Do not go gentle into that good night.
		
		Grave men, near death, who see with blinding sight
		Blind eyes could blaze like meteors and be gay,
		Rage, rage against the dying of the light.
		
		And you, my father, there on the sad height,
		Curse, bless, me now with your fierce tears, I pray.
		Do not go gentle into that good night.
		Rage, rage against the dying of the light.


	2. ESPECIALLY WHEN THE OCTOBER WIND

		Especially when the October wind 
		With frosty fingers punishes my hair, 
		Caught by the crabbing sun I walk on fire 
		And cast a shadow crab upon the land, 
		By the sea’s side, hearing the noise of birds, 
		Hearing the raven cough in winter sticks, 
		My busy heart who shudders as she talks 
		Sheds the syllabic blood and drains her words. 
		
		Shut, too, in a tower of words, I mark 
		On the horizon walking like the trees 
		The wordy shapes of women, and the rows 
		Of the star-gestured children in the park. 
		Some let me make you of the vowelled beeches, 
		Some of the oaken voices, from the roots 
		Of many a thorny shire tell you notes, 
		Some let me make you of the water’s speeches. 
		
		Behind a pot of ferns the wagging clock 
		Tells me the hour’s word, the neural meaning 
		Flies on the shafted disk, declaims the morning 
		And tells the windy weather in the cock. 
		Some let me make you of the meadow’s signs; 
		The signal grass that tells me all I know 
		Breaks with the wormy winter through the eye. 
		Some let me tell you of the raven’s sins. 
		
		Especially when the October wind 
		(Some let me make you of autumnal spells, 
		The spider-tongued, and the loud hill of Wales) 
		With fists of turnips punishes the land, 
		Some let me make you of the heartless words. 
		The heart is drained that, spelling in the scurry 
		Of chemic blood, warned of the coming fury. 
		By the sea’s side hear the dark-vowelled birds.


	3. FERN HILL

		Now as I was young and easy under the apple boughs
		About the lilting house and happy as the grass was green,
		   The night above the dingle starry,
		        Time let me hail and climb
		   Golden in the heydays of his eyes,
		And honoured among wagons I was prince of the apple towns
		And once below a time I lordly had the trees and leaves
		        Trail with daisies and barley
		   Down the rivers of the windfall light.
		
		And as I was green and carefree, famous among the barns
		About the happy yard and singing as the farm was home,
		   In the sun that is young once only,
		        Time let me play and be
		   Golden in the mercy of his means,
		And green and golden I was huntsman and herdsman, the calves
		Sang to my horn, the foxes on the hills barked clear and cold,
		        And the sabbath rang slowly
		   In the pebbles of the holy streams.
		
		All the sun long it was running, it was lovely, the hay
		Fields high as the house, the tunes from the chimneys, it was air
		   And playing, lovely and watery
		        And fire green as grass.
		   And nightly under the simple stars
		As I rode to sleep the owls were bearing the farm away,
		All the moon long I heard, blessed among stables, the nightjars
		   Flying with the ricks, and the horses
		        Flashing into the dark.
		
		And then to awake, and the farm, like a wanderer white
		With the dew, come back, the cock on his shoulder: it was all
		   Shining, it was Adam and maiden,
		        The sky gathered again
		   And the sun grew round that very day.
		So it must have been after the birth of the simple light
		In the first, spinning place, the spellbound horses walking warm
		   Out of the whinnying green stable
		        On to the fields of praise.
		
		And honoured among foxes and pheasants by the gay house
		Under the new made clouds and happy as the heart was long,
		   In the sun born over and over,
		        I ran my heedless ways,
		   My wishes raced through the house high hay
		And nothing I cared, at my sky blue trades, that time allows
		In all his tuneful turning so few and such morning songs
		   Before the children green and golden
		        Follow him out of grace,
		
		Nothing I cared, in the lamb white days, that time would take me
		Up to the swallow thronged loft by the shadow of my hand,
		   In the moon that is always rising,
		        Nor that riding to sleep
		   I should hear him fly with the high fields
		And wake to the farm forever fled from the childless land.
		Oh as I was young and easy in the mercy of his means,
		        Time held me green and dying
		   Though I sang in my chains like the sea.


	4. I SEE THE BOYS OF SUMMER

		I
		
		I see the boys of summer in their ruin
		Lay the gold tithings barren,
		Setting no store by harvest, freeze the soils;
		There in their heat the winter floods
		Of frozen loves they fetch their girls,
		And drown the cargoed apples in their tides.
		
		These boys of light are curdlers in their folly,
		Sour the boiling honey;
		The jacks of frost they finger in the hives;
		There in the sun the frigid threads
		Of doubt and dark they feed their nerves;
		The signal moon is zero in their voids.
		
		I see the summer children in their mothers
		Split up the brawned womb’s weathers,
		Divide the night and day with fairy thumbs;
		There in the deep with quartered shades
		Of sun and moon they paint their dams
		As sunlight paints the shelling of their heads.
		
		I see that from these boys shall men of nothing
		Stature by seedy shifting,
		Or lame the air with leaping from its heats;
		There from their hearts the dogdayed pulse
		Of love and light bursts in their throats.
		O see the pulse of summer in the ice.
		
		
		II
		
		But seasons must be challenged or they totter
		Into a chiming quarter
		Where, punctual as death, we ring the stars;
		There, in his night, the black-tongued bells
		The sleepy man of winter pulls,
		Nor blows back moon-and-midnight as she blows.
		
		We are the dark derniers let us summon
		Death from a summer woman,
		A muscling life from lovers in their cramp
		From the fair dead who flush the sea
		The bright-eyed worm on Davy’s lamp
		And from the planted womb the man of straw.
		
		We summer boys in this four-winded spinning,
		Green of the seaweeds’ iron,
		Hold up the noisy sea and drop her birds,
		Pick the world’s ball of wave and froth
		To choke the deserts with her tides,
		And comb the county gardens for a wreath.
		
		In spring we cross our foreheads with the holly,
		Heigh ho the blood and berry,
		And nail the merry squires to the trees;
		Here love’s damp muscle dries and dies
		Here break a kiss in no love’s quarry,
		O see the poles of promise in the boys.
		
		
		III
		
		I see you boys of summer in your ruin.
		Man in his maggot’s barren.
		And boys are full and foreign to the pouch.
		I am the man your father was.
		We are the sons of flint and pitch.
		O see the poles are kissing as they cross.


	5. MY HERO BARES HIS NERVES

		My hero bares his nerves along my wrist
		That rules from wrist to shoulder,
		Unpacks the head that, like a sleepy ghost,
		Leans on my mortal ruler,
		The proud spine spurning turn and twist.
		
		And these poor nerves so wired to the skull
		Ache on the lovelorn paper
		I hug to love with my unruly scrawl
		That utters all love hunger
		And tells the page the empty ill.
		
		My hero bares my side and sees his heart
		Tread, like a naked Venus,
		The beach of flesh, and wind her bloodred plait;
		Stripping my loin of promise,
		He promises a secret heat.
		
		He holds the wire from the box of nerves
		Praising the mortal error
		Of birth and death, the two sad knaves of thieves,
		And the hunger’s emperor;
		He pulls the chain, the cistern moves.


	6. OUR EUNUCH DREAMS

		I
		
		Our eunuch dreams, all seedless in the light,
		Of light and love the tempers of the heart,
		Whack their boys’ limbs,
		And, winding-footed in their shawl and sheet,
		Groom the dark brides, the widows of the night
		Fold in their arms.
		
		The shades of girls, all flavoured from their shrouds,
		When sunlight goes are sundered from the worm,
		The bones of men, the broken in their beds,
		By midnight pulleys that unhouse the tomb.
		
		
		II
		
		In this our age the gunman and his moll
		Two one-dimensional ghosts, love on a reel,
		Strange to our solid eye,
		And speak their midnight nothings as they swell;
		When cameras shut they hurry to their hole
		down in the yard of day.
		
		They dance between their arclamps and our skull,
		Impose their shots, showing the nights away;
		We watch the show of shadows kiss or kill
		Flavoured of celluloid give love the lie.
		
		
		III
		
		Which is the world? Of our two sleepings, which
		Shall fall awake when cures and their itch
		Raise up this red-eyed earth?
		Pack off the shapes of daylight and their starch,
		The sunny gentlemen, the Welshing rich,
		Or drive the night-geared forth.
		
		The photograph is married to the eye,
		Grafts on its bride one-sided skins of truth;
		The dream has sucked the sleeper of his faith
		That shrouded men might marrow as they fly.
		
		
		IV
		
		This is the world; the lying likeness of
		Our strips of stuff that tatter as we move
		Loving and being loth;
		The dream that kicks the buried from their sack
		And lets their trash be honoured as the quick.
		This is the world. Have faith.
		
		For we shall be a shouter like the cock,
		Blowing the old dead back; our shots shall smack
		The image from the plates;
		And we shall be fit fellows for a life,
		And who remains shall flower as they love,
		Praise to our faring hearts.


	7. THE SONG OF THE MISCHIEVOUS DOG

		There are many who say that a dog has its day,
		And a cat  has a number of lives;
		There are others who think that a lobster is pink,
		And that bees never work in their hives.
		There are fewer, of course, who insist that a horse
		Has a horn and two humps on its head,
		And a fellow who jests that a mare can build nests
		Is as rare as a donkey that’s red.
		Yet in spite of all this, I have moments of bliss,
		For I cherish a passion for bones,
		And though doubtful of biscuit, I’m willing to risk it,
		And I love to chase rabbits and stones.
		But my greatest delight is to take a good bite
		At a calf that is plump and delicious;
		And if I indulge in a bite at a bulge,
		Let’s hope you won’t think me too vicious.


	8. YOUR BREATH WAS SHED

		Your breath was shed
		Invisible to make
		About the soiled undead
		Night for my sake,
		
		A raining trail
		Intangible to them
		With biter’s tooth and tail
		And cobweb drum,
		
		A dark as deep
		My love as a round wave
		To hide the wolves of sleep
		And mask the grave.


*** R. S. Thomas (1913 - 2000)

	1. A PEASANT

		Iago Prytherch his name, though, be it allowed,
		Just an ordinary man of the bald Welsh hills,
		Who pens a few sheep in a gap of cloud.
		Docking mangels, chipping the green skin
		From the yellow bones with a half-witted grin
		Of satisfaction, or churning the crude earth
		To a stiff sea of clods that glint in the wind--
		So are his days spent, his spittled mirth
		Rarer than the sun that cracks the cheeks
		Of the gaunt sky perhaps once in a week.
		And then at night see him fixed in his chair
		Motionless, except when he leans to gob in the fire.
		There is something frightening in the vacancy of his mind.
		His clothes, sour with years of sweat
		And animal contact, shock the refined,
		But affected, sense with their stark naturalness.
		Yet this is your prototype, who, season by season
		Against siege of rain and the wind’s attrition,
		Preserves his stock, an impregnable fortress
		Not to be stormed, even in death’s confusion.
		Remember him, then, for he, too, is a winner of wars,
		Enduring like a tree under the curious stars.


	2. EVANS

		Evans? Yes, many a time
		I came down his bare flight
		Of stairs into the gaunt kitchen
		With its wood fire, where crickets sang
		Accompaniment to the black kettle"s
		Whine, and so into the cold
		Dark to smother in the thick tide
		Of night that drifted about the walls
		Of his stark farm on the hill ridge.
		
		It was not the dark filling my eyes
		And mouth appalled me; not even the drip
		Of rain like blood from the one tree
		Weather-tortured. It was the dark
		Silting the veins of that sick man
		I left stranded upon the vast
		And lonely shore of his bleak bed.


	3. GOOD

		The old man comes out on the hill
		and looks down to recall earlier days
		in the valley. He sees the stream shine,
		the church stand, hears the litter of
		children’s voices. A chill in the flesh
		tells him that death is not far off
		now: it is the shadow under the great boughs
		of life. His garden has herbs growing.
		The kestrel goes by with fresh prey
		in its claws. The wind scatters the scent
		of wild beans. The tractor operates
		on the earth’s body. His grandson is there
		ploughing; his young wife fetches him
		cakes and tea and a dark smile. It is well.


	4. KNEELING

		Moments of great calm,
		Kneeling before an altar
		Of wood in a stone church
		In summer, waiting for the God   
		To speak; the air a staircase   
		For silence; the sun’s light   
		Ringing me, as though I acted   
		A great rôle. And the audiences   
		Still; all that close throng
		Of spirits waiting, as I,
		For the message.
		                        Prompt me, God;
		But not yet. When I speak,   
		Though it be you who speak   
		Through me, something is lost.   
		The meaning is in the waiting.


	5. THE INTERROGATION

		But the financiers will ask
		In that day: IS it not better
		To leave broken bank balances
		Behind than broken heads?
		
		And Christ recognizing the
		New warriors will feel breaching
		His healed side their terrible
		Pencil and the haemorrhage of its figures.


	6. WALTER LLYWARCH

		I am, as you know, Walter Llywarch,
		Born in Wales of approved parents,
		Well goitred, round in the bum,
		Sure prey of the slow virus
		Bred in quarries of grey rain.
		
		Born in autumn at the right time
		For hearing stories from the cracked lips
		Of old folk dreaming of summer,
		I piled them on to the bare hearth
		Of my own fancy to make a blaze
		To warm myself, but achieved only
		The smoke’s acid that brings the smart
		Of false tears into the eyes.
		
		Months of fog, months of drizzle;
		Thought wrapped in the grey cocoon
		Of race, of place, awaiting the sun’s
		Coming, but when the sun came,
		Touching the hills with a hot hand,
		Wings were spread only to fly
		Round and round in a cramped cage
		Or beat in vain at the sky’s window.
		
		School in the week, on Sunday chapel:
		Tales of a land fairer than this
		Were not so tall, for others had proved it
		Without the grave’s passport, they sent
		The fruit home for ourselves to taste.
		
		Walter Llywarch--the words were a name
		On a lost letter that never came
		For one who waited in the long queue
		Of life that wound through a Welsh valley.
		I took instead, as others had done
		Before, a wife from the back pews
		In chapel, rather to share the rain
		Of winter evenings, than to intrude
		On her pale body; and yet we lay
		For warmth together and laughed to hear
		Each new child’s cry of despair.


*** Francis Thompson (1859 - 1907)

	1. A CORYMBUS FOR AUTUMN

		     HEARKEN my chant, ’tis
		As a Bacchante’s,
		A grape-spurt, a vine-splash, a tossed tress, flown vaunt ’tis!
		     Suffer my singing,
		Gipsy of Seasons, ere thou go winging;
		     Ere Winter throws
		     His slaking snows
		In thy feasting-flagon’s impurpurate glows!
		The sopped sun--toper as ever drank hard--
		     Stares foolish, hazed,
		     Rubicund, dazed,
		Totty with thine October tankard.
		Tanned maiden! with cheeks like apples russet,
		  And breast a brown agaric faint-flushing at tip,
		And a mouth too red for the moon to buss it,
		  But her cheek unvow its vestalship;
		     Thy mists enclip
		Her steel-clear circuit illuminous,
		     Until it crust
		     Rubiginous
		With the glorious gules of a glowing rust.
		Far other saw we, other indeed,
		     The crescent moon, in the May-days dead,
		     Fly up with its slender white wings spread
		Out of its nest in the sea’s waved mead!
		How are the veins of thee, Autumn, laden?
		           Umbered juices,
		           And pulpèd oozes
		  Pappy out of the cherry-bruises,
		Froth the veins of thee, wild, wild maiden!
		           With hair that musters
		           In globèd clusters,
		  In tumbling clusters, like swarthy grapes,
		Round thy brow and thine ears o’ershaden;
		With the burning darkness of eyes like pansies,
		           Like velvet pansies
		           Wherethrough escapes
		The splendid might of thy conflagrate fancies;
		  With robe gold-tawny not hiding the shapes
		           Of the feet whereunto it falleth down,
		        Thy naked feet unsandallèd;
		With robe gold-tawny that does not veil
		        Feet where the red
		        Is meshed in the brown,
		Like a rubied sun in a Venice-sail.
		
		The wassailous heart of the Year is thine!
		His Bacchic fingers disentwine
		        His coronal
		        At thy festival;
		His revelling fingers disentwine
		        Leaf, flower, and all,
		        And let them fall
		Blossom and all in thy wavering wine.
		The Summer looks out from her brazen tower,
		  Through the flashing bars of July,
		Waiting thy ripened golden shower;
		  Whereof there cometh, with sandals fleet,
		        The North-west flying viewlessly,
		  With a sword to sheer, and untameable feet,
		        And the gorgon-head of the Winter shown
		        To stiffen the gazing earth as stone.
		
		  In crystal Heaven’s magic sphere
		        Poised in the palm of thy fervid hand,
		  Thou seest the enchanted shows appear
		  That stain Favonian firmament;
		  Richer than ever the Occident
		        Gave up to bygone Summer’s wand.
		Day’s dying dragon lies drooping his crest,
		Panting red pants into the West.
		Or the butterfly sunset claps its wings
		  With flitter alit on the swinging blossom,
		The gusty blossom, that tosses and swings,
		  Of the sea with its blown and ruffled bosom;
		Its ruffled bosom wherethrough the wind sings
		Till the crispèd petals are loosened and strown
		        Overblown, on the sand;
		        Shed, curling as dead
		     Rose-leaves curl, on the fleckèd strand.
		Or higher, holier, saintlier when, as now,
		All nature sacerdotal seems, and thou.
		     The calm hour strikes on yon golden gong,
		        In tones of floating and mellow light
		     A spreading summons to even-song:
		        See how there
		        The cowlèd night
		     Kneels on the Eastern sanctuary-stair.
		What is this feel of incense everywhere?
		  Clings it round folds of the blanch-amiced clouds,
		Upwafted by the solemn thurifer,
		           The mighty spirit unknown,
		That swingeth the slow earth before the embannered Throne?
		  Or is’t the Season under all these shrouds
		Of light, and sense, and silence, makes her known
		        A presence everywhere,
		        An inarticulate prayer,
		A hand on the soothed tresses of the air?
		        But there is one hour scant
		Of this Titanian, primal liturgy;
		        As there is but one hour for me and thee,
		  Autumn, for thee and thine hierophant,
		        Of this grave ending chant.
		        Round the earth still and stark
		Heaven’s death-lights kindle, yellow spark by spark,
		Beneath the dreadful catafalque of the dark.
		
		        And I had ended there:
		But a great wind blew all the stars to flare,
		And cried, “I sweep the path before the moon!
		Tarry ye now the coming of the moon,
		        For she is coming soon;”
		Then died before the coming of the moon.
		And she came forth upon the trepidant air,
		        In vesture unimagined-fair,
		        Woven as woof of flag-lilies;
		        And curdled as of flag-lilies
		        The vapour at the feet of her,
		And a haze about her tinged in fainter wise.
		  As if she had trodden the stars in press,
		  Till the gold wine spurted over her dress,
		  Till the gold wine gushed out round her feet;
		        Spouted over her stainèd wear,
		  And bubbled in golden froth at her feet,
		        And hung like a whirlpool’s mist round her.
		  Still, mighty Season, do I see’t,
		  Thy sway is still majestical!
		  Thou hold’st of God, by title sure,
		Thine indefeasible investiture,
		  And that right round thy locks are native to;
		The heavens upon thy brow imperial,
		        This huge terrene thy ball,
		And o’er thy shoulders thrown wide air’s depending pall.
		  What if thine earth be blear and bleak of hue?
		        Still, still the skies are sweet!
		  Still, Season, still thou hast thy triumphs there!
		        How have I, unaware,
		Forgetful of my strain inaugural,
		  Cleft the great rondure of thy reign complete,
		Yielding thee half, who hast indeed the all?
		     I will not think thy sovereignty begun
		        But with the shepherd sun
		     That washes in the sea the stars’ gold fleeces
		        Or that with day it ceases,
		     Who sets his burning lips to the salt brine,
		        And purples it to wine;
		     While I behold how ermined Artemis
		        Ordainèd weed must wear,
		        And toil thy business;
		        Who witness am of her,
		     Her too in autumn turned a vintager;
		     And, laden with its lampèd clusters bright,
		     The fiery-fruited vineyard of this night.


	2. A FALLEN YEW

		IT seemed corrival of the world’s great prime,
		  Made to un-edge the scythe of Time,
		     And last with stateliest rhyme.
		
		No tender Dryad ever did indue
		  That rigid chiton of rough yew,
		     To fret her white flesh through:
		
		But some god like to those grim Asgard lords,
		  Who walk the fables of the hordes
		     From Scandinavian fjords,
		
		Upheaved its stubborn girth, and raised unriven,
		  Against the whirl-blast and the levin,
		     Defiant arms to Heaven.
		
		When doom puffed out the stars, we might have said,
		  It would decline its heavy head,
		     And see the world to bed.
		
		For this firm yew did from the vassal leas,
		  And rain and air, its tributaries,
		     Its revenues increase,
		
		And levy impost on the golden sun,
		  Take the blind years as they might run,
		     And no fate seek or shun.
		
		But now our yew is strook, is fallen--yea
		  Hacked like dull wood of every day
		     To this and that, men say.
		
		Never!--To Hades’ shadowy shipyards gone,
		  Dim barge of Dis, down Acheron
		     It drops, or Lethe wan.
		
		Stirred by its fall--poor destined bark of Dis!--
		  Along my soul a bruit there is
		     Of echoing images,
		
		Reverberations of mortality:
		  Spelt backward from its death, to me
		     Its life reads saddenedly.
		
		Its breast was hollowed as the tooth of eld;
		  And boys, their creeping unbeheld,
		     A laughing moment dwelled.
		
		Yet they, within its very heart so crept,
		  Reached not the heart that courage kept
		     With winds and years beswept.
		
		And in its boughs did close and kindly nest
		  The birds, as they within its breast,
		     By all its leaves caressed.
		
		But bird nor child might touch by any art
		  Each other’s or the tree’s hid heart,
		     A whole God’s breadth apart;
		
		The breadth of God, he breadth of death and life!
		  Even so, even so, in undreamed strife
		     With pulseless Law, the wife,--
		
		The sweetest wife on sweetest marriage-day,--
		  Their souls at grapple in mid-way,
		     Sweet to her sweet may say:
		
		“I take you to my inmost heart, my true!”
		  Ah, fool! but there is one heart you
		     Shall never take him to!
		
		The hold that falls not when the town is got,
		  The heart’s heart, whose immurèd plot
		     Hath keys yourself keep not!
		
		Its ports you cannot burst--you are withstood--
		  For him that to your listening blood
		     Sends precepts as he would.
		
		Its gates are deaf to Love, high summoner;
		  Yea, Love’s great warrant runs not there:
		     You are your prisoner.
		
		Yourself are with yourself the sole consortress
		  In that unleaguerable fortress;
		     It knows you not for portress
		
		Its keys are at the cincture hung of God;
		  Its gates are trepidant to His nod;
		     By Him its floors are trod.
		
		And if His feet shall rock those floors in wrath,
		  Or blest aspersion sleek His path,
		     Is only choice it hath.
		
		Yea, in that ultimate heart’s occult abode
		  To lie as in an oubliette of God,
		     Or as a bower untrod,
		
		Built by a secret Lover for His Spouse;--
		  Sole choice is this your life allows,
		     Sad tree, whose perishing boughs
		        So few birds house!


	3. DAISY

		WHERE the thistle lifts a purple crown
		  Six foot out of the turf,
		And the harebell shakes on the windy hill--
		  O the breath of the distant surf!--
		
		The hills look over on the South,
		  And southward dreams the sea;
		And, with the sea-breeze hand in hand,
		  Came innocence and she.
		
		Where ’mid the gorse the raspberry
		  Red for the gatherer springs,
		Two children did we stray and talk
		  Wise, idle, childish things.
		
		She listened with big-lipped surprise,
		  Breast-deep mid flower and spine:
		Her skin was like a grape, whose veins
		  Run snow instead of wine.
		
		She knew not those sweet words she spake,
		  Nor knew her own sweet way;
		But there’s never a bird, so sweet a song
		  Thronged in whose throat that day!
		
		Oh, there were flowers in Storrington
		  On the turf and on the spray;
		But the sweetest flower on Sussex hills
		  Was the Daisy-flower that day!
		
		Her beauty smoothed earth’s furrowed face!
		  She gave me tokens three:--
		A look, a word of her winsome mouth,
		  And a wild raspberry.
		
		A berry red, a guileless look,
		  A still word,--strings of sand!
		And yet they made my wild, wild heart
		  Fly down to her little hand.
		
		For standing artless as the air,
		  And candid as the skies,
		She took the berries with her hand,
		  And the love with her sweet eyes.
		
		The fairest things have fleetest end:
		  Their scent survives their close,
		But the rose’s scent is bitterness
		  To him that loved the rose!
		
		She looked a little wistfully,
		  Then went her sunshine way:--
		The sea’s eye had a mist on it,
		  And the leaves fell from the day.
		
		She went her unremembering way,
		  She went and left in me
		The pang of all the partings gone,
		  And partings yet to be.
		
		She left me marvelling why my soul
		  Was sad that she was glad;
		At all the sadness in the sweet,
		  The sweetness in the sad.
		
		Still, still I seemed to see her, still
		  Look up with soft replies,
		And take the berries with her hand,
		  And the love with her lovely eyes.
		
		Nothing begins, and nothing ends,
		  That is not paid with moan;
		For we are born in other’s pain,
		  And perish in our own.


	4. DREAM-TRYST

		THE breaths of kissing night and day
		  Were mingled in the eastern Heaven:
		Throbbing with unheard melody
		  Shook Lyra all its star-chord seven:
		     When dusk shrunk cold, and light trod shy,
		        And dawn’s grey eyes were troubled grey;
		     And souls went palely up the sky,
		        And mine to Lucidé.
		
		There was no change in her sweet eyes
		  Since last I saw those sweet eyes shine;
		There was no change in her deep heart
		  Since last that deep heart knocked at mine.
		     Her eyes were clear, her eyes were Hope’s,
		        Wherein did ever come and go
		     The sparkle of the fountain-drops
		        From her sweet soul below.
		
		The chambers in the house of dreams
		  Are fed with so divine an air,
		That Time’s hoar wings grow young therein,
		  And they who walk there are most fair.
		     I joyed for me, I joyed for her,
		        Who with the Past meet girt about:
		     Where our last kiss still warms the air,
		     Nor can her eyes go out.


	5. EPILOGUE

		VIRTUE may unlock hell, or even
		A sin turn in the wards of Heaven,
		(As ethics of the text-book go),
		So little men their own deeds know,
		Or through the intricate _mêlée_
		Guess whitherward draws the battle-sway;
		So little, if they know the deed,
		Discern what therefrom shall succeed.
		To wisest moralists ’tis but given
		To work rough border-law of Heaven,
		Within this narrow life of ours,
		These marches ’twixt delimitless Powers.
		Is it, if Heaven the future showed,
		Is it the all-severest mode
		To see ourselves with the eyes of God?
		God rather grant, at His assize,
		He see us not with our own eyes!
		
		Heaven, which man’s generations draws
		Nor deviates into replicas,
		Must of as deep diversity
		In judgment as creation be.
		There is no expeditious road
		To pack and label men for God,
		And save them by the barrel-load.
		Some may perchance, with strange surprise,
		Have blundered into Paradise.
		In vasty dusk of life abroad,
		They fondly thought to err from God,
		Nor knew the circle that they trod;
		And wandering all the night about,
		Found them at morn where they set out.
		Death dawned; Heaven lay in prospect wide:--
		Lo! they were standing by His side!
		
		The rhymer a life uncomplex,
		With just such cares as mortals vex,
		So simply felt as all men feel,
		Lived purely out to his soul’s weal.
		A double life the Poet lived,
		And with a double burthen grieved;
		The life of flesh and life of song,
		The pangs to both lives that belong;
		Immortal knew and mortal pain,
		Who in two worlds could lose and gain.
		And found immortal fruits must be
		Mortal through his mortality.
		The life of flesh and life of song!
		If one life worked the other wrong,
		What expiating agony
		May for him damned to poesy
		Shut in that little sentence be--
		What deep austerities of strife--
		“He lived his life.”  He lived _his_ life!


	6. THE HOUND OF HEAVEN

		I FLED Him, down the nights and down the days;
		  I fled Him, down the arches of the years;
		I fled Him, down the labyrinthine ways
		  Of my own mind; and in the mist of tears
		I hid from Him, and under running laughter.
		              Up vistaed hopes, I sped;
		              And shot, precipitated
		Adown Titanic glooms of chasmed fears,
		  From those strong Feet that followed, followed after.
		              But with unhurrying chase,
		              And unperturbéd pace,
		     Deliberate speed, majestic instancy,
		              They beat--and a Voice beat
		              More instant than the Feet--
		     “All things betray thee, who betrayest Me.”
		
		              I pleaded, outlaw-wise,
		By many a hearted casement, curtained red,
		  Trellised with intertwining charities;
		(For, though I knew His love Who followéd,
		              Yet was I sore adread
		Lest, having Him, I must have naught beside)
		But, if one little casement parted wide,
		  The gust of His approach would clash it to
		  Fear wist not to evade, as Love wist to pursue.
		Across the margent of the world I fled,
		  And troubled the gold gateways of the stars,
		  Smiting for shelter on their changèd bars;
		              Fretted to dulcet jars
		And silvern chatter the pale ports o’ the moon.
		I said to dawn: Be sudden--to eve: Be soon;
		  With thy young skiey blossoms heap me over
		              From this tremendous Lover!
		Float thy vague veil about me, lest He see!
		  I tempted all His servitors, but to find
		My own betrayal in their constancy,
		In faith to Him their fickleness to me,
		  Their traitorous trueness, and their loyal deceit.
		To all swift things for swiftness did I sue;
		  Clung to the whistling mane of every wind.
		        But whether they swept, smoothly fleet,
		     The long savannahs of the blue;
		              Or whether, Thunder-driven,
		        They clanged his chariot ’thwart a heaven,
		Plashy with flying lightnings round the spurn o’ their feet:--
		  Fear wist not to evade as Love wist to pursue.
		        Still with unhurrying chase,
		        And unperturbèd pace,
		  Deliberate speed, majestic instancy,
		           Came on the following Feet,
		           And a Voice above their beat--
		     “Naught shelters thee, who wilt not shelter Me.”
		
		I sought no more that, after which I strayed,
		     In face of man or maid;
		But still within the little children’s eyes
		     Seems something, something that replies,
		_They_ at least are for me, surely for me!
		I turned me to them very wistfully;
		But just as their young eyes grew sudden fair
		     With dawning answers there,
		Their angel plucked them from me by the hair.
		“Come then, ye other children, Nature’s--share
		With me” (said I) “your delicate fellowship;
		     Let me greet you lip to lip,
		     Let me twine with you caresses,
		           Wantoning
		     With our Lady-Mother’s vagrant tresses,
		           Banqueting
		     With her in her wind-walled palace,
		     Underneath her azured daïs,
		     Quaffing, as your taintless way is,
		           From a chalice
		Lucent-weeping out of the dayspring.”
		           So it was done:
		_I_ in their delicate fellowship was one--
		Drew the bolt of Nature’s secrecies.
		     _I_ knew all the swift importings
		     On the wilful face of skies;
		     I knew how the clouds arise
		     Spumèd of the wild sea-snortings;
		           All that’s born or dies
		     Rose and drooped with--made them shapers
		Of mine own moods, or wailful or divine--
		     With them joyed and was bereaven.
		     I was heavy with the even,
		     When she lit her glimmering tapers
		     Round the day’s dead sanctities.
		     I laughed in the morning’s eyes.
		I triumphed and I saddened with all weather,
		     Heaven and I wept together,
		And its sweet tears were salt with mortal mine;
		Against the red throb of its sunset-heart
		           I laid my own to beat,
		           And share commingling heat;
		But not by that, by that, was eased my human smart.
		In vain my tears were wet on Heaven’s grey cheek.
		For ah! we know not what each other says,
		     These things and I; in sound _I_ speak--
		_Their_ sound is but their stir, they speak by silences.
		Nature, poor stepdame, cannot slake my drouth;
		     Let her, if she would owe me,
		Drop yon blue bosom-veil of sky, and show me
		     The breasts o’ her tenderness:
		Never did any milk of hers once bless
		              My thirsting mouth.
		              Nigh and nigh draws the chase,
		              With unperturbèd pace,
		     Deliberate speed majestic instancy
		              And past those noisèd Feet
		              A voice comes yet more fleet--
		  “Lo! naught contents thee, who content’st not Me.”
		
		Naked I wait Thy love’s uplifted stroke!
		My harness piece by piece Thou hast hewn from me,
		              And smitten me to my knee;
		     I am defenceless utterly,
		     I slept, methinks, and woke,
		And, slowly gazing, find me stripped in sleep.
		In the rash lustihead of my young powers,
		     I shook the pillaring hours
		And pulled my life upon me; grimed with smears,
		I stand amid the dust o’ the mounded years--
		My mangled youth lies dead beneath the heap.
		My days have crackled and gone up in smoke,
		Have puffed and burst as sun-starts on a stream.
		     Yea, faileth now even dream
		The dreamer, and the lute the lutanist;
		Even the linked fantasies, in whose blossomy twist
		I swung the earth a trinket at my wrist,
		Are yielding; cords of all too weak account
		For earth with heavy griefs so overplussed.
		     Ah! is Thy love indeed
		A weed, albeit an amaranthine weed,
		Suffering no flowers except its own to mount?
		     Ah! must--
		     Designer infinite!--
		Ah! must Thou char the wood ere Thou canst limn with it?
		My freshness spent its wavering shower i’ the dust;
		And now my heart is as a broken fount,
		Wherein tear-drippings stagnate, spilt down ever
		     From the dank thoughts that shiver
		Upon the sighful branches of my mind.
		     Such is; what is to be?
		The pulp so bitter, how shall taste the rind?
		I dimly guess what Time in mists confounds;
		Yet ever and anon a trumpet sounds
		From the hid battlements of Eternity,
		Those shaken mists a space unsettle, then
		Round the half-glimpsèd turrets slowly wash again;
		     But not ere him who summoneth
		     I first have seen, enwound
		With grooming robes purpureal, cypress-crowned;
		His name I know, and what his trumpet saith.
		Whether man’s heart or life it be which yields
		     Thee harvest, must Thy harvest fields
		     Be dunged with rotten death?
		           Now of that long pursuit
		           Comes on at hand the bruit;
		     That Voice is round me like a bursting sea:
		           “And is thy earth so marred,
		           Shattered in shard on shard?
		     Lo, all things fly thee, for thou fliest Me!
		
		     “Strange, piteous, futile thing!
		Wherefore should any set thee love apart?
		Seeing none but I makes much of naught” (He said),
		“And human love needs human meriting:
		     How hast thou merited--
		Of all man’s clotted clay the dingiest clot?
		     Alack, thou knowest not
		How little worthy of any love thou art!
		Whom wilt thou find to love ignoble thee,
		     Save Me, save only Me?
		All which I took from thee I did but take,
		     Not for thy harms,
		But just that thou might’st seek it in My arms.
		     All which thy child’s mistake
		Fancies as lost, I have stored for thee at home:
		     Rise, clasp My hand, and come.”
		
		           Halts by me that footfall:
		           Is my gloom, after all,
		     Shade of His hand, outstretched caressingly?
		           “Ah, fondest, blindest, weakest,
		           I am He Whom thou seekest!
		     Thou dravest love from thee, who dravest Me.”


	7. THE POPPY

		SUMMER set lip to earth’s bosom bare.
		And left the flushed print in a poppy there:
		Like a yawn of fire from the grass it came,
		And the fanning wind puffed it to flapping flame.
		
		With burnt mouth red like a lion’s it drank
		The blood of the sun as he slaughtered sank,
		And dipped its cup in the purpurate shine
		When the eastern conduits ran with wine.
		
		Till it grew lethargied with fierce bliss,
		And hot as a swinked gipsy is,
		And drowsed in sleepy savageries,
		With mouth wide a-pout for a sultry kiss.
		
		A child and man paced side by side,
		Treading the skirts of eventide;
		But between the clasp of his hand and hers
		Lay, felt not, twenty withered years.
		
		She turned, with the rout of her dusk South hair,
		And saw the sleeping gipsy there;
		And snatched and snapped it in swift child’s whim,
		With--“Keep it, long as you live!”--to him.
		
		And his smile, as nymphs from their laving meres,
		Trembled up from a bath of tears;
		And joy, like a mew sea-rocked apart,
		Tossed on the wave of his troubled heart.
		
		For _he_ saw what she did not see,
		That--as kindled by its own fervency--
		The verge shrivelled inward smoulderingly:
		
		And suddenly ’twixt his hand and hers
		He knew the twenty withered years--
		No flower, but twenty shrivelled years.
		
		“Was never such thing until this hour,”
		Low to his heart he said; “the flower
		Of sleep brings wakening to me,
		And of oblivion memory.”
		
		“Was never this thing to me,” he said,
		“Though with bruisèd poppies my feet are red!”
		And again to his own heart very low:
		“O child!  I love, for I love and know;
		
		“But you, who love nor know at all
		The diverse chambers in Love’s guest-hall,
		Where some rise early, few sit long:
		In how differing accents hear the throng
		His great Pentecostal tongue;
		
		“Who know not love from amity,
		Nor my reported self from me;
		A fair fit gift is this, meseems,
		You give--this withering flower of dreams.
		
		“O frankly fickle, and fickly true,
		Do you know what the days will do to you?
		To your Love and you what the days will do,
		O frankly fickle, and fickly true?
		
		“You have loved me, Fair, three lives--or days:
		’Twill pass with the passing of my face.
		But where _I_ go, your face goes too,
		To watch lest I play false to you.
		
		“I am but, my sweet, your foster-lover,
		Knowing well when certain years are over
		You vanish from me to another;
		Yet I know, and love, like the foster-mother.
		
		“So, frankly fickle, and fickly true!
		For my brief life--while I take from you
		This token, fair and fit, meseems,
		For me--this withering flower of dreams.”
		
		                          * * * * * * *
		
		The sleep-flower sways in the wheat its head,
		Heavy with dreams, as that with bread:
		The goodly grain and the sun-flushed sleeper
		The reaper reaps, and Time the reaper.
		
		I hang ’mid men my needless head,
		And my fruit is dreams, as theirs is bread:
		The goodly men and the sun-hazed sleeper
		Time shall reap, but after the reaper
		The world shall glean of me, me the sleeper!
		
		Love! love! your flower of withered dream
		In leavèd rhyme lies safe, I deem,
		Sheltered and shut in a nook of rhyme,
		From the reaper man, and his reaper Time.
		
		Love! _I_ fall into the claws of Time:
		But lasts within a leavèd rhyme
		All that the world of me esteems--
		My withered dreams, my withered dreams.


	8. TO MONICA THOUGHT DYING

		        YOU, O the piteous you!
		        Who all the long night through
		        Anticipatedly
		        Disclose yourself to me
		        Already in the ways
		Beyond our human comfortable days;
		        How can you deem what Death
		        Impitiably saith
		        To me, who listening wake
		        For your poor sake?
		        When a grown woman dies
		You know we think unceasingly
		What things she said, how sweet, how wise;
		And these do make our misery.
		        But you were (you to me
		The dead anticipatedly!)
		You--eleven years, was’t not, or so?--
		        Were just a child, you know;
		        And so you never said
		Things sweet immeditatably and wise
		To interdict from closure my wet eyes:
		        But foolish things, my dead, my dead!
		        Little and laughable,
		        Your age that fitted well.
		And was it such things all unmemorable,
		        Was it such things could make
		Me sob all night for your implacable sake?
		
		        Yet, as you said to me,
		In pretty make-believe of revelry,
		        So the night long said Death
		        With his magniloquent breath;
		        (And that remembered laughter
		Which in our daily uses followed after,
		Was all untuned to pity and to awe):
		        “_A cup of chocolate_,
		        _One farthing is the rate_,
		        _You drink it through a straw_.”
		
		        How could I know, how know
		Those laughing words when drenched with sobbing so?
		Another voice than yours, than yours, he hath!
		        My dear, was’t worth his breath,
		His mighty utterance?--yet he saith, and saith!
		This dreadful Death to his own dreadfulness
		        Doth dreadful wrong,
		This dreadful childish babble on his tongue!
		That iron tongue made to speak sentences,
		And wisdom insupportably complete,
		Why should it only say the long night through,
		        In mimicry of you,--
		        “_A cup of chocolate_,
		        _One farthing is the rate_,
		_You drink it through a straw_, _a straw_, _a straw_!”
		        Oh, of all sentences,
		        Piercingly incomplete!
		Why did you teach that fatal mouth to draw,
		        Child, impermissible awe,
		        From your old trivialness?
		        Why have you done me this
		        Most unsustainable wrong,
		        And into Death’s control
		Betrayed the secret places of my soul?
		        Teaching him that his lips,
		Uttering their native earthquake and eclipse,
		        Could never so avail
		To rend from hem to hem the ultimate veil
		        Of this most desolate
		Spirit, and leave it stripped and desecrate,--
		        Nay, never so have wrung
		From eyes and speech weakness unmanned, unmeet;
		As when his terrible dotage to repeat
		Its little lesson learneth at your feet;
		        As when he sits among
		        His sepulchres, to play
		With broken toys your hand has cast away,
		With derelict trinkets of the darling young.
		Why have you taught--that he might so complete
		        His awful panoply
		        From your cast playthings--why,
		This dreadful childish babble to his tongue,
		        Dreadful and sweet?


*** Henry David Thoreau (1817 - 1862)

	1. CONSCIENCE

		Conscience is instinct bred in the house,
		Feeling and Thinking propagate the sin
		By an unnatural breeding in and in.
		I say, Turn it out doors,
		Into the moors.
		I love a life whose plot is simple,
		And does not thicken with every pimple,
		A soul so sound no sickly conscience binds it,
		That makes the universe no worse than ‘t finds it.
		I love an earnest soul,
		Whose mighty joy and sorrow
		Are not drowned in a bowl,
		And brought to life to-morrow;
		That lives one tragedy,
		And not seventy;
		A conscience worth keeping;
		Laughing not weeping;
		A conscience wise and steady,
		And forever ready;
		Not changing with events,
		Dealing in compliments;
		A conscience exercised about
		Large things, where one may doubt.
		I love a soul not all of wood,
		Predestinated to be good,
		But true to the backbone
		Unto itself alone,
		And false to none;
		Born to its own affairs,
		Its own joys and own cares;
		By whom the work which God begun
		Is finished, and not undone;
		Taken up where he left off,
		Whether to worship or to scoff;
		If not good, why then evil,
		If not good god, good devil.
		Goodness! you hypocrite, come out of that,
		Live your life, do your work, then take your hat.
		I have no patience towards
		Such conscientious cowards.
		Give me simple laboring folk,
		Who love their work,
		Whose virtue is song
		To cheer God along.


	2. I AM THE AUTUMNAL SUN

		Sometimes a mortal feels in himself Nature
		--not his Father but his Mother stirs
		within him, and he becomes immortal with her
		immortality. From time to time she claims
		kindredship with us, and some globule
		from her veins steals up into our own.
		
		I am the autumnal sun,
		With autumn gales my race is run;
		When will the hazel put forth its flowers,
		Or the grape ripen under my bowers?
		When will the harvest or the hunter’s moon
		Turn my midnight into mid-noon?
		I am all sere and yellow,
		And to my core mellow.
		The mast is dropping within my woods,
		The winter is lurking within my moods,
		And the rustling of the withered leaf
		Is the constant music of my grief . . .


	3. LOW-ANCHORED CLOUD

		Low-anchored cloud,
		Newfoundland air,
		Fountain-head and source of rivers,
		Dew-cloth, dream-drapery,
		And napkin spread by fays;
		Drifting meadow of the air,
		Where bloom the daisied banks and violets,
		And in whose fenny labyrinth
		The bittern booms and heron wades;
		Spirit of lakes and seas and rivers,
		Bear only perfumes and the scent
		Of healing herbs to just men’s fields!


	4. WINTER MEMORIES

		Within the circuit of this plodding life
		There enter moments of an azure hue,
		Untarnished fair as is the violet
		Or anemone, when the spring stew them
		By some meandering rivulet, which make
		The best philosophy untrue that aims
		But to console man for his grievances.
		I have remembered when the winter came,
		High in my chamber in the frosty nights,
		When in the still light of the cheerful moon,
		On the every twig and rail and jutting spout,
		The icy spears were adding to their length
		Against the arrows of the coming sun,
		How in the shimmering noon of winter past
		Some unrecorded beam slanted across
		The upland pastures where the Johnwort grew;
		Or heard, amid the verdure of my mind,
		The bee’s long smothered hum, on the blue flag
		Loitering amidst the mead; or busy rill,
		Which now through all its course stands still and dumb
		Its own memorial,--purling at its play
		Along the slopes, and through the meadows next,
		Until its youthful sound was hushed at last
		In the staid current of the lowland stream;
		Or seen the furrows shine but late upturned,
		And where the fieldfare followed in the rear,
		When all the fields around lay bound and hoar
		Beneath a thick integument of snow.
		So by God’s cheap economy made rich
		To go upon my winter’s task again.


*** J. R. R. Tolkien (1892 - 1973)

	1. ALL YE JOYFUL

		Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together!
		The wind’s in the tree-top, the wind’s in the heather;
		The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower,
		And bright are the windows of night in her tower.
		Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together!
		Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather!
		The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting;
		Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting.
		Sigh no more pine, till the wind of the morn!
		Fall Moon! Dark be the land!
		Hush! Hush! Oak, ash and thorn!
		Hushed by all water, till dawn is at hand!


	2. I SIT AND THINK

		I sit beside the fire and think of all that I have seen,
		of meadow-flowers and butterflies in summers that have been;
		Of yellow leaves and gossamer in autumns that there were,
		with morning mist and silver sun and wind upon my hair.
		I sit beside the fire and think of how the world will be
		when winter comes without a spring that I shall ever see.
		For still there are so many things that I have never seen:
		in every wood in every spring there is a different green.
		I sit beside the fire and think of people long ago,
		and people who will see a world that I shall never know.
		But all the while I sit and think of times there were before,
		I listen for returning feet and voices at the door.


	3. THE ROAD GOES EVER ON

		The roads goes ever on,
		Over rock and under tree,
		By caves where never sun has shone,
		By streams that never find the sea;
		Over snow by winter sown,
		And through the merry flowers of June,
		Over grass and over stone,
		And under mountains in the moon.
		
		The road goes ever on
		Under cloud and under star,
		Yet feet that wandering have gone
		Turn at last to home afar.
		Eyes that fire and sword have seen
		And horror in the halls of stone
		Look at last on meadows green
		And trees and hills they long have known.


*** Georg Trakl (1887 - 1914)

	1. DE PROFUNDIS

		There is a stubble field on which a black rain falls. 
		There is a tree which, brown, stands lonely here. 
		There is a hissing wind which haunts deserted huts--
		How sad this evening. 
		
		Past the village pond 
		The gentle orphan still gathers scanty ears of corn. 
		Golden and round her eyes are gazing in the dusk 
		And her lap awaits the heavenly bridegroom. 
		
		Returning home 
		Shepherds found the sweet body 
		Decayed in the bramble bush. 
		
		A shade I am remote from sombre hamlets. 
		The silence of God 
		I drank from the woodland well. 
		
		On my forehead cold metal forms. 
		Spiders look for my heart. 
		There is a light that fails in my mouth. 
		
		At night I found myself upon a heath, 
		Thick with garbage and the dust of stars. 
		In the hazel copse 
		Crystal angels have sounded once more. 


	2. GRODEK

		At evening the autumn woodlands ring 
		With deadly weapons. Over the golden plains 
		And lakes of blue, the sun 
		More darkly rolls. The night surrounds 
		Warriors dying and the wild lament 
		Of their fragmented mouths. 
		Yet silently there gather in the willow combe 
		Red clouds inhabited by an angry god, 
		Shed blood, and the chill of the moon. 
		All roads lead to black decay. 
		Under golden branching of the night and stars 
		A sister’s shadow sways through the still grove 
		To greet the heroes’ spirits, the bloodied heads. 
		And softly in the reeds Autumn’s dark flutes resound. 
		O prouder mourning!--You brazen altars, 
		The spirit’s hot flame is fed now by a tremendous pain: 
		The grandsons, unborn.


	3. WINTER EVENING

		When snow falls against the window, 
		Long sounds the evening bell . . .
		For so many has the table 
		Been prepared, the house set in order. 
		
		From their wandering, many 
		Come on dark paths to this gateway. 
		The tree of grace is flowering in gold 
		Out of the cool sap of the earth. 
		
		In stillness, wanderer, step in: 
		Grief has worn the threshold into stone. 
		But see: in pure light, glowing 
		There on the table: bread and wine.


*** Ivan Turgenev (1818 - 1883)

	1. A DREAM

		I fancied I was somewhere in Russia, in the wilds, in a simple country 
		house. 
		
		The room big and low pitched with three windows; the walls whitewashed; no 
		furniture. Before the house a barren plain; gradually sloping downwards, it 
		stretches into the distance; a grey monotonous sky hangs over it, like the 
		canopy of a bed. 
		
		I am not alone; there are some ten persons in the room with me. All quite 
		plain people, simply dressed. They walk up and down in silence, as it 
		were stealthily. They avoid one another, and yet are continually looking 
		anxiously at one another. 
		
		Not one knows why he has come into this house and what people there are 
		with him. On all the faces uneasiness and despondency . . . all in turn 
		approach the windows and look about intently as though expecting something 
		from without. 
		
		Then again they fall to wandering up and down. Among us is a small-sized 
		boy; from time to time he whimpers in the same thin voice, ‘Father, I’m 
		frightened!’ My heart turns sick at his whimper, and I too begin to be 
		afraid . . . of what? I don’t know myself. Only I feel, there is coming 
		nearer and nearer a great, great calamity. 
		
		The boy keeps on and on with his wail. Oh, to escape from here! How 
		stifling! How weary! how heavy . . . But escape is impossible. 
		
		That sky is like a shroud. And no wind . . . Is the air dead or what? 
		
		All at once the boy runs up to the window and shrieks in the same piteous 
		voice, ‘Look! look! the earth has fallen away!’ 
		
		‘How? fallen away?’ Yes; just now there was a plain before the house, and 
		now it stands on a fearful height! The horizon has sunk, has gone down, and 
		from the very house drops an almost overhanging, as it were scooped-out, 
		black precipice. 
		
		We all crowded to the window . . . Horror froze our hearts. ‘Here it is . . . 
		here it is!’ whispers one next me. 
		
		And behold, along the whole far boundary of the earth, something began to 
		stir, some sort of small, roundish hillocks began heaving and falling. 
		
		‘It is the sea!’ the thought flashed on us all at the same instant. ‘It 
		will swallow us all up directly . . . Only how can it grow and rise upwards? 
		To this precipice?’ 
		
		And yet, it grows, grows enormously . . . Already there are not separate 
		hillocks heaving in the distance . . . One continuous, monstrous wave 
		embraces the whole circle of the horizon. 
		
		It is swooping, swooping, down upon us! In an icy hurricane it flies, 
		swirling in the darkness of hell. Everything shuddered-and there, in 
		this flying mass-was the crash of thunder, the iron wail of thousands of 
		throats . . .
		
		Ah! what a roaring and moaning! It was the earth howling for terror . . .
		
		The end of it! the end of all! 
		
		The child whimpered once more . . . I tried to clutch at my companions, 
		but already we were all crushed, buried, drowned, swept away by that 
		pitch-black, icy, thundering wave! Darkness . . . darkness everlasting! 
		
		Scarcely breathing, I awoke.


	2. ALMS

		Near a large town, along the broad highroad walked an old sick man. 
		
		He tottered as he went; his old wasted legs, halting, dragging, stumbling, 
		moved painfully and feebly, as though they did not belong to him; his 
		clothes hung in rags about him; his uncovered head drooped on his 
		breast . . . He was utterly worn-out. 
		
		He sat down on a stone by the wayside, bent forward, leant his elbows on 
		his knees, hid his face in his hands; and through the knotted fingers the 
		tears dropped down on to the grey, dry dust. 
		
		He remembered . . . 
		
		Remembered how he too had been strong and rich, and how he had wasted his 
		health, and had lavished his riches upon others, friends and enemies . . .
		And here, he had not now a crust of bread; and all had forsaken him, 
		friends even before foes . . . Must he sink to begging alms? There was 
		bitterness in his heart, and shame. 
		
		The tears still dropped and dropped, spotting the grey dust. 
		
		Suddenly he heard some one call him by his name; he lifted his weary head, 
		and saw standing before him a stranger. 
		
		A face calm and grave, but not stern; eyes not beaming, but clear; a look 
		penetrating, but not unkind. 
		
		‘Thou hast given away all thy riches,’ said a tranquil voice . . . ‘But thou 
		dost not regret having done good, surely?’ 
		
		‘I regret it not,’ answered the old man with a sigh; ‘but here I am dying 
		now.’ 
		
		‘And had there been no beggars who held out their hands to thee,’ the 
		stranger went on, ‘thou wouldst have had none on whom to prove thy 
		goodness; thou couldst not have done thy good works.’ 
		
		The old man answered nothing, and pondered. 
		
		‘So be thou also now not proud, poor man,’ the stranger began again. ‘Go 
		thou, hold out thy hand; do thou too give to other good men a chance to 
		prove in deeds that they are good.’ 
		
		The old man started, raised his eyes . . . but already the stranger had 
		vanished, and in the distance a man came into sight walking along the road. 
		
		The old man went up to him, and held out his hand. This man turned away 
		with a surly face, and gave him nothing. 
		
		But after him another passed, and he gave the old man some trifling alms. 
		
		And the old man bought himself bread with the coppers given him, and sweet 
		to him seemed the morsel gained by begging, and there was no shame in his 
		heart, but the contrary: peace and joy came as a blessing upon him.


	3. CABBAGE SOUP

		A peasant woman, a widow, had an only son, a young man of twenty, the best
		workman in the village, and he died.
		
		The lady who was the owner of the village, hearing of the woman’s trouble,
		went to visit her on the very day of the burial.
		
		She found her at home.
		
		Standing in the middle of her hut, before the table, she was, without
		haste, with a regular movement of the right arm (the left hung listless at
		her side), scooping up weak cabbage soup from the bottom of a blackened
		pot, and swallowing it spoonful by spoonful.
		
		The woman’s face was sunken and dark; her eyes were red and swollen… but
		she held herself as rigid and upright as in church.
		
		‘Heavens!’ thought the lady, ‘she can eat at such a moment . . . what coarse
		feelings they have really, all of them!’
		
		And at that point the lady recollected that when, a few years before, she
		had lost her little daughter, nine months old, she had refused, in her
		grief, a lovely country villa near Petersburg, and had spent the whole
		summer in town! Meanwhile the woman went on swallowing cabbage soup.
		
		The lady could not contain herself, at last. ‘Tatiana!’ she said . . .
		‘Really! I’m surprised! Is it possible you didn’t care for your son? How is
		it you’ve not lost your appetite? How can you eat that soup!’
		
		‘My Vasia’s dead,’ said the woman quietly, and tears of anguish ran once
		more down her hollow cheeks. ‘It’s the end of me too, of course; it’s
		tearing the heart out of me alive. But the soup’s not to be wasted; there’s
		salt in it.’
		
		The lady only shrugged her shoulders and went away. Salt did not cost her
		much.


	4. HOW FAIR, HOW FRESH WERE THE ROSES

		Somewhere, sometime, long, long ago, I read a poem. It was soon forgotten 
		. . . but the first line has stuck in my memory--
		
		_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
		
		Now is winter; the frost has iced over the window-panes; in the dark room 
		burns a solitary candle. I sit huddled up in a corner; and in my head the 
		line keeps echoing and echoing--
		
		_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
		
		And I see myself before the low window of a Russian country house. The 
		summer evening is slowly melting into night, the warm air is fragrant of 
		mignonette and lime-blossom; and at the window, leaning on her arm, her 
		head bent on her shoulder, sits a young girl, and silently, intently gazes 
		into the sky, as though looking for new stars to come out. What candour, 
		what inspiration in the dreamy eyes, what moving innocence in the parted 
		questioning lips, how calmly breathes that still-growing, still-untroubled 
		bosom, how pure and tender the profile of the young face! I dare not speak 
		to her; but how dear she is to me, how my heart beats! 
		
		_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
		
		But here in the room it gets darker and darker . . .. The candle burns dim and 
		gutters, dancing shadows quiver on the low ceiling, the cruel crunch of the 
		frost is heard outside, and within the dreary murmur of old age . . .
		
		_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
		
		There rise up before me other images. I hear the merry hubbub of home life 
		in the country. Two flaxen heads, bending close together, look saucily at 
		me with their bright eyes, rosy cheeks shake with suppressed laughter, 
		hands are clasped in warm affection, young kind voices ring one above the 
		other; while a little farther, at the end of the snug room, other hands, 
		young too, fly with unskilled fingers over the keys of the old piano, and 
		the Lanner waltz cannot drown the hissing of the patriarchal samovar . . .
		
		_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
		
		The candle flickers and goes out . . .. Whose is that hoarse and hollow cough? 
		Curled up, my old dog lies, shuddering at my feet, my only companion . . .
		I’m cold . . . I’m frozen . . . and all of them are dead . . . dead . . . 
		
		_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._


	5. THE EGOIST

		He had every qualification for becoming the scourge of his family.
		
		He was born healthy, was born wealthy, and throughout the whole of his long
		life, continuing to be wealthy and healthy, he never committed a single
		sin, never fell into a single error, never once made a slip or a blunder.
		
		He was irreproachably conscientious! . . . And complacent in the sense of
		his own conscientiousness, he crushed every one with it, his family, his
		friends and his acquaintances.
		
		His conscientiousness was his capital . . . and he exacted an exorbitant
		interest for it.
		
		His conscientiousness gave him the right to be merciless, and to do no good
		deeds beyond what it dictated to him; and he was merciless, and did no good
		. . . for good that is dictated is no good at all.
		
		He took no interest in any one except his own exemplary self, and was
		genuinely indignant if others did not take as studious an interest in it!
		
		At the same time he did not consider himself an egoist, and was
		particularly severe in censuring, and keen in detecting egoists and egoism.
		To be sure he was. The egoism of another was a check on his own.
		
		Not recognising the smallest weakness in himself he did not understand, did
		not tolerate any weakness in any one. He did not, in fact, understand any
		one or any thing, since he was all, on all sides, above and below, before
		and behind, encircled by himself.
		
		He did not even understand the meaning of forgiveness. He had never had to
		forgive himself . . . What inducement could he have to forgive others?
		
		Before the tribunal of his own conscience, before the face of his own God,
		he, this marvel, this monster of virtue, raised his eyes heavenwards, and
		with clear unfaltering voice declared, ‘Yes, I am an exemplary, a truly
		moral man!’
		
		He will repeat these words on his deathbed, and there will be no throb even
		then in his heart of stone--in that heart without stain or blemish!
		
		Oh, hideousness of self-complacent, unbending, cheaply bought virtue; thou
		art almost more revolting than the frank hideousness of vice!


	6. THE FACE OF CHRIST

		I saw myself, in dream, a youth, almost a boy, in a low-pitched wooden 
		church. The slim wax candles gleamed, spots of red, before the old pictures 
		of the saints. 
		
		A ring of coloured light encircled each tiny flame. Dark and dim it was 
		in the church . . . But there stood before me many people. All fair-haired, 
		peasant heads. From time to time they began swaying, falling, rising 
		again, like the ripe ears of wheat, when the wind of summer passes in slow 
		undulation over them. 
		
		All at once some man came up from behind and stood beside me. 
		
		I did not turn towards him; but at once I felt that this man was Christ. 
		
		Emotion, curiosity, awe overmastered me suddenly. I made an effort . . . and 
		looked at my neighbour. 
		
		A face like every one’s, a face like all men’s faces. The eyes looked a 
		little upwards, quietly and intently. The lips closed, but not compressed; 
		the upper lip, as it were, resting on the lower; a small beard parted in 
		two. The hands folded and still. And the clothes on him like every one’s. 
		
		‘What sort of Christ is this?’ I thought. ‘Such an ordinary, ordinary man! 
		It can’t be!’ 
		
		I turned away. But I had hardly turned my eyes away from this ordinary man 
		when I felt again that it really was none other than Christ standing beside 
		me. 
		
		Again I made an effort over myself . . . And again the same face, like all 
		men’s faces, the same everyday though unknown features. 
		
		And suddenly my heart sank, and I came to myself. Only then I realised that 
		just such a face--a face like all men’s faces--is the face of Christ.


	7. THE ROSE

		The last days of August . . . Autumn was already at hand. 
		
		The sun was setting. A sudden downpour of rain, without thunder or 
		lightning, had just passed rapidly over our wide plain. 
		
		The garden in front of the house glowed and steamed, all filled with the 
		fire of the sunset and the deluge of rain. 
		
		She was sitting at a table in the drawing-room, and, with persistent 
		dreaminess, gazing through the half-open door into the garden. 
		
		I knew what was passing at that moment in her soul; I knew that, after a 
		brief but agonising struggle, she was at that instant giving herself up to 
		a feeling she could no longer master. 
		
		All at once she got up, went quickly out into the garden, and disappeared. 
		
		An hour passed . . . a second; she had not returned. 
		
		Then I got up, and, getting out of the house, I turned along the walk by 
		which-of that I had no doubt-she had gone. 
		
		All was darkness about me; the night had already fallen. But on the damp 
		sand of the path a roundish object could be discerned-bright red even 
		through the mist. 
		
		I stooped down. It was a fresh, new-blown rose. Two hours before I had seen 
		this very rose on her bosom. 
		
		I carefully picked up the flower that had fallen in the mud, and, going 
		back to the drawing-room, laid it on the table before her chair. 
		
		And now at last she came back, and with light footsteps, crossing the whole 
		room, sat down at the table. 
		
		Her face was both paler and more vivid; her downcast eyes, that looked 
		somehow smaller, strayed rapidly in happy confusion from side to side. 
		
		She saw the rose, snatched it up, glanced at its crushed, muddy petals, 
		glanced at me, and her eyes, brought suddenly to a standstill, were bright 
		with tears. 
		
		‘What are you crying for?’ I asked. 
		
		‘Why, see this rose. Look what has happened to it.’ 
		
		Then I thought fit to utter a profound remark. 
		
		‘Your tears will wash away the mud,’ I pronounced with a significant 
		expression. 
		
		‘Tears do not wash, they burn,’ she answered. And turning to the hearth she 
		flung the rose into the dying flame. 
		
		‘Fire burns even better than tears,’ she cried with spirit; and her lovely 
		eyes, still bright with tears, laughed boldly and happily. 
		
		I saw that she too had been in the fire.


	8. THE SPARROW

		I was returning from hunting, and walking along an avenue of the garden, my 
		dog running in front of me. 
		
		Suddenly he took shorter steps, and began to steal along as though tracking 
		game. 
		
		I looked along the avenue, and saw a young sparrow, with yellow about its 
		beak and down on its head. It had fallen out of the nest (the wind was 
		violently shaking the birch-trees in the avenue) and sat unable to move, 
		helplessly flapping its half-grown wings. 
		
		My dog was slowly approaching it, when, suddenly darting down from a tree 
		close by, an old dark-throated sparrow fell like a stone right before his 
		nose, and all ruffled up, terrified, with despairing and pitiful cheeps, it 
		flung itself twice towards the open jaws of shining teeth. 
		
		It sprang to save; it cast itself before its nestling . . . but all its tiny 
		body was shaking with terror; its note was harsh and strange. Swooning with 
		fear, it offered itself up! 
		
		What a huge monster must the dog have seemed to it! And yet it could not 
		stay on its high branch out of danger . . . A force stronger than its will 
		flung it down. 
		
		My Trésor stood still, drew back . . . Clearly he too recognised this force. 
		
		I hastened to call off the disconcerted dog, and went away, full of 
		reverence. 
		
		Yes; do not laugh. I felt reverence for that tiny heroic bird, for its 
		impulse of love. 
		
		Love, I thought, is stronger than death or the fear of death. Only by it, 
		by love, life holds together and advances.


	9. THE TWO BROTHERS

		It was a vision . . .
		
		Two angels appeared to me . . . two genii.
		
		I say angels, genii, because both had no clothes on their naked bodies, and
		behind their shoulders rose long powerful wings.
		
		Both were youths. One was rather plump, with soft smooth skin and dark
		curls. His eyes were brown and full, with thick eyelashes; his look
		was sly, merry, and eager. His face was charming, bewitching, a little
		insolent, a little wicked. His full soft crimson lips were faintly
		quivering. The youth smiled as one possessing power-self-confidently and
		languidly; a magnificent wreath of flowers rested lightly on his shining
		tresses, almost touching his velvety eyebrows. A spotted leopard’s skin,
		pinned up with a golden arrow, hung lightly from his curved shoulder to
		his rounded thigh. The feathers of his wings were tinged with rose colour;
		the ends of them were bright red, as though dipped in fresh-spilt scarlet
		blood. From time to time they quivered rapidly with a sweet silvery sound,
		the sound of rain in spring.
		
		The other was thin, and his skin yellowish. At every breath his ribs could
		be seen faintly heaving. His hair was fair, thin, and straight; his eyes
		big, round, pale grey… his glance uneasy and strangely bright. All his
		features were sharp; the little half-open mouth, with pointed fish-like
		teeth; the pinched eagle nose, the projecting chin, covered with whitish
		down. The parched lips never once smiled.
		
		It was a well-cut face, but terrible and pitiless! (Though the face of the
		first, the beautiful youth, sweet and lovely as it was, showed no trace of
		pity either.) About the head of the second youth were twisted a few broken
		and empty ears of corn, entwined with faded grass-stalks. A coarse grey
		cloth girt his loins; the wings behind, a dull dark grey colour, moved
		slowly and menacingly.
		
		The two youths seemed inseparable companions. Each of them leaned upon the
		other’s shoulder. The soft hand of the first lay like a cluster of grapes
		upon the bony neck of the second; the slender wrist of the second, with its
		long delicate fingers, coiled like a snake about the girlish bosom of the
		first.
		
		And I heard a voice. This is what it said: ‘Love and Hunger stand before
		thee--twin brothers, the two foundation-stones of all things living.
		
		‘All that lives moves to get food, and feeds to bring forth young.
		
		‘Love and Hunger--their aim is one; that life should cease not, the life of
		the individual and the life of others--the same universal life.’


	10. TO-MORROW

		How empty, dull, and useless is almost every day when it is spent! How few
		the traces it leaves behind it! How meaningless, how foolish those hours as
		they coursed by one after another!
		
		And yet it is man’s wish to exist; he prizes life, he rests hopes on it, on
		himself, on the future . . . Oh, what blessings he looks for from the future!
		
		But why does he imagine that other coming days will not be like this day he
		has just lived through?
		
		Nay, he does not even imagine it. He likes not to think at all, and he does
		well.
		
		‘Ah, to-morrow, to-morrow!’ he comforts himself, till ‘to-morrow’ pitches
		him into the grave.
		
		Well, and once in the grave, thou hast no choice, thou doest no more
		thinking.


	11. TWO RICH MEN

		When I hear the praises of the rich man Rothschild, who out of his immense
		revenues devotes whole thousands to the education of children, the care of
		the sick, the support of the aged, I admire and am touched.
		
		But even while I admire it and am touched by it, I cannot help recalling a
		poor peasant family who took an orphan niece into their little tumble-down
		hut.
		
		‘If we take Katka,’ said the woman, ‘our last farthing will go on her,
		there won’t be enough to get us salt to salt us a bit of bread.’
		
		‘Well, . . . we’ll do without salt,’ answered the peasant, her husband.
		
		Rothschild is a long way behind that peasant!


*** Miguel de Unamuno (1864 - 1936)

	1. THROW YOURSELF LIKE SEED

		Shake off this sadness, and recover your spirit;
		Sluggish you will never see the wheel of fate
		That brushes your heel as it turns going by,
		The man who wants to live is the man in whom life is abundant.
		
		Now you are only giving food to that final pain
		Which is slowly winding you in the nets of death,
		But to live is to work, and the only thing which lasts
		Is the work; start there, turn to the work.
		
		Throw yourself like seed as you walk, and into your own field,
		Don’t turn your face for that would be to turn it to death,
		And do not let the past weigh down your motion.
		
		Leave what’s alive in the furrow, what’s dead in yourself,
		For life does not move in the same way as a group of clouds;
		From your work you will be able one day to gather yourself. 


*** John Updike (1932 - 2009)

	1. BACK FROM VACATION

		‘Back from vacation’, the barber announces, 
		or the postman, or the girl at the drugstore, now tan. 
		They are amazed to find the workaday world 
		still in place, their absence having slipped no cogs, 
		their customers having hardly missed them, and 
		there being so sparse an audience to tell of the wonders, 
		the pyramids they have seen, the silken warm seas, 
		the nighttimes of marimbas, the purchases achieved 
		in foreign languages, the beggars, the flies, 
		the hotel luxury, the grandeur of marble cities. 
		But at Customs the humdrum pressed its claims. 
		Gray days clicked shut around them; the yoke still fit, 
		warm as if never shucked. The world is still so small, 
		the evidence says, though their hearts cry, ‘Not so!’


	2. DOG’S DEATH

		She must have been kicked unseen or brushed by a car. 
		Too young to know much, she was beginning to learn 
		To use the newspapers spread on the kitchen floor 
		And to win, wetting there, the words, ‘Good dog! Good dog!‘ 
		
		We thought her shy malaise was a shot reaction. 
		The autopsy disclosed a rupture in her liver. 
		As we teased her with play, blood was filling her skin 
		And her heart was learning to lie down forever. 
		
		Monday morning, as the children were noisily fed 
		And sent to school, she crawled beneath the youngest’s bed. 
		We found her twisted and limp but still alive. 
		In the car to the vet’s, on my lap, she tried 
		
		To bite my hand and died. I stroked her warm fur 
		And my wife called in a voice imperious with tears. 
		Though surrounded by love that would have upheld her, 
		Nevertheless she sank and, stiffening, disappeared. 
		
		Back home, we found that in the night her frame, 
		Drawing near to dissolution, had endured the shame 
		Of diarrhea and had dragged across the floor 
		To a newspaper carelessly left there. Good dog.


	3. EVENING CONCERT, SAINTE-CHAPELLE

		The celebrated windows flamed 
		with light directly pouring north 
		across the Seine; we rustled into place. 
		Then violins vaunting Vivaldi’s strident strength, 
		then Brahms, seemed to suck 
		with their passionate sweetness, 
		bit by bit, the vigor from the red, 
		the blazing blue, so that the listening eye 
		saw suddenly the thick black lines, 
		in shapes of shield and cross and strut and brace, 
		that held the holy glowing fantasy together. 
		The music surged; the glow became a milk, 
		a whisper to the eye, a glimmer ebbed 
		until our beating hearts, 
		our violins were cased in thin but solid sheets of lead.


	4. EX-BASKETBALL PLAYER

		Pearl Avenue runs past the high-school lot, 
		Bends with the trolley tracks, and stops, cut off 
		Before it has a chance to go two blocks, 
		At Colonel McComsky Plaza. Berth’s Garage 
		Is on the corner facing west, and there, 
		Most days, you’ll find Flick Webb, who helps Berth out. 
		
		Flick stands tall among the idiot pumps--
		Five on a side, the old bubble-head style, 
		Their rubber elbows hanging loose and low. 
		One’s nostrils are two S’s, and his eyes 
		An E and O. And one is squat, without 
		A head at all--more of a football type. 
		
		Once Flick played for the high-school team, the Wizards. 
		He was good: in fact, the best. In ‘46 
		He bucketed three hundred ninety points, 
		A county record still. The ball loved Flick. 
		I saw him rack up thirty-eight or forty 
		In one home game. His hands were like wild birds. 
		
		He never learned a trade, he just sells gas, 
		Checks oil, and changes flats. Once in a while, 
		As a gag, he dribbles an inner tube, 
		But most of us remember anyway. 
		His hands are fine and nervous on the lug wrench. 
		It makes no difference to the lug wrench, though. 
		
		Off work, he hangs around Mae’s Luncheonette. 
		Grease-gray and kind of coiled, he plays pinball, 
		Smokes those thin cigars, nurses lemon phosphates. 
		Flick seldom says a word to Mae, just nods 
		Beyond her face toward bright applauding tiers 
		Of Necco Wafers, Nibs, and Juju Beads.


	5. FLIGHT TO LIMBO

		The line didn’t move, though there were not 
		many people in it. In a half-hearted light 
		the lone agent dealt patiently, noiselessly, endlessly 
		with a large dazed family ranging 
		from twin toddlers in strollers to an old lady 
		in a bent wheelchair. Their baggage 
		was all in cardboard boxes. The plane was delayed, 
		the rumor went through the line. We shrugged, 
		in our hopeless overcoats. Aviation 
		had never seemed a very natural idea. 
		
		Bored children floated with faces drained of blood. 
		The girls in the tax-free shops stood frozen 
		amid promises of a beautiful life abroad. 
		Louis Armstrong sang in some upper corner, 
		a trickle of ignored joy. 
		Outside, in an unintelligible darkness 
		that stretched to include the rubies of strip malls, 
		winged behemoths prowled looking for the gates 
		where they could bury their koala-bear noses 
		and suck our dimming dynamos dry. 
		
		Boys in floppy sweatshirts and backward hats 
		slapped their feet ostentatiously 
		while security attendants giggled 
		and the voice of a misplaced angel melodiously 
		parroted FAA regulations. Women in saris 
		and kimonos dragged, as their penance, behind them 
		toddlers clutching Occidental teddy bears, 
		and chair legs screeched in the food court 
		while ill-paid wraiths mopped circles of night 
		into the motionless floor.


	6. HOEING

		I sometimes fear the younger generation will be deprived 
		of the pleasures of hoeing; 
		there is no knowing 
		how many souls have been formed by this simple exercise. 
		
		The dry earth like a great scab breaks, revealing 
		moist-dark loam--
		the pea-root’s home, 
		a fertile wound perpetually healing. 
		
		How neatly the green weeds go under! 
		The blade chops the earth new. 
		Ignorant the wise boy who 
		has never rendered thus the world fecunder.


	7. IN EXTREMIS

		I saw my toes the other day. 
		I hadn’t looked at them for months. 
		Indeed, they might have passed away. 
		And yet they were my best friends once. 
		When I was small, I knew them well. 
		I counted on them up to ten 
		And put them in my mouth to tell 
		The larger from the lesser. Then 
		I loved them better than my ears, 
		My elbows, adenoids, and heart. 
		But with the swelling of the years 
		We drifted, toes and I, apart. 
		Now, gnarled and pale, each said, j’accuse!--
		I hid them quickly in my shoes.


	8. JANUARY

		The days are short, 
		The sun a spark, 
		Hung thin between 
		The dark and dark. 
		
		Fat snowy footsteps 
		Track the floor. 
		Milk bottles burst 
		Outside the door. 
		
		The river is 
		A frozen place 
		Held still beneath 
		The trees of lace. 
		
		The sky is low. 
		The wind is gray. 
		The radiator 
		Purrs all day.


	9. ON THE ROAD

		Those dutiful dogtrots down airport corridors 
		while gnawing at a Dunkin’ Donuts cruller, 
		those hotel rooms where the TV remote 
		waits by the bed like a suicide pistol, 
		those hours in the air amid white shirts 
		whose wearers sleep-read through thick staid thrillers, 
		those breakfast buffets in prairie Marriotts-- 
		such venues of transit grow dearer than home. 
		
		The tricycle in the hall, the wife’s hasty kiss, 
		the dripping faucet and uncut lawn--this is life? 
		No, vita thrives via the road, in the laptop 
		whose silky screen shimmers like a dark queen’s mirror, 
		in the polished shoe that signifies killer intent, 
		and in the solitary mission, a bumpy glide 
		down through the cloud cover to a single runway 
		at whose end a man just like you guards the Grail.


	10. PENUMBRAE

		The shadows have their seasons, too. 
		The feathery web the budding maples 
		cast down upon the sullen lawn 
		
		bears but a faint relation to 
		high summer’s umbrageous weight 
		and tunnellike continuum-- 
		
		black leached from green, deep pools 
		wherein a globe of gnats revolves 
		as airy as an astrolabe. 
		
		The thinning shade of autumn is 
		an inherited Oriental, 
		red worn to pink, nap worn to thread. 
		
		Shadows on snow look blue. The skier, 
		exultant at the summit, sees his poles 
		elongate toward the valley: thus 
		
		each blade of grass projects another 
		opposite the sun, and in marshes 
		the mesh is infinite, 
		
		as the winged eclipse an eagle in flight 
		drags across the desert floor 
		is infinitesimal. 
		
		And shadows on water!-- 
		the beech bough bent to the speckled lake 
		where silt motes flicker gold, 
		
		or the steel dock underslung 
		with a submarine that trembles, 
		its ladder stiffened by air. 
		
		And loveliest, because least looked-for, 
		gray on gray, the stripes 
		the pearl-white winter sun 
		
		hung low beneath the leafless wood 
		draws out from trunk to trunk across the road 
		like a stairway that does not rise.


	11. PERFECTION WASTED

		And another regrettable thing about death 
		is the ceasing of your own brand of magic, 
		which took a whole life to develop and market-- 
		the quips, the witticisms, the slant 
		adjusted to a few, those loved ones nearest 
		the lip of the stage, their soft faces blanched 
		in the footlight glow, their laughter close to tears, 
		their tears confused with their diamond earrings, 
		their warm pooled breath in and out with your heartbeat, 
		their response and your performance twinned. 
		The jokes over the phone. The memories packed 
		in the rapid-access file. The whole act. 
		Who will do it again? That’s it: no one; 
		imitators and descendants aren’t the same.


	12. PLANTING TREES

		Our last connection with the mythic. 
		My mother remembers the day as a girl 
		she jumped across a little spruce 
		that now overtops the sandstone house 
		where still she lives; her face delights 
		at the thought of her years translated 
		into wood so tall, into so mighty 
		a peer of the birds and the wind. 
		
		Too, the old farmer still stout of step 
		treads through the orchard he has outlasted 
		but for some hollow-trunked much-lopped 
		apples and Bartlett pears. The dogwood 
		planted to mark my birth flowers each April, 
		a soundless explosion. We tell its story 
		time after time: the drizzling day, 
		the fragile sapling that had to be staked. 
		
		At the back of our acre here, my wife and I, 
		freshly moved in, freshly together, 
		transplanted two hemlocks that guarded our door 
		gloomily, green gnomes a meter high. 
		One died, gray as sagebrush next spring. 
		The other lives on and some day will dominate 
		this view no longer mine, its great 
		lazy feathery hemlock limbs down-drooping, 
		its tent-shaped caverns resinous and deep. 
		Then may I return, an old man, a trespasser, 
		and remember and marvel to see 
		our small deed, that hurried day, 
		so amplified, like a story through layers of air 
		told over and over, spreading.


	13. PURA VIDA

		Such heat! It brings the brain back to its basic blank. 
		Small, recurrent events become the daily news-- 
		the white-nosed coati treading the cecropia’s 
		bending thin branches like sidewalks in the sky, 
		the scarlet-rumped tanager flitting like a spark 
		in the tinder of dank green, the nodding palm leaves 
		perforated like Jacquard cards in a code of wormholes, 
		the black hawk skimming nothingness over and over. 
		
		What does the world’s wide brimming mean, with hunger 
		the unstated secret, dying the proximate reality? 
		Con mucho gusto--the muchness extends to the stars, 
		as wet and numerous as larvae underground 
		where the ants in their preset patterns scurry and nurture, 
		and the queen, immobilized, pours forth her eggs 
		in the dark. We are far from oaks and stoplights, 
		from England’s chill classrooms and Tuscany’s paved hills. 
		
		For thought is a stridulation, an insect sizzling, 
		knit of the moment’s headlines and temperate-zone quips, 
		viable in the debris of our rotting educations, 
		that thatch where peer-groups call each to each in semes 
		ecosystematically. Great God Himself 
		wilts with a rise in temperature, a drop in soil acidity, 
		a new language in its grimacing opacity. 
		The brain’s dry buzz revives, a bit, as evening falls.


	14. RELATIVES

		Just the thought of them makes your jawbone ache: 
		those turkey dinners, those holidays with 
		the air around the woodstove baked to a stupor, 
		and Aunt Lil’s tablecloth stained by her girlhood’s gravy. 
		A doggy wordless wisdom whimpers from 
		your uncles’ collected eyes; their very jokes 
		creak with genetic sorrow, a strain 
		of common heritage that hurts the gut. 
		
		Sheer boredom and fascination! A spidering 
		of chromosomes webs even the infants in 
		and holds us fast around the spread 
		of rotting food, of too-sweet pie. 
		The cousins buzz, the nephews crawl; 
		to love one’s self is to love them all.


	15. RETURNING NATIVE

		What can you say about Pennsylvania 
		in regard to New England except that 
		it is slightly less cold, and less rocky, 
		or rather that the rocks are different? 
		Redder, and gritty, and piled up here and there, 
		whether as glacial moraine or collapsed springhouse 
		is not easy to tell, so quickly 
		are human efforts bundled back into nature. 
		
		In fall, the trees turn yellower--
		hard maple, hickory, and oak 
		give way to tulip poplar, black walnut, 
		and locust. The woods are overgrown 
		with wild-grape vines, and with greenbrier 
		spreading its low net of anxious small claws. 
		In warm November, the mulching forest floor 
		smells like a rotting animal. 
		
		A genial pulpiness, in short: the sky 
		is soft with haze and paper-gray 
		even as the sun shines, and the rain 
		falls soft on the shoulders of farmers 
		while the children keep on playing, 
		their heads of hair beaded like spider webs. 
		A deep-dyed blur softens the bleak cities 
		whose people palaver in prolonged vowels. 
		
		There is a secret here, some death-defying joke 
		the eyes, the knuckles, the bellies imply--
		a suet of consolation fetched straight 
		from the slaughterhouse and hung out 
		for chickadees to peck in the lee of the spruce, 
		where the husks of sunflower seeds 
		and the peace-signs of bird feet crowd 
		the snow that barely masks the still-green grass. 
		
		I knew that secret once, and have forgotten. 
		The death-defying secret--it rises 
		toward me like a dog’s gaze, loving 
		but bewildered. When winter sits cold and black 
		on Boston’s granite hills, in Philly, 
		slumped between its two polluted rivers, 
		warmth’s shadow leans close to the wall 
		and gets the cement to deliver a kiss.


	16. SAYING GOODBYE TO VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

		They will not be the same next time. The sayings 
		so cute, just slightly off, will be corrected. 
		Their eyes will be more skeptical, plugged in 
		the more securely to the worldly buzz 
		of television, alphabet, and street talk, 
		culture polluting their gazes’ dawn blue. 
		It makes you see at last the value of 
		those boring aunts and neighbors (their smells 
		of summer sweat and cigarettes, their faces 
		like shapes of sky between shade-giving leaves) 
		who knew you from the start, when you were zero, 
		cooing their nothings before you could be bored 
		or knew a name, not even you own, or how 
		this world brave with hellos turns all goodbye.


	17. SEVEN STANZAS AT EASTER

		Make no mistake: if He rose at all 
		it was as His body; 
		if the cells’ dissolution did not reverse, the molecules 
		reknit, the amino acids rekindle, 
		the Church will fall. 
		
		It was not as the flowers, 
		each soft Spring recurrent; 
		it was not as His Spirit in the mouths and fuddled 
		eyes of the eleven apostles; 
		it was as His flesh: ours. 
		
		The same hinged thumbs and toes, 
		the same valved heart 
		that-pierced-died, withered, paused, and then 
		regathered out of enduring Might 
		new strength to enclose. 
		
		Let us not mock God with metaphor, 
		analogy, sidestepping, transcendence; 
		making of the event a parable, a sign painted in the 
		faded credulity of earlier ages: 
		let us walk through the door. 
		
		The stone is rolled back, not papier-mâché, 
		not a stone in a story, 
		but the vast rock of materiality that in the slow 
		grinding of time will eclipse for each of us 
		the wide light of day. 
		
		And if we will have an angel at the tomb, 
		make it a real angel, 
		weighty with Max Planck’s quanta, vivid with hair, 
		opaque in the dawn light, robed in real linen 
		spun on a definite loom. 
		
		Let us not seek to make it less monstrous, 
		for our own convenience, our own sense of beauty, 
		lest, awakened in one unthinkable hour, we are 
		embarrassed by the miracle, 
		and crushed by remonstrance.


*** César Vallejo (1892 - 1938)

	1. MASSES

		When the battle was over,
		And the fighter was dead, a man came toward him
		And said to him: “Do not die; I love you so!”
		But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
		
		And two came near, and repeated it.
		“Do not leave us! Courage! Return to life!”
		But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
		
		Twenty arrived, a hundred, a thousand, five hundred thousand,
		Shouting: “So much love, and it can do nothing against death!”
		But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
		
		Millions of persons stood around him,
		All with the same request: “Stay here, brother!”
		But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
		
		Then all the men on the earth
		Stood around him; the corpse looked at them sadly, deeply
		moved;
		He sat up slowly,
		Put his arms around the furst man; started to walk . . .


	2. MIGUEL

		I’m sitting here on the old patio
		beside your absence. It is a black well.
		We’d be playing, now. . . I can hear Mama yell   
		“Boys! Calm down!” We’d laugh, and off I’d go   
		to hide where you’d never look. . . under the stairs,   
		in the hall, the attic. . . Then you’d do the same.
		Miguel, we were too good at that game.   
		Everything would always end in tears.
		
		No one was laughing on that August night
		you went to hide away again, so late
		it was almost dawn. But now your brother’s through
		with this hunting and hunting and never finding you.
		The shadows crowd him. Miguel, will you hurry   
		and show yourself? Mama will only worry.


	3. THE BIG PEOPLE

		What time are the big people
		going to come back?
		Blind Santiago is striking six
		and already it’s very dark.
		
		Mother said that she wouldn’t be delayed
		
		Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel,
		be careful of going over there, where
		doubled-up griefs whimpering their memories
		have just gone
		toward the quiet poultry-yard, where
		the hens are still getting settled,
		who have been startled so much.
		
		We’d better just stay here.
		Mother said that she wouldn’t be delayed.
		
		And we shouldn’t be sad. Let’s go see
		the boats--mine is prettier than anybody’s!--
		we were playing with them the whole blessed day,
		without fighting among ourselves, as it should be:
		they stayed behind in the puddle, all ready,
		loaded with pleasant things for tomorrow.
		
		Let’s wait like this, obedient
		and helpless, for the homecoming, the apologies
		of the big people, who are always the first
		to abandon the rest of us in the house--
		as if we couldn’t get away too!
		
		Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel?
		I am calling, I am feeling around for you in the darkness.
		Don’t leave me behind by myself,
		to be locked in all alone.


	4. UNDER THE POPLARS

		     Like priestly imprisoned poets,         
		the poplars of blood have fallen asleep.
		On the hills, the flocks of Bethlehem                  
		chew arias of grass at sunset.                  
		
		     The ancient shepherd, who shivers         
		at the last martyrdoms of light,                  
		in his Easter eyes has caught                           
		a purebred flock of stars.                           
		
		     Formed in orphanhood, he goes down         
		with rumors of burial to the praying field,         
		and the sheep bells are seasoned with shadow.
		
		     It survives, the blue warped         
		in iron, and on it, pupils shrouded,                  
		a dog etches its pastoral howl.


*** Henry Vaughan (1621 - 1695)

	1. CHRIST’S NATIVITY

		Awake, glad heart! get up and sing!
		It is the birth-day of thy King.
		Awake! awake!
		The Sun doth shake
		Light from his locks, and all the way
		Breathing perfumes, doth spice the day.
		Awake, awake! hark how th’ wood rings;
		Winds whisper, and the busy springs
		A concert make;
		Awake! awake!
		Man is their high-priest, and should rise
		To offer up the sacrifice.
		I would I were some bird, or star,
		Flutt’ring in woods, or lifted far
		Above this inn
		And road of sin!
		Then either star or bird should be
		Shining or singing still to thee.
		I would I had in my best part
		Fit rooms for thee! or that my heart
		Were so clean as
		Thy manger was!
		But I am all filth, and obscene;
		Yet, if thou wilt, thou canst make clean.
		Sweet Jesu! will then. Let no more
		This leper haunt and soil thy door!
		Cure him, ease him,
		O release him!
		And let once more, by mystic birth,
		The Lord of life be born in earth.


	2. ETERNITY

		I saw Eternity the other night,
		Like a great ring of pure and endless light,
		All calm, as it was bright;
		And round beneath it, Time in hours, days, years,
		Driv’n by the spheres
		Like a vast shadow mov’d; in which the world
		And all her train were hurl’d.
		The doting lover in his quaintest strain
		Did there complain;
		Near him, his lute, his fancy, and his flights,
		Wit’s sour delights,
		With gloves, and knots, the silly snares of pleasure,
		Yet his dear treasure
		All scatter’d lay, while he his eyes did pour
		Upon a flow’r.
		The darksome statesman hung with weights and woe,
		Like a thick midnight-fog mov’d there so slow,
		He did not stay, nor go;
		Condemning thoughts (like sad eclipses) scowl
		Upon his soul,
		And clouds of crying witnesses without
		Pursued him with one shout.
		Yet digg’d the mole, and lest his ways be found,
		Work’d under ground,
		Where he did clutch his prey; but one did see
		That policy;
		Churches and altars fed him; perjuries
		Were gnats and flies;
		It rain’d about him blood and tears, but he
		Drank them as free.
		The fearful miser on a heap of rust
		Sate pining all his life there, did scarce trust
		His own hands with the dust,
		Yet would not place one piece above, but lives
		In fear of thieves;
		Thousands there were as frantic as himself,
		And hugg’d each one his pelf;
		The downright epicure plac’d heav’n in sense,
		And scorn’d pretence,
		While others, slipp’d into a wide excess,
		Said little less;
		The weaker sort slight, trivial wares enslave,
		Who think them brave;
		And poor despised Truth sate counting by
		Their victory.
		Yet some, who all this while did weep and sing,
		And sing, and weep, soar’d up into the ring;
		But most would use no wing.
		O fools (said I) thus to prefer dark night
		Before true light,
		To live in grots and caves, and hate the day
		Because it shews the way,
		The way, which from this dead and dark abode
		Leads up to God,
		A way where you might tread the sun, and be
		More bright than he.
		But as I did their madness so discuss
		One whisper’d thus,
		“This ring the Bridegroom did for none provide,
		But for his bride.”


	3. MOUNT OF OLIVES

		Sweet, sacred hill! on whose fair brow
		My Saviour sate, shall I allow
		Language to love,
		And idolize some shade, or grove,
		Neglecting thee? such ill-plac’d wit,
		Conceit, or call it what you please,
		Is the brain’s fit,
		And mere disease.
		
		Cotswold and Cooper’s both have met
		With learnèd swains, and echo yet
		Their pipes and wit;
		But thou sleep’st in a deep neglect,
		Untouch’d by any; and what need
		The sheep bleat thee a silly lay,
		That heard’st both reed
		And sheepward play?
		
		Yet if poets mind thee well,
		They shall find thou art their hill,
		And fountain too.
		Their Lord with thee had most to do;
		He wept once, walk’d whole nights on thee:
		And from thence—His suff’rings ended—
		Unto glory
		Was attended.
		
		Being there, this spacious ball
		Is but His narrow footstool all;
		And what we think
		Unsearchable, now with one wink 
		He doth comprise; but in this air
		When He did stay to bear our ill
		And sin, this hill
		Was then His Chair.


	4. THE EVENING WATCH

		_Body_:
		
		Farewell! I go to sleep; but when
		The day-star springs, I’ll wake again.
		
		
		_Soul_:
		
		Go, sleep in peace; and when thou liest
		Unnumber’d in thy dust, when all this frame
		Is but one dram, and what thou now descriest
		In sev’ral parts shall want a name,
		Then may his peace be with thee, and each dust
		Writ in his book, who ne’er betray’d man’s trust!
		
		
		_Body_:
		
		Amen! but hark, ere we two stray
		How many hours dost think ‘till day?
		
		
		_Soul_:
		
		Ah go; th’art weak, and sleepy. Heav’n
		Is a plain watch, and without figures winds
		All ages up; who drew this circle, even
		He fills it; days and hours are blinds.
		Yet this take with thee. The last gasp of time
		Is thy first breath, and man’s eternal prime.


	5. THE RELAPSE

		My God, how gracious art thou! I had slipt
		Almost to hell,
		And on the verge of that dark, dreadful pit
		Did hear them yell,
		But O thy love! thy rich, almighty love
		That sav’d my soul,
		And checkt their fury, when I saw them move,
		And heard them howl;
		O my sole comfort, take no more these ways,
		This hideous path,
		And I will mend my own without delays,
		Cease thou thy wrath!
		I have deserv’d a thick, Egyptian damp,
		Dark as my deeds,
		Should mist within me, and put out that lamp
		Thy spirit feeds;
		A darting conscience full of stabs and fears;
		No shade but Yew,
		Sullen, and sad eclipses, cloudy spheres,
		These are my due.
		But he that with his blood, (a price too dear,)
		My scores did pay,
		Bid me, by virtue from him, challenge here
		The brightest day;
		Sweet, downy thoughts; soft lily-shades; calm streams;
		Joys full and true;
		Fresh, spicy mornings; and eternal beams
		These are his due.


	6. THE WATERFALL

		With what deep murmurs through time’s silent stealth
		Doth thy transparent, cool, and wat’ry wealth
		Here flowing fall,
		And chide, and call,
		As if his liquid, loose retinue stay’d
		Ling’ring, and were of this steep place afraid;
		The common pass
		Where, clear as glass,
		All must descend
		Not to an end,
		But quicken’d by this deep and rocky grave,
		Rise to a longer course more bright and brave.
		Dear stream! dear bank, where often I
		Have sate and pleas’d my pensive eye,
		Why, since each drop of thy quick store
		Runs thither whence it flow’d before,
		Should poor souls fear a shade or night,
		Who came, sure, from a sea of light?
		Or since those drops are all sent back
		So sure to thee, that none doth lack,
		Why should frail flesh doubt any more
		That what God takes, he’ll not restore?
		O useful element and clear!
		My sacred wash and cleanser here,
		My first consigner unto those
		Fountains of life where the Lamb goes!
		What sublime truths and wholesome themes
		Lodge in thy mystical deep streams!
		Such as dull man can never find
		Unless that Spirit lead his mind
		Which first upon thy face did move,
		And hatch’d all with his quick’ning love.
		As this loud brook’s incessant fall
		In streaming rings restagnates all,
		Which reach by course the bank, and then
		Are no more seen, just so pass men.
		O my invisible estate,
		My glorious liberty, still late!
		Thou art the channel my soul seeks,
		Not this with cataracts and creeks.


	7. THEY ARE ALL GONE INTO THE WORLD OF LIGHT

		They are all gone into the world of light!
		And I alone sit ling’ring here;
		Their very memory is fair and bright,
		And my sad thoughts doth clear.
		It glows and glitters in my cloudy breast,
		Like stars upon some gloomy grove,
		Or those faint beams in which this hill is drest,
		After the sun’s remove.
		I see them walking in an air of glory,
		Whose light doth trample on my days:
		My days, which are at best but dull and hoary,
		Mere glimmering and decays.
		O holy Hope! and high Humility,
		High as the heavens above!
		These are your walks, and you have show’d them me
		To kindle my cold love.
		Dear, beauteous Death! the jewel of the just,
		Shining nowhere, but in the dark;
		What mysteries do lie beyond thy dust
		Could man outlook that mark!
		He that hath found some fledg’d bird’s nest, may know
		At first sight, if the bird be flown;
		But what fair well or grove he sings in now,
		That is to him unknown.
		And yet as angels in some brighter dreams
		Call to the soul, when man doth sleep:
		So some strange thoughts transcend our wonted themes
		And into glory peep.
		If a star were confin’d into a tomb,
		Her captive flames must needs burn there;
		But when the hand that lock’d her up, gives room,
		She’ll shine through all the sphere.
		O Father of eternal life, and all
		Created glories under thee!
		Resume thy spirit from this world of thrall
		Into true liberty.
		Either disperse these mists, which blot and fill
		My perspective still as they pass,
		Or else remove me hence unto that hill,
		Where I shall need no glass.


	8. UNPROFITABLENESS

		How rich, O Lord! how fresh thy visits are!
		‘Twas but just now my bleak leaves hopeless hung
		Sullied with dust and mud;
		Each snarling blast shot through me, and did share
		Their youth, and beauty, cold showers nipt, and wrung
		Their spiciness and blood;
		But since thou didst in one sweet glance survey
		Their sad decays, I flourish, and once more
		Breath all perfumes, and spice;
		I smell a dew like myrrh, and all the day
		Wear in my bosom a full sun; such store
		Hath one beam from thy eyes.
		But, ah, my God! what fruit hast thou of this?
		What one poor leaf did ever I yet fall
		To wait upon thy wreath?
		Thus thou all day a thankless weed dost dress,
		And when th’hast done, a stench or fog is all
		The odor I bequeath.


*** Lope de Vega (1562 - 1635)

	1. COUNTRY LIFE

		Let the vain courtier waste his days,
		Lured by the charms that wealth displays,
		The couch of down, the hoard of costly fare;
		Be his to kiss the ungrateful hand
		That waves the sceptre of command,
		And rear full many a palace in the air:
		Whilst Ï enjoy, all unconfined,
		The glowing sun, the genial wind,
		And tranquil hours, to rustic toil assigned;
		And prize far more, in peace and health,
		Contented indigence, than joyless wealth.
		Not mine in Fortune’s face to bend,
		At Grandeur’s altar to attend,
		Reflect his smile, and tremble at his frown;
		Nor mine a fond aspiring thought,
		A wish, a sigh, a vision, fraught
		With Fame’s bright phantom, Glory’s deathless crown!
		Nectareous draughts and viands pure
		Luxuriant nature will insure;
		These the clear fount and fertile field
		Still to the wearied shepherd yield;
		And when repose and visions reign,
		Then we are equals all, the monarch and the swain


	2. O NAVIS

		POOR bark of Life, upon the billows hoarse
		Assailed by storms of envy and deceit,
		Across what cruel seas in passage fleet
		My and sword alone direct thy course!
		My pen is dull; my sword of little force;
		Thy side lies open to the wild waves’ beat
		As out from Favor’s harbors we retreat,
		Pursued by hopes deceived and vain remorse.
		
		Let heaven by star to guide thee! here below
		How vain the joys that foolish hearts desire!
		Here friendship dies and enmity keeps true;
		Here happy days have left thee long ago!
		But seek not port, brave thou the tempest’s ire;
		Until the end thy fated course pursue!


	3. THE GOOD SHEPHERD

		SHEPHERD! who with thine amorous, sylvan song
		Hast broken the slumber that encompassed me,
		Who mad’st Thy crook from the accursed tree
		On which Thy powerful arms were stretched so long!
		Lead me to mercy’s ever-flowing fountains;
		For Thou my shepherd, guard, and guide shalt be;
		I will obey Thy voice, and wait to see
		Thy feet all beautiful upon the mountains.
		
		Hear, Shepherd Thou who for Thy flock art dying,
		Oh, wash away these scarlet sins, for Thou
		Rejoicest at the contrite sinner’s vow.
		Oh, wait! to Thee my weary soul is crying,
		Wait for me: Yet why ask it, when I see,
		With feet nailed to the cross, Thou’rt waiting still for me!


	4. TOMORROW

		Lord, what am I, that, with unceasing care,
		Thou didst seek after me,--that thou didst wait,
		Wet with unhealthy dews, before my gate,
		And pass the gloomy nights of winter there?
		O, strange delusion, that I did not greet
		Thy blest approach! and, O, to heaven how lost,
		If my ingratitude’s unkindly frost
		Has chilled the bleeding wounds upon thy feet!
		How oft my guardian angel gently cried,
		“Soul, from thy casement look, and thou shalt see
		How he persists to knock and wait for thee!”
		And, O, how often to that voice of sorrow,
		“To-morrow we will open,” I replied!
		And when the morrow came, I answered still,
		“To-morrow.”


*** Émile Verhaeren (1855 - 1916)

	1. INFINITELY

		The hounds of despair, the hounds of the autumnal wind,
		Gnaw with their howling the black echoes of evenings.
		The darkness, immensely, gropes in the emptiness
		For the moon, seen by the light of water.
		
		From point to point, over there, the distant lights,
		And in the sky, above, dreadful voices
		Coming and going from the infinity of the marshes and planes
		To the infinity of the valleys and the woods.
		
		And roadways that stretch out like sails
		And pass each other, coming unfolded in the distance, soundlessly,
		While lengthening beneath the stars,
		Through the shadows and the terror of the night.


	2. TENEBRAE

		A moon, with vacant, chilling eye, stares 
		At the winter, enthroned vast and white upon the hard ground; 
		The night is an entire and translucent azure; 
		The wind, a blade of sudden presence, stabs. 
		
		Far away, on the skylines, the long pathways of frost, 
		Seen, in the distance, to pierce the expanses, 
		And stars of gold, suspended to the zenith, 
		Always higher, amid the ether, to rend the blue of the sky. 
		
		The villages crouched in the plains of Flanders, 
		Near the rivers, the heather, and the great forests, 
		Between two pale infinities, shiver with cold, 
		Huddled near old hearthsides, where they stir the ashes.


	3. THE CATHEDRAL OF RHEIMS

		He who walks through the meadows of Champagne 
		At noon in Fall, when leaves like gold appear, 
		Sees it draw near 
		Like some great mountain set upon the plain, 
		From radiant dawn until the close of day, 
		Nearer it grows 
		To him who goes 
		Across the country. When tall towers lay 
		Their shadowy pall 
		Upon his way, 
		He enters, where 
		The solid stone is hollowed deep by all 
		Its centuries of beauty and of prayer. 
		
		Ancient French temple! thou whose hundred kings 
		Watch over thee, emblazoned on thy walls, 
		Tell me, within thy memory-hallowed halls 
		What chant of triumph, or what war-song rings? 
		Thou hast known Clovis and his Frankish train, 
		Whose mighty hand Saint Remy’s hand did keep 
		And in thy spacious vault perhaps may sleep 
		An echo of the voice of Charlemagne. 
		For God thou has known fear, when from His side 
		Men wandered, seeking alien shrines and new, 
		But still the sky was bountiful and blue 
		And thou wast crowned with France’s love and pride. 
		Sacred thou art, from pinnacle to base; 
		And in thy panes of gold and scarlet glass 
		The setting sun sees thousandfold his face; 
		Sorrow and joy, in stately silence pass 
		Across thy walls, the shadow and the light; 
		Around thy lofty pillars, tapers white 
		Illuminate, with delicate sharp flames, 
		The brows of saints with venerable names, 
		And in the night erect a fiery wall. 
		A great but silent fervour burns in all 
		Those simple folk who kneel, pathetic, dumb, 
		And know that down below, beside the Rhine - 
		Cannon, horses, soldiers, flags in line - 
		With blare of trumpets, mighty armies come. 
		
		Suddenly, each knows fear; 
		Swift rumours pass, that every one must hear, 
		The hostile banners blaze against the sky 
		And by the embassies mobs rage and cry. 
		Now war has come, and peace is at an end. 
		On Paris town the German troops descend. 
		They are turned back, and driven to Champagne. 
		And now, as to so many weary men, 
		The glorious temple gives them welcome, when 
		It meets them at the bottom of the plain. 
		
		At once, they set their cannon in its way. 
		There is no gable now, nor wall 
		That does not suffer, night and day, 
		As shot and shell in crushing torrents fall. 
		The stricken tocsin quivers through the tower; 
		The triple nave, the apse, the lonely choir 
		Are circled, hour by hour, 
		With thundering bands of fire 
		And Death is scattered broadcast among men. 
		
		And then 
		That which was splendid with baptismal grace; 
		The stately arches soaring into space, 
		The transepts, columns, windows gray and gold, 
		The organ, in whose tones the ocean rolled, 
		The crypts, of mighty shades the dwelling places, 
		The Virgin’s gentle hands, the Saints’ pure faces, 
		All, even the pardoning hands of Christ the Lord 
		Were struck and broken by the wanton sword 
		Of sacrilegious lust. 
		
		O beauty slain, O glory in the dust! 
		Strong walls of faith, most basely overthrown! 
		The crawling flames, like adders glistening 
		Ate the white fabric of this lovely thing. 
		Now from its soul arose a piteous moan, 
		The soul that always loved the just and fair. 
		Granite and marble loud their woe confessed, 
		The silver monstrances that Popes had blessed, 
		The chalices and lamps and crosiers rare 
		Were seared and twisted by a flaming breath; 
		The horror everywhere did range and swell, 
		The guardian Saints into this furnace fell, 
		Their bitter tears and screams were stilled in death. 
		
		Around the flames armed hosts are skirmishing, 
		The burning sun reflects the lurid scene; 
		The German army, fighting for its life, 
		Rallies its torn and terrified left wing; 
		And, as they near this place 
		The imperial eagles see 
		Before them in their flight, 
		Here, in the solemn night, 
		The old cathedral, to the years to be 
		Showing, with wounded arms, their own disgrace.


*** Paul Verlaine (1844 - 1896)

	1. INNOCENTS WE

		Their long skirts and high heels battled away:
		Depending on the ground’s and breezes’ whim,
		At times some stocking shone, low on the limb--
		Too soon concealed!--tickling our naïveté.
		
		At times, as well, an envious bug would bite
		Our lovelies’ necks beneath the boughs, and we
		Would glimpse a flash—white flash, ah! ecstasy!--
		And glut our mad young eyes on sheer delight.
		
		Evening would fall, the autumn day would draw
		To its uncertain close: our belles would cling
		Dreamingly to us, cooing, whispering
		Lies that still set our souls trembling with awe.


	2. MON RÊVE FAMILIER

		Oft do I dream this strange and penetrating dream:
		An unknown woman, whom I love, who loves me well,
		Who does not every time quite change, nor yet quite dwell
		The same,--and loves me well, and knows me as I am.
		
		For she knows me! My heart, clear as a crystal beam
		To her alone, ceases to be inscrutable
		To her alone, and she alone knows to dispel
		My grief, cooling my brow with her tears’ gentle stream.
		
		Is she of favor dark or fair?--I do not know.
		Her name? All I remember is that it doth flow
		Softly, as do the names of them we loved and lost.
		
		Her eyes are like the statues’,--mild and grave and wide;
		And for her voice she has as if it were the ghost
		Of other voices,--well-loved voices that have died.


	3. THE SKY-BLUE SMILES ABOVE THE ROOF

		The sky-blue smiles above the roof
		      Its tenderest;
		A green tree rears above the roof
		      Its waving crest.
		
		The church-bell in the windless sky
		      Peaceably rings,
		A skylark soaring in the sky
		      Endlessly sings.
		
		My God, my God, all life is there,
		      Simple and sweet;
		The soothing bee-hive murmur there
		      Comes from the street!
		
		What have you done, O you that weep
		      In the glad sun,--
		Say, with your youth, you man that weep,
		      What have you done?


*** Peter Viereck (1916 - 2006)

	1. A WALK ON MOSS

		I
		
		Two lovers walking in a lovers’ garden,
		Dreaming old books with heavy-lidded pages
		About two lovers walking in a garden.
		They walk as dawdlingly as bark uncurls,
		More inwardly than deep green lavishes;
		They walk as timelessly as moss spells out
		To every step the Braille of “dream forever,”
		Where “forever” means an hour’s walk on moss.
		His eyes that drowse too open, dream illusions:
		That worlds--what kind?--exist outside the garden.
		Then just in time both dim their eyes--to wake;
		And then she sees no grief on earth beyond
		The hint of pebbles in a sandal or
		A starling lost in rhododendron bushes.
		
		
		II
		
		Two lovers, speaking in a garden, spangling
		Confetti of tropes. In fun articulating
		Extravagant picnics of sound. Let her say: “I am
		A mere coiffure of baubles who thank the sun,
		‘It is your noon that loans us stellar ways.‘”
		
		“If head-dress,” let him answer,
		“then Milky Way.
		A pompadour of trellised fireflies.
		An intricacy of comets at toss of the head,
		
		A disciplined waterfall of well-tuned skies.
		“Then you, disheveler of cosmic primness,
		It is who orchestrates that luminary
		Lustre as startlingly as combs in winter.”
		
		And he: “Swim, tortoise-shell, on such sweet tides!”
		So let them speak--like Byzantines of love--
		A minute in fun, their courtship having been
		In truth least courtierlike of pastorals,
		Needing each other as simply as fetching water
		From stillness of wells. Two lovers, two true loves:
		As inarticulate as bread is shared.
		
		
		III
		
		A garden of togethers, waifs of groves,
		Two twigs slender as rain, leaning
		As tenderly as eyelids almost-meet.
		Or else an “ah” and “oh,” a pair of breaths
		So in, so through, so hoveringly past
		Corporeal gates as if two sighs were drifting
		Through sultry, gnat-stirred southlands, fluttered at
		By dusks of moth-eyed, mild astonishments.
		Yet lovers both: branded to the bone with knowledge,
		Stifled to the lungs with incense of fulfilment,
		Stained with each other’s scents like painter’s
		   palettes.
		Palettes whose perfect white is white and isn’t,
		Being blended from all colors ever found.
		Dark and pure their thicket of entangling;
		Dark and heavy its cloying; darkly white
		The gentleness--heavy, heavy--of the gorged lovers.
		
		
		IV
		
		From time to time they watch a goldfish circling.
		Beside white groves. The shade of saplings covers
		The pond as chastely as a shadow longs.
		White shadow, ceremoniously emblemed
		With slow wet rings that fade as sad as gold does.
		What have they to do--touching, as they walk,
		Only each other’s knowing fingertips--
		What have they to do, satiated and kind,
		Two lovers in a garden-walk, what else
		But watch a rainbow of fins paddle like petals
		Across a mirrored indolence of birches?
		More real than they themselves are, for an hour
		Is not the only solid stuff in dreamland
		The slow wet gold reflected from the circlings
		Of fish on the reflected white of bark?
		Here limbs are air, and contours cannot press.
		And only surfaces are deep.
		And nothing true except reflectedness.
		
		
		V
		
		Here and now, nothing is willed, and nothing
		   touches;
		Not even the slowed up air--westering breezelessly--
		Ripples the gauze of her shoulders. For an hour,
		Luxuriance has grown past wantonness; has grown
		Back down into a bud, as darkly pure
		As satin, as unfolded as cocoons . . .
		And so two lovers walking in a garden
		Became one moon. Pure white, drained beyond fire,
		One moon in empty skies,
		Rich beyond clouds and to itself enough.


	2. WE RAN ALL THE WAY HOME

		1
		
		Callously innocent in our disinfected games,
		We plastic-swaddled children of fifty years
		With unlined faces, hacking down some gnarls,
		Unpeeled a dryad once, stript, trapt, and spitting;--
		That older race, filth of unswaddled pulse-beat,
		A god and shieldless,
		uninnocently tender.
		
		
		2
		
		Plodding back home, yanking a god we cornered:
		A lassoed cataract amid canals.
		Then hours of swapping new toys for old spells,
		Till sobered by the hygiene-spraying aunts:
		“What makes our young ones fuss round just some stump?
		Go clutter honest lumber up with spooks,
		Read dryads in, go hunt for haunters; yet
		When all is said and done of ‘myth’ and ‘magic’,
		One flashlight shrivels any hunk of dusk.
		But watch for tricks: with lyric buzz re-enter
		Flies, incense, backwardness, those Old Expelled.
		Her spells?--her frauds! Aim lights--look, nothing there.
		
		
		3
		
		Frauds of the dryad:
		                speech, growth, weapon mocked us.
		Her weapon: raids by quicksilver evadings.
		Her growth: tree rhythm, an unfolding. Her speech:
		A riffraff of breezes, truant from asphalt and logic,
		Leaving behind a litter of petals and doubts.
		Of anti-metal something shimmered then
		(A winging of sap against a steeling of will)
		That would have rusted something of machine in us,
		Had something in us of weight not tamed that wine.
		We tamed by gifts. Gave metal’s just-as-good:
		“Instead! Instead! You need; we give; you change.”
		And so a god gets nursed into a pet;
		
		
		4
		
		But threshes about.
		               Exchanged her splintry wood--
		Imagine being cooped in living coarseness--
		For kind soft straw we dumped upon the pavement
		Of a prefab garage we lavished on her,
		A half-mile from our street. Ingratitude
		Of gods we house! Not one gift worked
		To stop that twisting on that first-class straw.
		
		
		5
		
		A far-off tremor shook our sleep that evening;
		A twirl of arms and boughs; recurrent dream:
		_No start,
		   Around around,
		       She is a god she is a plant
		           Undertow of flesh and ocean
		           Ocean and flesh of undertow
		       A plant is she a god is she
		   Around around,
		No end._
		
		
		6
		
		That obscene vibrance jarred our own snug beds
		And blighted every crib from birth with pulse:
		“Dear aunts, we have bad dreams, seal unrest out.”
		So much of other nuisance, junk, and murk
		We’ve killed for its own good, to scrape earth pure;
		But when some bitch-dog wags immortal hide,
		Our “put her out of her misery” won’t put.
		A rotten gyp when gift and gun both fail;
		No other vermin lasts; it’s them, it’s she, it’s
		Immortals always spoil our cleaning up.
		. . . And so a pet gets cursed into a god.
		
		
		7
		
		Next dream, half farce: she sowed--amid tame starches--
		Song’s fleeing laurel, wriggly still with nymph,
		And love’s wild myrtle,--till a crop of sighs
		Drowned out the crackle of our breakfast cornflakes.
		   “Deft aunts, help quick; growth shrinks us; school in panic.
		   Whatever sprouts, throbs to the dryad’s tossing.”
		“Growth just won’t shape like plastics, you poor boys;
		To wither myrtle, plant it in a pot;
		To wither laurel, spray it with a footnote.
		But darker than her wars, her lures. Those fancy
		God-molls got gossiped of in Arcady.
		Neighbors saw them bend near bulls, and as for swans--
		Then stomp more moral than a quadruped;
		Be well-scrubbed knights; in short, go lynch that foreigner.”
		Creation gets reversed to kill a god.
		
		
		8
		
		What cannot kill unkillable, can torture;
		She, writhing stubborn, droned unwelcome myth:
		_“Two signs, when first your campfire banned us, wrangled:
		Circle and line. Our cycle, your ascent.
		‘Revere each season’s own true bend,’ we sang then;
		‘Drain, build, stamp logic on,’ clanged will, male, steel.
		Clang-knit geometries of girders garland
		Your plumb-lines now
		                   and grid our zigzag ways.“_
		“Bulldozer world: grove’s awe and rubble razed for
		A smile of blueprints on a surge of chins.’
		
		_“Your lavishness with clicks and slot machines--“_
		
		“--(here tin gives birth, true stainless birth, not life’s kind)--”
		
		_“--is but man’s fear of liking being owned again
		By cornucopian lap.“_
		                   “All nest and trap and
		Prayer lips and infinite pillowing mercy . . . and quicksand
		Hail man-the-improver, for his is the world without end.
		
		From deicide, man deified. But she:
		
		
		9
		
		_“Girl was the older race’s core, unshrined by
		Who shrines machine, the heavy public man
		Too willed to play or pray. And girlhood once
		Uprooted roots out child, man, landmark too,
		Untending--to be priestess means to tend--
		The linking ivy of a heritage.
		Apart, apart the mute shared sap-flow dries,
		Into a crackle of unclutching. Hail
		The chattery scorch-torch-ping of progress popping.“_
		
		“Back to your lute-strings; our rustproof nerves twang prose.”
		
		_“What have you prosed us to?--once tide, ode, bud.
		Good for your files and glands, the thing your time-clock
		And cot call ‘woman’ means but gelded male.
		Yet girl-lap templed--inner Delphi--teaches
		   Doer what grower knows of spell and rite,
		   Willing what being knows of soul and gut.“_
		
		“A belly swelled into an oracle?”
		
		_“Don’t think apart the mixed-up dark of things.
		As we need your half, starving you’ll need ours;
		No crop from conquering plow without our furrow;
		Spray all your fruit-trees clean, they still won’t dangle
		Till fouled into life by dryad-rut within._
		
		
		10
		
		Was heard to pray when thought herself unheard:
		   _“You high ones, old ones, watching two by two
		   Wherever shrineless gods are exiled to,
		   Send down your lightning. But your olive too.
		   Cool whisper of the ages, not the age,
		   Expand the shallows of men’s anchorage,
		   Apprentice them to more than they can hear.
		   You earth-deep resonance they dare not hear,
		   Be everywhere, like fragrance of the orange,
		   Yet single and sonorous as its root,
		   Till lives are sweet and inward as an orange,
		   And every death a quilt of leaves on root.“_
		
		
		11
		
		Nerve-drugs for war words; for daft wings, a cage.
		We hiked to her garage dorm, spruced it up with
		Bars into really not too glum a cell:
		“To help you help yourself to be mature.”
		Chain stopped much nonsense; only her locks now threshing,--
		Fever of clouds across her forehead’s moon.
		That orbitless sick moon our purging kindness
		Drained glow-worm dim; yet sneaky silver embered
		Outrageously between the bars of norm--
		Whenever, chained or bribed, she still said “no”
		The one vile puking way still left to say it:
		
		_“At hefty orbit sleazily genteeled
		   (Shuttling from chintzy homes to brassy markets,
		   From taciful tantrums of your filtered hearts
		   To drive-in heavens of a public grin),
		My unchromed gullet vomits, vomits, vomits.“_
		
		
		12
		
		Oh aunts, the vileness of last gasp of gods!
		Yet that foul no, the same that threshed our sleep through,
		Somehow exulted more than all our yes.
		Exultant oceanic resonances--
		Dolphins of air--tinkled her chains like gauds;
		Far off, where bulging breakers shriek their spray
		Of birthday round a trouble-making island,
		Her pulse found girl-communion.
		                               Drawing up from
		The caterwauling deeps at Kythera
		That pain-surviving bitch-tenacity
		That just can’t help enduring through and through,
		She prayed her second prayer. But this time peer to peer,
		Tree-skirt to foam-skirt sister, tide to tide:--
		_“Undertow,
		You other blue,
		Tow these to you.
		Came sky; in upside-down of sky, there always
		Was undertow.
		Came Greek year; shrines held only what a port can
		Of undertow.
		Came eons, Lilith, Venusburg; there always
		Was undertow.
		Queened, demoned, pseudo-tamed, renamed, there always
		Was undertow.
		Lines of the straighteners, net of nerves and subways,
		Came; always indestructible below
		Is undertow.
		Now undertow’s
		Fierce coarseness, sinew us who are so birch-bark
		Gentle we pale with gladness at glint of dew.
		Them, goddess, too,
		Swerve
		       not too late
		                   from where they hurtle to;
		Sway up unearned for these who earn the lightning,
		The olive too.“_
		
		
		13
		
		Silence below. Prayer scorned. “You are alone.”
		_“Silence? No balm for these but their own ghat?
		They tried to force the wooed consent of things.
		Then, under-goddess, must they all the way
		(From whiz to slag) plumb their own plumb-line’s end?
		Once there were promises intense as noons.
		Hail man-the-improver,
		For his is the end of the world. In technicolor.“_
		   To us: _“Lively is not alive; a pyre
		   Seems snugger than a hearth a little while.“_
		Then royal-slim within imagined pine:
		_“Nears its end the chummy phase of will, male, steel,--
		Bang triply stoked; a few toys more, then feeds
		Your ash my wilds,
		                   re-greened;
		                                wild sap, strict dance;
		The second bloomtide of the hacked first gods._


	3. WHY CAN’T I LIVE FOREVER?

		  _“Here comes a candle to light you to bed,
		   And here comes a chopper to chop off your head”_
		                       (Nursery rhyme)
		
		DEATH is a blind flamingo, hunting fishes.
		He does not mean to gobble you or me--
		And when his beak swings wildly, never wishes
		To scare us so. If only he could see!
		
		At night he wades through surf to seek a mate.
		That’s why he stinks of salt and oyster shells.
		It is his blindness keeps him celibate:
		This bungler thinks he kisses when he kills.
		
		I wish he wouldn’t make us die. I wish
		He’d spread his wings one night and fly away
		To higher planets for his girls and fish.
		But he’s got used to Earth
		               and plans to stay.


*** Derek Walcott (1930 - 2017)

	1. A CITY’S DEATH BY FIRE

		After that hot gospeller has levelled all but the churched sky,
		I wrote the tale by tallow of a city’s death by fire;
		Under a candle’s eye, that smoked in tears, I
		Wanted to tell, in more than wax, of faiths that were snapped like wire.
		All day I walked abroad among the rubbled tales,
		Shocked at each wall that stood on the street like a liar;
		Loud was the bird-rocked sky, and all the clouds were bales
		Torn open by looting, and white, in spite of the fire.
		By the smoking sea, where Christ walked, I asked, why
		Should a man wax tears, when his wooden world fails?
		In town, leaves were paper, but the hills were a flock of faiths;
		To a boy who walked all day, each leaf was a green breath
		Rebuilding a love I thought was dead as nails,
		Blessing the death and the baptism by fire.


	2. A LESSON FOR THIS SUNDAY

		The growing idleness of summer grass
		With its frail kites of furious butterflies
		Requests the lemonade of simple praise
		In scansion gentler than my hammock swings
		And rituals no more upsetting than a
		Black maid shaking linen as she sings
		The plain notes of some Protestant hosanna—
		Since I lie idling from the thought in things—
		
		Or so they should, until I hear the cries
		Of two small children hunting yellow wings,
		Who break my Sabbath with the thought of sin.
		Brother and sister, with a common pin,
		Frowning like serious lepidopterists.
		The little surgeon pierces the thin eyes.
		Crouched on plump haunches, as a mantis prays
		She shrieks to eviscerate its abdomen.
		The lesson is the same. The maid removes
		Both prodigies from their interest in science.
		The girl, in lemon frock, begins to scream
		As the maimed, teetering thing attempts its flight.
		She is herself a thing of summery light,
		Frail as a flower in this blue August air,
		Not marked for some late grief that cannot speak.
		
		The mind swings inward on itself in fear
		Swayed towards nausea from each normal sign.
		Heredity of cruelty everywhere,
		And everywhere the frocks of summer torn,
		The long look back to see where choice is born,
		As summer grass sways to the scythe’s design.


	3. AFTER THE STORM

		There are so many islands!
		As many islands as the stars at night
		on that branched tree from which meteors are shaken
		like falling fruit around the schooner Flight.
		But things must fall, and so it always was,
		on one hand Venus, on the other Mars;
		fall, and are one, just as this earth is one
		island in archipelagoes of stars.
		My first friend was the sea. Now,is my last.
		I stop talking now. I work, then I read,
		cotching under a lantern hooked to the mast.
		I try to forget what happiness was,
		and when that don’t work,I study the stars.
		Sometimes is just me, and the soft-scissored foam
		as the deck turn white and the moon open
		a cloud like a door, and the light over me
		is a road in white moonlight taking me home.
		Shabine sang to you from the depths of the sea.


	4. DARK AUGUST

		So much rain, so much life like the swollen sky
		of this black August. My sister, the sun,
		broods in her yellow room and won’t come out.
		
		Everything goes to hell; the mountains fume
		like a kettle, rivers overrun; still,
		she will not rise and turn off the rain.
		
		She is in her room, fondling old things,
		my poems, turning her album. Even if thunder falls
		like a crash of plates from the sky,
		
		she does not come out.
		Don’t you know I love you but am hopeless
		at fixing the rain? But I am learning slowly
		
		to love the dark days, the steaming hills,
		the air with gossiping mosquitoes,
		and to sip the medicine of bitterness,
		
		so that when you emerge, my sister,
		parting the beads of the rain,
		with your forehead of flowers and eyes of forgiveness,
		
		all with not be as it was, but it will be true
		(you see they will not let me love
		as I want), because, my sister, then
		
		I would have learnt to love black days like bright ones,
		The black rain, the white hills, when once
		I loved only my happiness and you.


	5. LOVE AFTER LOVE

		The time will come 
		when, with elation 
		you will greet yourself arriving 
		at your own door, in your own mirror 
		and each will smile at the other’s welcome, 
		
		and say, sit here. Eat. 
		You will love again the stranger who was your self.
		Give wine. Give bread. Give back your heart 
		to itself, to the stranger who has loved you 
		
		all your life, whom you ignored 
		for another, who knows you by heart. 
		Take down the love letters from the bookshelf, 
		
		the photographs, the desperate notes, 
		peel your own image from the mirror. 
		Sit. Feast on your life.


	6. MIDSUMMER, TOBAGO

		Broad sun-stoned beaches.
		
		White heat.
		A green river.
		
		A bridge,
		scorched yellow palms
		
		from the summer-sleeping house
		drowsing through August.
		
		Days I have held,
		days I have lost,
		
		days that outgrow, like daughters,
		my harbouring arms.


	7. PENTECOST

		Better a jungle in the head
		than rootless concrete.
		Better to stand bewildered
		by the fireflies’ crooked street;
		
		winter lamps do not show
		where the sidewalk is lost,
		nor can these tongues of snow
		speak for the Holy Ghost;
		
		the self-increasing silence
		of words dropped from a roof
		points along iron railings,
		direction, in not proof.
		
		But best is this night surf
		with slow scriptures of sand,
		that sends, not quite a seraph,
		but a late cormorant,
		
		whose fading cry propels
		through phosphorescent shoal
		what, in my childhood gospels,
		used to be called the Soul.


	8. THE SEA IS HISTORY

		Where are your monuments, your battles, martyrs?
		Where is your tribal memory? Sirs,
		in that gray vault. The sea. The sea
		has locked them up. The sea is History.
		
		First, there was the heaving oil,
		heavy as chaos;
		then, likea light at the end of a tunnel,
		
		the lantern of a caravel,
		and that was Genesis.
		Then there were the packed cries,
		the shit, the moaning:
		
		Exodus.
		Bone soldered by coral to bone,
		mosaics
		mantled by the benediction of the shark’s shadow,
		
		that was the Ark of the Covenant.
		Then came from the plucked wires
		of sunlight on the sea floor
		
		the plangent harp of the Babylonian bondage,
		as the white cowries clustered like manacles
		on the drowned women,
		
		and those were the ivory bracelets
		of the Song of Solomon,
		but the ocean kept turning blank pages
		
		looking for History.
		Then came the men with eyes heavy as anchors
		who sank without tombs,
		
		brigands who barbecued cattle,
		leaving their charred ribs like palm leaves on the shore,
		then the foaming, rabid maw
		
		of the tidal wave swallowing Port Royal,
		and that was Jonah,
		but where is your Renaissance?
		
		Sir, it is locked in them sea sands
		out there past the reef’s moiling shelf,
		where the men-o’-war floated down;
		
		strop on these goggles, I’ll guide you there myself.
		It’s all subtle and submarine,
		through colonnades of coral,
		
		past the gothic windows of sea fans
		to where the crusty grouper, onyx-eyed,
		blinks, weighted by its jewels, like a bald queen;
		
		and these groined caves with barnacles
		pitted like stone
		are our cathedrals,
		
		and the furnace before the hurricanes:
		Gomorrah. Bones ground by windmills
		into marl and cornmeal,
		
		and that was Lamentations--
		that was just Lamentations,
		it was not History;
		
		then came, like scum on the river’s drying lip,
		the brown reeds of villages
		mantling and congealing into towns,
		
		and at evening, the midges’ choirs,
		and above them, the spires
		lancing the side of God
		
		as His son set, and that was the New Testament.
		
		Then came the white sisters clapping
		to the waves’ progress,
		and that was Emancipation--
		
		jubilation, O jubilation--
		vanishing swiftly
		as the sea’s lace dries in the sun,
		
		but that was not History,
		that was only faith,
		and then each rock broke into its own nation;
		
		then came the synod of flies,
		then came the secretarial heron,
		then came the bullfrog bellowing for a vote,
		
		fireflies with bright ideas
		and bats like jetting ambassadors
		and the mantis, like khaki police,
		
		and the furred caterpillars of judges
		examining each case closely,
		and then in the dark ears of ferns
		
		and in the salt chuckle of rocks
		with their sea pools, there was the sound
		like a rumour without any echo
		
		of History, really beginning.


*** Robert Penn Warren (1905 - 1989)

	1. A WAY TO LOVE GOD

		Here is the shadow of truth, for only the shadow is true.
		And the line where the incoming swell from the sunset Pacific
		First leans and staggers to break will tell all you need to know
		About submarine geography, and your father’s death rattle
		Provides all biographical data required for the Who’s Who of the dead.
		
		I cannot recall what I started to tell you, but at least
		I can say how night-long I have lain under the stars and
		Heard mountains moan in their sleep. By daylight,
		They remember nothing, and go about their lawful occasions
		Of not going anywhere except in slow disintegration. At night
		They remember, however, that there is something they cannot remember.
		So moan. Theirs is the perfected pain of conscience that
		Of forgetting the crime, and I hope you have not suffered it. I have.
		
		I do not recall what had burdened my tongue, but urge you
		To think on the slug’s white belly, how sick-slick and soft,
		On the hairiness of stars, silver, silver, while the silence
		Blows like wind by, and on the sea’s virgin bosom unveiled
		To give suck to the wavering serpent of the moon; and,
		In the distance, in plaza, piazza, place, platz, and square,
		Boot heels, like history being born, on cobbles bang.
		
		Everything seems an echo of something else.
		
		And when, by the hair, the headsman held up the head
		Of Mary of Scots, the lips kept on moving,
		But without sound. The lips,
		They were trying to say something very important.
		
		But I had forgotten to mention an upland
		Of wind-tortured stone white in darkness, and tall, but when
		No wind, mist gathers, and once on the Sarré at midnight,
		I watched the sheep huddling. Their eyes
		Stared into nothingness. In that mist-diffused light their eyes
		Were stupid and round like the eyes of fat fish in muddy water,
		Or of a scholar who has lost faith in his calling.
		
		Their jaws did not move. Shreds
		Of dry grass, gray in the gray mist-light, hung
		From the side of a jaw, unmoving.
		
		You would think that nothing would ever again happen.
		
		That may be a way to love God.


	2. MORTAL LIMIT

		I saw the hawk ride updraft in the sunset over Wyoming.
		It rose from coniferous darkness, past gray jags
		Of mercilessness, past whiteness, into the gloaming
		Of dream-spectral light above the lazy purity of snow-snags.
		
		There--west--were the Tetons. Snow-peaks would soon be
		In dark profile to break constellations. Beyond what height
		Hangs now the black speck? Beyond what range will gold eyes see
		New ranges rise to mark a last scrawl of light?
		
		Or, having tasted that atmosphere’s thinness, does it
		Hang motionless in dying vision before
		It knows it will accept the mortal limit,
		And swing into the great circular downwardness that will restore
		
		The breath of earth? Of rock? Of rot? Of other such
		Items, and the darkness of whatever dream we clutch?


	3. TELL ME A STORY

		Long ago, in Kentucky, I, a boy, stood
		By a dirt road, in first dark, and heard
		The great geese hoot northward.
		
		I could not see them, there being no moon
		And the stars sparse. I heard them.
		
		I did not know what was happening in my heart.
		
		It was the season before the elderberry blooms,
		Therefore they were going north.
		
		The sound was passing northward.


	4. TRUE LOVE

		In silence the heart raves. It utters words
		Meaningless, that never had
		A meaning. I was ten, skinny, red-headed,
		
		Freckled. In a big black Buick,
		Driven by a big grown boy, with a necktie, she sat
		In front of the drugstore, sipping something
		
		Through a straw.  There is nothing like
		Beauty.  It stops your heart. It
		Thickens your blood. It stops your breath. It
		
		Makes you feel dirty. You need a hot bath.
		I leaned against a telephone pole, and watched.
		I thought I would die if she saw me.
		
		How could I exist in the same world with that brightness?
		Two years later she smiled at me. She
		Named my name.  I thought I would wake up dead.
		
		Her grown brothers walked with the bent-knee
		Swagger of horsemen. They were slick-faced.
		Told jokes in the barbershop.  Did no work.
		
		Their father was what is called a drunkard.
		Whatever he was he stayed on the third floor
		Of the big white farmhouse under the maples for twenty-five years.
		
		He never came down. They brought everything up to him.
		I did not know what a mortgage was.
		His wife was a good, Christian woman, and prayed.
		
		When the daughter got married, the old man came down wearing
		An old tail coat, the pleated shirt yellowing.
		The sons propped him. I saw the wedding. There were
		
		Engraved invitations, it was so fashionable. I thought
		I would cry. I lay in bed that night
		And wondered if she would cry when something was done to her.
		
		The mortgage was foreclosed.  That last word was whispered.
		She never came back. The family
		Sort of drifted off. Nobody wears shiny boots like that now.
		
		But I know she is beautiful forever, and lives
		In a beautiful house, far away.
		She called my name once. I didn’t even know she knew it.


*** Walt Whitman (1819 - 1892)

	1. AS I LAY WITH MY HEAD IN YOUR LAP CAMERADO

		As I lay with my head in your lap camerado
		The confession I made I resume what I said to you and the open air
		   I resume
		I know I am restless and make others so
		I know my words are weapons full of danger full of death
		For I confront peace security and all the settled laws to
		   unsettle them
		I am more resolute because all have denied me than I could ever have
		   been had all accepted me
		I heed not and have never heeded either experience cautions
		   majorities nor ridicule
		And the threat of what is call’d hell is little or nothing to me
		And the lure of what is call’d heaven is little or nothing to me;
		Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me and still
		   urge you without the least idea what is our destination
		Or whether we shall be victorious or utterly quell’d and defeated.


	2. COME UP FROM THE FIELDS FATHER

		Come up from the fields father, here’s a letter from our Pete,
		And come to the front door mother, here’s a letter from thy dear son.
		
		Lo, ’tis autumn,
		Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,
		Cool and sweeten Ohio’s villages with leaves fluttering in the moderate wind,
		Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis’d vines,   
		(Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?
		Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)
		
		Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and with wondrous clouds,   
		Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.
		
		Down in the fields all prospers well,
		But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter’s call,
		And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.
		
		Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,
		She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.
		
		Open the envelope quickly,   
		O this is not our son’s writing, yet his name is sign’d,
		O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother’s soul!
		All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main words only,
		Sentences broken, _gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish, taken to hospital,
		At present low, but will soon be better._
		
		Ah now the single figure to me,
		Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,
		Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,
		By the jamb of a door leans.
		
		_Grieve not so, dear mother,_ (the just-grown daughter speaks through her sobs,
		The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay’d,)
		_See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better._
		Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be better, that brave and simple soul,)
		While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,
		The only son is dead.
		
		But the mother needs to be better,
		She with thin form presently drest in black,
		By day her meals untouch’d, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,
		In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,   
		O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,
		To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.


	3. I HEAR AMERICA SINGING

		I hear America singing the varied carols I hear
		Those of mechanics each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong
		The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam
		The mason singing his as he makes ready for work or leaves off work
		The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat the deckhand
		   singing on the steamboat deck
		The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench the hatter singing as
		   he stands
		The wood-cutter’s song the ploughboy’s on his way in the morning
		   or at noon intermission or at sundown
		The delicious singing of the mother or of the young wife at work
		   or of the girl sewing or washing
		Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else
		The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young
		   fellows robust friendly
		Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.


	4. O CAPTAIN! MY CAPTAIN!

		O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,
		The ship has weather’d every rack, the prize we sought is won,
		The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
		While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;
		                        But O heart! heart! heart!
		                           O the bleeding drops of red,
		                              Where on the deck my Captain lies,
		                                 Fallen cold and dead.
		
		O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;
		Rise up—for you the flag is flung—for you the bugle trills,
		For you bouquets and ribbon’d wreaths—for you the shores a-crowding,
		For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;
		                        Here Captain! dear father!
		                           This arm beneath your head!
		                              It is some dream that on the deck,
		                                You’ve fallen cold and dead.
		
		My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,
		My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,
		The ship is anchor’d safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,
		From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;
		                        Exult O shores, and ring O bells!
		                           But I with mournful tread,
		                              Walk the deck my Captain lies,
		                                 Fallen cold and dead.


	5. OH ME! OH LIFE!

		Oh me! Oh life! of the questions of these recurring,
		Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities fill’d with the foolish,
		Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I, and who more faithless?)
		Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the struggle ever renew’d,
		Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see around me,
		Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,
		The question, O me! so sad, recurring—What good amid these, O me, O life?
		
		                                      Answer.
		That you are here—that life exists and identity,
		That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.


	6. ON THE BEACH AT NIGHT ALONE

		On the beach at night alone,
		As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,
		As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef of the universes and of the future.
		
		A vast similitude interlocks all,
		All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,
		All distances of place however wide,
		All distances of time, all inanimate forms,
		All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in different worlds,
		All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,
		All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,
		All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,
		All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,
		This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann’d,
		And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them.


	7. WHEN I HEARD THE LEARN’D ASTRONOMER

		When I heard the learn’d astronomer,
		When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,
		When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,
		When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much applause in the lecture-room,
		How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,
		Till rising and gliding out I wander’d off by myself,
		In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
		Look’d up in perfect silence at the stars.


*** Reed Whittemore (1919 - 2012)

	1. A TALE OF A POEM AND A SQUASH

		Let me take this acorn squash, grown in my garden,
		And place beside it a poem grown in a hothouse.
		You will note the difference at once; the former is jolly
		And fat, self-contained, the latter anaemic,
		Colorless, tasteless, the clearest evidence
		That a poem does not make a squash. But now take the squash,
		And shoving its roundness into a lyric book,
		Look!
		How those covers squinch, being quashed, to elucidate
		Something or other
		
		where was I?
		
		Of late
		I have been reading too much on this subject.
		Art is not life, I am told, and thus in my garden
		(Which as a matter of fact has no squashes,
		Just toads), I fund myself gathering
		Wool mostly, a few old tomatoes of rhymes,
		And a mythical rosebud or two in the hope that these items
		Will store well against winter, my chosen season,
		When nothing from nature is blooming except my
		Dog, a few plants on a windowsill, and of course people,
		Most of whom,
		Like myself,
		Are not of the soil, the good earth, and in winter look
		More like a poem than a--
		
		but, as I say,
		This subject unnerves me.
		Where,
		Where does one go--into war? poverty?--
		To keep those squashes and poems from preening and posing
		For any nitwitted author who has mouths
		To feed and a ballpoint pen
		And some paper
		And thinks that if he could settle, once and for all,
		Life and art, art and life, and how they are
		Knit, he (that nit)
		Could stake himself some sort of claim on our cultural garden,
		And be forever in squ . . .
		
		but, as I say,
		I have been thinking of going away.


	2. AN ENGLISH TEACHER

		After a summer of beaches Mr. Meeching,
		Dressed as always in flannel and bristling tweed,
		Applied his tanned physique again to teaching
		Shelley and Meeching and how to (romantically) bleed.
		
		Standing before his first class with the erotic
		Air of the Cape still curling his hair,
		He thought of the sand and the breakers, and of
		 an exotic
		Quohaug chowder with camembert.
		
		Abstracted, class roll in hand, he let his gaze wander
		Lazily out over thirty-three heads to a dim
		Window where trees became masts and grass water
		And lobsters crawled on the steps of the briny gym.
		
		Sadly recalled to the roll, the text and the faces,
		He saw stretched before him a continent of drab
		And merely poetic commonplaces
		With nary a long-necked clam or soft-shelled crab.
		
		Poor Meeching.
		Would he ever again get through to the ocean side?
		He doubted it,
		Having no thoughts to comfort his soul in his dark
		 night of teaching
		Except that lucky old Shelley (by drowning) died.


	3. ANOTHER TEACHER

		He hated them all one by one but wanted to show them
		What was important and vital and by God if
		They thought they’d never have use for it he was
		Sorry as hell for them, that’s all, with their genteel
		Mercantile Main Street Babbitt
		Bourgeois-barbaric faces, they were beyond
		Saving, clearly, quite out of reach, and so he
		G-rrr
		Got up every morning and g-rrr ate his breakfast
		And g-rrr lumbered off to his eight o’clock
		Gladly to teach.


	4. GOD’S ACRES

		He who can tell a grosbeak from a grackle,
		Red oak from maple, marigold from heather
		May get on. But will that other,
		Inward drawn,
		Who never on his T-shirt smugly
		Sewed at camp a badge or feather
		For mastery of wood or shore or meadow?
		
		Not likely.
		
		His is not a placid, plotted
		Nature trail of brae and coot,
		Dingle, willet, plash and pintail,
		Botany and fruit,
		
		But thorns, thorns, thorns his flesh to scratch
		As he slogs nameless in his briar patch


	5. LADDERS

		“He flew up the ladder, tapped at the shutter . . .”
		   -Stendhal, _The Red and the Black_
		
		I am frightened by ladders, Freud, by ladders,
		Ladders that rock and shudder and sink in the ground.
		As I rise to dangerous roofs and windows and branches,
		My soul, Freud, my soul sinks in the ground.
		
		What does this tell of my love, Freud, my love?
		Is every swaying balcony or boudoir
		Out of reach of my love because of my nerve’s
		Faltering, Freud, after three rungs, Freud, or four?
		
		Help me, Freud, oh help me master the gap
		Between the ground and all such high and precarious
		  places.
		Hold the ladder firm, and when I fly up,
		Tell me, Freud, of successful similar cases.
		
		Without you, Freud, my love will tumble, and then
		Never, Freud, will I fly up ladders again.


	6. THE PALMS

		The de luxe tourist resort auto court
		Of the senses
		Has deck chairs and bright umbrellas, and over these
		Palms, always palms preside. But not from the palms
		Themselves, or their fruit,
		But their silhouettes and rustlings proceeds the dazzle
		That blinds and deceives,
		As a shell at a child’s ear strums forth the sea,
		As a spangled bauble burbles of old bazaars,
		And as sirens sweet in the storm-torn straits--but enough!
		--Oh, essence of palm,
		If all those bearded explorers with frozen fingers
		Had planted a tropic grove in polar snows,
		What poet would not have been warmed, and what motel
		Would not have been aired and graced with vast verandahs
		Where sunstruck nations
		Gathered unto your fronds, while hired beauties
		Squirmed to and fro in bikinis, and herons and pelicans
		Languidly glided over the arctic sea.


	7. THE PRIMITIVES

		To visit the vision in broken
		English of peoples who live on corn,
		Nuts and a broad-leaved prairie grass
		In houses of brick and mud with their beasts of burden and
		 children
		Is to be, as always, tricked.
		There are no primitive peoples.
		
		When the guide to the old part of town
		Points to the son of the son
		Of the father of fathers, Jarvis
		(Discoverer of the wheel),
		He has no choice but to choose as always, always
		A native of Springfield.
		
		None of the gnarled old crones
		In flaxen bags in Gaza
		But has danced the jellyroll blues
		In Springfield.
		
		None of the brittle bones
		In the catacombs
		But are my cousin Jonathan
		Of Springfield.
		
		There are no primitive peoples. All old crockery
		Stems from the common culture where converge,
		At Springfield,
		The Nile, The Tigris and The Ganges.


	8. THE SIEGE

		We raise our own, our king’s, our Khufu’s walls
		And hide behind with yams against our yielding
		Because we have been paid or whipped to build
		Against unbuilding.
		
		But no old colonial pillbox with its beams
		Fitted and spiked to rib
		Many a cluster of lungs and hearts from cold;
		No buttressed granite keep, or church, or shed
		Pillared against the slug, or mouse, or mold;
		Not even the snuggest web
		Woven of words and prayers for iron tomes
		Will serve to hold off Ugly, The Plugger, the dread
		Borer in the bastions of our ruin.


	9. THE WALK HOME

		As one grows older and Caesar, Hitler,
		Lear and the salesman are bundled off one by one,
		It is hard to sustain discomposure. The files thicken.
		“Leaves,” says the poet,
		“grass, and birds of the field,”
		Conjuring up a glass and a good book
		On some green hill
		Where nobody bears or cares more than old care will.
		
		Who’s in, who’s out--such words harden
		In bronze or plastic; pipes and slippers
		Move to their destined places, swords to theirs;
		And one walking home at dusk with the evening paper
		Thinks with erosive irreverence that perhaps
		He should let his subscription to that sheet lapse.
		
		What, then, would the world do? As swords clashed
		Under the sun, and Prince Hal and Sir Winston
		Triumphed on all continents, would then the word
		Sweep the ranks that one watching watched no longer?
		As he closed his eves to all but his own thin theme,
		Would the world then oblige, age and dream his dream?
		
		Dream. Dream. And still dream. And leave not a wrack.
		As one grows older
		Plato’s, Bottom’s and all such country rouses
		Thicken the files with the rest;
		And walking home at dusk with the sages, age
		Thinks no more than age must always think:--
		The world doesn’t oblige, and old pipes stink.


	10. THE WORLD AROUND US

		Serpents,
		Take, let us, a simple Christian,
		Not child wholly, nor saint,
		But one sharing their ego as he trots
		About on his earth with his eyes on his scuffed
		Shoes, frayed cuffs, and such marks
		Of his species--take him,
		And tell him that as he is frail and is dust and not even
		A mote on somebody’s optic, he could please
		Us all most excessively if he’d just
		Quick on his belly for God and the Right
		merely
		
		Crawl, that’s all--will he do it? Lord, he’ll
		Up on his two hind feet to prance and whinny
		Like Black Beauty. So I ask you,
		Serpents,
		Who are the world’s true Christians?
		
		Fish,
		As you know he is up there,
		Fishing.
		He lets his lines down with his hooks and sinkers;
		He drags with his nets our provinces;
		And not yet sated he even swims down to us,
		Brandishing
		Sharp things at us as if he were God knows
		What, maybe something Greek? But for all this,
		
		Fish,
		Think of him not as he would be but as he is,
		Poor forked beast,
		Who envies us vitamins, oxygen, salts and lebensraum,
		And gasping for breath in his thin air watches,
		helpless,
		As our climbing waters stalk him,
		
		Dogs,
		Are you with me?
		Fight, shall we, fire with fire? Be wise
		In the world’s ways? Listen.
		If you be not for the fashion of these times,
		Feel too deep the species’ difference, penalty of Rover,
		And languish for old custom in your exile,
		Then gather round and I’ll unfold, dear friends,
		For your ears only,
		Shhh . . .


	11. THOUGHTS OF THE CALIFORNIA DESERT

		Under palm trees, oranges, olives and pears
		The indolent desert slouches, half an eye closed
		And half an eye out for men of affairs whose cares
		Keep them from keeping their gaudy gardens hosed.
		
		Slouches and yawns, that clown. Leaves in disdain
		Gaseous dragons their nauseous knights to nettle.
		Flips his tail coyly, rolls over, says he would fain
		Die a dry death. Haw! browning a petal.
		
		Has it too good, too good. Is vastly diverted
		Watching his merchants and bankers stumble out doors.
		Parries their blows, says he loves, loves to be squirted
		As at him they fiercely empty their reservoirs.
		
		Sleeps a great deal, drinks deep, drinks deep and makes
		 hay,
		Thinking he’ll swallow the bankers and all one day.


	12. THREE POEMS TO JACKSON

		I
		
		Darkness comes early, stays late
		In my winter country; the frost
		Goes four feet down; trees are like sticks;
		A light snow lingers
		For a month or two, getting dirty. I write every day
		But throw much away.
		
		My third book will appear in the spring, a small book,
		A slight book,
		Containing no plays or long narrative poems,
		Borrowing hardly at all from the middle ages,
		Making few affirmations, avoiding inversions,
		Using iambics distrustfully, favoring lines
		Of odd lengths and irony.
		
		I am forty.
		I seem to know the dimensions of what I can do
		And the season to do it in.
		Give me a few more winters like this one, and spring--
		Or the thought of spring--
		Will cease to be a disturbance, and I’ll be
		Solid,
		Jackson.
		
		
		II
		
		Steam on a winter stream. Cold air
		Meeting warm water
		Condenses? I suppose so.
		But why should the water not freeze
		Like me? I don’t know.
		I am mufflered, mittened, booted and earflapped
		Like a child. I am taking the air.
		The air is bitter.
		The water is dark, incredibly dark; I look down
		And see nothing and see that Narcissus
		Was a summer child, a child who knew green
		Scum and tadpoles, not
		Black water.
		
		Nature would rather we rest our psyches in winter.
		She gives us no looking glass; she withdraws
		From our poems, leaving us
		Only our own thoughts, words and inflections
		To fund solace in. When we look out
		We see nothing like us; we live
		In a land of the dead with our mittens on; if we
		Walk all day in the rutted road by the stream,
		We find not even a stranger to befriend us.
		
		But I am forty.
		I look down from the stone bridge to the water,
		And I see, yes, my face. It sends me,
		Jackson.
		
		
		III
		
		And the lawyers said, and the wisemen said,
		“It is better to come to terms.”
		With what?
		With all that ice, stickery, black water?
		Of course not. Given a choice we choose
		To walk in the meadows, pick clover, commune with
		What there is to commune with. It is moral.
		How, then, come to terms?
		
		What the lawyers meant, and the wisemen, was that we
		Trundle out to the stone bridge and play at terms.
		Then the snow sparkles,
		The stream converts to a prize-winning shot from a kodak,
		And we think of spring.
		
		I have a book of lyrics coming out
		In the spring.
		I am twenty.
		The spirit is strong within me; I have not
		Come to terms with winter but bludgeoned winter
		To my terms.
		Is the air warm?
		I take off my coat.
		Is the grass soft?
		Off, shoes.
		And so on.
		One does these things as a poet. I am a poet,
		Jackson.


	13. THREE SONNETS TO TIME

		I
		
		When a man dies and is lowered into the ground
		And thus leaves behind all his failings at bed and board,
		He achieves something: fleshbound
		Was he a lout; bonebound is lord.
		
		The ceremonies are instructive: our double standard
		Permits us to dignify process--the sun’s burning,
		The moon’s dead whirling, the mountain’s crumbling sand ward--
		And meanwhile mock the living, the yet barnstorming.
		
		Yet man without the respect of man when he lives
		Comes to but feeble flourishings, war or sonnet.
		If the hat comes off after the visitor leaves,
		All the world’s grandest mouthings are but ironic.
		
		What he looks for, feels for, fears for, is, does
		Must be honored, surely, before his bones, his was.
		
		
		II
		
		In books, and in sealed containers at world’s fairs,
		Time is reduced to something tasteless and soluble.
		Why? When not in capsules it turns hairs,
		And bleaches golden words in the mouths of the voluble.
		
		We put up statues and plaques, and deposit regret
		At the tombs and shrines of time’s late enthusiasts.
		Why? We trust that with gifts we help time forget
		Our rickety present for all those marble pasts.
		
		But time does not live for capsules, stones, bones, books.
		It breathes even as we, and would be friends.
		When we tote pills, do shrines, muster backward looks,
		Will it not be offended, question our ends?
		
		--Thus, to dear time I pray, whom I swear to love
		Far beyond all that is timeless, below or above.
		
		
		III
		
		Again and again we deceive time. We sleep, we meander
		As if it were nothing to us when we’d come, or be, through,
		Or where, in the limitless world, our ship would founder,
		Or do whatever ships in metaphor do.
		
		We wear all the bright fashions, read soft books
		And lie in the sun in Nassau with our hides.
		We build our castles and line our secretest nooks
		With the addresses where passion or drink resides.
		
		And though time is never deceived--it is we, with our slippers on,
		Who are caught by surprise when our light verse yawns its last
		 yawn--
		To the last hour we must strive to keep not looking drawn
		From lamenting in secret, mumbling dirges at dawn.
		
		It is a game, but a very solemn one, this that we play
		With art, drama and rhetoric as we decay.


*** John Greenleaf Whittier (1807 - 1892)

	1. A DREAM OF SUMMER

		Bland as the morning breath of June
		The southwest breezes play;
		And, through its haze, the winter noon
		Seems warm as summer’s day.
		The snow-plumed Angel of the North
		Has dropped his icy spear;
		Again the mossy earth looks forth,
		Again the streams gush clear.
		
		The fox his hillside cell forsakes,
		The muskrat leaves his nook,
		The bluebird in the meadow brakes
		Is singing with the brook.
		“Bear up, O Mother Nature!“ cry
		Bird, breeze, and streamlet free;
		“Our winter voices prophesy
		Of summer days to thee!”
		
		So, in those winters of the soul,
		By bitter blasts and drear
		O’erswept from Memory’s frozen pole,
		Will sunny days appear.
		Reviving Hope and Faith, they show
		The soul its living powers,
		And how beneath the winter’s snow
		Lie germs of summer flowers!
		
		The Night is mother of the Day,
		The Winter of the Spring,
		And ever upon old Decay
		The greenest mosses cling.
		Behind the cloud the starlight lurks,
		Through showers the sunbeams fall;
		For God, who loveth all His works,
		Has left His hope with all!


	2. A MEMORY

		Here, while the loom of Winter weaves
		The shroud of flowers and fountains,
		I think of thee and summer eves
		Among the Northern mountains.
		
		When thunder tolled the twilight’s close,
		And winds the lake were rude on,
		And thou wert singing, _Ca’ the Yowes_,
		The bonny yowes of Cluden!
		
		When, close and closer, hushing breath,
		Our circle narrowed round thee,
		And smiles and tears made up the wreath
		Wherewith our silence crowned thee;
		
		And, strangers all, we felt the ties
		Of sisters and of brothers;
		Ah! whose of all those kindly eyes
		Now smile upon another’s?
		
		The sport of Time, who still apart
		The waifs of life is flinging;
		Oh, nevermore shall heart to heart
		Draw nearer for that singing!
		
		Yet when the panes are frosty-starred,
		And twilight’s fire is gleaming,
		I hear the songs of Scotland’s bard
		Sound softly through my dreaming!
		
		A song that lends to winter snows
		The glow of summer weather,--
		Again I hear thee ca’ the yowes
		To Cluden’s hills of heather.


	3. AN EASTER FLOWER GIFT

		O dearest bloom the seasons know,
		Flowers of the Resurrection blow,
		Our hope and faith restore;
		And through the bitterness of death
		And loss and sorrow, breathe a breath
		Of life forevermore!
		
		The thought of Love Immortal blends
		With fond remembrances of friends;
		In you, O sacred flowers,
		By human love made doubly sweet,
		The heavenly and the earthly meet,
		The heart of Christ and ours!


	4. DIVINE COMPASSION

		Long since, a dream of heaven I had,
		And still the vision haunts me oft;
		I see the saints in white robes clad,
		The martyrs with their palms aloft;
		But hearing still, in middle song,
		The ceaseless dissonance of wrong;
		And shrinking, with hid faces, from the strain
		Of sad, beseeching eyes, full of remorse and pain.
		
		The glad song falters to a wail,
		The harping sinks to low lament;
		Before the still unlifted veil
		I see the crowned foreheads bent,
		Making more sweet the heavenly air,
		With breathings of unselfish prayer;
		And a Voice saith: “O Pity which is pain,
		O Love that weeps, fill up my sufferings which remain!
		
		“Shall souls redeemed by me refuse
		To share my sorrow in their turn?
		Or, sin-forgiven, my gift abuse
		Of peace with selfish unconcern?
		Has saintly ease no pitying care?
		Has faith no work, and love no prayer?
		While sin remains, and souls in darkness dwell,
		Can heaven itself be heaven, and look unmoved on hell?”
		
		Then through the Gates of Pain, I dream,
		A wind of heaven blows coolly in;
		Fainter the awful discords seem,
		The smoke of torment grows more thin,
		Tears quench the burning soil, and thence
		Spring sweet, pale flowers of penitence
		And through the dreary realm of man’s despair,
		Star-crowned an angel walks, and to! God’s hope is there!
		
		Is it a dream? Is heaven so high
		That pity cannot breathe its air?
		Its happy eyes forever dry,
		Its holy lips without a prayer!
		My God! my God! if thither led
		By Thy free grace unmerited,
		No crown nor palm be mine, but let me keep
		A heart that still can feel, and eyes that still can weep.


	5. FORGIVENESS

		My heart was heavy, for its trust had been
		Abused, its kindness answered with foul wrong;
		So, turning gloomily from my fellow-men,
		One summer Sabbath day I strolled among
		The green mounds of the village burial-place;
		Where, pondering how all human love and hate
		Find one sad level; and how, soon or late,
		Wronged and wrongdoer, each with meekened face,
		And cold hands folded over a still heart,
		Pass the green threshold of our common grave,
		Whither all footsteps tend, whence none depart,
		Awed for myself, and pitying my race,
		Our common sorrow, like a nighty wave,
		Swept all my pride away, and trembling I forgave!


	6. HAMPTON BEACH

		The sunlight glitters keen and bright,
		Where, miles away,
		Lies stretching to my dazzled sight
		A luminous belt, a misty light,
		Beyond the dark pine bluffs and wastes of sandy gray.
		
		The tremulous shadow of the Sea!
		Against its ground
		Of silvery light, rock, hill, and tree,
		Still as a picture, clear and free,
		With varying outline mark the coast for miles around.
		
		On--on--we tread with loose-flung rein
		Our seaward way,
		Through dark-green fields and blossoming grain,
		Where the wild brier-rose skirts the lane,
		And bends above our heads the flowering locust spray.
		
		Ha! like a kind hand on my brow
		Comes this fresh breeze,
		Cooling its dull and feverish glow,
		While through my being seems to flow
		The breath of a new life, the healing of the seas!
		
		Now rest we, where this grassy mound
		His feet hath set
		In the great waters, which have bound
		His granite ankles greenly round
		With long and tangled moss, and weeds with cool spray wet.
		
		Good-by to Pain and Care! I take
		Mine ease to-day
		Here where these sunny waters break,
		And ripples this keen breeze, I shake
		All burdens from the heart, all weary thoughts away.
		
		I draw a freer breath, I seem
		Like all I see--
		Waves in the sun, the white-winged gleam
		Of sea-birds in the slanting beam,
		And far-off sails which flit before the south-wind free.
		
		So when Time’s veil shall fall asunder,
		The soul may know
		No fearful change, nor sudden wonder,
		Nor sink the weight of mystery under,
		But with the upward rise, and with the vastness grow.
		
		And all we shrink from now may seem
		No new revealing;
		Familiar as our childhood’s stream,
		Or pleasant memory of a dream
		The loved and cherished Past upon the new life stealing.
		
		Serene and mild the untried light
		May have its dawning;
		And, as in summer’s northern night
		The evening and the dawn unite,
		The sunset hues of Time blend with the soul’s new morning.
		
		I sit alone; in foam and spray
		Wave after wave
		Breaks on the rocks which, stern and gray,
		Shoulder the broken tide away,
		Or murmurs hoarse and strong through mossy cleft and cave.
		
		What heed I of the dusty land
		And noisy town?
		I see the mighty deep expand
		From its white line of glimmering sand
		To where the blue of heaven on bluer waves shuts down!
		
		In listless quietude of mind,
		I yield to all
		The change of cloud and wave and wind
		And passive on the flood reclined,
		I wander with the waves, and with them rise and fall.
		
		But look, thou dreamer! wave and shore
		In shadow lie;
		The night-wind warns me back once more
		To where, my native hill-tops o’er,
		Bends like an arch of fire the glowing sunset sky.
		
		So then, beach, bluff, and wave, farewell!
		I bear with me
		No token stone nor glittering shell,
		But long and oft shall Memory tell
		Of this brief thoughtful hour of musing by the Sea.


	7. THE CALL OF THE CHRISTIAN

		Not always as the whirlwind’s rush
		On Horeb’s mount of fear,
		Not always as the burning bush
		To Midian’s shepherd seer,
		Nor as the awful voice which came
		To Israel’s prophet bards,
		Nor as the tongues of cloven flame,
		Nor gift of fearful words,--
		
		Not always thus, with outward sign
		Of fire or voice from Heaven,
		The message of a truth divine,
		The call of God is given!
		Awaking in the human heart
		Love for the true and right,--
		Zeal for the Christian’s better part,
		Strength for the Christian’s fight.
		
		Nor unto manhood’s heart alone
		The holy influence steals
		Warm with a rapture not its own,
		The heart of woman feels!
		As she who by Samaria’s wall
		The Saviour’s errand sought,--
		As those who with the fervent Paul
		And meek Aquila wrought:
		
		Or those meek ones whose martyrdom
		Rome’s gathered grandeur saw
		Or those who in their Alpine home
		Braved the Crusader’s war,
		When the green Vaudois, trembling, heard,
		Through all its vales of death,
		The martyr’s song of triumph poured
		From woman’s failing breath.
		
		And gently, by a thousand things
		Which o’er our spirits pass,
		Like breezes o’er the harp’s fine strings,
		Or vapors o’er a glass,
		Leaving their token strange and new
		Of music or of shade,
		The summons to the right and true
		And merciful is made.
		
		Oh, then, if gleams of truth and light
		Flash o’er thy waiting mind,
		Unfolding to thy mental sight
		The wants of human-kind;
		If, brooding over human grief,
		The earnest wish is known
		To soothe and gladden with relief
		An anguish not thine own;
		
		Though heralded with naught of fear,
		Or outward sign or show;
		Though only to the inward ear
		It whispers soft and low;
		Though dropping, as the manna fell,
		Unseen, yet from above,
		Noiseless as dew-fall, heed it well,---
		Thy Father’s call of love!


	8. THE COMMON QUESTION

		Behind us at our evening meal
		The gray bird ate his fill,
		Swung downward by a single claw,
		And wiped his hooked bill.
		
		He shook his wings and crimson tail,
		And set his head aslant,
		And, in his sharp, impatient way,
		Asked, “What does Charlie want?”
		
		“Fie, silly bird!“ I answered, “tuck
		Your head beneath your wing,
		And go to sleep;“--but o’er and o’er
		He asked the self-same thing.
		
		Then, smiling, to myself I said
		How like are men and birds!
		We all are saying what he says,
		In action or in words.
		
		The boy with whip and top and drum,
		The girl with hoop and doll,
		And men with lands and houses, ask
		The question of Poor Poll.
		
		However full, with something more
		We fain the bag would cram;
		We sigh above our crowded nets
		For fish that never swam.
		
		No bounty of indulgent Heaven
		The vague desire can stay;
		Self-love is still a Tartar mill
		For grinding prayers alway.
		
		The dear God hears and pities all;
		He knoweth all our wants;
		And what we blindly ask of Him
		His love withholds or grants.
		
		And so I sometimes think our prayers
		Might well be merged in one;
		And nest and perch and hearth and church
		Repeat, “Thy will be done.”


	9. THE CRUCIFIXION

		Sunlight upon Judha’s hills!
		And on the waves of Galilee;
		On Jordan’s stream, and on the rills
		That feed the dead and sleeping sea!
		Most freshly from the green wood springs
		The light breeze on its scented wings;
		And gayly quiver in the sun
		The cedar tops of Lebanon!
		
		A few more hours,--a change hath come!
		The sky is dark without a cloud!
		The shouts of wrath and joy are dumb,
		And proud knees unto earth are bowed.
		A change is on the hill of Death,
		The helmed watchers pant for breath,
		And turn with wild and maniac eyes
		From the dark scene of sacrifice!
		
		That Sacrifice!--the death of Him,--
		The Christ of God, the holy One!
		Well may the conscious Heaven grow dim,
		And blacken the beholding, Sun.
		The wonted light hath fled away,
		Night settles on the middle day,
		And earthquake from his caverned bed
		Is waking with a thrill of dread!
		
		The dead are waking underneath!
		Their prison door is rent away!
		And, ghastly with the seal of death,
		They wander in the eye of day!
		The temple of the Cherubim,
		The House of God is cold and dim;
		A curse is on its trembling walls,
		Its mighty veil asunder falls!
		
		Well may the cavern-depths of Earth
		Be shaken, and her mountains nod;
		Well may the sheeted dead come forth
		To see the suffering son of God!
		Well may the temple-shrine grow dim,
		And shadows veil the Cherubim,
		When He, the chosen one of Heaven,
		A sacrifice for guilt is given!
		
		And shall the sinful heart, alone,
		Behold unmoved the fearful hour,
		When Nature trembled on her throne,
		And Death resigned his iron power?
		Oh, shall the heart--whose sinfulness
		Gave keenness to His sore distress,
		And added to His tears of blood--
		Refuse its trembling gratitude!


	10. THE MYSTIC’S CHRISTMAS

		“All hail!“ the bells of Christmas rang,
		“All hail!“ the monks at Christmas sang,
		The merry monks who kept with cheer
		The gladdest day of all their year.
		
		But still apart, unmoved thereat,
		A pious elder brother sat
		Silent, in his accustomed place,
		With God’s sweet peace upon his face.
		
		“Why sitt’st thou thus?“ his brethren cried.
		“It is the blessed Christmas-tide;
		The Christmas lights are all aglow,
		The sacred lilies bud and blow.
		
		“Above our heads the joy-bells ring,
		Without the happy children sing,
		And all God’s creatures hail the morn
		On which the holy Christ was born!
		
		“Rejoice with us; no more rebuke
		Our gladness with thy quiet look.”
		The gray monk answered: “Keep, I pray,
		Even as ye list, the Lord’s birthday.
		
		“Let heathen Yule fires flicker red
		Where thronged refectory feasts are spread;
		With mystery-play and masque and mime
		And wait-songs speed the holy time!
		
		“The blindest faith may haply save;
		The Lord accepts the things we have;
		And reverence, howsoe’er it strays,
		May find at last the shining ways.
		
		“They needs must grope who cannot see,
		The blade before the ear must be;
		As ye are feeling I have felt,
		And where ye dwell I too have dwelt.
		
		“But now, beyond the things of sense,
		Beyond occasions and events,
		I know, through God’s exceeding grace,
		Release from form and time and place.
		
		“I listen, from no mortal tongue,
		To hear the song the angels sung;
		And wait within myself to know
		The Christmas lilies bud and blow.
		
		“The outward symbols disappear
		From him whose inward sight is clear;
		And small must be the choice of clays
		To him who fills them all with praise!
		
		“Keep while you need it, brothers mine,
		With honest zeal your Christmas sign,
		But judge not him who every morn
		Feels in his heart the Lord Christ born!”


	11. THE PRAYER-SEEKER

		Along the aisle where prayer was made,
		A woman, all in black arrayed,
		Close-veiled, between the kneeling host,
		With gliding motion of a ghost,
		Passed to the desk, and laid thereon
		A scroll which bore these words alone,
		_Pray for me_!
		
		Back from the place of worshipping
		She glided like a guilty thing
		The rustle of her draperies, stirred
		By hurrying feet, alone was heard;
		While, full of awe, the preacher read,
		As out into the dark she sped:
		“_Pray for me_!”
		
		Back to the night from whence she came,
		To unimagined grief or shame!
		Across the threshold of that door
		None knew the burden that she bore;
		Alone she left the written scroll,
		The legend of a troubled soul,--
		_Pray for me_!
		
		Glide on, poor ghost of woe or sin!
		Thou leav’st a common need within;
		Each bears, like thee, some nameless weight,
		Some misery inarticulate,
		Some secret sin, some shrouded dread,
		Some household sorrow all unsaid.
		_Pray for us_!
		
		Pass on! The type of all thou art,
		Sad witness to the common heart!
		With face in veil and seal on lip,
		In mute and strange companionship,
		Like thee we wander to and fro,
		Dumbly imploring as we go
		_Pray for us_!
		
		Ah, who shall pray, since he who pleads
		Our want perchance hath greater needs?
		Yet they who make their loss the gain
		Of others shall not ask in vain,
		And Heaven bends low to hear the prayer
		Of love from lips of self-despair
		_Pray for us_!
		
		In vain remorse and fear and hate
		Beat with bruised bands against a fate
		Whose walls of iron only move
		And open to the touch of love.
		He only feels his burdens fall
		Who, taught by suffering, pities all.
		_Pray for us_!
		
		He prayeth best who leaves unguessed
		The mystery of another’s breast.
		Why cheeks grow pale, why eyes o’erflow,
		Or heads are white, thou need’st not know.
		Enough to note by many a sign
		That every heart hath needs like thine.
		_Pray for us_!


	12. THE REWARD

		Who, looking backward from his manhood’s prime,
		Sees not the spectre of his misspent time?
		And, through the shade
		Of funeral cypress planted thick behind,
		Hears no reproachful whisper on the wind
		From his loved dead?
		
		Who bears no trace of passion’s evil force?
		Who shuns thy sting, O terrible Remorse?
		Who does not cast
		On the thronged pages of his memory’s book,
		At times, a sad and half-reluctant look,
		Regretful of the past?
		
		Alas! the evil which we fain would shun
		We do, and leave the wished-for good undone
		Our strength to-day
		Is but to-morrow’s weakness, prone to fall;
		Poor, blind, unprofitable servants all
		Are we alway.
		
		Yet who, thus looking backward o’er his years,
		Feels not his eyelids wet with grateful tears,
		If he hath been
		Permitted, weak and sinful as he was,
		To cheer and aid, in some ennobling cause,
		His fellow-men?
		
		If he hath hidden the outcast, or let in
		A ray of sunshine to the cell of sin;
		If he hath lent
		Strength to the weak, and, in an hour of need,
		Over the suffering, mindless of his creed
		Or home, hath bent;
		
		He has not lived in vain, and while he gives
		The praise to Him, in whom he moves and lives,
		With thankful heart;
		He gazes backward, and with hope before,
		Knowing that from his works he nevermore
		Can henceforth part.


	13. THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM

		Where Time the measure of his hours
		By changeful bud and blossom keeps,
		And, like a young bride crowned with flowers,
		Fair Shiraz in her garden sleeps;
		
		Where, to her poet’s turban stone,
		The Spring her gift of flowers imparts,
		Less sweet than those his thoughts have sown
		In the warm soil of Persian hearts:
		
		There sat the stranger, where the shade
		Of scattered date-trees thinly lay,
		While in the hot clear heaven delayed
		The long and still and weary day.
		
		Strange trees and fruits above him hung,
		Strange odors filled the sultry air,
		Strange birds upon the branches swung,
		Strange insect voices murmured there.
		
		And strange bright blossoms shone around,
		Turned sunward from the shadowy bowers,
		As if the Gheber’s soul had found
		A fitting home in Iran’s flowers.
		
		Whate’er he saw, whate’er he heard,
		Awakened feelings new and sad,--
		No Christian garb, nor Christian word,
		Nor church with Sabbath-bell chimes glad,
		
		But Moslem graves, with turban stones,
		And mosque-spires gleaming white, in view,
		And graybeard Mollahs in low tones
		Chanting their Koran service through.
		
		The flowers which smiled on either hand,
		Like tempting fiends, were such as they
		Which once, o’er all that Eastern land,
		As gifts on demon altars lay.
		
		As if the burning eye of Baal
		The servant of his Conqueror knew,
		From skies which knew no cloudy veil,
		The Sun’s hot glances smote him through.
		
		“Ah me!“ the lonely stranger said,
		“The hope which led my footsteps on,
		And light from heaven around them shed,
		O’er weary wave and waste, is gone!
		
		“Where are the harvest fields all white,
		For Truth to thrust her sickle in?
		Where flock the souls, like doves in flight,
		From the dark hiding-place of sin?
		
		“A silent-horror broods o’er all,--
		The burden of a hateful spell,--
		The very flowers around recall
		The hoary magi’s rites of hell!
		
		“And what am I, o’er such a land
		The banner of the Cross to bear?
		Dear Lord, uphold me with Thy hand,
		Thy strength with human weakness share!”
		
		He ceased; for at his very feet
		In mild rebuke a floweret smiled;
		How thrilled his sinking heart to greet
		The Star-flower of the Virgin’s child!
		
		Sown by some wandering Frank, it drew
		Its life from alien air and earth,
		And told to Paynim sun and dew
		The story of the Saviour’s birth.
		
		From scorching beams, in kindly mood,
		The Persian plants its beauty screened,
		And on its pagan sisterhood,
		In love, the Christian floweret leaned.
		
		With tears of joy the wanderer felt
		The darkness of his long despair
		Before that hallowed symbol melt,
		Which God’s dear love had nurtured there.
		
		From Nature’s face, that simple flower
		The lines of sin and sadness swept;
		And Magian pile and Paynim bower
		In peace like that of Eden slept.
		
		Each Moslem tomb, and cypress old,
		Looked holy through the sunset air;
		And, angel-like, the Muezzin told
		From tower and mosque the hour of prayer.
		
		With cheerful steps, the morrow’s dawn
		From Shiraz saw the stranger part;
		The Star-flower of the Virgin-Born
		Still blooming in his hopeful heart!


*** Richard Wilbur (1921 - 2017)

	1. A BAROQUE WALL-FOUNTAIN IN THE VILLA SCIARRA

		Under the bronze crown
		Too big for the head of the stone cherub whose feet   
		     A serpent has begun to eat,
		Sweet water brims a cockle and braids down
		
		           Past spattered mosses, breaks
		On the tipped edge of a second shell, and fills   
		     The massive third below. It spills
		In threads then from the scalloped rim, and makes
		
		           A scrim or summery tent
		For a faun-ménage and their familiar goose.   
		     Happy in all that ragged, loose
		Collapse of water, its effortless descent
		
		           And flatteries of spray,
		The stocky god upholds the shell with ease,
		     Watching, about his shaggy knees,
		The goatish innocence of his babes at play;
		
		           His fauness all the while
		Leans forward, slightly, into a clambering mesh   
		     Of water-lights, her sparkling flesh
		In a saecular ecstasy, her blinded smile
		
		           Bent on the sand floor
		Of the trefoil pool, where ripple-shadows come
		     And go in swift reticulum,
		More addling to the eye than wine, and more
		
		           Interminable to thought
		Than pleasure’s calculus. Yet since this all   
		     Is pleasure, flash, and waterfall,   
		Must it not be too simple? Are we not
		
		           More intricately expressed
		In the plain fountains that Maderna set
		     Before St. Peter’s--the main jet   
		Struggling aloft until it seems at rest
		
		           In the act of rising, until   
		The very wish of water is reversed,
		     That heaviness borne up to burst   
		In a clear, high, cavorting head, to fill
		
		           With blaze, and then in gauze   
		Delays, in a gnatlike shimmering, in a fine
		     Illumined version of itself, decline,
		And patter on the stones its own applause?
		
		           If that is what men are
		Or should be, if those water-saints display   
		     The pattern of our areté,
		What of these showered fauns in their bizarre,
		
		           Spangled, and plunging house?
		They are at rest in fulness of desire
		     For what is given, they do not tire
		Of the smart of the sun, the pleasant water-douse
		
		           And riddled pool below,
		Reproving our disgust and our ennui   
		     With humble insatiety.
		Francis, perhaps, who lay in sister snow
		
		           Before the wealthy gate
		Freezing and praising, might have seen in this   
		     No trifle, but a shade of bliss--
		That land of tolerable flowers, that state
		
		           As near and far as grass
		Where eyes become the sunlight, and the hand   
		     Is worthy of water: the dreamt land
		Toward which all hungers leap, all pleasures pass.


	2. A BARRED OWL

		The warping night air having brought the boom
		Of an owl’s voice into her darkened room,
		We tell the wakened child that all she heard
		Was an odd question from a forest bird,
		Asking of us, if rightly listened to,
		“Who cooks for you?” and then “Who cooks for you?”
		
		Words, which can make our terrors bravely clear,
		Can also thus domesticate a fear,
		And send a small child back to sleep at night
		Not listening for the sound of stealthy flight
		Or dreaming of some small thing in a claw
		Borne up to some dark branch and eaten raw.


	3. A CHRONIC CONDITION

		Berkeley did not foresee such misty weather,
		Nor centuries of light
		Intend so dim a day. Swaddled together
		In separateness, the trees
		Persist or not beyond the gray-white
		Palings of the air. Gone
		Are whatever wings bothered the lighted leaves
		When leaves there were. Are all
		The sparrows fallen? I can hardly hear
		My memory of those bees
		Who only lately mesmerized the lawn.
		Now, something, blaze! A fear
		Swaddles me now that Hylas’ tree will fall
		Where no eye lights and grieves,
		Will fall to nothing and without a sound.
		I sway and lean above the vanished ground.


	4. A PLAIN SONG FOR COMADRE

		Though the unseen may vanish, though insight fails
		And doubter and downcast saint
		Join in the same complaint,
		What holy things were ever frightened off
		By a fly’s buzz, or itches, or a cough?
		Harder than nails
		
		They are, more warmly constant than the sun,
		At whose continual sign
		The dimly prompted vine
		Upbraids itself to a green excellence.
		What evening, when the slow and forced expense
		Of sweat is done,
		
		Does not the dark come flooding the straight furrow
		Or filling the well-made bowl?
		What night will not the whole
		Sky with its clear studs and steady spheres
		Turn on a sound chimney? It is seventeen years
		Come tomorrow
		
		That Bruna Sandoval has kept the church
		Of San Ysidro, sweeping
		And scrubbing the aisles, keeping
		The candlesticks and the plaster faces bright,
		And seen no vision but the thing done right
		From the clay porch
		
		To the white altar. For love and in all weathers
		This is what she has done.
		Sometimes the early sun
		Shines as she flings the scrubwater out, with a crash
		Of grimy rainbows, and the stained suds flash
		Like angel-feathers.


	5. A SIMILE FOR HER SMILE

		Your smiling, or the hope, the thought of it,
		Makes in my mind such pause and abrupt ease
		As when the highway bridgegates fall,
		Balking the hasty traffic, which must sit
		On each side massed and staring, while
		Deliberately the drawbridge starts to rise:
		
		Then horns are hushed, the oilsmoke rarefies,
		Above the idling motors one can tell
		The packet’s smooth approach, the slip,
		Slip of the silken river past the sides,
		The ringing of clear bells, the dip
		And slow cascading of the paddle wheel.


	6. ADVICE TO A PROPHET

		When you come, as you soon must, to the streets of our city,   
		Mad-eyed from stating the obvious,
		Not proclaiming our fall but begging us
		In God’s name to have self-pity,
		
		Spare us all word of the weapons, their force and range,   
		The long numbers that rocket the mind;
		Our slow, unreckoning hearts will be left behind,   
		Unable to fear what is too strange.
		
		Nor shall you scare us with talk of the death of the race.   
		How should we dream of this place without us?--
		The sun mere fire, the leaves untroubled about us,   
		A stone look on the stone’s face?
		
		Speak of the world’s own change. Though we cannot conceive   
		Of an undreamt thing, we know to our cost
		How the dreamt cloud crumbles, the vines are blackened by frost,   
		How the view alters. We could believe,
		
		If you told us so, that the white-tailed deer will slip   
		Into perfect shade, grown perfectly shy,
		The lark avoid the reaches of our eye,
		The jack-pine lose its knuckled grip
		
		On the cold ledge, and every torrent burn
		As Xanthus once, its gliding trout
		Stunned in a twinkling. What should we be without   
		The dolphin’s arc, the dove’s return,
		
		These things in which we have seen ourselves and spoken?   
		Ask us, prophet, how we shall call
		Our natures forth when that live tongue is all
		Dispelled, that glass obscured or broken
		
		In which we have said the rose of our love and the clean   
		Horse of our courage, in which beheld
		The singing locust of the soul unshelled,
		And all we mean or wish to mean.
		
		Ask us, ask us whether with the worldless rose   
		Our hearts shall fail us; come demanding   
		Whether there shall be lofty or long standing   
		When the bronze annals of the oak-tree close.


	7. AFTER THE LAST BULLETINS

		After the last bulletins the windows darken
		And the whole city founders readily and deep,
		Sliding on all its pillows
		To the thronged Atlantis of personal sleep,
		
		And the wind rises. The wind rises and bowls
		The day’s litter of news in the alleys. Trash
		Tears itself on the railings,
		Soars and falls with a soft crash,
		
		Tumbles and soars again. Unruly flights
		Scamper the park, and taking a statue for dead
		Strike at the positive eyes,
		Batter and flap the stolid head
		
		And scratch the noble name. In empty lots
		Our journals spiral in a fierce noyade
		Of all we thought to think,
		Or caught in corners cramp and wad
		
		And twist our words. And some from gutters flail
		Their tatters at the tired patrolman’s feet,
		Like all that fisted snow
		That cried beside his long retreat
		
		Damn you! damn you! to the emperor’s horse’s heels.
		Oh none too soon through the air white and dry
		Will the clear announcer’s voice
		Beat like a dove, and you and I
		
		From the heart’s anarch and responsible town
		Return by subway-mouth to life again,
		Bearing the morning papers,
		And cross the park where saintlike men,
		
		White and absorbed, with stick and bag remove
		The litter of the night, and footsteps rouse
		With confident morning sound
		The songbirds in the public boughs.


	8. CEREMONY

		A striped blouse in a clearing by Bazille   
		Is, you may say, a patroness of boughs   
		Too queenly kind toward nature to be kin.   
		But ceremony never did conceal,
		Save to the silly eye, which all allows,
		How much we are the woods we wander in.
		
		Let her be some Sabrina fresh from stream,
		Lucent as shallows slowed by wading sun,
		Bedded on fern, the flowers’ cynosure:
		Then nymph and wood must nod and strive to dream   
		That she is airy earth, the trees, undone,
		Must ape her languor natural and pure.
		
		Ho-hum. I am for wit and wakefulness,   
		And love this feigning lady by Bazille.   
		What’s lightly hid is deepest understood,   
		And when with social smile and formal dress   
		She teaches leaves to curtsey and quadrille,   
		I think there are most tigers in the wood.


	9. CONJURATION

		Backtrack of sea, the baywater goes; flats
		Bubble in sunlight, running with herringbone streams;
		Sea-lettuce lies in oily mats
		On sand mislaid; stranded
		Are slug, stone and shell, as dreams
		Drain into morning shine, and the cheat is ended.
		
		Oh, it was blue, the too amenable sea.
		We heard of pearls in the dark and wished to dive.
		But here in this snailshell, see, see,
		The crab-legs waggle; where,
		If altered now, and yet alive,
		Did softness get these bitter claws to wear?
		
		As curtains from a fatal window blown,
		The sea’s receding fingers terribly tell
		Of strangest things together grown;
		All join, and in the furl
		Of waters, blind in muck and shell,
		Pursue their slow paludal games. O pearl,
		
		Rise, rise and brighten, wear clear air, and in
		Your natal cloudiness receive the sun;
		Hang among single stars, and twin
		Our double deep; O tides,
		Return a truer blue, make one
		The sky’s blue speech, and what the sea confides.


	10. EJACULATION, REPLY, AND SONG

		_The Poet_
		
		How oft, retiring from the dusty road
		To rest a moment in the forest’s shade,
		The footsore traveler has set down his load
		And, couched upon some bank of mosses, heard,
		Thrilling the silence of a far, dim glade,
		The music of the ocka-ocka bird!
		
		
		_The Scientist_
		
		How “oft,” you ask, has such a thing occurred?
		The answer to your question, Sir, is _never._
		Art follows nature or it is absurd.
		No reputable ornithologist
		Mentions that name in any text whatever.
		The ocka-ocka bird does not exist!
		
		
		_The Mockingbird_
		
		Chip-chip. Tu-wit-a-wee. Ocka-ocka.


	11. FIVE WOMEN BATHING IN MOONLIGHT

		When night believes itself alone
		It is most natural, conceals
		No artifice. The open moon
		With webs in sky and water wields
		
		The slightest wave. This vision yields
		To one sole theme of semblance, land
		Leasing each wave the palest peals
		Of bright apparent notes of sand.
		
		The bathers whitely come and stand.
		Water diffuses them, their hair
		Like seaweed slurs the shoulders, and
		Their voices in the moonstrung air
		
		Go plucked of words. Now wading where
		The moon’s misprisions salve them in.
		To silver, they are unaware
		How lost they are when they begin
		
		To mix with water, making then
		Gestures of blithe obedience,
		As five Danilovas within
		The soft compulsions of their dance.


	12. FOR C.

		After the clash of elevator gates
		And the long sinking, she emerges where,
		A slight thing in the morning’s crosstown glare,
		She looks up toward the window where he waits,
		Then in a fleeting taxi joins the rest
		Of the huge traffic bound forever west.
		
		On such grand scale do lovers say good-bye--
		Even this other pair whose high romance
		Had only the duration of a dance,
		And who, now taking leave with stricken eye,
		See each in each a whole new life forgone.
		For them, above the darkling clubhouse lawn,
		
		Bright Perseids flash and crumble; while for these
		Who part now on the dock, weighed down by grief
		And baggage, yet with something like relief,
		It takes three thousand miles of knitting seas
		To cancel out their crossing, and unmake
		The amorous rough and tumble of their wake.
		
		We are denied, my love, their fine tristesse
		And bittersweet regrets, and cannot share
		The frequent vistas of their large despair,
		Where love and all are swept to nothingness;
		Still, there’s a certain scope in that long love
		Which constant spirits are the keepers of,
		
		And which, though taken to be tame and staid,
		Is a wild sostenuto of the heart,
		A passion joined to courtesy and art
		Which has the quality of something made,
		Like a good fiddle, like the rose’s scent,
		Like a rose window or the firmament.


	13. JUNK

		_Huru Welandes
		worc ne geswiceσ?
		monna ænigum
		σara σe Mimming can
		heardne gehealdan.
		
		--Waldere_
		
		An axe angles
		                              from my neighbor’s ashcan;
		It is hell’s handiwork,
		                                             the wood not hickory,
		The flow of the grain
		                                          not faithfully followed.
		The shivered shaft
		                                      rises from a shellheap
		Of plastic playthings,
		                                            paper plates,
		And the sheer shards
		                                         of shattered tumblers
		That were not annealed
		                                            for the time needful.
		At the same curbside,
		                                          a cast-off cabinet
		Of wavily warped
		                                   unseasoned wood
		Waits to be trundled
		                                         in the trash-man’s truck.
		Haul them off! Hide them!
		                                                The heart winces
		For junk and gimcrack,
		                                            for jerrybuilt things
		And the men who make them
		                                                for a little money,   
		Bartering pride
		                                 like the bought boxer
		Who pulls his punches,
		                                            or the paid-off jockey   
		Who in the home stretch
		                                             holds in his horse.   
		Yet the things themselves
		                                                in thoughtless honor
		Have kept composure,
		                                         like captives who would not
		Talk under torture.
		                                       Tossed from a tailgate
		Where the dump displays
		                                             its random dolmens,
		Its black barrows
		                                    and blazing valleys,
		They shall waste in the weather
		                                                         toward what they were.
		The sun shall glory
		                                       in the glitter of glass-chips,
		Foreseeing the salvage
		                                            of the prisoned sand,   
		And the blistering paint
		                                               peel off in patches,
		That the good grain
		                                       be discovered again.
		Then burnt, bulldozed,
		                                            they shall all be buried   
		To the depth of diamonds,
		                                                in the making dark
		Where halt Hephaestus
		                                          keeps his hammer
		And Wayland’s work
		                                      is worn away.


	14. LOOKING INTO HISTORY

		I
		
		Five soldiers fixed by Mathew Brady’s eye   
		Stand in a land subdued beyond belief.   
		Belief might lend them life again. I try
		Like orphaned Hamlet working up his grief
		
		To see my spellbound fathers in these men   
		Who, breathless in their amber atmosphere,   
		Show but the postures men affected then   
		And the hermit faces of a finished year.
		
		The guns and gear and all are strange until   
		Beyond the tents I glimpse a file of trees   
		Verging a road that struggles up a hill.   
		They’re sycamores.
		                           The long-abated breeze
		
		Flares in those boughs I know, and hauls the sound   
		Of guns and a great forest in distress.
		Fathers, I know my cause, and we are bound   
		Beyond that hill to fight at Wilderness.
		
		
		II
		
		But trick your eyes with Birnam Wood, or think   
		How fire-cast shadows of the bankside trees   
		Rode on the back of Simois to sink
		In the wide waters. Reflect how history’s
		
		Changes are like the sea’s, which mauls and mulls   
		Its salvage of the world in shifty waves,
		Shrouding in evergreen the oldest hulls
		And yielding views of its confounded graves
		
		To the new moon, the sun, or any eye   
		That in its shallow shoreward version sees
		The pebbles charging with a deathless cry   
		And carageen memorials of trees.
		
		
		III
		
		Now, old man of the sea,   
		I start to understand:
		The will will find no stillness
		Back in a stilled land.
		
		The dead give no command   
		And shall not find their voice   
		Till they be mustered by   
		Some present fatal choice.
		
		Let me now rejoice
		In all impostures, take
		The shape of lion or leopard,
		Boar, or watery snake,
		
		Or like the comber break,   
		Yet in the end stand fast   
		And by some fervent fraud   
		Father the waiting past,
		
		Resembling at the last
		The self-established tree
		That draws all waters toward   
		Its live formality.


	15. LOVE CALLS US TO THE THINGS OF THIS WORLD

		The eyes open to a cry of pulleys,
		And spirited from sleep, the astounded soul   
		Hangs for a moment bodiless and simple   
		As false dawn.
		                    Outside the open window   
		The morning air is all awash with angels.
		
		   Some are in bed-sheets, some are in blouses,   
		Some are in smocks: but truly there they are.   
		Now they are rising together in calm swells   
		Of halcyon feeling, filling whatever they wear   
		With the deep joy of their impersonal breathing;
		
		   Now they are flying in place, conveying
		The terrible speed of their omnipresence, moving   
		And staying like white water; and now of a sudden   
		They swoon down into so rapt a quiet
		That nobody seems to be there.
		                                            The soul shrinks
		
		   From all that it is about to remember,
		From the punctual rape of every blessèd day,
		And cries,
		              “Oh, let there be nothing on earth but laundry,   
		Nothing but rosy hands in the rising steam
		And clear dances done in the sight of heaven.”
		
		   Yet, as the sun acknowledges
		With a warm look the world’s hunks and colors,   
		The soul descends once more in bitter love   
		To accept the waking body, saying now
		In a changed voice as the man yawns and rises,   
		   “Bring them down from their ruddy gallows;
		Let there be clean linen for the backs of thieves;   
		Let lovers go fresh and sweet to be undone,   
		And the heaviest nuns walk in a pure floating   
		Of dark habits,
		                     keeping their difficult balance.”


	16. LYING

		To claim, at a dead party, to have spotted a grackle,
		When in fact you haven’t of late, can do no harm.
		Your reputation for saying things of interest
		Will not be marred, if you hasten to other topics,
		Nor will the delicate web of human trust
		Be ruptured by that airy fabrication.
		Later, however, talking with toxic zest
		Of golf, or taxes, or the rest of it
		Where the beaked ladle plies the chuckling ice,
		You may enjoy a chill of severance, hearing
		Above your head the shrug of unreal wings.
		Not that the world is tiresome in itself:
		We know what boredom is: it is a dull
		Impatience or a fierce velleity,
		A champing wish, stalled by our lassitude,
		To make or do. In the strict sense, of course,
		We invent nothing, merely bearing witness
		To what each morning brings again to light:
		Gold crosses, cornices, astonishment
		Of panes, the turbine-vent which natural law
		Spins on the grill-end of the diner’s roof,
		Then grass and grackles or, at the end of town
		In sheen-swept pastureland, the horse’s neck
		Clothed with its usual thunder, and the stones
		Beginning now to tug their shadows in
		And track the air with glitter. All these things
		Are there before us; there before we look
		Or fail to look; there to be seen or not
		By us, as by the bee’s twelve thousand eyes,
		According to our means and purposes.
		So too with strangeness not to be ignored,
		Total eclipse or snow upon the rose,
		And so with that most rare conception, nothing.
		What is it, after all, but something missed?
		It is the water of a dried-up well
		Gone to assail the cliffs of Labrador.
		There is what galled the arch-negator, sprung
		From Hell to probe with intellectual sight
		The cells and heavens of a given world
		Which he could take but as another prison:
		Small wonder that, pretending not to be,
		He drifted through the bar-like boles of Eden
		In a _black mist low creeping_, dragging down
		And darkening with moody self-absorption
		What, when he left it, lifted and, if seen
		From the sun’s vantage, seethed with vaulting hues.
		Closer to making than the deftest fraud
		Is seeing how the catbird’s tail was made
		To counterpoise, on the mock-orange spray,
		Its light, up-tilted spine; or, lighter still,
		How the shucked tunic of an onion, brushed
		To one side on a backlit chopping-board
		And rocked by trifling currents, prints and prints
		Its bright, ribbed shadow like a flapping sail.
		Odd that a thing is most itself when likened:
		The eye mists over, basil hints of clove,
		The river glazes toward the dam and spills
		To the drubbed rocks below its crashing cullet,
		And in the barnyard near the sawdust-pile
		Some great thing is tormented. Either it is
		A tarp torn loose and in the groaning wind
		Now puffed, now flattened, or a hip-shot beast
		Which tries again, and once again, to rise.
		What, though for pain there is no other word,
		Finds pleasure in the cruellest simile?
		It is something in us like the catbird’s song
		From neighbor bushes in the grey of morning
		That, harsh or sweet, and of its own accord,
		Proclaims its many kin. It is a chant
		Of the first springs, and it is tributary
		To the great lies told with the eyes half-shut
		That have the truth in view: the tale of Chiron
		Who, with sage head, wild heart, and planted hoof
		Instructed brute Achilles in the lyre,
		Or of the garden where we first mislaid
		Simplicity of wish and will, forgetting
		Out of what cognate splendor all things came
		To take their scattering names; and nonetheless
		That matter of a baggage-train surprised
		By a few Gascons in the Pyrenees
		Which, having worked three centuries and more
		In the dark caves of France, poured out at last
		The blood of Roland, who to Charles his king
		And to the dove that hatched the dove-tailed world
		Was faithful unto death, and shamed the Devil.


	17. MARGINALIA

		Things concentrate at the edges; the pond-surface
		Is bourne to fish and man and it is spread
		In textile scum and damask light, on which
		The lily-pads are set; and there are also
			Inlaid ruddy twigs, becalmed pine-leaves,
			Air-baubles, and the chain mail of froth.
		
		Descending into sleep (as when the night-lift
		Falls past a brilliant floor) we glimpse a sublime
		Décor and hear, perhaps, a complete music,
		But this evades us, as in the night meadows
			The crickets’ million roundsong dies away
			From all advances, rising in every distance.
		
		Our riches are centrifugal; men compose
		Daily, unwittingly, their final dreams,
		And those are our own voices whose remote
		Consummate chorus rides on the whirlpool’s rim,
			Past which we flog our sails, toward which we drift,
			Plying our trades, in hopes of a good drowning.


	18. ORCHARD TREES, JANUARY

		It’s not the case, though some might wish it so
		Who from a window watch the blizzard blow
		
		White riot through their branches vague and stark,
		That they keep snug beneath their pelted bark.
		
		They take affliction in until it jells
		To crystal ice between their frozen cells,
		
		And each of them is inwardly a vault
		Of jewels rigorous and free of fault,
		
		Unglimpsed until in May it gently bears
		A sudden crop of green-pronged solitaires.


	19. PARABLE

		I read how Quixote in his random ride
		Came to a crossing once, and lest he lose
		The purity of chance, would not decide
		
		Whither to fare, but wished his horse to choose.
		For glory lay wherever turned the fable.
		His head was light with pride, his horse’s shoes
		
		Were heavy, and he headed for the stable.


	20. SHAME

		It is a cramped little state with no foreign policy,
		Save to be thought inoffensive. The grammar of the language
		Has never been fathomed, owing to the national habit
		Of allowing each sentence to trail off in confusion.
		Those who have visited Scusi, the capital city,
		Report that the railway-route from Schuldig passes
		Through country best described as unrelieved.
		Sheep are the national product. The faint inscription
		Over the city gates may perhaps be rendered,
		“I’m afraid you won’t find much of interest here.”
		Census-reports which give the population
		As zero are, of course, not to be trusted,
		Save as reflecting the natives’ flustered insistence
		That they do not count, as well as their modest horror
		Of letting one’s sex be known in so many words.
		The uniform grey of the nondescript buildings, the absence
		Of churches or comfort-stations, have given observers
		An odd impression of ostentatious meanness,
		And it must be said of the citizens (muttering by
		In their ratty sheepskins, shying at cracks in the sidewalk)
		That they lack the peace of mind of the truly humble.
		The tenor of life is careful, even in the stiff
		Unsmiling carelessness of the border-guards
		And douaniers, who admit, whenever they can,
		Not merely the usual carloads of deodorant
		But gypsies, g-strings, hasheesh, and contraband pigments.
		Their complete negligence is reserved, however,
		For the hoped-for invasion, at which time the happy people
		(Sniggering, ruddily naked, and shamelessly drunk)
		Will stun the foe by their overwhelming submission,
		Corrupt the generals, infiltrate the staff,
		Usurp the throne, proclaim themselves to be sun-gods,
		And bring about the collapse of the whole empire.


	21. THE BEAUTIFUL CHANGES

		One wading a Fall meadow finds on all sides   
		The Queen Anne’s Lace lying like lilies
		On water; it glides
		So from the walker, it turns
		Dry grass to a lake, as the slightest shade of you   
		Valleys my mind in fabulous blue Lucernes.
		
		The beautiful changes as a forest is changed   
		By a chameleon’s tuning his skin to it;   
		As a mantis, arranged
		On a green leaf, grows
		Into it, makes the leaf leafier, and proves   
		Any greenness is deeper than anyone knows.
		
		Your hands hold roses always in a way that says   
		They are not only yours; the beautiful changes   
		In such kind ways,   
		Wishing ever to sunder
		Things and things’ selves for a second finding, to lose   
		For a moment all that it touches back to wonder.


	22. THE DEATH OF A TOAD

		A toad the power mower caught,
		Chewed and clipped of a leg, with a hobbling hop has got
		To the garden verge, and sanctuaried him
		Under the cineraria leaves, in the shade
		Of the ashen heartshaped leaves, in a dim,
		Low, and a final glade.
		
		The rare original heartsblood goes,
		Spends on the earthen hide, in the folds and wizenings, flows
		In the gutters of the banked and staring eyes. He lies
		As still as if he would return to stone,
		And soundlessly attending, dies
		Toward some deep monotone,
		
		Toward misted and ebullient seas
		And cooling shores, toward lost Amphibia’s emperies.
		Day dwindles, drowning, and at length is gone
		In the wide and antique eyes, which still appear
		To watch, across the castrate lawn,
		The haggard daylight steer.


	23. THE RIDDLE

		Shall I love God for causing me to be?
		I was mere utterance; shall these words love me?
		
		Yet when I caused His work to jar and stammer,
		And one free subject loosened all His grammar,
		
		I love Him that He did not in a rage
		Once and forever rule me off the page,
		
		But, thinking I might come to please Him yet,
		Crossed out ‘delete’ and wrote His patient ‘stet’.


	24. TO AN AMERICAN POET JUST DEAD

		In the _Boston Sunday Herald_ just three lines
		Of no-point type for you who used to sing
		The praises of imaginary wines,
		And died, or so I’m told, of the real thing.
		
		Also gone, but a lot less forgotten
		Are an eminent cut-rate druggist, a lover of Giving,
		A lender, and various brokers: gone from this rotten
		Taxable world to a higher standard of living.
		
		It is out in the comfy suburbs I read you are dead,
		And the soupy summer is settling, full of the yawns
		Of Sunday fathers loitering late in bed,
		And the shhh of sprays on all the little lawns.
		
		Will the sprays weep wide for you their chaplet tears?
		For you will the deep-freeze units melt and mourn?
		For you will Studebakers shred their gears
		And sound from each garage a muted horn?
		
		They won’t. In summer sunk and stupefied
		The suburbs deepen in their sleep of death.
		And though they sleep the sounder since you died
		It’s just as well that now you save your breath.


	25. WE

		“We ought to drop the bomb at once before
		Those Russians do. I’m sure you all agree?”
		Of course we do; and hearing of a war
		The Continentals rise in clouds of tea,
		Attired in looks of conscious ancestry,
		Decorous rags, and decorative gore.
		
		“I fear we’re growing soft,” says Mr. Fee,
		A hardened gentleman of several score.
		“Lemon?,” inquires Miss Blood. “It seems to me
		We mustn’t shilly shally any more.”
		The Continentals quick-step out the door
		And pivot off around the shrubbery.
		
		How good to have the Russians to abhor:
		It lets us dance the nation on our knee
		Who haven’t been quite certain since the war
		Precisely what we meant by saying _we_.
		The alien elements have come to be
		Entirely too enormous to ignore.
		
		The servant girl has spoken back to me.
		My dividends are yearly getting lower.
		The nights are full of fires and burglary.
		The Jews have bought my cottage by the shore.
		I feel at times like locking up the door
		And never even going out to tea.


	26. WEATHER BIRD

		It’s hard to decide whether the weather-swallow
		Seems on his standard over a tile hill
		To be flying stock-still,
		Or hurdling, rather, a tall composite billow,
		Far too fast for the sea’s
		Slack to be seen, and the vast redundancies.
		
		And it’s hard to say whether the swallow’s standard
		Looks like a leash he ever strains to break,
		Holding him lest he take
		The sky too far; or whether the house, half-foundered,
		Cast him a line, in the hope
		He’d raise it toward horizons with that rope.
		
		Both would be best.
		Contention magnifies,
		And this discarnate swallow is the crown
		Of all that pulls him down,
		Since as a schoolboy’s kite he tries to rise,
		And must be held-to tight
		For fear the house will lose its touch with height.
		
		A house should hug the earth, but turn with it,
		Be buoy to circling storms, and the moon’s manger,
		Aware of the slight danger
		Its halcyon bird may hurl to a helix, set
		The roof toward anywhere,
		And tug the dwellers into empty air.


	27. WELLFLEET: THE HOUSE

		Roof overwoven by a soft tussle of leaves,
		The walls awave with sumac shadow, lilac
		Lofts and falls in the yard, and the house believes
		It’s guarded, garlanded in a former while.
		
		Here one cannot intrude, the stillness being
		Lichenlike grown, a coating of quietudes;
		The portraits dream themselves, they are done with seeing;
		Rocker and teacart balance in iron moods.
		
		Yet for the transient here is no offense,
		Because at certain hours a wallowed light
		Floods at the seaside windows, vague, intense,
		And lays on all within a mending blight,
		
		Making the kitchen silver blindly gleam,
		The yellow floorboards swim, the dazzled clock
		Boom with a buoy sound, the chambers seem
		Alluvial as that champed and glittering rock.
		
		The sea strokes up to fashion dune and beach
		In strew by strew, and year by hundred years.
		One is at home here. Nowhere in ocean’s reach
		Can time have any foreignness or fears.


	28. WORLDS

		For Alexander there was no Far East,
		Because he thought the Asian continent
		India ended. Free Cathay at least
		Did not contribute to his discontent.
		
		But Newton, who had grasped all space, was more
		Serene. To him it seemed that he’d but played
		With several shells and pebbles on the shore
		Of that profundity he had not made.
		
		Swiss Einstein with his relativity--
		Most secure of all. God does not play dice
		With the cosmos and its activity.
		Religionless equations won’t suffice.


	29. YEAR’S END

		Now winter downs the dying of the year,   
		And night is all a settlement of snow;
		From the soft street the rooms of houses show   
		A gathered light, a shapen atmosphere,   
		Like frozen-over lakes whose ice is thin   
		And still allows some stirring down within.
		
		I’ve known the wind by water banks to shake
		The late leaves down, which frozen where they fell   
		And held in ice as dancers in a spell   
		Fluttered all winter long into a lake;   
		Graved on the dark in gestures of descent,   
		They seemed their own most perfect monument.
		
		There was perfection in the death of ferns   
		Which laid their fragile cheeks against the stone   
		A million years. Great mammoths overthrown   
		Composedly have made their long sojourns,   
		Like palaces of patience, in the gray
		And changeless lands of ice. And at Pompeii
		
		The little dog lay curled and did not rise   
		But slept the deeper as the ashes rose
		And found the people incomplete, and froze   
		The random hands, the loose unready eyes   
		Of men expecting yet another sun
		To do the shapely thing they had not done.
		
		These sudden ends of time must give us pause.   
		We fray into the future, rarely wrought
		Save in the tapestries of afterthought.
		More time, more time. Barrages of applause   
		Come muffled from a buried radio.
		The New-year bells are wrangling with the snow.


*** Oscar Wilde (1854 - 1900)

	1. AT VERONA

		HOW steep the stairs within King’s houses are
		  For exile-wearied feet as mine to tread
		  And O how salt and bitter is the bread
		Which falls from this Hound’s table--better far
		That I had died in the red ways of war
		  Or that the gate of Florence bare my head
		  Than to live thus by all things comraded
		Which seek the essence of my soul to mar.
		
		‘Curse God and die: what better hope than this?
		  He hath forgotten thee in all the bliss
		  Of his gold city and eternal day’--
		Nay peace: behind my prison’s blinded bars
		  I do possess what none can take away
		  My love and all the glory of the stars.


	2. CANZONET

		  I HAVE no store
		Of gryphon-guarded gold;
		  Now as before
		Bare is the shepherd’s fold.
		  Rubies nor pearls
		Have I to gem thy throat;
		  Yet woodland girls
		Have loved the shepherd’s note.
		
		  Then pluck a reed
		And bid me sing to thee
		  For I would feed
		Thine ears with melody
		  Who art more fair
		Than fairest fleur-de-lys
		  More sweet and rare
		Than sweetest ambergris.
		
		  What dost thou fear?
		Young Hyacinth is slain
		  Pan is not here
		And will not come again.
		  No horned Faun
		Treads down the yellow leas
		  No God at dawn
		Steals through the olive trees.
		
		  Hylas is dead
		Nor will he e’er divine
		  Those little red
		Rose-petalled lips of thine.
		  On the high hill
		No ivory dryads play
		  Silver and still
		Sinks the sad autumn day.


	3. E TENEBRIS

		COME down O Christ and help me! reach Thy hand
		  For I am drowning in a stormier sea
		  Than Simon on Thy lake of Galilee:
		The wine of life is spilt upon the sand
		My heart is as some famine-murdered land
		  Whence all good things have perished utterly
		  And well I know my soul in Hell must lie
		If I this night before God’s throne should stand.
		‘He sleeps perchance or rideth to the chase
		  Like Baal when his prophets howled that name
		  From morn to noon on Carmel’s smitten height.’
		Nay peace I shall behold before the night
		  The feet of brass the robe more white than flame
		  The wounded hands the weary human face.


	4. ENDYMION

		THE apple trees are hung with gold
		  And birds are loud in Arcady
		The sheep lie bleating in the fold
		The wild goat runs across the wold
		But yesterday his love he told
		  I know he will come back to me.
		O rising moon!  O Lady moon!
		  Be you my lover’s sentinel
		  You cannot choose but know him well
		For he is shod with purple shoon
		You cannot choose but know my love
		  For he a shepherd’s crook doth bear
		And he is soft as any dove
		  And brown and curly is his hair.
		
		The turtle now has ceased to call
		  Upon her crimson-footed groom
		The grey wolf prowls about the stall
		The lily’s singing seneschal
		Sleeps in the lily-bell and all
		  The violet hills are lost in gloom.
		O risen moon!  O holy moon!
		  Stand on the top of Helice
		  And if my own true love you see
		Ah! if you see the purple shoon
		The hazel crook the lad’s brown hair
		  The goat-skin wrapped about his arm
		Tell him that I am waiting where
		  The rushlight glimmers in the Farm.
		
		The falling dew is cold and chill
		  And no bird sings in Arcady
		The little fauns have left the hill
		Even the tired daffodil
		Has closed its gilded doors and still
		  My lover comes not back to me.
		False moon!  False moon!  O waning moon!
		  Where is my own true lover gone
		  Where are the lips vermilion
		The shepherd’s crook the purple shoon?
		Why spread that silver pavilion
		  Why wear that veil of drifting mist?
		Ah! thou hast young Endymion
		  Thou hast the lips that should be kissed!


	5. HÉLAS!

		TO drift with every passion till my soul
		Is a stringed lute on which can winds can play
		Is it for this that I have given away
		Mine ancient wisdom and austere control?
		Methinks my life is a twice-written scroll
		Scrawled over on some boyish holiday
		With idle songs for pipe and virelay
		Which do but mar the secret of the whole.
		Surely there was a time I might have trod
		The sunlit heights and from life’s dissonance
		Struck one clear chord to reach the ears of God:
		Is that time dead? lo! with a little rod
		I did but touch the honey of romance--
		And must I lose a soul’s inheritance?


	6. LE JARDIN DES TUILERIES

		THIS winter air is keen and cold
		  And keen and cold this winter sun
		  But round my chair the children run
		Like little things of dancing gold.
		
		Sometimes about the painted kiosk
		  The mimic soldiers strut and stride
		  Sometimes the blue-eyed brigands hide
		In the bleak tangles of the bosk.
		
		And sometimes while the old nurse cons
		  Her book they steal across the square
		  And launch their paper navies where
		Huge Triton writhes in greenish bronze.
		
		And now in mimic flight they flee
		  And now they rush a boisterous band--
		  And tiny hand on tiny hand
		Climb up the black and leafless tree.
		
		Ah! cruel tree! if I were you
		  And children climbed me for their sake
		  Though it be winter I would break
		Into spring blossoms white and blue!


	7. LE PANNEAU

		UNDER the rose-tree’s dancing shade
		  There stands a little ivory girl
		  Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl
		With pale green nails of polished jade.
		
		The red leaves fall upon the mould
		  The white leaves flutter one by one
		  Down to a blue bowl where the sun
		Like a great dragon writhes in gold.
		
		The white leaves float upon the air
		  The red leaves flutter idly down
		  Some fall upon her yellow gown
		And some upon her raven hair.
		
		She takes an amber lute and sings
		  And as she sings a silver crane
		  Begins his scarlet neck to strain
		And flap his burnished metal wings.
		
		She takes a lute of amber bright
		  And from the thicket where he lies
		  Her lover with his almond eyes
		Watches her movements in delight.
		
		And now she gives a cry of fear
		  And tiny tears begin to start:
		  A thorn has wounded with its dart
		The pink-veined sea-shell of her ear.
		
		And now she laughs a merry note:
		  There has fallen a petal of the rose
		  Just where the yellow satin shows
		The blue-veined flower of her throat.
		
		With pale green nails of polished jade
		  Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl
		  There stands a little ivory girl
		Under the rose-tree’s dancing shade.


	8. PAN

		I
		
		O GOAT-FOOT God of Arcady!
		This modern world is grey and old
		And what remains to us of thee?
		
		No more the shepherd lads in glee
		Throw apples at thy wattled fold
		O goat-foot God of Arcady!
		
		Nor through the laurels can one see
		Thy soft brown limbs thy beard of gold
		And what remains to us of thee?
		
		And dull and dead our Thames would be
		For here the winds are chill and cold
		O goat-loot God of Arcady!
		
		Then keep the tomb of Helice
		Thine olive-woods thy vine-clad wold
		And what remains to us of thee?
		
		Though many an unsung elegy
		Sleeps in the reeds our rivers hold
		O goat-foot God of Arcady!
		Ah what remains to us of thee?
		
		II
		
		AH leave the hills of Arcady
		Thy satyrs and their wanton play
		This modern world hath need of thee.
		
		No nymph or Faun indeed have we
		For Faun and nymph are old and grey
		Ah leave the hills of Arcady!
		
		This is the land where liberty
		Lit grave-browed Milton on his way
		This modern world hath need of thee!
		
		A land of ancient chivalry
		Where gentle Sidney saw the day
		Ah leave the hills of Arcady!
		
		This fierce sea-lion of the sea
		This England lacks some stronger lay
		This modern world hath need of thee!
		
		Then blow some trumpet loud and free
		And give thine oaten pipe away
		Ah leave the hills of Arcady!
		This modern world hath need of thee!


	9. ROME UNVISITED

		I
		
		THE corn has turned from grey to red
		  Since first my spirit wandered forth
		  From the drear cities of the north
		And to Italia’s mountains fled.
		
		And here I set my face towards home
		  For all my pilgrimage is done
		  Although methinks yon blood-red sun
		Marshals the way to Holy Rome.
		
		O Blessed Lady who dost hold
		  Upon the seven hills thy reign!
		  O Mother without blot or stain
		Crowned with bright crowns of triple gold!
		
		O Roma Roma at thy feet
		  I lay this barren gift of song!
		  For ah! the way is steep and long
		That leads unto thy sacred street.
		
		II
		
		AND yet what joy it were for me
		  To turn my feet unto the south
		  And journeying towards the Tiber mouth
		To kneel again at Fiesole!
		
		And wandering through the tangled pines
		  That break the gold of Arno’s stream
		  To see the purple mist and gleam
		Of morning on the Apennines
		
		By many a vineyard-hidden home
		  Orchard and olive-garden grey
		  Till from the drear Campagna’s way
		The seven hills bear up the dome!
		
		III
		
		A PILGRIM from the northern seas--
		  What joy for me to seek alone
		  The wondrous temple and the throne
		Of him who holds the awful keys!
		
		When bright with purple and with gold
		  Come priest and holy cardinal
		  And borne above the heads of all
		The gentle Shepherd of the Fold.
		
		O joy to see before I die
		  The only God-anointed king
		  And hear the silver trumpets ring
		A triumph as he passes by!
		
		Or at the brazen-pillared shrine
		  Holds high the mystic sacrifice
		  And shows his God to human eyes
		Beneath the veil of bread and wine.
		
		IV
		
		FOR lo what changes time can bring!
		  The cycles of revolving years
		  May free my heart from all its fears
		And teach my lips a song to sing.
		
		Before yon field of trembling gold
		  Is garnered into dusty sheaves
		  Or ere the autumn’s scarlet leaves
		Flutter as birds adown the wold
		
		I may have run the glorious race
		  And caught the torch while yet aflame
		  And called upon the holy name
		Of Him who now doth hide His face.


	10. SAN MINIATO

		SEE I have climbed the mountain side
		  Up to this holy house of God
		  Where once that Angel-Painter trod
		Who saw the heavens opened wide
		
		And throned upon the crescent moon
		  The Virginal white Queen of Grace--
		  Mary! could I but see thy face
		Death could not come at all too soon.
		
		O crowned by God with thorns and pain!
		  Mother of Christ!  O mystic wife!
		  My heart is weary of this life
		And over-sad to sing again.
		
		O crowned by God with love and flame!
		  O crowned by Christ the Holy One!
		  O listen ere the searching sun
		Show to the world my sin and shame.


	11. THE NEW REMORSE

		THE sin was mine; I did not understand.
		  So now is music prisoned in her cave
		  Save where some ebbing desultory wave
		Frets with its restless whirls this meagre strand.
		And in the withered hollow of this land
		  Hath Summer dug herself so deep a grave
		  That hardly can the leaden willow crave
		One silver blossom from keen Winter’s hand.
		
		But who is this who cometh by the shore?
		(Nay love look up and wonder!)  Who is this
		  Who cometh in dyed garments from the South?
		It is thy new-found Lord and he shall kiss
		  The yet unravished roses of thy mouth
		And I shall weep and worship as before.


*** C. K. Williams (1936 - 2015)

	1. DROPLETS

		Even when the rain falls relatively hard,
		only one leaf at a time of the little tree
		you planted on the balcony last year,
		then another leaf at its time, and one more,
		is set trembling by the constant droplets,
		
		but the rain, the clouds flocked over the city,
		you at the piano inside, your hesitant music
		mingling with the din of the downpour,
		the gush of rivulets loosed from the eaves,
		the iron railings and flowing gutters,
		
		all of it fuses in me with such intensity
		that I can’t help wondering why my longing
		to live forever has so abated that it hardly
		comes to me anymore, and never as it did,
		as regret for what I might not live to live,
		
		but rather as a layering of instants like this,
		transient as the mist drawn from the rooftops,
		yet emphatic as any note of the nocturne
		you practice, and, the storm faltering, fading
		into its own radiant passing, you practice again.


	2. FROM MY WINDOW

		Spring: the first morning when that one true block of sweet, laminar,
		              complex scent arrives
		from somewhere west and I keep coming to lean on the sill, glorying in
		              the end of the wretched winter.
		The scabby-barked sycamores ringing the empty lot across the way are
		              budded--I hadn’t noticed --
		and the thick spikes of the unlikely urban crocuses have already broken
		             the gritty soil.
		Up the street, some surveyors with tripods are waving each other left and
		             right the way they do.
		A girl in a gym suit jogged by a while ago, some kids passed, playing
		             hooky, I imagine,
		and now the paraplegic Vietnam vet who lives in a half-converted ware-
		             house down the block
		and the friend who stays with him and seems to help him out come
		             weaving towards me,
		their battered wheelchair lurching uncertainly from one edge of the
		             sidewalk to the other.
		I know where they’re going--to the “Legion“: once, when I was putting
		             something out, they stopped,
		both drunk that time, too, both reeking--it wasn’t ten o’clock--and we
		             chatted for a bit.
		I don’t know how they stay alive--on benefits most likely. I wonder if
		             they’re lovers?
		They don’t look it. Right now, in fact, they look a wreck, careening hap-
		             hazardly along,
		contriving, as they reach beneath me, to dip a wheel from the curb so
		             that the chair skewers, teeters,
		tips, and they both tumble, the one slowly, almost gracefully sliding in
		             stages from his seat,
		his expression hardly marking it, the other staggering over him, spinning
		             heavily down,
		to lie on the asphalt, his mouth working, his feet shoving weakly and
		             fruitlessly against the curb.
		In the storefront office on the corner, Reed and Son, Real Estate, have
		             come to see the show.
		Gazing through the golden letters of their name, they’re not, at least,
		             thank god, laughing.
		Now the buddy, grabbing at a hydrant, gets himself erect and stands
		             there for a moment, panting.
		Now he has to lift the other, who lies utterly still, a forearm shielding his
		             eyes from the sun.
		He hauls him partly upright, then hefts him almost all the way into the
		             chair, but a dangling foot
		catches a support-plate, jerking everything around so that he has to put
		             him down,
		set the chair to rights, and hoist him again and as he does he jerks the
		             grimy jeans right off him.
		No drawers, shrunken, blotchy thighs: under the thick, white coils of
		             belly blubber,
		the poor, blunt pud, tiny, terrified, retracted, is almost invisible in the
		             sparse genital hair,
		then his friend pulls his pants up, he slumps wholly back as though he
		             were, at last, to be let be,
		and the friend leans against the cyclone fence, suddenly staring up at me
		             as though he’d known,
		all along, that I was watching and I can’t help wondering if he knows that
		             in the winter, too,
		I watched, the night he went out to the lot and walked, paced rather, 
		             almost ran, for how many hours.
		It was snowing, the city in that holy silence, the last we have, when the
		             storm takes hold,
		and he was making patterns that I thought at first were circles, then real-
		             ized made a figure eight,
		what must have been to him a perfect symmetry but which, from where
		             I was, shivered, bent,
		and lay on its side: a warped, unclear infinity, slowly, as the snow came
		             faster, going out.
		Over and over again, his head lowered to the task, he slogged the path
		             he’d blazed,
		but the race was lost, his prints were filling faster than he made them
		             now and I looked away,
		up across the skeletal trees to the tall center city buildings, some, though
		             it was midnight,
		with all their offices still gleaming, their scarlet warning beacons signal-
		             ing erratically
		against the thickening flakes, their smoldering auras softening portions of
		             the dim, milky sky.
		In the morning, nothing: every trace of him effaced, all the field pure
		             white,
		its surface glittering, the dawn, glancing from its glaze, oblique, relent-
		             less, unadorned.


	3. LIGHT

		Another drought morning after a too brief dawn downpour,
		unaccountable silvery glitterings on the leaves of the withering maples--
		
		I think of a troop of the blissful blessed approaching Dante,
		“a hundred spheres shining,” he rhapsodizes, “the purest pearls . . .”
		
		then of the frightening brilliants myriad gleam in my lamp
		of the eyes of the vast swarm of bats I found once in a cave,
		
		a chamber whose walls seethed with a spaceless carpet of creatures,
		their cacophonous, keen, insistent, incessant squeakings and squealings
		
		churning the warm, rank, cloying air; of how one,
		perfectly still among all the fitfully twitching others,
		
		was looking straight at me, gazing solemnly, thoughtfully up
		from beneath the intricate furl of its leathery wings
		
		as though it couldn’t believe I was there, or were trying to place me,
		to situate me in the gnarl we’d evolved from, and now,
		
		the trees still heartrendingly asparkle, Dante again,
		this time the way he’ll refer to a figure he meets as “the life of . . .”
		
		not the soul, or person, the _life_, and once more the bat, and I,
		our lives in that moment together, our lives, our _lives_,
		
		his with no vision of celestial splendor, no poem,
		mine with no flight, no unblundering dash through the dark,
		
		his without realizing it would, so soon, no longer exist,
		mine having to know for us both that everything ends,
		
		world, after-world, even their memory, steamed away
		like the film of uncertain vapor of the last of the luscious rain.


	4. SHAME

		A girl who, in 1971, when I was living by myself, painfully lonely, bereft, depressed, offhandedly mentioned to me in a conversation with some friends that although at first she’d found me--
		
		I can’t remember the term, some dated colloquialism signifying odd, unacceptable, out-of-things--she’d decided that I was after all all right . . . twelve years later she comes back to me from nowhere and I realize that it wasn’t my then irrepressible, unselective, incessant sexual want she meant, which, when we’d been introduced, I’d naturally aimed at her and which she’d easily deflected, but that she’d thought I really was, in myself, the way I looked and spoke and acted, what she was saying, creepy, weird, whatever, and I am taken with a terrible humiliation.


	5. TAR

		The first morning of Three Mile Island: those first disquieting, uncertain, mystifying hours.
		All morning a crew of workmen have been tearing the old decrepit roof off our building,
		and all morning, trying to distract myself, I’ve been wandering out to watch them
		as they hack away the leaden layers of asbestos paper and disassemble the disintegrating drains.
		After half a night of listening to the news, wondering how to know a hundred miles downwind
		if and when to make a run for it and where, then a coming bolt awake at seven
		when the roofers we’ve been waiting for since winter sent their ladders shrieking up our wall,
		we still know less than nothing: the utility company continues making little of the accident,
		the slick federal spokesmen still have their evasions in some semblance of order.
		Surely we suspect now we’re being lied to, but in the meantime, there are the roofers,
		setting winch-frames, sledging rounds of tar apart, and there I am, on the curb across, gawking.
		
		I never realized what brutal work it is, how matter-of-factly and harrowingly dangerous.
		The ladders flex and quiver, things skid from the edge, the materials are bulky and recalcitrant.
		When the rusty, antique nails are levered out, their heads pull off; the underroofing crumbles.
		Even the battered little furnace, roaring along as patient as a donkey, chokes and clogs,
		a dense, malignant smoke shoots up, and someone has to fiddle with a cock, then hammer it,
		before the gush and stench will deintensify, the dark, Dantean broth wearily subside.
		In its crucible, the stuff looks bland, like licorice, spill it, though, on your boots or coveralls,
		it sears, and everything is permeated with it, the furnace gunked with burst and half-burst bubbles,
		the men themselves so completely slashed and mucked they seem almost from another realm, like trolls.
		When they take their break, they leave their brooms standing at attention in the asphalt pails,
		work gloves clinging like Br’er Rabbit to the bitten shafts, and they slouch along the precipitous lip,
		the enormous sky behind them, the heavy noontime air alive with shimmers and mirages.
		
		Sometime in the afternoon I had to go inside: the advent of our vigil was upon us.
		However much we didn’t want to, however little we would do about it, we’d understood:
		we were going to perish of all this, if not now, then soon, if not soon, then someday.
		Someday, some final generation, hysterically aswarm beneath an atmosphere as unrelenting as rock,
		would rue us all, anathematize our earthly comforts, curse our surfeits and submissions.
		I think I know, though I might rather not, why my roofers stay so clear to me and why the rest,
		the terror of that time, the reflexive disbelief and distancing, all we should hold on to, dims so.
		I remember the president in his absurd protective booties, looking absolutely unafraid, the fool.
		I remember a woman on the front page glaring across the misty Susquehanna at those looming stacks.
		But, more vividly, the men, silvered with glitter from the shingles, clinging like starlings beneath the eaves.
		Even the leftover carats of tar in the gutter, so black they seemed to suck the light out of the air.
		By nightfall kids had come across them: every sidewalk on the block was scribbled with obscenities and hearts.


	6. THE GAFFE

		1.
		
		If that someone who’s me yet not me yet who judges me is always with me,   
		as he is, shouldn’t he have been there when I said so long ago that thing I said?   
		
		If he who rakes me with such not trivial shame for minor sins now were there then,   
		shouldn’t he have warned me he’d even now devastate me for my unpardonable affront?   
		
		I’m a child then, yet already I’ve composed this conscience-beast, who harries me:   
		is there anything else I can say with certainty about who I was, except that I, that he,   
		
		could already draw from infinitesimal transgressions complex chords of remorse,   
		and orchestrate ever undiminishing retribution from the hapless rest of myself?   
		
		
		2.
		
		The son of some friends of my parents has died, and my parents, paying their call,   
		take me along, and I’m sent out with the dead boy’s brother and some others to play.   
		
		We’re joking around, and some words come to my mind, which to my amazement are said.   
		_How do you know when you can laugh when somebody dies, your brother dies?_
		
		is what’s said, and the others go quiet, the backyard goes quiet, everyone stares,   
		and I want to know now why that someone in me who’s me yet not me let me say it.   
		
		Shouldn’t he have told me the contrition cycle would from then be ever upon me,   
		it didn’t matter that I’d really only wanted to know how grief ends, and when?   
		
		
		3.
		
		I could hear the boy’s mother sobbing inside, then stopping, sobbing then stopping.   
		Was the end of her grief already there? Had her someone in her told her it would end?   
		
		Was her someone in her kinder to her, not tearing at her, as mine did, still does, me,   
		for guessing grief someday ends? Is that why her sobbing stopped sometimes?   
		
		She didn’t laugh, though, or I never heard her. _How do you know when you can laugh?_
		Why couldn’t someone have been there in me not just to accuse me, but to explain?   
		
		The kids were playing again, I was playing, I didn’t hear anything more from inside.   
		The way now sometimes what’s in me is silent, too, and sometimes, though never really, forgets.


	7. THE NAIL

		Some dictator or other had gone into exile, and now reports were coming about his regime,
		the usual crimes, torture, false imprisonment, cruelty and corruption, but then a detail:
		that the way his henchmen had disposed of enemies was by hammering nails into their skulls.
		Horror, then, what mind does after horror, after that first feeling that you’ll never catch your breath,
		mind imagines--how not be annihilated by it?--the preliminary tap, feels it in the tendons of the hand,
		feels the way you do with _your_ nail when you’re fixing something, making something, shelves, a bed;
		the first light tap to set the slant, and then the slightly harder tap, to em-bed the tip a little more . . .
		
		No, no more: this should be happening in myth, in stone, or paint, not in reality, not here;
		it should be an emblem of itself, not itself, something that would mean, not really have to happen,
		something to go out, expand in implication from that unmoved mass of matter in the breast;
		as in the image of an anguished face, in grief for us, not us as us, us as in a myth, a moral tale,
		a way to tell the truth that grief is limitless, a way to tell us we must always understand
		it’s we who do such things, we who set the slant, embed the tip, lift the sledge and drive the nail,
		drive the nail which is the axis upon which turns the brutal human world upon the world.


	8. THE RAMPAGE

		a baby got here once who before
		he was all the way out and could already feel the hindu
		pain inside him and the hebrew and the iliad
		decided he was never going to stop crying no matter what
		until they did something he wasn’t going
		to turn the horror
		off in their fat sentences
		and in the light bulb how much murder to get light
		and in the walls agony agony for the bricks for the glaze
		he was going to keep screaming
		until they made death little like he was
		and loved him too and sent
		him back to undo all this
		and it happened
		he kept screaming he scared them he saw them
		filling with womb-light again like stadiums
		he saw the tears sucked back into the story the smiles
		opening like sandwiches
		so he stopped
		and looked up and said all right
		it’s better now
		I’m hungry now I want just to sleep
		and they let him


*** William Carlos Williams (1883 - 1963)

	1. A CELEBRATION

		A middle-northern March, now as always-- 
		gusts from the South broken against cold winds-- 
		but from under, as if a slow hand lifted a tide, 
		it moves--not into April--into a second March, 
		
		the old skin of wind-clear scales dropping 
		upon the mold: this is the shadow projects the tree 
		upward causing the sun to shine in his sphere. 
		
		So we will put on our pink felt hat--new last year! 
		--newer this by virtue of brown eyes turning back 
		the seasons--and let us walk to the orchid-house, 
		see the flowers will take the prize tomorrow 
		at the Palace. 
		Stop here, these are our oleanders. 
		When they are in bloom-- 
		You would waste words 
		It is clearer to me than if the pink 
		were on the branch. It would be a searching in 
		a colored cloud to reveal that which now, huskless, 
		shows the very reason for their being. 
		
		And these the orange-trees, in blossom--no need 
		to tell with this weight of perfume in the air. 
		If it were not so dark in this shed one could better 
		see the white. 
		It is that very perfume 
		has drawn the darkness down among the leaves. 
		Do I speak clearly enough? 
		It is this darkness reveals that which darkness alone 
		loosens and sets spinning on waxen wings-- 
		not the touch of a finger-tip, not the motion 
		of a sigh. A too heavy sweetness proves 
		its own caretaker. 
		And here are the orchids! 
		Never having seen 
		such gaiety I will read these flowers for you: 
		This is an odd January, died--in Villon’s time. 
		Snow, this is and this the stain of a violet 
		grew in that place the spring that foresaw its own doom. 
		
		And this, a certain July from Iceland: 
		a young woman of that place 
		breathed it toward the South. It took root there. 
		The color ran true but the plant is small. 
		
		This falling spray of snow-flakes is 
		a handful of dead Februaries 
		prayed into flower by Rafael Arevalo Martinez 
		of Guatemala. 
		Here’s that old friend who 
		went by my side so many years: this full, fragile 
		head of veined lavender. Oh that April 
		that we first went with our stiff lusts 
		leaving the city behind, out to the green hill-- 
		May, they said she was. A hand for all of us: 
		this branch of blue butterflies tied to this stem. 
		
		June is a yellow cup I’ll not name; August 
		the over-heavy one. And here are-- 
		russet and shiny, all but March. And March? 
		Ah, March-- 
		Flowers are a tiresome pastime. 
		One has a wish to shake them from their pots 
		root and stem, for the sun to gnaw. 
		
		Walk out again into the cold and saunter home 
		to the fire. This day has blossomed long enough. 
		I have wiped out the red night and lit a blaze 
		instead which will at least warm our hands 
		and stir up the talk. 
		I think we have kept fair time. 
		Time is a green orchard.


	2. APPROACH OF WINTER

		The half-stripped trees 
		struck by a wind together, 
		bending all, 
		the leaves flutter drily 
		and refuse to let go 
		or driven like hail 
		stream bitterly out to one side 
		and fall 
		where the salvias, hard carmine-- 
		like no leaf that ever was-- 
		edge the bare garden.


	3. ARRIVAL

		And yet one arrives somehow, 
		finds himself loosening the hooks of 
		her dress 
		in a strange bedroom-- 
		feels the autumn 
		dropping its silk and linen leaves 
		about her ankles. 
		The tawdry veined body emerges 
		twisted upon itself 
		like a winter wind . . . !


*** Karol Wojtyła (1920 - 2005)

	1. JOHN BESEECHES HER

		Don’t lower the wave of my heart, 
		it swells to your eyes, mother;
		don’t alter love, but bring the wave to me
		in your translucent hands.
		He asked for this.
		I am John the fisherman. There isn’t much 
		in me to love.
		I feel I am still on that lake shore,
		gravel crunching under my feet--
		and, suddenly--Him.
		You will embrace his mystery in me no more,
		yet quietly I spread round your thoughts like myrtle.
		And calling you Mother--His wish--
		I beseech you: may this word
		never grow less for you.
		True, it’s not easy to measure the meaning 
		of the words he breathed into us both
		so that all earlier love in those words 
		should be concealed.


	2. MATERIAL

		I
		
		Listen: the even knocking of hammers,
		so much their own,
		I project on to the people
		to test the strength of each blow.
		Listen now: electric current
		cuts through a river of rock.
		And a thought grows in me day after day:
		the greatness of work is inside man.
		Hard and cracked 
		his hand is differently charged
		by the hammer
		and thought differently unravels in stone
		as human energy splits from the strength of stone
		cutting the bloodstream, an artery
		in the right place.
		Look, how love feeds 
		on this well-grounded anger
		which flows in to people’s breath
		as a river bent by the wind, 
		and which is never spoken, but just breaks high vocal cords.
		Passers-by scuttle off into doorways, 
		someone whispers: “Yet here is a great force.”
		Fear not. Man’s daily deeds have a wide span,
		a strait riverbed can’t imprison them long.
		Fear not. For centuries they all stand in Him, 
		and you look at Him now
		through the even knocking of hammers.
		
		
		II
		
		Bound are the blocks of stone, the low-voltage wire
		cuts deep in their flesh, an invisible whip--
		stones know this violence.
		When an elusive blast rips their ripe compactness
		and tears them from their eternal simplicity,
		the stones know this violence.
		Yet can the current unbind their full strength?
		It is he who carries that strength in his hands:
		the worker.
		
		
		III
		
		Hands are the heart’s landscape. They split sometimes
		like ravines into which an undefined force rolls.
		The very same hands which man only opens 
		when his palms have had their fill of toil.
		Now he sees: because of him alone others can walk in peace.
		Hands are a landscape. When they split, the pain of their sores
		surges free as a stream. 
		But no thought of pain--
		no grandeur in pain alone.
		For his own grandeur he does not know how to name.
		
		
		IV
		
		No, not just hands drooping with the hammer’s weight, 
		not the taut torso, muscles shaping their own style, 
		but thought informing his work,
		deep, knotted in wrinkles on his brow,
		and over his head, joined in a sharp arc, shoulders and veins vaulted.
		So for a moment he is a Gothic building
		cut by a vertical thought born in the eyes.
		No, not a profile alone, 
		not a mere figure between God and the stone,
		sentenced to grandeur and error.


	3. OVER THIS, YOUR WHITE GRAVE

		Over this, your white grave
		the flowers of life in white--
		so many years without you--
		how many have passed out of sight?
		Over this your white grave
		covered for years, there is a stir
		in the air, something uplifting
		and, like death, beyond comprehension.
		Over this your white grave
		oh, mother, can such loving cease?
		for all his filial adoration
		a prayer:
		Give her eternal peace--


	4. THE QUARRY

		He wasn’t alone. 
		His muscles grew into the flesh of the crowd, energy their pulse,
		As long as they held a hammer, as long as his feet felt the ground.
		And a stone smashed his temples and cut through his heart’s chamber.
		They took his body and walked in a silent line
		Toil still lingered about him, a sense of wrong.
		They wore gray blouses, boots ankle-deep in mud.
		In this, they showed the end.
		How violently his time halted: 
		the pointers on the low voltage dials jerked, 
		then dropped to zero again.
		White stone now within him, eating into his being, 
		taking over enough of him to turn him into stone.
		Who will lift up that stone, 
		unfurl his thoughts again under the cracked temples?
		So plaster cracks on the wall.
		They laid him down, his back on a sheet of gravel.
		His wife came, worn out with worry; his son returned from school
		Should his anger now flow into the anger of others?
		It was maturing in him through his own truth and love 
		Should he be used by those who came after, 
		deprived of substance, unique and deeply his own?
		The stones on the move again; a wagon bruising the flowers.
		Again the electric current cuts deep into the walls. 
		But the man has taken with him the world’s inner structure, 
		where the greater the anger, the higher the explosion of love.


*** William Wordsworth (1770 - 1850)

	1. LINES WRITTEN IN EARLY SPRING

		I heard a thousand blended notes, 
		While in a grove I sate reclined, 
		In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
		Bring sad thoughts to the mind. 
		
		To her fair works did Nature link 
		The human soul that through me ran; 
		And much it grieved my heart to think 
		What man has made of man. 
		
		Through primrose tufts, in that green bower, 
		The periwinkle trailed its wreaths; 
		And ’tis my faith that every flower 
		Enjoys the air it breathes. 
		
		The birds around me hopped and played, 
		Their thoughts I cannot measure:-- 
		But the least motion which they made 
		It seemed a thrill of pleasure. 
		
		The budding twigs spread out their fan, 
		To catch the breezy air; 
		And I must think, do all I can, 
		That there was pleasure there. 
		
		If this belief from heaven be sent, 
		If such be Nature’s holy plan, 
		Have I not reason to lament 
		What man has made of man?


	2. ODE TO DUTY

		_Jam non consilio bonus, sed more eo perductus, ut non tantum recte facere possim, sed nisi recte facere non possim“_
		
		“I am no longer good through deliberate intent, but by long habit have reached a point where I am not only able to do right, but am unable to do anything but what is right.“ 
		--_Seneca, Letters 120.10_
		
		Stern Daughter of the Voice of God! 
		O Duty! if that name thou love 
		Who art a light to guide, a rod 
		To check the erring, and reprove; 
		Thou, who art victory and law 
		When empty terrors overawe; 
		From vain temptations dost set free; 
		And calm’st the weary strife of frail humanity! 
		
		There are who ask not if thine eye 
		Be on them; who, in love and truth, 
		Where no misgiving is, rely 
		Upon the genial sense of youth: 
		Glad Hearts! without reproach or blot; 
		Who do thy work, and know it not: 
		Oh! if through confidence misplaced 
		They fail, thy saving arms, dread Power! around them cast. 
		
		Serene will be our days and bright, 
		And happy will our nature be, 
		When love is an unerring light, 
		And joy its own security. 
		And they a blissful course may hold 
		Even now, who, not unwisely bold, 
		Live in the spirit of this creed; 
		Yet seek thy firm support, according to their need. 
		
		I, loving freedom, and untried; 
		No sport of every random gust, 
		Yet being to myself a guide, 
		Too blindly have reposed my trust: 
		And oft, when in my heart was heard 
		Thy timely mandate, I deferred 
		The task, in smoother walks to stray; 
		But thee I now would serve more strictly, if I may. 
		
		Through no disturbance of my soul, 
		Or strong compunction in me wrought, 
		I supplicate for thy control; 
		But in the quietness of thought: 
		Me this unchartered freedom tires; 
		I feel the weight of chance-desires: 
		My hopes no more must change their name, 
		I long for a repose that ever is the same. 
		
		Stern Lawgiver! yet thou dost wear 
		The Godhead’s most benignant grace; 
		Nor know we anything so fair 
		As is the smile upon thy face: 
		Flowers laugh before thee on their beds 
		And fragrance in thy footing treads; 
		Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong; 
		And the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are fresh and strong. 
		
		To humbler functions, awful Power! 
		I call thee: I myself commend 
		Unto thy guidance from this hour; 
		Oh, let my weakness have an end! 
		Give unto me, made lowly wise, 
		The spirit of self-sacrifice; 
		The confidence of reason give; 
		And in the light of truth thy Bondman let me live!


	3. RESOLUTION AND INDEPENDENCE

		There was a roaring in the wind all night; 
		The rain came heavily and fell in floods; 
		But now the sun is rising calm and bright; 
		The birds are singing in the distant woods; 
		Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods; 
		The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters; 
		And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters. 
		
		All things that love the sun are out of doors; 
		The sky rejoices in the morning’s birth; 
		The grass is bright with rain-drops;--on the moors 
		The hare is running races in her mirth; 
		And with her feet she from the plashy earth 
		Raises a mist, that, glittering in the sun, 
		Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run. 
		
		I was a Traveller then upon the moor; 
		I saw the hare that raced about with joy; 
		I heard the woods and distant waters roar; 
		Or heard them not, as happy as a boy: 
		The pleasant season did my heart employ: 
		My old remembrances went from me wholly; 
		And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy. 
		
		But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might 
		Of joys in minds that can no further go, 
		As high as we have mounted in delight 
		In our dejection do we sink as low; 
		To me that morning did it happen so; 
		And fears and fancies thick upon me came; 
		Dim sadness--and blind thoughts, I knew not, nor could name. 
		
		I heard the sky-lark warbling in the sky; 
		And I bethought me of the playful hare: 
		Even such a happy Child of earth am I; 
		Even as these blissful creatures do I fare; 
		Far from the world I walk, and from all care; 
		But there may come another day to me-- 
		Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty. 
		
		My whole life I have lived in pleasant thought, 
		As if life’s business were a summer mood; 
		As if all needful things would come unsought 
		To genial faith, still rich in genial good; 
		But how can He expect that others should 
		Build for him, sow for him, and at his call 
		Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all? 
		
		I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy, 
		The sleepless Soul that perished in his pride; 
		Of Him who walked in glory and in joy 
		Following his plough, along the mountain-side: 
		By our own spirits are we deified: 
		We Poets in our youth begin in gladness; 
		But thereof come in the end despondency and madness. 
		
		Now, whether it were by peculiar grace, 
		A leading from above, a something given, 
		Yet it befell that, in this lonely place, 
		When I with these untoward thoughts had striven, 
		Beside a pool bare to the eye of heaven 
		I saw a Man before me unawares: 
		The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs. 
		
		As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie 
		Couched on the bald top of an eminence; 
		Wonder to all who do the same espy, 
		By what means it could thither come, and whence; 
		So that it seems a thing endued with sense: 
		Like a sea-beast crawled forth, that on a shelf 
		Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself; 
		
		Such seemed this Man, not all alive nor dead, 
		Nor all asleep--in his extreme old age: 
		His body was bent double, feet and head 
		Coming together in life’s pilgrimage; 
		As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage 
		Of sickness felt by him in times long past, 
		A more than human weight upon his frame had cast. 
		
		Himself he propped, limbs, body, and pale face, 
		Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood: 
		And, still as I drew near with gentle pace, 
		Upon the margin of that moorish flood 
		Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, 
		That heareth not the loud winds when they call, 
		And moveth all together, if it move at all. 
		
		At length, himself unsettling, he the pond 
		Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look 
		Upon the muddy water, which he conned, 
		As if he had been reading in a book: 
		And now a stranger’s privilege I took; 
		And, drawing to his side, to him did say, 
		“This morning gives us promise of a glorious day.“ 
		
		A gentle answer did the old Man make, 
		In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew: 
		And him with further words I thus bespake, 
		“What occupation do you there pursue? 
		This is a lonesome place for one like you.“ 
		Ere he replied, a flash of mild surprise 
		Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes. 
		
		His words came feebly, from a feeble chest, 
		But each in solemn order followed each, 
		With something of a lofty utterance drest-- 
		Choice word and measured phrase, above the reach 
		Of ordinary men; a stately speech; 
		Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use, 
		Religious men, who give to God and man their dues. 
		
		He told, that to these waters he had come 
		To gather leeches, being old and poor: 
		Employment hazardous and wearisome! 
		And he had many hardships to endure: 
		From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor; 
		Housing, with God’s good help, by choice or chance; 
		And in this way he gained an honest maintenance. 
		
		The old Man still stood talking by my side; 
		But now his voice to me was like a stream 
		Scarce heard; nor word from word could I divide; 
		And the whole body of the Man did seem 
		Like one whom I had met with in a dream; 
		Or like a man from some far region sent, 
		To give me human strength, by apt admonishment. 
		
		My former thoughts returned: the fear that kills; 
		And hope that is unwilling to be fed; 
		Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills; 
		And mighty Poets in their misery dead. 
		--Perplexed, and longing to be comforted, 
		My question eagerly did I renew, 
		“How is it that you live, and what is it you do?“ 
		
		He with a smile did then his words repeat; 
		And said that, gathering leeches, far and wide 
		He travelled; stirring thus about his feet 
		The waters of the pools where they abide. 
		“Once I could meet with them on every side; 
		But they have dwindled long by slow decay; 
		Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may.“ 
		
		While he was talking thus, the lonely place, 
		The old Man’s shape, and speech--all troubled me: 
		In my mind’s eye I seemed to see him pace 
		About the weary moors continually, 
		Wandering about alone and silently. 
		While I these thoughts within myself pursued, 
		He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed. 
		
		And soon with this he other matter blended, 
		Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind, 
		But stately in the main; and, when he ended, 
		I could have laughed myself to scorn to find 
		In that decrepit Man so firm a mind. 
		“God,“ said I, “be my help and stay secure; 
		I’ll think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor!”


	4. SEPTEMBER

		Departing summer hath assumed 
		An aspect tenderly illumed, 
		The gentlest look of spring; 
		That calls from yonder leafy shade 
		Unfaded, yet prepared to fade, 
		A timely carolling. 
		
		No faint and hesitating trill, 
		Such tribute as to winter chill 
		The lonely redbreast pays! 
		Clear, loud, and lively is the din, 
		From social warblers gathering in 
		Their harvest of sweet lays. 
		
		Nor doth the example fail to cheer 
		Me, conscious that my leaf is sere, 
		And yellow on the bough:-- 
		Fall, rosy garlands, from my head! 
		Ye myrtle wreaths, your fragrance shed 
		Around a younger brow! 
		
		Yet will I temperately rejoice; 
		Wide is the range, and free the choice 
		Of undiscordant themes; 
		Which, haply, kindred souls may prize 
		Not less than vernal ecstasies, 
		And passion’s feverish dreams. 
		
		For deathless powers to verse belong, 
		And they like Demi-gods are strong 
		On whom the Muses smile; 
		But some their function have disclaimed, 
		Best pleased with what is aptliest framed 
		To enervate and defile. 
		
		Not such the initiatory strains 
		Committed to the silent plains 
		In Britain’s earliest dawn: 
		Trembled the groves, the stars grew pale, 
		While all-too-daringly the veil 
		Of nature was withdrawn! 
		
		Nor such the spirit-stirring note 
		When the live chords Alcæus smote, 
		Inflamed by sense of wrong; 
		Woe! woe to Tyrants! from the lyre 
		Broke threateningly, in sparkles dire 
		Of fierce vindictive song. 
		
		And not unhallowed was the page 
		By wingèd Love inscribed, to assuage 
		The pangs of vain pursuit; 
		Love listening while the Lesbian Maid 
		With finest touch of passion swayed 
		Her own Æolian lute. 
		
		O ye, who patiently explore 
		The wreck of Herculanean lore, 
		What rapture! could ye seize 
		Some Theban fragment, or unroll 
		One precious, tender-hearted scroll 
		Of pure Simonides. 
		
		That were, indeed, a genuine birth 
		Of poesy; a bursting forth 
		Of genius from the dust: 
		What Horace gloried to behold, 
		What Maro loved, shall we enfold? 
		Can haughty Time be just! 


	5. THE TABLES TURNED

		Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books; 
		Or surely you’ll grow double: 
		Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks; 
		Why all this toil and trouble? 
		
		The sun above the mountain’s head, 
		A freshening lustre mellow 
		Through all the long green fields has spread, 
		His first sweet evening yellow. 
		
		Books! ‘tis a dull and endless strife: 
		Come, hear the woodland linnet, 
		How sweet his music! on my life, 
		There’s more of wisdom in it. 
		
		And hark! how blithe the throstle sings! 
		He, too, is no mean preacher: 
		Come forth into the light of things, 
		Let Nature be your teacher. 
		
		She has a world of ready wealth, 
		Our minds and hearts to bless-- 
		Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health, 
		Truth breathed by cheerfulness. 
		
		One impulse from a vernal wood 
		May teach you more of man, 
		Of moral evil and of good, 
		Than all the sages can. 
		
		Sweet is the lore which Nature brings; 
		Our meddling intellect 
		Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things:-- 
		We murder to dissect. 
		
		Enough of Science and of Art; 
		Close up those barren leaves; 
		Come forth, and bring with you a heart 
		That watches and receives. 


	6. THERE WAS A BOY

		There was a Boy; ye knew him well, ye cliffs 
		And islands of Winander! many a time, 
		At evening, when the earliest stars began 
		To move along the edges of the hills, 
		Rising or setting, would he stand alone, 
		Beneath the trees, or by the glimmering lake; 
		And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands 
		Pressed closely palm to palm and to his mouth 
		Uplifted, he, as through an instrument, 
		Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls 
		That they might answer him.--And they would shout 
		Across the watery vale, and shout again, 
		Responsive to his call,--with quivering peals, 
		And long halloos, and screams, and echoes loud 
		Redoubled and redoubled; concourse wild 
		Of jocund din! And, when there came a pause 
		Of silence such as baffled his best skill: 
		Then, sometimes, in that silence, while he hung 
		Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise 
		Has carried far into his heart the voice 
		Of mountain-torrents; or the visible scene 
		Would enter unawares into his mind 
		With all its solemn imagery, its rocks, 
		Its woods, and that uncertain heaven received 
		Into the bosom of the steady lake. 
		
		This boy was taken from his mates, and died 
		In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old. 
		Pre-eminent in beauty is the vale 
		Where he was born and bred: the churchyard hangs 
		Upon a slope above the village-school; 
		And through that churchyard when my way has led 
		On summer-evenings, I believe that there 
		A long half-hour together I have stood 
		Mute--looking at the grave in which he lies! 


*** Charles Wright (1935 - )

	1. BLACK ZODIAC

		Darkened by time, the masters, like our memories, mix 
		And mismatch, 
		and settle about our lawn furniture, like air 
		Without a meaning, like air in its clear nothingness. 
		What can we say to either of them? 
		How can they be so dark and so clear at the same time? 
		They ruffle our hair, 
		they ruffle the leaves of the August trees. 
		Then stop, abruptly as wind. 
		The flies come back, and the heat-- 
		what can we say to them? 
		Nothing is endless but the sky. 
		The flies come back, and the afternoon 
		Teeters a bit on its green edges, 
		then settles like dead weight 
		Next to our memories, and the pale hems of the masters’ gowns. 
		________ 
		
		Those who look for the Lord will cry out in praise of him. 
		Perhaps. And perhaps not-- 
		dust and ashes though we are, 
		Some will go wordlessly, some 
		Will listen their way in with their mouths 
		Where pain puts them, an inch-and-a-half above the floor. 
		And some will revile him out of love 
		and deep disdain. 
		The gates of mercy, like an eclipse, darken our undersides. 
		Rows of gravestones stay our steps, 
		August humidity 
		Bright as auras around our bodies. 
		And some will utter the words, 
		speaking in fear and tongues, 
		Hating their garments splotched by the flesh. 
		These are the lucky ones, the shelved ones, the twice-erased. 
		________ 
		
		Dante and John Chrysostom 
		Might find this afternoon a sidereal roadmap, 
		A pilgrim’s way . . .
		You might too 
		Under the prejaundiced outline of the quarter moon, 
		Clouds sculling downsky like a narrative for whatever comes, 
		What hasn’t happened to happen yet 
		Still lurking behind the stars, 
		31 August 1995 . . .
		The afterlife of insects, space graffiti, white holes 
		In the landscape, 
		such things, such avenues, lead to dust 
		And handle our hurt with ease. 
		Sky blue, blue of infinity, blue 
		waters above the earth: 
		Why do the great stories always exist in the past? 
		________ 
		
		The unexamined life’s no different from 
		the examined life-- 
		Unanswerable questions, small talk, 
		Unprovable theorems, long-abandoned arguments-- 
		You’ve got to write it all down. 
		Landscape or waterscape, light-length on evergreen, dark sidebar 
		Of evening, 
		you’ve got to write it down. 
		Memory’s handkerchief, death’s dream and automobile, 
		God’s sleep, 
		you’ve still got to write it down, 
		Moon half-empty, moon half-full, 
		Night starless and egoless, night blood-black and prayer-black, 
		Spider at work between the hedges, 
		Last bird call, 
		toad in a damp place, tree frog in a dry . . .
		________ 
		
		We go to our graves with secondary affections, 
		Second-hand satisfaction, half-souled, 
		star charts demagnetized. 
		We go in our best suits. The birds are flying. Clouds pass. 
		Sure we’re cold and untouchable, 
		but we harbor no ill will. 
		No tooth tuned to resentment’s fork, 
		we’re out of here, and sweet meat. 
		Calligraphers of the disembodied, God’s word-wards, 
		What letters will we illuminate? 
		Above us, the atmosphere, 
		The nothing that’s nowhere, signs on, and waits for our beck and call. 
		Above us, the great constellations sidle and wince, 
		The letters undarken and come forth, 
		Your X and my X. 
		The letters undarken and they come forth. 
		________ 
		
		Eluders of memory, nocturnal sleep of the greenhouse, 
		Spirit of slides and silences, 
		Invisible Hand, 
		Witness and walk on. 
		Lords of the discontinuous, lords of the little gestures, 
		Succor my shift and save me . . .
		All afternoon the rain has rained down in the mind, 
		And in the gardens and dwarf orchard. 
		All afternoon 
		The lexicon of late summer has turned its pages 
		Under the rain, 
		abstracting the necessary word. 
		Autumn’s upon us. 
		The rain fills our narrow beds. 
		Description’s an element, like air or water. 
		That’s the word.


	2. CLEAR NIGHT

		Clear night, thumb-top of a moon, a back-lit sky.
		Moon-fingers lay down their same routine
		On the side deck and the threshold, the white keys and the black keys.
		Bird hush and bird song. A cassia flower falls.
		
		I want to be bruised by God.
		I want to be strung up in a strong light and singled out.
		I want to be stretched, like music wrung from a dropped seed.   
		I want to be entered and picked clean.
		
		And the wind says “What?” to me.
		And the castor beans, with their little earrings of death, say “What?” to me.
		And the stars start out on their cold slide through the dark.   
		And the gears notch and the engines wheel.


	3. FUTURE TENSE

		All things in the end are bittersweet--
		An empty gaze, a little way-station just beyond silence.
		
		If you can’t delight in the everyday,
		                     you have no future here.
		
		And if you can, no future either.
		
		And time, black dog, will sniff you out, 
		                    and lick your lean cheeks,
		And lie down beside you--warm, real close--and will not move.


	4. ROAD WARRIORS

		My traveling clothes light up the noon. 
		I’ve been on my way for a long time 
		back to the past, 
		That irreconcilable city. 
		Everyone wants to join me, it seems, and I let them. 
		Roadside flowers drive me to distraction, 
		dragonflies 
		Hover like lapus lazuli, there, just out of reach. 
		
		Narrow road, wide road, all of us on it, unhappy, 
		Unsettled, seven yards short of immortality 
		And a yard short of not long to live. 
		Better to sit down in the tall grass 
		and watch the clouds, 
		To lift our faces up to the sky, 
		Considering--for most of us--our lives have been a constant mistake.


	5. THE APPALACHIAN BOOK OF THE DEAD

		Sunday, September Sunday . . . Outdoors,
		Like an early page from The Appalachian Book of the Dead,   
		Sunlight lavishes brilliance on every surface,
		Doves settle, surreptitious angels, on tree limb and box branch,   
		A crow calls, deep in its own darkness,
		Something like water ticks on
		Just there, beyond the horizon, just there, steady clock . . .
		
		Go in fear of abstractions . . .
		            Well, possibly. Meanwhile,
		They are the strata our bodies rise through, the sere veins   
		Our skins rub off on.
		For instance, whatever enlightenment there might be   
		Housels compassion and affection, those two tributaries   
		That river above our lives,
		Whose waters we sense the sense of
		            late at night, and later still.
		
		Uneasy, suburbanized,
		I drift from the lawn chair to the back porch to the dwarf orchard   
		Testing the grass and border garden.
		A stillness, as in the passageways of Paradise,
		Bell jars the afternoon.
		            Leaves, like ex votos, hang hard and shine   
		Under the endlessness of heaven.
		Such skeletal altars, such vacant sanctuary.
		
		It always amazes me
		How landscape recalibrates the stations of the dead,
		How what we see jacks up
		                                                 the odd quotient of what we don’t see,   
		How God’s breath reconstitutes our walking up and walking down.   
		First glimpse of autumn, stretched tight and snicked, a bad face lift,
		Flicks in and flicks out,
		            a virtual reality.
		Time to begin the long division.


*** Thomas Wyatt (1503 - 1542)

	1. AND WILT THOU LEAVE ME THUS?

		And wilt thou leave me thus?
		Say nay, say nay, for shame,
		To save thee from the blame
		Of all my grief and grame;
		And wilt thou leave me thus?
		Say nay, say nay!
		
		And wilt thou leave me thus,
		That hath loved thee so long
		In wealth and woe among?
		And is thy heart so strong
		As for to leave me thus?
		Say nay, say nay!
		
		And wilt thou leave me thus,
		That hath given thee my heart
		Never for to depart,
		Nother for pain nor smart;
		And wilt thou leave me thus?
		Say nay, say nay!
		
		And wilt thou leave me thus
		And have no more pity
		Of him that loveth thee?
		Hélas, thy cruelty!
		And wilt thou leave me thus?
		Say nay, say nay!


	2. FORGET NOT YET

		Forget not yet the tried intent 
		Of such a truth as I have meant; 
		My great travail so gladly spent, 
		           Forget not yet. 
		
		Forget not yet when first began 
		The weary life ye know, since whan 
		The suit, the service, none tell can; 
		           Forget not yet. 
		
		Forget not yet the great assays, 
		The cruel wrong, the scornful ways; 
		The painful patience in denays, 
		           Forget not yet. 
		
		Forget not yet, forget not this, 
		How long ago hath been and is 
		The mind that never meant amiss; 
		           Forget not yet. 
		
		Forget not then thine own approved, 
		The which so long hath thee so loved, 
		Whose steadfast faith yet never moved; 
		           Forget not this. 


	3. I FIND NO PEACE

		I find no peace, and all my war is done.
		I fear and hope. I burn and freeze like ice.
		I fly above the wind, yet can I not arise;
		And nought I have, and all the world I seize on.
		That loseth nor locketh holdeth me in prison
		And holdeth me not--yet can I scape no wise--
		Nor letteth me live nor die at my device,
		And yet of death it giveth me occasion.
		Without eyen I see, and without tongue I plain.
		I desire to perish, and yet I ask health.
		I love another, and thus I hate myself.
		I feed me in sorrow and laugh in all my pain;
		Likewise displeaseth me both life and death,
		And my delight is causer of this strife.


	4. THE LONG LOVE

		The longë love that in my thought doth harbour 
		And in mine hert doth keep his residence, 
		Into my face presseth with bold pretence 
		And therein campeth, spreading his banner. 
		She that me learneth to love and suffer 
		And will that my trust and lustës negligence 
		Be rayned by reason, shame, and reverence, 
		With his hardiness taketh displeasure. 
		Wherewithall unto the hert’s forest he fleeth, 
		Leaving his enterprise with pain and cry, 
		And there him hideth and not appeareth. 
		What may I do when my master feareth 
		But in the field with him to live and die? 
		For good is the life ending faithfully. 


	5. THEY FLEE FROM ME

		They flee from me that sometime did me seek
		With naked foot, stalking in my chamber.
		I have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,
		That now are wild and do not remember
		That sometime they put themself in danger
		To take bread at my hand; and now they range,
		Busily seeking with a continual change.
		
		Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise
		Twenty times better; but once in special,
		In thin array after a pleasant guise,
		When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall,
		And she me caught in her arms long and small;
		Therewithall sweetly did me kiss
		And softly said, ‘Dear heart, how like you this?’
		
		It was no dream: I lay broad waking.
		But all is turned thorough my gentleness
		Into a strange fashion of forsaking;
		And I have leave to go of her goodness,
		And she also, to use newfangleness.
		But since that I so kindly am served
		I would fain know what she hath deserved.


*** W. B. Yeats (1865 - 1939)

	1. A COAT

		I made my song a coat 
		Covered with embroideries 
		Out of old mythologies 
		From heel to throat; 
		But the fools caught it, 
		Wore it in the world’s eyes 
		As though they’d wrought it. 
		Song, let them take it
		For there’s more enterprise 
		In walking naked.


	2. A DIALOGUE OF SELF AND SOUL

		I
		
		_My Soul:_
		
		I summon to the winding ancient stair;
		Set all your mind upon the steep ascent,
		Upon the broken, crumbling battlement,
		Upon the breathless starlit air,
		Upon the star that marks the hidden pole;
		Fix every wandering thought upon
		That quarter where all thought is done:
		Who can distinguish darkness from the soul?
		
		
		_My Self:_
		
		The consecrated blade upon my knees
		Is Sato’s ancient blade, still as it was,
		Still razor-keen, still like a looking-glass
		Unspotted by the centuries;
		That flowering, silken, old embroidery, torn
		From some court-lady’s dress and round
		The wooden scabbard bound and wound,
		Can, tattered, still protect, faded adorn.
		
		
		_My Soul:_
		
		Why should the imagination of a man
		Long past his prime remember things that are
		Emblematical of love and war?
		Think of ancestral night that can,
		If but imagination scorn the earth
		And intellect its wandering
		To this and that and t’other thing,
		Deliver from the crime of death and birth.
		
		
		_My Self:_
		
		Montashigi, third of his family, fashioned it
		Five hundred years ago, about it lie
		Flowers from I know not what embroidery--
		Heart’s purple--and all these I set
		For emblems of the day against the tower
		Emblematical of the night,
		And claim as by a soldier’s right
		A charter to commit the crime once more.
		
		
		_My Soul:_
		
		Such fullness in that quarter overflows
		And falls into the basin of the mind
		That man is stricken deaf and dumb and blind,
		For intellect no longer knows
		Is from the Ought, or Knower from the Known--
		That is to say, ascends to Heaven;
		Only the dead can be forgiven;
		But when I think of that my tongue’s a stone.
		
		
		II
		
		_My Self:_
		
		A living man is blind and drinks his drop.
		What matter if the ditches are impure?
		What matter if I live it all once more?
		Endure that toil of growing up;
		The ignominy of boyhood; the distress
		Of boyhood changing into man;
		The unfinished man and his pain
		Brought face to face with his own clumsiness;
		
		The finished man among his enemies?--
		How in the name of Heaven can he escape
		That defiling and disfigured shape
		The mirror of malicious eyes
		Casts upon his eyes until at last
		He thinks that shape must be his shape?
		And what’s the good of an escape
		If honour find him in the wintry blast?
		
		I am content to live it all again
		And yet again, if it be life to pitch
		Into the frog-spawn of a blind man’s ditch,
		A blind man battering blind men;
		Or into that most fecund ditch of all,
		The folly that man does
		Or must suffer, if he woos
		A proud woman not kindred of his soul.
		
		I am content to follow to its source
		Every event in action or in thought;
		Measure the lot; forgive myself the lot!
		When such as I cast out remorse
		So great a sweetness flows into the breast
		We must laugh and we must sing,
		We are blest by everything,
		Everything we look upon is blest.


	3. A DREAM OF DEATH

		I dreamed that one had died in a strange place
		Near no accustomed hand;
		And they had nailed the boards above her face
		The peasants of that land
		Wondering to lay her in that solitude
		And raised above her mound
		A cross they had made out of two bits of wood
		And planted cypress round;
		And left her to the indifferent stars above
		Until I carved these words:
		_She was more beautiful than thy first love
		But now lies under boards_.


	4. A DRINKING SONG

		Wine comes in at the mouth
		And love comes in at the eye;
		That’s all we shall know for truth
		Before we grow old and die.
		I lift the glass to my mouth,
		I look at you, and I sigh.


	5. A MEDITATION IN TIME OF WAR

		For one throb of the artery, 
		While on that old grey stone I sat 
		Under the old wind-broken tree, 
		I knew that One is animate 
		Mankind inanimate phantasy.


	6. A PRAYER FOR MY DAUGHTER

		Once more the storm is howling, and half hid   
		Under this cradle-hood and coverlid   
		My child sleeps on. There is no obstacle   
		But Gregory’s Wood and one bare hill   
		Whereby the haystack and roof-levelling wind,   
		Bred on the Atlantic, can be stayed;   
		And for an hour I have walked and prayed   
		Because of the great gloom that is in my mind. 
		
		I have walked and prayed for this young child an hour, 
		And heard the sea-wind scream upon the tower, 
		And under the arches of the bridge, and scream 
		In the elms above the flooded stream; 
		Imagining in excited reverie 
		That the future years had come   
		Dancing to a frenzied drum   
		Out of the murderous innocence of the sea. 
		
		May she be granted beauty, and yet not   
		Beauty to make a stranger’s eye distraught,   
		Or hers before a looking-glass; for such,   
		Being made beautiful overmuch,   
		Consider beauty a sufficient end,   
		Lose natural kindness, and maybe   
		The heart-revealing intimacy   
		That chooses right, and never find a friend. 
		
		Helen, being chosen, found life flat and dull,   
		And later had much trouble from a fool;   
		While that great Queen that rose out of the spray,   
		Being fatherless, could have her way,   
		Yet chose a bandy-leggèd smith for man.   
		It’s certain that fine women eat   
		A crazy salad with their meat   
		Whereby the Horn of Plenty is undone. 
		
		In courtesy I’d have her chiefly learned;   
		Hearts are not had as a gift, but hearts are earned   
		By those that are not entirely beautiful.   
		Yet many, that have played the fool 
		For beauty’s very self, has charm made wise;   
		And many a poor man that has roved,   
		Loved and thought himself beloved,   
		From a glad kindness cannot take his eyes. 
		
		May she become a flourishing hidden tree,   
		That all her thoughts may like the linnet be,   
		And have no business but dispensing round   
		Their magnanimities of sound;   
		Nor but in merriment begin a chase,   
		Nor but in merriment a quarrel.   
		Oh, may she live like some green laurel   
		Rooted in one dear perpetual place. 
		
		My mind, because the minds that I have loved,   
		The sort of beauty that I have approved,   
		Prosper but little, has dried up of late,   
		Yet knows that to be choked with hate   
		May well be of all evil chances chief.   
		If there’s no hatred in a mind   
		Assault and battery of the wind   
		Can never tear the linnet from the leaf. 
		
		An intellectual hatred is the worst,   
		So let her think opinions are accursed.   
		Have I not seen the loveliest woman born 
		Out of the mouth of Plenty’s horn,   
		Because of her opinionated mind   
		Barter that horn and every good   
		By quiet natures understood   
		For an old bellows full of angry wind? 
		
		Considering that, all hatred driven hence,   
		The soul recovers radical innocence   
		And learns at last that it is self-delighting, 
		Self-appeasing, self-affrighting,   
		And that its own sweet will is heaven’s will,   
		She can, though every face should scowl   
		And every windy quarter howl   
		Or every bellows burst, be happy still. 
		
		And may her bridegroom bring her to a house   
		Where all’s accustomed, ceremonious;   
		For arrogance and hatred are the wares   
		Peddled in the thoroughfares.   
		How but in custom and in ceremony   
		Are innocence and beauty born?   
		Ceremony’s a name for the rich horn,   
		And custom for the spreading laurel tree.


	7. ADAM’S CURSE

		We sat together at one summer’s end,
		That beautiful mild woman, your close friend,   
		And you and I, and talked of poetry.
		I said, ‘A line will take us hours maybe;
		Yet if it does not seem a moment’s thought,   
		Our stitching and unstitching has been naught.   
		Better go down upon your marrow-bones   
		And scrub a kitchen pavement, or break stones   
		Like an old pauper, in all kinds of weather;   
		For to articulate sweet sounds together
		Is to work harder than all these, and yet   
		Be thought an idler by the noisy set
		Of bankers, schoolmasters, and clergymen   
		The martyrs call the world.’
		
		                            And thereupon
		That beautiful mild woman for whose sake   
		There’s many a one shall find out all heartache   
		On finding that her voice is sweet and low   
		Replied, ‘To be born woman is to know--
		Although they do not talk of it at school--
		That we must labour to be beautiful.’
		I said, ‘It’s certain there is no fine thing   
		Since Adam’s fall but needs much labouring.
		There have been lovers who thought love should be   
		So much compounded of high courtesy   
		That they would sigh and quote with learned looks   
		Precedents out of beautiful old books;   
		Yet now it seems an idle trade enough.’
		
		We sat grown quiet at the name of love;   
		We saw the last embers of daylight die,   
		And in the trembling blue-green of the sky   
		A moon, worn as if it had been a shell   
		Washed by time’s waters as they rose and fell   
		About the stars and broke in days and years.
		
		I had a thought for no one’s but your ears:   
		That you were beautiful, and that I strove   
		To love you in the old high way of love;
		That it had all seemed happy, and yet we’d grown   
		As weary-hearted as that hollow moon.


	8. AMONG SCHOOL CHILDREN

		I
		
		I walk through the long schoolroom questioning;
		A kind old nun in a white hood replies;
		The children learn to cipher and to sing,
		To study reading-books and history,
		To cut and sew, be neat in everything
		In the best modern way--the children’s eyes
		In momentary wonder stare upon
		A sixty-year-old smiling public man.
		
		
		II
		
		I dream of a Ledaean body, bent
		Above a sinking fire, a tale that she
		Told of a harsh reproof, or trivial event
		That changed some childish day to tragedy--
		Told, and it seemed that our two natures blent
		Into a sphere from youthful sympathy,
		Or else, to alter Plato’s parable,
		Into the yolk and white of the one shell.
		
		
		III
		
		And thinking of that fit of grief or rage
		I look upon one child or t’other there
		And wonder if she stood so at that age--
		For even daughters of the swan can share
		Something of every paddler’s heritage--
		And had that colour upon cheek or hair,
		And thereupon my heart is driven wild:
		She stands before me as a living child.
		
		
		IV
		
		Her present image floats into the mind--
		Did Quattrocento finger fashion it
		Hollow of cheek as though it drank the wind
		And took a mess of shadows for its meat?
		And I though never of Ledaean kind
		Had pretty plumage once--enough of that,
		Better to smile on all that smile, and show
		There is a comfortable kind of old scarecrow.
		
		
		V
		
		What youthful mother, a shape upon her lap
		Honey of generation had betrayed,
		And that must sleep, shriek, struggle to escape
		As recollection or the drug decide,
		Would think her son, did she but see that shape
		With sixty or more winters on its head,
		A compensation for the pang of his birth,
		Or the uncertainty of his setting forth?
		
		
		VI
		
		Plato thought nature but a spume that plays
		Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;
		Solider Aristotle played the taws
		Upon the bottom of a king of kings;
		World-famous golden-thighed Pythagoras
		Fingered upon a fiddle-stick or strings
		What a star sang and careless Muses heard:
		Old clothes upon old sticks to scare a bird.
		
		
		VII
		
		Both nuns and mothers worship images,
		But those the candles light are not as those
		That animate a mother’s reveries,
		But keep a marble or a bronze repose.
		And yet they too break hearts--O Presences
		That passion, piety or affection knows,
		And that all heavenly glory symbolise--
		O self-born mockers of man’s enterprise;
		
		
		VIII
		
		Labour is blossoming or dancing where
		The body is not bruised to pleasure soul,
		Nor beauty born out of its own despair,
		Nor blear-eyed wisdom out of midnight oil.
		O chestnut tree, great rooted blossomer,
		Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?
		O body swayed to music, O brightening glance,
		How can we know the dancer from the dance?


	9. AN IRISH AIRMAN FORESEES HIS DEATH

		I know that I shall meet my fate 
		Somewhere among the clouds above; 
		Those that I fight I do not hate, 
		Those that I guard I do not love; 
		My country is Kiltartan Cross, 
		My countrymen Kiltartan’s poor, 
		No likely end could bring them loss 
		Or leave them happier than before. 
		Nor law, nor duty bade me fight, 
		Nor public men, nor cheering crowds, 
		A lonely impulse of delight 
		Drove to this tumult in the clouds; 
		I balanced all, brought all to mind, 
		The years to come seemed waste of breath, 
		A waste of breath the years behind 
		In balance with this life, this death.


	10. BEGGAR TO BEGGAR CRIED

		“Time to put off the world and go somewhere
		And find my health again in the sea air,”
		Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
		“And make my soul before my pate is bare;
		
		“And get a comfortable wife and house
		To rid me of the devil in my shoes,
		Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
		“And the worse devil that is between my thighs.
		
		“And though I’d marry with a comely lass,
		She need not be too comely--let it pass,”
		Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
		“But there’s a devil in a looking-glass.”
		
		“Nor should she be too rich, because the rich
		Are driven by wealth as beggars by the itch,”
		Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
		“And cannot have a humorous happy speech.”
		
		“And there I’ll grow respected at my ease,
		And hear amid the garden’s nightly peace,”
		Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
		“The wind-blown clamor of the barnacle-geese.”


	11. BYZANTIUM

		The unpurged images of day recede;
		The Emperor’s drunken soldiery are abed;
		Night resonance recedes, night-walkers’ song
		After great cathedral gong;
		A starlit or a moonlit dome disdains
		All that man is,
		All mere complexities,
		The fury and the mire of human veins.
		
		Before me floats an image, man or shade,
		Shade more than man, more image than a shade;
		For Hades’ bobbin bound in mummy-cloth
		May unwind the winding path;
		A mouth that has no moisture and no breath
		Breathless mouths may summon;
		I hail the superhuman;
		I call it death-in-life and life-in-death.
		
		Miracle, bird or golden handiwork,
		More miracle than bird or handiwork,
		Planted on the starlit golden bough,
		Can like the cocks of Hades crow,
		Or, by the moon embittered, scorn aloud
		In glory of changeless metal
		Common bird or petal
		And all complexities of mire or blood.
		
		At midnight on the Emperor’s pavement flit
		Flames that no faggot feeds, nor steel has lit,
		Nor storm disturbs, flames begotten of flame,
		Where blood-begotten spirits come
		And all complexities of fury leave,
		Dying into a dance,
		An agony of trance,
		An agony of flame that cannot singe a sleeve.
		
		Astraddle on the dolphin’s mire and blood,
		Spirit after spirit! The smithies break the flood,
		The golden smithies of the Emperor!
		Marbles of the dancing floor
		Break bitter furies of complexity,
		Those images that yet
		Fresh images beget,
		That dolphin-torn, that gong-tormented sea.


	12. COLD HEAVEN

		Suddenly I saw the cold and rook-delighting heaven
		That seemed as though ice burned and was but the more ice,
		And thereupon imagination and heart were driven
		So wild that every casual thought of that and this
		Vanished, and left but memories, that should be out of season
		With the hot blood of youth, of love crossed long ago;
		And I took all the blame out of all sense and reason,
		Until I cried and trembled and rocked to and fro,
		Riddled with light. Ah! when the ghost begins to quicken,
		Confusion of the death-bed over, is it sent
		Out naked on the roads, as the books say, and stricken
		By the injustice of the skies for punishment?


	13. CRAZY JANE TALKS WITH THE BISHOP

		I met the Bishop on the road
		And much said he and I.
		‘Those breasts are flat and fallen now
		Those veins must soon be dry;
		Live in a heavenly mansion,
		Not in some foul sty.’
		
		‘Fair and foul are near of kin,
		And fair needs foul,’ I cried.
		‘My friends are gone, but that’s a truth
		Nor grave nor bed denied,
		Learned in bodily lowliness
		And in the heart’s pride.
		
		‘A woman can be proud and stiff
		When on love intent;
		But Love has pitched his mansion in
		The place of excrement;
		For nothing can be sole or whole
		That has not been rent.’


	14. DOWN BY THE SALLEY GARDENS

		Down by the salley gardens
		   my love and I did meet;
		She passed the salley gardens
		   with little snow-white feet.
		She bid me take love easy,
		   as the leaves grow on the tree;
		But I, being young and foolish,
		   with her would not agree.
		
		In a field by the river
		   my love and I did stand,
		And on my leaning shoulder
		   she laid her snow-white hand.
		She bid me take life easy,
		   as the grass grows on the weirs;
		But I was young and foolish,
		   and now am full of tears.


	15. EASTER, 1916

		I have met them at close of day   
		Coming with vivid faces
		From counter or desk among grey   
		Eighteenth-century houses.
		I have passed with a nod of the head   
		Or polite meaningless words,   
		Or have lingered awhile and said   
		Polite meaningless words,
		And thought before I had done   
		Of a mocking tale or a gibe   
		To please a companion
		Around the fire at the club,   
		Being certain that they and I   
		But lived where motley is worn:   
		All changed, changed utterly:   
		A terrible beauty is born.
		
		That woman’s days were spent   
		In ignorant good-will,
		Her nights in argument
		Until her voice grew shrill.
		What voice more sweet than hers   
		When, young and beautiful,   
		She rode to harriers?
		This man had kept a school   
		And rode our wingèd horse;   
		This other his helper and friend   
		Was coming into his force;
		He might have won fame in the end,   
		So sensitive his nature seemed,   
		So daring and sweet his thought.
		This other man I had dreamed
		A drunken, vainglorious lout.
		He had done most bitter wrong
		To some who are near my heart,   
		Yet I number him in the song;
		He, too, has resigned his part
		In the casual comedy;
		He, too, has been changed in his turn,   
		Transformed utterly:
		A terrible beauty is born.
		
		Hearts with one purpose alone   
		Through summer and winter seem   
		Enchanted to a stone
		To trouble the living stream.
		The horse that comes from the road,   
		The rider, the birds that range   
		From cloud to tumbling cloud,   
		Minute by minute they change;   
		A shadow of cloud on the stream   
		Changes minute by minute;   
		A horse-hoof slides on the brim,   
		And a horse plashes within it;   
		The long-legged moor-hens dive,   
		And hens to moor-cocks call;   
		Minute by minute they live:   
		The stone’s in the midst of all.
		
		Too long a sacrifice
		Can make a stone of the heart.   
		O when may it suffice?
		That is Heaven’s part, our part   
		To murmur name upon name,   
		As a mother names her child   
		When sleep at last has come   
		On limbs that had run wild.   
		What is it but nightfall?
		No, no, not night but death;   
		Was it needless death after all?
		For England may keep faith   
		For all that is done and said.   
		We know their dream; enough
		To know they dreamed and are dead;   
		And what if excess of love   
		Bewildered them till they died?   
		I write it out in a verse--
		MacDonagh and MacBride   
		And Connolly and Pearse
		Now and in time to be,
		Wherever green is worn,
		Are changed, changed utterly:   
		A terrible beauty is born.


	16. EGO DOMINUS TUUS

		_Hic_
		
		On the grey sand beside the shallow stream,
		Under your old wind-beaten tower, where still
		A lamp burns on beside the open book
		That Michael Robartes left, you walk in the moon;
		And though you have passed the best of life still trace,
		Enthralled by the unconquerable delusion,
		Magical shapes.
		
		
		_Ille_
		
		By the help of an image
		I call to my own opposite, summon all
		That I have handled least, least looked upon.
		
		
		_Hic_
		
		And I would find myself and not an image.
		
		
		_Ille_
		
		That is our modern hope, and by its light
		We have lit upon the gentle, sensitive mind
		And lost the old nonchalance of the hand.
		Whether we have chosen chisel, pen or brush
		We are but critics, or but half create,
		Timid, entangled, empty and abashed,
		Lacking the countenance of our friends.
		
		
		_Hic_
		
		And yet
		The chief imagination of christendom
		Dante Alighieri so utterly found himself
		That he has made that hollow face of his
		More plain to the mind’s eye than any face
		But that of Christ.
		
		
		_Ille_
		
		And did he find himself,
		Or was the hunger that had made it hollow
		A hunger for the apple on the bough
		Most out of reach? and is that spectral image
		The man that Lapo and that Guido knew?
		I think he fashioned from his opposite
		An image that might have been a stony face,
		Staring upon a bedouin’s horse-hair roof
		From doored and windowed cliff, or half upturned
		Among the coarse grass and the camel dung.
		He set his chisel to the hardest stone.
		Being mocked by Guido for his lecherous life,
		Derided and deriding, driven out
		To climb that stair and eat that bitter bread,
		He found the unpersuadable justice, he found
		The most exalted lady loved by a man.
		
		
		_Hic_
		
		Yet surely there are men who have made their art
		Out of no tragic war--lovers of life,
		Impulsive men that look for happiness
		And sing when they have found it.
		
		
		_Ille_
		
		No, not sing;
		For those that love the world serve it in action,
		Grow rich, popular and full of influence,
		And should they paint or write still it is action:
		The struggle of the fly in marmalade.
		The rhetorician would deceive his neighbors,
		The sentimentalist himself; while art
		Is but a vision of reality.
		What portion in the world can the artist have
		Who has awakened from the common dream,
		But dissipation and despair?
		
		
		_Hic_
		
		And yet
		No one denies to Keats love of the world.
		Remember his deliberate happiness.
		
		
		_Ille_
		
		His art is happy, but who knows his mind?
		I see a school-boy when I think of him
		With face and nose pressed to a sweet-shop window.
		For certainly he sank into his grave
		His senses and his heart unsatisfied,
		And made--being poor, ailing and ignorant,
		Shut out from all the luxury of the world,
		The ill-bred son of a livery-stable keeper-
		Luxuriant song.
		
		
		_Hic_
		
		Why should you leave the lamp
		Burning alone beside an open book,
		And trace these characters upon the sands?
		A style is found by sedentary toil
		And by the imitation of great masters.
		
		
		_Ille_
		
		Because I seek an image not a book,
		Those men that in their writings are most wise
		Own nothing but their blind, stupified hearts.
		I call to the mysterious one who yet
		Shall walk the wet sands by the edge of the stream
		And look most like me, being indeed my double,
		And prove if all imaginable things
		The most unlike, being my anti-self,
		And standing by these characters disclose
		All that I seek: and whisper it as though
		He were afraid the birds, who cry aloud
		Their momentary cries before it is dawn,
		Would carry it away to blasphemous men.


	17. EPHEMERA

		“Your eyes that once were never weary of mine
		“Are bowed in sorrow under pendulous lids
		“Because our love is waning.”
		
		                             And then she:
		“Although our love is waning let us stand
		“By the lone border of the lake once more
		“Together in that hour of gentleness
		“When the poor tired child Passion falls asleep:
		“How far away the stars seem and how far
		“Is our first kiss and ah how old my heart!”
		
		Pensive they paced along the faded leaves
		While slowly he whose hand held hers replied:
		“Passion has often worn our wandering hearts.”
		
		The woods were round them and the yellow leaves
		Fell like faint meteors in the gloom and once
		A rabbit old and lame limped down the path;
		Autumn was over him: and now they stood
		On the lone border of the lake once more:
		Turning he saw that she had thrust dead leaves
		Gathered in silence dewy as her eyes
		In bosom and hair.
		
		                  “Ah do not mourn“ he said
		“That we are tired for other loves await us;
		“Hate on and love through unrepining hours.
		“Before us lies eternity; our souls
		“Are love and a continual farewell.”


	18. HE AND SHE

		As the moon sidles up
		Must she sidle up,
		As trips the scared moon
		Away must she trip,
		“His light had struck me blind
		Dared I stop.”
		She sings as the moon sings
		“I am I, am I;
		The greater grows my light
		The further that I Aly.”
		All creation shivers
		With that sweet cry.


	19. HE WISHES HIS BELOVED WERE DEAD

		Were you but lying cold and dead, 
		And lights were paling out of the West, 
		You would come hither, and bend your head, 
		And I would lay my head on your breast; 
		And you would murmur tender words, 
		Forgiving me, because you were dead: 
		Nor would you rise and hasten away, 
		Though you have the will of wild birds, 
		But know your hair was bound and wound 
		About the stars and moon and sun: 
		O would, beloved, that you lay 
		Under the dock-leaves in the ground, 
		While lights were paling one by one.


	20. IN MEMORY

		The light of evening, Lissadell,
		Great windows open to the south,
		Two girls in silk kimonos, both
		Beautiful, one a gazelle.
		But a raving autumn shears
		Blossom from the summer’s wreath;
		The older is condemned to death,
		Pardoned, drags out lonely years
		Conspiring among the ignorant.
		I know not what the younger dreams--
		Some vague Utopia--and she seems,
		When withered old and skeleton-gaunt,
		An image of such politics.
		Many a time I think to seek
		One or the other out and speak
		Of that old Georgian mansion, mix
		Pictures of the mind, recall
		That table and the talk of youth,
		Two girls in silk kimonos, both
		Beautiful, one a gazelle.
		
		Dear shadows, now you know it all,
		All the folly of a fight
		With a common wrong or right.
		The innocent and the beautiful
		Have no enemy but time;
		Arise and bid me strike a match
		And strike another till time catch;
		Should the conflagration climb,
		Run till all the sages know.
		We the great gazebo built,
		They convicted us of guilt;
		Bid me strike a match and blow.


	21. LAPIS LAZULI

		I have heard that hysterical women say
		They are sick of the palette and fiddle-bow,
		Of poets that are always gay,
		For everybody knows or else should know
		That if nothing drastic is done
		Aeroplane and Zeppelin will come out,
		Pitch like King Billy bomb-balls in
		Until the town lie beaten flat.
		
		All perform their tragic play,
		There struts Hamlet, there is Lear,
		That’s Ophelia, that Cordelia;
		Yet they, should the last scene be there,
		The great stage curtain about to drop,
		If worthy their prominent part in the play,
		Do not break up their lines to weep.
		They know that Hamlet and Lear are gay;
		Gaiety transfiguring all that dread.
		All men have aimed at, found and lost;
		Black out; Heaven blazing into the head:
		Tragedy wrought to its uttermost.
		Though Hamlet rambles and Lear rages,
		And all the drop scenes drop at once
		Upon a hundred thousand stages,
		It cannot grow by an inch or an ounce.
		
		On their own feet they came, or on shipboard,
		Camel-back, horse-back, ass-back, mule-back,
		Old civilisations put to the sword.
		Then they and their wisdom went to rack:
		No handiwork of Callimachus
		Who handled marble as if it were bronze,
		Made draperies that seemed to rise
		When sea-wind swept the corner, stands;
		His long lamp chimney shaped like the stem
		Of a slender palm, stood but a day;
		All things fall and are built again
		And those that build them again are gay.
		
		Two Chinamen, behind them a third,
		Are carved in Lapis Lazuli,
		Over them flies a long-legged bird
		A symbol of longevity;
		The third, doubtless a serving-man,
		Carries a musical instrument.
		
		Every discolouration of the stone,
		Every accidental crack or dent
		Seems a water-course or an avalanche,
		Or lofty slope where it still snows
		Though doubtless plum or cherry-branch
		Sweetens the little half-way house
		Those Chinamen climb towards, and I
		Delight to imagine them seated there;
		There, on the mountain and the sky,
		On all the tragic scene they stare.
		One asks for mournful melodies;
		Accomplished fingers begin to play.
		Their eyes mid many wrinkles, their eyes,
		Their ancient, glittering eyes, are gay.


	22. LEDA AND THE SWAN

		A sudden blow: the great wings beating still
		Above the staggering girl, her thighs caressed
		By the dark webs, her nape caught in his bill,
		He holds her helpless breast upon his breast.
		
		How can those terrified vague fingers push
		The feathered glory from her loosening thighs?
		And how can body, laid in that white rush,
		But feel the strange heart beating where it lies?
		
		A shudder in the loins engenders there
		The broken wall, the burning roof and tower
		And Agamemnon dead.
		                                  Being so caught up,
		So mastered by the brute blood of the air,
		Did she put on his knowledge with his power
		Before the indifferent beak could let her drop?


	23. LOVE AND THE BIRD

		The moments passed as at a play,
		I had the wisdom love can bring,
		I had my share of mother wit;
		And yet for all that I could say,
		And though I had her praise for it,
		And she seemed happy as a king,
		Love’s moon was withering away.
		Believing every word I said
		I praised her body and her mind,
		Till pride had made her eyes grow bright,
		And pleasure made her cheeks grow red,
		And vanity her footfall light;
		Yet we, for all that praise, could find
		Nothing but darkness overhead.
		I sat as silent as a stone
		And knew, though she’d not said a word,
		That even the best of love must die,
		And had been savagely undone
		Were it not that love, upon the cry
		Of a most ridiculous little bird,
		Threw up in the air his marvellous moon.


	24. MERU

		Civilization is hooped together, brought
		Under a rule, under the semblance of peace
		By manifold illusion; but man’s life is thought
		And he, despite his terror, cannot cease
		Ravening through century after century,
		Ravening, raging and uprooting that he may come
		Into the desolation of reality:
		Egypt and Greece, good-bye, and good-bye, Rome.
		
		Hermits upon Mount Meru or Everest
		Caverned in night under the drifted snow,
		Or where that snow and winter’s dreadful blast
		Beat down upon their naked bodies, know
		That day brings round the night, that before dawn
		His glory and his monuments are gone.


	25. NEVER GIVE ALL THE HEART

		Never give all the heart, for love 
		Will hardly seem worth thinking of 
		To passionate women if it seem 
		Certain, and they never dream 
		That it fades out from kiss to kiss; 
		For everything that’s lovely is 
		But a brief, dreamy, kind delight. 
		O never give the heart outright, 
		For they, for all smooth lips can say, 
		Have given their hearts up to the play. 
		And who could play it well enough
		If deaf and dumb and blind with love? 
		He that made this knows all the cost, 
		For he gave all his heart and lost.


	26. NO SECOND TROY

		Why should I blame her that she filled my days 
		With misery, or that she would of late 
		Have taught to ignorant men most violent ways, 
		Or hurled the little streets upon the great, 
		Had they but courage equal to desire? 
		What could have made her peaceful with a mind 
		That nobleness made simple as a fire, 
		With beauty like a tightened bow, a kind 
		That is not natural in an age like this, 
		Being high and solitary and most stern? 
		Why, what could she have done, being what she is? 
		Was there another Troy for her to burn?


	27. RECONCILIATION

		Some may have blamed you that you took away 
		The verses that could move them on the day 
		When, the ears being deafened, the sight of the eyes blind 
		With lightning, you went from me, and I could find 
		Nothing to make a song about but kings, 
		Helmets, and swords, and half-forgotten things 
		That were like memories of you--but now 
		We’ll out, for the world lives as long ago; 
		And while we’re in our laughing, weeping fit, 
		Hurl helmets, crowns, and swords into the pit. 
		But, dear, cling close to me; since you were gone, 
		My barren thoughts have chilled me to the bone.


	28. RUNNING TO PARADISE

		As I came over Windy Gap
		They threw a halfpenny into my cap,
		For I am running to Paradise.
		And all that I need do is to wish,
		And somebody puts his hand in the dish
		To throw me a bit of salted fish,
		And there the king is but as the beggar.
		
		My brother Mourteen is worn out
		With skelping his big brawling lout,
		While I am running to Paradise.
		A poor life, do what he can,
		And though he keep a dog and a gun,
		A serving maid and a serving man,
		And there the king is but as the beggar.
		
		Poor men have grown to be rich men,
		And rich men grown to be poor again,
		While I am running to Paradise.
		And many a darling wit’s grown dull
		That tossed a bare heel when at school;
		Now it has filled an old sock full,
		And there the king is but as the beggar.
		
		The wind is old and still at play
		While I must hurry upon my way
		For I am running to Paradise.
		Yet never have I lit on a friend
		To take my fancy like the wind
		That nobody can buy or bind-
		And there the king is but as the beggar.


	29. SAILING TO BYZANTIUM

		I
		
		That is no country for old men. The young
		In one another’s arms, birds in the trees,
		--Those dying generations--at their song,
		The salmon-falls, the mackerel-crowded seas,
		Fish, flesh, or fowl, commend all summer long
		Whatever is begotten, born, and dies.
		Caught in that sensual music all neglect
		Monuments of unageing intellect.
		
		
		II
		
		An aged man is but a paltry thing,
		A tattered coat upon a stick, unless
		Soul clap its hands and sing, and louder sing
		For every tatter in its mortal dress,
		Nor is there singing school but studying
		Monuments of its own magnificence;
		And therefore I have sailed the seas and come
		To the holy city of Byzantium.
		
		
		III
		
		O sages standing in God’s holy fire
		As in the gold mosaic of a wall,
		Come from the holy fire, perne in a gyre,
		And be the singing-masters of my soul.
		Consume my heart away; sick with desire
		And fastened to a dying animal
		It knows not what it is; and gather me
		Into the artifice of eternity.
		
		
		IV
		
		Once out of nature I shall never take
		My bodily form from any natural thing,
		But such a form as Grecian goldsmiths make
		Of hammered gold and gold enamelling
		To keep a drowsy Emperor awake;
		Or set upon a golden bough to sing
		To lords and ladies of Byzantium
		Of what is past, or passing, or to come.


	30. SEPTEMBER 1913

		What need you, being come to sense, 
		But fumble in a greasy till 
		And add the halfpence to the pence 
		And prayer to shivering prayer, until 
		You have dried the marrow from the bone; 
		For men were born to pray and save: 
		Romantic Ireland’s dead and gone, 
		It’s with O’Leary in the grave. 
		
		Yet they were of a different kind, 
		The names that stilled your childish play, 
		They have gone about the world like wind, 
		But little time had they to pray 
		For whom the hangman’s rope was spun, 
		And what, God help us, could they save? 
		Romantic Ireland’s dead and gone, 
		It’s with O’Leary in the grave. 
		
		Was it for this the wild geese spread 
		The grey wing upon every tide; 
		For this that all that blood was shed, 
		For this Edward Fitzgerald died, 
		And Robert Emmet and Wolfe Tone, 
		All that delirium of the brave? 
		Romantic Ireland’s dead and gone, 
		It’s with O’Leary in the grave. 
		
		Yet could we turn the years again, 
		And call those exiles as they were
		In all their loneliness and pain, 
		You’d cry, ‘Some woman’s yellow hair 
		Has maddened every mother’s son’: 
		They weighed so lightly what they gave. 
		But let them be, they’re dead and gone, 
		They’re with O’Leary in the grave.


	31. SIXTEEN DEAD MEN

		O but we talked at large before 
		The sixteen men were shot, 
		But who can talk of give and take, 
		What should be and what not 
		While those dead men are loitering there 
		To stir the boiling pot? 
		
		You say that we should still the land 
		Till Germany’s overcome; 
		But who is there to argue that 
		Now Pearse is deaf and dumb? 
		And is their logic to outweigh 
		MacDonagh’s bony thumb? 
		
		How could you dream they’d listen 
		That have an ear alone 
		For those new comrades they have found, 
		Lord Edward and Wolfe Tone, 
		Or meddle with our give and take 
		That converse bone to bone?


	32. THE BALLAD OF FATHER GILLIGAN

		The old priest Peter Gilligan
		Was weary night and day;
		For half his flock were in their beds
		Or under green sods lay.
		
		Once while he nodded on a chair
		At the moth-hour of eve
		Another poor man sent for him
		And he began to grieve.
		
		“I have no rest nor joy nor peace
		“For people die and die“;
		And after cried he “God forgive!
		“My body spake not I!”
		
		He knelt and leaning on the chair
		He prayed and fell asleep;
		And the moth-hour went from the fields
		And stars began to peep.
		
		They slowly into millions grew
		And leaves shook in the wind;
		And God covered the world with shade
		And whispered to mankind.
		
		Upon the time of sparrow chirp
		When the moths came once more
		The old priest Peter Gilligan
		Stood upright on the floor.
		
		“Mavrone mavrone! the man has died
		“While I slept on the chair“;
		He roused his horse out of its sleep
		And rode with little care.
		
		He rode now as he never rode
		By rocky lane and fen;
		The sick man’s wife opened the door:
		“Father! you come again!”
		
		“And is the poor man dead?“ he cried
		“He died an hour ago”
		The old priest Peter Gilligan
		In grief swayed to and fro.
		
		“When you were gone he turned and died
		“As merry as a bird.”
		The old priest Peter Gilligan
		He knelt him at that word.
		
		“He who hath made the night of stars
		“For souls who tire and bleed
		“Sent one of His great angels down
		“To help me in my need.
		
		“He who is wrapped in purple robes
		“With planets in His care
		“Had pity on the least of things
		“Asleep upon a chair.”


	33. THE BALLAD OF FATHER O’HART

		Good Father John O’Hart
		In penal days rode out
		To a shoneen who had free lands
		And his own snipe and trout.
		
		In trust took he John’s lands;
		Sleiveens were all his race;
		And he gave them as dowers to his daughters
		And they married beyond their place.
		
		But Father John went up
		And Father John went down;
		And he wore small holes in his shoes
		And he wore large holes in his gown.
		
		All loved him only the shoneen
		Whom the devils have by the hair
		From the wives and the cats and the children
		To the birds in the white of the air.
		
		The birds for he opened their cages
		As he went up and down;
		And he said with a smile “Have peace now“;
		And he went his way with a frown.
		
		But if when any one died
		Came keeners hoarser than rooks
		He bade them give over their keening;
		For he was a man of books.
		
		And these were the works of John
		When weeping score by score
		People came into Coloony;
		For he’d died at ninety-four.
		
		There was no human keening;
		The birds from Knocknarea
		And the world round Knocknashee
		Came keening in that day.
		
		The young birds and old birds
		Came flying heavy and sad;
		Keening in from Tiraragh
		Keening from Ballinafad;
		
		Keening from Inishmurray
		Nor stayed for bite or sup;
		This way were all reproved
		Who dig old customs up.


	34. THE BALLAD OF THE FOXHUNTER

		“Now lay me in a cushioned chair
		“And carry me you four
		“With cushions here and cushions there
		“To see the world once more.
		
		“And some one from the stables bring
		“My Dermot dear and brown
		“And lead him gently in a ring
		“And gently up and down.
		
		“Now leave the chair upon the grass:
		“Bring hound and huntsman here
		“And I on this strange road will pass
		“Filled full of ancient cheer.”
		
		His eyelids droop his head falls low
		His old eyes cloud with dreams;
		The sun upon all things that grow
		Pours round in sleepy streams.
		
		Brown Dermot treads upon the lawn
		And to the armchair goes
		And now the old man’s dreams are gone
		He smooths the long brown nose.
		
		And now moves many a pleasant tongue
		Upon his wasted hands
		For leading aged hounds and young
		The huntsman near him stands.
		
		“My huntsman Rody blow the horn
		“And make the hills reply.”
		The huntsman loosens on the morn
		A gay and wandering cry.
		
		A fire is in the old man’s eyes
		His fingers move and sway
		And when the wandering music dies
		They hear him feebly say
		
		“My huntsman Rody blow the horn
		“And make the hills reply.”
		“I cannot blow upon my horn
		“I can but weep and sigh.”
		
		The servants round his cushioned place
		Are with new sorrow wrung;
		And hounds are gazing on his face
		Both aged hounds and young.
		
		One blind hound only lies apart
		On the sun-smitten grass;
		He holds deep commune with his heart:
		The moments pass and pass;
		
		The blind hound with a mournful din
		Lifts slow his wintry head;
		The servants bear the body in;
		The hounds wail for the dead.


	35. THE CAP AND BELLS

		The jester walked in the garden:
		The garden had fallen still;
		He bade his soul rise upward
		And stand on her window-sill.
		
		It rose in a straight blue garment,
		When owls began to call:
		It had grown wise-tongued by thinking
		Of a quiet and light footfall;
		
		But the young queen would not listen;
		She rose in her pale night-gown;
		She drew in the heavy casement
		And pushed the latches down.
		
		He bade his heart go to her,
		When the owls called out no more;
		In a red and quivering garment
		It sang to her through the door.
		
		It had grown sweet-tongued by dreaming
		Of a flutter of flower-like hair;
		But she took up her fan from the table
		And waved it off on the air.
		
		‘I have cap and bells,’ he pondered,
		‘I will send them to her and die’;
		And when the morning whitened
		He left them where she went by.
		
		She laid them upon her bosom,
		Under a cloud of her hair,
		And her red lips sang them a love-song
		Till stars grew out of the air.
		
		She opened her door and her window,
		And the heart and the soul came through,
		To her right hand came the red one,
		To her left hand came the blue.
		
		They set up a noise like crickets,
		A chattering wise and sweet,
		And her hair was a folded flower
		And the quiet of love in her feet.


	36. THE CIRCUS ANIMAL’S DESERTION

		I
		
		I sought a theme and sought for it in vain,
		I sought it daily for six weeks or so.
		Maybe at last being but a broken man
		I must be satisfied with my heart, although
		Winter and summer till old age began
		My circus animals were all on show,
		Those stilted boys, that burnished chariot,
		Lion and woman and the Lord knows what.
		
		
		II
		
		What can I but enumerate old themes,
		First that sea-rider Oisin led by the nose
		Through three enchanted islands, allegorical dreams,
		Vain gaiety, vain battle, vain repose,
		Themes of the embittered heart, or so it seems,
		That might adorn old songs or courtly shows;
		But what cared I that set him on to ride,
		I, starved for the bosom of his fairy bride.
		
		And then a counter-truth filled out its play,
		‘The Countess Cathleen’ was the name I gave it,
		She, pity-crazed, had given her soul away
		But masterful Heaven had intervened to save it.
		I thought my dear must her own soul destroy
		So did fanaticism and hate enslave it,
		And this brought forth a dream and soon enough
		This dream itself had all my thought and love.
		
		And when the Fool and Blind Man stole the bread
		Cuchulain fought the ungovernable sea;
		Heart mysteries there, and yet when all is said
		It was the dream itself enchanted me:
		Character isolated by a deed
		To engross the present and dominate memory.
		Players and painted stage took all my love
		And not those things that they were emblems of.
		
		
		III
		
		Those masterful images because complete
		Grew in pure mind but out of what began?
		A mound of refuse or the sweepings of a street,
		Old kettles, old bottles, and a broken can,
		Old iron, old bones, old rags, that raving slut
		Who keeps the till. Now that my ladder’s gone
		I must lie down where all the ladders start
		In the foul rag and bone shop of the heart.


	37. THE DAWN

		I would be as ignorant as the dawn,
		That has looked down
		On that old queen measuring a town
		With the pin of a brooch,
		Or on the withered men that saw
		From their pedantic Babylon
		The careless planets in their courses,
		The stars fade out where the moon comes,
		And took their tablets and made sums--
		Yet did but look, rocking the glittering coach
		Above the cloudy shoulders of the horses.
		I would be--for no knowledge is worth a straw--
		Ignorant and wanton as the dawn.


	38. THE DEATH OF CUCHULAIN

		A man came slowly from the setting sun
		To Forgail’s daughter Emer in her dun
		And found her dyeing cloth with subtle care
		And said casting aside his draggled hair:
		“I am Aleel the swineherd whom you bid
		“Go dwell upon the sea cliffs vapour hid;
		“But now my years of watching are no more.”
		
		Then Emer cast the web upon the floor
		And stretching out her arms red with the dye
		Parted her lips with a loud sudden cry.
		
		Looking on her Aleel the swineherd said:
		“Not any god alive nor mortal dead
		“Has slain so mighty armies so great kings
		“Nor won the gold that now Cuchulain brings.”
		
		“Why do you tremble thus from feet to crown?”
		
		Aleel the swineherd wept and cast him down
		Upon the web-heaped floor and thus his word:
		“With him is one sweet-throated like a bird.”
		
		“Who bade you tell these things?“ and then she cried
		To those about “Beat him with thongs of hide
		“And drive him from the door.”
		
		                               And thus it was:
		And where her son Finmole on the smooth grass
		Was driving cattle came she with swift feet
		And called out to him “Son it is not meet
		“That you stay idling here with flocks and herds.”
		
		“I have long waited mother for those words:
		“But wherefore now?”
		
		                       “There is a man to die;
		“You have the heaviest arm under the sky.”
		
		“My father dwells among the sea-worn bands
		“And breaks the ridge of battle with his hands.”
		
		“Nay you are taller than Cuchulain son.”
		
		“He is the mightiest man in ship or dun.”
		
		“Nay he is old and sad with many wars
		“And weary of the crash of battle cars.”
		
		“I only ask what way my journey lies
		“For God who made you bitter made you wise.”
		
		“The Red Branch kings a tireless banquet keep
		“Where the sun falls into the Western deep.
		“Go there and dwell on the green forest rim;
		“But tell alone your name and house to him
		“Whose blade compels and bid them send you one
		“Who has a like vow from their triple dun.”
		
		Between the lavish shelter of a wood
		And the gray tide the Red Branch multitude
		Feasted and with them old Cuchulain dwelt
		And his young dear one close beside him knelt
		And gazed upon the wisdom of his eyes
		More mournful than the depth of starry skies
		And pondered on the wonder of his days;
		And all around the harp-string told his praise
		And Concobar the Red Branch king of kings
		With his own fingers touched the brazen strings.
		At last Cuchulain spake “A young man strays
		“Driving the deer along the woody ways.
		“I often hear him singing to and fro
		“I often hear the sweet sound of his bow
		“Seek out what man he is.”
		
		                           One went and came.
		“He bade me let all know he gives his name
		“At the sword point and bade me bring him one
		“Who had a like vow from our triple dun.”
		
		“I only of the Red Branch hosted now”
		Cuchulain cried “have made and keep that vow.”
		
		After short fighting in the leafy shade
		He spake to the young man “Is there no maid
		“Who loves you no white arms to wrap you round
		“Or do you long for the dim sleepy ground
		“That you come here to meet this ancient sword?”
		
		“The dooms of men are in God’s hidden hoard.”
		
		“Your head a while seemed like a woman’s head
		“That I loved once.”
		
		                     Again the fighting sped
		But now the war rage in Cuchulain woke
		And through the other’s shield his long blade broke
		And pierced him.
		
		               “Speak before your breath is done.”
		“I am Finmole mighty Cuchulain’s son.”
		
		“I put you from your pain. I can no more.”
		
		While day its burden on to evening bore
		With head bowed on his knees Cuchulain stayed;
		Then Concobar sent that sweet-throated maid
		And she to win him his gray hair caressed;
		In vain her arms in vain her soft white breast.
		Then Concobar the subtlest of all men
		Ranking his Druids round him ten by ten
		Spake thus “Cuchulain will dwell there and brood
		“For three days more in dreadful quietude
		“And then arise and raving slay us all.
		“Go cast on him delusions magical
		“That he might fight the waves of the loud sea.”
		And ten by ten under a quicken tree
		The Druids chaunted swaying in their hands
		Tall wands of alder and white quicken wands.
		
		In three days’ time Cuchulain with a moan
		Stood up and came to the long sands alone:
		For four days warred he with the bitter tide;
		And the waves flowed above him and he died.


	39. THE EVERLASTING VOICES

		O sweet everlasting Voices, be still; 
		Go to the guards of the heavenly fold 
		And bid them wander obeying your will, 
		Flame under flame, till Time be no more; 
		Have you not heard that our hearts are old, 
		That you call in birds, in wind on the hill, 
		In shaken boughs, in tide on the shore? 
		O sweet everlasting Voices, be still.


	40. THE FALLEN MAJESTY

		Although crowds gathered once if she but showed her face
		And even old men’s eyes grew dim, this hand alone,
		Like some last courtier at a gipsy camping place
		Babbling of fallen majesty, records what’s gone.
		The lineaments, the heart that laughter has made sweet,
		These, these remain, but I record what’s gone. A crowd
		Will gather and not know that through its very street
		Once walked a thing that seemed, as it were, a burning
		cloud.


	41. THE FALLING OF THE LEAVES

		Autumn is over the long leaves that love us
		And over the mice in the barley sheaves;
		Yellow the leaves of the rowan above us
		And yellow the wet wild-strawberry leaves.
		
		The hour of the waning of love has beset us
		And weary and worn are our sad souls now;
		Let us part ere the season of passion forget us
		With a kiss and a tear on thy drooping brow.


	42. THE FASCINATION OF WHAT’S DIFFICULT

		The fascination of what’s difficult
		Has dried the sap out of my veins, and rent
		Spontaneous joy and natural content
		Out of my heart. There’s something ails our colt
		That must, as if it had not holy blood
		Nor on Olympus leaped from cloud to cloud,
		Shiver under the lash, strain, sweat and jolt
		As though it dragged road metal. My curse on plays
		That have to be set up in fifty ways,
		On the day’s war with every knave and dolt,
		Theatre business, management of men.
		I swear before the dawn comes round again
		I’ll find the stable and pull out the bolt.


	43. THE FISH

		Although you hide in the ebb and flow 
		Of the pale tide when the moon has set, 
		The people of coming days will know 
		About the casting out of my net, 
		And how you have leaped times out of mind 
		Over the little silver cords, 
		And think that you were hard and unkind, 
		And blame you with many bitter words.


	44. THE FISHERMAN

		Although I can see him still-- 
		The freckled man who goes 
		To a gray place on a hill 
		In gray Connemara clothes 
		At dawn to cast his flies-- 
		It’s long since I began 
		To call up to the eyes 
		This wise and simple man. 
		All day I’d looked in the face 
		What I had hoped it would be 
		To write for my own race 
		And the reality: 
		The living men that I hate, 
		The dead man that I loved, 
		The craven man in his seat, 
		The insolent unreproved-- 
		And no knave brought to book 
		Who has won a drunken cheer-- 
		The witty man and his joke 
		Aimed at the commonest ear, 
		The clever man who cries 
		The catch cries of the clown, 
		The beating down of the wise 
		And great Art beaten down. 
		
		Maybe a twelve-month since 
		Suddenly I began, 
		In scorn of this audience, 
		Imagining a man, 
		And his sun-freckled face 
		And gray Connemara cloth, 
		Climbing up to a place 
		Where stone is dark with froth, 
		And the down turn of his wrist 
		When the flies drop in the stream-- 
		A man who does not exist, 
		A man who is but a dream; 
		And cried, “Before I am old 
		I shall have written him one 
		Poem maybe as cold 
		And passionate as the dawn.”


	45. THE FOUR AGES OF MAN

		He with body waged a fight,
		But body won; it walks upright.
		
		Then he struggled with the heart,
		Innocence and peace depart.
		
		Then he struggled with the mind;
		His proud heart he left behind.
		
		Now his wars on God begin,
		At stroke of midnight God shall win.


	46. THE GREY ROCK

		_Here’s an old story I’ve remade,
		Imagining ’twould better please
		Your ears than stories now in fashion.
		Though you may think I waste my breath
		Pretending that there can be passion
		That has more life in it than death,
		Though at the bottling of your wine
		The bow-legged Goban had no say;
		The moral’s yours because it’s mine._
		
		When cups went round at close of day
		Is not that how good stories run?
		Somewhere within some hollow hill,
		If books speak truth, in Slievenamon
		But let that be--the gods were still
		And sleepy having had their meal:
		And smoky torches made a glare
		On painted pillars, on a deal
		Of old stringed instruments, hung there
		By the ancient holy hands that brought them
		From murmuring Murias; on cups
		Old Goban hammered them and wrought them,
		And put his pattern round their tops
		To hold the wine they buy of him.
		But from the juice that made them wise
		All those had lifted up the dim
		Imaginations of their eyes;
		For one that was like woman made
		Before their sleepy eyelids ran,
		And trembling with her passion said:
		“Come out and dig for a dead man,
		Who’s burrowing somewhere in the ground;
		And mock him to his face, and then
		Hollo him on with horse and hound,
		For he is the worst of all dead men.”
		
		_We should be dared and terror struck
		If we but saw in dreams that room
		And those fierce eyes, and curse our luck
		That emptied all our days to come.
		I knew a woman none could please
		Because she dreamed when but a child
		Of men and women made like these;
		And after, when her blood ran wild,
		Had ravelled her own story out,
		And said, “In two or in three years
		I need must marry some poor lout,”
		And having said it burst in tears.
		Since, tavern comrades, you have died
		Maybe your images have stood,
		Mere bone and muscle thrown aside,
		Before that roomful or as good.
		“Twas wine or women or some curse
		But never made a boorer song
		That you might have a heavier purse;
		Nor gave loud service to a cause
		That you might have a troop of friends.
		You kept the Muses’ sterner laws
		And unrepenting faced your ends;
		And therefore earned the right
		and yet
		Dowson and Tohnson most I praise
		To troop with those the world’s forgot,
		And copy their proud steady gaze._
		
		“The Danish troop was driven put
		Between the dawn and dusk,” she said;
		“Although the event was long in doubt,
		Although the King of Ireland’s dead
		And half his kings, before sundown
		All was accomplished.”
		
		When this day
		Murrough the King of Ireland’s son
		Foot after foot was giving way,
		He and his best troops back to back
		Had perished there, but the Danes ran
		Stricken with panic from the attack,
		The shouting of an unseen man;
		And, being thankful, Murrough found,
		Led by a foot-sole dipped in blood
		That had made prints upon the ground,
		Where by old thorn trees that man stood;
		And though when he gazed here and there
		He had but gazed on thorn trees, spoke:
		“Who is the friend that seems but air
		And yet could give so fine a stroke?’
		Thereon a young man met his eye
		Who said, ‘Because she held me in
		Her love and would not have me die,
		Rock-nurtured Aoife took a pin
		And pushing it into my shirt
		Promised that for a pin’s sake
		No man should see to do me hurt;
		But there it’s gone; I will not take
		The fortune that had been my shame,
		Seeing, King’s son, what wounds you have.
		’Twas roundly spoke, but when night came
		He had betrayed me to his grave,
		For he and the King’s son were dead.
		I’d promised him two hundred years,
		And when, for all I’d done or said
		And these immortal eyes shed tears
		He claimed his country’s need was most.
		I’d saved his life, yet for the sake
		Of a new friend he has turned a ghost.
		What does he care if my heart break?
		I call for spade and horse and hound
		That we may harry him.” Thereon
		She cast herself upon the ground
		And rent her clothes and made her moan:
		“Why are they faithless when their might
		Is from the holy shades that rove
		The grey rock and the windy light?
		Why should the faithfulest heart most love
		The bitter sweetness of false faces?
		Why must the lasting love what passes?
		Why are the gods by men betrayed!”
		But thereon every god stood up
		With a slow smile and without sound,
		And, stretching forth his arm and cup
		To where she moaned upon the ground,
		Suddenly drenched her to the skin;
		And she with Goban’s wine adrip,
		No more remembering what had been,
		Stared at the gods with laughing lip.
		
		_I have kept my faith, though faith was tried,
		To that rock-born, rock-wandering foot;
		And the world’s altered since you died,
		And I am in no good repute
		With the loud host before the sea,
		That think sword strokes were better meant
		Than lover’s music:--let that be,
		So that the wandering foot’s content._


	47. THE HAWK

		Call down the hawk from the air-
		Let him be hooded or caged
		Till the yellow eye has grown mild.
		For larder and spit are bare,
		The old cook enraged,
		The scullion gone wild.
		I will not be clapped in a hood,
		Nor a cage, nor alight upon wrist,
		Now I have learnt to be proud
		Hovering over the wood
		In the broken mist
		Or tumbling cloud.
		What tumbling cloud did you cleave,
		Yellow-eyed hawk of the mind,
		Last evening, that I, who had sat
		Dumbfounded before a knave
		Should give to my friend
		A pretence of wit?


	48. THE INDIAN UPON GOD

		I passed along the water’s edge below the humid trees
		My spirit rocked in evening light the rushes round my knees
		My spirit rocked in sleep and sighs; and saw the moorfowl pace
		All dripping on a grassy slope and saw them cease to chase
		Each other round in circles and heard the eldest speak:
		_Who holds the world between His bill and made us strong or weak
		Is an undying moorfowl and He lives beyond the sky.
		The rains are from His dripping wing the moonbeams from His eye._
		I passed a little further on and heard a lotus talk:
		_Who made the world and ruleth it He hangeth on a stalk_
		_For I am in His image made and all this tinkling tide
		Is but a sliding drop of rain between His petals wide._
		A little way within the gloom a roebuck raised his eyes
		Brimful of starlight and he said: _The Stamper of the Skies
		He is a gentle roebuck; for how else I pray could He
		Conceive a thing so sad and soft a gentle thing like me?_
		I passed a little further on and heard a peacock say:
		_Who made the grass and made the worms and made my feathers gay
		He is a monstrous peacock and He waveth all the night
		His languid tail above us lit with myriad spots of light._


	49. THE LAKE ISLE OF INNISFREE

		I will arise and go now and go to Innisfree
		And a small cabin build there of clay and wattles made:
		Nine bean rows will I have there a hive for the honey bee
		And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
		
		And I shall have some peace there for peace comes dropping slow
		Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings;
		There midnight’s all a glimmer and noon a purple glow
		And evening full of the linnet’s wings.
		
		I will arise and go now for always night and day
		I hear lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
		While I stand on the roadway or on the pavements gray
		I hear it in the deep heart’s core.


	50. THE LAMENTATION OF THE OLD PENSIONER

		I had a chair at every hearth
		When no one turned to see
		With “Look at that old fellow there
		“And who may he be?”
		And therefore do I wander now
		And the fret lies on me.
		
		The road-side trees keep murmuring
		Ah wherefore murmur ye
		As in the old days long gone by
		Green oak and poplar tree?
		The well-known faces are all gone
		And the fret lies on me.


	51. THE MADNESS OF KING GOLL

		I sat on cushioned otter skin:
		My word was law from Ith to Emen
		And shook at Invar Amargin
		The hearts of the world-troubling seamen.
		And drove tumult and war away
		From girl and boy and man and beast;
		The fields grew fatter day by day
		The wild fowl of the air increased;
		And every ancient Ollave said
		While he bent down his fading head
		“He drives away the Northern cold.”
		_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
		 the beech leaves old._
		
		I sat and mused and drank sweet wine;
		A herdsman came from inland valleys
		Crying the pirates drove his swine
		To fill their dark-beaked hollow galleys.
		I called my battle-breaking men
		And my loud brazen battle-cars
		From rolling vale and rivery glen
		And under the blinking of the stars
		Fell on the pirates by the deep
		And hurled them in the gulph of sleep:
		These hands won many a torque of gold.
		_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
		 the beech leaves old._
		
		But slowly as I shouting slew
		And trampled in the bubbling mire
		In my most secret spirit grew
		A whirling and a wandering fire:
		I stood: keen stars above me shone
		Around me shone keen eyes of men:
		I laughed aloud and hurried on
		By rocky shore and rushy fen;
		I laughed because birds fluttered by
		And starlight gleamed and clouds flew high
		And rushes waved and waters rolled.
		_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
		 the beech leaves old._
		
		And now I wander in the woods
		When summer gluts the golden bees
		Or in autumnal solitudes
		Arise the leopard-coloured trees;
		Or when along the wintry strands
		The cormorants shiver on their rocks;
		I wander on and wave my hands
		And sing and shake my heavy locks.
		The gray wolf knows me; by one ear
		I lead along the woodland deer;
		The hares run by me growing bold.
		_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
		 the beech leaves old._
		
		I came upon a little town
		That slumbered in the harvest moon
		And passed a-tiptoe up and down
		Murmuring to a fitful tune
		How I have followed night and day
		A tramping of tremendous feet
		And saw where this old tympan lay
		Deserted on a doorway seat
		And bore it to the woods with me;
		Of some unhuman misery
		Our married voiced wildly trolled.
		_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
		 the beech leaves old._
		
		I sang how when day’s toil is done
		Orchil shakes out her long dark hair
		That hides away the dying sun
		And sheds faint odours through the air:
		When my hand passed from wire to wire
		It quenched with sound like falling dew
		The whirling and the wandering fire;
		But lift a mournful ulalu
		For the kind wires are torn and still
		And I must wander wood and hill
		Through summer’s heat and winter’s cold.
		_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
		 the beech leaves old._


	52. THE MAGI

		Now as at all times I can see in the mind’s eye,
		In their stiff, painted clothes, the pale unsatisfied ones
		Appear and disappear in the blue depths of the sky
		With all their ancient faces like rain-beaten stones,
		And all their helms of silver hovering side by side,
		And all their eyes still fixed, hoping to find once more,
		Being by Calvary’s turbulence unsatisfied,
		The uncontrollable mystery on the bestial floor.


	53. THE MAN WHO DREAMED OF FAERYLAND

		He stood among a crowd at Drumahair;
		His heart hung all upon a silken dress
		And he had known at last some tenderness
		Before earth made of him her sleepy care;
		But when a man poured fish into a pile
		It seemed they raised their little silver heads
		And sang how day a Druid twilight sheds
		Upon a dim green well-beloved isle
		Where people love beside star-laden seas;
		How Time may never mar their faery vows
		Under the woven roofs of quicken boughs:
		The singing shook him out of his new ease.
		
		He wandered by the sands of Lisadill;
		His mind ran all on money cares and fears
		And he had known at last some prudent years
		Before they heaped his grave under the hill;
		But while he passed before a plashy place
		A lug-worm with its gray and muddy mouth
		Sang how somewhere to north or west or south
		There dwelt a gay exulting gentle race;
		And how beneath those three times blessed skies
		A Danaan fruitage makes a shower of moons
		And as it falls awakens leafy tunes:
		And at that singing he was no more wise.
		
		He mused beside the well of Scanavin
		He mused upon his mockers: without fail
		His sudden vengeance were a country tale
		Now that deep earth has drunk his body in;
		But one small knot-grass growing by the pool
		Told where ah little all-unneeded voice!
		Old Silence bids a lonely folk rejoice
		And chaplet their calm brows with leafage cool
		And how when fades the sea-strewn rose of day
		A gentle feeling wraps them like a fleece
		And all their trouble dies into its peace:
		The tale drove his fine angry mood away.
		
		He slept under the hill of Lugnagall;
		And might have known at last unhaunted sleep
		Under that cold and vapour-turbaned steep
		Now that old earth had taken man and all:
		Were not the worms that spired about his bones
		A-telling with their low and reedy cry
		Of how God leans His hands out of the sky
		To bless that isle with honey in His tones;
		That none may feel the power of squall and wave
		And no one any leaf-crowned dancer miss
		Until He burn up Nature with a kiss:
		The man has found no comfort in the grave.


	54. THE MEDITATION OF THE OLD FISHERMAN

		You waves though you dance by my feet like children at play
		Though you glow and you glance though you purr and you dart;
		In the Junes that were warmer than these are the waves were more gay
		_When I was a boy with never a crack in my heart_.
		
		The herring are not in the tides as they were of old;
		My sorrow! for many a creak gave the creel in the cart
		That carried the take to Sligo town to be sold
		_When I was a boy with never a crack in my heart_.
		
		And ah you proud maiden you are not so fair when his oar
		Is heard on the water as they were the proud and apart
		Who paced in the eve by the nets on the pebbly shore
		_When I was a boy with never a crack in my heart_.


	55. THE MOUNTAIN TOMB

		POUR wine and dance, if manhood still have pride,
		Bring roses, if the rose be yet in bloom;
		The cataract smokes on the mountainside.
		Our Father Rosicross is in his tomb.
		
		Pull down the blinds, bring fiddle and clarionet,
		Let there be no foot silent in the room,
		Nor mouth with kissing nor the wine unwet.
		Our Father Rosicross is in his tomb.
		
		In vain, in vain; the cataract still cries,
		The everlasting taper lights the gloom,
		All wisdom shut into its onyx eyes.
		Our Father Rosicross sleeps in his tomb.


	56. THE PHOENIX

		“What have I earned for all that work,” I said,
		“For all that I have done at my own charge?
		The daily spite of this unmannerly town
		Where who has served the most is most defamed,
		The reputation of his lifetime lost
		Between the night and morning. I might have lived--
		And you know well how great the longing has been--
		Where every day my footfall should have lit
		In the green shadow on Ferrara wall;
		Or climbed among the images of the past,
		The unperturbed and courtly images,
		Evening and morn, the steep street of Urbino
		To where the duchess and her people talked
		The stately midnight through until they stood
		In their great window looking at the dawn.
		I might have had no friend that could not mix
		Courtesy and passion into one, like those
		That saw the wicks grow yellow in the dawn.
		I might have used the one substantial right
		My trade allows--chosen my company,
		And chosen what scenery had pleased me best.”
		
		Theron my phoenix answered in reproof:
		“The drunkards, pilferers of public funds--
		All the dishonest crowd I had driven away.
		When my luck changed and they dared to meet my face,
		Crawled from obscurity and set upon me
		Those I had served and some that I had fed;
		Yet never have I, now nor any time,
		Complained of the people.”
		
		All I could reply
		Was: “You that have not lived in thought but deed
		Can have the purity of a natural force;
		But I, whose virtues are the definitions
		Of the analytic mind, can neither close
		The eye of the mind nor keep my tongue from speech.”
		
		And yet, because my heart leaped at her words,
		I was abashed, and now they come to mind
		After nine years, I sink my head abashed.


	57. THE REALISTS

		Hope that you may understand.
		What can books, of men that wive
		In a dragon-guarded land;
		Paintings of the dolphin drawn;
		Sea nymphs, in their pearly waggons,
		Do but wake the hope to live
		That had gone
		With the dragons.


	58. THE ROSE OF PEACE

		If Michael leader of God’s host
		When Heaven and Hell are met
		Looked down on you from Heaven’s door-post
		He would his deeds forget.
		
		Brooding no more upon God’s wars
		In his Divine homestead
		He would go weave out of the stars
		A chaplet for your head.
		
		And all folk seeing him bow down
		And white stars tell your praise
		Would come at last to God’s great town
		Led on by gentle ways;
		
		And God would bid His warfare cease.
		Saying all things were well;
		And softly make a rosy peace
		A peace of Heaven with Hell.


	59. THE ROSE OF THE WORLD

		Who dreamed that beauty passes like a dream?
		For these red lips with all their mournful pride
		Mournful that no new wonder may betide
		Troy passed away in one high funeral gleam
		And Usna’s children died.
		
		We and the labouring world are passing by:
		Amid men’s souls that waver and give place
		Like the pale waters in their wintry race
		Under the passing stars foam of the sky
		Lives on this lonely face.
		
		Bow down archangels in your dim abode:
		Before you were or any hearts to beat
		Weary and kind one lingered by His seat;
		He made the world to be a grassy road
		Before her wandering feet.


	60. THE ROSE TREE

		‘O words are lightly spoken,’ 
		Said Pearse to Connolly, 
		‘Maybe a breath of politic words 
		Has withered our Rose Tree; 
		Or maybe but a wind that blows 
		Across the bitter sea.’ 
		
		‘It needs to be but watered,’ 
		James Connolly replied, 
		‘To make the green come out again 
		And spread on every side, 
		And shake the blossom from the bud 
		To be the garden’s pride.’ 
		
		‘But where can we draw water,’ 
		Said Pearse to Connolly, 
		‘When all the wells are parched away? 
		O plain as plain can be 
		There’s nothing but our own red blood 
		Can make a right Rose Tree.’


	61. THE SAD SHEPHERD

		There was a man whom Sorrow named his friend
		And he of his high comrade Sorrow dreaming
		Went walking with slow steps along the gleaming
		And humming sands where windy surges wend:
		And he called loudly to the stars to bend
		From their pale thrones and comfort him but they
		Among themselves laugh on and sing alway:
		And then the man whom Sorrow named his friend
		Cried out _Dim sea hear my most piteous story!_
		The sea swept on and cried her old cry still
		Rolling along in dreams from hill to hill;
		He fled the persecution of her glory
		And in a far-off gentle valley stopping
		Cried all his story to the dewdrops glistening
		But naught they heard for they are always listening
		The dewdrops for the sound of their own dropping.
		And then the man whom Sorrow named his friend
		Sought once again the shore and found a shell
		And thought _I will my heavy story tell
		Till my own words re-echoing shall send
		Their sadness through a hollow pearly heart;
		And my own tale again for me shall sing
		And my own whispering words be comforting
		And lo! my ancient burden may depart_.
		Then he sang softly nigh the pearly rim;
		But the sad dweller by the sea-ways lone
		Changed all he sang to inarticulate moan
		Among her wildering whirls forgetting him.


	62. THE SECOND COMING

		Turning and turning in the widening gyre   
		The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
		Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
		Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
		The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere   
		The ceremony of innocence is drowned;
		The best lack all conviction, while the worst   
		Are full of passionate intensity.
		
		Surely some revelation is at hand;
		Surely the Second Coming is at hand.   
		The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out   
		When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi
		Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert   
		A shape with lion body and the head of a man,   
		A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,   
		Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it   
		Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.   
		The darkness drops again; but now I know   
		That twenty centuries of stony sleep
		Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,   
		And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,   
		Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?


	63. THE SONG OF THE HAPPY SHEPHERD

		The woods of Arcady are dead
		And over is their antique joy;
		Of old the world on dreaming fed;
		Gray Truth is now her painted toy;
		Yet still she turns her restless head:
		But O sick children of the world
		Of all the many changing things
		In dreary dancing past us whirled
		To the cracked tune that Chronos sings
		Words alone are certain good.
		Where are now the warring kings
		Word be-mockers?--By the Rood
		Where are now the warring kings?
		An idle word is now their glory
		By the stammering schoolboy said
		Reading some entangled story:
		The kings of the old time are fled
		The wandering earth herself may be
		Only a sudden flaming word
		In clanging space a moment heard
		Troubling the endless reverie.
		
		Then nowise worship dusty deeds
		Nor seek; for this is also sooth;
		To hunger fiercely after truth
		Lest all thy toiling only breeds
		New dreams new dreams; there is no truth
		Saving in thine own heart. Seek then
		No learning from the starry men
		Who follow with the optic glass
		The whirling ways of stars that pass--
		Seek then for this is also sooth
		No word of theirs--the cold star-bane
		Has cloven and rent their hearts in twain
		And dead is all their human truth.
		Go gather by the humming-sea
		Some twisted echo-harbouring shell
		And to its lips thy story tell
		And they thy comforters will be
		Rewarding in melodious guile
		Thy fretful words a little while
		Till they shall singing fade in ruth
		And die a pearly brotherhood;
		For words alone are certain good:
		Sing then for this is also sooth.
		
		I must be gone: there is a grave
		Where daffodil and lily wave
		And I would please the hapless faun
		Buried under the sleepy ground
		With mirthful songs before the dawn.
		His shouting days with mirth were crowned;
		And still I dream he treads the lawn
		Walking ghostly in the dew
		Pierced by my glad singing through
		My songs of old earth’s dreamy youth:
		But ah! she dreams not now; dream thou!
		For fair are poppies on the brow:
		Dream dream for this is also sooth.


	64. THE SONG OF WANDERING AENGUS

		I went out to the hazel wood,
		Because a fire was in my head,
		And cut and peeled a hazel wand,
		And hooked a berry to a thread;
		And when white moths were on the wing,
		And moth-like stars were flickering out,
		I dropped the berry in a stream
		And caught a little silver trout.
		
		When I had laid it on the floor
		I went to blow the fire a-flame,
		But something rustled on the floor,
		And someone called me by my name:
		It had become a glimmering girl
		With apple blossom in her hair
		Who called me by my name and ran
		And faded through the brightening air.
		
		Though I am old with wandering
		Through hollow lands and hilly lands,
		I will find out where she has gone,
		And kiss her lips and take her hands;
		And walk among long dappled grass,
		And pluck till time and times are done,
		The silver apples of the moon,
		The golden apples of the sun.


	65. THE SORROW OF LOVE

		The quarrel of the sparrows in the eaves
		The full round moon and the star-laden sky
		And the loud song of the ever-singing leaves
		Had hid away earth’s old and weary cry.
		
		And then you came with those red mournful lips
		And with you came the whole of the world’s tears
		And all the trouble of her labouring ships
		And all the trouble of her myriad years.
		
		And now the sparrows warring in the eaves
		The curd-pale moon the white stars in the sky
		And the loud chaunting of the unquiet leaves
		Are shaken with earth’s old and weary cry.


	66. THE STOLEN CHILD

		Where dips the rocky highland
		Of Sleuth Wood in the lake
		There lies a leafy island
		Where flapping herons wake
		The drowsy water rats;
		There we’ve hid our faery vats
		Full of berries
		And of reddest stolen cherries.
		_Come away O human child!
		To the waters and the wild
		With a faery hand in hand
		For the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand._
		
		Where the wave of moonlight glosses
		The dim gray sands with light
		Far off by furthest Rosses
		We foot it all the night
		Weaving olden dances
		Mingling hands and mingling glances
		Till the moon has taken flight;
		To and fro we leap
		And chase the frothy bubbles
		While the world is full of troubles
		And is anxious in its sleep.
		_Come away O human child!
		To the waters and the wild
		With a faery hand in hand
		For the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand._
		
		Where the wandering water gushes
		From the hills above Glen-Car
		In pools among the rushes
		That scarce could bathe a star
		We seek for slumbering trout
		And whispering in their ears
		Give them unquiet dreams;
		Leaning softly out
		From ferns that drop their tears
		Over the young streams
		_Come away O human child!
		To the waters and the wild
		With a faery hand in hand
		For the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand._
		
		Away with us he’s going
		The solemn-eyed:
		He’ll hear no more the lowing
		Of the calves on the warm hillside
		Or the kettle on the hob
		Sing peace into his breast
		Or see the brown mice bob
		Round and round the oatmeal-chest.
		_For he comes the human child
		To the waters and the wild
		With a faery hand in hand
		From a world more full of weeping than he can understand._


	67. THE THORN TREE

		She is foremost of those that I would hear praised.
		I have gone about the house, gone up and down
		As a man does who has published a new book
		Or a young girl dressed out in her new gown,
		And though I have turned the talk by hook or crook
		Until her praise should be the uppermost theme,
		A woman spoke of some new tale she had read;
		A man--so vaguely that he seemed to dream--
		Of some strange woman’s name that ran in his head.
		She is foremost of those that I would hear praised.
		I will talk no more of books or the long war,
		But walk by the dry thorn until I have found
		Some beggar sheltering from the wind, and there
		If there be rags enough he will know her name
		And be well pleased remembering it, for in the old days,
		Though she had young men’s praise and old men’s blame,
		Among the poor both old and young gave her praise.


	68. THE TOWER

		        I
		
		What shall I do with this absurdity--
		O heart, O troubled heart--this caricature,
		Decrepit age that has been tied to me
		As to a dog’s tail?
		                                 Never had I more
		Excited, passionate, fantastical
		Imagination, nor an ear and eye
		That more expected the impossible--
		No, not in boyhood when with rod and fly,
		Or the humbler worm, I climbed Ben Bulben’s back
		And had the livelong summer day to spend.
		It seems that I must bid the Muse go pack,
		Choose Plato and Plotinus for a friend
		Until imagination, ear and eye,
		Can be content with argument and deal
		In abstract things; or be derided by
		A sort of battered kettle at the heel.
		
		                                      II
		
		I pace upon the battlements and stare
		On the foundations of a house, or where
		Tree, like a sooty finger, starts from the earth;
		And send imagination forth
		Under the day’s declining beam, and call
		Images and memories
		From ruin or from ancient trees,
		For I would ask a question of them all.
		
		Beyond that ridge lived Mrs. French, and once
		When every silver candlestick or sconce
		Lit up the dark mahogany and the wine,
		A serving-man, that could divine
		That most respected lady’s every wish,
		Ran and with the garden shears
		Clipped an insolent farmer’s ears
		And brought them in a little covered dish.
		
		Some few remembered still when I was young
		A peasant girl commended by a song,
		Who’d lived somewhere upon that rocky place,
		And praised the colour of her face,
		And had the greater joy in praising her,
		Remembering that, if walked she there,
		Farmers jostled at the fair
		So great a glory did the song confer.
		
		And certain men, being maddened by those rhymes,
		Or else by toasting her a score of times,
		Rose from the table and declared it right
		To test their fancy by their sight;
		But they mistook the brightness of the moon
		For the prosaic light of day--
		Music had driven their wits astray--
		And one was drowned in the great bog of Cloone.
		
		Strange, but the man who made the song was blind; 
		Yet, now I have considered it, I find 
		That nothing strange; the tragedy began 
		With Homer that was a blind man,
		And Helen has all living hearts betrayed. 
		O may the moon and sunlight seem 
		One inextricable beam, 
		For if I triumph I must make men mad.
		
		And I myself created Hanrahan
		And drove him drunk or sober through the dawn
		From somewhere in the neighbouring cottages.
		Caught by an old man’s juggleries
		He stumbled, tumbled, fumbled to and fro
		And had but broken knees for hire
		And horrible splendour of desire;
		I thought it all out twenty years ago:
		
		Good fellows shuffled cards in an old bawn;
		And when that ancient ruffian’s turn was on
		He so bewitched the cards under his thumb
		That all but the one card became
		A pack of hounds and not a pack of cards,
		And that he changed into a hare.
		Hanrahan rose in frenzy there
		And followed up those baying creatures towards--
		
		O towards I have forgotten what--enough!
		I must recall a man that neither love
		Nor music nor an enemy’s clipped ear
		Could, he was so harried, cheer;
		A figure that has grown so fabulous
		There’s not a neighbour left to say
		When he finished his dog’s day:
		An ancient bankrupt master of this house.
		
		Before that ruin came, for centuries,
		Rough men-at-arms, cross-gartered to the knees
		Or shod in iron, climbed the narrow stairs,
		And certain men-at-arms there were
		Whose images, in the Great Memory stored,
		Come with loud cry and panting breast
		To break upon a sleeper’s rest
		While their great wooden dice beat on the board.
		
		As I would question all, come all who can;
		Come old, necessitous, half-mounted man;
		And bring beauty’s blind rambling celebrant;
		The red man the juggler sent
		Through God-forsaken meadows; Mrs. French,
		Gifted with so fine an ear;
		The man drowned in a bog’s mire,
		When mocking muses chose the country wench.
		
		Did all old men and women, rich and poor,
		Who trod upon these rocks or passed this door,
		Whether in public or in secret rage
		As I do now against old age?
		But I have found an answer in those eyes
		That are impatient to be gone;
		Go therefore; but leave Hanrahan,
		For I need all his mighty memories.
		
		Old lecher with a love on every wind,
		Bring up out of that deep considering mind
		All that you have discovered in the grave,
		For it is certain that you have
		Reckoned up every unforeknown, unseeing
		Plunge, lured by a softening eye,
		Or by a touch or a sigh,
		Into the labyrinth of another’s being;
		
		Does the imagination dwell the most 
		Upon a woman won or woman lost? 
		If on the lost, admit you turned aside 
		From a great labyrinth out of pride, 
		Cowardice, some silly over-subtle thought 
		Or anything called conscience once; 
		And that if memory recur, the sun’s 
		Under eclipse and the day blotted out.
		
		                          III
		
		It is time that I wrote my will;
		I choose upstanding men
		That climb the streams until
		The fountain leap, and at dawn
		Drop their cast at the side
		Of dripping stone; I declare
		They shall inherit my pride,
		The pride of people that were
		Bound neither to Cause nor to State,
		Neither to slaves that were spat on,
		Nor to the tyrants that spat,
		The people of Burke and of Grattan
		That gave, though free to refuse--
		Pride, like that of the morn,
		When the headlong light is loose,
		Or that of the fabulous horn,
		Or that of the sudden shower
		When all streams are dry,
		Or that of the hour
		When the swan must fix his eye
		Upon a fading gleam,
		Float out upon a long
		Last reach of glittering stream
		And there sing his last song.
		And I declare my faith:
		I mock Plotinus’ thought
		And cry in Plato’s teeth,
		Death and life were not
		Till man made up the whole,
		Made lock, stock and barrel
		Out of his bitter soul,
		Aye, sun and moon and star, all,
		And further add to that
		That, being dead, we rise,
		Dream and so create
		Translunar Paradise.
		I have prepared my peace
		With learned Italian things 
		And the proud stones of Greece, 
		Poet’s imaginings 
		And memories of love, 
		Memories of the words of women, 
		All those things whereof 
		Man makes a superhuman 
		Mirror-resembling dream.
		
		As at the loophole there
		The daws chatter and scream,
		And drop twigs layer upon layer.
		When they have mounted up,
		The mother bird will rest
		On their hollow top,
		And so warm her wild nest.
		
		I leave both faith and pride 
		To young upstanding men 
		Climbing the mountain side, 
		That under bursting dawn 
		They may drop a fly; 
		Being of that metal made 
		Till it was broken by 
		This sedentary trade.
		
		Now shall I make my soul,
		Compelling it to study
		In a learned school
		Till the wreck of body,
		Slow decay of blood,
		Testy delirium
		Or dull decrepitude,
		Or what worse evil come--
		The death of friends, or death
		Of every brilliant eye
		That made a catch in the breath-- 
		Seem but the clouds of the sky 
		When the horizon fades;
		Or a bird’s sleepy cry 
		Among the deepening shades.


	69. THE TWO TREES

		Beloved gaze in thine own heart
		The holy tree is growing there;
		From joy the holy branches start
		And all the trembling flowers they bear.
		The changing colours of its fruit
		Have dowered the stars with merry light;
		The surety of its hidden root
		Has planted quiet in the night;
		The shaking of its leafy head
		Has given the waves their melody
		And made my lips and music wed
		Murmuring a wizard song for thee.
		There through bewildered branches go
		Winged Loves borne on in gentle strife
		Tossing and tossing to and fro
		The flaming circle of our life.
		When looking on their shaken hair
		And dreaming how they dance and dart
		Thine eyes grow full of tender care:
		Beloved gaze in thine own heart.
		
		Gaze no more in the bitter glass
		The demons with their subtle guile
		Lift up before us when they pass
		Or only gaze a little while;
		For there a fatal image grows
		With broken boughs and blackened leaves
		And roots half hidden under snows
		Driven by a storm that ever grieves.
		For all things turn to barrenness
		In the dim glass the demons hold
		The glass of outer weariness
		Made when God slept in times of old.
		There through the broken branches go
		The ravens of unresting thought;
		Peering and flying to and fro
		To see men’s souls bartered and bought.
		When they are heard upon the wind
		And when they shake their wings; alas!
		Thy tender eyes grow all unkind:
		Gaze no more in the bitter glass.


	70. THE WHITE BIRDS

		I would that we were my beloved white birds on the foam of the sea!
		We tire of the flame of the meteor before it can fade and flee;
		And the flame of the blue star of twilight hung low
		 on the rim of the sky
		Has awaked in our hearts my beloved a sadness that may not die.
		
		A weariness comes from those dreamers dew dabbled the lily and rose;
		Ah dream not of them my beloved the flame of the meteor that goes
		Or the flame of the blue star that lingers hung low
		 in the fall of the dew:
		For I would we were changed to white birds on the
		 wandering foam: I and you!
		
		I am haunted by numberless islands and many a Danaan shore
		Where Time would surely forget us and Sorrow come near us no more;
		Soon far from the rose and the lily and fret of the flames would we be
		Were we only white birds my beloved buoyed out on the foam of the sea!


	71. THE WILD OLD WICKED MAN

		‘Because I am mad about women
		I am mad about the hills,’
		Said that wild old wicked man
		Who travels where God wills.
		‘Not to die on the straw at home,
		Those hands to close the eyes,
		That is all I ask, my dear,
		From the old man in the skies.
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
		
		‘Kind are all your words, my dear,
		Do not the rest withhold.
		Who can know the year, my dear,
		When an old man’s blood grows cold?
		I have what no young man can have
		Because he loves too much.
		Words I have that can pierce the heart,
		But what can he do but touch?’
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
		
		Then said she to that wild old man,
		his stout stick under his hand,
		‘Love to give or to withhold
		Is not at my command.
		I gave it all to an older man:
		That old man in the skies.
		Hands that are busy with His beads
		can never close those eyes.’
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
		
		‘Go your ways, O go your ways,
		I choose another mark,
		Girls down on the seashore
		Who understand the dark;
		Bawdy talk for the fishermen;
		A dance for the fisher-lads;
		When dark hangs upon the water
		They turn down their beds.
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
		
		‘A young man in the dark am I,
		But a wild old man in the light,
		That can make a cat laugh, or
		Can touch by mother wit
		Things hid in their marrow-bones
		From time long passed away,
		Hid from all those warty lads
		That by their bodies lay.
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
		
		‘All men live in suffering,
		I know as few can know,
		Whether they take the upper road
		Or stay content on the low,
		Rower bent in his row-boat
		Or weaver bent at his loom,
		Horseman erect upon horseback
		Or child hid in the womb.
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
		
		‘That some stream of lightning
		From the old man in the skies
		Can burn out that suffering
		No right-taught man denies.
		But a coarse old man am I,
		I choose the second-best,
		I forget it all a while
		Upon a woman’s breast.’
		                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._


	72. THE WILD SWANS AT COOLE

		The trees are in their autumn beauty,
		The woodland paths are dry,
		Under the October twilight the water
		Mirrors a still sky;
		Upon the brimming water among the stones
		Are nine-and-fifty swans.
		
		The nineteenth autumn has come upon me
		Since I first made my count;
		I saw, before I had well finished,
		All suddenly mount
		And scatter wheeling in great broken rings
		Upon their clamorous wings.
		
		I have looked upon those brilliant creatures,
		And now my heart is sore.
		All’s changed since I, hearing at twilight,
		The first time on this shore,
		The bell-beat of their wings above my head,
		Trod with a lighter tread.
		
		Unwearied still, lover by lover,
		They paddle in the cold
		Companionable streams or climb the air;
		Their hearts have not grown old;
		Passion or conquest, wander where they will,
		Attend upon them still.
		
		But now they drift on the still water,
		Mysterious, beautiful;
		Among what rushes will they build,
		By what lake’s edge or pool
		Delight men’s eyes when I awake some day
		To find they have flown away?


	73. THE WITCH

		Toil and grow rich,
		What’s that but to lie
		With a foul witch
		And after, drained dry,
		To be brought
		To the chamber where
		Lies one long sought
		With despair.


	74. THREE SONGS TO THE SAME TUNE

		I
		
		Grandfather sang it under the gallows
		“Hear gentlemen, ladies and all mankind
		Money is good and a girl might be better
		But good strong blows are delights to the mind.”
		There, standing on the cart,
		He sang it from his heart.
		
		Those fanatics all that we do would undo:
		Down the fanatic, down the clown;
		Down, down, hammer them down,
		Down to the tune of O’Donnell Abu.
		
		“A girl I had, but she followed another,
		Money I had and it went in the night,
		Strong drink I had, and it brought me to sorrow,
		But a good strong cause and blows are delight.”
		All there caught up the tune:
		“On, on my darling man.”
		
		Those fanatics all that we do would undo;
		Down the fanatic, down the clown;
		Down, down, hammer them down,
		Down to the tune of O’Donnell Abu.
		
		“Money is good and a girl might be better
		No matter what happens and who takes the fall,
		But a good strong cause”-the rope gave a jerk there
		No more sang he for his throat was too small;
		But he kicked before he died;
		He did it out of pride.
		
		Those fanatics all that we do would undo :
		Down the fanatic, down the clown;
		Down, down, hammer them down,
		Down to the tune of O’Donnell Abu.
		
		
		II
		
		Justify all those renowned generations;
		They left their bodies to fatten the wolves,
		They left their homesteads to fatten the foxes,
		Fled to far countries, or sheltered themselves
		In cavern, crevice, hole,
		Defending Ireland’s soul.
		
		“Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman,
		“They killed my goose and a cat.
		Drown, drown in the water butt,
		Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman.
		
		Justify all those renowned generations,
		Justify all that have sunk in their blood,
		Justify all that have died on the scaffold,
		Justify all that have fled or have stood
		Or have marched the night long
		Singing, singing a song.
		
		“Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman,
		“They killed my goose and a cat.
		Drown, drown in the water butt,
		Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman.
		
		Fail, and that history turns into rubbish,
		All that great past to a trouble of fools;
		Those that come after shall mock at O’Donnell,
		Mock at the memory of both O’Neills,
		Mock Emmet, mock Parnell:
		All the renown that fell.
		
		“Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman,
		“They killed my goose and a cat.
		Drown, drown in the water butt,
		Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman.
		
		
		III
		
		The soldier takes pride in saluting his Captain,
		The devotee proffers a knee to his Lord,
		Some back a mare thrown from a thoroughbred,
		Troy looked on Helen, it died and adored;
		Great nations, blossom above;
		A slave bows down to a slave.
		
		“Who’d care to dig ’em,” said the old, old man,
		“Those six feet marked in chalk;
		Much I talk, more I walk;
		Time I were buried,” said the old, old man.
		
		When nations are empty up there at the top,
		When order has weakened or faction is strong,
		Time for us all to pick out a good tune,
		Take to the roads and go marching along.
		March, march-How does it run-
		O any old words to a tune.
		
		“Who’d care to dig ’em,” said the old, old man,
		“Those six feet marked in chalk;
		Much I talk, more I walk,
		Time I were buried,” said the old, old man.
		
		Soldiers take pride in saluting their captain,
		Where are the captains that govern mankind?
		What happens a tree that has nothing within it?
		O marching wind, O a blast of the wind,
		Marching, marching along,
		March, march, lift up the song:
		
		“Who’d care to dig ’em,” said the old, old man,
		“Those six feet marked in chalk;
		Much I talk, more I walk;
		Time I were buried,” said the old, old man.


	75. TO A CHILD DANCING IN THE WIND

		Has no one said those daring
		Kind eyes should be more learned?
		I have found out how despairing
		The moths are when they are burned.
		But I am old and you are young,
		So we speak a different tongue.
		Oh you will take whatever’s offered
		And dream that all the world’s a friend,
		Suffer as your mother suffered,
		Be as broken in the end.
		I could have warned you--but you are young,
		And I speak a barbarous tongue.


	76. TO A CHILD DANCING UPON THE SHORE

		Dance there upon the shore;
		What need have you to care
		For wind or water’s roar?
		And tumble out your hair
		That the salt drops have wet;
		Being young you have not known
		The fool’s triumph, nor yet
		Love lost as soon as won.
		And he, the best warrior, dead
		And all the sheaves to bind!
		What need that you should dread
		The monstrous crying of wind?


	77. TO A FRIEND WHOSE WORK HAS COME TO NOTHING

		Now all the truth is out,
		Be secret and take defeat
		From any brazen throat,
		For how can you compete,
		Being honor bred, with one
		Who were it proved he lies
		Were neither shamed in his own
		Nor in his neighbors’ eyes;
		Bred to a harder thing
		Than Triumph, turn away
		And like a laughing string
		Whereon mad fingers play
		Amid a place of stone,
		Be secret and exult,
		Because of all things known
		That is most difficult.


	78. TO AN ISLE IN THE WATER

		Shy one, shy one, 
		Shy one of my heart, 
		She moves in the firelight 
		Pensively apart. 
		
		She carries in the dishes, 
		And lays them in a row. 
		To an isle in the water 
		With her would I go. 
		
		She carries in the candles, 
		And lights the curtained room, 
		Shy in the doorway 
		And shy in the gloom; 
		
		And shy as a rabbit, 
		Helpful and shy. 
		To an isle in the water 
		With her would I fly.


	79. TO IRELAND IN THE COMING TIMES

		Know, that I would accounted be 
		True brother of a company 
		That sang, to sweeten Ireland’s wrong, 
		Ballad and story, rann and song; 
		Nor be I any less of them, 
		Because the red-rose-bordered hem 
		Of her, whose history began 
		Before God made the angelic clan, 
		Trails all about the written page. 
		When Time began to rant and rage 
		The measure of her flying feet 
		Made Ireland’s heart begin to beat; 
		And Time bade all his candles flare 
		To light a measure here and there; 
		And may the thoughts of Ireland brood 
		Upon a measured quietude. 
		
		Nor may I less be counted one 
		With Davis, Mangan, Ferguson, 
		Because, to him who ponders well, 
		My rhymes more than their rhyming tell 
		Of things discovered in the deep, 
		Where only body’s laid asleep. 
		For the elemental creatures go 
		About my table to and fro, 
		That hurry from unmeasured mind 
		To rant and rage in flood and wind; 
		Yet he who treads in measured ways 
		May surely barter gaze for gaze. 
		Man ever journeys on with them 
		After the red-rose-bordered hem. 
		Ah, faeries, dancing under the moon, 
		A Druid land, a Druid tune! 
		
		While still I may, I write for you 
		The love I lived, the dream I knew. 
		From our birthday, until we die, 
		Is but the winking of an eye; 
		And we, our singing and our love, 
		What measurer Time has lit above, 
		And all benighted things that go 
		About my table to and fro, 
		Are passing on to where may be, 
		In truth’s consuming ecstasy, 
		No place for love and dream at all; 
		For God goes by with white footfall. 
		I cast my heart into my rhymes, 
		That you, in the dim coming times, 
		May know how my heart went with them 
		After the red-rose-bordered hem.


	80. TO THE ROSE UPON THE ROOD OF TIME

		Red Rose, proud Rose, sad Rose of all my days!
		Come near me, while I sing the ancient ways:
		Cuchulain battling with the bitter tide;
		The Druid, grey, wood-nurtured, quiet-eyed,
		Who cast round Fergus dreams, and ruin untold;
		And thine own sadness, whereof stars, grown old
		In dancing silver-sandalled on the sea,
		Sing in their high and lonely melody.
		Come near, that no more blinded by man’s fate,
		I find under the boughs of love and hate,
		In all poor foolish things that live a day,
		Eternal beauty wandering on her way.
		
		Come near, come near, come near--Ah, leave me still
		A little space for the rose-breath to fill!
		Lest I no more hear common things that crave;
		The weak worm hiding down in its small cave,
		The field-mouse running by me in the grass,
		And heavy mortal hopes that toil and pass;
		But seek alone to hear the strange things said
		By God to the bright hearts of those long dead,
		And learn to chaunt a tongue men do not know.
		Come near; I would, before my time to go,
		Sing of old Eire and the ancient ways:
		Red Rose, proud Rose, sad Rose of all my days.


	81. UNDER BEN BULBEN

		I
		
		Swear by what the Sages spoke   
		Round the Mareotic Lake
		That the Witch of Atlas knew,   
		Spoke and set the cocks a-crow.
		
		Swear by those horsemen, by those women,   
		Complexion and form prove superhuman,   
		That pale, long visaged company
		That airs an immortality
		Completeness of their passions won;   
		Now they ride the wintry dawn
		Where Ben Bulben sets the scene.
		
		Here’s the gist of what they mean.   
		
		
		II
		
		Many times man lives and dies   
		Between his two eternities,   
		That of race and that of soul,   
		And ancient Ireland knew it all.   
		Whether man dies in his bed   
		Or the rifle knocks him dead,
		A brief parting from those dear   
		Is the worst man has to fear.   
		Though grave-diggers’ toil is long,   
		Sharp their spades, their muscle strong,   
		They but thrust their buried men   
		Back in the human mind again.
		
		
		III
		
		You that Mitchel’s prayer have heard   
		‘Send war in our time, O Lord!’   
		Know that when all words are said   
		And a man is fighting mad,   
		Something drops from eyes long blind   
		He completes his partial mind,   
		For an instant stands at ease,   
		Laughs aloud, his heart at peace,   
		Even the wisest man grows tense   
		With some sort of violence   
		Before he can accomplish fate   
		Know his work or choose his mate.
		
		
		IV
		
		Poet and sculptor do the work   
		Nor let the modish painter shirk   
		What his great forefathers did,   
		Bring the soul of man to God,   
		Make him fill the cradles right.
		
		Measurement began our might:   
		Forms a stark Egyptian thought,   
		Forms that gentler Phidias wrought.
		
		Michael Angelo left a proof   
		On the Sistine Chapel roof,   
		Where but half-awakened Adam   
		Can disturb globe-trotting Madam   
		Till her bowels are in heat,   
		Proof that there’s a purpose set   
		Before the secret working mind:   
		Profane perfection of mankind.
		
		Quattrocento put in paint,
		On backgrounds for a God or Saint,   
		Gardens where a soul’s at ease;   
		Where everything that meets the eye
		Flowers and grass and cloudless sky   
		Resemble forms that are, or seem   
		When sleepers wake and yet still dream,   
		And when it’s vanished still declare,   
		With only bed and bedstead there,   
		That Heavens had opened.
		
		                                        Gyres run on;
		When that greater dream had gone   
		Calvert and Wilson, Blake and Claude   
		Prepared a rest for the people of God,   
		Palmer’s phrase, but after that
		Confusion fell upon our thought.
		
		
		V
		
		Irish poets learn your trade   
		Sing whatever is well made,   
		Scorn the sort now growing up   
		All out of shape from toe to top,
		Their unremembering hearts and heads   
		Base-born products of base beds.   
		Sing the peasantry, and then   
		Hard-riding country gentlemen,   
		The holiness of monks, and after   
		Porter-drinkers’ randy laughter;   
		Sing the lords and ladies gay   
		That were beaten into the clay   
		Through seven heroic centuries;   
		Cast your mind on other days   
		That we in coming days may be   
		Still the indomitable Irishry.
		
		
		VI
		
		Under bare Ben Bulben’s head
		In Drumcliff churchyard Yeats is laid,   
		An ancestor was rector there
		Long years ago; a church stands near,
		By the road an ancient Cross.
		No marble, no conventional phrase,   
		On limestone quarried near the spot   
		By his command these words are cut:
		
		               Cast a cold eye   
		               On life, on death.   
		               Horseman, pass by!


	82. WHEN YOU ARE OLD

		When you are old and gray and full of sleep
		And nodding by the fire take down this book
		And slowly read and dream of the soft look
		Your eyes had once and of their shadows deep;
		
		How many loved your moments of glad grace
		And loved your beauty will love false or true;
		But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you
		And loved the sorrows of your changing face.
		
		And bending down beside the glowing bars
		Murmur a little sadly how love fled
		And paced upon the mountains overhead
		And hid his face amid a crowd of stars.