
Louis MacNeice [1906-1963]

###

NEWSREEL.

Enter the dream-house, brothers and sisters, leaving 
Your debts asleep, your history at the door: 
This is the home for heroes, and this loving 
Darkness a fur you can afford. 

Fish in their tank electrically heated 
Nose without envy the glass wall: for them 
Clerk, spy, nurse, killer, prince, the great and the defeated, 
Move in a mute day-dream. 

Bathed in this common source, you gape incurious 
At what your active hours have willed--
Sleep-walking on that silver wall, the furious 
Sick shapes and pregnant fancies of your world. 

There is the mayor opening the oyster season: 
A society wedding: the autumn hats look swell: 
An old crocks' race, and a politician 
In fishing-waders to prove that all is well. 

Oh, look at the warplanes! Screaming hysteric treble 
In the low power-dive, like gannets they fall steep. 
But what are they to trouble--
These silver shadows-- to trouble your watery, womb-deep sleep? 

See the big guns, rising, groping, erected 
To plant death in your world's soft womb. 
Fire-bud, smoke-blossom, iron seed projected-- 
Are these exotics? They will grow nearer home! 

Grow nearer home-- and out of the dream-house stumbling 
One night into a strangling air and the flung 
Rags of children and thunder of stone niagaras tumbling, 
You'll know you slept too long.


TEMPT ME NO MORE.

Tempt me no more; for I
Have known the lightning's hour,
The poet's inward pride,
The certainty of power.
Bayonets are closing round.
I shrink; yet I must wring
A living from despair
And out of steel a song.
Though song, though breath be short,
I'll share not the disgrace
Of those that ran away
Or never left the base.
Comrades, my tongue can speak
No comfortable words,
Calls to a for lorn hope,
Gives work and not rewards.
Oh keep the sickle sharp
And follow still the plough:
Others may reap, though some
See not the winter through.
Father, who endest all,
Pity our broken sleep;
For we lie down with tears
And waken but to weep.
And if our blood alone
Will melt this iron earth,
Take it. It is well spent
Easing a saviour 's birth


IS IT FAR TO GO?.

_Is it far to go?_
A step-- no further.
_Is it hard to go?_
Ask the melting snow,
The eddying feather.

_What can I take there?_
Not a hank, not a hair.
_What shall I leave behind?_
Ask the hastening wind,
The fainting star.

_Shall I be gone long?_
For ever and a day.
_To whom there belong?_
Ask the stone to say,
Ask my song.

_Who will say farewell?_
The beating bell.
_Will anyone miss me?_
That I dare not tell--
Quick, Rose, and kiss me.



WALKING AWAY.

It is eighteen years ago, almost to the day--
A sunny day with leaves just turning,
The touch-lines new-ruled-- since I watched you play
Your first game of football, then, like a satellite
Wrenched from its orbit, go drifting away

Behind a scatter of boys. I can see
You walking away from me towards the school
With the pathos of a half-fledged thing set free
Into a wilderness, the gait of one
Who finds no path where the path should be.

That hesitant figure, eddying away
Like a winged seed loosened from its parent stem,
Has something I never quite grasp to convey
About nature’s give-and-take-- the small, the scorching
Ordeals which fire one’s irresolute clay.

I have had worse partings, but none that so
Gnaws at my mind still. Perhaps it is roughly
Saying what God alone could perfectly show--
How selfhood begins with a walking away,
And love is proved in the letting go.


TWO TRAVELLERS.

One of us in the compartment stares 
Out of his window the whole day long 
With attentive mein, as if he knows, 
There is hid in the journeying scene a song 
To recall or compose 
From snatches of vision, hints of vanishing airs. 

He'll mark the couched hares 
In grass whereover the lapwing reel and twist: 
He notes how the shockheaded sunflowers climb 
Like boys on the wire by the railway line; 
And for him those morning rivers are love-in-a-mist, 
And the chimneystacks prayers. 

The other is plainly a man of affairs, 
A seasoned commuter. His looks assert, 
As he opens a briefcase intent on perusing 
Facts and figures, he'd never divert 
With profitless musing 
The longest journey, or notice the dress it wears. 

Little he cares 
For the coloured drift of his passage: no, not a thing 
Values in all that is hurrying past, 
Though dimly he senses from first to last 
How flaps and waves the smoke of his travelling 
At the window-squares. 

One is preoccupied, one just stares, 
While the whale-ribbed terminus nears apace 
Where passengers all must change, and under 
Its arch triumphal quickly disperse 
So you may wonder 
Watching these two whom the train indifferently bears.



WHERE ARE THE WAR POETS?.

They who in folly or mere greed 
Enslaved religion, markets, laws, 
Borrow our language now and bid 
Us to speak up in freedom's cause. 

It is the logic of our times, 
No subject for immortal verse - 
That we who lived by honest dreams 
Defend the bad against the worse


THE CONFLICT.

I sang as one 
Who on a tilting deck sings 
To keep their courage up, thought the wave hangs 
That shall cut off their sun. 

As storm-cocks sing, 
Flinging their natural answer in the wind's teeth, 
And care not if it is waste of breath 
Or birth-control of spring. 

As ocean-flyer clings 
To height, to the last drop of spirit driving on 
While yet ahead is land to be won 
And work for wings. 

Singing I was at peace, 
Above the clouds, outside the ring: 
For sorrow finds a swift release in song 
And pride in poise. 

Yet living here, 
As one between two massive powers I live 
Whom neutrality cannot save 
Nor occupation cheer. 

None such shall be left alive: 
The innocent wing is soon shot down, 
And private stars fade in the blood-red dawn 
Where two worlds strive. 

The red advance of life 
Contracts pride, calls out the common blood, 
Beats song into a single-blade, 
Makes a depth-charge of grief. 

Move then with new desires, 
For where we used to build and love 
Is no man's land, and only ghosts can live 
Between two fires.


COME, LIVE WITH ME AND BE MY LOVE.

Come, live with me and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove
Of peace and plenty, bed and board,
That chance employment may afford.

I’ll handle dainties on the docks
And thou shalt read of summer frocks:
At evening by the sour canals
We’ll hope to hear some madrigals.

Care on thy maiden brow shall put
A wreath of wrinkles, and thy foot
Be shod with pain: not silken dress
But toil shall tire thy loveliness.

Hunger shall make thy modest zone
And cheat fond death of all but bone--
If these delight thy mind may move,
Then live with me and be my love.


THE ECSTATIC.

Lark, skylark, spilling your rubbed and round 
Pebbles of sounds in air's still lake, 
Whose widening circles fill the noon; yet none 
Is known so small beside the sun: 

Be strong your fervent soaring, your skyward air! 
Tremble there, a nerve of song! 
Float up there where voice and wing are one, 
A singing star, a note of light! 

Buoyed, embayed in heaven's noon-wide]reaches--
For soon Light's tide will turn-- Oh Stay! 
Cease not till day streams to the west, then down 
That estuary drop down to peace.


