
Thomas Merton [1941-]

###





SUMMER

(An Ode.)


    Now like a pageant of the Golden Year
      In rich memorial pomp the hours go by,
    With rose-embroidered flags unfurled
    And tasselled bugles calling through the world
        Wake, for your hope draws near!
    Wake, for in each soft porch of azure sky,
      Seen through each arch of pale green leaves, the Gate
      Of Eden swings apart for Summer's royal state.

    Ah, when the Spirit of the moving scene
      Has entered in, the splendour will be spent!
    The flutes will cease, the gates will close;
    Only the scattered crimson of the rose,
        The wild wood's hapless queen,
    Dis-kingdomed, will declare the way he went;
      And, in a little while, her court will go,
      Pass like a cloud and leave no trace on earth below.

    Tell us no more of Autumn, the slow gold
      Of fruitage ripening in a world's decay,
    The falling leaves, the moist rich breath
    Of woods that swoon and crumble into death
        Over the gorgeous mould:
      Give us the flash and scent of keen-edged May
      Where wastes that bear no harvest yield their bloom,
      Rude crofts of flowering nettle, bents of yellow broom.

    The very reeds and sedges of the fen
      Open their hearts and blossom to the sky;
    The wild thyme on the mountain's knees
    Unrolls its purple market to the bees;
        Unharvested of men
    The Traveller's Joy can only smile and die.
      Joy, joy alone the throbbing whitethroats bring,
      Joy to themselves and heaven! They were but born to sing!

    And see, between the northern-scented pines,
      The whole sweet summer sharpens to a glow!
    See, as the well-spring plashes cool
    Over a shadowy green fern-fretted pool
        The mystic sunbeam shines
    For one mad moment on a breast of snow
      A warm white shoulder and a glowing arm
      Up-flung, where some swift Undine sinks in shy alarm.

    And if she were not all a dream, and lent
      Life for a little to your own desire,
    Oh, lover in the hawthorn lane,
    Dream not you hold her, or you dream in vain!
        The violet, spray-besprent
    When from that plunge the rainbows flashed like fire,
      Will scarce more swiftly lose its happy dew
      Than eyes which Undine haunts will cease to shine on you.

    What though the throstle pour his heart away,
      A happy spendthrift of uncounted gold,
    Swinging upon a blossomed briar
    With soft throat lifted in a wild desire
        To make the world his may.
    Ever the pageant through the gates is rolled
      Further away; in vain the rich notes throng
      Flooding the mellow noon with wave on wave of song.

    The feathery meadows like a lilac sea,
      Knee-deep, with honeyed clover, red and white,
    Roll billowing: the crisp clouds pass
    Trailing their soft blue shadows o'er the grass;
        The skylark, mad with glee,
    Quivers, up, up, to lose himself in light;
      And, through the forest, like a fairy dream
      Through some dark mind, the ferns in branching beauty stream.

    Enough of joy! A little respite lend,
      Summer, fair god that hast so little heed
    Of these that serve thee but to die,
    Mere trappings of thy tragic pageantry!
        Show us the end, the end!
    We too, with human hearts that break and bleed,
      March to the night that rounds their fleeting hour,
      And feel we, too, perchance but serve some loftier Power.

    O that our hearts might pass away with thee,
      Burning and pierced and full of thy sweet pain,
    Burst through the gates with thy swift soul,
    Hunt thy most white perfection to the goal,
        Nor wait, once more to see
    Thy chaliced lilies rotting in the rain,
      Thy ragged yellowing banners idly hung
      In woods that have forgotten all the songs we sung!

    _Peace! Like a pageant of the Golden Year
      In rich memorial pomp the hours go by,
    With rose-embroidered flags unfurled
    And tasselled bugles calling through the world
        Wake, for your hope draws near!
    Wake, for in each soft porch of azure sky,
      Seen through each arch of pale green leaves, the Gate
      Of Eden swings apart for Summer's royal state._

    Not wait! Forgive, forgive that feeble cry
      Of blinded passion all unworthy thee!
    For here the spirit of man may claim
    A loftier vision and a nobler aim
        Than e'er was born to die:
    Man only, of earth, throned on Eternity,
      From his own sure abiding-place can mark
      How earth's great golden dreams go past into the dark.






SONG.


    I.

    When that I loved a maiden
      My heaven was in her eyes,
    And when they bent above me
      I knew no deeper skies;
    But when her heart forsook me
      My spirit broke its bars,
    For grief beyond the sunset
      And love beyond the stars.


    II.

    When that I loved a maiden
      She seemed the world to me:
    Now is my soul the universe,
      My dreams the sky and sea:
    There is no heaven above me,
      No glory binds or bars
    My grief beyond the sunset,
      My love beyond the stars.


    III.

    When that I loved a maiden
      I worshipped where she trod;
    But, when she clove my heart, the cleft
      Set free the imprisoned god:
    Then was I king of all the world,
      My soul had burst its bars,
    For grief beyond the sunset
      And love beyond the stars.


THE EMPIRE BUILDERS.


    Who are the Empire-builders? They
      Whose desperate arrogance demands
    A self-reflecting power to sway
      A hundred little selfless lands?
    Lord God of battles, ere we bow
      To these and to their soulless lust,
    Let fall Thy thunders on us now
      And strike us equal to the dust.

    Before the stars in heaven were made
      Our great Commander led us forth;
    And now the embattled lines are laid
      To East, to West, to South, to North;
    According as of old He planned
      We take our station in the field,
    Nor dare to dream we understand
      The splendour of the swords we wield.

    We know not what the Soul intends
      That lives and moves behind our deeds;
    We wheel and march to glorious ends
      Beyond the common soldier's needs:
    And some are raised to high rewards,
      And some by regiments are hurled
    To die upon the opposing swords
      And sleep--forgotten by the world.

    And not where navies churn the foam,
      Nor called to fields of fierce emprize,
    In many a country cottage-home
      The Empire-builder lives and dies:
    Or through the roaring streets he goes
      A lean and weary City slave,
    The conqueror of a thousand foes
      Who walks, unheeded, to his grave.

    Leaders unknown of hopes forlorn
      Go past us in the daily mart,
    With many a shadowy crown of thorn
      And many a kingly broken heart:
    Though England's banner overhead
      Ever the secret signal flew,
    We only see its Cross is red
      As children see the skies are blue.

    For all are Empire-builders here,
      Whose hearts are true to heaven and home
    And, year by slow revolving year,
      Fulfil the duties as they come;
    So simple seems the task, and yet
      Many for this are crucified;
    Ay, and their brother-men forget
      The simple wounds in palm and side.

    But he that to his home is true,
      Where'er the tides of power may flow,
    Has built a kingdom great and new
      Which Time nor Fate shall overthrow
    These are the Empire-builders, these
      Annex where none shall say them nay
    Beyond the world's uncharted seas
      Realms that can never pass away.



THE ORIGIN OF LIFE.


    I.

    _In the beginning?_--Slowly grope we back
            Along the narrowing track,
    Back to the deserts of the world's pale prime,
            The mire, the clay, the slime;
    And then ... what then? Surely to something less;
            Back, back, to Nothingness!


    II.

    You dare not halt upon that dwindling way!
            There is no gulf to stay
    Your footsteps to the last. Go back you must!
            Far, far below the dust,
    Descend, descend! Grade by dissolving grade,
            We follow, unafraid!
    Dissolve, dissolve this moving world of men
            Into thin air--and then?


    III.

    O pioneers, O warriors of the Light,
            In that abysmal night,
    Will you have courage, then, to rise and tell
            Earth of this miracle?
    Will you have courage, then, to bow the head,
            And say, when all is said--

    "Out of this Nothingness arose our thought!
            This blank abysmal Nought
    Woke, and brought forth that lighted City street,
            Those towers, that armoured fleet?" ...


    IV.

    When you have seen those vacant primal skies
            Beyond the centuries.
    Watched the pale mists across their darkness flow,
            As in a lantern-show,
    Weaving, by merest "chance," out of thin air,
            Pageants of praise and prayer;
    Watched the great hills like clouds arise and set,
            And one--named Olivet;
    When you have seen, as a shadow passing away,
            One child clasp hands and pray;
    When you have seen emerge from that dark mire
            One martyr, ringed with fire;
    Or, from that Nothingness, by special grace,
            One woman's love-lit face, ...


    V.

    Will you have courage, then, to front that law
            (From which your sophists draw
    Their only right to flout one human creed)
            That nothing can proceed--
    Not even thought, not even love--from less
            Than its own nothingness?
    The law is yours! But dare you waive your pride,
            And kneel where you denied?
    The law is yours! Dare you re-kindle, then,
            One faith for faithless men,
    And say you found, on that dark road you trod,
            _In the beginning--GOD_?





THE LITANY OF WAR.


    Sandalphon, whose white wings to heaven upbear
            The weight of human prayer,
    Stood silent in the still eternal Light
            Of God, one dreadful night.
    His wings were clogged with blood and foul with mire,
            His body seared with fire.
    "Hast thou no word for Me?" the Master said.
            The angel sank his head:

    "Word from the nations of the East and West,"
            He moaned, "that blood is best.
    The patriot prayers of either half of earth,
            Hear Thou, and judge their worth.
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
            First, the first nation's prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord!_'

    "Pure as the first, as passionate in trust
            That their own cause is just;
    Puppets as fond in those dark hands of greed;
            As fervent in their creed;
    As blindly moved, as utterly betrayed,
            As urgent for Thine aid;
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear
            The second nation's prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord._'

    "Over their slaughtered children, one great cry
            From either enemy!
    From either host, thigh-deep in filth and shame,
            One prayer, one and the same;
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
            From East and West, one prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord._'"

    Then, on the Cross of His creative pain,
            God bowed His head again.
    Then, East and West, over all seas and lands,
            Out-stretched His piercèd hands.
    "And yet," Sandalphon whispered, "men deny
            The Eternal Calvary."





THE OPTIMIST.


    Teach me to live and to forgive
      The death that all must die
    Who pass in slumber through this heaven
      Of earth and sea and sky;
    Who live by grace of Time and Space
      At which their peace is priced;
    And cast their lots upon the robe
      That wraps the cosmic Christ;

    Who cannot see the world-wide Tree
      Where Love lies bleeding still;
    This universal cross of God
      Our star-crowned Igdrasil.

    Teach me to live; I do not ask
      For length of earthly days,
    Or that my heaven-appointed task
      Should fall in pleasant ways;

    If in this hour of warmth and light
      The last great knell were knolled;
    If Death should close mine eyes to-night
      And all the tale be told;

    While I have lips to speak or sing
      And power to draw this breath,
    Shall I not praise my Lord and King
      Above all else, for death?

    When on a golden eve he drove
      His keenest sorrow deep
    Deep in my heart, and called it love;
      I did not wince or weep.

    A wild Hosanna shook the world
      And wakened all the sky,
    As through a white and burning light
      Her passionate face went by.

    When on a golden dawn he called
      My best beloved away,
    I did not shrink or stand appalled
      Before the hopeless day.

    The joy of that triumphant dearth
      And anguish cannot die;
    The joy that casts aside this earth
      For immortality.

    I would not change one word of doom
      Upon the dreadful scroll,
    That gave her body to the tomb
      And freed her fettered soul.

    For now each idle breeze can bring
      The kiss I never seek;
    The nightingale has heard her sing,
      The rose caressed her cheek.

    And every pang of every grief
      That ruled my soul an hour,
    Has given new splendours to the leaf,
      New glories to the flower;

    And melting earth into the heaven
      Whose inmost heart is pain,
    Has drawn the veils apart and given
      Her soul to mine again.




ART, THE HERALD.

"The voice of one crying in the wilderness"


    I

    Beyond; beyond; and yet again beyond!
    What went ye out to seek, oh foolish-fond?
      Is not the heart of all things here and now?
    Is not the circle infinite, and the centre
    Everywhere, if ye would but hear and enter?
      Come; the porch bends and the great pillars bow.


    II

    Come; come and see the secret of the sun;
    The sorrow that holds the warring worlds in one;
      The pain that holds Eternity in an hour;
    One God in every seed self-sacrificed,
    One star-eyed, star-crowned universal Christ,
      Re-crucified in every wayside flower.




THE CRY OF THE MAD MOONSHEE.

        _If the blossoms were beans,
        I should know what it means--
    This blaze, which I certainly cannot endure;
        It is evil, too,
        For its colour is blue,
    And the sense of the matter is quite obscure.
        Celestial truth
        _Is the food of youth;
    But the music was dark as a moonless night.
        The facts in the song
        Were all of them wrong,_

    _And there was not a single sum done right;
    Tho' a metaphysician amongst the crowd,
    In a voice that was notably deep and loud,
    Repeated, as fast as he was able,
    The whole of the multiplication table._

    So the cry flapped off as a wild goose flies,
    And the stars came out in the trembling skies,
      And ever the mystic glory grew
    In the garden of blue chrysanthemums,
    Till there came a rumble of distant drums;
      And the multitude suddenly turned and flew.
    ... A dead ape lay where their feet had been ...
    And we called for the yellow palankeen,
      And the flowers divided and let us through.

    The black-barred moon was large and low
    When we came to the Forest of Ancient Woe;
      And over our heads the stars were bright.
    But through the forest the path we travelled
    Its phosphorescent aisle unravelled
      In one thin ribbon of dwindling light:
    And twice and thrice on the fainting track
    We paused to listen. The moon grew black,
      But the coolies' faces glimmered white,
    As the wild woods echoed in dreadful chorus
    A laugh that came horribly hopping o'er us
      Like monstrous frogs thro' the murky night.

    Then the tall thin man as we swung along
    Sang us an old enchanted song
      That lightened our hearts of their fearful load.
    But, e'en as the moonlit air grew sweet,
    We heard the pad of stealthy feet
      Dogging us down the thin white road;
    And the song grew weary again and harsh,
    And the black trees dripped like the fringe of a marsh,
      And a laugh crept out like a shadowy toad;
    And we knew it was neither ghoul nor djinn:
    _It was Creeping Sin! It was Creeping Sin!_

    But we came to a bend, and the white moon glowed
    Like a gate at the end of the narrowing road
      Far away; and on either hand,
    As guards of a path to the heart's desire,
    The strange tall blossoms of soft blue fire
      Stretched away thro' that unknown land,
    League on league with their dwindling lane
    Down to the large low moon; and again
    There shimmered around us that mystical strain,
      In a tongue that it seemed we could understand.



THE MYSTIC.

    With wounds out-reddening every moon-washed rose
    King Love went thro' earth's garden-close!
      From that first gate of birth in the golden gloom,
    I traced Him. Thorns had frayed His garment's hem,
    Ay, and His flesh! I marked, I followed them
      Down to that threshold of--the tomb?

    And there Love vanished, yet I entered! Night
    And Doubt mocked at the dwindling light:
      Strange claw-like hands flung me their shadowy hate.
    I clomb the dreadful stairways of desire
    Between a thousand eyes and wings of fire
      And knocked upon the second Gate.

    The second Gate! When, like a warrior helmed,
    In battle on battle overwhelmed,
      My soul lay stabbed by all the swords of sense,
    Blinded and stunned by stars and flowers and trees,
    Did I not struggle to my bended knees
      And wrestle with Omnipotence?

    Did earth not flee before me, when the breath
    Of worship smote her with strange death,
      Withered her gilded garment, broke her sword,
    Shattered her graven images and smote
    All her light sorrows thro' the breast and throat
      Whose death-cry crowned me God and Lord?

    Yea, God and Lord! Had tears not purged my sight?
    I saw the myriad gates of Light
      Opening and shutting in each way-side flower,
    And like a warder in the gleam of each,
    Death, whispering in some strange eternal speech
      To every passing hour.

    The second Gate? Was I not born to pass
    A million? Though the skies be brass
      And the earth iron, shall I not win thro' all?
    Shall I who made the infinite heavens my mark
    Shrink from this first wild horror of the dark,
      These formless gulfs, these glooms that crawl?

    Never was mine that easy faithless hope
    Which makes all life one flowery slope
      To heaven! Mine be the vast assaults of doom,
    Trumpets, defeats, red anguish, age-long strife,
    Ten million deaths, ten million gates to life,
      The insurgent heart that bursts the tomb.

    Vain, vain, unutterably vain are all
    The sights and sounds that sink and fall,
      The words and symbols of this fleeting breath:
    Shall I not drown the finite in the Whole,
    Cast off this body and complete my soul
      Thro' deaths beyond this gate of death?

    It will not open! Through the bars I see
    The glory and the mystery
      Wind upward ever! The earth-dawn breaks! I bleed
    With beating here for entrance. Hark, O hark,
    Love, Love, return and give me the great Dark,
      Which is the Light of Life indeed.


ART.

    I.

    Yes! Beauty still rebels!
    Our dreams like clouds disperse:
      She dwells
    In agate, marble, verse.

    No false constraint be thine!
    But, for right walking, choose
      The fine,
    The strict cothurnus, Muse.

    Vainly ye seek to escape
    The toil! The yielding phrase
      Ye shape
    Is clay, not chrysoprase.

    And all in vain ye scorn
    That seeming ease which ne'er
      Was born
    Of aught but love and care.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Recall the gods that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky.

    For Beauty still rebels!
    Our dreams like clouds disperse:
      She dwells
    In agate, marble, verse.


    II.

    When Beauty from the sea,
    With breasts of whiter rose
      Than we
    Behold on earth, arose.

    Naked thro' Time returned
    The Bliss of Heaven that day,
      And burned
    The dross of earth away.

    Kings at her splendour quailed.
    For all his triple steel
      She haled
    War at her chariot-wheel.

    The rose and lily bowed
    To cast, of odour sweet
      A cloud
    Before her wandering feet.

    And from her radiant eyes
    There shone on soul and sense
      The skies'
    Divine indifference.

    O, mortal memory fond!
    Slowly she passed away
      Beyond
    The curling clouds of day.

    _Return_, we cry, _return_,
    Till in the sadder light
      We learn
    That she was infinite.

    The Dream that from the sea
    With breasts of whiter rose
      Than we
    Behold on earth, arose.


    III.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Becall the dreams that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky;
    And kings that not endure
    In bronze to re-ascend
      Secure
    Until the world shall end.

    Poet, let passion sleep
    Till with the cosmic rhyme
      You keep
    Eternal tone and time,

    By rule of hour and flower,
    By strength of stern restraint
      And power
    To fail and not to faint.

    The task is hard to learn
    While all the songs of Spring
      Return
    Along the blood and sing.

    Yet hear--from her deep skies,
    How Art, for all your pain,
      Still cries
    _Ye must be born again!_

    Reject the wreath of rose,
    Take up the crown of thorn
      That shows
    To-night a child is born.

    The far immortal face
    In chosen onyx fine
      Enchase,
    Delicate line by line.

    Strive with Carrara, fight
    With Parian, till there steal
      To light
    Apollo's pure profile.

    Set the great lucid form
    Free from its marble tomb
      To storm
    The heights of death and doom.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Recall the gods that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky,



THE OLD SCEPTIC.


    I am weary of disbelieving: why should I wound my love
      To pleasure a sophist's pride in a graven image of truth?
    I will go back to my home, with the clouds and the stars above,
      And the heaven I used to know, and the God of my buried youth.

    I will go back to the home where of old in my boyish pride
      I pierced my father's heart with a murmur of unbelief.
    He only looked in my face as I spoke, but his mute eyes cried
      Night after night in my dreams; and he died in grief, in grief.

    Books? I have read the books, the books that we write ourselves,
      Extolling our love of an abstract truth and our pride of debate:
    I will go back to the love of the cotter who sings as he delves,
      To that childish infinite love and the God above fact and date.

    To that ignorant infinite God who colours the meaningless flowers,
      To that lawless infinite Poet who crowns the law with the crime;
    To the Weaver who covers the world with a garment of wonderful hours,
      And holds in His hand like threads the tales and the truths of time.

    Is the faith of the cotter so simple and narrow as this? Ah, well,
      It is hardly so narrow as yours who daub and plaster with dyes
    The shining mirrors of heaven, the shadowy mirrors of hell,
      And blot out the dark deep vision, if it seem to be framed with lies.

    No faith I hurl against you, no fact to freeze your sneers.
      Only the doubt you taught me to weld in the fires of youth
    Leaps to my hand like the flaming sword of nineteen hundred years,
      The sword of the high God's answer, _O Pilate, what is truth?_

    Your laughter has killed more hearts than ever were pierced with swords,
      Ever you daub new mirrors and turn the old to the wall;
    And more than blood is lost in the weary battle of words;
      For creeds are many; but God is One, and contains them all.

    Ah, why should we strive or cry? Surely the end is close!
      Hold by your little truths: deem your triumph complete!
    But nothing is true or false in the infinite heart of the rose;
      And the earth is a little dust that clings to our travelling feet.

    I will go back to my home and look at the wayside flowers,
      And hear from the wayside cabins the kind old hymns again,
    Where Christ holds out His arms in the quiet evening hours,
      And the light of the chapel porches broods on the peaceful lane.

    And there I shall hear men praying the deep old foolish prayers,
      And there I shall see, once more, the fond old faith confessed,
    And the strange old light on their faces who hear as a blind man hears,--
     _Come unto Me, ye weary, and I will give you rest._

    I will go back and believe in the deep old foolish tales,
      And pray the simple prayers that I learned at my mother's knee,
    Where the Sabbath tolls its peace thro' the breathless mountain-vales,
      And the sunset's evening hymn hallows the listening sea.