*** Matthew Arnold (1822 - 1888)

1. BACCHANALIA

	I
	
	The evening comes, the fields are still.
	The tinkle of the thirsty rill,
	Unheard all day, ascends again;
	Deserted is the half-mown plain,
	Silent the swaths; the ringing wain,
	The mower’s cry, the dog’s alarms,
	All housed within the sleeping farms.
	The business of the day is done,
	The last-left haymaker is gone.
	And from the thyme upon the height,
	And from the elder-blossom white
	And pale dog-roses in the hedge,
	And from the mint-plant in the sedge,
	In puffs of balm the night-air blows
	The perfume which the day foregoes.
	And on the pure horizon far,
	See, pulsing with the first-born star,
	The liquid sky above the hill!
	The evening comes, the fields are still.
	
	Loitering and leaping,
	With saunter, with bounds,
	Flickering and circling
	In files and in rounds,
	Gayly their pine-staff green
	Tossing in air,
	Loose o’er their shoulders white
	Showering their hair,
	See! the wild Mænads
	Break from the wood,
	Youth and Iacchus
	Maddening their blood.
	See! through the quiet land
	Rioting they pass,
	Fling the fresh heaps about,
	Trample the grass,
	Tear from the rifled hedge
	Garlands, their prize;
	Fill with their sports the field,
	Fill with their cries.
	
	Shepherd, what ails thee, then?
	Shepherd, why mute?
	Forth with thy joyous song!
	Forth with thy flute!
	Tempts not the revel blithe?
	Lure not their cries?
	Glow not their shoulders smooth?
	Melt not their eyes?
	Is not, on cheeks like those,
	Lovely the flush?
	--_Ah! so the quiet was!
	So was the hush!_
	
	
	II
	
	The epoch ends, the world is still.
	The age has talked and worked its fill.
	The famous orators have shone,
	The famous poets sung and gone,
	The famous men of war have fought,
	The famous speculators thought,
	The famous players, sculptors, wrought,
	The famous painters filled their wall,
	The famous critics judged it all.
	The combatants are parted now;
	Uphung the spear, unbent the bow,
	The puissant crowned, the weak laid low.
	And in the after-silence sweet,
	Now strifes are hushed, our ears doth meet,
	Ascending pure, the bell-like fame
	Of this or that down-trodden name,
	Delicate spirits, pushed away
	In the hot press of the noonday.
	And o’er the plain, where the dead age
	Did its now-silent warfare wage,--
	O’er that wide plain, now wrapped in gloom,
	Where many a splendor finds its tomb,
	Many spent fames and fallen nights nights--
	The one or two immortal lights
	Rise slowly up into the sky,
	To shine there everlastingly,
	Like stars over the bounding hill.
	The epoch ends, the world is still.
	
	Thundering and bursting
	In torrents, in waves,
	Carolling and shouting
	Over tombs, amid graves,
	See! on the cumbered plain
	Clearing a stage,
	Scattering the past about,
	Comes the new age.
	Bards make new poems,
	Thinkers new schools,
	Statesmen new systems,
	Critics new rules.
	All things begin again;
	Life is their prize;
	Earth with their deeds they fill,
	Fill with their cries.
	
	Poet, what ails thee, then?
	Say, why so mute?
	Forth with thy praising voice!
	Forth with thy flute!
	Loiterer! why sittest thou
	Sunk in thy dream?
	Tempts not the bright new age?
	Shines not its stream?
	Look, ah! what genius,
	Art, science, wit!
	Soldiers like Cæsar,
	Statesmen like Pitt!
	Sculptors like Phidias,
	Raphaels in shoals,
	Poets like Shakspeare,--
	Beautiful souls!
	See, on their glowing cheeks
	Heavenly the flush!
	--_Ah! so the silence was!
	So was the hush!_
	
	 The world but feels the present’s spell:
	The poet feels the past as well;
	Whatever men have done, might do,
	Whatever thought, might think it too.



2. THE BETTER PART

	Long fed on boundless hopes, O race of man,
	How angrily thou spurn’st all simpler fare!
	“Christ,” some one says, “was human as we are;
	No judge eyes us from heaven, our sin to scan;
	
	We live no more, when we have done our span.”
	“Well, then, for Christ,” thou answerest, “who can care?
	From sin which Heaven records not, why forbear?
	Live we like brutes our life without a plan!”
	
	So answerest thou; but why not rather say,--
	“Hath man no second life? _Pitch this one high!_
	Sits there no judge in heaven, our sin to see?
	
	_More strictly, then, the inward judge obey!_
	Was Christ a man like us? _Ah! let us try_
	_If we then, too, can be such men as he!_”



3. THE BURIED LIFE

	Light flows our war of mocking words; and yet,
	Behold, with tears mine eyes are wet!
	I feel a nameless sadness o’er me roll.
	Yes, yes, we know that we can jest,
	We know, we know that we can smile!
	But there’s a something in this breast,
	To which thy light words bring no rest,
	And thy gay smiles no anodyne;
	Give me thy hand, and hush awhile,
	And turn those limpid eyes on mine,
	And let me read there, love! thy inmost soul.
	
	Alas! is even love too weak
	To unlock the heart, and let it speak?
	Are even lovers powerless to reveal
	To one another what indeed they feel?
	
	I knew the mass of men concealed
	Their thoughts, for fear that if revealed
	They would by other men be met
	With blank indifference, or with blame reproved;
	I knew they lived and moved
	Tricked in disguises, alien to the rest
	Of men, and alien to themselves--and yet
	The same heart beats in every human breast!
	
	But we, my love! doth a like spell benumb
	Our hearts, our voices? must we too be dumb?
	
	Ah! well for us, if even we,
	Even for a moment, can get free
	Our heart, and have our lips unchained;
	For that which seals them hath been deep-ordained!
	
	Fate, which foresaw
	How frivolous a baby man would be,--
	By what distractions he would be possessed,
	How he would pour himself in every strife,
	And well-nigh change his own identity,--
	That it might keep from his capricious play
	His genuine self, and force him to obey
	Even in his own despite his being’s law,
	Bade through the deep recesses of our breast
	The unregarded river of our life
	Pursue with indiscernible flow its way;
	And that we should not see
	The buried stream, and seem to be
	Eddying at large in blind uncertainty,
	Though driving on with it eternally.
	
	But often, in the world’s most crowded streets,
	But often, in the din of strife,
	There rises an unspeakable desire
	After the knowledge of our buried life;
	A thirst to spend our fire and restless force
	In tracking out our true, original course;
	A longing to inquire
	Into the mystery of this heart which beats
	So wild, so deep in us,--to know
	Whence our lives come, and where they go.
	And many a man in his own breast then delves,
	But deep enough, alas! none ever mines.
	And we have been on many thousand lines,
	And we have shown, on each, spirit and power;
	But hardly have we, for one little hour,
	Been on our own line, have we been ourselves,--
	Hardly had skill to utter one of all
	The nameless feelings that course through our breast,
	But they course on forever unexpressed.
	And long we try in vain to speak and act
	Our hidden self, and what we say and do
	Is eloquent, is well--but ’tis not true!
	And then we will no more be racked
	With inward striving, and demand
	Of all the thousand nothings of the hour
	Their stupefying power;
	Ah, yes, and they benumb us at our call!
	Yet still, from time to time, vague and forlorn,
	From the soul’s subterranean depth upborne
	As from an infinitely distant land,
	Come airs, and floating echoes, and convey
	A melancholy into all our day.
	
	Only--but this is rare--
	When a beloved hand is laid in ours,
	When, jaded with the rush and glare
	Of the interminable hours,
	Our eyes can in another’s eyes read clear,
	When our world-deafened ear
	Is by the tones of a loved voice caressed,--
	A bolt is shot back somewhere in our breast,
	And a lost pulse of feeling stirs again.
	The eye sinks inward, and the heart lies plain,
	And what we mean, we say, and what we would, we know.
	
	A man becomes aware of his life’s flow,
	And hears its winding murmur, and he sees
	The meadows where it glides, the sun, the breeze.
	
	And there arrives a lull in the hot race
	Wherein he doth forever chase
	The flying and elusive shadow, rest.
	An air of coolness plays upon his face,
	And an unwonted calm pervades his breast;
	And then he thinks he knows
	The hills where his life rose,
	And the sea where it goes.



4. THE CHURCH OF BROU

	I
	
	_The Castle_
	
	
	Down the Savoy valleys sounding,
	 Echoing round this castle old,
	’Mid the distant mountain-chalets
	 Hark! what bell for church is tolled?
	
	In the bright October morning
	 Savoy’s Duke had left his bride.
	From the castle, past the drawbridge,
	 Flowed the hunters’ merry tide.
	
	Steeds are neighing, gallants glittering.
	 Gay, her smiling lord to greet,
	From her mullioned chamber-casement
	 Smiles the Duchess Marguerite.
	
	From Vienna, by the Danube,
	 Here she came, a bride, in spring.
	Now the autumn crisps the forest;
	 Hunters gather, bugles ring.
	
	Hounds are pulling, prickers swearing,
	 Horses fret, and boar-spears glance.
	Off!--They sweep the marshy forests,
	 Westward on the side of France.
	
	Hark! the game’s on foot; they scatter!
	 Down the forest-ridings lone,
	Furious, single horsemen gallop.
	 Hark! a shout--a crash--a groan!
	
	Pale and breathless, came the hunters--
	 On the turf dead lies the boar.
	God! the duke lies stretched beside him,
	 Senseless, weltering in his gore.
	
	In the dull October evening,
	 Down the leaf-strewn forest-road,
	To the castle, past the drawbridge,
	 Came the hunters with their load.
	
	In the hall, with sconces blazing,
	 Ladies waiting round her seat,
	Clothed in smiles, beneath the dais
	 Sate the Duchess Marguerite.
	
	Hark! below the gates unbarring!
	 Tramp of men, and quick commands!
	“’Tis my lord come back from hunting;”
	 And the duchess claps her hands.
	
	Slow and tired, came the hunters;
	 Stopped in darkness in the court.
	“Ho, this way, ye laggard hunters!
	 To the hall! What sport, what sport?”
	
	Slow they entered with their master;
	 In the hall they laid him down.
	On his coat were leaves and blood-stains,
	 On his brow an angry frown.
	
	Dead her princely youthful husband
	 Lay before his youthful wife,
	Bloody ’neath the flaring sconces--
	 And the sight froze all her life.
	
	In Vienna, by the Danube,
	 Kings hold revel, gallants meet.
	Gay of old amid the gayest
	 Was the Duchess Marguerite.
	
	In Vienna, by the Danube,
	 Feast and dance her youth beguiled.
	Till that hour she never sorrowed;
	 But from then she never smiled.
	
	’Mid the Savoy mountain-valleys,
	 Far from town or haunt of man,
	Stands a lonely church, unfinished,
	 Which the Duchess Maud began.
	
	Old, that duchess stern began it,
	 In gray age, with palsied hands;
	But she died while it was building,
	 And the church unfinished stands,--
	
	Stands as erst the builders left it,
	 When she sank into her grave;
	Mountain greensward paves the chancel,
	 Harebells flower in the nave.
	
	“In my castle all is sorrow,”
	 Said the Duchess Marguerite then:
	“Guide me, some one, to the mountain;
	 We will build the church again.”
	
	Sandalled palmers, faring homeward,
	 Austrian knights from Syria came.
	“Austrian wanderers bring, O warders!
	 Homage to your Austrian dame.”
	
	From the gate the warders answered,--
	 “Gone, O knights, is she you knew!
	Dead our duke, and gone his duchess;
	 Seek her at the church of Brou.”
	
	Austrian knights and march-worn palmers
	 Climb the winding mountain-way;
	Reach the valley, where the fabric
	 Rises higher day by day.
	
	Stones are sawing, hammers ringing;
	 On the work the bright sun shines;
	In the Savoy mountain-meadows,
	 By the stream, below the pines.
	
	On her palfrey white the duchess
	 Sate, and watched her working train,--
	Flemish carvers, Lombard gilders,
	 German masons, smiths from Spain.
	
	Clad in black, on her white palfrey,
	 Her old architect beside,--
	There they found her in the mountains,
	 Morn and noon and eventide.
	
	There she sate, and watched the builders,
	 Till the church was roofed and done;
	Last of all, the builders reared her
	 In the nave a tomb of stone.
	
	On the tomb two forms they sculptured,
	 Lifelike in the marble pale,--
	One, the duke in helm and armor;
	 One, the duchess in her veil.
	
	Round the tomb the carved stone fret-work
	 Was at Easter-tide put on.
	Then the duchess closed her labors;
	 And she died at the St. John.
	
	
	II
	
	_The Church_
	
	Upon the glistening leaden roof
	Of the new pile, the sunlight shines;
	 The stream goes leaping by.
	The hills are clothed with pines sun-proof;
	’Mid bright green fields, below the pines,
	 Stands the church on high.
	What church is this, from men aloof?
	’Tis the Church of Brou.
	
	At sunrise, from their dewy lair
	Crossing the stream, the kine are seen
	 Round the wall to stray,--
	The churchyard wall that clips the square
	Of open hill-sward fresh and green
	 Where last year they lay.
	But all things now are ordered fair
	Round the Church of Brou.
	
	On Sundays, at the matin-chime,
	The Alpine peasants, two and three,
	 Climb up here to pray;
	Burghers and dames, at summer’s prime,
	Ride out to church from Chambery,
	 Dight with mantles gay.
	But else it is a lonely time
	Round the Church of Brou.
	
	On Sundays, too, a priest doth come
	From the walled town beyond the pass,
	 Down the mountain-way;
	And then you hear the organ’s hum,
	You hear the white-robed priest say mass,
	 And the people pray.
	But else the woods and fields are dumb
	Round the Church of Brou.
	
	And after church, when mass is done,
	The people to the nave repair
	 Round the tomb to stray;
	And marvel at the forms of stone,
	And praise the chiselled broideries rare--
	 Then they drop away.
	The princely pair are left alone
	In the Church of Brou.
	
	
	III
	
	_The Tomb_
	
	So rest, forever rest, O princely pair!
	In your high church, ’mid the still mountain-air,
	Where horn, and hound, and vassals, never come.
	Only the blessed saints are smiling dumb
	From the rich painted windows of the nave
	On aisle, and transept, and your marble grave;
	Where thou, young prince, shalt never more arise
	From the fringed mattress where thy duchess lies,
	On autumn-mornings, when the bugle sounds,
	And ride across the drawbridge with thy hounds
	To hunt the boar in the crisp woods till eve;
	And thou, O princess, shalt no more receive,
	Thou and thy ladies, in the hall of state,
	The jaded hunters with their bloody freight,
	Coming benighted to the castle-gate.
	 So sleep, forever sleep, O marble pair!
	Or, if ye wake, let it be then, when fair
	On the carved western front a flood of light
	Streams from the setting sun, and colors bright
	Prophets, transfigured saints, and martyrs brave,
	In the vast western window of the nave;
	And on the pavement round the tomb there glints
	A checker-work of glowing sapphire-tints,
	And amethyst, and ruby,--then unclose
	Your eyelids on the stone where ye repose,
	And from your broidered pillows lift your heads,
	And rise upon your cold white marble beds;
	And looking down on the warm rosy tints
	Which checker, at your feet, the illumined flints,
	Say, _What is this? we are in bliss--forgiven--
	Behold the pavement of the courts of heaven!_
	Or let it be on autumn-nights, when rain
	Doth rustlingly above your heads complain
	On the smooth leaden roof, and on the walls
	Shedding her pensive light at intervals
	The moon through the clere-story windows shines,
	And the wind washes through the mountain-pines,--
	Then, gazing up ’mid the dim pillars high,
	The foliaged marble forest where ye lie,
	_Hush_, ye will say, _it is eternity!
	This is the glimmering verge of heaven, and these
	The columns of the heavenly palaces._
	And in the sweeping of the wind your ear
	The passage of the angels’ wings will hear,
	And on the lichen-crusted leads above
	The rustle of the eternal rain of love.



5. CONSOLATION

	Mist clogs the sunshine.
	Smoky dwarf houses
	Hem me round everywhere;
	A vague dejection
	Weighs down my soul.
	
	Yet, while I languish,
	Everywhere countless
	Prospects unroll themselves,
	And countless beings
	Pass countless moods.
	
	Far hence, in Asia,
	On the smooth convent-roofs,
	On the gold terraces,
	Of holy Lassa,
	Bright shines the sun.
	
	Gray time-worn marbles
	Hold the pure Muses;
	In their cool gallery,
	By yellow Tiber,
	They still look fair.
	
	Strange unloved uproar
	Shrills round their portal;
	Yet not on Helicon
	Kept they more cloudless
	Their noble calm.
	
	Through sun-proof alleys
	In a lone, sand-hemmed
	City of Africa,
	A blind, led beggar,
	Age-bowed, asks alms.
	
	No bolder robber
	Erst abode ambushed
	Deep in the sandy waste;
	No clearer eyesight
	Spied prey afar.
	
	Saharan sand-winds
	Seared his keen eyeballs;
	Spent is the spoil he won.
	For him the present
	Holds only pain.
	
	Two young, fair lovers,
	Where the warm June-wind,
	Fresh from the summer fields
	Plays fondly round them,
	Stand, tranced in joy.
	
	With sweet, joined voices,
	And with eyes brimming,
	“Ah!” they cry, “Destiny,
	Prolong the present!
	Time, stand still here!”
	
	The prompt stern goddess
	Shakes her head, frowning:
	Time gives his hour-glass
	Its due reversal;
	Their hour is gone.
	
	With weak indulgence
	Did the just goddess
	Lengthen their happiness,
	She lengthened also
	Distress elsewhere.
	
	The hour whose happy
	Unalloyed moments
	I would eternalize,
	Ten thousand mourners
	Well pleased see end.
	
	The bleak, stern hour,
	Whose severe moments
	I would annihilate,
	Is passed by others
	In warmth, light, joy.
	
	Time, so complained of,
	Who to no one man
	Shows partiality,
	Brings round to all men
	Some undimmed hours.



6. DOVER BEACH

	The sea is calm to-night.
	The tide is full, the moon lies fair
	Upon the straits; on the French coast, the light
	Gleams and is gone; the cliffs of England stand,
	Glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay.
	
	Come to the window, sweet is the night-air!
	Only, from the long line of spray
	Where the sea meets the moon-blanched sand,
	Listen! you hear the grating roar
	Of pebbles which the waves draw back, and fling,
	At their return, up the high strand,
	Begin and cease, and then again begin,
	With tremulous cadence slow, and bring
	The eternal note of sadness in.
	
	Sophocles long ago
	Heard it on the Ægean, and it brought
	Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow
	Of human misery: we
	Find also in the sound a thought,
	Hearing it by this distant northern sea.
	
	The sea of faith
	Was once, too, at the full, and round earth’s shore
	Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled.
	But now I only hear
	Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,
	Retreating, to the breath
	Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear
	And naked shingles of the world.
	
	Ah, love, let us be true
	To one another! for the world, which seems
	To lie before us like a land of dreams,
	So various, so beautiful, so new,
	Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light,
	Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain;
	And we are here as on a darkling plain
	Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,
	Where ignorant armies clash by night.



7. THE FUTURE

	A wanderer is man from his birth.
	He was born in a ship
	On the breast of the river of Time;
	Brimming with wonder and joy,
	He spreads out his arms to the light,
	Rivets his gaze on the banks of the stream.
	
	As what he sees is, so have his thoughts been.
	Whether he wakes
	Where the snowy mountainous pass,
	Echoing the screams of the eagles,
	Hems in its gorges the bed
	Of the new-born, clear-flowing stream;
	Whether he first sees light
	Where the river in gleaming rings
	Sluggishly winds through the plain;
	Whether in sound of the swallowing sea,--
	As is the world on the banks,
	So is the mind of the man.
	
	Vainly does each, as he glides,
	Fable and dream
	Of the lands which the river of Time
	Had left ere he woke on its breast,
	Or shall reach when his eyes have been closed.
	Only the tract where he sails
	He wots of; only the thoughts,
	Raised by the objects he passes, are his.
	
	Who can see the green earth any more
	As she was by the sources of Time?
	Who imagines her fields as they lay
	In the sunshine, unworn by the plough?
	Who thinks as they thought,
	The tribes who then roamed on her breast,
	Her vigorous, primitive sons?
	
	What girl
	Now reads in her bosom as clear
	As Rebekah read, when she sate
	At eve by the palm-shaded well?
	Who guards in her breast
	As deep, as pellucid a spring
	Of feeling, as tranquil, as sure?
	
	What bard,
	At the height of his vision, can deem
	Of God, of the world, of the soul,
	With a plainness as near,
	As flashing, as Moses felt,
	When he lay in the night by his flock
	On the starlit Arabian waste?
	Can rise and obey
	The beck of the Spirit like him?
	
	This tract which the river of Time
	Now flows through with us, is the plain.
	Gone is the calm of its earlier shore.
	Bordered by cities, and hoarse
	With a thousand cries is its stream.
	And we on its breast, our minds
	Are confused as the cries which we hear,
	Changing and short as the sights which we see.
	
	And we say that repose has fled
	Forever the course of the river of Time.
	That cities will crowd to its edge
	In a blacker, incessanter line;
	That the din will be more on its banks,
	Denser the trade on its stream,
	Flatter the plain where it flows,
	Fiercer the sun overhead;
	That never will those on its breast
	See an ennobling sight,
	Drink of the feeling of quiet again.
	
	But what was before us we know not,
	And we know not what shall succeed.
	
	Haply, the river of Time--
	As it grows, as the towns on its marge
	Fling their wavering lights
	On a wider, statelier stream--
	May acquire, if not the calm
	Of its early mountainous shore,
	Yet a solemn peace of its own.
	
	And the width of the waters, the hush
	Of the gray expanse where he floats,
	Freshening its current, and spotted with foam
	As it draws to the ocean, may strike
	Peace to the soul of the man on its breast,--
	As the pale waste widens around him,
	As the banks fade dimmer away,
	As the stars come out, and the night-wind
	Brings up the stream
	Murmurs and scents of the infinite sea.



8. THE GOOD SHEPHERD WITH THE KID

	_He saves the sheep, the goats he doth not save._
	So rang Tertullian’s sentence, on the side
	Of that unpitying Phrygian sect which cried,
	“Him can no fount of fresh forgiveness lave,
	Who sins, once washed by the baptismal wave.”
	So spake the fierce Tertullian. But she sighed,
	The infant Church! of love she felt the tide
	Stream on her from her Lord’s yet recent grave.
	
	And then she smiled; and in the Catacombs,
	With eye suffused but heart inspired true,
	On those walls subterranean, where she hid
	
	Her head ’mid ignominy, death, and tombs,
	She her Good Shepherd’s hasty image drew--
	And on his shoulders, not a lamb, a kid.



9. GROWING OLD

	What is it to grow old?
	Is it to lose the glory of the form,
	The lustre of the eye?
	Is it for beauty to forego her wreath?
	--Yes, but not this alone.
	
	Is it to feel our strength--
	Not our bloom only, but our strength--decay?
	Is it to feel each limb
	Grow stiffer, every function less exact,
	Each nerve more loosely strung?
	
	Yes, this, and more; but not,
	Ah! ’tis not what in youth we dreamed ’twould be.
	’Tis not to have our life
	Mellowed and softened as with sunset-glow,--
	A golden day’s decline.
	
	’Tis not to see the world
	As from a height, with rapt prophetic eyes,
	And heart profoundly stirred;
	And weep, and feel the fulness of the past,
	The years that are no more.
	
	It is to spend long days,
	And not once feel that we were ever young;
	It is to add, immured
	In the hot prison of the present, month
	To month with weary pain.
	
	It is to suffer this,
	And feel but half, and feebly, what we feel.
	Deep in our hidden heart
	Festers the dull remembrance of a change,
	But no emotion,--none.
	
	It is--last stage of all--
	When we are frozen up within, and quite
	The phantom of ourselves,
	To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost,
	Which blamed the living man.



10. ISOLATION

	We were apart: yet, day by day,
	I bade my heart more constant be.
	I bade it keep the world away,
	And grow a home for only thee;
	Nor feared but thy love likewise grew,
	Like mine, each day, more tried, more true.
	
	The fault was grave! I might have known,
	What far too soon, alas! I learned,--
	The heart can bind itself alone,
	And faith may oft be unreturned.
	Self-swayed our feelings ebb and swell.
	Thou lov’st no more. Farewell! Farewell!
	
	Farewell!--And thou, thou lonely heart,
	Which never yet without remorse
	Even for a moment didst depart
	From thy remote and spherèd course
	To haunt the place where passions reign,--
	Back to thy solitude again!
	
	Back! with the conscious thrill of shame
	Which Luna felt, that summer-night,
	Flash through her pure immortal frame,
	When she forsook the starry height
	To hang o’er Endymion’s sleep
	Upon the pine-grown Latmian steep.
	
	Yet she, chaste queen, had never proved
	How vain a thing is mortal love,
	Wandering in heaven, far removed;
	But thou hast long had place to prove
	This truth,--to prove, and make thine own:
	“Thou hast been, shalt be, art, alone.”
	
	Or, if not quite alone, yet they
	Which touch thee are unmating things,--
	Ocean and clouds and night and day;
	Lorn autumns and triumphant springs;
	And life, and others’ joy and pain,
	And love, if love, of happier men.
	
	Of happier men; for they, at least,
	Have _dreamed_ two human hearts might blend
	In one, and were through faith released
	From isolation without end
	Prolonged; nor knew, although not less
	Alone than thou, their loneliness.



11. MORALITY

	We cannot kindle when we will
	The fire which in the heart resides;
	The spirit bloweth and is still,
	In mystery our soul abides.
	 But tasks in hours of insight willed
	 Can be through hours of gloom fulfilled.
	
	With aching hands and bleeding feet
	We dig and heap, lay stone on stone;
	We bear the burden and the heat
	Of the long day, and wish ’twere done.
	 Not till the hours of light return,
	 All we have built do we discern.
	
	Then, when the clouds are off the soul,
	When thou dost bask in Nature’s eye,
	Ask how _she_ viewed thy self-control,
	Thy struggling, tasked morality,--
	 Nature, whose free, light, cheerful air,
	 Oft made thee, in thy gloom, despair.
	
	And she, whose censure thou dost dread,
	Whose eye thou wast afraid to seek,
	See, on her face a glow is spread,
	A strong emotion on her cheek!
	 “Ah, child!” she cries, “that strife divine,
	 Whence was it, for it is not mine?
	
	“There is no effort on _my_ brow;
	I do not strive, I do not weep:
	I rush with the swift spheres, and glow
	In joy, and when I will, I sleep.
	 Yet that severe, that earnest air,
	 I saw, I felt it once--but where?
	
	“I knew not yet the gauge of time,
	Nor wore the manacles of space;
	I felt it in some other clime,
	I saw it in some other place.
	 ’Twas when the heavenly house I trod,
	 And lay upon the breast of God.”



12. MYCERINUS

	“Not by the justice that my father spurned,
	Not for the thousands whom my father slew,
	Altars unfed and temples overturned,
	Cold hearts and thankless tongues, where thanks are due;
	Fell this dread voice from lips that cannot lie,
	Stern sentence of the Powers of Destiny.
	
	“I will unfold my sentence and my crime.
	My crime,--that, rapt in reverential awe,
	I sate obedient, in the fiery prime
	Of youth, self-governed, at the feet of Law;
	Ennobling this dull pomp, the life of kings,
	By contemplation of diviner things.
	
	“My father loved injustice, and lived long;
	Crowned with gray hairs he died, and full of sway.
	I loved the good he scorned, and hated wrong--
	The gods declare my recompense to-day.
	I looked for life more lasting, rule more high;
	And when six years are measured, lo, I die!
	
	“Yet surely, O my people, did I deem
	Man’s justice from the all-just gods was given;
	A light that from some upper fount did beam,
	Some better archetype, whose seat was heaven;
	A light that, shining from the blest abodes,
	Did shadow somewhat of the life of gods.
	
	“Mere phantoms of man’s self-tormenting heart,
	Which on the sweets that woo it dares not feed!
	Vain dreams, which quench our pleasures, then depart,
	When the duped soul, self-mastered, claims its meed;
	When, on the strenuous just man, Heaven bestows,
	Crown of his struggling life, an unjust close!
	
	“Seems it so light a thing, then, austere powers,
	To spurn man’s common lure, life’s pleasant things?
	Seems there no joy in dances crowned with flowers,
	Love free to range, and regal banquetings?
	Bend ye on these indeed an unmoved eye,
	Not gods, but ghosts, in frozen apathy?
	
	“Or is it that some force, too stern, too strong,
	Even for yourselves to conquer or beguile,
	Bears earth and heaven and men and gods along,
	Like the broad volume of the insurgent Nile?
	And the great powers we serve, themselves may be
	Slaves of a tyrannous necessity?
	
	“Or in mid-heaven, perhaps, your golden cars,
	Where earthly voice climbs never, wing their flight,
	And in wild hunt, through mazy tracts of stars,
	Sweep in the sounding stillness of the night?
	Or in deaf ease, on thrones of dazzling sheen,
	Drinking deep draughts of joy, ye dwell serene?
	
	“Oh, wherefore cheat our youth, if thus it be,
	Of one short joy, one lust, one pleasant dream?
	Stringing vain words of powers we cannot see,
	Blind divinations of a will supreme;
	Lost labor! when the circumambient gloom
	But hides, if gods, gods careless of our doom?
	
	“The rest I give to joy. Even while I speak,
	My sand runs short; and as yon star-shot ray,
	Hemmed by two banks of cloud, peers pale and weak,
	Now, as the barrier closes, dies away,--
	Even so do past and future intertwine,
	Blotting this six years’ space, which yet is mine.
	
	“Six years,--six little years,--six drops of time!
	Yet suns shall rise, and many moons shall wane,
	And old men die, and young men pass their prime,
	And languid pleasure fade and flower again,
	And the dull gods behold, ere these are flown,
	Revels more deep, joy keener than their own.
	
	“Into the silence of the groves and woods
	I will go forth; though something would I say,--
	Something,--yet what, I know not: for the gods
	The doom they pass revoke not nor delay;
	And prayers and gifts and tears are fruitless all,
	And the night waxes, and the shadows fall.
	
	“Ye men of Egypt, ye have heard your king!
	I go, and I return not. But the will
	Of the great gods is plain; and ye must bring
	Ill deeds, ill passions, zealous to fulfil
	Their pleasure, to their feet; and reap their praise,--
	The praise of gods, rich boon! and length of days.”
	
	--So spake he, half in anger, half in scorn;
	And one loud cry of grief and of amaze
	Broke from his sorrowing people; so he spake,
	And turning, left them there: and with brief pause,
	Girt with a throng of revellers, bent his way
	To the cool region of the groves he loved.
	There by the river-banks he wandered on,
	From palm-grove on to palm-grove, happy trees,
	Their smooth tops shining sunward, and beneath
	Burying their unsunned stems in grass and flowers;
	Where in one dream the feverish time of youth
	Might fade in slumber, and the feet of joy
	Might wander all day long and never tire.
	Here came the king, holding high feast, at morn,
	Rose-crowned; and ever, when the sun went down,
	A hundred lamps beamed in the tranquil gloom,
	From tree to tree all through the twinkling grove,
	Revealing all the tumult of the feast,--
	Flushed guests, and golden goblets foamed with wine;
	While the deep-burnished foliage overhead
	Splintered the silver arrows of the moon.
	  It may be that sometimes his wondering soul
	From the loud joyful laughter of his lips
	Might shrink half startled, like a guilty man
	Who wrestles with his dream; as some pale shape,
	Gliding half hidden through the dusky stems,
	Would thrust a hand before the lifted bowl,
	Whispering, _A little space, and thou art mine!_
	It may be, on that joyless feast his eye
	Dwelt with mere outward seeming; he, within,
	Took measure of his soul, and knew its strength,
	And by that silent knowledge, day by day,
	Was calmed, ennobled, comforted, sustained.
	It may be; but not less his brow was smooth,
	And his clear laugh fled ringing through the gloom,
	And his mirth quailed not at the mild reproof
	Sighed out by winter’s sad tranquillity;
	Nor, palled with its own fulness, ebbed and died
	In the rich languor of long summer-days;
	Nor withered when the palm-tree plumes, that roofed
	With their mild dark his grassy banquet-hall,
	Bent to the cold winds of the showerless spring;
	No, nor grew dark when autumn brought the clouds.
	  So six long years he revelled, night and day.
	And when the mirth waxed loudest, with dull sound
	Sometimes from the grove’s centre echoes came,
	To tell his wondering people of their king;
	In the still night, across the steaming flats,
	Mixed with the murmur of the moving Nile.



13. THE NECKAN

	In summer, on the headlands,
	 The Baltic Sea along,
	Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,
	 And sings his plaintive song.
	
	Green rolls, beneath the headlands,
	 Green rolls the Baltic Sea;
	And there, below the Neckan’s feet,
	 His wife and children be.
	
	He sings not of the ocean,
	 Its shells and roses pale:
	Of earth, of earth, the Neckan sings,
	 He hath no other tale.
	
	He sits upon the headlands,
	 And sings a mournful stave
	Of all he saw and felt on earth,
	 Far from the kind sea-wave.
	
	Sings how, a knight, he wandered
	 By castle, field, and town;
	But earthly knights have harder hearts
	 Than the sea-children own.
	
	Sings of his earthly bridal,
	 Priest, knights, and ladies gay.
	“And who art thou,” the priest began,
	 “Sir Knight, who wedd’st to-day?”
	
	“I am no knight,” he answered;
	 “From the sea-waves I come.”
	The knights drew sword, the ladies screamed,
	 The surpliced priest stood dumb.
	
	He sings how from the chapel
	 He vanished with his bride,
	And bore her down to the sea-halls,
	 Beneath the salt sea-tide.
	
	He sings how she sits weeping
	 ’Mid shells that round her lie.
	“False Neckan shares my bed,” she weeps;
	 “No Christian mate have I.”
	
	He sings how through the billows
	 He rose to earth again,
	And sought a priest to sign the cross,
	 That Neckan heaven might gain.
	
	He sings how, on an evening,
	 Beneath the birch-trees cool,
	He sate and played his harp of gold,
	 Beside the river-pool.
	
	Beside the pool sate Neckan,
	 Tears filled his mild blue eye.
	On his white mule, across the bridge,
	 A cassocked priest rode by.
	
	“Why sitt’st thou there, O Neckan,
	 And play’st thy harp of gold?
	Sooner shall this my staff bear leaves,
	 Than thou shalt heaven behold.”
	
	But, lo! the staff, it budded;
	 It greened, it branched, it waved.
	“O ruth of God!” the priest cried out,
	 “This lost sea-creature saved!”
	
	The cassocked priest rode onwards,
	 And vanished with his mule;
	And Neckan in the twilight gray
	 Wept by the river-pool.
	
	He wept, “The earth hath kindness,
	 The sea, the starry poles;
	Earth, sea, and sky, and God above,--
	 But, ah! not human souls!”
	
	In summer, on the headlands,
	 The Baltic Sea along,
	Sits Neckan with his harp of gold,
	 And sings this plaintive song.



14. PHILOMELA

	Hark! ah, the nightingale--
	The tawny-throated!
	Hark! from that moonlit cedar what a burst!
	What triumph! hark! what pain!
	
	O wanderer from a Grecian shore,
	Still, after many years, in distant lands,
	Still nourishing in thy bewildered brain
	That wild, unquenched, deep-sunken, old-world pain,
	Say, will it never heal?
	And can this fragrant lawn
	With its cool trees, and night,
	And the sweet, tranquil Thames,
	And moonshine, and the dew,
	To thy racked heart and brain
	Afford no balm?
	
	Dost thou to-night behold,
	Here, through the moonlight on this English grass,
	The unfriendly palace in the Thracian wild?
	Dost thou again peruse
	With hot cheeks and seared eyes
	The too clear web, and thy dumb sister’s shame?
	Dost thou once more assay
	Thy flight, and feel come over thee,
	Poor fugitive, the feathery change.
	Once more, and once more seem to make resound
	With love and hate, triumph and agony,
	Lone Daulis, and the high Cephissian vale?
	Listen, Eugenia,--
	How thick the bursts come crowding through the leaves!
	Again--thou hearest?
	Eternal passion!
	Eternal pain!



15. PROGRESS

	The Master stood upon the mount, and taught.
	He saw a fire in his disciples’ eyes;
	“The old law,” they said, “is wholly come to naught:
	   Behold the new world rise!”
	
	“Was it,” the Lord then said, “with scorn ye saw
	The old law observed by scribes and Pharisees?
	I say unto you, see ye keep that law
	   More faithfully than these!
	
	“Too hasty heads for ordering worlds, alas!
	Think not that I to annul the law have willed:
	No jot, no tittle, from the law shall pass
	   Till all have been fulfilled.”
	
	So Christ said eighteen hundred years ago.
	And what, then, shall be said to those to-day,
	Who cry aloud to lay the old world low
	   To clear the new world’s way?
	
	“Religious fervors! ardor misapplied!
	Hence, hence!” they cry, “ye do but keep man blind!
	But keep him self-immersed, pre-occupied,
	   And lame the active mind.”
	
	Ah! from the old world let some one answer give:
	“Scorn ye this world, their tears, their inward cares?
	I say unto you, see that _your_ souls live
	   A deeper life than theirs!
	
	“Say ye, ‘The spirit of man has found new roads,
	And we must leave the old faiths, and walk therein’?
	Leave, then, the cross as ye have left carved gods,
	   But guard the fire within!
	
	“Bright, else, and fast the stream of life may roll,
	And no man may the other’s hurt behold;
	Yet each will have one anguish,--his own soul
	   Which perishes of cold.”
	
	Here let that voice make end; then let a strain
	From a far lonelier distance, like the wind
	Be heard, floating through heaven, and fill again
	   These men’s profoundest mind:--
	
	“Children of men! the unseen Power, whose eye
	Forever doth accompany mankind,
	Hath looked on no religion scornfully
	   That men did ever find.
	
	“Which has not taught weak wills how much they can?
	Which has not fallen on the dry heart like rain?
	Which has not cried to sunk, self-weary man,--
	   _Thou must be born again!_
	
	“Children of men! not that your age excel
	In pride of life the ages of your sires,
	But that _ye_ think clear, feel deep, bear fruit well,
	   The Friend of man desires.”



16. RUGBY CHAPEL

	Coldly, sadly descends
	The autumn evening. The field
	Strewn with its dank yellow drifts
	Of withered leaves, and the elms,
	Fade into dimness apace,
	Silent; hardly a shout
	From a few boys late at their play!
	The lights come out in the street,
	In the schoolroom windows; but cold,
	Solemn, unlighted, austere,
	Through the gathering darkness, arise
	The chapel-walls, in whose bound
	Thou, my father! art laid.
	
	There thou dost lie, in the gloom
	Of the autumn evening. But ah!
	That word _gloom_ to my mind
	Brings thee back in the light
	Of thy radiant vigor again.
	In the gloom of November we passed
	Days not dark at thy side;
	Seasons impaired not the ray
	Of thy buoyant cheerfulness clear.
	Such thou wast! and I stand
	In the autumn evening, and think
	Of bygone autumns with thee.
	
	Fifteen years have gone round
	Since thou arosest to tread,
	In the summer-morning, the road
	Of death, at a call unforeseen,
	Sudden. For fifteen years,
	We who till then in thy shade
	Rested as under the boughs
	Of a mighty oak, have endured
	Sunshine and rain as we might,
	Bare, unshaded, alone,
	Lacking the shelter of thee.
	
	O strong soul, by what shore
	Tarriest thou now? For that force,
	Surely, has not been left vain!
	Somewhere, surely, afar,
	In the sounding labor-house vast
	Of being, is practised that strength,
	Zealous, beneficent, firm!
	
	Yes, in some far-shining sphere,
	Conscious or not of the past,
	Still thou performest the word
	Of the Spirit in whom thou dost live,
	Prompt, unwearied, as here.
	Still thou upraisest with zeal
	The humble good from the ground,
	Sternly repressest the bad;
	Still, like a trumpet, dost rouse
	Those who with half-open eyes
	Tread the border-land dim
	’Twixt vice and virtue; reviv’st,
	Succorest. This was thy work,
	This was thy life upon earth.
	
	What is the course of the life
	Of mortal men on the earth?
	Most men eddy about
	Here and there, eat and drink,
	Chatter and love and hate,
	Gather and squander, are raised
	Aloft, are hurled in the dust,
	Striving blindly, achieving
	Nothing; and then they die,--
	Perish; and no one asks
	Who or what they have been,
	More than he asks what waves,
	In the moonlit solitudes mild
	Of the midmost ocean, have swelled,
	Foamed for a moment, and gone.
	
	And there are some whom a thirst
	Ardent, unquenchable, fires,
	Not with the crowd to be spent,
	Not without aim to go round
	In an eddy of purposeless dust,
	Effort unmeaning and vain.
	Ah yes! some of us strive
	Not without action to die
	Fruitless, but something to snatch
	From dull oblivion, nor all
	Glut the devouring grave.
	We, we have chosen our path,--
	Path to a clear-purposed goal,
	Path of advance; but it leads
	A long, steep journey, through sunk
	Gorges, o’er mountains in snow.
	Cheerful, with friends, we set forth:
	Then, on the height, comes the storm.
	Thunder crashes from rock
	To rock; the cataracts reply;
	Lightnings dazzle our eyes;
	Roaring torrents have breached
	The track; the stream-bed descends
	In the place where the wayfarer once
	Planted his footstep; the spray
	Boils o’er its borders; aloft,
	The unseen snow-beds dislodge
	Their hanging ruin. Alas!
	Havoc is made in our train!
	Friends who set forth at our side
	Falter, are lost in the storm.
	
	We, we only are left!
	With frowning foreheads, with lips
	Sternly compressed, we strain on,
	On; and at nightfall at last
	Come to the end of our way,
	To the lonely inn ’mid the rocks;
	Where the gaunt and taciturn host
	Stands on the threshold, the wind
	Shaking his thin white hairs,
	Holds his lantern to scan
	Our storm-beat figures, and asks,--
	Whom in our party we bring?
	Whom we have left in the snow?
	
	Sadly we answer, We bring
	Only ourselves! we lost
	Sight of the rest in the storm.
	Hardly ourselves we fought through,
	Stripped, without friends, as we are.
	Friends, companions, and train,
	The avalanche swept from our side.
	
	But thou wouldst not _alone_
	Be saved, my father! _alone_
	Conquer and come to thy goal,
	Leaving the rest in the wild.
	We were weary, and we
	Fearful, and we in our march
	Fain to drop down and to die.
	Still thou turnedst, and still
	Beckonedst the trembler, and still
	Gavest the weary thy hand.
	If, in the paths of the world,
	Stones might have wounded thy feet,
	Toil or dejection have tried
	Thy spirit, of that we saw
	Nothing: to us thou wast still
	Cheerful, and helpful, and firm!
	Therefore to thee it was given
	Many to save with thyself;
	And, at the end of thy day,
	O faithful shepherd! to come,
	Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.
	
	And through thee I believe
	In the noble and great who are gone;
	Pure souls honored and blest
	By former ages, who else else--
	Such, so soulless, so poor,
	Is the race of men whom I see--
	Seemed but a dream of the heart,
	Seemed but a cry of desire.
	Yes! I believe that there lived
	Others like thee in the past,
	Not like the men of the crowd
	Who all round me to-day
	Bluster or cringe, and make life
	Hideous and arid and vile;
	But souls tempered with fire,
	Fervent, heroic, and good,
	Helpers and friends of mankind.
	
	Servants of God!--or sons
	Shall I not call you? because
	Not as servants ye knew
	Your Father’s innermost mind,
	His who unwillingly sees
	One of his little ones lost,--
	Yours is the praise, if mankind
	Hath not as yet in its march
	Fainted and fallen and died.
	
	See! In the rocks of the world
	Marches the host of mankind,
	A feeble, wavering line.
	Where are they tending? A God
	Marshalled them, gave them their goal.
	Ah, but the way is so long!
	
	Years they have been in the wild:
	Sore thirst plagues them; the rocks,
	Rising all round, overawe;
	Factions divide them; their host
	Threatens to break, to dissolve.
	Ah! keep, keep them combined!
	Else, of the myriads who fill
	That army, not one shall arrive;
	Sole they shall stray; on the rocks
	Batter forever in vain,
	Die one by one in the waste.
	
	Then, in such hour of need
	Of your fainting, dispirited race,
	Ye like angels appear,
	Radiant with ardor divine.
	Beacons of hope, ye appear!
	Languor is not in your heart,
	Weakness is not in your word,
	Weariness not on your brow.
	Ye alight in our van! at your voice,
	Panic, despair, flee away.
	Ye move through the ranks, recall
	The stragglers, refresh the outworn,
	Praise, re-inspire the brave.
	Order, courage, return;
	Eyes rekindling, and prayers,
	Follow your steps as ye go.
	Ye fill up the gaps in our files,
	Strengthen the wavering line,
	Stablish, continue our march,
	On, to the bound of the waste,
	On, to the City of God.



17. SAINT BRANDAN

	Saint Brandan sails the northern main;
	The brotherhoods of saints are glad.
	He greets them once, he sails again;
	So late! such storms! The saint is mad!
	
	He heard, across the howling seas,
	Chime convent-bells on wintry nights;
	He saw, on spray-swept Hebrides,
	Twinkle the monastery-lights;
	
	But north, still north, Saint Brandan steered;
	And now no bells, no convents more!
	The hurtling Polar lights are neared,
	The sea without a human shore.
	
	At last (it was the Christmas-night;
	Stars shone after a day of storm)
	He sees float past an iceberg white,
	And on it--Christ!--a living form.
	
	That furtive mien, that scowling eye,
	Of hair that red and tufted fell,
	It is--oh, where shall Brandan fly?--
	The traitor Judas, out of hell!
	
	Palsied with terror, Brandan sate;
	The moon was bright, the iceberg near.
	He hears a voice sigh humbly, “Wait!
	By high permission I am here.
	
	“One moment wait, thou holy man!
	On earth my crime, my death, they knew;
	My name is under all men’s ban:
	Ah! tell them of my respite too.
	
	“Tell them, one blessed Christmas-night
	(It was the first after I came,
	Breathing self-murder, frenzy, spite,
	To rue my guilt in endless flame),--
	
	“I felt, as I in torment lay
	’Mid the souls plagued by heavenly power,
	An angel touch mine arm, and say,--
	_Go hence, and cool thyself an hour!_
	
	“‘Ah! whence this mercy, Lord?’ I said.
	_The leper recollect_, said he,
	_Who asked the passers-by for aid,_
	_In Joppa, and thy charity_.
	
	“Then I remembered how I went,
	In Joppa, through the public street,
	One morn when the sirocco spent
	Its storms of dust with burning heat;
	“And in the street a leper sate,
	Shivering with fever, naked, old;
	Sand raked his sores from heel to pate,
	The hot wind fevered him fivefold.
	
	“He gazed upon me as I passed,
	And murmured, _Help me, or I die!_
	To the poor wretch my cloak I cast,
	Saw him look eased, and hurried by.
	
	“O Brandan! think what grace divine,
	What blessing must full goodness shower,
	When fragment of it small, like mine,
	Hath such inestimable power!
	
	“Well-fed, well-clothed, well-friended, I
	Did that chance act of good, that one!
	Then went my way to kill and lie,
	Forgot my good as soon as done.
	
	“That germ of kindness, in the womb
	Of mercy caught, did not expire;
	Outlives my guilt, outlives my doom,
	And friends me in the pit of fire.
	
	“Once every year, when carols wake,
	On earth, the Christmas-night’s repose,
	Arising from the sinner’s lake,
	I journey to these healing snows.
	
	“I stanch with ice my burning breast,
	With silence balm my whirling brain.
	O Brandan! to this hour of rest,
	That Joppan leper’s ease was pain.”
	
	Tears started to Saint Brandan’s eyes;
	He bowed his head, he breathed a prayer,
	Then looked--and lo, the frosty skies!
	The iceberg, and no Judas there!



18. THE SCHOLAR-GYPSY

	Go, for they call you, shepherd, from the hill;
	 Go, shepherd, and untie the wattled cotes!
	   No longer leave thy wistful flock unfed,
	 Nor let thy bawling fellows rack their throats,
	   Nor the cropped grasses shoot another head;
	     But when the fields are still,
	 And the tired men and dogs all gone to rest,
	   And only the white sheep are sometimes seen
	   Cross and recross the strips of moon-blanched green,
	 Come, shepherd, and again renew the quest!
	
	Here, where the reaper was at work of late,--
	 In this high field’s dark corner, where he leaves
	   His coat, his basket, and his earthen cruse,
	 And in the sun all morning binds the sheaves,
	   Then here at noon comes back his stores to use,--
	     Here will I sit and wait,
	 While to my ear from uplands far away
	   The bleating of the folded flocks is borne,
	   With distant cries of reapers in the corn,--
	 All the live murmur of a summer’s day.
	
	Screened is this nook o’er the high, half-reaped field,
	 And here till sundown, shepherd! will I be.
	   Through the thick corn the scarlet poppies peep,
	 And round green roots and yellowing stalks I see
	   Pale blue convolvulus in tendrils creep;
	     And air-swept lindens yield
	   Their scent, and rustle down their perfumed showers
	   Of bloom on the bent grass where I am laid,
	   And bower me from the August-sun with shade;
	 And the eye travels down to Oxford’s towers.
	
	And near me on the grass lies Glanvil’s book.
	 Come, let me read the oft-read tale again!
	   The story of that Oxford scholar poor,
	 Of shining parts and quick inventive brain,
	   Who, tired of knocking at preferment’s door,
	     One summer-morn forsook
	 His friends, and went to learn the gypsy-lore,
	   And roamed the world with that wild brotherhood,
	   And came, as most men deemed, to little good,
	 But came to Oxford and his friends no more.
	
	But once, years after, in the country-lanes,
	 Two scholars, whom at college erst he knew,
	   Met him, and of his way of life inquired;
	 Whereat he answered, that the gypsy-crew,
	   His mates, had arts to rule as they desired
	     The workings of men’s brains,
	 And they can bind them to what thoughts they will.
	   “And I,” he said, “the secret of their art,
	   When fully learned, will to the world impart;
	 But it needs Heaven-sent moments for this skill.”
	
	This said, he left them, and returned no more.
	 But rumors hung about the country-side,
	   That the lost Scholar long was seen to stray,
	 Seen by rare glimpses, pensive and tongue-tied,
	   In hat of antique shape, and cloak of gray,
	     The same the gypsies wore.
	 Shepherds had met him on the Hurst in spring;
	   At some lone alehouse in the Berkshire moors,
	   On the warm ingle-bench, the smock-frocked boors
	 Had found him seated at their entering;
	
	But, ’mid their drink and clatter, he would fly.
	 And I myself seem half to know thy looks,
	   And put the shepherds, wanderer! on thy trace;
	 And boys who in lone wheat-fields scare the rooks
	   I ask if thou hast passed their quiet place;
	     Or in my boat I lie
	 Moored to the cool bank in the summer-heats,
	   Mid wide grass meadows which the sunshine fills,
	   And watch the warm, green-muffled Cumner hills,
	 And wonder if thou haunt’st their shy retreats.
	
	For most, I know, thou lov’st retired ground!
	 Thee at the ferry Oxford riders blithe,
	   Returning home on summer-nights, have met
	 Crossing the stripling Thames at Bab-lock-hithe,
	   Trailing in the cool stream thy fingers wet,
	     As the punt’s rope chops round;
	 And leaning backward in a pensive dream,
	   And fostering in thy lap a heap of flowers
	     Plucked in shy fields and distant Wychwood bowers,
	 And thine eyes resting on the moonlit stream.
	
	And then they land, and thou art seen no more!
	 Maidens, who from the distant hamlets come
	   To dance around the Fyfield elm in May,
	 Oft through the darkening fields have seen thee roam,
	   Or cross a stile into the public way;
	     Oft thou hast given them store
	 Of flowers,--the frail-leafed, white anemone,
	   Dark bluebells drenched with dews of summer eves,
	   And purple orchises with spotted leaves,--
	 But none hath words she can report of thee!
	
	And, above Godstow Bridge, when hay-time’s here
	 In June, and many a scythe in sunshine flames,
	   Men who through those wide fields of breezy grass,
	 Where black-winged swallows haunt the glittering Thames,
	   To bathe in the abandoned lasher pass,
	     Have often passed thee near
	 Sitting upon the river-bank o’ergrown;
	   Marked thine outlandish garb, thy figure spare,
	   Thy dark vague eyes, and soft abstracted air:
	 But, when they came from bathing, thou wast gone!
	
	At some lone homestead in the Cumner hills,
	 Where at her open door the housewife darns,
	   Thou hast been seen, or hanging on a gate
	 To watch the threshers in the mossy barns.
	   Children, who early range these slopes and late
	     For cresses from the rills,
	 Have known thee eying, all an April-day,
	   The springing pastures and the feeding kine;
	     And marked thee, when the stars come out and shine,
	 Through the long dewy grass move slow away.
	
	In autumn, on the skirts of Bagley Wood,--
	 Where most the gypsies by the turf-edged way
	   Pitch their smoked tents, and every bush you see
	 With scarlet patches tagged and shreds of gray,
	   Above the forest ground called Thessaly,--
	     The blackbird picking food
	 Sees thee, nor stops his meal, nor fears at all;
	   So often has he known thee past him stray,
	   Rapt, twirling in thy hand a withered spray,
	 And waiting for the spark from heaven to fall.
	
	And once, in winter, on the causeway chill
	 Where home through flooded fields foot-travellers go,
	   Have I not passed thee on the wooden bridge
	 Wrapped in thy cloak and battling with the snow,
	   Thy face toward Hinksey and its wintry ridge?
	     And thou hast climbed the hill,
	 And gained the white brow of the Cumner range;
	   Turned once to watch, while thick the snowflakes fall,
	   The line of festal light in Christ-church hall:
	 Then sought thy straw in some sequestered grange.
	
	But what--I dream! Two hundred years are flown
	 Since first thy story ran through Oxford halls,
	   And the grave Glanvil did the tale inscribe
	 That thou wert wandered from the studious walls
	   To learn strange arts, and join a gypsy-tribe.
	     And thou from earth art gone
	 Long since, and in some quiet churchyard laid,--
	   Some country-nook, where o’er thy unknown grave
	   Tall grasses and white flowering nettles wave,
	 Under a dark, red-fruited yew-tree’s shade.
	
	--No, no, thou hast not felt the lapse of hours!
	 For what wears out the life of mortal men?
	   ’Tis that from change to change their being rolls;
	 ’Tis that repeated shocks, again, again,
	   Exhaust the energy of strongest souls,
	     And numb the elastic powers,
	 Till having used our nerves with bliss and teen,
	   And tired upon a thousand schemes our wit,
	   To the just-pausing Genius we remit
	 Our well-worn life, and are--what we have been.
	
	Thou hast not lived, why shouldst thou perish, so?
	 Thou hadst _one_ aim, _one_ business, _one_ desire;
	   Else wert thou long since numbered with thedead!
	 Else hadst thou spent, like other men, thy fire!
	   The generations of thy peers are fled,
	     And we ourselves shall go;
	 But thou possessest an immortal lot,
	   And we imagine thee exempt from age,
	   And living as thou liv’st on Glanvil’s page,
	 Because thou hadst--what we, alas! have not.
	
	For early didst thou leave the world, with powers
	 Fresh, undiverted to the world without,
	   Firm to their mark, not spent on other things;
	 Free from the sick fatigue, the languid doubt,
	   Which much to have tried, in much been baffled, brings.
	     O life unlike to ours!
	 Who fluctuate idly without term or scope,
	   Of whom each strives, nor knows for what he strives,
	   And each half lives a hundred different lives;
	 Who wait like thee, but not, like thee, in hope.
	
	Thou waitest for the spark from heaven! and we,
	 Light half-believers of our casual creeds,
	   Who never deeply felt, nor clearly willed,
	 Whose insight never has borne fruit in deeds,
	   Whose vague resolves never have been fulfilled;
	     For whom each year we see
	 Breeds new beginnings, disappointments new;
	   Who hesitate and falter life away,
	   And lose to-morrow the ground won to-day--
	 Ah! do not we, wanderer! await it too?
	
	Yes, we await it! but it still delays,
	 And then we suffer! and amongst us one,
	   Who most has suffered, takes dejectedly
	 His seat upon the intellectual throne;
	   And all his store of sad experience he
	     Lays bare of wretched days;
	 Tells us his misery’s birth and growth and signs,
	   And how the dying spark of hope was fed,
	   And how the breast was soothed, and how the head,
	 And all his hourly varied anodynes.
	
	This for our wisest! and we others pine,
	 And wish the long unhappy dream would end,
	   And waive all claim to bliss, and try to bear;
	 With close-lipped patience for our only friend,--
	   Sad patience, too near neighbor to despair,--
	     But none has hope like thine!
	 Thou through the fields and through the woods dost stray,
	   Roaming the country-side, a truant boy,
	   Nursing thy project in unclouded joy,
	 And every doubt long blown by time away.
	
	Oh, born in days when wits were fresh and clear,
	 And life ran gayly as the sparkling Thames;
	   Before this strange disease of modern life,
	 With its sick hurry, its divided aims,
	   Its heads o’ertaxed, its palsied hearts, was rife,--
	     Fly hence, our contact fear!
	 Still fly, plunge deeper in the bowering wood!
	   Averse, as Dido did with gesture stern
	   From her false friend’s approach in Hades turn,
	 Wave us away, and keep thy solitude!
	
	Still nursing the unconquerable hope,
	 Still clutching the inviolable shade,
	   With a free, onward impulse brushing through,
	 By night, the silvered branches of the glade,--
	   Far on the forest-skirts, where none pursue,
	     On some mild pastoral slope
	 Emerge, and resting on the moonlit pales
	   Freshen thy flowers as in former years
	   With dew, or listen with enchanted ears,
	 From the dark dingles, to the nightingales!
	
	But fly our paths, our feverish contact fly!
	 For strong the infection of our mental strife,
	   Which, though it gives no bliss, yet spoils for rest;
	 And we should win thee from thy own fair life,
	   Like us distracted, and like us unblest.
	     Soon, soon thy cheer would die,
	 Thy hopes grow timorous, and unfixed thy powers,
	   And thy clear aims be cross and shifting made;
	   And then thy glad perennial youth would fade,
	 Fade, and grow old at last, and die like ours.
	
	Then fly our greetings, fly our speech and smiles!
	--As some grave Tyrian trader, from the sea,
	   Descried at sunrise an emerging prow
	 Lifting the cool-haired creepers stealthily,
	   The fringes of a southward-facing brow
	     Among the Aegeaen isles;
	 And saw the merry Grecian coaster come,
	   Freighted with amber grapes, and Chian wine,
	   Green bursting figs, and tunnies steeped in brine,
	 And knew the intruders on his ancient home,--
	
	The young light-hearted masters of the waves,--
	 And snatched his rudder, and shook out more sail,
	   And day and night held on indignantly
	 O’er the blue Midland waters with the gale,
	   Betwixt the Syrtes and soft Sicily,
	     To where the Atlantic raves
	 Outside the western straits, and unbent sails
	   There where down cloudy cliffs, through sheets of foam,
	   Shy traffickers, the dark Iberians come;
	 And on the beach undid his corded bales.



19. SELF-DEPENDENCE

	Weary of myself, and sick of asking
	What I am, and what I ought to be,
	At this vessel’s prow I stand, which bears me
	Forwards, forwards, o’er the starlit sea.
	
	And a look of passionate desire
	O’er the sea and to the stars I send:
	“Ye who from my childhood up have calmed me,
	Calm me, ah, compose me to the end!
	
	Ah, once more,” I cried, “ye stars, ye waters,
	On my heart your mighty charm renew;
	Still, still let me, as I gaze upon you,
	Feel my soul becoming vast like you!”
	
	From the intense, clear, star-sown vault of heaven,
	Over the lit sea’s unquiet way,
	In the rustling night-air came the answer,--
	“Wouldst thou _be_ as these are? _Live_ as they.
	
	“Unaffrighted by the silence round them,
	Undistracted by the sights they see,
	These demand not that the things without them
	Yield them love, amusement, sympathy.
	
	“And with joy the stars perform their shining,
	And the sea its long moon-silvered roll;
	For self-poised they live, nor pine with noting
	All the fever of some differing soul.
	
	“Bounded by themselves, and unregardful
	In what state God’s other works may be,
	In their own tasks all their powers pouring,
	These attain the mighty life you see.”
	
	O air-born voice! long since, severely clear,
	A cry like thine in mine own heart I hear,--
	“Resolve to be thyself; and know, that he
	Who finds himself loses his misery!”



20. SUMMER NIGHT

	In the deserted, moon-blanched street,
	How lonely rings the echo of my feet!
	Those windows, which I gaze at, frown,
	Silent and white, unopening down,
	Repellent as the world; but see,
	A break between the housetops shows
	The moon! and lost behind her, fading dim
	Into the dewy dark obscurity
	Down at the far horizon’s rim,
	Doth a whole tract of heaven disclose!
	
	And to my mind the thought
	Is on a sudden brought
	Of a past night, and a far different scene.
	Headlands stood out into the moonlit deep
	As clearly as at noon;
	The spring-tide’s brimming flow
	Heaved dazzlingly between;
	Houses, with long white sweep,
	Girdled the glistening bay;
	Behind, through the soft air,
	The blue haze-cradled mountains spread away.
	That night was far more fair--
	But the same restless pacings to and fro,
	And the same vainly throbbing heart was there,
	And the same bright, calm moon.
	
	And the calm moonlight seems to say,--
	_Hast thou, then, still the old unquiet breast,_
	_Which neither deadens into rest,_
	_Nor ever feels the fiery glow_
	_That whirls the spirit from itself away,_
	_But fluctuates to and fro,_
	_Never by passion quite possessed,_
	_And never quite benumbed by the world’s sway?_
	And I, I know not if to pray
	Still to be what I am, or yield, and be
	Like all the other men I see.
	
	For most men in a brazen prison live,
	Where, in the sun’s hot eye,
	With heads bent o’er their toil, they languidly
	Their lives to some unmeaning task-work give,
	Dreaming of naught beyond their prison-wall.
	And as, year after year,
	Fresh products of their barren labor fall
	From their tired hands, and rest
	Never yet comes more near,
	Gloom settles slowly down over their breast.
	And while they try to stem
	The waves of mournful thought by which they are prest,
	Death in their prison reaches them,
	Unfreed, having seen nothing, still unblest.
	
	And the rest, a few,
	Escape their prison, and depart
	On the wide ocean of life anew.
	There the freed prisoner, where’er his heart
	Listeth, will sail;
	Nor doth he know how there prevail,
	Despotic on that sea,
	Trade-winds which cross it from eternity.
	Awhile he holds some false way, undebarred
	By thwarting signs, and braves
	The freshening wind and blackening waves.
	And then the tempest strikes him; and between
	The lightning-bursts is seen
	Only a driving wreck,
	And the pale master on his spar-strewn deck
	With anguished face and flying hair,
	Grasping the rudder hard,
	Still bent to make some port, he knows not where,
	Still standing for some false, impossible shore.
	And sterner comes the roar
	Of sea and wind; and through the deepening gloom
	Fainter and fainter wreck and helmsman loom,
	And he too disappears, and comes no more.
	
	Is there no life, but these alone?
	Madman or slave, must man be one?
	
	Plainness and clearness without shadow of stain!
	Clearness divine!
	Ye heavens, whose pure dark regions have no sign
	Of languor, though so calm, and though so great
	Are yet untroubled and unpassionate;
	Who, though so noble, share in the world’s toil,
	And, though so tasked, keep free from dust and soil!
	I will not say that your mild deeps retain
	A tinge, it may be, of their silent pain
	Who have longed deeply once, and longed in vain;
	But I will rather say that you remain
	A world above man’s head, to let him see
	How boundless might his soul’s horizons be,
	How vast, yet of what clear transparency!
	How it were good to live there, and breathe free;
	How fair a lot to fill
	Is left to each man still!



21. (FROM) THE HYMN OF EMPEDOCLES

	IS it so small a thing
	To have enjoy’d the sun,
	To have lived light in the spring,
	To have loved, to have thought, to have done;
	To have advanced true friends, and beat down baffling foes;
	
	That we must feign a bliss
	Of doubtful future date,
	And while we dream on this
	Lose all our present state,
	And relegate to worlds yet distant our repose?
	
	Not much, I know, you prize
	What pleasures may be had,
	Who look on life with eyes
	Estranged, like mine, and sad:
	And yet the village churl feels the truth more than you;
	
	Who ‘s loth to leave this life
	Which to him little yields:
	His hard-task’d sunburnt wife,
	His often-labour’d fields;
	The boors with whom he talk’d, the country spots he knew.
	
	But thou, because thou hear’st
	Men scoff at Heaven and Fate;
	Because the gods thou fear’st
	Fail to make blest thy state,
	Tremblest, and wilt not dare to trust the joys there are.
	
	I say, Fear not! life still
	Leaves human effort scope.
	But, since life teems with ill,
	Nurse no extravagant hope.
	Because thou must not dream, thou need’st not then despair.



22. WORLDLY PLACE

	_Even in a palace, life may be led well!_
	So spake the imperial sage, purest of men,
	Marcus Aurelius. But the stifling den
	Of common life, where, crowded up pell-mell,
	
	Our freedom for a little bread we sell,
	And drudge under some foolish master’s ken
	Who rates us if we peer outside our pen,--
	Matched with a palace, is not this a hell?
	
	_Even in a palace!_ On his truth sincere,
	Who spoke these words, no shadow ever came;
	And when my ill-schooled spirit is aflame
	
	Some nobler, ampler stage of life to win,
	I’ll stop, and say, “There were no succor here!
	The aids to noble life are all within.”



23. YOUTH AND CALM

	’Tis death! and peace indeed is here,
	And ease from shame, and rest from fear.
	There’s nothing can dismarble now
	The smoothness of that limpid brow.
	But is a calm like this, in truth,
	The crowning end of life and youth?
	And when this boon rewards the dead,
	Are all debts paid, has all been said?
	And is the heart of youth so light,
	Its step so firm, its eye so bright,
	Because on its hot brow there blows
	A wind of promise and repose
	From the far grave, to which it goes;
	Because it has the hope to come,
	One day, to harbor in the tomb?
	Ah, no! the bliss youth dreams is one
	For daylight, for the cheerful sun,
	For feeling nerves and living breath;
	Youth dreams a bliss on this side death.
	It dreams a rest, if not more deep,
	More grateful than this marble sleep;
	It hears a voice within it tell,--
	_Calm’s not life’s crown, though calm is well._
	’Tis all, perhaps, which man acquires,
	But ’tis not what our youth desires.

