*** W. H. Auden (1907 - 1973)

1. AFTER READING A CHILD’S GUIDE TO MODERN PHYSICS

	If all a top physicist knows
	About the Truth be true,
	Then, for all the so-and-so’s,
	Futility and grime,
	Our common world contains,
	We have a better time
	Than the Greater Nebulae do,
	Or the atoms in our brains. 
	
	Marriage is rarely bliss
	But, surely it would be worse
	As particles to pelt
	At thousands of miles per sec
	About a universe
	Wherein a lover’s kiss
	Would either not be felt
	Or break the loved one’s neck. 
	
	Though the face at which I stare
	While shaving it be cruel
	For, year after year, it repels
	An ageing suitor, it has,
	Thank God, sufficient mass
	To be altogether there,
	Not an indeterminate gruel
	Which is partly somewhere else. 
	
	Our eyes prefer to suppose
	That a habitable place
	Has a geocentric view,
	That architects enclose
	A quiet Euclidian space:
	Exploded myths - but who
	Could feel at home astraddle
	An ever expanding saddle? 
	
	This passion of our kind
	For the process of finding out
	Is a fact one can hardly doubt,
	But I would rejoice in it more
	If I knew more clearly what
	We wanted the knowledge for,
	Felt certain still that the mind
	Is free to know or not. 
	
	It has chosen once, it seems,
	And whether our concern
	For magnitude’s extremes
	Really become a creature
	Who comes in a median size,
	Or politicizing Nature
	Be altogether wise,
	Is something we shall learn.



2. ANOTHER TIME

	For us like any other fugitive,
	Like the numberless flowers that cannot number
	And all the beasts that need not remember,
	It is today in which we live.
	
	So many try to say Not Now,
	So many have forgotten how
	To say I Am, and would be
	Lost, if they could, in history.
	
	Bowing, for instance, with such old-world grace
	To a proper flag in a proper place,
	Muttering like ancients as they stump upstairs
	Of Mine and His or Ours and Theirs.
	
	Just as if time were what they used to will
	When it was gifted with possession still,
	Just as if they were wrong
	In no more wishing to belong.
	
	No wonder then so many die of grief,
	So many are so lonely as they die;
	No one has yet believed or liked a lie,
	Another time has other lives to live.



3. ARE YOU THERE?

	Each lover has some theory of his own
	About the difference between the ache
	Of being with his love, and being alone:
	
	Why what, when dreaming, is dear flesh and bone
	That really stirs the senses, when awake,
	Appears a simulacrum of his own.
	
	Narcissus disbelieves in the unknown;
	He cannot join his image in the lake
	So long as he assumes he is alone.
	
	The child, the waterfall, the fire, the stone,
	Are always up to mischief, though, and take
	The universe for granted as their own.
	
	The elderly, like Proust, are always prone
	To think of love as a subjective fake;
	The more they love, the more they feel alone.
	
	Whatever view we hold, it must be shown
	Why every lover has a wish to make
	Some kind of otherness his own:
	Perhaps, in fact, we never are alone.



4. AT LAST THE SECRET IS OUT

	At last the secret is out,
	as it always must come in the end,
	the delicious story is ripe to tell
	to tell to the intimate friend;
	over the tea-cups and into the square
	the tongues has its desire;
	still waters run deep, my dear,
	there’s never smoke without fire.
	
	Behind the corpse in the reservoir,
	behind the ghost on the links,
	behind the lady who dances
	and the man who madly drinks,
	under the look of fatigue
	the attack of migraine and the sigh
	there is always another story,
	there is more than meets the eye.
	
	For the clear voice suddenly singing,
	high up in the convent wall,
	the scent of the elder bushes,
	the sporting prints in the hall,
	the croquet matches in summer,
	the handshake, the cough, the kiss,
	there is always a wicked secret,
	a private reason for this.



5. COCAINE LIL AND MORPHINE SUE

	Did you ever hear about Cocaine Lil?
	She lived in Cocaine town on Cocaine hill,
	She had a cocaine dog and a cocaine cat,
	They fought all night with a cocaine rat.
	
	She had cocaine hair on her cocaine head.
	She had a cocaine dress that was poppy red:
	She wore a snowbird hat and sleigh-riding clothes,
	On her coat she wore a crimson, cocaine rose.
	
	Big gold chariots on the Milky Way,
	Snakes and elephants silver and gray.
	Oh the cocaine blues they make me sad,
	Oh the cocaine blues make me feel bad.
	
	Lil went to a snow party one cold night,
	And the way she sniffed was sure a fright.
	There was Hophead Mag with Dopey Slim,
	Kankakee Liz and Yen Shee Jim.
	
	There was Morphine Sue and the Poppy Face Kid,
	Climbed up snow ladders and down they skid;
	There was the Stepladder Kit, a good six feet,
	And the Sleigh-riding Sister who were hard to beat.
	
	Along in the morning about half past three
	They were all lit up like a Christmas tree;
	Lil got home and started for bed,
	Took another sniff and it knocked her dead.
	
	They laid her out in her cocaine clothes:
	She wore a snowbird hat with a crimson rose;
	On her headstone you’ll find this refrain:
	She died as she lived, sniffing cocaine



6. THE FALL OF ROME

	The piers are pummelled by the waves;
	In a lonely field the rain
	Lashes an abandoned train;
	Outlaws fill the mountain caves.
	
	Fantastic grow the evening gowns;
	Agents of the Fisc pursue
	Absconding tax-defaulters through
	The sewers of provincial towns.
	
	Private rites of magic send
	The temple prostitutes to sleep;
	All the literati keep
	An imaginary friend.
	
	Cerebrotonic Cato may
	Extol the Ancient Disciplines,
	But the muscle-bound Marines
	Mutiny for food and pay.
	
	Caesar’s double-bed is warm
	As an unimportant clerk
	Writes I DO NOT LIKE MY WORK
	On a pink official form.
	
	Unendowed with wealth or pity,
	Little birds with scarlet legs,
	Sitting on their speckled eggs,
	Eye each flu-infected city.
	
	Altogether elsewhere, vast
	Herds of reindeer move across
	Miles and miles of golden moss,
	Silently and very fast.



7. FOR WHAT AS EASY

	For what as easy 
	For what thought small, 
	For what is well 
	Because between, 
	To you simply 
	From me I mean. 
	
	Who goes with who 
	The bedclothes say, 
	As I and you 
	Go kissed away, 
	The data given, 
	The senses even. 
	
	Fate is not late, 
	Nor the speech rewritten, 
	Nor one word forgotten, 
	Said at the start 
	About heart, 
	By heart, for heart.



8. GIVE ME A DOCTOR

	Give me a doctor partridge-plump, 
	Short in the leg and broad in the rump, 
	An endomorph with gentle hands 
	Who’ll never make absurd demands 
	That I abandon all my vices 
	Nor pull a long face in a crisis, 
	But with a twinkle in his eye 
	Will tell me that I have to die.



9. IF I COULD TELL YOU

	Time will say nothing but I told you so,
	Time only knows the price we have to pay;
	If I could tell you I would let you know.
	
	If we should weep when clowns put on their show,
	If we should stumble when musicians play,
	Time will say nothing but I told you so.
	
	There are no fortunes to be told, although,
	Because I love you more than I can say,
	If I could tell you I would let you know.
	
	The winds must come from somewhere when they blow,
	There must be reasons why the leaves decay;
	Time will say nothing but I told you so.
	
	Perhaps the roses really want to grow,
	The vision seriously intends to stay;
	If I could tell you I would let you know.
	
	Suppose all the lions get up and go,
	And all the brooks and soldiers run away;
	Will Time say nothing but I told you so?
	If I could tell you I would let you know.



10. LADY WEEPING AT THE CROSSROADS

	Lady, weeping at the crossroads,
	Would you meet your love
	In the twilight with his greyhounds,
	And the hawk on his glove?
	
	Bribe the birds then on the branches,
	Bribe them to be dumb,
	Stare the hot sun out of heaven
	That the night may come.
	
	Starless are the nights of travel,
	Bleak the winter wind;
	Run with terror all before you
	And regret behind.
	
	Run until you hear the ocean’s
	Everlasting cry;
	Deep though it may be and bitter
	You must drink it dry,
	
	Wear out patience in the lowest
	Dungeons of the sea,
	Searching through the stranded shipwrecks
	For the golden key,
	
	Push on to the world’s end, pay the
	Dread guard with a kiss,
	Cross the rotten bridge that totters
	Over the abyss.
	
	There stands the deserted castle
	Ready to explore;
	Enter, climb the marble staircase,
	Open the locked door.
	
	Cross the silent ballroom,
	Doubt and danger past;
	Blow the cobwebs from the mirror
	See yourself at last.
	
	Put your hand behind the wainscot,
	You have done your part;
	Find the penknife there and plunge it
	Into your false heart.



11. MIRANDA

	My dear one is mine as mirrors are lonely, 
	As the poor and sad are real to the good king, 
	And the high green hill sits always by the sea. 
	
	Up jumped the Black Man behind the elder tree, 
	Turned a somersault and ran away waving; 
	My Dear One is mine as mirrors are lonely. 
	
	The Witch gave a squawk; her venomous body 
	Melted into light as water leaves a spring, 
	And the high green hill sits always by the sea. 
	
	At his crossroads, too, the Ancient prayed for me, 
	Down his wasted cheeks tears of joy were running: 
	My dear one is mine as mirrors are lonely. 
	
	He kissed me awake, and no one was sorry; 
	The sun shone on sails, eyes, pebbles, anything, 
	And the high green hill sits always by the sea. 
	
	So to remember our changing garden, we 
	Are linked as children in a circle dancing: 
	My dear one is mine as mirrors are lonely, 
	And the high, green hill sits always by the sea.



12. THE MORE LOVING ONE

	Looking up at the stars, I know quite well
	That, for all they care, I can go to hell,
	But on earth indifference is the least
	We have to dread from man or beast.
	
	How should we like it were stars to burn
	With a passion for us we could not return?
	If equal affection cannot be,
	Let the more loving one be me.
	
	Admirer as I think I am
	Of stars that do not give a damn,
	I cannot, now I see them, say
	I missed one terribly all day.
	
	Were all stars to disappear or die,
	I should learn to look at an empty sky
	And feel its total dark sublime,
	Though this might take me a little time.



13. MUSÉE DES BEAUX ARTS

	About suffering they were never wrong,
	The old Masters: how well they understood
	Its human position: how it takes place
	While someone else is eating or opening a window or just walking dully along;
	How, when the aged are reverently, passionately waiting
	For the miraculous birth, there always must be
	Children who did not specially want it to happen, skating
	On a pond at the edge of the wood:
	They never forgot
	That even the dreadful martyrdom must run its course
	Anyhow in a corner, some untidy spot
	Where the dogs go on with their doggy life and the torturer’s horse
	Scratches its innocent behind on a tree.
	
	In Breughel’s Icarus, for instance: how everything turns away
	Quite leisurely from the disaster; the ploughman may
	Have heard the splash, the forsaken cry,
	But for him it was not an important failure; the sun shone
	As it had to on the white legs disappearing into the green
	Water, and the expensive delicate ship that must have seen
	Something amazing, a boy falling out of the sky,
	Had somewhere to get to and sailed calmly on.



14. A NEW YEAR GREETING

	On this day tradition allots
	   to taking stock of our lives,
	my greetings to all of you, Yeasts,
	   Bacteria, Viruses,
	Aerobics and Anaerobics:
	   A Very Happy New Year
	to all for whom my ectoderm
	   is as Middle-Earth to me.
	
	For creatures your size I offer
	   a free choice of habitat,
	so settle yourselves in the zone
	   that suits you best, in the pools
	of my pores or the tropical
	   forests of arm-pit and crotch,
	in the deserts of my fore-arms,
	   or the cool woods of my scalp.
	
	Build colonies: I will supply
	   adequate warmth and moisture,
	the sebum and lipids you need,
	   on condition you never
	do me annoy with your presence,
	   but behave as good guests should,
	not rioting into acne
	   or athlete’s-foot or a boil.
	
	Does my inner weather affect
	   the surfaces where you live?
	Do unpredictable changes
	   record my rocketing plunge
	from fairs when the mind is in tift
	   and relevant thoughts occur
	to fouls when nothing will happen
	   and no one calls and it rains.
	
	I should like to think that I make
	   a not impossible world,
	but an Eden it cannot be:
	   my games, my purposive acts,
	may turn to catastrophes there.
	   If you were religious folk,
	how would your dramas justify
	   unmerited suffering?
	
	By what myths would your priests account
	   for the hurricanes that come
	twice every twenty-four hours,
	   each time I dress or undress,
	when, clinging to keratin rafts,
	   whole cities are swept away
	to perish in space, or the Flood
	   that scalds to death when I bathe?
	
	Then, sooner or later, will dawn
	   a Day of Apocalypse,
	when my mantle suddenly turns
	   too cold, too rancid, for you,
	appetising to predators
	   of a fiercer sort, and I
	am stripped of excuse and nimbus,
	   a Past, subject to Judgement.



15. O WHAT IS THAT SOUND

	O what is that sound which so thrills the ear
	Down in the valley drumming, drumming?
	Only the scarlet soldiers, dear,
	The soldiers coming.
	
	O what is that light I see flashing so clear
	Over the distance brightly, brightly?
	Only the sun on their weapons, dear,
	As they step lightly.
	
	O what are they doing with all that gear,
	What are they doing this morning, morning?
	Only their usual manoeuvres, dear,
	Or perhaps a warning.
	
	O why have they left the road down there,
	Why are they suddenly wheeling, wheeling?
	Perhaps a change in their orders, dear,
	Why are you kneeling?
	
	O haven’t they stopped for the doctor’s care,
	Haven’t they reined their horses, horses?
	Why, they are none of them wounded, dear,
	None of these forces.
	
	O is it the parson they want, with white hair,
	Is it the parson, is it, is it?
	No, they are passing his gateway, dear,
	Without a visit.
	
	O it must be the farmer that lives so near.
	It must be the farmer so cunning, so cunning?
	They have passed the farmyard already, dear,
	And now they are running.
	
	O where are you going? Stay with me here!
	Were the vows you swore deceiving, deceiving?
	No, I promised to love you, dear,
	But I must be leaving.
	
	O it’s broken the lock and splintered the door,
	O it’s the gate where they’re turning, turning;
	Their boots are heavy on the floor
	And their eyes are burning.



16. O WHERE ARE YOU GOING?

	“O where are you going?” said reader to rider,
	“That valley is fatal where furnaces burn,
	Yonder’s the midden whose odours will madden,
	That gap is the grave where the tall return.”
	
	“O do you imagine,” said fearer to farer,
	“That dusk will delay on your path to the pass,
	Your diligent looking discover the lacking,
	Your footsteps feel from granite to grass?”
	
	“O what was that bird,” said horror to hearer,
	“Did you see that shape in the twisted trees?
	Behind you swiftly the figure comes softly,
	The spot on your skin is a shocking disease.”
	
	“Out of this house”--said rider to reader,
	“Yours never will”--said farer to fearer
	“They’re looking for you”--said hearer to horror,
	As he left them there, as he left them there.



17. OLD PEOPLE’S HOME

	All are limitory, but each has her own 
	nuance of damage.  The elite can dress and decent themselves, 
	   are ambulant with a single stick, adroit 
	to read a book all through, or play the slow movements of 
	   easy sonatas. (Yet, perhaps their very 
	carnal freedom is their spirit’s bane: intelligent 
	   of what has happened and why, they are obnoxious 
	to a glum beyond tears.)  Then come those on wheels, the average 
	   majority, who endure T.V. and, led by 
	lenient therapists, do community-singing, then 
	   the loners, muttering in Limbo, and last 
	the terminally incompetent, as improvident, 
	   unspeakable, impeccable as the plants 
	they parody. (Plants may sweat profusely but never 
	   sully themselves.)  One tie, though, unites them: all 
	appeared when the world, though much was awry there, was more 
	   spacious, more comely to look at, it’s Old Ones 
	with an audience and secular station.  Then a child, 
	   in dismay with Mamma, could refuge with Gran 
	to be revalued and told a story.  As of now, 
	   we all know what to expect, but their generation 
	is the first to fade like this, not at home but assigned 
	   to a numbered frequent ward, stowed out of conscience 
	as unpopular luggage. 
	                                      As I ride the subway 
	   to spend half-an-hour with one, I revisage 
	who she was in the pomp and sumpture of her hey-day, 
	   when week-end visits were a presumptive joy, 
	not a good work.  Am I cold to wish for a speedy 
	   painless dormition, pray, as I know she prays, 
	that God or Nature will abrupt her earthly function?



18. REFUGEE BLUES

	Say this city has ten million souls,
	Some are living in mansions, some are living in holes:
	Yet there’s no place for us, my dear, yet there’s no place for us.
	
	Once we had a country and we thought it fair,
	Look in the atlas and you’ll find it there:
	We cannot go there now, my dear, we cannot go there now.
	
	In the village churchyard there grows an old yew,
	Every spring it blossoms anew:
	Old passports can’t do that, my dear, old passports can’t do that.
	
	The consul banged the table and said,
	“If you’ve got no passport you’re officially dead”:
	But we are still alive, my dear, but we are still alive.
	
	Went to a committee; they offered me a chair;
	Asked me politely to return next year:
	But where shall we go to-day, my dear, but where shall we go to-day?
	
	Came to a public meeting; the speaker got up and said;
	“If we let them in, they will steal our daily bread”:
	He was talking of you and me, my dear, he was talking of you and me.
	
	Thought I heard the thunder rumbling in the sky;
	It was Hitler over Europe, saying, “They must die”:
	O we were in his mind, my dear, O we were in his mind.
	
	Saw a poodle in a jacket fastened with a pin,
	Saw a door opened and a cat let in:
	But they weren’t German Jews, my dear, but they weren’t German Jews.
	
	Went down the harbour and stood upon the quay,
	Saw the fish swimming as if they were free:
	Only ten feet away, my dear, only ten feet away.
	
	Walked through a wood, saw the birds in the trees;
	They had no politicians and sang at their ease:
	They weren’t the human race, my dear, they weren’t the human race.
	
	Dreamed I saw a building with a thousand floors,
	A thousand windows and a thousand doors:
	Not one of them was ours, my dear, not one of them was ours.
	
	Stood on a great plain in the falling snow;
	Ten thousand soldiers marched to and fro:
	Looking for you and me, my dear, looking for you and me.



19. THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES

	   She looked over his shoulder
	      For vines and olive trees,
	   Marble well-governed cities
	      And ships upon untamed seas,
	   But there on the shining metal
	      His hands had put instead
	   An artificial wilderness
	      And a sky like lead.
	
	A plain without a feature, bare and brown,
	  No blade of grass, no sign of neighborhood,
	Nothing to eat and nowhere to sit down,
	  Yet, congregated on its blankness, stood
	  An unintelligible multitude,
	A million eyes, a million boots in line,
	Without expression, waiting for a sign.
	
	Out of the air a voice without a face
	  Proved by statistics that some cause was just
	In tones as dry and level as the place:
	  No one was cheered and nothing was discussed;
	  Column by column in a cloud of dust
	They marched away enduring a belief
	Whose logic brought them, somewhere else, to grief.
	
	   She looked over his shoulder
	      For ritual pieties,
	   White flower-garlanded heifers,
	      Libation and sacrifice,
	   But there on the shining metal
	      Where the altar should have been,
	   She saw by his flickering forge-light
	      Quite another scene.
	
	Barbed wire enclosed an arbitrary spot
	  Where bored officials lounged (one cracked a joke)
	And sentries sweated for the day was hot:
	  A crowd of ordinary decent folk
	  Watched from without and neither moved nor spoke
	As three pale figures were led forth and bound
	To three posts driven upright in the ground.
	
	The mass and majesty of this world, all
	  That carries weight and always weighs the same
	Lay in the hands of others; they were small
	  And could not hope for help and no help came:
	  What their foes like to do was done, their shame
	Was all the worst could wish; they lost their pride
	And died as men before their bodies died.
	
	   She looked over his shoulder
	      For athletes at their games,
	   Men and women in a dance
	      Moving their sweet limbs
	   Quick, quick, to music,
	      But there on the shining shield
	   His hands had set no dancing-floor
	      But a weed-choked field.
	
	A ragged urchin, aimless and alone,
	  Loitered about that vacancy; a bird
	Flew up to safety from his well-aimed stone:
	  That girls are raped, that two boys knife a third,
	  Were axioms to him, who’d never heard
	Of any world where promises were kept,
	Or one could weep because another wept.
	
	   The thin-lipped armorer,
	      Hephaestos, hobbled away,
	   Thetis of the shining breasts
	      Cried out in dismay
	   At what the god had wrought
	      To please her son, the strong
	   Iron-hearted man-slaying Achilles
	      Who would not live long.



20. STOP ALL THE CLOCKS

	Stop all the clocks, cut off the telephone, 
	Prevent the dog from barking with a juicy bone, 
	Silence the pianos and with muffled drum 
	Bring out the coffin, let the mourners come. 
	
	Let aeroplanes circle moaning overhead 
	Scribbling on the sky the message He Is Dead, 
	Put crepe bows round the white necks of the public doves, 
	Let the traffic policemen wear black cotton gloves. 
	
	He was my North, my South, my East and West, 
	My working week and my Sunday rest, 
	My noon, my midnight, my talk, my song; 
	I thought that love would last for ever: I was wrong. 
	
	The stars are not wanted now: put out every one; 
	Pack up the moon and dismantle the sun; 
	Pour away the ocean and sweep up the wood; 
	For nothing now can ever come to any good.



21. THE UNKNOWN CITIZEN

	He was found by the Bureau of Statistics to be
	One against whom there was no official complaint,
	And all the reports on his conduct agree
	That, in the modern sense of an old-fashioned word, he was a saint,
	For in everything he did he served the Greater Community.
	Except for the War till the day he retired
	He worked in a factory and never got fired,
	But satisfied his employers, Fudge Motors Inc.
	Yet he wasn’t a scab or odd in his views,
	For his Union reports that he paid his dues,
	(Our report on his Union shows it was sound)
	And our Social Psychology workers found
	That he was popular with his mates and liked a drink.
	The Press are convinced that he bought a paper every day
	And that his reactions to advertisements were normal in every way.
	Policies taken out in his name prove that he was fully insured,
	And his Health-card shows he was once in hospital but left it cured.
	Both Producers Research and High-Grade Living declare
	He was fully sensible to the advantages of the Instalment Plan
	And had everything necessary to the Modern Man,
	A phonograph, a radio, a car and a frigidaire.
	Our researchers into Public Opinion are content
	That he held the proper opinions for the time of year;
	When there was peace, he was for peace: when there was war, he went.
	He was married and added five children to the population,
	Which our Eugenist says was the right number for a parent of his generation.
	And our teachers report that he never interfered with their education.
	Was he free? Was he happy? The question is absurd:
	Had anything been wrong, we should certainly have heard.



22. A WALK AFTER DARK

	A cloudless night like this 
	Can set the spirit soaring: 
	After a tiring day 
	The clockwork spectacle is 
	Impressive in a slightly boring 
	Eighteenth-century way. 
	
	It soothed adolescence a lot 
	To meet so shameless a stare; 
	The things I did could not 
	Be so shocking as they said 
	If that would still be there 
	After the shocked were dead 
	
	Now, unready to die 
	Bur already at the stage 
	When one starts to resent the young, 
	I am glad those points in the sky 
	May also be counted among 
	The creatures of middle-age. 
	
	It’s cosier thinking of night 
	As more an Old People’s Home 
	Than a shed for a faultless machine, 
	That the red pre-Cambrian light 
	Is gone like Imperial Rome 
	Or myself at seventeen. 
	
	Yet however much we may like 
	The stoic manner in which 
	The classical authors wrote, 
	Only the young and rich 
	Have the nerve or the figure to strike 
	The lacrimae rerum note. 
	
	For the present stalks abroad 
	Like the past and its wronged again 
	Whimper and are ignored, 
	And the truth cannot be hid; 
	Somebody chose their pain, 
	What needn’t have happened did. 
	
	Occurring this very night 
	By no established rule, 
	Some event may already have hurled 
	Its first little No at the right 
	Of the laws we accept to school 
	Our post-diluvian world: 
	
	But the stars burn on overhead, 
	Unconscious of final ends, 
	As I walk home to bed, 
	Asking what judgment waits 
	My person, all my friends, 
	And these United States.



23. WE TOO HAD KNOWN GOLDEN HOURS

	We, too, had known golden hours 
	When body and soul were in tune, 
	Had danced with our true loves 
	By the light of a full moon, 
	And sat with the wise and good 
	As tongues grew witty and gay 
	Over some noble dish 
	Out of Escoffier; 
	Had felt the intrusive glory 
	Which tears reserve apart, 
	And would in the old grand manner 
	Have sung from a resonant heart. 
	But, pawed-at and gossiped-over 
	By the promiscuous crowd, 
	Concocted by editors 
	Into spells to befuddle the crowd, 
	All words like Peace and Love, 
	All sane affirmative speech, 
	Had been soiled, profaned, debased 
	To a horrid mechanical screech. 
	No civil style survived 
	That pandaemonioum 
	But the wry, the sotto-voce, 
	Ironic and monochrome: 
	And where should we find shelter 
	For joy or mere content 
	When little was left standing 
	
	But the suburb of dissent?

