*** Witter Bynner (1881 - 1968)

1. A FARMER REMEMBERS LINCOLN

	‘LINCOLN?-- 
	Well, I was in the old Second Maine, 
	The first regiment in Washington from the Pine Tree State. 
	Of course I didn’t get the butt of the clip; 
	We was there for guardin’ Washington-- 
	We was all green. 
	
	‘I ain’t never ben to the theayter in my life-- 
	I didn’t know how to behave. 
	I ain’t never ben since. 
	I can see as plain as my hat the box where he sat in 
	When he was shot. 
	I can tell you, sir, there was a panic 
	When we found our President was in the shape he was in! 
	Never saw a soldier in the world but what liked him. 
	
	‘Yes, sir. His looks was kind o’ hard to forget. 
	He was a spare man, 
	An old farmer. 
	Everything was all right, you know, 
	But he wasn’t a smooth-appearin’ man at all-- 
	Not in no ways; 
	Thin-faced, long-necked, 
	And a swellin’ kind of a thick lip like. 
	
	‘And he was a jolly old fellow--always cheerful; 
	He wasn’t so high but the boys could talk to him their own ways. 
	While I was servin’ at the Hospital 
	He’d come in and say, ‘You look nice in here,’
	Praise us up, you know. 
	And he’d bend over and talk to the boys-- 
	And he’d talk so good to ‘em--so close-- 
	That’s why I call him a farmer. 
	I don’t mean that everything about him wasn’t all right, you understand, 
	It’s just--well, I was a farmer-- 
	And he was my neighbor, anybody’s neighbor. 
	I guess even you young folks would ‘a’ liked him.’



2. GRIEVE NOT FOR BEAUTY

	Grieve not for the invisible, transported brow
	On which like leaves the dark hair grew,
	Nor for the lips of laughter that are now
	Laughing inaudibly in sun and dew,
	Nor for those limbs that, fallen low
	And seeming faint and slow,
	Shall yet pursue
	More ways of swiftness than the swallow dips
	Among . . . and find more winds than ever blew
	The straining sails of unimpeded ships!
	Mourn not!--yield only happy tears
	To deeper beauty than appears!



3. THE MYSTIC

	By seven vineyards on one hill 
	  We walked. The native wine 
	In clusters grew beside us two, 
	  For your lips and for mine, 
	
	When, “Hark!” you said,--“Was that a bell 
	  Or a bubbling spring we heard?“ 
	But I was wise and closed my eyes 
	  And listened to a bird; 
	
	For as summer leaves are bent and shake 
	  With singers passing through, 
	So moves in me continually 
	  The winged breath of you. 
	
	You tasted from a single vine 
	  And took from that your fill-- 
	But I inclined to every kind, 
	  All seven on one hill.



4. SANTE FE

	Among the automobiles and in a region 
	Now Democratic, now Republican, 
	With a department-store, a branch of the Legion, 
	A Chamber of Commerce and a moving-van, 
	In spite of cities crowding on the Trail, 
	Here is a mountain-town that prays and dances 
	With something left, though much besides may fail, 
	Of the ancient faith and wisdom of St. Francis. 
	
	His annual feast has come. His image moves 
	Along these streets of people. And the trees 
	And kneeling women, just as they did before, 
	Welcome and worship him because he proves 
	That natural sinners put him at his ease, 
	And so he enters the cathedral-door.

