*** Roy Campbell (1901 - 1957)

1. THE FLAMING TERRAPIN

	How often have I lost this fervent mood, 
	And gone down dingy thoroughfares to brood 
	On evils like my own from day to day: 
	‘Life is a dusty corridor,’ I say, 
	‘Shut at both ends.’ But far across the plain, 
	Old Ocean growls and tosses his grey mane, 
	Pawing the rocks in all his old unrest 
	Or lifting lazily on some white crest 
	His pale foam-feathers for the moon to burn--
	Then to my veins I feel new sap return, 
	Strength tightens up my sinews long grown dull, 
	And in the old charred crater of the skull 
	Light strikes the slow somnambulistic mind 
	And sweeps her forth to ride the rushing wind, 
	And stamping on the hill-tops high in air, 
	To shake the golden bonfire of her hair. 
	This sudden strength that catches up men’s souls 
	And rears them up like giants in the sky, 
	Giving them fins where the dark ocean rolls, 
	And wings of eagles when the whirlwinds fly, 
	Stand visible to me in its true self 
	(No spiritual essence or wing’d elf 
	Like Ariel on the empty winds to spin). 
	I see him as a mighty Terrapin, 
	Rafting whole islands on his stormy back, 
	Built of strong metals molten from the black 
	Roots of the inmost earth . . . 
	
	The Ark is launched; cupped by the streaming breeze, 
	The stiff sails tug the long reluctant keel, 
	And Noah, spattered by the rising seas, 
	Stands with his great fist fastened to the wheel. 
	Like driven clouds, the waves went rustling by, 
	Feathered and fanned across their liquid sky, 
	And, like those waves, the clouds in silver bars 
	Creamed on the scattered shingle of the stars. 
	All night he watched black water coil and burn, 
	And the white wake of phosphorus astern 
	Lit up the sails and made the lanterns dim, 
	Until it seemed the whole sea burned for him . . . 
	The Flaming Terrapin, his labours done, 
	Humped like a cloud o’er mountain, crag and field 
	Rose on the skyline. The far-shooting sun 
	Splintered its arrows on his fiery shield, 
	From whose bright dome in sudden ricochets 
	Recoiling flashed the long reflected rays: 
	While, rolling his red eyes, a double moon 
	That lit the hillsides with a second noon, 
	He sank to rest. His golden ridges, tiered 
	Above the foam, now slowly disappeared: 
	And as clouds roll immense and globed and still 
	To burst in thunder round a lonely hill, 
	The slow foam gathered round him: o’er his wild 
	Mountainous outline, ponderously piled, 
	It hung one moment, poised in grim suspense, 
	And then swamped crashing down, and from its dense 
	Vortex of thunder, with a gradual sweep 
	Rolled forth in groaning circles on the deep . . . 
	
	Though the dark sky has gathered stormy numbers 
	Of vultures to be snowed upon my corpse; 
	Though the weak arc of Heaven warps 
	Beneath the darkness that encumbers 
	The night beyond; though we believe the end 
	Is but the end, and that the torn flesh crumbles 
	And the fierce soul, rent from its temple, tumbles 
	Into the gloom where empty winds contend, 
	In gnat-like vortex droning--what is this 
	That makes us stamp upon the mountain-tops, 
	So fearless at the brink of the abyss, 
	Where into space the sharp rock-rampart drops 
	And bleak winds hiss? 
	It is the silent chanting of the soul: 
	‘Though times shall change and stormy ages roll, 
	I am that ancient hunter of the plains 
	That raked the shaggy flitches of the Bison: 
	Pass world: I am the dreamer that remains, 
	The Man, clear-cut against the last horizon!’



2. HORSES ON THE CAMARGUE

	In the grey wastes of dread, 
	The haunt of shattered gulls where nothing moves 
	But in a shroud of silence like the dead, 
	I heard a sudden harmony of hooves, 
	And, turning, saw afar 
	A hundred snowy horses unconfined, 
	The silver runaways of Neptune’s car 
	Racing, spray-curled, like waves before the wind. 
	Sons of the Mistral, fleet 
	As him with whose strong gusts they love to flee, 
	Who shod the flying thunders on their feet 
	And plumed them with the snortings of the sea; 
	Theirs is no earthly breed 
	Who only haunts the verges of the earth 
	And only on the sea’s salt herbage feed--
	Surely the great white breakers gave them birth. 
	For when for years a slave, 
	A horse of the Camargue, in alien lands, 
	Should catch some far-off fragrance of the wave 
	Carried far inland from this native sands, 
	Many have told the tale 
	Of how in fury, foaming at the rein, 
	He hurls his rider; and with lifted tail, 
	With coal-red eyes and catarcating mane, 
	Heading his course for home, 
	Though sixty foreign leagues before him sweep, 
	Will never rest until he breathes the foam 
	And hears the native thunder of the deep. 
	And when the great gusts rise 
	And lash their anger on these arid coasts, 
	When the scared gulls career with mournful cries 
	And whirl across the waste like driven ghosts; 
	When hail and fire converge, 
	The only souls to which they strike no pain 
	Are the white crested fillies of the surge 
	And the white horses of the windy plain. 
	Then in their strength and pride 
	The stallions of the wilderness rejoice; 
	They feel their Master’s trident in their side, 
	And high and shrill they answer to his voice. 
	With white tails smoking free, 
	Long streaming manes, and arching necks, they show 
	Their kinship to their sisters of the sea--
	And forward hurl their thunderbolts of snow. 
	Still out of hardship bred, 
	Spirits of power and beauty and delight 
	Have ever on such frugal pasture fed 
	And loved to course with tempests through the night.



3. MASS AT DAWN

	I dropped my sail and dried my dripping seines 
	Where the white quay is chequered by cool planes 
	In whose great branches, always out of sight, 
	The nightingales are singing day and night. 
	Though all was grey beneath the moon’s grey beam, 
	My boat in her new paint shone like a bride, 
	And silver in my baskets shone the bream: 
	My arms were tired and I was heavy-eyed, 
	But when with food and drink, at morning-light, 
	The children met me at the water-side, 
	Never was wine so red or bread so white. 

