*** Abraham Cowley (1618 - 1667)

1. THE CHANGE

	LOVE in her sunny eyes does basking play;
	Love walks the pleasant mazes of her hair;
	Love does on both her lips for ever stray
	And sows and reaps a thousand kisses there.
	In all her outward parts Love’s always seen;
	But, oh, He never went within.
	
	Within Love’s foes, his greatest foes abide,
	Malice, Inconstance, and Pride.
	So the Earth’s face, trees, herbs, and flowers do dress,
	With other beauties numberless;
	But at the center, darkness is, and Hell;
	There wicked spirits, and there the Damned dwell.
	
	With me alas, quite contrary it fares;
	Darkness and death lies in my weeping eyes,
	Despair and paleness in my face appears,
	And grief, and fear, Love’s greatest enemies;
	But, like the Persian tyrant, Love within
	Keeps his proud court, and ne’re is seen.
	
	Oh take my heart, and by that means you’ll prove
	Within, too stor’d enough of Love;
	Give me but yours, I’ll by that change so thrive,
	That Love in all my parts shall live.
	So powerful is this change, it render can,
	My outside woman, and your inside man.



2. DRINKING

	THE thirsty earth soaks up the rain,
	And drinks, and gapes for drink again.
	The plants suck in the earth, and are
	With constant drinking fresh and fair.
	The sea itself, which one would think
	Should have but little need of drink,
	Drinks ten thousand rivers up,
	So fill’d that they o’erflow the cup.
	The busy sun (and one would guess
	By’s drunken fiery face no less)
	Drinks up the sea, and when h’as done,
	The moon and stars drink up the sun.
	They drink and dance by their own light,
	They drink and revel all the night.
	Nothing in Nature’s sober found,
	But an eternal health goes round.
	Fill up the bowl then, fill it high,
	Fill all the glasses there, for why
	Should every creature drink but I,
	Why, man of morals, tell me why?



3. THE GIVEN HEART

	I wonder what those lovers mean, who say
	They have giv’n their hearts away.
	Some good kind lover tell me how;
	For mine is but a torment to me now.
	
	If so it be one place both hearts contain,
	For what do they complain?
	What courtesy can Love do more,
	Than to join hearts that parted were before?
	
	Woe to her stubborn heart, if once mine come
	Into the self-same room;
	‘Twill tear and blow up all within,
	Like a granado shot into a magazine.
	
	Then shall Love keep the ashes, and torn parts,
	Of both our broken hearts:
	Shall out of both one new one make,
	From hers, th’ allay; from mine, the metal take.
	
	For of her heart he from the flames will find
	But little left behind:
	Mine only will remain entire;
	No dross was there, to perish in the fire.



4. THE WISH

	Well then; I now do plainly see
	This busy world and I shall ne’er agree.
	The very honey of all earthly joy
	Does of all meats the soonest cloy;
	And they (methinks) deserve my pity
	Who for it can endure the stings,
	The crowd, and buzz, and murmurings
	Of this great hive, the city.
	
	Ah, yet, ere I descend to th’ grave
	May I a small house and large garden have!
	And a few friends, and many books, both true,
	Both wise, and both delightful too!
	And since love ne’er will from me flee,
	A mistress moderately fair,
	And good as guardian angels are,
	Only belov’d, and loving me.
	
	O fountains! when in you shall I
	Myself eas’d of unpeaceful thoughts espy?
	O fields! O woods! when shall I be made
	The happy tenant of your shade?
	Here’s the spring-head of Pleasure’s flood:
	Here’s wealthy Nature’s treasury,
	Where all the riches lie that she
	Has coin’d and stamp’d for good.
	
	Pride and ambition here
	Only in far-fetch’d metaphors appear;
	Here nought but winds can hurtful murmurs scatter,
	And nought but Echo flatter.
	The gods, when they descended, hither
	From heaven did always choose their way:
	And therefore we may boldly say
	That ‘tis the way too thither.
	
	How happy here should I
	And one dear she live, and embracing die!
	She who is all the world, and can exclude
	In deserts solitude.
	I should have then this only fear:
	Lest men, when they my pleasures see,
	Should hither throng to live like me,
	And so make a city here.

