*** Annie Dillard (1945 - )

1. THE HEART

	It’s the lobby of the Plaza,
	the systole and diastole
	of hard women in soft coats, soft
	men in hard coats, palming
	quarters, fungers, keys.
	Drop in any mailbox.
	I’ll answer. Please.
	
	It’s the murmur, the scarring fever,
	of a page, always the same,
	urgent, muted: calling
	Mr. Name. Calling Mr. Name
	
	You exsanguinate.
	For the carpets of indolence,
	for the cut-throat chandelier,
	for the forced forsythia
	on the table--you pay, dear.
	
	But some of it’s free. A knock
	and rise in the ribs, gardenia
	pectoris, and at four a muffled din:
	the revolving door is bearing balloons;
	look out--someone’s checking in.



2. MAYAKOVSKY IN NEW YORK

	New York: You take a train that rips through versts.
	It feels as if the trains were running over your ears.
	
	For many hours the train flies along the banks
	of the Hudson about two feet from the water. At the stops,
	passengers run out, buy up bunches of celery,
	and run back in, chewing the stalks as they go.
	
	Bridges leap over the train with increasing frequency.
	
	At each stop an additional story grows
	onto the roofs. Finally houses with squares
	and dots of windows rise up. No matter how far
	you throw back your head, there are no tops.
	
	Time and again, the telegraph poles are made
	of wood. Maybe it only seems that way.
	
	In the narrow canyons between the buildings, a sort
	of adventurer-wind howls and runs away
	along the versts of the ten avenues. Below
	flows a solid human mass. Only their yellow
	waterproof slickers hiss like samovars and blaze.
	The construction rises and with it the crane, as if
	the building were being lifted up off the ground
	by its pigtail. It is hard to take it seriously.
	
	The buildings are glowing with electricity; their evenly
	cut-out windows are like a stencil. Under awnings
	the papers lie in heaps, delivered by trucks.
	It is impossible to tear oneself away from this spectacle.
	
	At midnight those leaving the theaters drink a last soda.
	Puddles of rain stand cooling. Poor people scavenge
	bones. In all directions is a labyrinth of trains
	suffocated by vaults. There is no hope, your eyes
	are not accustomed to seeing such things.
	
	They are starting to evolve an American gait out
	of the cautious steps of the Indians on the paths of empty
	Manhattan. Maybe it only seems that way.



3. MORNINGS LIKE THIS

	Sunday. What still sunny days
	We have now. And I alone in them.
	So brief--our best!
	
	So much is wrong, but not my hills.
	I have been thinking of writing
	A letter to the President of China.
	
	Do it, do it, do it, do it.
	I beseech you, I beseech you,
	I beseech you, I beseech you.
	
	Mornings like this: I look
	About the earth and the heavens:
	There is not enough to believe--
	
	Mornings like this. How heady
	The morning air! How sharp
	And sweet and clear the morning air!
	
	Authentic winter! The odor of campfires!
	Beans eighteen inches long!
	A billion chances--and I am here!
	
	And here I lie in the quiet room
	And read and read and read.
	So easy--so easy--so easy.
	
	Pools in old woods, full of leaves.
	Give me time enough in this place
	And I will surely make a beautiful thing.



4. A NATURAL HISTORY OF GETTING THROUGH THE YEAR

	_November 1, 1895_
	
	The mountains are on fire
	and everything is dry; insects gone.
	My private work this year will be:
	Biology, Bible, Art, Geology, Body,
	Literature. This term will be devoted
	to Art, Zoology, Bibles, Epics, Dramas,
	etc. I find the Entomostraca interesting.
	
	
	_January 25, 1896_
	
	I spent most of the day
	mounting butterflies from India.
	This finishes all the flies for this year
	until more are caught.
	Poisoned plants at night.
	Very warm. The brightest,
	warmest January I remember.
	
	
	_Plan of Nature Study for April_
	
	Birds and flowers will keep one busy.
	Make collections of both, and observe
	the battles and songs of birds. Watch
	for the eggs of Phoebe about the middle
	of the month. Study the circulation
	of the blood in a frog’s foot.
	Take up mental hygiene;
	because it is much needed now.



5. QUATRAIN OF THE BODY’S SLEEP

	I lure sleep. I bait sleep in with my white throat.
	I pretend to be asleep. Then everything happens at once.
	Sleep wraps me round in his dim coat;
	I weep; you leap from your corner and dance.

