*** John Dryden (1631 - 1700)

1. CAN LIFE BE A BLESSING

	Can life be a blessing, 
	 Or worth the possessing,
	 Can life be a blessing if love were away?
	 Ah no! though our love all night keep us waking,
	 And though he torment us with cares all the day,
	 Yet he sweetens, he sweetens our pains in the taking,
	 There’s an hour at the last, there’s an hour to repay.
	
	 In ev’ry possessing,
	 The ravishing blessing,
	In ev’ry possessing the fruit of our pain,
	Poor lovers forget long ages of anguish,
	Whate’er they have suffer’d and done to obtain;
	‘Tis a pleasure, a pleasure to sigh and to languish,
	When we hope, when we hope to be happy again.



2. DREAMS

	Dreams are but interludes which Fancy makes;
	When monarch Reason sleeps, this mimic wakes:
	Compounds a medley of disjointed things,
	A mob of cobblers, and a court of kings:
	Light fumes are merry, grosser fumes are sad;
	Both are the reasonable soul run mad;
	And many monstrous forms in sleep we see,
	That neither were, nor are, nor e’er can be.
	Sometimes forgotten things long cast behind
	Rush forward in the brain, and come to mind.
	The nurse’s legends are for truths received,
	And the man dreams but what the boy believed.
	Sometimes we but rehearse a former play,
	The night restores our actions done by day;
	As hounds in sleep will open for their prey.
	In short, the farce of dreams is of a piece,
	Chimeras all; and more absurd, or less.



3. A SONG FOR ST. CECELIA’S DAY

	From harmony, from Heav’nly harmony 
	              This universal frame began. 
	      When Nature underneath a heap 
	              Of jarring atoms lay, 
	      And could not heave her head, 
	The tuneful voice was heard from high, 
	              Arise ye more than dead. 
	Then cold, and hot, and moist, and dry, 
	      In order to their stations leap, 
	              And music’s pow’r obey. 
	From harmony, from Heav’nly harmony 
	              This universal frame began: 
	              From harmony to harmony 
	Through all the compass of the notes it ran, 
	      The diapason closing full in man. 
	
	What passion cannot music raise and quell! 
	               When Jubal struck the corded shell, 
	        His list’ning brethren stood around 
	        And wond’ring, on their faces fell 
	        To worship that celestial sound: 
	Less than a god they thought there could not dwell 
	               Within the hollow of that shell 
	               That spoke so sweetly and so well. 
	What passion cannot music raise and quell! 
	
	        The trumpet’s loud clangor 
	               Excites us to arms 
	        With shrill notes of anger 
	                       And mortal alarms. 
	        The double double double beat 
	               Of the thund’ring drum 
	        Cries, hark the foes come; 
	Charge, charge, ‘tis too late to retreat. 
	
	        The soft complaining flute 
	        In dying notes discovers 
	        The woes of hopeless lovers, 
	Whose dirge is whisper’d by the warbling lute. 
	
	        Sharp violins proclaim 
	Their jealous pangs, and desperation, 
	Fury, frantic indignation, 
	Depth of pains and height of passion, 
	        For the fair, disdainful dame. 
	
	But oh! what art can teach 
	        What human voice can reach 
	The sacred organ’s praise? 
	Notes inspiring holy love, 
	Notes that wing their Heav’nly ways 
	        To mend the choirs above. 
	
	Orpheus could lead the savage race; 
	And trees unrooted left their place; 
	               Sequacious of the lyre: 
	But bright Cecilia rais’d the wonder high’r; 
	        When to her organ, vocal breath was giv’n, 
	An angel heard, and straight appear’d 
	               Mistaking earth for Heav’n. 
	
	As from the pow’r of sacred lays 
	        The spheres began to move, 
	And sung the great Creator’s praise 
	        To all the bless’d above; 
	So when the last and dreadful hour 
	  This crumbling pageant shall devour, 
	The trumpet shall be heard on high, 
	        The dead shall live, the living die, 
	        And music shall untune the sky.



4. SONG FROM AN EVENING’S LOVE

	After the pangs of a desperate lover,
	When day and night I have sighed all in vain,
	Ah, what a pleasure it is to discover
	In her eyes pity, who causes my pain!
	
	When with unkindness our love at a stand is,
	And both have punished ourselves with the pain,
	Ah, what a pleasure the touch of her hand is!
	Ah, what a pleasure to touch it again!
	
	When the denial comes fainter and fainter,
	And her eyes give what her tongue does deny,
	Ah, what a trembling I feel when I venture!
	Ah, what a trembling does usher my joy!
	
	When, with a sigh, she accords me the blessing,
	And her eyes twinkle ‘twixt pleasure and pain,
	Ah, what a joy ‘tis beyond all expressing!
	Ah, what a joy to hear ‘Shall we again!’



5. VENI, CREATOR SPIRITUS

	Creator Spirit, by whose aid 
	The world’s foundations first were laid, 
	Come, visit ev’ry pious mind; 
	Come, pour thy joys on human kind; 
	From sin, and sorrow set us free; 
	And make thy temples worthy Thee. 
	
	O, Source of uncreated Light, 
	The Father’s promis’d Paraclete! 
	Thrice Holy Fount, thrice Holy Fire, 
	Our hearts with heav’nly love inspire; 
	Come, and thy Sacred Unction bring 
	To sanctify us, while we sing! 
	
	Plenteous of grace, descend from high, 
	Rich in thy sev’n-fold energy! 
	Thou strength of his Almighty Hand, 
	Whose pow’r does heav’n and earth command: 
	Proceeding Spirit, our Defence, 
	Who do’st the gift of tongues dispence, 
	And crown’st thy gift with eloquence! 
	
	Refine and purge our earthly parts; 
	But, oh, inflame and fire our hearts! 
	Our frailties help, our vice control; 
	Submit the senses to the soul; 
	And when rebellious they are grown, 
	Then, lay thy hand, and hold ‘em down. 
	
	Chase from our minds th’ Infernal Foe; 
	And peace, the fruit of love, bestow; 
	And, lest our feet should step astray, 
	Protect, and guide us in the way. 
	
	Make us Eternal Truths receive, 
	And practise, all that we believe: 
	Give us thy self, that we may see 
	The Father and the Son, by thee. 
	
	Immortal honour, endless fame, 
	Attend th’ Almighty Father’s name: 
	The Saviour Son be glorified, 
	Who for lost Man’s redemption died: 
	And equal adoration be, 
	Eternal Paraclete, to thee. 

