*** William Faulkner (1897 - 1962)

1. GRAY THE DAY

	Gray the day, all the year is cold,
	Across the empty land the swallows’ cry
	Marks the southflown spring. Naught is bowled
	Save winter, in the sky.
	
	O sorry earth, when this bleak bitter sleep
	Stirs and turns and time once more is green,
	In empty path and lane and grass will creep
	With none to tread it clean.
	
	April and May and June, and all the dearth
	Of heart to green it for, to hurt and wake;
	What good is budding, gray November earth?
	No need to break your sleep for greening’s sake.
	
	The hushed plaint of wind in stricken trees
	Shivers the grass in path and lane
	And Grief and Time are tideless golden seas--
	Hush, hush! He’s home again.



2. NIGHT PIECE

	Trumpets of sun to silence fall
	On house and barn and stack and wall.
	Within the cottage, slowly wheeling,
	The lamplight’s gold turns on the ceiling.
	Beneath the stake and windless vane
	Cattle stamp and munch their grain;
	Below the starry apple bough
	Leans the warped and clotted plow.
	The moon rolls up, while far away
	And thin with sorrow, the sheepdog’s bay
	Fills the valley with lonely sound.
	Slow leaves of darkness steal around.
	The watch the watchman, Death will keep
	And man in amnesty may sleep.
	
	The world is still, for she is old
	And many’s the bead of a life she’s told.
	Her gossip there, the watching moon
	View hill and stream and wave and dune
	And many ‘s the fair one she’s seen wither:
	The pass and pass, she cares not whither--
	Lovers’ vows by her made bright,
	The outcast cursing at her light;
	Mazed within her lambence lies
	All the strife of flesh that dies.
	Then through the darkened room with whispers speaking
	There comes to man the sleep that all are seeking.
	
	The lurking thief, in sharp regret
	Watches the far world, waking yet,
	But which in sleep will soon be still;
	While he upon his misty hill
	Hears a dark bird briefly cry
	From its thicket on the sky,
	And curses the moon because her light
	Marks every outcast under night.
	
	Still swings the murderer, bent of knees
	In a slightly strained repose,
	Nor feels the faint hand of the breeze:
	He now with Solomon all things knows:
	That, lastly, breath is to a man
	But to want and fret a span.



3. A POPLAR

	Why do you shiver there
	Between the white river and the road?
	You are not cold,
	With the sun light dreaming about you;
	And yet you lift your pliant supplicating arms as though
	To draw clouds from the sky to hide your slenderness.
	
	You are a young girl
	Trembling in the throes of ecstatic modesty,
	A white objective girl
	Whose clothing has been forcibly taken away from her.

