*** Samuel Ferguson (1810 - 1886)

1. THE FAIRY THORN

	“GET up, our Anna dear, from the weary spinning wheel
	For your father’s on the hill, and your mother is asleep; 
	Come up above the crags, and we’ll dance a highland reel 
	Around the fairy thorn on the steep.” 
	
	At Anna Grace’s door’t was thus the maidens cried,
	Three merry maidens fair in kirtles of the green; 
	And Anna laid the sock and the weary wheel aside, 
	The fairest of the four, I ween. 
	
	They’re glancing through the glimmer of the quiet eve, 
	Away in milky wavings of neck and ankle bare;
	The heavy-sliding stream in its sleeply song they leave, 
	And the crags in the ghostly air; 
	
	And linking hand in hand, and singing as they go, 
	The maids along the hill-side have ta’en their fearless way, 
	Till they come to where the rowan trees in lovely beauty grow
	Beside the Fairy Hawthorn gray. 
	
	The hawthorn stands between the ashes tall and slim, 
	Like matron with her twin grand-daughters at her knee; 
	The rowan berries cluster o’er her low head gray and dim 
	In ruddy kisses sweet to see.
	
	The merry maidens four have ranged them in a row, 
	Between each lovely couple a stately rowan stem, 
	And away in mazes wavy like skimming birds they go,--
	Oh, never caroll’d bird like them! 
	
	But solemn is the silence of the silvery haze
	That drinks away their voices in echoless repose, 
	And dreamily the evening has still’d the haunted braes, 
	And dreamier the gloaming grows. 
	
	And sinking one by one, like lark-notes from the sky 
	When the falcon’s shadow saileth across the open shaw,
	Are hush’d the maidens’ voices, as cowering down they lie 
	In the flutter of their sudden awe. 
	
	For, from the air above and the grassy ground beneath, 
	And from the mountain-ashes and the old white thorn between, 
	A power of faint enchantment doth through their beings breathe,
	And they sink down together on the green. 
	
	They sink together silent, and, stealing side by side, 
	They fling their lovely arms o’er their drooping necks so fair, 
	Then vainly strive again their naked arms to hide, 
	For their shrinking necks again are bare.
	
	Thus clasp’d and prostrate all, with their heads together bow’d, 
	Soft o’er their bosoms beating—the only human sound--
	They hear the silky footsteps of the silent fairy crowd, 
	Like a river in the air, gliding round. 
	
	Nor scream can any raise, nor prayer can any say,
	But wild, wild, the terror of the speechless three, 
	For they feel fair Anna Grace drawn silently away, 
	By whom they dare not look to see. 
	
	They feel their tresses twine with her parting locks of gold, 
	And the curls elastic falling, as her head withdraws;
	They feel her sliding arms from their tranced arms unfold, 
	But they dare not look to see the cause: 
	
	For heavy on their senses the faint enchantment lies 
	Through all that night of anguish and perilous amaze; 
	And neither fear nor wonder can ope their quivering eyes,
	Or their limbs from the cold ground raise, 
	
	Till out of night the earth has roll’d her dewy side, 
	With every haunted mountain and streamy vale below; 
	When, as the mist dissolves in the yellow morning-tide, 
	The maidens’ trance dissolveth so.
	
	Then fly the ghastly three as swiftly as they may, 
	And tell their tale of sorrow to anxious friends in vain: 
	They pin’d away and died within the year and day, 
	And ne’er was Anna Grace seen again.



2. LAMENT FOR THOMAS DAVIS

	I walked through Ballinderry in the spring-time,
	When the bud was on the tree;
	And I said, in every fresh-ploughed field beholding
	The sowers striding free,
	Scattering broadside forth the corn in golden plenty
	On the quick seed-clasping soil,
	“Even such this day, among the fresh-stirred hearts of Erin.
	Thomas Davis, is thy toil.”
	
	I Sat by Ballyshannon in the summer,
	And saw the salmon leap;
	And I said, as I beheld the gallant creatures
	Spring glittering from the deep,
	Through the spray, and through the prone heaps striving onward
	To the calm, clear streams above,
	“So seekest thou thy native founts of freedom, Thomas Davis,
	In thy brightness of strength and love.”
	
	I stood in Derrybawn in the autumn,
	And I heard the eagle call,
	With a clangorous cry of wrath and lamentation
	That filled the wide mountain hall,
	O’er the bare, deserted place of his plundered eyrie;
	And I said, as he screamed and soared,
	“So callest thou, thou wrathful, soaring Thomas Davis,
	For a nation’s rights restored!”
	
	And, alas! to think but now, and thou art lying,
	Dear Davis, dead at thy mother’s knee;
	And I, no mother near, on my own sick-bed,
	That face on earth shall never see;
	I may lie and try to feel that I am dreaming,
	I may lie and try to say, “Thy will be done,”
	But a hundred such as I will never comfort Erin
	For the loss of the noble son!
	
	Young husbandman of Erin’s fruitful seed-time,
	In the fresh track of danger’s plough!
	Who will walk the heavy, toilsome, perilous furrow,
	Girt with freedom’s seed-sheets, now?
	Who will banish with the wholesome crop of knowledge
	The daunting weed and the bitter thorn,
	Now that thou thyself art but a seed for hopeful planting
	Against the Resurrection morn?
	
	Young salmon of the flood-tide of freedom
	That swells round Erin’s shore!
	Thou wilt leap against their loud oppressive torrent
	Of bigotry and hate no more;
	Drawn downward by their prone material instinct,
	Let them thunder on their rocks and foam--
	Thou hast leapt, aspiring soul, to founts beyond their raging,
	Where troubled waters never come!
	
	But I grieve not, Eagle of the empty eyrie,
	That thy wrathful cry is still;
	And that the songs alone of peaceful mourners
	Are heard to-day on Earth’s hill;
	Better far, if brothers’ war be destined for us
	(God avert that horrid day I pray),
	That ere our hands be stained with slaughter fratricidal,
	Thy warm heart should be cold in clay.
	
	But my trust is strong in God, Who made us brothers,
	That He will not suffer their right hands,
	Which thou hast joined in holier rites than wedlock
	To draw opposing brands.
	Oh, many a tuneful tongue that thou madest vocal
	Would lie cold and silent then;
	And songless long once more, should often-widowed Erin
	Mourn the loss of her brave young men.
	
	Oh, brave young men, my love, my pride, my promise,
	’Tis on you my hopes are set,
	In manliness, in kindliness, in justice,
	To make Erin a nation yet;
	Self-respecting, self-relying, self-advancing--
	In union or in severance, free and strong--
	And if God grant this, then, under God, to Thomas Davis
	Let the greater praise belong.

