*** Louise Glück (1943 - )

1. MARCH

	The light stays longer in the sky, but it’s a cold light,
	it brings no relief from winter.
	
	My neighbor stares out the window,
	talking to her dog. He’s sniffing the garden,
	trying to reach a decision about the dead flowers.
	
	It’s a little early for all this.
	Everything’s still very bare--
	nevertheless, something’s different today from yesterday.
	
	We can see the mountain: the peak’s glittering where the ice catches the light.
	But on the sides the snow’s melted, exposing bare rock.
	
	My neighbor’s calling the dog, making her unconvincing doglike sounds.
	The dog’s polite; he raises his head when she calls,
	but he doesn’t move. So she goes on calling,
	her failed bark slowly deteriorating into a human voice.
	
	All her life she dreamed of living by the sea
	but fate didn’t put her there.
	It laughed at her dreams;
	it locked her up in the hills, where no one escapes.
	
	The sun beats down on the earth, the earth flourishes.
	And every winter, it’s as though the rock underneath the earth rises
	higher and higher and the earth becomes rock, cold and rejecting.
	
	She says hope killed her parents, it killed her grandparents.
	It rose up each spring with the wheat
	and died between the heat of summer and the raw cold.
	In the end, they told her to live near the sea,
	as though that would make a difference.
	By late spring she’ll be garrulous, but now she’s down to two words,
	_never_ and _only_, to express this sense that life’s cheated her.
	
	Never the cries of gulls, only, in summer, the crickets, the cicadas.
	Only the smell of the field, when all she wanted
	was the smell of the sea, of disappearance.
	
	The sky above the fields has turned a sort of grayish pink
	as the sun sinks. The clouds are silk yarn, magenta and crimson.
	
	And everywhere the earth is rustling, not lying still.
	And the dog senses this stirring; his ears twitch.
	
	He walks back and forth, vaguely remembering
	from other years this elation. The season of discoveries
	is beginning. Always the same discoveries, but to the dog,
	intoxicating and new, not duplicitous.
	
	I tell my neighbor we’ll be like this
	when we lose our memories. I ask her if she’s ever seen the sea
	and she says, once, in a movie.
	It was a sad story, nothing worked out at all.
	
	The lovers part. The sea hammers the shore, the mark each wave leaves
	wiped out by the wave that follows.
	Never accumulation, never one wave trying to build on another,
	never the promise of shelter--
	
	The sea doesn’t change as the earth changes;
	it doesn’t lie.
	You ask the sea, what can you promise me
	and it speaks the truth; it says _erasure._
	
	Finally the dog goes in.
	We watch the crescent moon,
	very faint at first, then clearer and clearer
	as the sky grows dark.
	Soon it will be the sky of early spring, stretching above the stubborn ferns 
	   and violets.
	
	Nothing can be forced to live.
	The earth is like a drug now, like a voice from far away,
	a lover or master. In the end, you do what the voice tells you.
	It says forget, you forget.
	It says begin again, you begin again.



2. PARABLE OF THE DOVE

	A dove lived in a village.
	When it opened its mouth
	sweetness came out, sound
	like a silver light around
	the cherry bough. But
	the dove wasn’t satisfied.
	
	It saw the villagers
	gathered to listen under
	the blossoming tree.
	It didn’t think: I
	am higher than they are.
	It wanted to walk among them,
	to experience the violence of human feeling,
	in part for its song’s sake.
	
	So it became human.
	It found passion, it found violence,
	first conflated, then
	as separate emotions
	and these were not
	contained by music. Thus
	its song changed,
	the sweet notes of its longing to be human
	soured and flattened. Then
	
	the world drew back; the mutant
	fell from love
	as from the cherry branch,
	it fell stained with the bloody
	fruit of the tree.
	
	So it is true after all, not merely
	a rule of art:
	change your form and you change your nature.
	And time does this to us.



3. WINTER MORNING

	1
	
	Today, when I woke up, I asked myself 
	why did Christ die? Who knows 
	the meaning of such questions?
	
	It was a winter morning, unbelievably cold. 
	So the thoughts went on, 
	from each question came 
	another question, like a twig from a branch, 
	like a branch from a black trunk.
	
	
	2
	
	At a time like this 
	a young woman traveled through the desert settlements 
	looking neither forward nor backward, 
	sitting in perfect composure on the tired animal 
	as the child stirred, still sealed in its profound attachment--
	The husband walked slightly ahead, older, out of place; 
	increasingly, the mule stumbled, the path becoming 
	difficult in darkness, though they persisted 
	in a world like our world, not ruled 
	by man but by a statue in heaven--
	
	
	3
	
	Above the crowds representing 
	humankind, the lost 
	citizens of a remote time,
	
	the insulted body 
	raised on a cross like a criminal 
	to die publicly 
	above Jerusalem, the shimmering city
	
	while in great flocks 
	birds circled the body, not partial 
	to this form over the others
	
	since men were all alike,
	defeated by the air,
	
	whereas in air
	the body of a bird becomes a banner:
	
	But the lesson that was needed
	was another lesson.

