*** Ted Hughes (1930 - 1998)

1. GOD’S GRANDEUR

	The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
	It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
	It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
	Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
	Generations have trod, have trod, have trod;
	And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with toil;
	And wears man’s smudge and shares man’s smell: the soil
	Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.
	And for all this, nature is never spent;
	There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
	And though the last lights off the black West went
	Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs--
	Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
	World broods with warm breast and with ah! bright wings.



2. OLD AGE GETS UP

	Stirs its ashes and embers, its burnt sticks
	
	An eye powdered over, half melted and solid again
	Ponders
	Ideas that collapse
	At the first touch of attention
	
	The light at the window, so square and so same
	So full-strong as ever, the window frame
	A scaffold in space, for eyes to lean on
	
	Supporting the body, shaped to its old work
	Making small movements in gray air
	Numbed from the blurred accident
	Of having lived, the fatal, real injury
	Under the amnesia
	
	Something tries to save itself-searches
	For defenses-but words evade
	Like flies with their own notions
	
	Old age slowly gets dressed
	Heavily dosed with death’s night
	Sits on the bed’s edge
	
	Pulls its pieces together
	Loosely tucks in its shirt



3. SEPTEMBER

	We sit late, watching the dark slowly unfold:
	No clock counts this.
	When kisses are repeated and the arms hold
	There is no telling where time is.
	
	It is midsummer: the leaves hang big and still:
	Behind the eye a star,
	Under the silk of the wrist a sea, tell
	Time is nowhere.
	
	We stand; leaves have not timed the summer.
	No clock now needs
	Tell we have only what we remember:
	Minutes uproaring with our heads
	
	Like an unfortunate King’s and his Queen’s
	When the senseless mob rules;
	And quietly the trees casting their crowns
	Into the pools.



4. THE THOUGHT-FOX

	I imagine this midnight moment’s forest:
	Something else is alive
	Beside the clock’s loneliness
	And this blank page where my fingers move.
	
	Through the window I see no star:
	Something more near
	Though deeper within darkness
	Is entering the loneliness:
	
	Cold, delicately as the dark snow,
	A fox’s nose touches twig, leaf;
	Two eyes serve a movement, that now
	And again now, and now, and now
	
	Sets neat prints into the snow
	Between trees, and warily a lame
	Shadow lags by stump and in hollow
	Of a body that is bold to come
	
	Across clearings, an eye,
	A widening deepening greenness,
	Brilliantly, concentratedly,
	Coming about its own business
	
	Till, with sudden sharp hot stink of fox
	It enters the dark hole of the head.
	The window is starless still; the clock ticks,
	The page is printed.



5. WIND

	This house has been far out at sea all night,
	The woods crashing through darkness, the booming hills,
	Winds stampeding the fields under the window
	Floundering black astride and blinding wet
	
	Till day rose; then under an orange sky
	The hills had new places, and wind wielded
	Blade-light, luminous black and emerald,
	Flexing like the lens of a mad eye.
	
	At noon I scaled along the house-side as far as
	The coal-house door. Once I looked up --
	Through the brunt wind that dented the balls of my eyes
	The tent of the hills drummed and strained its guyrope,
	
	The fields quivering, the skyline a grimace,
	At any second to bang and vanish with a flap;
	The wind flung a magpie away and a black--
	Back gull bent like an iron bar slowly. The house
	
	Rang like some fine green goblet in the note
	That any second would shatter it. Now deep
	In chairs, in front of the great fire, we grip
	Our hearts and cannot entertain book, thought,
	
	Or each other. We watch the fire blazing,
	And feel the roots of the house move, but sit on,
	Seeing the window tremble to come in,
	Hearing the stones cry out under the horizons.



6. WORK AND PLAY

	The swallow of summer, she toils all the summer,
	A blue-dark knot of glittering voltage,
	A whiplash swimmer, a fish of the air.
	But the serpent of cars that crawls through the dust
	In shimmering exhaust
	Searching to slake
	Its fever in ocean
	Will play and be idle or else it will bust.
	
	The swallow of summer, the barbed harpoon,
	She flings from the furnace, a rainbow of purples,
	Dips her glow in the pond and is perfect.
	But the serpent of cars that collapsed on the beach
	Disgorges its organs
	A scamper of colours
	Which roll like tomatoes
	Nude as tomatoes
	With sand in their creases
	To cringe in the sparkle of rollers and screech.
	
	The swallow of summer, the seamstress of summer,
	She scissors the blue into shapes and she sews it,
	She draws a long thread and she knots it at the corners.
	But the holiday people
	Are laid out like wounded
	Flat as in ovens
	Roasting and basting
	With faces of torment as space burns them blue
	Their heads are transistors
	Their teeth grit on sand grains
	Their lost kids are squalling
	While man-eating flies
	Jab electric shock needles but what can they do?
	
	They can climb in their cars with raw bodies, raw faces
	And start up the serpent
	And headache it homeward
	A car full of squabbles
	And sobbing and stickiness
	With sand in their crannies
	Inhaling petroleum
	That pours from the foxgloves
	While the evening swallow
	The swallow of summer, cartwheeling through crimson,
	Touches the honey-slow river and turning
	Returns to the hand stretched from under the eaves ---
	A boomerang of rejoicing shadow.

