*** Robinson Jeffers (1887 - 1962)

1. ASCENT TO THE SIERRAS

	Here at the foot of the pass
	The fierce clans of the mountain you’d think for
	thousands of years,
	Men with harsh mouths and eyes like the eagles’ hunger,
	Have gathered among these rocks at the dead hour
	Of the morning star and the stars waning
	To raid the plain and at moonrise returning driven
	Their scared booty to the highlands, the tossing horns
	And glazed eyes in the light of torches. The men have
	looked back
	Standing above these rock-heads to bark laughter
	At the burning granaries and the farms and the town
	That sow the dark flat land with terrible rubies . . .
	lighting the dead . . .
	It is not true: from this land
	The curse was lifted; the highlands have kept peace
	with the valleys; no
	blood in the sod; there is no old sword
	Keeping grim rust, no primal sorrow. The people are
	all one people, their
	homes never knew harrying;
	The tribes before them were acorn-eaters, harmless
	as deer. Oh, fortunate
	earth; you must find someone
	To make you bitter music; how else will you take bonds
	of the future,
	against the wolf in men’s hearts?



2. AVE CAESAR

	No bitterness: our ancestors did it.
	They were only ignorant and hopeful, they wanted freedom but wealth too.
	Their children will learn to hope for a Caesar.
	Or rather--for we are not aquiline Romans but soft mixed colonists--
	Some kindly Sicilian tyrant who’ll keep
	Poverty and Carthage off until the Romans arrive,
	We are easy to manage, a gregarious people,
	Full of sentiment, clever at mechanics, and we love our luxuries.
	
	Beyond the great valley an odd instinctive rising
	Begins to possess the ground, the flatness gathers
	to little humps and
	barrows, low aimless ridges,
	A sudden violence of rock crowns them. The crowded
	orchards end, they
	have come to a stone knife;
	The farms are finished; the sudden foot of the
	slerra. Hill over hill,
	snow-ridge beyond mountain gather
	The blue air of their height about them.



3. THE BEAUTY OF THINGS

	To feel and speak the astonishing beauty of things--earth,
	stone and water,
	Beast, man and woman, sun, moon and stars--
	The blood-shot beauty of human nature, its thoughts,
	frenzies and passions,
	And unhuman nature its towering reality
	For man’s half dream; man, you might say, is nature
	dreaming, but rock
	And water and sky are constant--to feel
	Greatly, and understand greatly, and express greatly, the natural
	Beauty, is the sole business of poetry.
	The rest’s diversion: those holy or noble sentiments, the
	intricate ideas,
	The love, lust, longing: reasons, but not the reason.



4. THE EXCESSES OF GOD

	Is it not by his high superfluousness we know
	Our God? For to be equal a need
	Is natural, animal, mineral: but to fling
	Rainbows over the rain
	And beauty above the moon, and secret rainbows
	On the domes of deep sea-shells,
	And make the necessary embrace of breeding
	Beautiful also as fire,
	Not even the weeds to multiply without blossom
	Nor the birds without music:
	There is the great humaneness at the heart of things,
	The extravagant kindness, the fountain
	Humanity can understand, and would flow likewise
	If power and desire were perch-mates.



5. HURT HAWKS

	I
	
	The broken pillar of the wing jags from the clotted shoulder,
	The wing trails like a banner in defeat,
	No more to use the sky forever but live with famine
	And pain a few days: cat nor coyote
	Will shorten the week of waiting for death, there is game without talons.
	He stands under the oak-bush and waits
	The lame feet of salvation; at night he remembers freedom
	And flies in a dream, the dawns ruin it.
	He is strong and pain is worse to the strong, incapacity is worse.
	The curs of the day come and torment him   
	At distance, no one but death the redeemer will humble that head,
	The intrepid readiness, the terrible eyes.
	The wild God of the world is sometimes merciful to those
	That ask mercy, not often to the arrogant.
	You do not know him, you communal people, or you have forgotten him;
	Intemperate and savage, the hawk remembers him;
	Beautiful and wild, the hawks, and men that are dying, remember him.
	
	
	II
	
	I’d sooner, except the penalties, kill a man than a hawk; but the great redtail
	Had nothing left but unable misery
	From the bones too shattered for mending, the wing that trailed under his talons when he moved.
	We had fed him for six weeks, I gave him freedom,
	He wandered over the foreland hill and returned in the evening, asking for death,
	Not like a beggar, still eyed with the old
	Implacable arrogance. I gave him the lead gift in the twilight. What fell was relaxed,
	Owl-downy, soft feminine feathers; but what
	Soared: the fierce rush: the night-herons by the flooded river cried fear at its rising
	Before it was quite unsheathed from reality.



6. JULY FOURTH BY THE OCEAN

	The continent’s a tamed ox, with all its mountains,
	Powerful and servile; here is for plowland, here is
	for park and playground, this helpless
	Cataract for power; it lies behind us at heel
	All docile between this ocean and the other. If
	flood troubles the lowlands, or earthquake
	Cracks walls, it is only a slave’s blunder or the natural
	Shudder of a new made slave. Therefore we happy
	masters about the solstice
	Light bonfires on the shore and celebrate our power.
	The bay’s necklaced with fire, the bombs make crystal
	fountains in the air, the rockets
	Shower swan’s-neck over the night water . . . I imagined
	The stars drew apart a little as if from troublesome
	children, coldly compassionate;
	But the ocean neither seemed astonished nor in awe:
	If this had been the little sea that Xerxes whipped,
	how it would have feared us.



7. THE MAID’S THOUGHT

	Why listen, even the water is sobbing for something.
	The west wind is dead, the waves
	Forget to hate the cliff, in the upland canyons
	Whole hillsides burst aglow
	With golden broom. Dear how it rained last month,
	And every pool was rimmed
	With sulphury pollen dust of the wakening pines.
	Now tall and slender suddenly
	The stalks of purple iris blaze by the brooks,
	The pencilled ones on the hill;
	This deerweed shivers with gold, the white globe-tulips
	Blow out their silky bubbles,
	But in the next glen bronze-bells nod, the does
	Scalded by some hot longing
	Can hardly set their pointed hoofs to expect
	Love but they crush a flower;
	Shells pair on the rock, birds mate, the moths fly double.
	O it Is time for us now
	Mouth kindling mouth to entangle our maiden bodies
	To make that burning flower.



8. PRAISE LIFE

	This country least, but every inhabited country
	Is clotted with human anguish.
	Remember that at your feasts.
	
	And this is no new thing but from time out of mind,
	No transient thing, but exactly
	Conterminous with human life.
	
	Praise life, it deserves praise, but the praise of life
	That forgets the pain is a pebble
	Rattled in a dry gourd.



9. THE PURSE-SEINE

	Our sardine fishermen work at night in the dark
	of the moon; daylight or moonlight
	They could not tell where to spread the net,
	unable to see the phosphorescence of the shoals of fish.
	They work northward from Monterey, coasting
	Santa Cruz; off New Year’s Point or off Pigeon Point
	The look-out man will see some lakes of milk-color
	light on the sea’s night-purple; he points,
	and the helmsman
	Turns the dark prow, the motorboat circles the
	gleaming shoal and drifts out her seine-net.
	They close the circle
	And purse the bottom of the net, then with great
	labor haul it in.
	
	I cannot tell you
	How beautiful the scene is, and a little terrible,
	then, when the crowded fish
	Know they are caught, and wildly beat from one wall
	to the other of their closing destiny the phosphorescent
	Water to a pool of flame, each beautiful slender body
	sheeted with flame, like a live rocket
	A comet’s tail wake of clear yellow flame; while outside the narrowing
	Floats and cordage of the net great sea-lions come up
	to watch, sighing in the dark; the vast walls of night
	Stand erect to the stars.
	
	Lately I was looking from a night mountain-top
	On a wide city, the colored splendor, galaxies of light:
	how could I help but recall the seine-net
	Gathering the luminous fish? I cannot tell you how
	beautiful the city appeared, and a little terrible.
	I thought, We have geared the machines and locked all together
	into inter-dependence; we have built the great cities; now
	There is no escape. We have gathered vast populations incapable
	of free survival, insulated
	From the strong earth, each person in himself helpless, on all
	dependent. The circle is closed, and the net
	Is being hauled in. They hardly feel the cords drawing, yet
	they shine already. The inevitable mass-disasters
	Will not come in our time nor in our children’s, but we
	and our children
	Must watch the net draw narrower, government take all
	powers--or revolution, and the new government
	Take more than all, add to kept bodies kept souls--or anarchy,
	the mass-disasters.
	These things are Progress;
	Do you marvel our verse is troubled or frowning, while it keeps
	its reason? Or it lets go, lets the mood flow
	In the manner of the recent young men into mere hysteria,
	splintered gleams, crackled laughter. But they are
	quite wrong.
	There is no reason for amazement: surely one always knew
	that cultures decay, and life’s end is death.



10. RETURN

	A little too abstract, a little too wise,
	It is time for us to kiss the earth again,
	It is time to let the leaves rain from the skies,
	Let the rich life run to the roots again.
	I will go to the lovely Sur Rivers
	And dip my arms in them up to the shoulders.
	I will find my accounting where the alder leaf quivers
	In the ocean wind over the river boulders.
	I will touch things and things and no more thoughts,
	That breed like mouthless May-flies darkening the sky,
	The insect clouds that blind our passionate hawks
	So that they cannot strike, hardly can fly.
	Things are the hawk’s food and noble is the mountain, Oh noble
	Pico Blanco, steep sea-wave of marble.



11. ROCK AND HAWK

	Here is a symbol in which
	Many high tragic thoughts
	Watch their own eyes.
	
	This gray rock, standing tall
	On the headland, where the seawind
	Lets no tree grow,
	
	Earthquake-proved, and signatured
	By ages of storms: on its peak
	A falcon has perched.
	
	I think here is your emblem
	To hang in the future sky;
	Not the cross, not the hive,
	
	But this; bright power, dark peace;
	Fierce consciousness joined with final
	Disinterestedness;
	
	Life with calm death; the falcon’s
	Realist eyes and act
	Married to the massive
	
	Mysticism of stone,
	Which failure cannot cast down
	Nor success make proud.



12. SHINE, PERISHING REPUBLIC

	While this America settles in the mould of its vulgarity, heavily thickening 
	to empire
	And protest, only a bubble in the molten mass, pops and sighs out, and the
	mass hardens,
	I sadly smiling remember that the flower fades to make fruit, the fruit rots
	to make earth.
	Out of the mother; and through the spring exultances, ripeness and deca-
	dence; and home to the mother.
	
	You making haste haste on decay: not blameworthy; life is good, be it stub-
	bornly long or suddenly
	A mortal splendor: meteors are not needed less than mountains:
	shine, perishing republic.
	But for my children, I would have them keep their distance from the thick-
	ening center; corruption
	Never has been compulsory, when the cities lie at the monster’s feet there
	are left the mountains.
	And boys, be in nothing so moderate as in love of man, a clever servant,
	insufferable master.
	There is the trap that catches noblest spirits, that caught--they say--
	God, when he walked on earth.



13. THE SILENT SHEPHERDS

	What’s the best life for a man?
	--Never to have been born, sings the choros, and the next best
	Is to die young. I saw the Sybil at Cumae
	Hung in her cage over the public street--
	What do you want, Sybil? I want to die.
	Apothanein Thelo. Apothanein Thelo. Apothanein Thelo.
	You have got your wish. But I meant life, not death.
	What’s the best life for a man? To ride in the wind. To ride
	horses and herd cattle
	In solitary places above the ocean on the beautiful mountain,
	and come home hungry in the evening
	And eat and sleep. He will live in the wild wind and quick rain,
	he will not ruin his eyes with reading,
	Nor think too much.
	However, we must have philosophers.
	I will have shepherds for my philosophers,
	Tall dreary men lying on the hills all night
	Watching the stars, let their dogs watch the sheep. And I’ll have lunatics
	For my poets, strolling from farm to farm, wild liars distorting
	The country news into supernaturalism--
	For all men to such minds are devils or gods--and that increases
	Man’s dignity, man’s importance, necessary lies
	Best told by fools.
	I will have no lawyers nor constables
	Each man guard his own goods: there will be manslaughter,
	But no more wars, no more mass-sacrifice. Nor I’ll have no doctors,
	Except old women gathering herbs on the mountain,
	Let each have her sack of opium to ease the death-pains.
	
	That would be a good world, free and out-doors.
	But the vast hungry spirit of the time
	Cries to his chosen that there is nothing good
	Except discovery, experiment and experience and discovery: To look
	truth in the eyes,
	To strip truth naked, let our dogs do our living for us
	But man discover.
	It is a fine ambition,
	But the wrong tools. Science and mathematics
	Run parallel to reality, they symbolize it, they squint at it,
	They never touch it: consider what an explosion
	Would rock the bones of men into little white fragments and unsky the world
	If any mind for a moment touch truth.



14. THE STARS GO OVER THE LONELY OCEAN

	Unhappy about some far off things
	That are not my affair, wandering
	Along the coast and up the lean ridges,
	I saw in the evening
	The stars go over the lonely ocean,
	And a black-maned wild boar
	Plowing with his snout on Mal Paso Mountain.
	
	The old monster snuffled, “Here are sweet roots,
	Fat grubs, slick beetles and sprouted acorns.
	The best nation in Europe has fallen,
	And that is Finland,
	But the stars go over the lonely ocean,”
	The old black-bristled boar,
	Tearing the sod on Mal Paso Mountain.
	
	“The world’s in a bad way, my man,
	And bound to be worse before it mends;
	Better lie up in the mountain here
	Four or five centuries,
	While the stars go over the lonely ocean,”
	Said the old father of wild pigs,
	Plowing the fallow on Mal Paso Mountain.
	
	“Keep clear of the dupes that talk democracy
	And the dogs that talk revolution,
	Drunk with talk, liars and believers.
	I believe in my tusks.
	Long live freedom and damn the ideologies,”
	Said the gamey black-maned boar
	Tusking the turf on Mal Paso Mountain.



15. SUMMER HOLIDAY

	When the sun shouts and people abound
	One thinks there were the ages of stone and the age of bronze
	And the iron age; iron the unstable metal;
	Steel made of iron, unstable as his mother; the towered-up cities
	Will be stains of rust on mounds of plaster.
	Roots will not pierce the heaps for a time, kind rains will cure them,
	Then nothing will remain of the iron age
	And all these people but a thigh-bone or so, a poem
	Stuck in the world’s thought, splinters of glass
	In the rubbish dumps, a concrete dam far off in the mountain . . .



16. THE SUMMIT REDWOOD

	Only stand high a long enough time your lightning
	will come; that is what blunts the peaks of redwoods;
	But this old tower of life on the hilltop has taken
	it more than twice a century, this knows in every
	Cell the salty and the burning taste, the shudder and the voice.
	
	The fire from heaven; it has felt the earth’s too
	Roaring up hill in autumn, thorned oak-leaves tossing
	their bright ruin to the bitter laurel-leaves, and all
	Its under-forest has died and died, and lives to be
	burnt; the redwood has lived. Though the fire entered,
	It cored the trunk while the sapwood increased. The
	trunk is a tower, the bole of the trunk is a black cavern,
	The mast of the trunk with its green boughs the
	mountain stars are strained through
	Is like the helmet-spike on the highest head of an
	army; black on lit blue or hidden in cloud
	It is like the hill’s finger in heaven. And when the
	cloud hides it, though in barren summer, the boughs
	Make their own rain.
	
	Old Escobar had a cunning trick
	when he stole beef. He and his grandsons
	Would drive the cow up here to a starlight death and
	hoist the carcass into the tree’s hollow,
	Then let them search his cabin he could smile for
	pleasure, to think of his meat hanging secure
	Exalted over the earth and the ocean, a theft like a
	star, secret against the supreme sky.



17. TIME OF DISTURBANCE

	The best is, in war or faction or ordinary vindictive
	life, not to take sides.
	Leave it for children, and the emotional rabble of the
	streets, to back their horse or support a brawler.
	
	But if you are forced into it: remember that good and
	evil are as common as air, and like air shared
	By the panting belligerents; the moral indignation that
	hoarsens orators is mostly a fool.
	
	Hold your nose and compromise; keep a cold mind. Fight,
	if needs must; hate no one. Do as God does,
	Or the tragic poets: they crush their man without hating
	him, their Lear or Hitler, and often save without
	love.
	
	As for these quarrels, they are like the moon, recurrent
	and fantastic. They have their beauty but night’s is better.
	It is better to be silent than make a noise.
	It is better to strike dead than strike often.
	It is better not to strike.



18. TO A YOUNG ARTIST

	It is good for strength not to be merciful
	To its own weakness, good for the deep urn to run over, good to explore
	The peaks and the deeps, who can endure it,
	Good to be hurt, who can be healed afterward: but you that have whetted consciousness
	Too bitter an edge, too keenly daring,
	So that the color of a leaf can make you tremble and your own thoughts like harriers
	Tear the live mind: were your bones mountains,
	Your blood rivers to endure it? and all that labor of discipline labors to death.
	Delight is exquisite, pain is more present;
	You have sold the armor, you have bought shining with burning, one should be stronger than strength
	To fight baresark in the stabbing field
	In the rage of the stars: I tell you unconsciousness is the treasure, the tower, the fortress;
	Referred to that one may live anything;
	The temple and the tower: poor dancer on the flints and shards in the temple porches, turn home.



19. TO DEATH

	I think of you as a great king, cold and austere;
	The throne is not gold but iron, the stones of the high hall
	are black basalt blocks, and the pavement also,
	With blood in the corners:
	Yet you are merciful; it is for you we labor,
	And after a time you give us eternal peace.
	
	I think of you as a mean little servant, but steward of the estate,
	Pale and a hunchback, shuffling along the corridors,
	Tapping at every door. You have the keys of the treasury.
	
	You are the arbiter of the games and bestower of prizes.
	For you the young men sweat and the boys play battle, for your award
	Their hot young lives: what can they win with their lives--
	Whether they bide at home or bleed on the capes of Asia,
	Or add columns of figures or the fates of Europe--
	But eternal peace?



20. TO THE STONE-CUTTERS

	Stone-cutters fighting time with marble, you fore defeated
	Challengers of oblivion
	Eat cynical earnings, knowing rock splits, records fall down,
	The square-limbed Roman letters
	Scale in the thaws, wear in the rain. The poet as well
	Builds his monument mockingly;
	For man will be blotted out, the blithe earth die, the brave sun
	Die blind and blacken to the heart:
	Yet stones have stood for a thousand years, and pained thoughts found
	The honey of peace in old poems.



21. THE TRUMPET

	I
	
	_Reference to a Passage in Plutarch’s Life of Sulla_
	
	The people buying and selling, consuming pleasures, talking in the archways,
	Were all suddenly struck quiet
	And ran from under stone to look up at the sky: so shrill and mournful,
	So fierce and final, a brazen
	Pealing of trumpets high up in the air, in the summer blue over Tuscany.
	They marvelled; the soothsayers answered:
	"Although the Gods are little troubled toward men, at the end of each period
	A sign is declared in heaven
	Indicating new times, new customs, a changed people; the Romans
	Rule, and Etruria is finished;
	A wise mariner will trim the sails to the wind."
	
	I heard yesterday
	So shrill and mournful a trumpet-blast,
	It was hard to be wise.... You must eat change and endure; not be much troubled
	For the people; they will have their happiness.
	When the republic grows too heavy to endure, then Caesar will carry It;
	When life grows hateful, there’s power ...
	
	
	II
	
	_To the Children_
	
	Power’s good; life is not always good but power’s good.
	So you must think when abundance
	Makes pawns of people and all the loaves are one dough.
	The steep singleness of passion
	Dies; they will say, "What was that?" but the power triumphs.
	Loveliness will live under glass
	And beauty will go savage in the secret mountains.
	There is beauty in power also.
	You children must widen your minds’ eyes to take mountains
	Instead of faces, and millions
	Instead of persons; not to hate life; and massed power
	After the lone hawk’s dead.
	
	
	III
	
	That light blood-loving weasel, a tongue of yellow
	Fire licking the sides of the gray stones,
	Has a more passionate and more pure heart
	In the snake-slender flanks than man can imagine;
	But he is betrayed by his own courage,
	The man who kills him is like a cloud hiding a star.
	
	Then praise the jewel-eyed hawk and the tall blue heron;
	The black cormorants that fatten their sea-rock
	With shining slime; even that ruiner of anthills
	The red-shafted woodpecker flying,
	A white star between blood-color wing-clouds,
	Across the glades of the wood and the green lakes of shade.
	
	These live their felt natures; they know their norm
	And live it to the brim; they understand life.
	While men moulding themselves to the anthill have choked
	Their natures until the souls the in them;
	They have sold themselves for toys and protection:
	No, but consider awhile: what else? Men sold for toys.
	
	Uneasy and fractional people, having no center
	But in the eyes and mouths that surround them,
	Having no function but to serve and support
	Civilization, the enemy of man,
	No wonder they live insanely, and desire
	With their tongues, progress; with their eyes, pleasure; with their hearts, death.
	
	Their ancestors were good hunters, good herdsmen and swordsman,
	But now the world is turned upside down;
	The good do evil, the hope’s in criminals; in vice
	That dissolves the cities and war to destroy them.
	Through wars and corruptions the house will fall.
	Mourn whom it falls on. Be glad: the house is mined, it will fall.
	
	
	IV
	
	Rain, hail and brutal sun, the plow in the roots,
	The pitiless pruning-iron in the branches,
	Strengthen the vines, they are all feeding friends
	Or powerless foes until the grapes purple.
	But when you have ripened your berries it is time to begin to perish.
	
	The world sickens with change, rain becomes poison,
	The earth is a pit, it Is time to perish.
	The vines are fey, the very kindness of nature
	Corrupts what her cruelty before strengthened.
	When you stand on the peak of time it is time to begin to perish.
	
	Reach down the long morbid roots that forget the plow,
	Discover the depths; let the long pale tendrils
	Spend all to discover the sky, now nothing is good
	But only the steel mirrors of discovery . . .
	And the beautiful enormous dawns of time, after we perish.
	
	
	V
	
	Mourning the broken balance, the hopeless prostration of the earth
	Under men’s hands and their minds,
	The beautiful places killed like rabbits to make a city,
	The spreading fungus, the slime-threads
	And spores; my own coast’s obscene future: I remember the farther
	Future, and the last man dying
	Without succession under the confident eyes of the stars.
	It was only a moment’s accident,
	The race that plagued us; the world resumes the old lonely immortal
	Splendor; from here I can even
	Perceive that that snuffed candle had something . . . a fantastic virtue,
	A faint and unshapely pathos . . .
	So death will flatter them at last: what, even the bald ape’s by-shot
	Was moderately admirable?
	
	
	VI 
	
	_Palinode_
	
	All summer neither rain nor wave washes the cormorants’
	Perch, and their droppings have painted it shining white.
	If the excrement of fish-eaters makes the brown rock a snow-mountain
	At noon, a rose in the morning, a beacon at moonrise
	On the black water: it is barely possible that even men’s present
	Lives are something; their arts and sciences (by moonlight)
	Not wholly ridiculous, nor their cities merely an offense.
	
	
	VII
	
	Under my windows, between the road and the sea-cliff, bitter wild grass
	Stands narrowed between the people and the storm.
	The ocean winter after winter gnaws at its earth, the wheels and the feet
	Summer after summer encroach and destroy.
	Stubborn green life, for the cliff-eater I cannot comfort you, ignorant which color,
	Gray-blue or pale-green, will please the late stars;
	But laugh at the other, your seed shall enjoy wonderful vengeance’s and suck
	The arteries and walk in triumph on the faces.



22. WE ARE THOSE PEOPLE

	I have abhorred the wars and despised the liars, laughed at the frightened
	And forecast victory; never one moment’s doubt.
	But now not far, over the backs of some crawling years, the next
	Great war’s column of dust and fire writhes
	Up the sides of the sky: it becomes clear that we too may suffer
	What others have, the brutal horror of defeat--
	Or if not in the next, then in the next--therefore watch Germany
	And read the future. We wish, of course, that our women
	Would die like biting rats in the cellars, our men like wolves on the mountain:
	It will not be so. Our men will curse, cringe, obey;
	Our women uncover themselves to the grinning victors for bits of chocolate.



23. THE WORLD’S WONDERS

	Being now three or four years more than sixty,
	I have seen strange things in my time. I have seen a merman
	standing waist-deep in the ocean off my rock shore,
	
	Unmistakably human and unmistakably a sea-beast: he submerged and never came up again,
	While we stood watching. I do not know what he was, and I have no theory: but this was the least of wonders.
	
	I have seen the United States grow up the strongest and wealthiest of nations, and swim in the wind over bankruptcy.
	I have seen Europe, for twenty-five hundred years the crown of the world, become its beggar and cripple.

