*** Stéphane Mallarmé (1842 - 1898)

1. DISTRESS

	I don’t come to conquer your flesh tonight, O beast 
	In whom are the sins of the race, nor to stir 
	In your foul tresses a mournful tempest 
	Beneath the fatal boredom my kisses pour: 
	
	A heavy sleep without those dreams that creep 
	Under curtains alien to remorse, I ask of your bed, 
	Sleep you can savour after your dark deceits, 
	You who know more of Nothingness than the dead. 
	
	For Vice, gnawing this inborn nobleness of mine 
	Marked me, like you, with its sterility, 
	But shroud-haunted, pale, destroyed, I flee 
	
	While that heart no tooth of any crime 
	Can wound lives in your breast of stone, 
	Frightened of dying while I sleep alone.



2. L’APRÈS-MIDI D’UN FAUNE

	I would immortalize these nymphs; so bright
	Their sunlit colouring so airy light
	It floats like drowsy down. Loved I a dream?
	My doubts born of oblivious darkness seem
	A subtle tracery of branches grown
	The tree’s true self--proving that I have known
	Thinking it love the blushing of a rose.
	But think. These nymphs their loveliness ... suppose
	They bodied forth your senses’ fabulous thirst?
	Illusion! which the blue eyes of the first
	As cold and chaste as is the weeping spring
	Beget: the other sighing passioning
	Is she the wind warm in your fleece at noon?
	No; through this quiet when a weary swoon
	Crushes and chokes the latest faint essay
	Of morning cool against the encroaching day
	There is no murmuring water save the gush
	Of my clear fluted notes; and in the hush
	Blows never a wind save that which through my reed
	Puffs out before the rain of notes can speed
	Upon the air with that calm breath of art
	That mounts the unwrinkled zenith visibly
	Where inspiration seeks its native sky.
	You fringes of a calm Sicilian lake
	The sun’s own mirror which I love to take
	Silent beneath your starry flowers tell
	_How here I cut the hollow rushes well_
	_Tamed by my skill when on the glaucous gold_
	_Of distant lawns about their fountain cold_
	_A living whiteness stirs like a lazy wave;_
	_And at the first slow notes my panpipes gave_
	_These flocking swans these naiads rather fly_
	_Or dive_. Noon burns inert and tawny dry
	Nor marks how clean that Hymen slipped away
	From me who seek in song the real A.
	Wake then to the first ardour and the sight
	O lonely faun of the old fierce white light
	With lilies one of you for innocence.
	Other than their lips’ delicate pretence
	The light caress that quiets treacherous lovers
	My breast I know not how to tell discovers
	The bitten print of some immortal’s kiss.
	But hush! a mystery so great as this
	I dare not tell save to my double reed
	Which sharer of my every joy and need
	Dreams down its cadenced monologues that we
	Falsely confuse the beauties that we see
	With the bright palpable shapes our song creates:
	My flute as loud as passion modulates
	Purges the common dream of flank and breast
	Seen through closed eyes and inwardly caressed
	Of every empty and monotonous line.
	
	Bloom then O Syrinx in thy flight malign
	A reed once more beside our trysting-lake.
	Proud of my music let me often make
	A song of goddesses and see their rape
	Profanely done on many a painted shape.
	So when the grape’s transparent juice I drain
	I quell regret for pleasures past and feign
	A new real grape. For holding towards the sky
	The empty skin I blow it tight and lie
	Dream-drunk till evening eyeing it.
	                                     Tell o’er
	Remembered joys and plump the grape once more.
	_Between the reeds I saw their bodies gleam_
	_Who cool no mortal fever in the stream_
	_Crying to the woods the rage of their desire:_
	_And their bright hair went down in jewelled fire_
	_Where crystal broke and dazzled shudderingly._
	_I check my swift pursuit: for see where lie_
	_Bruised being twins in love by languor sweet_
	_Two sleeping girls clasped at my very feet._
	_I seize and run with them nor part the pair_
	_Breaking this covert of frail petals where_
	_Roses drink scent of the sun and our light play_
	_’Mid tumbled flowers shall match the death of day._
	I love that virginal fury--ah the wild
	Thrill when a maiden body shrinks defiled
	Shuddering like arctic light from lips that sear
	Its nakedness ... the flesh in secret fear!
	Contagiously through my linked pair it flies
	Where innocence in either struggling dies
	Wet with fond tears or some less piteous dew.
	_Gay in the conquest of these fears I grew_
	_So rash that I must needs the sheaf divide_
	_Of ruffled kisses heaven itself had tied._
	_For as I leaned to stifle in the hair_
	_Of one my passionate laughter (taking care_
	_With a stretched finger that her innocence_
	_Might stain with her companion’s kindling sense_
	_To touch the younger little one who lay_
	_Child-like unblushing) my ungrateful prey_
	_Slips from me freed by passion’s sudden death_
	_Nor heeds the frenzy of my sobbing breath._
	
	Let it pass! others of their hair shall twist
	A rope to drag me to those joys I missed.
	See how the ripe pomegranates bursting red
	To quench the thirst of the mumbling bees have bled;
	So too our blood kindled by some chance fire
	Flows for the swarming legions of desire.
	At evening when the woodland green turns gold
	And ashen grey ’mid the quenched leaves behold!
	Red Etna glows by Venus visited
	Walking the lava with her snowy tread
	Whene’er the flames in thunderous slumber die.
	I hold the goddess!
	                   Ah sure penalty!
	
	But the unthinking soul and body swoon
	At last beneath the heavy hush of noon.
	Forgetful let me lie where summer’s drouth
	Sifts fine the sand and then with gaping mouth
	Dream planet-struck by the grape’s round wine-red star.
	
	Nymphs I shall see the shade that now you are.



3. THE PIPE

	Yesterday I found my pipe while pondering a long evening of work, 
	of fine winter work. Thrown aside were my cigarettes, with all the childish 
	joys of summer, into the past which the leaves shining blue in the sun, 
	the muslins, illuminate, and taken up once again was the grave pipe 
	of a serious man who wants to smoke for a long while without being disturbed, 
	so as better to work: but I was not prepared for the surprise that this 
	abandoned object had in store for me; for hardly had I drawn the first puff 
	when I forgot the grand books I was planning to write, and, amazed, moved to 
	a feeling of tenderness, I breathed in the air of the previous winter 
	which was now coming back to me. I had not been in contact with my 
	faithful sweetheart since returning to France, and now all of London, 
	London as I had lived it a year ago entirely alone, appeared before my eyes: 
	first the dear fogs that muffle one’s brains and have an odor of their own 
	there when they penetrate beneath the casements. My tobacco had the scent 
	of a somber room with leather furniture sprinkled by coal dust, on which 
	the thin black cat would curl and stretch; the big fires! and the maid 
	with red arms pouring coals, and the noise of those coals falling from 
	the sheet--iron bucket into the iron scuttle in the morning--when the postman 
	gave the solemn double knock that kept me alive! Once again I saw through 
	the windows those sickly trees of the deserted square--I saw the open sea, 
	crossed so often that winter, shivering on the deck of the steamer wet with 
	drizzle and blackened from the fumes--with my poor wandering beloved, decked out 
	in traveller’s clothes, a long dress, dull as the dust of the roads, 
	a coat clinging damply to her cold shoulders, one of those straw hats with 
	no feather and hardly any ribbons that wealthy ladies throw away upon arrival, 
	mangled as they are by the sea, and that poor loved ones refurbish for many 
	another season. Around her neck was wound the terrible handkerchief that 
	one waves when saying goodbye forever.



4. SEA BREEZE

	The flesh is sad, alas!--and I’ve read all the books.
	Let’s go! Far off. Let’s go! I sense
	That the birds, intoxicated, fly
	Deep into unknown spume and sky!
	Nothing--not even old gardens mirrored by eyes--
	Can restrain this heart that drenches itself in the sea,
	O nights, or the abandoned light of my lamp,
	On the void of paper, that whiteness defends,
	No, not even the young woman feeding her child.
	I shall go! Steamer, straining at your ropes
	Lift your anchor towards an exotic rawness!
	A Boredom, made desolate by cruel hope
	Still believes in the last goodbye of handkerchiefs!
	And perhaps the masts, inviting lightning,
	Are those the gale bends over shipwrecks,
	Lost, without masts, without masts, no fertile islands . . .
	But, oh my heart, listen to the sailors’ chant!

