*** Christopher Marlowe (1564 - 1593)

1. THE FACE THAT LAUNCH’D A THOUSAND SHIPS

	Was this the face that launch’d a thousand ships,
	And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?
	Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
	Her lips suck forth my soul: see where it flies!
	Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.
	Here will I dwell, for heaven is in these lips,
	And all is dross that is not Helena.
	I will be Paris, and for love of thee,
	Instead of Troy, shall Wittenberg be sack’d;
	And I will combat with weak Menelaus,
	And wear thy colours on my plumed crest;
	Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel,
	And then return to Helen for a kiss.
	O, thou art fairer than the evening air
	Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;
	Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
	When he appear’d to hapless Semele;
	More lovely than the monarch of the sky
	In wanton Arethusa’s azur’d arms;
	And none but thou shalt be my paramour!



2. HERO AND LEANDER

	It lies not in our power to love or hate,
	For will in us is over-rul’d by fate.
	hen two are stript long ere the course begin,
	We wish that one should lose, the other win;
	And one especially do we affect
	Of two gold ingots, like in each respect:
	The reason no man knows; let it suffice,
	What we behold is censur’d by our eyes.
	Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
	Who ever lov’d, that lov’d not at first sight.



3. THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE

	Come live with me and be my love,
	And we will all the pleasures prove,
	That valleys, groves, hills, and fields,
	Woods, or steepy mountain yields.
	And we will sit upon the rocks,
	Seeing the shepherds feed their flocks,
	By shallow rivers, to whose falls
	Melodious birds sing madrigals.
	And I will make thee beds of roses,
	And a thousand fragrant posies,
	A cap of flowers and a kirtle
	Embroider’d all with leaves of myrtle:
	A gown made of the finest wool,
	Which from our pretty lambs we pull;
	Fair lined slippers for the cold,
	With buckles of the purest gold:
	A belt of straw and ivy buds,
	With coral clasps and amber studs;
	And if these pleasures may thee move,
	Come live with me and be my love.
	The shepherd swains shall dance and sing
	For thy delight each May morning;
	If these delights thy mind may move,
	Then live with me and be my love.

