*** Claude McKay (1890 - 1948)

1. AFTER THE WINTER

	Some day, when trees have shed their leaves
	    And against the morning’s white
	The shivering birds beneath the eaves
	    Have sheltered for the night,
	We’ll turn our faces southward, love,
	    Toward the summer isle
	Where bamboos spire the shafted grove
	    And wide-mouthed orchids smile.
	
	And we will seek the quiet hill
	    Where towers the cotton tree,
	And leaps the laughing crystal rill,
	    And works the droning bee.
	And we will build a cottage there
	    Beside an open glade,
	With black-ribbed blue-bells blowing near,
	    And ferns that never fade.



2. AMERICA

	Although she feeds me bread of bitterness,
	And sinks into my throat her tiger’s tooth,
	Stealing my breath of life, I will confess
	I love this cultured hell that tests my youth.
	Her vigor flows like tides into my blood,
	Giving me strength erect against her hate,
	Her bigness sweeps my being like a flood.
	Yet, as a rebel fronts a king in state,
	I stand within her walls with not a shred
	Of terror, malice, not a word of jeer.
	Darkly I gaze into the days ahead,
	And see her might and granite wonders there,
	Beneath the touch of Time’s unerring hand,
	Like priceless treasures sinking in the sand.



3. DECEMBER, 1919

	Last night I heard your voice, mother,
	The words you sang to me
	When I, a little barefoot boy,
	Knelt down against your knee.
	
	And tears gushed from my heart, mother,
	And passed beyond its wall,
	But though the fountain reached my throat
	The drops refused to fall.
	
	’Tis ten years since you died, mother,
	Just ten dark years of pain,
	And oh, I only wish that I
	Could weep just once again.



4. FUTILITY

	Oh, I have tried to laugh the pain away,
	Let new flames brush my love-springs like a feather.
	But the old fever seizes me to-day,
	As sickness grips a soul in wretched weather.
	I have given up myself to every urge,
	With not a care of precious powers spent,
	Have bared my body to the strangest scourge,
	To soothe and deaden my heart’s unhealing rent.
	But you have torn a nerve out of my frame,
	A gut that no physician can replace,
	And reft my life of happiness and aim.
	Oh what new purpose shall I now embrace?
	What substance hold, what lovely form pursue,
	When my thought burns through everything to you?



5. I KNOW MY SOUL

	I plucked my soul out of its secret place,
	And held it to the mirror of my eye,
	To see it like a star against the sky,
	A twitching body quivering in space,
	A spark of passion shining on my face.
	And I explored it to determine why
	This awful key to my infinity
	Conspires to rob me of sweet joy and grace.
	And if the sign may not be fully read,
	If I can comprehend but not control,
	I need not gloom my days with futile dread,
	Because I see a part and not the whole.
	Contemplating the strange, I’m comforted
	By this narcotic thought: I know my soul.



6. JOY IN THE WOODS

	There is joy in the woods just now,
	      The leaves are whispers of song,
	And the birds make mirth on the bough
	      And music the whole day long,
	And God! to dwell in the town
	      In these springlike summer days,
	On my brow an unfading frown
	      And hate in my heart always--
	
	A machine out of gear, aye, tired,
	Yet forced to go on--for I’m hired.
	
	Just forced to go on through fear,
	      For every day I must eat
	And find ugly clothes to wear,
	      And bad shoes to hurt my feet
	And a shelter for work-drugged sleep!
	      A mere drudge! but what can one do?
	A man that’s a man cannot weep!
	      Suicide? A quitter? Oh, no!
	
	But a slave should never grow tired,
	Whom the masters have kindly hired.
	
	But oh! for the woods, the flowers
	      Of natural, sweet perfume,
	The heartening, summer showers
	      And the smiling shrubs in bloom,
	Dust-free, dew-tinted at morn,
	      The fresh and life-giving air,
	The billowing waves of corn
	      And the birds’ notes rich and clear:--
	
	For a man-machine toil-tired
	May crave beauty too--though he’s hired.



7. ON BROADWAY

	About me young careless feet
	Linger along the garish street;
	Above, a hundred shouting signs
	Shed down their bright fantastic glow
	Upon the merry crowd and lines
	Of moving carriages below.
	Oh wonderful is Broadway--only
	My heart, my heart is lonely.
	Desire naked, linked with Passion,
	Goes trutting by in brazen fashion;
	From playhouse, cabaret and inn
	The rainbow lights of Broadway blaze
	All gay without, all glad within;
	As in a dream I stand and gaze
	At Broadway, shining Broadway--only
	My heart, my heart is lonely.



8. SUMMER MORN IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

	All yesterday it poured, and all night long
	I could not sleep; the rain unceasing beat
	Upon the shingled roof like a weird song,
	Upon the grass like running children’s feet.
	And down the mountains by the dark cloud kissed,
	Like a strange shape in filmy veiling dressed,
	Slid slowly, silently, the wraith-like mist,
	And nestled soft against the earth’s wet breast.
	
	But lo, there was a miracle at dawn!
	The still air stirred at touch of the faint breeze,
	The sun a sheet of gold bequeathed the lawn,
	The songsters twittered in the rustling trees.
	And all things were transfigured in the day,
	But me whom radiant beauty could not move;
	For you, more wonderful, were far away,
	And I was blind with hunger for your love.



9. THROUGH AGONY

	I
	
	All night, through the eternity of night,
	Pain was my potion though I could not feel.
	Deep in my humbled heart you ground your heel,
	Till I was reft of even my inner light,
	Till reason from my mind had taken flight,
	And all my world went whirling in a reel.
	And all my swarthy strength turned cold like steel,
	A passive mass beneath your puny might.
	Last night I gave you triumph over me,
	So I should be myself as once before,
	I marveled at your shallow mystery,
	And haunted hungrily your temple door.
	I gave you sum and substance to be free,
	Oh, you shall never triumph any more!
	
	
	II
	
	I do not fear to face the fact and say,
	How darkly-dull my living hours have grown,
	My wounded heart sinks heavier than stone,
	Because I loved you longer than a day!
	I do not shame to turn myself away
	From beckoning flowers beautifully blown,
	To mourn your vivid memory alone
	In mountain fastnesses austerely gray.
	The mists will shroud me on the utter height,
	The salty, brimming waters of my breast
	Will mingle with the fresh dews of the night
	To bathe my spirit hankering to rest.
	But after sleep I’ll wake with greater might,
	Once more to venture on the eternal quest.



10. TO ONE COMING NORTH

	At first you’ll joy to see the playful snow,
	 Like white moths trembling on the tropic air,
	Or waters of the hills that softly flow
	 Gracefully falling down a shining stair.
	
	And when the fields and streets are covered white
	 And the wind-worried void is chilly, raw,
	Or underneath a spell of heat and light
	 The cheerless frozen spots begin to thaw,
	
	Like me you’ll long for home, where birds’ glad song
	 Means flowering lanes and leas and spaces dry,
	And tender thoughts and feelings fine and strong,
	 Beneath a vivid silver-flecked blue sky.
	
	But oh! more than the changeless southern isles,
	 When Spring has shed upon the earth her charm,
	You’ll love the Northland wreathed in golden smiles
	 By the miraculous sun turned glad and warm.

