*** Thomas Merton (1915 - 1968)

1. 1941

	The white, the silent stars
	Drive their wheeling ring,
	Crane down out of the tall black air
	To hear the swanworld sing.
	
	But the long, deep knife is in,
	(O bitter, speechless earth)
	Throat grows tight, voice thin,
	Blood gets no regrowth,
	
	As night devours our days,
	Death puts out our eyes,
	Towns dry up and fare like tongues
	But no voice prophesies.



2. ADVICE TO A YOUNG PROPHET

	Keep away, son, these lakes are salt. These flowers   
	Eat insects. Here private lunatics   
	Yell and skip in a very dry country.
	
	Or where some haywire monument   
	Some badfaced daddy of fear   
	Commands an unintelligent rite.
	
	To dance on the unlucky mountain,   
	To dance they go, and shake the sin   
	Out of their feet and hands,
	
	Frenzied until the sudden night   
	Falls very quiet, and magic sin   
	Creeps, secret, back again.
	
	Badlands echo with omens of ruin:
	Seven are very satisfied, regaining possession:   
	(Bring a little mescaline, you’ll get along!)
	
	There’s something in your bones,
	There’s someone dirty in your critical skin,
	There’s a tradition in your cruel misdirected finger   
	Which you must obey, and scribble in the hot sand:
	
	“Let everybody come and attend   
	Where lights and airs are fixed
	To teach and entertain. O watch the sandy people   
	Hopping in the naked bull’s-eye,
	
	Shake the wildness out of their limbs,
	Try to make peace like John in skins
	Elijah in the timid air   
	or Anthony in tombs:
	
	Pluck the imaginary trigger, brothers.   
	Shoot the devil: he’ll be back again!”
	
	America needs these fatal friends
	Of God and country, to grovel in mystical ashes,   
	Pretty big prophets whose words don’t burn,   
	Fighting the strenuous imago all day long.
	
	Only these lunatics, (O happy chance)
	Only these are sent. Only this anaemic thunder   
	Grumbles on the salt flats, in rainless night:
	
	O go home, brother, go home!   
	The devil’s back again,
	And magic Hell is swallowing flies.



3. AT THIS PRECISE MOMENT OF HISTORY

	1. At this precise moment of history   
	   With Goody-two-shoes running for Congress
	   We are testing supersonic engines   
	   To keep God safe in the cherry tree.   
	   When I said so in this space last Thursday   
	   I meant what I said: power struggles.
	
	2. You would never dream of such corn. The colonials in sandalwood like running wide open and available for protection. You can throw them away without a refund.
	
	3. Dr. Hanfstaengel who was not called Putzi except by those who did not know him is taped in the national archives. J. Edgar Hoover he ought to know
	   And does know.
	
	   But calls Dr. Hanfstaengel Putzi nevertheless   
	   Somewhere on tape in the   
	   Archives.
	
	   He (Dr. H.) is not a silly man.   
	   He left in disgust
	   About the same time Shirley Temple
	   Sat on Roosevelt’s knee   
	   An accomplished pianist
	   A remembered personality.   
	   He (Dr. H.) began to teach   
	   Immortal anecdotes
	   To his mother a Queen Bee   
	   In the American colony.
	
	4. What is your attitude toward historical subjects?   
	   --Perhaps it’s their size!
	
	5. When I said this in space you would never believe   
	   Corn Colonel was so expatriated.
	   --If you think you know,
	   Take this wheel
	   And become standard.
	
	6. She is my only living mother
	   This bee of the bloody arts
	   Bandaging victims of Saturday’s dance   
	   Like a veritable sphinx
	   In a totally new combination.
	
	7. The Queen Mother is an enduring vignette at an early age.
	   Now she ought to be kept in submersible decompression chambers
	
	   For a while.
	
	8. What is your attitude toward historical subjects   
	   Like Queen Colonies?
	   --They are permanently fortified
	   For shape retention.
	
	9. Solid shades   
	   Seven zippered pockets   
	   Close to my old place
	   Waiting by the road
	   Big disk brakes
	   Spinoff
	   Zoom
	   Long lights stabbing at the   
	   Two together piggyback   
	   In a stark sports roadster
	
	   Regretting his previous outburst   
	   Al loads his Cadillac   
	   With lovenests.
	
	10. She is my only living investment   
	     She examines the housing industry   
	     Counts 3.5 million postwar children   
	     Turning twenty-one
	     And draws her own conclusion   
	     In the commercial fishing field.
	
	11. Voice of little sexy ventriloquist mignonne:
	     “Well I think all of us are agreed and sincerely I myself believe that honest people on both sides have got it all on tape. Governor Reagan thinks that nuclear wampums are a last resort that ought not to be resorted.” (But little mignonne went right to the point with: “We have a commitment to fulfill and we better do it quick.” No dupe she!)
	     All historians die of the same events at least twice.
	
	13. I feel that I ought to open this case with an apology. Dr. H. certainly has a beautiful voice. He is not a silly man. He is misunderstood even by Presidents.
	
	14. You people are criticizing the Church but what are you going to put in her place? Sometime sit down with a pencil and paper and ask yourself what you’ve got that the Church hasn’t.
	
	15. Nothing to add
	     But the big voice of a detective   
	     Using the wrong first names   
	     In national archives.
	
	16. She sat in shocking pink with an industrial zipper specially designed for sitting on the knees of presidents in broad daylight. She spoke the president’s mind. “We have a last resort to be resorted and we better do it quick.” He wondered at what he had just said.
	
	17. It was all like running wideopen in a loose gown   
	     Without slippers   
	     At least someplace.



4. AUBADE: HARLEM

	Across the cages of the keyless aviaries,
	The lines and wires, the gallows of the broken kites,   
	Crucify, against the fearful light,
	The ragged dresses of the little children.
	Soon, in the sterile jungles of the waterpipes and ladders,   
	The bleeding sun, a bird of prey, will terrify the poor,   
	These will forget the unbelievable moon.
	
	But in the cells of whiter buildings,
	Where the glass dawn is brighter than the knives of surgeons,   
	Paler than alcohol or ether, shinier than money,
	The white men’s wives, like Pilate’s,
	Cry in the peril of their frozen dreams:
	
	“Daylight has driven iron spikes,
	Into the flesh of Jesus’ hands and feet:
	Four flowers of blood have nailed Him to the walls of Harlem.”
	
	Along the white halls of the clinics and the hospitals   
	Pilate evaporates with a cry:
	They have cut down two hundred Judases,
	Hanged by the neck in the opera houses and the museum.
	
	Across the cages of the keyless aviaries,
	The lines and wires, the gallows of the broken kites,   
	Crucify, against the fearful light,
	The ragged dresses of the little children.



5. AUBADE: THE CITY

	Now that the clouds have come like cattle
	To the cold waters of the city’s river,
	All the windows turn their scandalized expression
	Toward the tide’s tin dazzle,
	
	And question, with their weak-eyed stare,
	The riotous sun.
	
	From several places at a time
	Cries of defiance,
	As delicate as frost, as sharp as glass,
	Rise from the porcelain buildings
	And break in the blue sky.
	
	Then, falling swiftly from the air,
	The fragments of this fragile indignation
	Ring on the echoing streets
	No louder than a shower of pins.
	
	But suddenly the bridges’ choiring cables
	Jangle gently in the wind
	And play like quiet piano-strings.
	
	All down the faces of the buildings
	Windows begin to close
	Like figures in a long division.
	
	Those whose eyes all night have simulated sleep,
	Suddenly stare, from where they lie, like wolves,
	Tied in the tangle of the bedding,
	
	And listen for the waking blood
	To flood the apprehensive silence of their flesh.
	They fear the heart that now lies quenched may quicken,
	And start to romp against the rib,
	Soft and insistent as a secret bell.
	
	They also fear the light will grow
	Into the windows of their hiding places, like a tree
	Of tropical flowers
	And put them, one by one, to flight.
	
	Then life will have to begin.
	Pieces of paper, lying in the streets,
	Will start up, in the twisting wind,
	And fly like idiot birds before the faces of the crowds.
	And in the roaring buildings
	Elevator doors will have begun
	To clash like sabres.



6. BIRDCAGE WALK

	I
	
	One royal afternoon
	When I was young and easily surprised   
	By uncles coming from the park
	At the command of nurses and of guards,
	
	I wondered, over trees and ponds,   
	At the sorry, rude walls
	And the white windows of the apartments.
	
	“These,” said my uncle, “are the tallest houses.”   
	
	
	II
	
	Yes, in the spring of my joy
	When I was visibly affected by a gaitered bishop,   
	Large and unsteady in the flagged yard,
	Guards, dogs and blackbirds fled on every hand.
	
	“He is an old one,” said uncle,   
	“The gaiters are real.”
	
	
	III
	
	Rippled, fistfed windows of your
	Dun high houses! Then
	Come cages made of pretty willows
	Where they put the palace girls!
	Green ducks wade slowly from the marble water.   
	One swan reproves a saucy daughter.
	
	I consider my own true pond,
	Look for the beginning and the end.
	I lead the bishop down lanes and islands.
	
	
	IV
	
	Yes, in the windows of my first existence   
	Before my yawns became seasons,
	When nurses and uncles were sure,   
	Chinese fowl fought the frosty water   
	Startled by this old pontifex.
	
	“No bridge” (He smiled   
	Between the budding branches),
	“No crossing to the cage   
	Of the paradise bird!”
	
	Astounded by the sermons in the leaves
	I cried, “No! No! The stars have higher houses!”
	
	Kicking the robins and ganders   
	From the floor of his insular world
	The magic bishop leaned his blessing on the children.
	
	
	V
	
	That was the bold day when
	Moved by the unexpected summons   
	I opened all the palace aviaries   
	As by a king’s representative
	I was appointed fowler.



7. THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY COMPARED TO A WINDOW

	Because my will is simple as a window
	And knows no pride of original birth,
	It is my life to die, like glass, by light:
	Slain in the strong rays of the bridegroom sun.
	
	Because my love is simple as a window
	And knows no shame of original dust, 
	I longed all night, (when I was visible) for dawn my death: 
	When I would marry day, my Holy Spirit: 
	And die by transsubstantiation into light.
	
	For light, my lover, steals my life in secret.
	I vanish into day, and leave no shadow 
	But the geometry of my cross, 
	Whose frame and structure are the strength 
	By which I die, but only to the earth, 
	And am uplifted to the sky my life. 
	
	When I became the substance of my lover, 
	(Being obedient, sinless glass) 
	I love all things that need my lover’s life, 
	And live to give my newborn Morning to your quiet rooms, 
	--Your rooms, that would be tombs, 
	Or vaults of night, and death, and terror, 
	Fill with the clarity of living Heaven, 
	Shine with the rays of God’s Jerusalem:
	O shine, bright Sions! 
	
	Because I die by brightness and the Holy Spirit, 
	The sun rejoices in your jail, my kneeling Christian, 
	(Where even now you weep and grin 
	To learn, from my simplicity, the strength of faith). 
	
	Therefore do not be troubled at the judgements of the thunder, 
	Stay still and pray, still stay, my other son, 
	And do not fear the armies and black ramparts 
	Of the advancing and retreating rains: 
	I’ll let no lightning kill your room’s white order. 
	
	Although it is the day’s last hour, 
	Look with no fear: 
	For the torn storm lets in, at the world’s rim, 
	Three streaming rays as straight as Jacob’s ladder:
	
	And you shall see the sun, my Son, my Substance, 
	Come to convince the world of the day’s end, and of the night, 
	Smile to the lovers of the day in smiles of blood; 
	For though my love, He’ll be their Brother, 
	My light--the Lamb of their Apocalypse.



8. THE DARK MORNING

	This is the black day when
	Fog rides the ugly air:
	Water wades among the buildings
	To the prisoner’s curled ear.
	
	Then rain, in thin sentences,
	Slakes him like danger,
	Whose heart is his Germany
	Fevered with anger.
	
	This is the dark day when
	Locks let the enemy in
	Through all the coiling passages of
	(Curled ear) my prison!



9. A DIRGE

	Some one who hears the bugle neigh will know
	How cold it is, when sentries die by starlight.
	
	But none who love to hear the hammering drum
	Will look, when the betrayer
	Laughs in the desert like a broken monument,
	Ringing his tongue in the red bell of his head,
	Gesturing like a flag.
	
	The air that quivered after the earthquake
	(When God died like a thief)
	Still plays the ancient forums like pianos;
	The treacherous wind, lover of the demented,
	Will harp forever in the haunted temples.
	
	What speeches do the birds make
	With their beaks, to the desolate dead?
	And yet we love those carsick amphitheaters,
	
	Nor hear our messenger come home from hell
	With hands shot full of blood.
	
	No one who loves the fleering fife, will feel
	The light of morning stab his flesh,
	
	But some who hear the trumpet’s raving, in the ruined sky,
	Will dread the burnished helmet of the sun
	Whose anger goes before the King.



10. EARTHQUAKE

	Go tell the earth to shake
	And tell the thunder
	To wake the sky
	And tear the clouds apart.
	Tell my people to come out
	And wonder
	Where the old world is gone,
	For a new world is born,
	And all my people
	Shall be one.
	
	So tell the earth to shake.
	With marching feet
	Of messengers of peace,
	Proclaim my law of love
	To every nation,
	Every race.
	
	For the old wrongs are over,
	The old days are done;
	A new world is rising
	Where my people shall be one.
	
	For the old world is ended,
	The old sky is torn
	Apart. A new day is born:
	They hate no more,
	They do not go to war any more.
	My people shall be one.
	
	And say:
	The old wrongs are over,
	The old ways are done;
	There shall be no more hate
	And no oppression.
	The old wrongs are gone,
	My people shall be one.



11. EAST WITH IBN BATTUTA

	1. _Cairo 1326_
	
	Cloisters (khanqahs) of Darvishes 
	Built by aristocrats 
	Have silver rings on their doors 
	The mystics sit down to eat 
	Each from his private bowl 
	Each drinks 
	From his own cup 
	They are given 
	Changes of clothing 
	And a monthly allowance 
	On Thursday nights 
	They are given sugar 
	Soap and oil 
	For their lamps 
	And the price of a bath. 
	
	In the great cemetery 
	They build chambers 
	Pavilions 
	Hire singers 
	To chant the Koran 
	Day and night among the tombs 
	With pleasant voices. 
	
	Convent at Dayr at-Tin: 
	A piece of the Prophet’s 
	Wooden basin with the pencil 
	With which he applied kohl 
	The awl 
	With which he sewed his sandals 
	Bought by the founder 
	For a hundred thousand dirhams. 
	
	
	2. _Syria_
	
	Ma’arra and Sarmín: towns 
	Of abominable Shi’ites 
	Who hate the Ten Companions 
	And every person called Omar 
	
	In Sarmín (where scented soap 
	Is made and exported 
	To Damascus and Cairo) 
	These heretics so hate the Ten 
	They will not even say “Ten” 
	Their brokers at auctions 
	When they come to “ten” 
	Say “Nine-plus-one” 
	
	One day a faithful Turk 
	At one of their markets 
	Heard the broker call “Nine-plus-one” 
	He went for him with a club, shouting 
	“You ****, say TEN!” 
	
	“Ten with a club” 
	Wept the broker. 
	
	
	3. _The Nusayris_
	
	These heretics hate all true believers and when ordered by the Sultan 
	To build mosques build them far from their homes 
	Keep asses and cattle in them let them fall into disrepair. 
	
	If a true believer coming from another country 
	Stops in a ruined mosque and sings the call to prayer 
	The infidels say: “Stop braying, 
	We will bring you a little hay.” 
	
	Once a stranger came to the Nusayris and told them he was the Mahdi 
	He promised to divide Syria among them 
	Giving each one a city or a town. 
	He gave them olive leaves and said: 
	“These will bring you success. These leaves 
	Are warrants of your appointment.” 
	
	They went forth into city and town 
	And when arrested, each said to the Governor: 
	“The Imám al-Mahdi has come. He has given me this town!” 
	
	The Governor would then reply: “Show me your warrant” 
	
	Each one then produced his olive leaves 
	And was flogged. 
	
	So the stranger told the heretics to fight: 
	“Go with myrtle rods,” he said 
	“Instead of swords. The rods 
	Will turn to swords at the moment of battle.” 
	
	They entered a town on Friday when the men were at the mosque. 
	They raped the women and the Muslims 
	Came running out with swords 
	And cut them to pieces. 
	
	News was sent to the capital by carrier pigeon. The Governor 
	Moved out with an army. Twenty thousand heretics 
	Were slaughtered. The rest hid in the mountains. 
	They offered one dinar per head if they were spared. 
	This news went by pigeon to the Sultan 
	Who said: “Kill them.” 
	
	But the General 
	Said these people could be useful 
	Working on the land 
	And their lives were spared. 
	
	
	4. _Mecca_
	
	“The Meccans are very elegant and clean in their dress, and most of them wear white garments, which you always see fresh and snowy. They use a great deal of perfume and kohl and make free use of toothpicks of green arák-wood. 
	
	“The Meccan women are extraordinarily beautiful and very pious and modest. They too make great use of perfumes to such a degree that they will spend the night hungry in order to buy perfumes with the price of their food. 
	
	“They visit the mosque every Thursday night, wearing their finest apparel; and the whole sanctuary is saturated with the smell of their perfume. When one of these women goes away the odour of the perfume clings to the place after she has gone.” 
	
	
	5. _Isfahan_
	
	In Isfahan the fair 
	Surrounded by orchards 
	(Apricots and quinces 
	Pears and melons) 
	The people out-do one another 
	In banquets 
	“In the preparation for which 
	They display all their resources” 
	One corporation entertained another with viands 
	Cooked over candles 
	“The guests returned the invitation 
	And cooked their viands with silk.” 
	
	
	6. _Delhi_
	
	In the Sultan’s apartments 
	I saw a Júgí 
	Sitting in midair 
	I fell in a faint 
	They had to give me a drink 
	To revive me 
	
	And there he was 
	Still sitting in midair 
	His companion 
	Took a sandal from a bag 
	Beat it on the ground 
	Til it rose in the air 
	All by itself and poised 
	Over the floating one 
	And it began hitting him 
	On the back of the neck 
	Until he floated down 
	And landed. 
	
	“I would tell them to do something else,” 
	Said the Sultan, “If I did not fear 
	For your reason.” 
	
	
	7. _Calicut_
	
	Chinese vessels at anchor in the harbor 
	One of the largest in the world. Malabar 
	Coast of ginger pepper spice 
	Four decks with cabins saloons 
	Merchants of Canton Sumatra 
	Ceylon stay locked in cabins 
	With wives and slave girls 
	Sailors bring their boys to sea 
	Cultivate salads and ginger 
	In wooden vats 
	
	In Calicut I missed my boat 
	To China and my slave 
	Girls were all stolen by the King 
	Of Sumatra and my companions 
	Were scattered over China 
	Sumatra and Bengal 
	
	When I saw what had happened 
	I sailed for the Maldives 
	Where all the inhabitants 
	Are Muslims 
	
	Live on red fish lightly cooked 
	Or smoked in palmleaf baskets 
	It tastes like mutton 
	
	These natives wear no pants 
	Only aprons 
	Bathe twice a day 
	Use sandalwood and do not fight 
	Their armor is prayer.



12. AN ELEGY FOR FIVE OLD LADIES

	(Newton, Mass., April 20:  Five women ranging in age from 80 to 96 drowned this afternoon when a driverless car rolled across a rest home lawn and sank in Crystal Lake . . . the new york times)
	
	Let us forget that it is spring and celebrate the riderless will of five victims. 
	Old companions are sitting silent in the home. Five of their number have suddenly gone too far; as if waifs, 
	As if orphans were to swim without license. Their ride was not lucky. It took them very far out of bounds. 
	Mrs. Watson said she saw them all go at three-forty-five. Their bell had rung too loud and too late. 
	It was a season when water is too cold for anyone, and is especially icy for an old person. 
	The brazen sedan was not to be trusted. The wheels went too well for one short and straight journey.  It was the last: the doors did not open. 
	Dimly and too late they saw themselves on a very wicked lawn. May God have mercy on their recreation! 
	Let us accordingly pay homage to five now legendary persons, the very chaste daughters of one unlucky ride. 
	Let the perversity of a machine become our common study, while I name loudly five loyal spouses of death!



13. ELEGY FOR THE MONASTERY BARN

	As though an aged person were to wear
	Too gay a dress
	And walk about the neighborhood
	Announcing the hour of her death,
	
	So now, one summer day’s end,
	At suppertime, when wheels are still,
	The long barn suddenly puts on the traitor, beauty,
	And hails us with a dangerous cry,
	For: “Look!” she calls to the country,
	“Look how fast I dress myself in fire!”
	
	Had we half guessed how long her spacious shadows
	Harbored a woman’s vanity
	We would be less surprised to see her now
	So loved, and so attended, and so feared.
	
	She, in whose airless heart
	We burst our veins to fill her full of hay,
	Now stands apart.
	She will not have us near her. Terribly,
	Sweet Christ, how terribly her beauty burns us now!
	
	And yet she has another legacy,
	More delicate, to leave us, and more rare.
	
	Who knew her solitude?
	Who heard the peace downstairs
	While flames ran whispering among the rafters?
	Who felt the silence, there,
	The long, hushed gallery
	Clean and resigned and waiting for the fire?
	
	Look! They have all come back to speak their summary:
	Fifty invisible cattle, the past years
	Assume their solemn places one by one.
	This is the little minute of their destiny.
	Here is their meaning found. Here is their end.
	
	Laved in the flame as in a Sacrament
	The brilliant walls are holy
	In their first-last hour of joy.
	
	Fly from within the barn! Fly from the silence
	Of this creature sanctified by fire!
	Let no man stay inside to look upon the Lord!
	Let no man wait within and see the Holy
	One sitting in the presence of disaster
	Thinking upon this barn His gentle doom!



14. FABLE FOR A WAR

	The old Roman sow 
	Bears a new litter now 
	To fatten for a while 
	On the same imperial swill. 
	The cannibal wolf will dig 
	And root out Spanish bones beside the pig. 
	
	Germany has reared 
	A rare ugly bird 
	To screech a sour song 
	In the German tongue: 
	Tell me if there be 
	A sparrowhawk for such birds as he? 
	
	The parrots lift their beaks 
	And fill the air with shrieks. 
	Ambassador is sent 
	From the parrots’ parliament: 
	“Oh see how fine I fly 
	And nibble crackers got in Germany.” 
	
	Europe is a feast 
	For every bloody beast: 
	Jackals will grow fat 
	On the bones after that. 
	But in the end of all 
	None but the crows can sing the funeral. 
	
	Germany has reared 
	A rare ugly bird, 
	But crows ate Roman pig 
	Before this bird was egg. 
	And in the end of all 
	Crows will come back and sing the funeral.



15. THE FALL

	There is no where in you a paradise that is no place and there
	You do not enter except without a story.
	
	To enter there is to become unnameable.
	
	Whoever is nowhere is nobody, and therefore cannot exist except as unborn:
	No disguise will avail him anything
	
	Such a one is neither lost nor found.
	
	But he who has an address is lost.
	
	They fall, they fall into apartments and are securely established!
	
	They find themselves in streets. They are licensed
	To proceed from place to place
	They now know their own names
	They can name several friends and know
	Their own telephones must some time ring.
	
	If all telephones ring at once, if all names are shouted at once and all cars crash at one crossing:
	If all cities explode and fly away in dust
	Yet identities refuse to be lost. There is a name and a number for everyone.
	
	There is a definite place for bodies, there are pigeon holes for ashes:
	Such security can business buy!
	
	Who would dare to go nameless in so secure a universe?
	Yet, to tell the truth, only the nameless are at home in it.
	
	They bear with them in the center of nowhere the unborn flower of nothing:
	This is the paradise tree. It must remain unseen until words end and arguments are silent.



16. FOLLOW MY WAYS AND I WILL LEAD YOU

	Follow my ways and I will lead you
	To golden-haired suns,
	Logos and music, blameless joys,
	Innocent of questions
	And beyond answers.
	For I, Solitude, am thine own Self:
	I, Nothingness, am thy All.
	I, Silence, am thy Amen.



17. FOR M. ON A COLD GREY MORNING

	A grey good morning and rain
	And melting snow
	Far from any help
	Or love, I am warmer
	At least wanting you.
	
	Sorry in the grey
	Weather without lights
	Far from any other center
	I nurse one inner lamp
	Our common need
	Which is our common presence
	
	It burns alone
	And still
	In the wet dark and for us,
	Lighting a dry place in me
	I do not know
	Because it is myself
	Love's inner cell
	Where I am glad to be a prisoner
	Since I am prisoner with you.
	
	While you come back to life in distant rain
	Looking perhaps at the dark river
	With blurred eyes
	Still full of dreams
	And think of me in my hills,
	You wake in me, darling.
	
	We are nearer than we know
	Love has another
	Place of its own
	Nearer to you than hill or city:
	Nearer than your own mirror
	You wake in another room
	And the bed where you slept
	Is a nest in my heart.



18. FRAGMENT

	When we are alone 
	Within the inner wood 
	Beyond the trackless ways 
	In elemental sleep 
	
	Though evening towns begin to burn 
	As copper as chrysanthemums 
	And the far cities flower 
	Twined in a map of incandescent wires 
	No voice from those abounding lights 
	Reddens the darkness of our rendezvous. 
	
	No radio has arrows that can find us 
	Winged after us with aimless jealousy into the night, our screen. 
	
	In the night of my penniless Genesis 
	The worlds are all too old: 
	And cities that enchanted me 
	Die like the clouds, the children of the sea. 
	
	For no one finds us anymore, Beloved, 
	Cradled in the sounding night, the new creation 
	That you have made for us alone. 



19. FROM THE LEGEND OF ST. CLEMENT

	I have seen the sun
	Spilling its copper petals on the Black Sea
	By the base of the prisoners’ cliff
	Where, from the acts of martyrs,
	Tall poems grow up like buildings.
	
	Deep in the wall of the wounded mountain
	(Where seas no longer frown)
	The songs of the martyrs come up like cities or buildings.
	Their chains shine with hymns
	And their hands cut down the giant blocks of stone.
	
	Poetry, psalms
	Flower with a huge architecture
	Raising their grandeur on the gashed cape.
	Words of God blaze like a disaster
	In the windows of their prophetic cathedral.
	But the sighs of the deep multitude
	Grow out of the mountain’s heart as clean as vines.
	
	O martyrs! O tremendous prisoners!
	Burying your murder in this marble hill!
	The Lamb shall soon stand
	White as a shout against the sky:
	His feet shall soon strike rainbows from the rock.
	The cliffs give up their buried streams.
	Throw down the chains of your wrists, prisoners!
	Drink, and swim!
	
	The winds have carried your last sentences
	Across Ukraine.
	Your poetry shall grow in distant places.
	Asia, Greece, Egypt, England know your name.
	Your hymns shall stand like vineyards
	And swing with fruit in other worlds, in other centuries.
	
	And your ecstasy shall make shade,
	Foliage for summers unforeseen
	To cover travellers in continents you have not known
	When the temples have fallen,
	The theaters cemented in your blood have long ago fallen.
	
	Your joy echoes across the carved ridge
	Plays across mountains
	Stands like fleets or islands
	Sailing the seas to Greece
	And after twenty times one hundred
	Years of repercussion
	Your waters shatter the land at my feet with seas forever
	young.



20. HOW TO ENTER THE BIG CITY

	I
	
	Swing by starwhite bones and
	Lights tick in the middle.
	Blue and white steel
	Black and white
	People hurrying along the wall.   
	”Here you are, bury my dead bones.“
	
	Curve behind the sun again   
	Towers full of ice. Rich   
	Glass houses, “Here,
	Have a little of my blood,”   
	Rich people!”
	
	Wheat in towers. Meat on ice.
	Cattlecars. Miles of wide-open walls.   
	Baseball between these sudden tracks.   
	Yell past the red street--
	Have you any water to drink, City?   
	Rich glass buildings, give us milk!   
	Give us coffee! Give us rum!
	
	There are huge clouds all over the sky.
	River smells of gasoline.
	Cars after cars after cars, and then
	A little yellow street goes by without a murmur.
	
	There came a man
	(”Those are radios, that were his eyes“)   
	Who offered to sell us his bones.
	
	Swing by starwhite buildings and   
	Lights come to life with a sound   
	Of bugs under the dead rib.
	
	Miles of it. Still the same city.   
	
	
	II
	
	Do you know where you are going?   
	Do you know whom you must meet?
	
	Fortune, perhaps, or good news   
	Or the doctor, or the ladies   
	In the long bookstore,
	The angry man in the milkbar   
	The drunkard under the clock.   
	Fortune, perhaps, or wonder   
	Or, perhaps, death.
	
	In any case, our tracks
	Are aimed at a working horizon.
	The buildings, turning twice about the sun,   
	Settle in their respective positions.
	Centered in its own incurable discontent, the City   
	Consents to be recognized.
	
	
	III
	
	Then people come out into the light of afternoon,   
	Covered all over with black powder,
	And begin to attack one another with statements   
	Or to ignore one another with horror.
	Customs have not changed.
	Young men full of coffee and
	Old women with medicine under their skin
	Are all approaching death at twenty miles an hour.
	
	Everywhere there is optimism without love
	And pessimism without understanding,
	They who have new clothes, and smell of haircuts   
	Cannot agree to be at peace
	With their own images, shadowing them in windows   
	From store to store.
	
	
	IV
	
	Until the lights come on with a swagger of frauds   
	And savage ferns,
	The brown-eyed daughters of ravens,
	Sing in the lucky doors
	While night comes down the street like the millennium   
	Wrapping the houses in dark feathers
	Soothing the town with a sign
	Healing the strong wings of sunstroke.
	Then the wind of an easy river wipes the flies
	Off my Kentucky collarbone.
	
	The claws of the treacherous stars   
	Renegade drums of wood
	Endure the heavenward protest.   
	Their music heaves and hides.   
	Rain and foam and oil
	Make sabbaths for our wounds.   
	(Come, come, let all come home!)
	The summer sighs, and runs.
	My broken bird is under the whole town,   
	My cross is for the gypsies I am leaving   
	And there are real fountains under the floor.
	
	
	V
	
	Branches baptize our faces with silver
	Where the sweet silent avenue escapes into the hills.   
	Winds at last possess our empty country
	There, there under the moon   
	In parabolas of milk and iron   
	The ghosts of historical men   
	(Figures of sorrow and dust)
	Weep along the hills like turpentine.   
	And seas of flowering tobacco
	Surround the drowning sons of Daniel Boone.



21. A HYMN OF NOT MUCH PRAISE FOR NEW YORK

	When the windows of the West Side clash like cymbals in the setting sunlight,
	And when wind wails amid the East Side’s aerials,
	And when, both north and south of thirty-fourth street,   
	In all the dizzy buildings,
	The elevators clack their teeth and rattle the bars of their cages,   
	Then the children of the city,
	Leaving the monkey-houses of their office-buildings and apartments,
	With the greatest difficulty open their mouths, and sing:
	“Queen among the cities of the Earth: New York!   
	Rich as a cake, common as a doughnut,
	Expensive as a fur and crazy as cocaine,
	We love to hear you shake
	Your big face like a shining bank
	Letting the mad world know you’re full of dimes!
	
	“This is your night to make maraccas out of all that metal money
	Paris is in the prison-house, and London dies of cancer.   
	This is the time for you to whirl,
	Queen of our hopped-up peace,
	And let the excitement of your somewhat crippled congas   
	Supersede the waltzes of more shining
	Capitals that have been bombed.
	
	“Meanwhile we, your children,
	Weeping in our seasick zoo of windows while you dance,   
	Will gobble aspirins,
	And try to keep our cage from caving in.
	All the while our minds will fill with these petitions,   
	Flowering quietly in between our gongs of pulse.   
	These will have to serve as prayers:
	
	“‘O lock us in the safe jails of thy movies!
	Confine us to the semiprivate wards and white asylums   
	Of the unbearable cocktail parties, O New York!   
	Sentence us for life to the penitentiaries of thy bars and nightclubs,
	And leave us stupefied forever by the blue, objective lights   
	That fill the pale infirmaries of thy restaurants,
	And the clinics of thy schools and offices,
	And the operating-rooms of thy dance-halls.
	
	“‘But never give us any explanations, even when we ask,   
	Why all our food tastes of iodoform,
	And even the freshest flowers smell of funerals.
	No, never let us look about us long enough to wonder   
	Which of the rich men, shivering in the overheated office,   
	And which of the poor men, sleeping face-down on the _Daily Mirror_,
	Are still alive, and which are dead.’”



22. IN SILENCE

	Be still.
	Listen to the stones of the wall.
	Be silent, they try
	to speak your
	
	name.
	Listen
	to the living walls.
	
	Who are you?
	Who
	are you? Whose
	silence are you?
	
	Who (be quiet)
	are you (as these stones
	are quiet). Do not
	think of what you are
	still less of
	what you may one day be.
	
	Rather
	be what you are (but who?)
	be the unthinkable one
	you do not know.
	
	O be still, while
	you are still alive,
	and all things live around you
	
	speaking (I do not hear)
	to your own being,
	speaking by the unknown
	that is in you and in themselves.
	
	“I will try, like them
	to be my own silence:
	and this is difficult. The whole
	world is secretly on fire. The stones
	burn, even the stones they burn me.
	How can a man be still or
	listen to all things burning?
	How can he dare to sit with them
	when all their silence is on fire?”



23. IPHIGENIA: POLITICS

	The stairs lead to the room as bleak as glass 
	Where fancy turns the statues. 
	The empty chairs are dreaming of a protocol, 
	The tables, of a treaty; 
	And the world has become a museum. 
	
	(The girl is gone, 
	Fled from the broken altar by the beach, 
	From the unholy sacrifice when calms became a trade-wind.) 
	
	The palaces stare out from their uncurtained trouble, 
	And windows weep in the weak sun. 
	The women fear the empty upper rooms 
	More than the streets as grey as guns 
	Or the swordlight of the wide unfriendly esplanade. 
	
	Thoughts turn to salt among those shrouded chairs 
	Where, with knives no crueller than pens, or promises, 
	Took place the painless slaying of the leader’s daughter. 
	
	O, humbler than the truth she bowed her head, 
	And scarcely seemed, to us, to die. 
	But after she was killed she fled, alive, like a surprise, 
	Out of the glass world, to Diana’s Tauris. 
	
	Then wind cheered like a hero in the tackle of the standing ships 
	And hurled them bravely on the swords and lances of the wintry sea-- 
	While wisdom turned to salt upon the broken piers. 
	
	This is the way the ministers have killed the truth, our daughter, 
	Steps lead back into the rooms we fear to enter; 
	Our minds are bleaker than the hall of mirrors: 
	
	And the world has become a museum.



24. KINGFISHER

	As king fishers catch fire, dragonflies draw flame;
	As tumbled over rim in roundy wells
	Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell’s
	Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;
	Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
	Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
	Selves--goes itself; myself it speaks and spells,
	Crying What I do is me: for that I came.
	I say more: the just man justices;
	Keeps grace: that keeps all his goings graces;
	Acts in God’s eye what in God’s eye he is--
	Christ. For Christ plays in ten thousand places,
	Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his
	To the Father through the features of men’s faces. 



25. LANDSCAPE

	1 
	
	A Personage is seen 
	Leaning upon a cushion 
	Printed with cornflowers. 
	
	A Child appears 
	Holding up a pencil. 
	
	“This is a picture 
	(Says the Child to the Personage) 
	Of the vortex.” 
	
	“Draw it your own way,” 
	Says the Personage. 
	
	(Music is heard 
	Pure in the island windows, 
	Sea-music on the Child’s 
	Interminable shore, his coral home.) 
	
	Behind a blue mountain 
	Covered with chickenfoot trees, 
	The molten sun appears, 
	A heavy, painted flower. 
	
	A Personage is seen 
	Leaning upon the mountain 
	With the sun in one hand 
	And a pencil in the other. 
	
	“This is a picture 
	(Says the Personage to the Child) 
	Of the beginning of the world.” 
	
	“Or of its end!” cries the Child 
	Hiding himself in the cushions. 
	
	
	2 
	
	A Woman appears 
	Leaning upon the Child’s shoulder. 
	He looks up again. 
	
	“This is my Mother 
	(Says the Child to the Personage) 
	Older than the moon.” 
	
	(Grecian horses are heard 
	Returning from the foam 
	Of the pure island’s windows, 
	And the Child’s horizons.) 
	
	“My Mother is a world 
	(Says the Child to the Personage) 
	Printed with gillyflowers.” 
	
	“Paint her your own way” 
	(Says the Personage to the Child). 
	And, lifting up his pencil, 
	He crosses out the sun.



26. A MESSENGER FROM THE HORIZON

	Look, a naked runner
	A messenger,
	Following the wind
	From budding hills.
	
	By sweet sunstroke
	Wounded and signed,
	(He is therefore sacred)
	Silence is his way.
	
	Rain is his own
	Most private weather.
	Amazement is his star.
	
	O stranger, Our early hope
	Flies fast by,
	A mute comet, an empty sun.
	Adam is his name!
	
	O primeval angel
	Virgin brother of astonishment,
	Born of one word, one bare
	Inquisitive diamond.
	
	O blessed,
	Invulnerable cry,
	O unplanned Saturday,
	O lucky father!
	
	Come without warning
	A friend of hurricanes,
	Lightning in your bones!
	We will open to you
	The sun-door, the noble eye!
	
	Open to rain, to somersaulting air,
	To everything that swims,
	To skies that wake,
	Flare and applaud.
	
	(It is too late, he flies the other way
	Wrapping his honesty in rain.)
	
	---
	
	Pardon all runners,
	All speechless, alien winds,
	All mad waters.
	
	Pardon their impulses,
	Their wild attitudes,
	Their young flights, their reticence.
	
	When a message has no clothes on
	How can it be spoken.



27. THE NIGHT TRAIN

	In the unreason of a rainy midnight
	France blooms along the windows
	Of my sleepy bathysphere,
	And runs to seed, in a luxuriance of curious lights.
	
	Escape is drawn straight through my dream
	And shines to Paris, clean as a violin string,
	While springtides of commotion,
	(The third-class pianos of the Orient Express)
	Fill up the hollow barrels of my ears.
	
	Cities that stood, by day, as gay as lancers
	Are lost, in the night, like old men dying.
	At a point where polished rails branch off forever,
	The steel laments, like crazy mothers.
	We wake, and weep the deaths of the cathedrals
	That we have never seen,
	Because we hear the jugulars of the country
	Fly in the wind, and vanish with a cry.
	
	At once the diplomats start up, as white as bread.
	Buckle the careless cases of their minds,
	That just fell open in the sleepers,
	And lock them under pillows:
	
	For, by the rockets of imaginary sieges
	They see to read big, terrible print,
	Each in the other’s face,
	That spells the undecoded names
	Of the assassins they will recognize too late:
	The ones that seem to be secret police,
	Now all in place, all armed, in the obvious ambush!



28. NIGHT-FLOWERING CACTUS

	I know my time, which is obscure, silent and brief
	For I am present without warning one night only.
	
	When sun rises on the brass valleys I become serpent.
	
	Though I show my true self only in the dark and to no man
	(For I appear by day as serpent)
	I belong neither to night nor day.
	
	Sun and city never see my deep white bell
	Or know my timeless moment of void:
	There is no reply to my munificence.
	
	When I come I lift my sudden Eucharist
	Out of the earth’s unfathomable joy
	Clean and total I obey the world’s body
	I am intricate and whole, not art but wrought passion
	Excellent deep pleasure of essential waters
	Holiness of form and mineral mirth:
	
	I am the extreme purity of virginal thirst.
	
	I neither show my truth nor conceal it
	My innocence is described dimly
	Only by divine gift
	As a white cavern without explanation.
	
	He who sees my purity
	Dares not speak of it.
	When I open once for all my impeccable bell
	No one questions my silence:
	The all-knowing bird of night flies out of my mouth.
	
	Have you seen it? Then though my mirth has quickly ended
	You live forever in its echo:
	You will never be the same again.



29. NOTES FOR A NEW LITURGY

	There’s a big Zulu runs our congregation
	A woe doctor cherubim chaser
	Puts his finger on the chief witch
	Has a mind to deter foes
	Is by the Star Archangel shown a surprise
	Writes his letters in vision mentions his B.A.
	From many a college
	Has a fan to scatter flies
	Receives a penetrating look
	From an imaginary visitant in white
	Knows all the meanings at once
	Knows he is in heaven in rectangles
	Of invented saints
	Flaming with new degrees and orders every day
	
	“I dreamt this Church I dreamt
	Seven precious mitres over my head
	My word is final.
	
	“I now General Overseer Concession Registrar
	Of rains and weather Committeeman
	For Pepsi-Cola all over the islands
	Flail of incontinent clergy
	Wave my highstrung certificate in times of change
	Don’t you need a Defender with a medical guarantee?
	
	“You think that I am only a clown-healer from the out-district?
	Hold this black bag while I lay hands on children
	Steady my followers with magic curios
	
	When I sleep I watch you with eyes in my feet
	Last night I dreamt of four beds
	I must marry again must go get
	Another angel-nun
	Come holy deaconess we’ll ride
	Barefoot in yellow busses to Jordan River
	Wearing emblems of the common vow
	
	“Subleaders keep telling the message
	Like it was new
	Confirming my charism as Prime-Mover in Management
	I shall continue in office as President
	For all time until the earth melt
	As all Full-Leaders stand over you wearing their watches
	Moulding you by government of thought
	And I return a while to the Origin
	Ruling through a female medium from an obscure place:
	
	“HOLD THIS MITRE WHILE I STRANGLE CHICKENS
	AND THROW THEM IN THE AIR
	COVERING THE SACRED STONE WITH BLOODY FEATHERS
	(And surround the altar
	With lie detectors.”)



30. NOW YOU ARE ALL HERE

	1. Now you are all here you might as well know this is America we do what we like. 
	
	2. Be spontaneous it is the right way. 
	
	3. Mothers you have met before still defy comprehension. 
	
	4. Our scene is foggy we are asking you to clarify. 
	
	5. Explains geomoetry of life. Where? At Catholic Worker. 
	
	6. Very glad you came. With our mouths full of cornflakes we were expecting an emergency. 
	
	7. Cynics declare you are in Greece. 
	
	8. Better get back quick before the place is all used up. 
	
	9. The night court: the mumbling judge: confused. 
	
	10. Well-wishers are there to meet you head on. 
	
	11. For the journal: soldiers, harbingers of change. 
	
	12. You came just in time, the score is even. 
	
	13. None of the machines has yet been broken. 
	
	14. Come on we know you have seen Popes. 
	
	15. People have been a little self-conscious around here in the emergency.
	
	16. Who cares what the cynics declare. But you have been in Greece.



31. O SWEET IRRATIONAL WORSHIP

	Wind and a bobwhite
	And the afternoon sun.
	
	By ceasing to question the sun
	I have become light,
	
	Bird and wind.
	
	My leaves sing.
	
	I am earth, earth
	
	All these lighted things
	Grow from my heart.
	
	A tall, spare pine
	Stands like the initial of my first
	Name when I had one.
	
	When I had a spirit,
	When I was on fire
	When this valley was
	Made out of fresh air
	You spoke my name
	In naming Your silence:
	O sweet, irrational worship!
	
	I am earth, earth
	
	My heart’s love
	Bursts with hay and flowers.
	I am a lake of blue air
	In which my own appointed place
	Field and valley
	Stand reflected.
	
	I am earth, earth
	
	Out of my grass heart
	Rises the bobwhite.
	
	Out of my nameless weeds
	His foolish worship.



32. THE ORACLE

	The girls with eyes of wicks of lights, 
	Thin as the rushes, and as many, 
	Make in their minds uncertain shapes of music, 
	And slyly string their phony harps with twine. 
	
	The girls with eyes of drops of water, 
	Thin as the fires, and as frightened, 
	Bring pennies and their empty zodiacs. 
	Horses, loose on a plain, drum 
	The secret dance their thought does now! 
	
	Come up and light your harmless questions. 
	Burn them to the Brazen Face, 
	And wait, in terror, for the Brazen Voice. 
	
	   “You girls with eyes of wicks of lights, 
	   Shake me: I ring like a bank. 
	   I shout like the assembly: ‘Go, be presidents!’ 
	   You shall all marry rectangles!” 
	
	   “But you with eyes of drops of water, 
	   Punch my brass eyes with your little fists; 
	   I am a box, my voice is only electric. 
	   So keep your pennies for the poor; 
	   Sew, in your houses, and cry.” 
	
	But already, down the far, fast ladders of light 
	The stern, astounding angel 
	Starts with a truer message, 
	Carrying a lily.



33. PASTORAL

	Earth’s amniotic atmosphere 
	(Wherein winged clouds arch over us) 
	Cleaves to the turning globe like flesh 
	To feed and light and cover us. 
	
	Above the building stands the flesh, 
	Blue, translucent and electric, 
	Wherein birds fly and glide and sing, 
	Beasts move, trees grow: all geocentric. 
	
	Air mantles us and binds us in 
	And carries words about the bone 
	(If air is flesh, then earth is bone; 
	And neither, thus, will live alone.) 
	Coordinating earth and air, 
	We line the ground, and plant the seeds, 
	And tend the plants, and graze the beasts; 
	And wander with them here and there 
	With sounds and gesture, words and prayer.



34. PLACE NAMES

	Jair son of Manasseh went and seized the encampments 
	And called them the Encampments of Jair 
	Nobah went and seized Kenath 
	With its outlying villages 
	And called it Nobah 
	After himself. 
	                        (Numbers 32: 41-42)
	
	
	1827 
	
	D’Entrecasteaux enters the bay 
	Looks it over 
	Leaves it with name of his ship: 
	“Astrolabe Bay.” 
	
	
	1871-1883 
	
	Baron Nikolai Miklouho-Maclay 
	(Tibud Maclay) 
	Comes and goes 
	Exploring 
	Recording the language 
	As a reward for hospitality 
	Leaves the coast with 
	His own name: 
	“Maclay Coast” 
	
	To further honor 
	The place where he landed 
	He called it “Constantine Harbour” 
	(Grand Duke Constantine 
	President of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society 
	Had paid for the trip.) 
	
	
	1878 
	
	Australian gold-prospectors 
	Put in at Bongu 
	In the good ship Dove 
	But leave at once 
	Forgetting to name the place 
	“Dove Harbor” 
	But there is a “Dove Point” 
	A hundred miles up the coast. 
	
	
	1884 
	
	Herr Finsch 
	Representing the Neu Guinea Kompagnie 
	Hoists the German flag 
	Over “Bismarck (naturally) 
	Archipelago” “Kaiser 
	(Of course) Wilhelmsland” 
	And last but not least 
	“Finschhafen.”



35. POEM

	Thief and gambler, in the mind’s Algiers, 
	Bicker for a division, in a veil of shade. 
	Stillness explodes into a cloud of battlecocks. 
	Knife, with a bright tooth, bites the hiding heart. 
	Death caws, like copper, in the throat, 
	And the dry gambler’s dying like a daw. 
	
	The thief’s a flying shadow: 
	Slants up the wall with pockets full of coin, 
	And, in the wide sky, disappears. 
	
	But where the sun bullbellows in the mind’s Sahara, 
	His money shines on the waterless earth; 
	And in his sky of thoughts, his old desires 
	Fly back as black as carrion birds, 
	And gradual death begins to ring, 
	Like gongs, the sunstruck canyon’s quiet stones, 
	
	Until the nameless traveler learns in terror 
	His lidless eyes are open targets-- 
	Where sudden night flings in her quiet spear. 
	
	He hears ring shut the clangorous gates of day, 
	And sees eternity hang open like a pit. 
	
	Meanwhile, the distant kites become companions, 
	Loving him for what was once his flesh. 



36. A PRACTICAL PROGRAM FOR MONKS

	1
	
	Each one shall sit at table with his own cup and spoon, and with his own repentance. Each one's own business shall be his most important affair, and provide his own remedies.
	They have neglected bowl and plate.
	Have you a wooden fork?
	Yes, each monk has a wooden fork as well as a potato.
	
	
	2
	
	Each one shall wipe away tears with his own saint, when three bells hold in store a hot afternoon. Each one is supposed to mind his own heart, with its conscience, night and morning.
	Another turn on the wheel: ho hum! And observe the Abbot!
	Time to go to bed in a straw blanket.
	
	
	3
	
	Plenty of bread for everyone between prayers and the psalter: will you recite another?
	Merci, and Miserere.
	Always mind both the clock and the Abbot until eternity.
	Miserere.
	
	
	4
	
	Details of the Rule are all liquid and solid. What canon was the first to announce regimentation before us? Mind the step on the way down!
	Yes, I dare say you are right, Father. I believe you; I believe you.
	I believe it is easier when they have ice water and even a lemon.
	Each one can sit at table with his own lemon, and mind his own conscience.
	
	
	5
	
	Can we agree that the part about the lemon is regular?
	In any case, it is better to have sheep than peacocks, and cows rather than a chained leopard says Modest, in one of his proverbs.
	The monastery, being owner of a communal rowboat, is the antechamber of heaven.
	Surely that ought to be enough.
	
	
	6
	
	Each one can have some rain after Vespers on a hot afternoon, but ne quid nimis, or the purpose of the Order will be forgotten.
	We shall send you hyacinths and a sweet millennium.
	Everything the monastery provides is very pleasant to see and to sell for nothing.
	What is baked smells fine. There is a sign of God on every leaf that nobody sees in the garden. The fruit trees are there on purpose, even when no one is looking. Just put the apples in the basket.
	In Kentucky there is also room for a little cheese.
	Each one shall fold his own napkin, and neglect the others.
	
	
	7
	
	Rain is always very silent in the night, under such gentle cathedrals.
	Yes, I have taken care of the lamp, Miserere.
	Have you a patron saint, and an angel?
	Thank you. Even though the nights are never dangerous, I have one of everything.



37. PROVERBS

	1. I will tell you what you can do ask me if you do not understand what I just said 
	
	2. One thing you can do be a manufacturer make appliances 
	
	3. Be a Man-u-fac-tu-rer 
	
	4. Make appliances sell them for a high price 
	
	5. I will tell you about industry make appliances 
	
	6. Make appliances that move 
	
	7. Ask me if you do not understand what is move 
	
	8. First get the facts 
	
	9. Where to apply? Ask industry 
	
	10. Do not expect to get by without Mr. and Mrs. Consumer 
	
	11. Man-u-fic-tion 
	
	12. I am wondering if you got the idea be a manu 
	
	13. MAKE FALSE GODS 
	
	14. Apply mind energy they will move 
	
	15. Mention one of the others see what happens 
	
	16. Now apply that to our problem 
	
	17. Try not to understand 
	
	18. Be a mounte-fictioner 
	
	19. Surpass all others in price and profit 
	
	20. Assail the public with lies 
	
	21. Home-spun-facts-are-more-fun repeat this 
	
	22. Prevent spreading on garments 
	
	23. Breathe more than others 
	
	24. Supply movement and traction 
	
	25. Our epidemix will exceed 
	
	26. A homemade appliance: no honorable mention 
	
	27. Now you can refer to garments and spread out 
	
	28. But there are still more facts 
	
	29. For excitement: say whose epidemic may be next 
	
	30. Apply this to the facts and see what happens 
	
	31. Wear dermal gloves in bed 
	
	32. Here is an appliance that will terrorize mothers 
	
	33. And fight the impossible 
	
	34. Man-u-fac-ture: wear it on your head 
	
	35. Beat it here come the mothers



38. A PSALM

	When psalms surprise me with their music
	And antiphons turn to rum
	The Spirit sings: the bottom drops out of my soul.
	
	And from the center of my cellar, Love, louder than thunder
	Opens a heaven of naked air.
	
	New eyes awaken.
	I send Love's name into the world with wings
	And songs grow up around me like a jungle.
	Choirs of all creatures sing the tunes
	Your Spirit played in Eden.
	Zebras and antelopes and birds of paradise
	Shine on the face of the abyss
	And I am drunk with the great wilderness
	Of the sixth day in Genesis.
	
	But sound is never half so fair
	As when that music turns to air
	And the universe dies of excellence.
	
	Sun, moon and stars
	Fall from their heavenly towers.
	Joys walk no longer down the blue world's shore.
	
	Though fires loiter, lights still fly on the air of the gulf,
	All fear another wind, another thunder:
	Then one more voice
	Snuffs all their flares in one gust.
	
	And I go forth with no more wine and no more stars
	And no more buds and no more Eden
	And no more animals and no more sea:
	
	While God sings by himself in acres of night
	And walls fall down, that guarded Paradise.



39. THE SECRET

	Since I am 
	Somebody’s dream, 
	I have a good life. 
	
	Sometimes I go away in my sailboat on a cloud 
	and take a quiet little trip. 
	
	I have a secret 
	which I have learned how to read inside myself; 
	if I told it to you, 
	it would make you laugh. 
	
	My heart is naked 
	and no one can put clothes on it, 
	and nothing can be put on 
	that will not immediately fall off. 
	
	My secret is ignorant, 
	it doesn’t sing songs, 
	no lie, 
	it has nothing to tell you. 
	
	My two eyes 
	are maps of the planet-- 
	I see everything 
	and nothing upsets me. 
	
	Just now 
	I was in China 
	and saw there a great piece of happiness 
	that belonged to one man. 
	
	And I have been to the center of the earth, 
	where there is no suffering. 
	
	If on your loneliest nights, 
	I visit other planets 
	and the most secret stars of all, 
	
	besides being no one, 
	know that I am you 
	and everybody. 
	
	But if I go away 
	without giving you a name to remember me with, 
	how will I find 
	the right dream to return to? 
	
	You won’t have to mark down 
	on your calendar that I am coming back; 
	don’t bother to write me into your notebooks. 
	I will be around 
	when you aren’t thinking about me, 
	
	without hair or a neck, 
	without a nose and cheeks 
	no reputation-- 
	there won’t be anything. 
	
	I am a bird 
	which God made.



40. SENECA

	When the torch is taken
	And the room is dark
	The mute wife
	Knowing Seneca’s ways
	Listens to night
	To rumors
	All around the house
	While her wise
	Lord promenades
	Within his own temple
	Master and censor
	Overseeing
	His own ways
	With his philosophical
	sconce
	Policing the streets
	Of this secret Rome
	While the wife
	Silent as a sea
	Policing nothing
	Waits in darkness
	For the Night Bird’s
	Inscrutable cry.



41. SINCERITY

		_Omnis homo mendax_
	
	As for the liar, fear him less
	Than one who thinks himself sincere
	Who, having deceived himself,
	Can deceive you with a good conscience.
	
	One who doubts his own truth
	May mistrust another less:
	
	Knowing, in his own heart,
	That all men are liars
	He will be less outraged
	When he is deceived by another.
	
	So, too, will he sooner believe
	In the sincerity of God.
	
	The sincerity of God! Who never justifies
	His actions to men! Who makes no bargains
	With any other sincerity, because He knows
	There is no other! Who does what He pleases
	And never protests His innocence!
	
	Which of us can stand the sincerity of God?
	
	Which of us can bear a Lord
	Who is neither guilty nor innocent
	(Who cannot be innocent because He cannot
	be guilty)?
	
	What has our sincerity to do with His
	Whose truth is no approval of our truth
	And is not judged by anyone,
	Even by Himself?
	
	(Yet if I think myself sincere
	I will approve the purity of God
	Convinced that my own purity
	Is approved by Him)
	
	So, when the Lord speaks, we go to sleep
	Or turn quickly to some congenial business
	Since, as every liar knows,
	No man can bear such sincerity.



42. SONG

	The bottom of the sea has come 
	And builded in my noiseless room 
	The fishes’ and the mermaids’ home, 
	
	Whose it is most, most hell to be 
	Out of the heavy-hanging sea 
	And in the thin, thin changeable air 
	
	Or unroom sleep some other where; 
	But play their coral violins 
	Where waters most lock music in: 
	
	The bottom of my room, the sea. 
	Full of voiceless curtaindeep 
	There mermaid somnambules come sleep 
	Where fluted half-lights show the way, 
	
	And there, there lost orchestras play 
	And down the many quarterlights come 
	To the dim mirth of my aquadrome: 
	The bottom of my sea, the room.



43. SONG FOR NOBODY

	A yellow flower
	(Light and spirit)
	Sings by itself
	For nobody.
	
	A golden spirit
	(Light and emptiness)
	Sings without a word
	By itself.
	
	Let no one touch this gentle sun
	In whose dark eye
	Someone is awake.
	
	(No light, no gold, no name, no color
	And no thought:
	O, wide awake!)
	
	A golden heaven
	Sings by itself
	A song to nobody.



44. THE SONG OF THE TRAVELLER

	How light the heavy world becomes, when with transparent waters 
	All the shy elms and wakeful appletrees are dressed! 
	How the sun shouts, and spins his wheel of flame 
	And shoots the whole land full of diamonds 
	Enriching every flower’s watery vesture with his praise, 
	O green spring mornings when we hear creation singing! 
	
	The stones between our steps are radium and platinum 
	When, on this sacred day, sweet Christ, we climb Your hill; 
	And all the hours, our steps, 
	Pray us our way to the high top with silent music from the clouds 
	As each new bench-mark builds us to a quieter altitude, 
	Promising those holy heights where the low world will die. 
	
	Shall we look back out of this airy treasury 
	And spill the plenty that we have already in our hands 
	To view you, cities full of sorcery, 
	And count the regiments deployed on your grey plain 
	Where you lie boiling in your smoky wars? 
	
	For lo! the music of your treachery 
	Still plagues us with a sullen rumor in this sinless sun, 
	And your coarse voice still reaches us. 
	Sandpapering the silence of our atmosphere. 
	Shall we turn back to hear those far, far fragile trumpets play? 
	
	Let us but lean one moment to the witchery of your thin clarions 
	And all our flowery mountain will be tattered with a coat of weeds; 
	And the bright sun, our friend, turning to a prodigious enemy, 
	Will burn our way with curses, 
	Hardening our hesitation, in that instant, to a solid weight, 
	
	To bake us white as monuments, like Mistress Lot, 
	Saltpillars planted on the stony road from Sodom.



45. THE SOWING OF MEANINGS

	See the high birds! Is theirs the song
	That dies among the wood-light
	Wounding the listener with such bright arrows?
	Or do they play in wheeling silences
	Defining in the perfect sky
	The bounds of (here below) our solitude,
	
	Where spring has generated lights of green
	To glow in clouds upon the sombre branches?
	Ponds full of sky and stillnesses
	What heavy summer songs still sleep
	Under the tawny rushes at your brim?
	
	More than a season will be born here, nature,
	In your world of gravid mirrors!
	The quiet air awaits one note,
	One light, one ray and it will be the angels’ spring:
	One flash, one glance upon the shiny pond, and then
	Asperges me! sweet wilderness, and lo! we are redeemed!
	
	For, like a grain of fire
	Smouldering in the heart of every living essence
	God plants His undivided power--
	Buries His thought too vast for worlds
	In seed and root and blade and flower,
	
	Until, in the amazing light of April,
	Surcharging the religious silence of the spring,
	Creation finds the pressure of His everlasting secret
	Too terrible to bear.
	
	Then every way we look, lo! rocks and trees
	Pastures and hills and streams and birds and firmament
	And our own souls within us flash, and shower us with light,
	While the wild countryside, unknown, unvisited of men,
	Bears sheaves of clean, transforming fire.
	
	And then, oh then the written image, schooled in sacrifice,
	The deep united threeness printed in our being,
	Shot by the brilliant syllable of such an intuition, turns within,
	And plants that light far down into the heart of darkness and oblivion,
	Dives after, and discovers flame.



46. ST. MALACHY

	In November, in the days to remember the dead
	When air smells cold as earth,
	St. Malachy, who is very old, gets up,
	Parts the thin curtain of trees and dawns upon our land.
	
	His coat is filled with drops of rain, and he is bearded
	With all the seas of Poseidon.
	(Is it a crozier, or a trident in his hand?)
	He weeps against the gothic window, and the empty
	cloister
	Mourns like an ocean shell.
	
	Two bells in the steeple
	Talk faintly to the old stranger
	And the tower considers his waters.
	“I have been sent to see my festival,” (his cavern speaksl)
	“For I am the saint of the day.
	Shall I shake the drops from my locks and stand in your
	transept,
	Or, leaving you, rest in the silence of my history?”
	
	So the bells rang and we opened the antiphoners
	And the wrens and larks flew up out of the pages.
	Our thoughts became lambs. Our hearts swam like seas.
	One monk believed that we should sing to him
	Some stone-age hymn
	Or something in the giant language.
	So we played to him in the plainsong of the giant Gregory
	And oceans of Scripture sang upon bony Eire.
	
	Then the last salvage of flowers
	(Fostered under glass after the gardens foundered)
	Held up their little lanterns on Malachy’s altar
	To peer into his wooden eyes before the Mass began.
	
	Rain sighed down the sides of the stone church.
	Storms sailed by all day in battle fleets.
	At five o’clock, when we tried to see the sun, the speechless
	visitor
	Sighed and arose and shook the humus from his feet
	And with his trident stirred our trees
	And left down-wood, shaking some drops upon the ground.
	
	Thus copper flames fall, tongues of fire fall
	The leaves in hundreds fall upon his passing
	While night sends down her dreadnought darkness
	Upon this spurious Pentecost.
	
	And the Melchisedec of our year’s end
	Who came without a parent, leaves without a trace,
	And rain comes rattling down upon our forest
	Like the doors of a country jail.



47. STRANGER

	When no one listens
	To the quiet trees
	When no one notices
	The sun in the pool.
	
	Where no one feels
	The first drop of rain
	Or sees the last star
	
	Or hails the first morning
	Of a giant world
	Where peace begins
	And rages end:
	
	One bird sits still
	Watching the work of God:
	One turning leaf,
	Two falling blossoms,
	Ten circles upon the pond.
	
	One cloud upon the hillside,
	Two shadows in the valley
	And the light strikes home.
	Now dawn commands the capture
	Of the tallest fortune,
	The surrender
	Of no less marvelous prize!
	
	Closer and clearer
	Than any wordy master,
	Thou inward Stranger
	Whom I have never seen,
	
	Deeper and cleaner
	Than the clamorous ocean,
	Seize up my silence
	Hold me in Thy Hand!
	
	Now act is waste
	And suffering undone
	Laws become prodigals
	Limits are torn down
	For envy has no property
	And passion is none.
	
	Look, the vast Light stands still
	Our cleanest Light is One!



48. THE STRIFE BETWEEN THE POET AND AMBITION

	Money and fame break in the room
	And find the poet all alone.
	They lock the door, so he won’t run,
	And turn the radio full-on
	And beat the poor dope like a drum.
	
	
	“Better sing your snatch of song
	Before that ostrich voice is dumb,
	Better hit your share of gong
	Before the sounding brass is mum:
	Tomorrow, tomorrow Death will come
	And find you sitting dumb and senseless
	With your epics unbegun,
	And take away your pens and pencils--
	
	
	There’ll be no sculptures on your tomb
	And other bards will occupy
	Your seven-fifty sitting room.”
	
	
	“Pardon, sirs, my penny face
	Bowed to your dollar presences,
	Curtsying to Famous Verse,
	Flattering wealth with smiles and smirks,
	Choking down my hopeless tears!
	For someone stole my crate of birds,
	And busted up the music box
	In which I kept my market flocks
	Of bull-ideas and mental bears
	And my poetic pocketfox,
	My case of literary deers,
	My eagle-vans to bat the airs!
	They broke the cages and let go
	My aviary of metric birds,
	And all the diction in my zoo
	Was let out by the amateurs!
	The fishpond of my Friday words
	Is fished out by the days and years.
	My whole menagerie of verse
	Is ruined by these sly monsieurs!”
	
	
	The days and years run down the beach
	And throw his ideas in the air
	And wind his similes up to pitch
	And bat his verses out of reach.
	He mopes along the empty shore
	With gullcries in his windfilled ear.
	The hours and minutes, playing catch
	With every image they can snatch,
	Bat his metaphors to the birds
	And cheer him with these bullying words:
	“Better sing your snatch of song
	Before that ostrich voice is dumb:
	Better whack your share of gong
	Before the sounding brass is mum:
	Tomorrow, tomorrow Death will come
	And find your epics unbegun:
	There’ll be no statues on your tomb,
	And other bards will occupy
	Your seven-fifty sitting room!”



49. WHEN IN THE SOUL OF THE SERENE DISCIPLE

	When in the soul of the serene disciple
	With no more Fathers to imitate
	Poverty is a success,
	It is a small thing to say the roof is gone:
	He has not even a house.
	
	Stars, as well as friends,
	Are angry with the noble ruin.
	Saints depart in several directions.
	
	Be still:
	There is no longer any need of comment.
	It was a lucky wind
	That blew away his halo with his cares,
	A lucky sea that drowned his reputation.
	
	Here you will find
	Neither a proverb nor a memorandum.
	There are no ways,
	No methods to admire
	Where poverty is no achievement.
	His God lives in his emptiness like an affliction.
	
	What choice remains?
	Well, to be ordinary is not a choice:
	It is the usual freedom
	Of men without visions.



50. THE WIDOW OF NAIM

	The men that cut their graves in the grey rocks 
	Go down more slowly than the sun upon their dusty country: 
	White as the wall, the weepers leave the town, 
	To be the friends of grief, and follow 
	To the new tomb a widow’s sorrow. 
	
	The men with hands as hard as rope, 
	(Some smell of harvests, some of nets,) the strangers, 
	Come up the hill more slowly than the seasons of the year. 
	
	“Why do you walk in funerals, you men of Naim, 
	Why go you down to graves, with eyes like winters, 
	And your cold faces clean as cliffs? 
	See how we come, our brows are full of sun, 
	Our smiles are fairer than the wheat and hay, 
	Our eyes are saner than the sea. 
	Lay down your burden at our four-roads’ crossing, 
	And learn a wonder from the Christ, our Traveller.” 
	
	      (Oh, you will say that those old times 
	      Are all dried up like water, 
	      Since the great God went walking on a road to Naim, 
	      How many hundred years has slept again in death 
	      That widow’s son, after the marvel of his miracle: 
	      He did not rise for long, and sleeps forever. 
	      And what of the men of the town? 
	      What have the desert winds done to the dust 
	      Of the poor weepers, and the widow’s friends?) 
	
	The men that cut their graves in the grey rocks 
	Spoke to the sons of God upon the four cross roads: 
	“Men of Genesareth, who climb our hill as slow as spring or summer, 
	Christ is your Master, and we see His eyes are Jordans, 
	His hands and feet are wounded, and His words are wine. 
	He has let death baptize the one who stirs and wakens 
	In the bier we carry, 
	That we may read the Cross and Easter in this rising, 
	And learn the endless heaven 
	Promised to all the widow-Church’s risen children.”



51. WITH THE WORLD IN MY BLOODSTREAM

	I lie on my hospital bed
	Water runs inside the walls
	And the musical machinery
	All around overhead
	Plays upon my metal system
	My invented back bone
	Lends to the universal tone
	A flat impersonal song
	All the planes in my mind
	Sing to my worried blood
	To my jet streams
	I swim in the world’s genius
	The spring’s plasm
	I wonder who the hell I am.
	
	The world’s machinery
	Expands in the walls
	Of the hot musical building
	Made in maybe twenty-four
	And my lost childhood remains
	One of the city’s living cells
	Thanks to this city
	I am still living
	But whose life lies here
	And whose invented music sings?
	
	All the freights in the night
	Swing my dark technical bed
	All around overhead
	And wake the questions in my blood
	My jet streams fly far above
	But my low gash is no good
	Here below earth and bone
	Bleeding in a numbered bed
	Though all my veins run
	With Christ and with the stars’ plasm.
	
	Ancestors and Indians
	Zen Masters and Saints
	Parade in the incredible hotel
	And dark-eyed Negro mercy bends
	And uncertain fibers of the will
	Toward recovery and home.
	What recovery and what Home?
	I have no more sweet home
	I doubt the bed here and the road there
	And WKLO I most abhor
	My head is rotten with the town’s song.
	
	Here below stars and light
	And the Chicago plane
	Slides up the rainy straits of night
	While in my maze I walk and sweat
	Wandering in the low bone system
	Or searching the impossible ceiling
	For the question and the meaning
	Till the machine rolls in again
	I grow hungry for invented air
	And for the technical community of men
	For my lost Zen breathing
	For the unmarried fancy
	And the wild gift I made in those days
	For all the compromising answers
	All the gambles and blue rhythms
	Of individual despair.
	
	So the world’s logic runs
	Up and down the doubting walls
	While the frights and the planes
	Swing my sleep out the window
	All around, overhead
	In doubt and technical heat
	In oxygen and jet streams
	In the world’s enormous space
	And in man’s enormous want
	Until the want itself is gone
	Nameless bloodless and alone
	The Cross comes and Eckhart’s scandal
	The Holy Supper and the precise wrong
	And the accurate little spark
	In emptiness in the jet stream
	Only the spark can understand
	All that burns flies upward
	Where the rainy jets have gone
	A sign of needs and possible homes
	An invented back bone
	A dull song of oxygen
	A lost spark in Eckhart’s Castle.
	World’s plasm and world’s cell
	I bleed myself awake and well
	
	Only the spark is now true
	Dancing in the empty room
	All around overhead
	While the frail body of Christ
	Sweats in a technical bed
	I am Christ’s lost cell
	His childhood and desert age
	His descent into hell.
	Love without need and without name
	Bleeds in the empty problem
	And the spark without identity
	Circles the empty ceiling.

