*** Alice Meynell (1847 - 1922)

1. I AM THE WAY

	Thou art the Way.
	Hadst Thou been nothing but the goal,
	I cannot say
	If Thou hadst ever met my soul.
	
	I cannot see--
	I, child of process--if there lies
	An end for me,
	Full of repose, full of replies.
	
	I’ll not reproach
	The way that goes, my feet that stir.
	Access, approach,
	Art Thou, time, way, and wayfarer.



2. IN AUTUMN

	The leaves are many under my feet,
	And drift one way.
	Their scent of death is weary and sweet.
	A flight of them is in the grey
	Where sky and forest meet.
	
	The low winds moan for sad sweet years;
	The birds sing all for pain,
	Of a common thing, to weary ears,--
	Only a summer’s fate of rain,
	And a woman’s fate of tears.
	
	I walk to love and life alone
	Over these mournful places,
	Across the summer overthrown,
	The dead joys of these silent faces,
	To claim my own.
	
	I know his heart has beat to bright
	Sweet loves gone by;
	I know the leaves that die to-night
	Once budded to the sky;
	And I shall die from his delight.
	
	O leaves, so quietly ending now,
	You heard the cuckoos sing.
	And I will grow upon my bough
	If only for a spring,
	And fall when the rain is on my brow.
	
	O tell me, tell me ere you die,
	Is it worth the pain?
	You bloomed so fair, you waved so high;
	Now that the sad days wane,
	Are you repenting where you lie?
	
	I lie amongst you, and I kiss
	Your fragrance mouldering.
	O dead delights, is it such bliss,
	That tuneful Spring?
	Is love so sweet, that comes to this?
	
	Kiss me again as I kiss you;
	Kiss me again;
	For all your tuneful nights of dew,
	In this your time of rain,
	For all your kisses when Spring was new.
	
	You will not, broken hearts; let be.
	I pass across your death
	To a golden summer you shall not see,
	And in your dying breath
	There is no benison for me.
	
	There is an autumn yet to wane,
	There are leaves yet to fall,
	Which, when I kiss, may kiss again,
	And, pitied, pity me all for all,
	And love me in mist and rain.



3. IN FEBRUARY

	Rich meanings of the prophet-Spring adorn,
	Unseen, this colourless sky of folded showers,
	And folded winds; no blossom in the bowers;
	A poet’s face asleep in this grey morn.
	Now in the midst of the old world forlorn
	A mystic child is set in these still hours.
	I keep this time, even before the flowers,
	Sacred to all the young and the unborn.
	
	To all the miles and miles of unsprung wheat,
	And to the Spring waiting beyond the portal,
	And to the future of my own young art,
	And, among all these things, to you, my sweet,
	My friend, to your calm face and the immortal
	Child tarrying all your life-time in your heart.



4. MY HEART SHALL BE THY GARDEN

	My heart shall be thy garden. Come, my own,
	Into thy garden; thine be happy hours
	Among my fairest thoughts, my tallest flowers,
	From root to crowning petal, thine alone.
	Thine is the place from where the seeds are sown
	Up to the sky inclosed, with all its showers.
	But ah, the birds, the birds! Who shall build bowers
	To keep these thine? O friend, the birds have flown.
	
	For as these come and go, and quit our pine
	To follow the sweet season, or, new-corners,
	Sing one song only from our alder-trees,
	My heart has thoughts, which, though thine eyes hold mine.
	Flit to the silent world and other summers,
	With wings that dip beyond the silver seas.



5. RENOUNCEMENT

	I must not think of thee; and, tired yet strong,
	I shun the love that lurks in all delight--
	The love of thee--and in the blue heaven’s height,
	And in the dearest passage of a song.
	Oh, just beyond the sweetest thoughts that throng
	This breast, the thought of thee waits hidden yet bright;
	But it must never, never come in sight;
	I must stop short of thee the whole day long.
	But when sleep comes to close each difficult day,
	When night gives pause to the long watch I keep,
	And all my bonds I needs must loose apart,
	Must doff my will as raiment laid away,--
	With the first dream that comes with the first sleep
	I run, I run, I am gather’d to thy heart.



6. YOUR OWN FAIR YOUTH

	Your own fair youth, you care so little for it--
	Smiling toward Heaven, you would not stay the advances
	Of time and change upon your hapiest fancies.
	I keep your golden hour, and will restore it.
	If ever, in time to come, you would explore it--
	Your old self, whose thoughts went like last year’s pansies,
	Look unto me; no mirror keeps its glances;
	In my unfailing praises now I store it.
	
	To guard all joys of yours from Time’s estranging,
	I shall then be a treasury where your gay,
	Happy, and pensive past unaltered is.
	I shall then be a garden charmed from changing,
	In which your June has never passed away.
	Walk there awhile among my memories.

