*** A. A. Milne (1882 - 1956)

1. SPRING MORNING

	Where am I going? I don’t quite know.
	Down to the stream where the king-cups grow--
	Up on the hill where the pine-trees blow--
	Anywhere, anywhere. I don’t know.
	
	Where am I going? The clouds sail by,
	Little ones, baby ones, over the sky.
	Where am I going? The shadows pass,
	Little ones, baby ones, over the grass.
	
	If you were a cloud, and sailed up there,
	You’d sail on water as blue as air,
	And you’d see me here in the fields and say:
	“Doesn’t the sky look green today?”
	
	Where am I going? The high rooks call:
	“It’s awful fun to be born at all.”
	Where am I going? The ring-doves coo:
	“We do have beautiful things to do.”
	
	If you were a bird, and lived on high,
	You’d lean on the wind when the wind came by,
	You’d say to the wind when it took you away:
	“That’s where I wanted to go today!”
	
	Where am I going? I don’t quite know.
	What does it matter where people go?
	Down to the wood where the blue-bells grow--
	Anywhere, anywhere. I don’t know.



2. THE THREE FOXES

	Once upon a time there were three little foxes
	Who didn’t wear stockings, and they didn’t wear sockses,
	But they all had handkerchiefs to blow their noses,
	And they kept their handkerchiefs in cardboard boxes.
	
	And they lived in forest in three little houses,
	And they didn’t wear coats, and they didn’t wear trousies.
	They ran through the woods on their little bare tootsies,
	And they played “Touch Last” with a family of mouses.
	
	They didn’t go shopping in the High Street shopses,
	But caught what they wanted in the woods and copses.
	They all went fishing, and they caught three wormses,
	They went out hunting, and they caught three wopses.
	
	They wen to a Fair, and they all won prizes--
	Tree plum-puddingses and three mince-pieses.
	They rode on elephants and swang on swingses,
	And hit three coco-nuts at coco-nut shieses.
	
	That’s all I know of three little foxes
	Who kept their handkerchiefs in three little boxes.
	They lived in the forest in three little houses,
	But they didn’t wear coats and they didn’t wear trousies,
	And they didn’t wear stockings and they didn’t wear sockses.

