*** Ogden Nash (1902 - 1971)

1. ADVENTURES OF ISABEL

	Isabel met an enormous bear,
	Isabel, Isabel, didn’t care;
	The bear was hungry, the bear was ravenous,
	The bear’s big mouth was cruel and cavernous.
	The bear said, Isabel, glad to meet you,
	How do, Isabel, now I’ll eat you!
	Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry.
	Isabel didn’t scream or scurry.
	She washed her hands and she straightened her hair up,
	Then Isabel quietly ate the bear up.
	Once in a night as black as pitch
	Isabel met a wicked old witch.
	the witch’s face was cross and wrinkled,
	The witch’s gums with teeth were sprinkled.
	Ho, ho, Isabel! the old witch crowed,
	I’ll turn you into an ugly toad!
	Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry,
	Isabel didn’t scream or scurry,
	She showed no rage and she showed no rancor,
	But she turned the witch into milk and drank her.
	Isabel met a hideous giant,
	Isabel continued self reliant.
	The giant was hairy, the giant was horrid,
	He had one eye in the middle of his forhead.
	Good morning, Isabel, the giant said,
	I’ll grind your bones to make my bread.
	Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry,
	Isabel didn’t scream or scurry.
	She nibled the zwieback that she always fed off,
	And when it was gone, she cut the giant’s head off.
	Isabel met a troublesome doctor,
	He punched and he poked till he really shocked her.
	The doctor’s talk was of coughs and chills
	And the doctor’s satchel bulged with pills.
	The doctor said unto Isabel,
	Swallow this, it will make you well.
	Isabel, Isabel, didn’t worry,
	Isabel didn’t scream or scurry.
	She took those pills from the pill concocter,
	And Isabel calmly cured the doctor.



2. THE ANT

	The ant has made herself illustrious
	By constant industry industrious.
	So what? Would you be calm and placid
	If you were full of formic acid?



3. BANKERS ARE JUST LIKE ANYONE ELSE, EXCEPT RICHER

	This is a song to celebrate banks,
	Because they are full of money and you go into them and all
	you hear is clinks and clanks,
	Or maybe a sound like the wind in the trees on the hills,
	Which is the rustling of the thousand dollar bills.
	Most bankers dwell in marble halls,
	Which they get to dwell in because they encourage deposits
	and discourage withdrawals,
	And particularly because they all observe one rule which woe
	betides the banker who fails to heed it,
	Which is you must never lend any money to anybody unless
	they don’t need it.
	I know you, you cautious conservative banks!
	If people are worried about their rent it is your duty to deny
	them the loan of one nickel, yes, even one copper engraving
	of the martyred son of the late Nancy Hanks;
	Yes, if they request fifty dollars to pay for a baby you must
	look at them like Tarzan looking at an uppity ape in the
	jungle,
	And tell them what do they think a bank is, anyhow, they had
	better go get the money from their wife’s aunt or ungle.
	But suppose people come in and they have a million and they
	want another million to pile on top of it,
	Why, you brim with the milk of human kindness and you
	urge them to accept every drop of it,
	And you lend them the million so then they have two million
	and this gives them the idea that they would be better off
	with four,
	So they already have two million as security so you have no
	hesitation in lending them two more,
	And all the vice-presidents nod their heads in rhythm,
	And the only question asked is do the borrowers want the
	money sent or do they want to take it withm.
	Because I think they deserve our appreciation and thanks,
	the jackasses who go around saying that health and happi-
	ness are everything and money isn’t essential,
	Because as soon as they have to borrow some unimportant
	money to maintain their health and happiness they starve
	to death so they can’t go around any more sneering at good
	old money, which is nothing short of providential.



4. BIOLOGICAL REFLECTION

	A girl whose cheeks are covered with paint
	Has an advantage with me over one whose ain’t.



5. A CAUTION FOR EVERYBODY

	Consider the auk;
	Becoming extinct because he forgot how to fly, and could only walk.
	Consider man, who may well become extinct
	Because he forgot how to walk and learned how to fly before he thinked.



6. CELERY

	Celery, raw
	Develops the jaw,
	But celery, stewed,
	Is more quietly chewed.



7. COME ON IN, THE SENILITY IS FINE

	People live forever in Jacksonville and St. Petersburg and Tampa,
	But you don’t have to live forever to become a grampa.
	The entrance requirements for grampahood are comparatively mild,
	You only have to live until your child has a child.
	From that point on you start looking both ways over your shoulder,
	Because sometimes you feel thirty years younger and sometimes
	thirty years older.
	Now you begin to realize who it was that reached the height of
	imbecility,
	It was whoever said that grandparents have all the fun and none of
	the responsibility.
	This is the most enticing spiderwebs of a tarradiddle ever spun,
	Because everybody would love to have a baby around who was no
	responsibility and lots of fun,
	But I can think of no one but a mooncalf or a gaby
	Who would trust their own child to raise a baby.
	So you have to personally superintend your grandchild from diapers
	to pants and from bottle to spoon,
	Because you know that your own child hasn’t sense enough to come
	in out of a typhoon.
	You don’t have to live forever to become a grampa, but if you do
	want to live forever,
	Don’t try to be clever;
	If you wish to reach the end of the trail with an uncut throat,
	Don’t go around saying Quote I don’t mind being a grampa but I
	hate being married to a gramma Unquote.



8. THE COW

	The cow is of the bovine ilk;
	One end is moo, the other, milk.



9. A DRINK WITH SOMETHING IN IT

	There is something about a Martini,
	A tingle remarkably pleasant;
	A yellow, a mellow Martini;
	I wish I had one at present.
	There is something about a Martini,
	Ere the dining and dancing begin,
	And to tell you the truth,
	It is not the vermouth--
	I think that perhaps it’s the gin.



10. THE DUCK

	Behold the duck. 
	It does not cluck. 
	A cluck it lacks. 
	It quacks. 
	It is specially fond 
	Of a puddle or pond. 
	When it dines or sups, 
	It bottoms ups.



11. I DO, I WILL, I HAVE

	How wise I am to have instructed the butler
	to instruct the first footman to instruct the second
	footman to instruct the doorman to order my carriage;
	I am about to volunteer a definition of marriage.
	Just as I know that there are two Hagens, Walter and Copen,
	I know that marriage is a legal and religious alliance entered
	into by a man who can’t sleep with the window shut and a
	woman who can’t sleep with the window open.
	Moreover, just as I am unsure of the difference between
	flora and fauna and flotsam and jetsam,
	I am quite sure that marriage is the alliance of two people
	one of whom never remembers birthdays and the other
	never forgetsam,
	And he refuses to believe there is a leak in the water pipe or
	the gas pipe and she is convinced she is about to asphyxiate
	or drown,
	And she says Quick get up and get my hairbrushes off the
	windowsill, it’s raining in, and he replies Oh they’re all right,
	it’s only raining straight down.
	That is why marriage is so much more interesting than divorce,
	Because it’s the only known example of the happy meeting of
	the immovable object and the irresistible force.
	So I hope husbands and wives will continue to debate and
	combat over everything debatable and combatable,
	Because I believe a little incompatibility is the spice of life,
	particularly if he has income and she is pattable.



12. JUST KEEP QUIET AND NOBODY WILL NOTICE

	There is one thing that ought to be taught in all the colleges,
	Which is that people ought to be taught not to go around always making apologies.
	I don’t mean the kind of apologies people make when they run over you or borrow five dollars or step on your feet,
	Because I think that is sort of sweet;
	No, I object to one kind of apology alone,
	Which is when people spend their time and yours apologizing for everything they own.
	You go to their house for a meal,
	And they apologize because the anchovies aren’t caviar or the partridge is veal;
	They apologize privately for the crudeness of the other guests,
	And they apologize publicly for their wife’s housekeeping or their husband’s jests;
	If they give you a book by Dickens they apologize because it isn’t by Scott,
	And if they take you to the theater, they apologize for the acting and the dialogue and the plot;
	They contain more milk of human kindness than the most capacious diary can,
	But if you are from out of town they apologize for everything local and if you are a foreigner they apologize for everything American.
	I dread these apologizers even as I am depicting them,
	I shudder as I think of the hours that must be spend in contradicting them,
	Because you are very rude if you let them emerge from an argument victorious,
	And when they say something of theirs is awful, it is your duty to convince them politely that it is magnificent and glorious,
	And what particularly bores me with them,
	Is that half the time you have to politely contradict them when you rudely agree with them,
	So I think there is one rule every host and hostess ought to keep with the comb and nail file and bicarbonate and aromatic spirits on a handy shelf,
	Which is don’t spoil the denouement by telling the guests everything is terrible, but let them have the thrill of finding it out for themselves.



13. MORE ABOUT PEOPLE

	When people aren’t asking questions 
	They’re making suggestions 
	And when they’re not doing one of those 
	They’re either looking over your shoulder or stepping on your toes 
	And then as if that weren’t enough to annoy you 
	They employ you. 
	Anybody at leisure 
	Incurs everybody’s displeasure. 
	It seems to be very irking 
	To people at work to see other people not working, 
	So they tell you that work is wonderful medicine, 
	Just look at Firestone and Ford and Edison, 
	And they lecture you till they’re out of breath or something 
	And then if you don’t succumb they starve you to death or something. 
	All of which results in a nasty quirk: 
	That if you don’t want to work you have to work to earn enough money so that you won’t have to work.



14. MORNING PRAYER

	Now another day is breaking,
	Sleep was sweet and so is waking.
	Dear Lord, I promised you last night
	Never again to sulk or fight.
	Such vows are easier to keep
	When a child is sound asleep.
	Today, O Lord, for your dear sake,
	I’ll try to keep them when awake.



15. NO, YOU BE A LONE EAGLE

	I find it very hard to be fair-minded
	About people who go around being air-minded.
	I just can’t see any fun
	In soaring up up up into the sun
	When the chances are still a fresh cool orchid to a paper geranium
	That you’ll unsoar down down down onto your (to you) invaluable cranium.
	I know the constant refrain
	About how safer up in God’s trafficless heaven than in an automobile or a train
	But . . .
	My God, have you ever taken a good look at a strut?
	Then that one about how you’re in Boston before you can say antidisestablishmentarianism
	So that preferring to take five hours by rail is a pernicious example of antiquarianism.
	At least when I get on the Boston train I have a good chance of landing in the South Station
	And not in that part of the daily press which is reserved for victims of aviation.
	Then, despite the assurance that aeroplanes are terribly comfortable I notice that when you are railroading or automobiling
	You don’t have to take a paper bag along just in case of a funny feeling.
	It seems to me that no kind of depravity
	Brings such speedy retribution as ignoring the law of gravity.
	Therefore nobody could possibly indict me for perjury
	When I swear that I wish the Wright brothers had gone in for silver fox farming or tree surgery.



16. THE OCTOPUS

	Tell me, O Octopus, I begs
	Is those things arms, or is they legs?
	I marvel at thee, Octopus;
	If I were thou, I’d call me Us.



17. OH TO BE ODD!

	Hypochondriacs
	Spend the winter at the bottom of Florida and the summer on top of the Adirondriacs.
	You go to Paris and live on champagne wine and cognac
	If you’re dipsomognac.
	If you’re a manic-depressive
	You don’t go anywhere where you won’t be cheered up, and people say “there, there!“ if your bills are excessive.
	But you stick around and work day and night and night and day with your nose to the sawmill.
	If you’re nawmill.



18. OLD DR. VALENTINE TO HIS SON

	Your hopeless patients will live,
	Your healthy patients will die.
	I have only this word to give:
	Wonder, and find out why.



19. THE PEOPLE UPSTAIRS

	The people upstairs all practise ballet
	Their living room is a bowling alley
	Their bedroom is full of conducted tours.
	Their radio is louder than yours,
	They celebrate week-ends all the week.
	When they take a shower, your ceilings leak.
	They try to get their parties to mix
	By supplying their guests with Pogo sticks,
	And when their fun at last abates,
	They go to the bathroom on roller skates.
	I might love the people upstairs more
	If only they lived on another floor.



20. THE PURIST

	I give you now Professor Twist,
	A conscientious scientist,
	Trustees exclaimed, “He never bungles!”
	And sent him off to distant jungles.
	Camped on a tropic riverside,
	One day he missed his loving bride.
	She had, the guide informed him later,
	Been eaten by an alligator.
	Professor Twist could not but smile.
	“You mean,” he said, “a crocodile.”



21. REFLECTION ON BABIES

	A bit of talcum 
	Is always walcum.



22. TO MY VALENTINE

	More than a catbird hates a cat,
	Or a criminal hates a clue,
	Or the Axis hates the United States,
	That’s how much I love you.
	
	I love you more than a duck can swim,
	And more than a grapefruit squirts,
	I love you more than a gin rummy is a bore,
	And more than a toothache hurts.
	
	As a shipwrecked sailor hates the sea,
	Or a juggler hates a shove,
	As a hostess detests unexpected guests,
	That’s how much you I love.
	
	I love you more than a wasp can sting,
	And more than the subway jerks,
	I love you as much as a beggar needs a crutch,
	And more than a hangnail irks.
	
	I swear to you by the stars above,
	And below, if such there be,
	As the High Court loathes perjurious oathes,
	That’s how you’re loved by me.



23. VERY LIKE A WHALE

	One thing that literature would be greatly the better for
	Would be a more restricted employment by the authors of simile and metaphor.
	Authors of all races, be they Greeks, Romans, Teutons or Celts,
	Can’t seem just to say that anything is the thing it is but have to go out of their way to say that it is like something else.
	What does it mean when we are told
	That that Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold?
	In the first place, George Gordon Byron had enough experience
	To know that it probably wasn’t just one Assyrian, it was a lot of Assyrians.
	However, as too many arguments are apt to induce apoplexy and thus hinder longevity.
	We’ll let it pass as one Assyrian for the sake of brevity.
	Now then, this particular Assyrian, the one whose cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold,
	Just what does the poet mean when he says he came down like a wold on the fold?
	In heaven and earth more than is dreamed of in our philosophy there are great many things.
	But I don’t imagine that among them there is a wolf with purple and gold cohorts or purple and gold anythings.
	No, no, Lord Byron, before I’ll believe that this Assyrian was actually like a wolf I must have some kind of proof;
	Did he run on all fours and did he have a hairy tail and a big red mouth and big white teeth and did he say Woof Woof?
	Frankly I think it is very unlikely, and all you were entitled to say, at the very most,
	Was that the Assyrian cohorts came down like a lot of Assyrian cohorts about to destroy the Hebrew host.
	But that wasn’t fancy enough for Lord Byron, oh dear me no, he had to invent a lot of figures of speech and then interpolate them,
	With the result that whenever you mention Old Testament soldiers to people they say Oh yes, they’re the ones that a lot of wolves dressed up in gold and purple ate them.
	That’s the kind of thing that’s being done all the time by poets, from Homer to Tennyson;
	They’re always comparing ladies to lilies and veal to venison,
	And they always say things like that the snow is a white blanket after a winter storm.
	Oh it is, is it, all right then, you sleep under a six-inch blanket of snow and I’ll sleep under a half-inch blanket of unpoetical blanket material and we’ll see which one keeps warm,
	And after that maybe you’ll begin to comprehend dimly
	What I mean by too much metaphor and simile.

