*** Pablo Neruda (1904 - 1973)

1. THE CHOSEN ONES

	And we, the dead, arrayed in time,
	scattered in arrogantly practical cemeteries
	or fallen into the charnel houses of poor Bolivians,
	we, the dead of 1925, ’26, ’33,
	1940, 1918, nineteen hundred and five,
	thousands of nineteen hundreds, in short,
	how goes it with us who died
	before this foolish millennium?
	
	I, Pedro of the High Plains, Pedro of the Seeds, Pedro Nobody,
	didn’t I have the right to the millennium and the resurrection?
	I want to see the resurrected so I can spit in their faces,
	the future generations about to be killed
	in airplanes, railroads, wars of hatred,
	those who barely had time to be born
	and present arms to the new age
	and who will end up dismembered,
	rotting away in the midst of revelry and wine!
	I, a dead man, want to leave my grave--and why not?
	
	Why should those who died before their time be forgotten?
	Everyone’s invited to the party!
	It’s one more year, one more century, with the dead and the living,
	and the balance sheets must be heeded, not only to lay out the life,
	but also the withered flowers, the rotted wreaths, and the silence,
	because silence has a right to the beauty and we, death’s delegates,
	we want to be there for a single flowering moment
	when the gates of future glory are opened.



2. THE DICTATORS

	An odor stayed on in the canefields:
	Carrion, blood, and a nausea
	Of harrowing petals.
	Between coconut palms lay the graves, in their stilled
	Strangulation, their festering surfeit of bones.
	A finical satrap conversed
	With wineglasses, collars, and piping.
	In the palace, all flashed like a clockdial.
	The gloved laugh redoubled, a moment
	Spanning the passageways, meeting
	The newly-killed voices and the buried blue mouths. Out of sight,
	Lament was perpetual, and fell, like the plant and its pollen,
	Forcing a lightless increase in the blinded, big leaves.
	And bludgeon by bludgeon on the terrible waters,
	Scale over scale in the bog,
	The snout filled with silence and slime
	And vendetta was born.



3. DISCOVERERS

	From the north Almagro brought his wrinkled lightning,
	and over the territory, amid explosion and twilight,
	he bent day and night as over a chart.
	Shadow of thorns, shadow of thistle and wax
	the Spaniard united with his dry figure,
	watching the wounded strategies of earth.
	Night, snow and sand make the form
	of my slim fatherland,
	all silence is in its long line,
	all foam emerges from its marine beard,
	all coal fills it with mysterious kisses.
	Like an ember, gold burns in its fingers
	and silver illumines, like a green moon,
	its hardened shadow of grave planet.
	The Spaniard seated near the rose, one day,
	near the oil, near the wine, near the old sky,
	could not conceive this spot of angry stone
	rising from the dung of the marine eagle.



4. A DOG HAS DIED

	My dog has died.
	I buried him in the garden
	next to a rusted old machine.
	
	Some day I’ll join him right there,
	but now he’s gone with his shaggy coat,
	his bad manners and his cold nose,
	and I, the materialist, who never believed
	in any promised heaven in the sky
	for any human being,
	I believe in a heaven I’ll never enter.
	Yes, I believe in a heaven for all dogdom
	where my dog waits for my arrival
	waving his fan-like tail in friendship.
	
	Ai, I’ll not speak of sadness here on earth,
	of having lost a companion
	who was never servile.
	His friendship for me, like that of a porcupine
	withholding its authority,
	was the friendship of a star, aloof,
	with no more intimacy than was called for,
	with no exaggerations:
	he never climbed all over my clothes
	filling me full of his hair or his mange,
	he never rubbed up against my knee
	like other dogs obsessed with sex.
	
	No, my dog used to gaze at me,
	paying me the attention I need,
	the attention required
	to make a vain person like me understand
	that, being a dog, he was wasting time,
	but, with those eyes so much purer than mine,
	he’d keep on gazing at me
	with a look that reserved for me alone
	all his sweet and shaggy life,
	always near me, never troubling me,
	and asking nothing.
	
	Ai, how many times have I envied his tail
	as we walked together on the shores of the sea
	in the lonely winter of Isla Negra
	where the wintering birds filled the sky
	and my hairy dog was jumping about
	full of the voltage of the sea’s movement:
	my wandering dog, sniffing away
	with his golden tail held high,
	face to face with the ocean’s spray.
	
	Joyful, joyful, joyful,
	as only dogs know how to be happy
	with only the autonomy
	of their shameless spirit.
	
	There are no good-byes for my dog who has died,
	and we don’t now and never did lie to each other.
	
	So now he’s gone and I buried him,
	and that’s all there is to it.



5. EVERY DAY YOU PLAY

	You are here. Oh, you do not run away.
	You will answer me to the last cry.
	Curl round me as though you were frightened.
	Even so, a strange shadow once ran through your eyes.
	
	Now, now too, little one, you bring me honeysuckle,
	and even your breasts smell of it.
	While the sad wind goes slaughtering butterflies
	I love you, and my happiness bites the plum of your mouth.
	
	How you must have suffered getting accustomed to me,
	my savage, solitary soul, my name that sends them all running.
	So many times we have seen the morning star burn, kissing our eyes,
	and over our heads the gray light unwinds in turning fans.
	
	My words rained over you, stroking you.
	A long time I have loved the sunned mother-of-pearl of your body.
	Until I even believe that you own the universe.
	I will bring you happy flowers from the mountains, bluebells,
	dark hazels, and rustic baskets of kisses.
	I want to do with you what spring does with the cherry trees.



6. FANTOM OF THE FREIGHTER

	Distance in flight above pipes of foam,
	Salt in ritual waves and regular ranks,
	And an odor and murmur of old ship,
	Of rotted wood and damaged ironwork,
	And tired machines that howl and weep
	Pushing the prow and kicking the sides,
	Mumbling lamentations, swallowing and swallowing distances,
	Making a noise of sour waters over the sour waters,
	Moving the old ship over the old waters.
	
	Inner storeholds, crepuscular tunnels
	Visited by intermittent daylight of the harbors:
	Bags, bags heaped up by a somber god
	Like grey animals, rounded and eyeless,
	With gentle grey ears,
	And worthy stomachs full of wheat or copra,
	Sensitive bellies of pregnant women,
	Meanly dressed in grey, patiently
	Waiting in the shadow of a dolorous cinema.
	
	Suddenly the waters outside
	Are heard passing, running like an opaque horse,
	With a noise of horses’ hooves in the water,
	Rapid, submerging themselves once more in the waters.
	Then there is nothing but time in the cabins,
	Time in the miserable solitary diningroom,
	Motionless and visible like a great sorrow.
	
	Odor of leather and cloth thickly worn out,
	And onions and oil and yet more,
	Odor of something floating in the corners of the ship,
	Odor of something nameless,
	That comes down the stairs like a wave of air,
	And traverses the corridors with its nonexistent body,
	And looks on with eyes preserved by death,
	
	It looks on with its colorless eyes that are sightless,
	Slow, and it passes trembling without substance or shadow,
	Sounds wrinkle it, things go through it,
	Its transparency makes the dirty chairs glisten
	Who is this fantom without a fantom’s body,
	With its steps light as nocturnal dust
	And its voice that only objects preserve?
	
	The furnishings travel full of its silent being
	Like little ships within the old ship,
	Freighted with its vague and disintegrated being:
	The wardrobes, the green tablecovers,
	The color of the curtains and the floor,
	Everything has suffered the slow emptiness of its hands
	And things have been worn out by its breath.
	
	It slips and slides, it descends, transparent,
	Air within cold air that flows over the ship,
	It leans on the railings with its hidden hands
	And looks at the bitter sea which flees behind the ship.
	Only the waters repel its influence,
	Its odor and color of forgotten fantom
	And cool and deep they unfold their dance
	Like lives of fire, like blood or perfume,
	They surge, new and strong, united and reunited.
	
	The waters, without wearing out, without custom or time,
	Green with quantity, skillful and cold,
	Touch the black stomach of the ship and wash its material,
	Its injured sides, its iron wrinkles,
	The living waters gnaw the hull of the ship,
	Traveling with broad banners of foam
	And their teeth of salt flying in drops.
	
	The fantom looks at the sea with its eyeless face:
	The circle of day, the coughing of the ship, a bird
	In the rounded and lonely equation of space;
	And it descends anew into the life of the ship,
	Falling upon the wood and dead time,
	Gliding into black kitchens and cabins,
	Slow with air and atmosphere and desolate space.



7. FINALE

	Matilde, years or days   
	sleeping, feverish,   
	here or there,
	gazing off,
	twisting my spine,   
	bleeding true blood,   
	perhaps I awaken   
	or am lost, sleeping:
	hospital beds, foreign windows,
	white uniforms of the silent walkers,
	the clumsiness of feet.
	
	And then, these journeys   
	and my sea of renewal:   
	your head on the pillow,   
	your hands floating
	in the light, in my light,   
	over my earth.
	
	It was beautiful to live   
	when you lived!
	
	The world is bluer and of the earth   
	at night, when I sleep
	enormous, within your small hands.



8. HORSEMAN IN RAIN

	Primordial waters: clover and oat striving, water-walls,
	A meshing of cords in the net of the night,
	In the barbarous weave of the damp, dropping water,
	A rending of water-drops, lamenting successions,
	Diagonal rage, cutting heaven.
	Steeped in aromas, smashing the water, interposing
	The roan of their gloss, like a foliage, between boulder and water,
	The horses gallop in water,
	Their vapor attending, in a lunatic milk,
	A stampede of doves that hardens, like water.
	Not day, but a cistern
	Of obdurate weather, green agitations,
	Where hooves join a landscape of haste
	With the lapse of the rain and the bestial aroma of horses.
	Blankets and pommels, clustering cloak-furs,
	Seedfalls of darkness
	Ablaze on the haunches of brimstone
	That beat the considering jungle.
	
	Beyond and beyond and beyond
	And beyond and beyond and beyond and beyoooooond:
	The horsemen demolish the rain, the horsemen
	Pass under the bittering hazelnut, the rain
	Weaves unperishing wheat in a shimmer of lustres.
	Here is water’s effulgence, confusion of lightning,
	To spill on the leaf, here, from the noise of the gallop,
	The water goes wounded to earth, without flight.
	The bridle reins dampen: branch-covered archways,
	Footfalls of footfalls, an herbage of darkness
	In splintering starshapes, moonlike, icelike, a cyclone of horses
	Riddled with points like an icicle prism
	And born out of furor, the innocent fingers brim over,
	The apple encompassing terror
	And the terrible banners of empire, are smitten.



9. IF YOU FORGET ME

	I want you to know 
	one thing. 
	
	You know how this is: 
	if I look 
	at the crystal moon, at the red branch 
	of the slow autumn at my window, 
	if I touch 
	near the fire 
	the impalpable ash 
	or the wrinkled body of the log, 
	everything carries me to you, 
	as if everything that exists, 
	aromas, light, metals, 
	were little boats 
	that sail 
	toward those isles of yours that wait for me. 
	
	Well, now, 
	if little by little you stop loving me 
	I shall stop loving you little by little. 
	
	If suddenly 
	you forget me 
	do not look for me, 
	for I shall already have forgotten you. 
	
	If you think it long and mad, 
	the wind of banners 
	that passes through my life, 
	and you decide 
	to leave me at the shore 
	of the heart where I have roots, 
	remember 
	that on that day, 
	at that hour, 
	I shall lift my arms 
	and my roots will set off 
	to seek another land. 
	
	But 
	if each day, 
	each hour, 
	you feel that you are destined for me 
	with implacable sweetness, 
	if each day a flower 
	climbs up to your lips to seek me, 
	ah my love, ah my own, 
	in me all that fire is repeated, 
	in me nothing is extinguished or forgotten, 
	my love feeds on your love, beloved, 
	and as long as you live it will be in your arms 
	without leaving mine.



10. LEVIATHAN

	Night of the brute, antarctic outlander,
	Nearing or passing me--an ice-field
	Displacing the darkness--one day
	I shall enter your walls, I shall rear
	On the sunken marine of your winter, your armory.
	
	Southward, there crackled a holocaust, black
	With your planet’s expulsion, the domains
	Of your silence that moved in the algae
	And jostled the lump of the ages.
	
	Then, form was, alone, was magnitude
	Sealed by a world’s agitation, wherein glided
	Your leather pre-eminence, mistrusting
	The gifts of its nature: tenderness, power.
	
	Ark of our passion, inflaming
	A hummock of dark, as with torches,
	When your blind blood was quickened
	An epoch of ocean still slept in its gardens,
	And in an immensity the disfiguring moon
	Divided its track with a magnet of phosphor.
	Life sputtered,
	The mother-medusa, blue in the flame,
	A tempest of multiple wombs,
	And increase grew whole in its purity
	Like the pompano’s pulse in the sea.
	
	Among waters, your congress
	Of mastheads and spars was disposed
	And your power of inviolate night
	Was shed on the roots in a deluge.
	Past expectancy’s islands, your continent
	Fled; dereliction and terror
	Made the loneliness tremble.
	Even so, terror mounted the globes
	Of the glacial moon, terror entered your flesh
	And struck at your solitude, the asylums
	Of dread where your lamp lay extinguished.
	With you was the night, a tempestuous slime
	That held you like pitch and enveloped you
	While your tail’s hurricano
	Spun the ice of a slumbering galaxy.
	
	O enormously wounded onel Fiery fountainhead,
	Lashing a ruin of thunders,
	On the harpoon’s periphery, stained
	In the blood-bath, bleeding your virtue away,
	The repose and the calm of the animal conduct you,
	A cyclone of fracturing crescents,
	To the black boats of blubber
	And the creatures of rancor and plague.
	
	Great mold among crystals, dead
	On a pole of the moon, heaven itself is encompassed,
	Pandemonium’s cloud, and laments there,
	And covers all ocean with blood.



11. THE MEN

	I’m Ramón González Barbagelata from anywhere,    
	from Cucuy, from Paraná, from Rio Turbio, from Oruro,   
	from Maracaibo, from Parral, from Ovalle, from Loconmilla,    
	I’m the poor devil from the poor Third World,    
	I’m the third-class passenger installed, good God!    
	in the lavish whiteness of snow-covered mountains,    
	concealed among orchids of subtle idiosyncrasy.    
	
	I’ve arrived at this famous year 2000, and what do I get? 
	With what do I scratch myself? What do I have to do with    
	the three glorious zeros that flaunt themselves    
	over my very own zero, my own non-existence?    
	Pity that brave heart awaiting its call    
	or the man enfolded by warmer love,    
	nothing’s left today except my flimsy skeleton,    
	my eyes unhinged, confronting the era’s beginning.    
	
	The era’s beginning: are these ruined shacks,    
	these poor schools, these people still in rags and tatters,    
	this cloddish insecurity of my poor families,    
	is all this the day? the century’s beginning, the golden door?    
	
	Well, enough said, I, at least, discreet,    
	as in office, patched and pensive,    
	I proclaim the redundancy of the inaugural:    
	I’ve arrived here with all my baggage,    
	bad luck and worse jobs,    
	misery always waiting with open arms,    
	the mobilization of people piled up on top of each other,    
	and the manifold geography of hunger.



12. ODE TO A LARGE TUNA IN THE MARKET

	Here,   
	among the market vegetables,
	this torpedo
	from the ocean   
	depths,   
	a missile   
	that swam,
	now   
	lying in front of me
	dead.
	
	Surrounded
	by the earth’s green froth   
	--these lettuces,
	bunches of carrots--
	only you   
	lived through
	the sea’s truth, survived
	the unknown, the
	unfathomable
	darkness, the depths   
	of the sea,
	the great   
	abyss,
	_le grand abîme,_
	only you:   
	varnished
	black-pitched   
	witness
	to that deepest night.
	
	Only you:
	dark bullet
	barreled   
	from the depths,
	carrying   
	only   
	your   
	one wound,
	but resurgent,
	always renewed,
	locked into the current,
	fins fletched
	like wings
	in the torrent,
	in the coursing
	of
	the
	underwater
	dark,
	like a grieving arrow,
	sea-javelin, a nerveless   
	oiled harpoon.
	
	Dead
	in front of me,
	catafalqued king
	of my own ocean;
	once   
	sappy as a sprung fir
	in the green turmoil,
	once seed
	to sea-quake,
	tidal wave, now
	simply
	dead remains;
	in the whole market
	yours   
	was the only shape left
	with purpose or direction
	in this   
	jumbled ruin
	of nature;
	you are   
	a solitary man of war
	among these frail vegetables,
	your flanks and prow
	black   
	and slippery
	as if you were still
	a well-oiled ship of the wind,
	the only
	true
	machine
	of the sea: unflawed,
	undefiled,   
	navigating now
	the waters of death.



13. ODE TO TOMATOES

	The street
	filled with tomatoes,
	midday,
	summer,
	light is
	halved
	like
	a
	tomato,
	its juice
	runs
	through the streets.
	
	In December,
	unabated,
	the tomato
	invades
	the kitchen,
	it enters at lunchtime,
	takes
	its ease
	on countertops,
	among glasses,
	butter dishes,
	blue saltcellars.
	
	It sheds
	its own light,
	benign majesty.



14. OPEN SEA

	If, to my hands, from its havocs and bounties,
	The Sea might appoint me a ferment, a portion, a fruit,
	I would speak for that concord of distance, perspectives of steel,
	Evenings and airs of alerted extension
	Your power, like a language of whiteness, O Ocean,
	The spoilure and rending of columns,
	Into innocent essence brought low.
	
	Not yet that ultimate wave in the weight of its brine,
	Smashing on seacoast, conducing
	The peace of the sand that encircles a world.
	But power and volume concenter,
	Capacity ranges the waters,
	Unmoved, in the flowing aloneness, in a surfeit of lives:
	Time, it may be, or the goblet of motion’s entirety,
	Upgathered and brimless with death; original singlehood,
	Visceral greens
	In a charring totality.
	
	The drowned arm, uplifting,
	Carries the kiss of the salt in a droplet. From the torsoes of men,
	A humid perfume on the beaches,
	The soaked flower, retained;
	Your power in a semblance of squandering force,
	Undiminished, returned in a semblance of calm.
	
	The wave, giving way
	In a bow of identity, explosion of feathers,
	A trifle of spindrift, expends itself headlong
	And returns to its cause, unconsumed.
	
	And vigor recovers its origin.
	No more than a ruined excess you surrender, O Sea,
	Who unhusk what the cargo rejects,
	Whatever mobility frees from abundance
	Or the cluster of being dissevers.
	
	Farther than sea-surge your form is extended.
	
	Ardent and ordered, like a gesture of breathing
	On breast and its vesture, out of isolate being,
	Borne up into tissue of light,
	Your meadows arise on the billow
	And the flesh of a planet is bared.
	
	Substance of selfhood overflows into being.
	The crescent of silence is brimmed.
	
	Here is no crater’s dismemberment,
	In the cup of the headlands,
	Or pinnacle’s emptiness, vestiges, scars,
	Patrolling an air’s mutilation:
	The goblet is shaken with salt and with honey,
	Creation’s abysm of waters,
	And nothing is lacking, O Sea!
	
	For the petals of ocean contend with a planet’s pulsation.
	The undersea granaries tremble.
	Hazard is hung on the smooth of a wave--
	A swarming and swimming of schools
	And only the mesh of the netcord, ascending,
	Draws up a fish-scale’s extinction of lightning
	One wounded gradation of distance,
	In the crystal’s accomplished perfection.



15. PARTY’S END

	I
	
	The first rains are here: it is raining today over March
	and the swallows that dance in the downpour;
	we have the ocean again on our table,
	all is as the wave wills,
	and will surely be so again: all
	
	is as it was: but I, one day made invisible,
	will relinquish all power of return
	in my arms, hands, feet, eyes, my human discernment,
	trapped by a shadow’s finality.
	
	
	II
	
	Among the revellers met at the feast,
	some move toward the shadows again, this one or that,
	as the power that unites us disposes: later,
	words, mouths, and roads go their separate ways,
	but the errand is always the same: each presses on
	toward the nothingness into which the divided are drawn.
	
	
	III
	
	Party’s end . . . Isla Negra soaks under the rains:
	it rains on a tempest of emptiness, on the spray,
	on the pole’s coruscations exploding in salt;
	all ebbs and delays, leaving only a glare on the sea.
	Where are we going? asks the drowning redundance of things.
	What am I? the seaweed inquires, silent till now,
	and is answered in wave after wave after wave:
	one rhythm creates and destroys and continues:
	truth lies in the bitter mobility.
	
	
	IV
	
	Those uninhabited poems, between heaven and autumn,
	poems without people, transportation expenses:
	for a moment, let no living creature enter my verses,
	no trace of a man on the sand’s empty reaches,
	no footprints, dead papers, distinguishing marks
	of the traveler-only
	the fog’s exaltation, the color of March, the sea-bird’s
	delirium, salt petrels, pelicans, pigeons,
	the infinite
	chill in the air,
	shown once, before meditation and dreaming begin,
	before time’s uses resume, extending themselves in the night,
	an ocean of solitude given for only a moment,
	mouth pressing mouth in a month of humidity, a soiled
	summer’s anguish, while I watch how the crystal expands,
	how the rock climbs its pitiless silence,
	how the ocean destroys itself without marring its energy.
	
	
	V
	
	We live out our lifetimes asking: How much?
	seeing How much? in the eyes of our mothers and fathers,
	their mouths and their hands: this and that
	for How much? How much for the earth, for a kilo of bread,
	for the windfall of grapes, for the shoes on our feet.
	How much, mister, how much does it take, slipping
	into our smiles for a moment, cocksure,
	while our fathers in patches and hand-me-downs, certain
	of nothing, entered the warehouses as one enters a terrible temple.
	Later, much farther away, nothing has changed.
	
	
	VI
	
	It displeases the esthete to edify: the poem with a moral
	that went out of fashion when the poem taught the man
	how to live like a man, leaving behind its violet
	cachet in the soul. I speak of the whithers and wherefores
	as I choose--from the throne to the oil-slick
	that bloodies the world, asking
	How much? while the grains of my anger grow greater
	with my How many? syllables speaking all the world’s languages:
	yes, I speak, I speak on; and will be, if need be, a cracked violin
	or a troubador wracked by the truth and the doubt of the world.
	
	
	VII 
	
	The brutal imperative, as the blood in a wound may be brutal
	or the gathering chill in the wind is made bearable
	for all our discomfiture, makes warriors of us, gives us the stance
	and inflection of fighters; but still, with unspeakable tenderness,
	the table, the spoon, and the chair call out to us:
	in the thick of the battle we wait for the cry of the crockery.
	But backward is nowhere! Having settled our loyalties,
	nothing can lower the balances
	but the weight of our reason bearing down on us one way,
	and the path we broke open with our common enlightenment:
	men move back and forth on our bridge of commitment.
	That is the unprepossessing pride of our lifetime,
	and its organized splendor.
	
	
	VIII 
	
	Party’s end.
	This is the rainy season,
	with the underground rivers of Chile on the move
	drilling delicate troughs of volcanoes,
	piercing the quartz and the gold, moving the silences.
	This is the mighty arcana of water barely known to us here;
	though we speak of the sea and name it by name: Cape Horn:
	the stain of mortality never mars its dominion,
	we can never implant our transactions,
	the mines, motors, flags of our species.
	Open-ended, the water shakes itself free:
	it moves while it cleanses and cleanses:
	it cleanses the stone and the sand, our wounds and utensils.
	It is never used up, like the bleeding away of the fire,
	it does not turn to cinder and ash.
	
	
	IX
	
	Night and the water are one; it washes the sky,
	enters our dreams with the immediate burst of its presence,
	night
	doggedly there, interrupted and starry,
	alone
	as it sweeps off the leavings
	of every dead day
	with the snowy
	device of its heraldry over us,
	and under us,
	between us,
	the net with the knots of its cordage: shadow and dream.
	Water or dream, truth’s nakedness,
	shadow and stone-
	we are these and continue to be:
	our nocturnes say nothing of light,
	we drink the pure darkness:
	our lot is to stand by the stones
	of the oven;
	when we bent toward the bread with our paddles,
	we drew out the darkness
	and were broken
	into
	our lives:
	it was night that divided us,
	gave us its wisdom by halves
	till we walked
	without faltering, pierced
	by the light of the stars.
	
	
	X
	
	Those threshed out of life, the dead with the delicate faces,
	whom we cherished, who burned
	in the firmament in a multiple silence
	and rippled the wheat with their dying:
	the seemingly dead bore off a part of ourselves,
	left us poised by a thread, aware of their menace,
	while the wheat was flailed finer and funer
	and the cycle of living resumed.
	
	All at once, the most preciously dead
	are gone from our table. We wait
	without ever quite waiting, as one waits for the dead,
	while she whom we cherished comes closer,
	behind every chair, and will not take her place at the table.
	Or unhappy Alberto, dead with his fiddle there,
	the fathers caved in on the grandfathers.
	
	
	XI
	
	Let us build an expendable day
	without winding the hours, counting
	only the salient clarity--that day
	of all days that came bearing oranges.
	The columns close on the niggling particulars,
	leaving their chewed scrap of paper
	spinning off in the sand,
	devoured by the winters.
	Not a leaf in the forest
	survives our recall, though its scent
	and vibration stay in the memory:
	in that forest I put forth my foliage
	and carry its sigh in my veins
	with no thought for the hour or the day.
	The years and the numbers betray us:
	month follows month in the vast of the tunnel,
	October and April clash like two lunatic stones,
	the apples rain into one basket,
	the silvery catch in one net,
	while night with a rapier’s precision
	cuts through day’s splendor--the day
	that is ours if we are there to retrieve it tomorrow.
	
	
	XII
	
	White spindrift, March on the Island, I see
	wave work against wave and splinter the whiteness,
	the ungratified cup of the ocean brimming over,
	the immovable sky slowly
	lengthen and part with the flight of pontifical birds.
	We come upon yellow,
	the month changes its color, the beard
	of the watery autumn grows long:
	but my name remains Pablo,
	I am just as I was,
	with my doubts, with my debts,
	with my loves,
	
	having a whole sea to myself with its
	personnel moving the waves,
	pummeled by storms that blow me
	toward Cloudcuckooland:
	I come and I go with the sea and the countries it grazes, I know
	the thorn’s languages,
	the bite of the obdurate fish,
	the chill of the latitudes,
	the blood on the coral, the taciturn
	night of the whale.
	I have pushed past the deltas, from country to country,
	the unbearable wastes of the world,
	and never found peace. I have always come back.
	What can I say without roots?
	
	
	XIII
	
	What can I say without touching my palms to the land?
	To whom shall I turn but the rain?
	I have never set foot in the countries I lived in,
	every port was a port of return:
	I have no postcards, no keepsakes of hair
	from important cathedrals: I have built what I could
	out of natural stone, like a native, open-handed,
	I have worked with my reason, unreason, my caprices,
	my fury, and poise: hour after hour
	I have touched the domains of the lion
	and the turbulent tower of bee:
	having seen what there was to be seen,
	having handled the clay and the loam, the spray and the rock,
	with those who remember my footprints and words,
	the tendrils of plants whose kisses remain on my mouth,
	I say: “Here is my place,” stripping myself down in the light
	and dropping my hands in the sea,
	until all is transparent again
	there under the earth, and my sleep can be tranquil.



16. THE POET

	That time, when I moved among happenings,
	In the midst of my mournful devotions, that time
	When I cherished a leaflet of quartz,
	At gaze, in a lifetime’s vocation.
	I ranged in the markets of avarice
	Where goodness is bought for a price, breathed the insensate
	Miasmas of envy, the inhuman
	Contention of masks and existences.
	I endured in the bog-dweller’s element; the lily
	That breaks on the water in a sudden
	Disturbance of bubbles and blossoms, devoured me.
	Whatever the foot sought, the spirit deflected,
	Or sheered toward the fang of the pit.
	So my poems took being, in travail
	Retrieved from the thorn, like a penance,
	Wrenched by a seizure of hands, out of solitude;
	Or I parted, for burial,
	The secretest fower in immodesty’s garden.
	Estranged to myself, like shadow on water
	That moves through a corridor’s fathoms,
	I sped through the exile of each man’s existence,
	This way and that, and so, to habitual loathing;
	For I saw that their being was this: to encompass
	One half of existence’s fulness, like fishes
	In an alien margin of ocean. And there,
	In immensity’s mire, I encountered their death:
	Death grazing the barriers,
	Death opening roadways and doorways.



17. SEXUAL WATER

	Rolling in solitary drops,
	in gouts like teeth,
	in thick gobs of marmalade and blood,
	rolling in drops,
	the water pours down,
	in gouts like a blade,
	a lacerating river of glass,
	it pours down, gnawing,
	hammering the axle of symmetry, soldering the soul’s brazings,
	smashing abandoned objects, drenching what is dark.
	
	It is merely a gasp, damper than weeping,
	a liquid, a sweat, an oil without a name,
	a motion of stabbing,
	shaping, thickening,
	the water pours down
	in sluggish drops
	to its sea, to its juiceless ocean,
	to its wave without water.
	
	I see a summer stretched out, and a death-rattle growing from a barn,
	wine-cellars, locusts,
	crowds of people, palpitations,
	homes, little girls
	sleeping with hands on their hearts,
	dreaming of bandits, burnings,
	I see boats,
	I see trees of spinal cords, hackling like angry cats,
	I see blood, daggers and women’s stockings, and men’s hair,
	I see bedsteads, I see corridors where a virgin cries out,
	I see blankets and pipe-organs and hotels.
	
	I see private dreams,
	I let in the lagging days,
	and the beginnings, too, and the memories, too;
	like an eyelid horribly pried up,
	I stand watching.
	
	And, further, there is this sound:
	a red uproar of bones,
	a cleaving together of flesh,
	and legs, yellow as spikes of corn, splicing.
	I listen between the crackling of kisses,
	I listen, flailed between pantings and wailings.
	I stand watching, hearing,
	with half of my soul on the sea and with half of my soul on the earth,
	and with the two halves of my soul I watch the world.
	
	And even if I clap my eyes shut and dam my heart, thoroughly,
	I see a soft water wash down,
	in soft drops.
	It is like a hurricane of gelatin,
	a cascade of sperms and jellyfish.
	I see a clotted rainbow, flowing.
	I see its waters moving across my bones.



18. SOLDIER ASLEEP

	Derelict there in the leafy encirclement,
	the soldier arrived. His weariness struck at him then,
	and he fell in the leaves and lianas
	at the foot of that Providence, the plumed and omnipotent God
	alone with His universe, still
	warm from the jungles.
	Godhead looked long
	at the warrior outlandishly born from the sea-water:
	stared long at those eyes, at the blood-clabbered beard
	and the sword, the black scintillation
	of armor, the weariness weighing
	like haze on the head
	of the bloody young man.
	How many zones
	in the darkness, till the God of the Feathers
	could be born and entwine on the wood
	and the roseate stone, the web of his volumel
	What a chaos of lunatic water,
	nocturnal ferocity, what ravening
	troughs for the light, unregenerate yet, what
	crazed fermentation of lives and destructions, what bran
	of fertility, before the decorum could come:
	the orders of plants and of clans,
	the cut stone disposed on the stone,
	the smoke of the ritual lamps,
	soil firm for the stance of a man,
	disposition of tribes
	and tribunes of terrestrial gods!
	
	All the flakes of the rock shook:
	it felt the descent of the Terror
	like a swarming of insects,
	and massing the might of its properties,
	sent rain to the roots,
	conferred with the motions of earth
	still unmoved and obscure in the stone
	of its cosmic investiture,
	unable to stir in a fang or a claw,
	a river, a temblor,
	a meteor’s hiss
	through the pit of its emperies:
	and remained in that place, like a silence, a stone immobility.
	while Beltrán of Córdoba slept on.



19. SONNET

	I don’t love you as if you were a rose of salt, topaz,   
	or arrow of carnations that propagate fire:   
	I love you as one loves certain obscure things,   
	secretly, between the shadow and the soul.
	
	I love you as the plant that doesn’t bloom but carries   
	the light of those flowers, hidden, within itself,   
	and thanks to your love the tight aroma that arose   
	from the earth lives dimly in my body.
	
	I love you without knowing how, or when, or from where,   
	I love you directly without problems or pride:
	I love you like this because I don’t know any other way to love,
	except in this form in which I am not nor are you,   
	so close that your hand upon my chest is mine,   
	so close that your eyes close with my dreams.



20. TONIGHT I CAN WRITE THE SADDEST LINES

	Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 
	
	Write, for example,‘The night is shattered 
	and the blue stars shiver in the distance.’ 
	
	The night wind revolves in the sky and sings. 
	
	Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 
	I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too. 
	
	Through nights like this one I held her in my arms 
	I kissed her again and again under the endless sky. 
	
	She loved me sometimes, and I loved her too. 
	How could one not have loved her great still eyes. 
	
	Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 
	To think that I do not have her. To feel that I have lost her. 
	
	To hear the immense night, still more immense without her. 
	And the verse falls to the soul like dew to the pasture. 
	
	What does it matter that my love could not keep her. 
	The night is shattered and she is not with me. 
	
	This is all. In the distance someone is singing. In the distance. 
	My soul is not satisfied that it has lost her. 
	
	My sight searches for her as though to go to her. 
	My heart looks for her, and she is not with me. 
	
	The same night whitening the same trees. 
	We, of that time, are no longer the same. 
	
	I no longer love her, that’s certain, but how I loved her. 
	My voice tried to find the wind to touch her hearing. 
	
	Another’s. She will be another’s. Like my kisses before. 
	Her voide. Her bright body. Her inifinite eyes. 
	
	I no longer love her, that’s certain, but maybe I love her. 
	Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
	
	Because through nights like this one I held her in my arms 
	my sould is not satisfied that it has lost her. 
	
	Though this be the last pain that she makes me suffer 
	and these the last verses that I write for her.



21. WHITE THIGHS

	White thighs, hillocks of whiteness, oh woman’s body,
	you resemble the world in your attitude of surrender
	My peasant’s body savagely excavates you
	and makes the child leap from the earth’s depth,
	
	I was alone like a tunnel. The birds fled from me,
	and into me entered the night’s heavy invasion.
	To outlive me I framed you like an arm at the forge,
	like an arrow in my bow, like a stone in my sling.
	
	But falls the hour of vengeance and I love you.
	Body of flesh and moss and firm covetous milk.
	Oh the cups of your chest, oh eyes of absencel
	Oh roses of the pubis! Oh slow sad voice!
	
	Oh body of my woman, I shall persist in your gracefulness.
	My thirst, my desire unlimited, my uncertain road.
	Dark watercourses where eternal thirst follows,
	and weariness follows, and infinite sorrow.



22. WIDOWER’S TANGO

	Oh Maligna, by this time you must have found the letter, wept with rage,
	and insulted the memory of my mother,
	calling her rotten bitch and mother of curs,
	and you must have drunk your afternoon tea, all by yourself, alone,
	gazing at my old shoes, empty now for ever,
	and you can’t remember my sicknesses, my nightly dreams, my meals.
	without cursing me aloud as though I were still there
	fussing about the tropics, the Coringhi coolies,
	the poisonous fevers that did me so much harm,
	and the frightful English, whom I detest still.
	
	Maligna, here’s the truth: what a huge night! what a solitary earth!
	I’ve gone back again to the lonely bedrooms,
	I can throw my trousers and shirts upon the floor;
	there are no clothes-hangers in my room, no pictures of anybody on the walls.
	How much of the darkness in my soul would I give to regain you,
	and how threatening seem to me now the names of the months,
	to eating cold meals in cafés, and once more,
	and how lugubrious a drum-sound the name of winter has!
	
	Later you will find buried near the coconut tree
	the knife that I hid for fear that you’d kill me,
	and now, suddenly, I should like to smell its kitchen steel
	used to the weight of your hand and the lustre of your foot:
	beneath the earth’s damp, among the deaf roots,
	the poor thing would know, of all human languages, only your name,
	and the thick earth does not comprehend your name
	composed of impenetrable heavenly substances.
	
	Just as it troubles me to think of the clear day of your legs
	stretched out like arrested and hard solar waters,
	and the swallow that sleeping and fying lives in your eyes,
	and the dog of madness that you house in your heart,
	so also I perceive the deaths existing between us from now on,
	and the air I breathe bears ashes and destruction,
	the long, lonely space that encircles me for ever.
	
	I would give this wind from the giant sea for your hoarse breathing
	heard in the long nights without admixture of oblivion,
	combining with the atmosphere like a whip with the hide of a horse.
	And to hear the sound of you, in darkness, at the back of the house,
	like one decanting a delicate, tremulous, silvery, reluctant honey,
	how many times over would I give this chorus of shadow that is mine,
	and the noise of useless swords that clash in my heart,
	and the dove of blood perching solitary upon my forehead
	invoking things gone, beings gone,
	substances strangely inseparable and lost.



23. ’TIS THE MORROW FULL OF STORM

	’Tis the morrow full of storm
	in the heart of summer.
	
	The wandering hands of the wind shake the clouds
	like white handkerchiefs waved in farewell.
	
	Innumerable heart of the wind
	fluttering over our silence of love.
	
	Humming through the trees, heavenly music,
	like a tongue full of songs and wars.
	
	Wind that lifts the fallen leaves in robbery
	and turns the palpitating flight of the birds.
	
	Wind that throws them down in foamless waves
	and weightless shapes, and falling flames.
	
	Their volume of kisses breaks and goes under
	fought at the gate of the summer wind.

