*** Saint-John Perse (1887 - 1975)

1. THE BOOK

	And then what a wail in the mouth of the hearth, 
	a night of long rains on their march toward the city, 
	stirred in your heart the obscure birth of speech:
	“. . . Of a luminous exile--and more distant already 
	than the storm that is rolling--how can I, O Lord, 
	keep the ways that you opened?
	“. . . Will you leave me only this confusion of evening--having, 
	for so long a day, nourished me on the salt of your solitude,
	“witness of our silences, of your shadow, and of the great blasts of your voice?”
	
	--Thus you lamented in the confusion of evening. 
	But sitting by the window opposite the stretch of wall 
	across the way, having failed to resuscitate the lost splendor,
	you would open the Book, and letting your worn finger 
	wander among the prophecies, your gaze far away, 
	you awaited the moment of departure, 
	the rising of the great wind that would suddenly tear you away,
	like the typhoon, parting the clouds before your waiting eyes.



2. NOCTURNE

	Now! they are ripe, these fruits of a jealous fate. 
	From our dream grown, on our blood fed, and haunting the purple of our nights, 
	they are the fruits of long concern, 
	they are the fruits of long desire, 
	they were our most secret accomplices and, often verging upon avowal, 
	drew us to their ends out of the abyss of our nights . . .
	Praise to the first dawn, now they are ripe and beneath the purple, 
	these fruits of an imperious fate. 
	--We do not find our liking here.
	
	Sun of being, betrayal! 
	Where was the fraud, where was the offense? 
	Where was the fault and where the flaw, and the error, which is the error? 
	Shall we trace the theme back to its birth?
	Shall we relive the fever and the torment? . . . 
	Majesty of the rose, we are not among your adepts: our blood 
	goes to what is bitterer, our care to what is more severe, 
	our roads are uncertain, and eep is the night out of which our gods are torn. 
	Dog roses and black briars populate for us the shore of shipwreck.
	
	Now they are ripening, these fruits of another shore: 
	“Sun of being, shield me!“--turncoat’s words. 
	And those who have seen him pass will say: who was that man, and which his home? 
	Did he go alone at dawn to show the purple of this nights? . . . 
	Sun of being, Prince and Master? our works are scattered, 
	our tasks without honor and our grain without harvest: 
	the binder of sheaves awaits, at the evening’s ebb. 
	--Behold, they are dyed with our blood, these fruits of a stormy fate.
	
	At the gait of a binder of sheaves life goes, without hatred or ransom.



3. SONG

	My horse stopped under the tree full of doves, 
	I whistle so pure that there are no promises 
	to their banks that all these rivers keep. 
	Living leaves in the morning are the image of glory . . .
	
	And it is not that a man is not sad, but rising before
	daybreak and standing cautiously in the trade of an old tree,
	leaning from the chin to the last star, he sees in the depths 
	of the sky great pure things which turn to pleasure.
	
	My horse stopped under the cooing tree, I whistle a purer whistle . . .
	And peace to those who are about to die, who have not seen this day.
	But from my brother the poet, we had news.
	He wrote one more very sweet thing. And some knew about it.

