*** Sylvia Plath (1932 - 1963)

1. THE APPLICANT

	First, are you our sort of a person?
	Do you wear
	A glass eye, false teeth or a crutch,
	A brace or a hook,
	Rubber breasts or a rubber crotch,
	
	Stitches to show something’s missing? No, no? Then
	How can we give you a thing?
	Stop crying.
	Open your hand.
	Empty? Empty. Here is a hand
	
	To fill it and willing
	To bring teacups and roll away headaches
	And do whatever you tell it.
	Will you marry it?
	It is guaranteed
	
	To thumb shut your eyes at the end
	And dissolve of sorrow.
	We make new stock from the salt.
	I notice you are stark naked.
	How about this suit--
	
	Black and stiff, but not a bad fit.
	Will you marry it?
	It is waterproof, shatterproof, proof
	Against fire and bombs through the roof.
	Believe me, they’ll bury you in it.
	
	Now your head, excuse me, is empty.
	I have the ticket for that.
	Come here, sweetie, out of the closet.
	Well, what do you think of _that?_
	Naked as paper to start
	
	But in twenty-five years she’ll be silver,
	In fifty, gold.
	A living doll, everywhere you look.
	It can sew, it can cook,
	It can talk, talk, talk.
	
	It works, there is nothing wrong with it.
	You have a hole, it’s a poultice.
	You have an eye, it’s an image.
	My boy, it’s your last resort.
	Will you marry it, marry it, marry it.



2. THE COLOSSUS

	I shall never get you put together entirely,
	Pieced, glued, and properly jointed.
	Mule-bray, pig-grunt and bawdy cackles
	Proceed from your great lips.
	It’s worse than a barnyard.
	
	Perhaps you consider yourself an oracle,
	Mouthpiece of the dead, or of some god or other.
	Thirty years now I have labored
	To dredge the silt from your throat.
	I am none the wiser.
	
	Scaling little ladders with glue pots and pails of lysol
	I crawl like an ant in mourning
	Over the weedy acres of your brow
	To mend the immense skull plates and clear
	The bald, white tumuli of your eyes.
	
	A blue sky out of the Oresteia
	Arches above us. O father, all by yourself
	You are pithy and historical as the Roman Forum.
	I open my lunch on a hill of black cypress.
	Your fluted bones and acanthine hair are littered
	
	In their old anarchy to the horizon-line.
	It would take more than a lightning-stroke
	To create such a ruin.
	Nights, I squat in the cornucopia
	Of your left ear, out of the wind,
	
	Counting the red stars and those of plum-color.
	The sun rises under the pillar of your tongue.
	My hours are married to shadow.
	No longer do I listen for the scrape of a keel
	On the blank stones of the landing.



3. CROSSING THE WATER

	Black lake, black boat, two black, cut-paper people.
	Where do the black trees go that drink here?
	Their shadows must cover Canada.
	
	A little light is filtering from the water flowers.
	Their leaves do not wish us to hurry:
	They are round and flat and full of dark advice.
	
	Cold worlds shake from the oar.
	The spirit of blackness is in us, it is in the fishes.
	A snag is lifting a valedictory, pale hand;
	
	Stars open among the lilies.
	Are you not blinded by such expressionless sirens?
	This is the silence of astounded souls.



4. ELM

	I know the bottom, she says. I know it with my great tap root:   
	It is what you fear.
	I do not fear it: I have been there.
	
	Is it the sea you hear in me,   
	Its dissatisfactions?
	Or the voice of nothing, that was your madness?
	
	Love is a shadow.
	How you lie and cry after it
	Listen: these are its hooves: it has gone off, like a horse.
	
	All night I shall gallop thus, impetuously,
	Till your head is a stone, your pillow a little turf,   
	Echoing, echoing.
	
	Or shall I bring you the sound of poisons?   
	This is rain now, this big hush.
	And this is the fruit of it: tin-white, like arsenic.
	
	I have suffered the atrocity of sunsets.   
	Scorched to the root
	My red filaments burn and stand, a hand of wires.
	
	Now I break up in pieces that fly about like clubs.   
	A wind of such violence
	Will tolerate no bystanding: I must shriek.
	
	The moon, also, is merciless: she would drag me   
	Cruelly, being barren.
	Her radiance scathes me. Or perhaps I have caught her.
	
	I let her go. I let her go
	Diminished and flat, as after radical surgery.   
	How your bad dreams possess and endow me.
	
	I am inhabited by a cry.   
	Nightly it flaps out
	Looking, with its hooks, for something to love.
	
	I am terrified by this dark thing   
	That sleeps in me;
	All day I feel its soft, feathery turnings, its malignity.
	
	Clouds pass and disperse.
	Are those the faces of love, those pale irretrievables?   
	Is it for such I agitate my heart?
	
	I am incapable of more knowledge.   
	What is this, this face
	So murderous in its strangle of branches?--
	
	Its snaky acids hiss.
	It petrifies the will. These are the isolate, slow faults   
	That kill, that kill, that kill.



5. THE EVERLASTING MONDAY

	Thou shalt have an everlasting
	Monday and stand in the moon.
	
	The moon’s man stands in his shell,
	Bent under a bundle
	Of sticks. The light falls chalk and cold
	Upon our bedspread.
	His teeth are chattering among the leprous
	Peaks and craters of those extinct volcanoes.
	
	He also against black frost
	Would pick sticks, would not rest
	Until his own lit room outshone
	Sunday’s ghost of sun;
	Now works his hell of Mondays in the moon’s ball,
	Fireless, seven chill seas chained to his ankle.



6. MONOLOGUE AT 3 AM

	Better that every fiber crack
	and fury make head,
	blood drenching vivid
	couch, carpet, floor
	and the snake-figured almanac
	vouching you are
	a million green counties from here,
	
	than to sit mute, twitching so
	under prickling stars,
	with stare, with curse
	blackening the time
	goodbyes were said, trains let go,
	and I, great magnanimous fool, thus wrenched from
	my one kingdom.



7. MORNING SONG

	Love set you going like a fat gold watch.
	The midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry   
	Took its place among the elements.
	
	Our voices echo, magnifying your arrival. New statue.
	In a drafty museum, your nakedness
	Shadows our safety. We stand round blankly as walls.
	
	I’m no more your mother
	Than the cloud that distills a mirror to reflect its own slow
	Effacement at the wind’s hand.
	
	All night your moth-breath
	Flickers among the flat pink roses. I wake to listen:
	A far sea moves in my ear.
	
	One cry, and I stumble from bed, cow-heavy and floral
	In my Victorian nightgown.
	Your mouth opens clean as a cat’s. The window square
	
	Whitens and swallows its dull stars. And now you try
	Your handful of notes;
	The clear vowels rise like balloons.



8. MUSSEL HUNTER AT ROCK HARBOR

	I came before the water--
	Colorists came to get the
	Good of the Cape light that scours
	Sand grit to sided crystal
	And buffs and sleeks the blunt hulls
	Of the three fishing smacks beached
	On the bank of the river’s
	
	Backtracking tail. I’d come for
	Free fish-bait: the blue mussels
	Clumped like bulbs at the grassroot
	Margin of the tidal pools.
	Dawn tide stood dead low. I smelt
	Mud stench, shell guts, gulls’ leavings;
	Heard a queer crusty scrabble
	
	Cease, and I neared the silenced
	Edge of a cratered pool-bed.
	The mussels hung dull blue and
	Conspicuous, yet it seemed
	A sly world’s hinges had swung
	Shut against me. All held still.
	Though I counted scant seconds,
	
	Enough ages lapsed to win
	Confidence of safe-conduct
	In the wary other world
	Eyeing me. Grass put forth claws,
	Small mud knobs, nudged from under,
	Displaced their domes as tiny
	Knights might doff their casques. The crabs
	
	Inched from their pygmy burrows
	And from the trench-dug mud, all Camouflaged in mottled mail
	Of browns and greens. Each wore one
	Claw swollen to a shield large
	As itself--no fiddler’s arm
	Grown Gargantuan by trade,
	
	But grown grimly, and grimly
	Borne, for a use beyond my
	Guessing of it. Sibilant
	Mass-motived hordes, they sidled
	Out in a converging stream
	Toward the pool-mouth, perhaps to
	Meet the thin and sluggish thread
	
	Of sea retracing its tide--
	Way up the river-basin.
	Or to avoid me. They moved
	Obliquely with a dry-wet
	Sound, with a glittery wisp
	And trickle. Could they feel mud
	Pleasurable under claws
	
	As I could between bare toes?
	That question ended it--I
	Stood shut out, for once, for all,
	Puzzling the passage of their
	Absolutely alien
	Order as I might puzzle
	At the clear tail of Halley’s
	
	Comet coolly giving my
	Orbit the go-by, made known
	By a family name it
	Knew nothing of. So the crabs
	Went about their business, which
	Wasn’t fiddling, and I filled
	A big handkerchief with blue
	
	Mussels. From what the crabs saw,
	If they could see, I was one
	Two-legged mussel-picker.
	High on the airy thatching
	Of the dense grasses I found
	The husk of a fiddler-crab,
	Intact, strangely strayed above
	
	His world of mud--green color
	And innards bleached out blown off
	Somewhere by much sun and wind;
	There was no telling if he’d
	Died recluse of suicide
	Or headstrong Columbus crab.
	The crab-face, etched and set there,
	
	Grimaced as skulls grimace: it
	Had an Oriental look,
	A samurai death mask done
	On a tiger tooth, less for
	Art’s sake than God’s. Far from sea--
	Where red-freckled crab-backs, claws
	And whole crabs, dead, their soggy
	
	Bellies pallid and upturned,
	Perform their shambling waltzes
	On the waves’ dissolving turn
	And return, losing themselves
	Bit by bit to their friendly
	Element--this relic saved
	Face, to face the bald-faced sun.



9. POPPIES IN OCTOBER

	Even the sun-clouds this morning cannot manage such skirts.
	Nor the woman in the ambulance
	Whose red heart blooms through her coat so astoundingly –
	
	A gift, a love gift
	Utterly unasked for
	By a sky
	
	Palely and flamily
	Igniting its carbon monoxides, by eyes
	Dulled to a halt under bowlers.
	
	Oh my God, what am I
	That these late mouths should cry open
	In a forest of frosts, in a dawn of cornflowers.



10. TULIPS

	The tulips are too excitable, it is winter here.
	Look how white everything is, how quiet, how snowed-in.   
	I am learning peacefulness, lying by myself quietly
	As the light lies on these white walls, this bed, these hands.   
	I am nobody; I have nothing to do with explosions.   
	I have given my name and my day-clothes up to the nurses   
	And my history to the anesthetist and my body to surgeons.
	
	They have propped my head between the pillow and the sheet-cuff   
	Like an eye between two white lids that will not shut.
	Stupid pupil, it has to take everything in.
	The nurses pass and pass, they are no trouble,
	They pass the way gulls pass inland in their white caps,
	Doing things with their hands, one just the same as another,   
	So it is impossible to tell how many there are.
	
	My body is a pebble to them, they tend it as water
	Tends to the pebbles it must run over, smoothing them gently.
	They bring me numbness in their bright needles, they bring me sleep.   
	Now I have lost myself I am sick of baggage——
	My patent leather overnight case like a black pillbox,   
	My husband and child smiling out of the family photo;   
	Their smiles catch onto my skin, little smiling hooks.
	
	I have let things slip, a thirty-year-old cargo boat   
	stubbornly hanging on to my name and address.
	They have swabbed me clear of my loving associations.   
	Scared and bare on the green plastic-pillowed trolley   
	I watched my teaset, my bureaus of linen, my books   
	Sink out of sight, and the water went over my head.   
	I am a nun now, I have never been so pure.
	
	I didn’t want any flowers, I only wanted
	To lie with my hands turned up and be utterly empty.
	How free it is, you have no idea how free——
	The peacefulness is so big it dazes you,
	And it asks nothing, a name tag, a few trinkets.
	It is what the dead close on, finally; I imagine them   
	Shutting their mouths on it, like a Communion tablet.   
	
	The tulips are too red in the first place, they hurt me.
	Even through the gift paper I could hear them breathe   
	Lightly, through their white swaddlings, like an awful baby.   
	Their redness talks to my wound, it corresponds.
	They are subtle : they seem to float, though they weigh me down,   
	Upsetting me with their sudden tongues and their color,   
	A dozen red lead sinkers round my neck.
	
	Nobody watched me before, now I am watched.   
	The tulips turn to me, and the window behind me
	Where once a day the light slowly widens and slowly thins,   
	And I see myself, flat, ridiculous, a cut-paper shadow   
	Between the eye of the sun and the eyes of the tulips,   
	And I have no face, I have wanted to efface myself.   
	The vivid tulips eat my oxygen.
	
	Before they came the air was calm enough,
	Coming and going, breath by breath, without any fuss.   
	Then the tulips filled it up like a loud noise.
	Now the air snags and eddies round them the way a river   
	Snags and eddies round a sunken rust-red engine.   
	They concentrate my attention, that was happy   
	Playing and resting without committing itself.
	
	The walls, also, seem to be warming themselves.
	The tulips should be behind bars like dangerous animals;   
	They are opening like the mouth of some great African cat,   
	And I am aware of my heart: it opens and closes
	Its bowl of red blooms out of sheer love of me.
	The water I taste is warm and salt, like the sea,
	And comes from a country far away as health.



11. WAKING IN WINTER

	I can taste the tin of the sky -- the real tin thing.
	Winter dawn is the color of metal,
	The trees stiffen into place like burnt nerves.
	All night I have dreamed of destruction, annihilations --
	An assembly-line of cut throats, and you and I
	Inching off in the gray Chevrolet, drinking the green
	Poison of stilled lawns, the little clapboard gravestones,
	Noiseless, on rubber wheels, on the way to the sea resort.
	
	How the balconies echoed! How the sun lit up
	The skulls, the unbuckled bones facing the view!
	Space! Space! The bed linen was giving out entirely.
	Cot legs melted in terrible attitudes, and the nurses --
	Each nurse patched her soul to a wound and disappeared.
	The deathly guests had not been satisfied
	With the rooms, or the smiles, or the beautiful rubber plants,
	Or the sea, Hushing their peeled sense like Old Mother Morphia.



12. WINTER TREES

	The wet dawn inks are doing their blue dissolve.
	On their blotter of fog the trees
	Seem a botanical drawing.
	Memories growing, ring on ring,
	A series of weddings.
	
	Knowing neither abortions nor bitchery,
	Truer than women,
	They seed so effortlessly!
	Tasting the winds, that are footless,
	Waist-deep in history.
	
	Full of wings, otherworldliness.
	In this, they are Ledas.
	O mother of leaves and sweetness
	Who are these pietas?
	The shadows of ringdoves chanting, but chasing nothing.



13. YOU’RE

	Clownlike, happiest on your hands,   
	Feet to the stars, and moon-skulled,   
	Gilled like a fish. A common-sense   
	Thumbs-down on the dodo’s mode.   
	Wrapped up in yourself like a spool,   
	Trawling your dark as owls do.   
	Mute as a turnip from the Fourth   
	Of July to All Fools’ Day,
	O high-riser, my little loaf.
	
	Vague as fog and looked for like mail.   
	Farther off than Australia.
	Bent-backed Atlas, our traveled prawn.   
	Snug as a bud and at home   
	Like a sprat in a pickle jug.   
	A creel of eels, all ripples.   
	Jumpy as a Mexican bean.   
	Right, like a well-done sum.   
	A clean slate, with your own face on.

