*** Edgar Allan Poe (1809 - 1849)

1. ANNABEL LEE

	It was many and many a year ago,
	In a kingdom by the sea,
	That a maiden there lived whom you may know
	By the name of Annabel Lee;
	And this maiden she lived with no other thought
	Than to love and be loved by me.
	
	I was a child and she was a child,
	In this kingdom by the sea;
	But we loved with a love that was more than love--
	I and my Annabel Lee;
	With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
	Coveted her and me.
	
	And this was the reason that, long ago,
	In this kingdom by the sea,
	A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
	My beautiful Annabel Lee;
	So that her highborn kinsman came
	And bore her away from me,
	To shut her up in a sepulchre
	In this kingdom by the sea.
	
	The angels, not half so happy in heaven,
	Went envying her and me--
	Yes!--that was the reason (as all men know,
	In this kingdom by the sea)
	That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
	Chilling and killing my Annabel Lee.
	
	But our love it was stronger by far than the love
	Of those who were older than we--
	Of many far wiser than we--
	And neither the angels in heaven above,
	Nor the demons down under the sea,
	Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
	Of the beautiful Annabel Lee.
	
	For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
	Of the beautiful Annabel Lee;
	And the stars never rise but I feel the bright eyes
	Of the beautiful Annabel Lee;
	And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side
	Of my darling--my darling--my life and my bride,
	In the sepulchre there by the sea,
	In her tomb by the sounding sea.



2. THE BELLS

	I
	
	Hear the sledges with the bells--
	Silver bells!
	What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
	How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
	In the icy air of night!
	While the stars that oversprinkle
	All the heavens, seem to twinkle
	With a crystalline delight;
	Keeping time, time, time,
	In a sort of Runic rhyme,
	To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells
	From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.
	
	
	II
	
	Hear the mellow wedding bells,
	Golden bells!
	What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!
	Through the balmy air of night
	How they ring out their delight!
	From the molten-golden notes,
	And an in tune,
	What a liquid ditty floats
	To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats
	On the moon!
	Oh, from out the sounding cells,
	What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!
	How it swells!
	How it dwells
	On the Future! how it tells
	Of the rapture that impels
	To the swinging and the ringing
	Of the bells, bells, bells,
	Of the bells, bells, bells,bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!
	
	
	III
	
	Hear the loud alarum bells--
	Brazen bells!
	What a tale of terror, now, their turbulency tells!
	In the startled ear of night
	How they scream out their affright!
	Too much horrified to speak,
	They can only shriek, shriek,
	Out of tune,
	In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
	In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire,
	Leaping higher, higher, higher,
	With a desperate desire,
	And a resolute endeavor,
	Now-- now to sit or never,
	By the side of the pale-faced moon.
	Oh, the bells, bells, bells!
	What a tale their terror tells
	Of Despair!
	How they clang, and clash, and roar!
	What a horror they outpour
	On the bosom of the palpitating air!
	Yet the ear it fully knows,
	By the twanging,
	And the clanging,
	How the danger ebbs and flows:
	Yet the ear distinctly tells,
	In the jangling,
	And the wrangling,
	How the danger sinks and swells,
	By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells--
	Of the bells--
	Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	In the clamor and the clangor of the bells!
	
	
	IV
	
	Hear the tolling of the bells--
	Iron Bells!
	What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!
	In the silence of the night,
	How we shiver with affright
	At the melancholy menace of their tone!
	For every sound that floats
	From the rust within their throats
	Is a groan.
	And the people-- ah, the people--
	They that dwell up in the steeple,
	All Alone
	And who, tolling, tolling, tolling,
	In that muffled monotone,
	Feel a glory in so rolling
	On the human heart a stone-
	They are neither man nor woman-
	They are neither brute nor human-
	They are Ghouls:
	And their king it is who tolls;
	And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
	Rolls
	A paean from the bells!
	And his merry bosom swells
	With the paean of the bells!
	And he dances, and he yells;
	Keeping time, time, time,
	In a sort of Runic rhyme,
	To the paean of the bells--
	Of the bells:
	Keeping time, time, time,
	In a sort of Runic rhyme,
	To the throbbing of the bells--
	Of the bells, bells, bells--
	To the sobbing of the bells;
	Keeping time, time, time,
	As he knells, knells, knells,
	In a happy Runic rhyme,
	To the rolling of the bells--
	Of the bells, bells, bells:
	To the tolling of the bells,
	Of the bells, bells, bells, bells--
	Bells, bells, bells-
	To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.



3. THE CITY IN THE SEA

	Lo! Death has reared himself a throne
	In a strange city lying alone
	Far down within the dim West,
	Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best
	Have gone to their eternal rest.
	There shrines and palaces and towers
	(Time-eaten towers that tremble not!)
	Resemble nothing that is ours.
	Around, by lifting winds forgot,
	Resignedly beneath the sky
	The melancholy waters lie.
	No rays from the holy heaven come down
	On the long night-time of that town;
	But light from out the lurid sea
	Streams up the turrets silently--
	Gleams up the pinnacles far and free--
	Up domes--up spires--up kingly halls--
	Up fanes--up Babylon-like walls--
	Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers
	Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers--
	Up many and many a marvellous shrine
	Whose wreathed friezes intertwine
	The viol, the violet, and the vine.
	Resignedly beneath the sky
	The melancholy waters lie.
	So blend the turrets and shadows there
	That all seem pendulous in air,
	While from a proud tower in the town
	Death looks gigantically down.
	There open fanes and gaping graves
	Yawn level with the luminous waves;
	But not the riches there that lie
	In each idol’s diamond eye--
	Not the gaily-jewelled dead
	Tempt the waters from their bed;
	For no ripples curl, alas!
	Along that wilderness of glass--
	No swellings tell that winds may be
	Upon some far-off happier sea--
	No heavings hint that winds have been
	On seas less hideously serene.
	But lo, a stir is in the air!
	The wave--there is a movement there!
	As if the towers had thrust aside,
	In slightly sinking, the dull tide--
	As if their tops had feebly given
	A void within the filmy Heaven.
	The waves have now a redder glow--
	The hours are breathing faint and low--
	And when, amid no earthly moans,
	Down, down that town shall settle hence,
	Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,
	Shall do it reverence.



4. THE CONQUEROR WORM

	Lo! ‘tis a gala night
	Within the lonesome latter years.
	An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
	In veils, and drowned in tears,
	Sit in a theatre to see
	A play of hopes and fears
	While the orchestra breathes fitfully
	The music of the spheres.
	Mimes, in the form of God on high,
	Mutter and mumble low,
	And hither and thither fly;
	Mere puppets they, who come and go
	At bidding of vast formless things
	That shift the scenery to and fro,
	Flapping from out their condor wings
	Invisible Woe.
	That motley drama--oh, be sure
	It shall not be forgot!
	With its Phantom chased for evermore
	By a crowd that seize it not,
	Through a circle that ever returneth in
	To the self-same spot;
	And much of Madness, and more of Sin,
	And Horror the soul of the plot.
	But see amid the mimic rout
	A crawling shape intrude:
	A blood-red thing that writhes from out
	The scenic solitude!
	It writhes--it writhes!--with mortal pangs
	The mimes become its food,
	And seraphs sob at vermin fangs
	In human gore imbued.
	Out--out are the lights--out all!
	And over each quivering form
	The curtain, a funeral pall,
	Comes down with the rush of a storm,
	While the angels, all pallid and wan,
	Uprising, unveiling, affirm
	That the play is the tragedy, ``Man,‘’
	And the hero, the Conqueror Worm.



5. A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM

	TAKE this kiss upon the brow!
	And, in parting from you now,
	Thus much let me avow--
	You are not wrong, who deem
	That my days have been a dream;
	Yet if hope has flown away
	In a night, or in a day,
	In a vision, or in none,
	Is it therefore the less gone?
	All that we see or seem
	Is but a dream within a dream.
	
	I stand amid the roar
	Of a surf-tormented shore,
	And I hold within my hand
	Grains of the golden sand--
	How few! yet how they creep
	Through my fingers to the deep,
	While I weep--while I weep!
	O God! can I not grasp
	Them with a tighter clasp?
	O God! can I not save
	One from the pitiless wave?
	Is all that we see or seem
	But a dream within a dream?



6. ELDORADO

	Gaily bedight, 
	  A gallant knight, 
	In sunshine and in shadow,   
	  Had journeyed long,   
	  Singing a song, 
	In search of Eldorado. 
	
	  But he grew old-- 
	  This knight so bold--   
	And o’er his heart a shadow--   
	  Fell as he found 
	  No spot of ground 
	That looked like Eldorado. 
	
	  And, as his strength   
	  Failed him at length, 
	He met a pilgrim shadow--   
	  ‘Shadow,’ said he,   
	  ‘Where can it be-- 
	This land of Eldorado?’ 
	
	  ‘Over the Mountains 
	  Of the Moon, 
	Down the Valley of the Shadow,   
	  Ride, boldly ride,’ 
	  The shade replied,-- 
	‘If you seek for Eldorado!’



7. THE FOREST REVERIE

	‘Tis said that when
	The hands of men
	Tamed this primeval wood,
	And hoary trees with groans of woe,
	Like warriors by an unknown foe,
	Were in their strength subdued,
	The virgin Earth Gave instant birth
	To springs that ne’er did flow
	That in the sun Did rivulets run,
	And all around rare flowers did blow
	The wild rose pale Perfumed the gale
	And the queenly lily adown the dale
	(Whom the sun and the dew
	And the winds did woo),
	With the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew.
	So when in tears
	The love of years
	Is wasted like the snow,
	And the fine fibrils of its life
	By the rude wrong of instant strife
	Are broken at a blow
	Within the heart
	Do springs upstart
	Of which it doth now know,
	And strange, sweet dreams,
	Like silent streams
	That from new fountains overflow,
	With the earlier tide
	Of rivers glide
	Deep in the heart whose hope has died--
	Quenching the fires its ashes hide,--
	Its ashes, whence will spring and grow
	Sweet flowers, ere long,
	The rare and radiant flowers of song!



8. THE HAUNTED PALACE

	I
	
	In the greenest of our valleys,
	By good angels tenanted,
	Once fair and stately palace --
	Radiant palace --reared its head.
	In the monarch Thought’s dominion --
	It stood there!
	Never seraph spread a pinion
	Over fabric half so fair.
	
	
	II
	
	Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
	On its roof did float and flow;
	(This --all this --was in the olden
	Time long ago)
	And every gentle air that dallied,
	In that sweet day,
	Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
	A winged odour went away.
	
	
	III
	
	Wanderers in that happy valley
	Through two luminous windows saw
	Spirits moving musically
	To a lute’s well-tuned law,
	Round about a throne, where sitting
	(Porphyrogene!)
	In state his glory well befitting,
	The ruler of the realm was seen.
	
	
	IV
	
	And all with pearl and ruby glowing
	Was the fair palace door,
	Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing
	And sparkling evermore,
	A troop of Echoes whose sweet duty
	Was but to sing,
	In voices of surpassing beauty,
	The wit and wisdom of their king.
	
	
	V
	
	But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
	Assailed the monarch’s high estate;
	(Ah, let us mourn, for never morrow
	Shall dawn upon him, desolate!)
	And, round about his home, the glory
	That blushed and bloomed
	Is but a dim-remembered story
	Of the old time entombed.
	
	
	VI
	
	And travellers now within that valley,
	Through the red-litten windows, see
	Vast forms that move fantastically
	To a discordant melody;
	While, like a rapid ghastly river,
	Through the pale door,
	A hideous throng rush out forever,
	And laugh --but smile no more.



9. ISRAFEL

	_And the angel Israfel, whose heart-strings are a lute, and who has the sweetest voice of all God’s creatures._ --KORAN
	
	In Heaven a spirit doth dwell
	  “Whose heart-strings are a lute”;   
	None sing so wildly well
	As the angel Israfel,
	And the giddy stars (so legends tell),   
	Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell   
	  Of his voice, all mute.
	
	Tottering above
	  In her highest noon,
	  The enamoured moon
	Blushes with love,
	  While, to listen, the red levin   
	  (With the rapid Pleiads, even,   
	  Which were seven,)
	  Pauses in Heaven.
	
	And they say (the starry choir   
	  And the other listening things)   
	That Israfeli’s fire
	Is owing to that lyre
	  By which he sits and sings--
	The trembling living wire
	  Of those unusual strings.
	
	But the skies that angel trod,
	  Where deep thoughts are a duty,   
	Where Love’s a grown-up God,
	  Where the Houri glances are   
	Imbued with all the beauty
	  Which we worship in a star.
	
	Therefore, thou art not wrong,   
	  Israfeli, who despisest
	An unimpassioned song;
	To thee the laurels belong,
	  Best bard, because the wisest!   
	Merrily live, and long!
	
	The ecstasies above
	  With thy burning measures suit--
	Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,
	  With the fervour of thy lute--
	  Well may the stars be mute!
	
	Yes, Heaven is thine; but this
	  Is a world of sweets and sours;
	  Our flowers are merely-flowers,   
	And the shadow of thy perfect bliss
	  Is the sunshine of ours.
	
	If I could dwell
	Where Israfel
	  Hath dwelt, and he where I,
	He might not sing so wildly well
	  A mortal melody,
	While a bolder note than this might swell   
	  From my lyre within the sky.



10. LENORE

	Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!
	Let the bell toll!-- a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river;
	And, Guy de Vere, hast thou no tear?-- weep now or nevermore!
	See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!
	Come! let the burial rite be read-- the funeral song be sung!--
	An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young--
	A dirge for her the doubly dead in that she died so young.
	“Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,
	And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her-- that she died!
	How shall the ritual, then, be read?-- the requiem how be sung
	By you- by yours, the evil eye,-- by yours, the slanderous tongue
	That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?”
	Peccavimus; but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
	Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong.
	The sweet Lenore hath “gone before,“ with Hope, that flew beside,
	Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy
	bride.
	For her, the fair and debonair, that now so lowly lies,
	The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes
	The life still there, upon her hair-- the death upon her eyes.
	“Avaunt! avaunt! from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven--
	From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven--
	From grief and groan, to a golden throne, beside the King of
	Heaven!
	Let no bell toll, then,-- lest her soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
	Should catch the note as it doth float up from the damned Earth!
	And I!-- to-night my heart is light!-- no dirge will I upraise,
	But waft the angel on her flight with a Paean of old days!”



11. THE RAVEN

	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
	Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore--
	   While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
	As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
	“’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door--
	           Only this and nothing more.”
	
	   Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December;
	And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
	   Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
	   From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
	For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
	           Nameless here for evermore.
	
	   And the silken, sad, uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
	Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
	   So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
	   “’Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door--
	Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
	           This it is and nothing more.”
	
	   Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
	“Sir,” said I, “or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
	   But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
	   And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
	That I scarce was sure I heard you”--here I opened wide the door;--
	           Darkness there and nothing more.
	
	   Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
	Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
	   But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token,
	   And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, “Lenore?”
	This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, “Lenore!”--
	           Merely this and nothing more.
	
	   Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
	Soon again I heard a tapping somewhat louder than before.
	   “Surely,” said I, “surely that is something at my window lattice;
	     Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
	Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;--
	           ’Tis the wind and nothing more!”
	
	   Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
	In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore;
	   Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he;
	   But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
	Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
	           Perched, and sat, and nothing more.
	
	Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
	By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
	“Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou,” I said, “art sure no craven,
	Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore--
	Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night’s Plutonian shore!”
	           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
	
	   Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
	Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
	   For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
	   Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
	Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
	           With such name as “Nevermore.”
	
	   But the Raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only
	That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
	   Nothing farther then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
	   Till I scarcely more than muttered “Other friends have flown before--
	On the morrow he will leave me, as my Hopes have flown before.”
	           Then the bird said “Nevermore.”
	
	   Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
	“Doubtless,” said I, “what it utters is its only stock and store
	   Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
	   Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
	Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
	           Of ‘Never--nevermore’.”
	
	   But the Raven still beguiling all my fancy into smiling,
	Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird, and bust and door;
	   Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
	   Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
	What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
	           Meant in croaking “Nevermore.”
	
	   This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
	To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom’s core;
	   This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
	   On the cushion’s velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o’er,
	But whose velvet-violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o’er,
	           She shall press, ah, nevermore!
	
	   Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
	Swung by Seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
	   “Wretch,” I cried, “thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
	   Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore;
	Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe and forget this lost Lenore!”
	           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
	
	   “Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
	Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
	   Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
	   On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
	Is there--is there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!”
	           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
	
	   “Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!
	By that Heaven that bends above us--by that God we both adore--
	   Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
	   It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
	Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore.”
	           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
	
	   “Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!” I shrieked, upstarting--
	“Get thee back into the tempest and the Night’s Plutonian shore!
	   Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
	   Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
	Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!”
	           Quoth the Raven “Nevermore.”
	
	   And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
	On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
	   And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon’s that is dreaming,
	   And the lamp-light o’er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
	And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
	           Shall be lifted--nevermore!



12. SANCTA MARIA

	Sancta Maria! turn thine eyes--
	Upon the sinner’s sacrifice,
	Of fervent prayer and humble love,
	From thy holy throne above.
	At morn; at noon; at twilight dim--
	Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
	In joy and woe; in good and ill--
	Mother of God, be with me still!
	When the Hours flew brightly by,
	And not a cloud obscured the sky,
	My soul, lest it should truant be,
	Thy grace did guide to thine and thee;
	Now, when storms of Fate o’ercast
	Darkly my Present and my Past,
	Let my Future radiant shine
	With sweet hopes of thee and thine!



13. TO ONE IN PARADISE

	Thou wast that all to me, love, 
	For which my soul did pine-- 
	A green isle in the sea, love, 
	A fountain and a shrine, 
	All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers, 
	And all the flowers were mine. 
	
	Ah, dream too bright to last! 
	Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise 
	But to be overcast! 
	A voice from out the Future cries, 
	“On! on!”--but o’er the Past 
	(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies 
	Mute, motionless, aghast! 
	
	For, alas! alas! with me 
	The light of Life is o’er! 
	No more--no more--no more-- 
	(Such language holds the solemn sea 
	To the sands upon the shore) 
	Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree, 
	Or the stricken eagle soar! 
	
	And all my days are trances, 
	And all my nightly dreams 
	Are where thy grey eye glances, 
	And where thy footstep gleams-- 
	In what ethereal dances, 
	By what eternal streams. 



14. THE VALLEY OF UNREST

	_Once_ it smiled a silent dell 
	Where the people did not dwell; 
	They had gone unto the wars, 
	Trusting to the mild-eyed stars, 
	Nightly, from their azure towers, 
	To keep watch above the flowers, 
	In the midst of which all day 
	The red sun-light lazily lay. 
	Now each visitor shall confess 
	The sad valley’s restlessness. 
	Nothing there is motionless-- 
	Nothing save the airs that brood 
	Over the magic solitude. 
	Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees 
	That palpitate like the chill seas 
	Around the misty Hebrides! 
	Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven 
	That rustle through the unquiet Heaven 
	Uneasily, from morn till even, 
	Over the violets there that lie 
	In myriad types of the human eye-- 
	Over the lilies there that wave 
	And weep above a nameless grave! 
	They wave:--from out their fragrant tops 
	External dews come down in drops. 
	They weep:--from off their delicate stems 
	Perennial tears descend in gems. 

