*** Edwin Arlington Robinson (1869 - 1935)

1. DISCOVERY

	We told of him as one who should have soared 
	And seen for us the devastating light 
	Whereof there is not either day or night, 
	And shared with us the glamour of the Word 
	That fell once upon Amos to record
	For men at ease in Zion, when the sight 
	Of ills obscured aggrieved him and the might 
	Of Hamath was a warning of the Lord. 
	
	Assured somehow that he would make us wise, 
	Our pleasure was to wait; and our surprise
	Was hard when we confessed the dry return 
	Of his regret. For we were still to learn 
	That earth has not a school where we may go 
	For wisdom, or for more than we may know.



2. THE GARDEN

	There is a fenceless garden overgrown 
	With buds and blossoms and all sorts of leaves; 
	And once, among the roses and the sheaves, 
	The Gardener and I were there alone. 
	He led me to the plot where I had thrown
	The fennel of my days on wasted ground, 
	And in that riot of sad weeds I found 
	The fruitage of a life that was my own. 
	
	My life! Ah, yes, there was my life, indeed! 
	And there were all the lives of humankind;
	And they were like a book that I could read, 
	Whose every leaf, miraculously signed, 
	Outrolled itself from Thought’s eternal seed. 
	Love-rooted in God’s garden of the mind.



3. THE GIFT OF GOD

	Blessed with a joy that only she
	Of all alive shall ever know,
	She wears a proud humility
	For what it was that willed it so--
	That her degree should be so great
	Among the favoured of the Lord
	That she may scarcely bear the weight
	Of her bewildering reward.
	
	As one apart, immune, alone,
	Or featured for the shining ones,
	And like to none that she has known
	Of other women’s other sons--
	The firm fruition of her need,
	He shines anointed; and he blurs
	Her vision, till it seems indeed
	A sacrilege to call him hers.
	
	She fears a little for so much
	Of what is best, and hardly dares
	To think of him as one to touch
	With aches, indignities, and cares;
	She sees him rather at the goal,
	Still shining; and her dream foretells
	The proper shining of a soul
	Where nothing ordinary dwells.
	
	Perchance a canvass of the town
	Would find him far from flags and shouts,
	And leave him only the renown
	Of many smiles and many doubts;
	Perchance the crude and common tongue
	Would havoc strangely with his worth;
	But she, with innocence unwrung,
	Would read his name around the earth.
	
	And others, knowing how this youth
	Would shine, if love could make him great,
	When caught and tortured for the truth
	Would only writhe and hesitate;
	While she, arranging for his days
	What centuries could not fulfil,
	Transmutes him with her faith and praise,
	And has him shining where she will.
	
	She crowns him with her gratefulness,
	And says again that life is good;
	And should the gift of God be less
	In him than in her motherhood,
	His fame, though vague, will not be small
	As upward through her dream he fares,
	Half clouded with a crimson fall
	Of roses thrown on marble stairs.



4. THE HOUSE ON THE HILL

	They are all gone away, 
	The house is shut and still, 
	There is nothing more to say. 
	
	Through broken walls and gray 
	The winds blow bleak and shrill: 
	They are all gone away. 
	
	Nor is there one today 
	To speak them good or ill: 
	There is nothing more to say. 
	
	Why is it then we stray 
	Around the sunken sill? 
	They are all gone away. 
	
	And our poor fancy-play 
	For them is wasted skill: 
	There is nothing more to say. 
	
	There is ruin and decay 
	In the House on the Hill 
	They are all gone away, 
	There is nothing more to say.



5. LATE SUMMER

	Confused, he found her lavishing feminine 
	Gold upon clay, and found her inscrutable; 
	And yet she smiled. Why, then, should horrors 
	Be as they were, without end, her playthings? 
	
	And why were dead years hungrily telling her
	Lies of the dead, who told them again to her? 
	If now she knew, there might be kindness 
	Clamoring yet where a faith lay stifled. 
	
	A little faith in him, and the ruinous 
	Past would be for time to annihilate,
	And wash out, like a tide that washes 
	Out of the sand what a child has drawn there. 
	
	God, what a shining handful of happiness, 
	Made out of days and out of eternities, 
	Were now the pulsing end of patience--
	Could he but have what a ghost had stolen! 
	
	What was a man before him, or ten of them, 
	While he was here alive who could answer them, 
	And in their teeth fling confirmations 
	Harder than agates against an egg-shell?
	
	But now the man was dead, and would come again 
	Never, though she might honor ineffably 
	The flimsy wraith of him she conjured 
	Out of a dream with his wand of absence. 
	
	And if the truth were now but a mummery,
	Meriting pride’s implacable irony, 
	So much the worse for pride. Moreover, 
	Save her or fail, there was conscience always. 
	
	Meanwhile, a few misgivings of innocence, 
	Imploring to be sheltered and credited,
	Were not amiss when she revealed them. 
	Whether she struggled or not, he saw them. 
	
	Also, he saw that while she was hearing him 
	Her eyes had more and more of the past in them; 
	And while he told what cautious honor
	Told him was all he had best be sure of, 
	
	He wondered once or twice, inadvertently, 
	Where shifting winds were driving his argosies, 
	Long anchored and as long unladen, 
	Over the foam for the golden chances.
	
	“If men were not for killing so carelessly, 
	And women were for wiser endurances,” 
	He said, “we might have yet a world here 
	Fitter for Truth to be seen abroad in; 
	
	“If Truth were not so strange in her nakedness,
	And we were less forbidden to look at it, 
	We might not have to look.” He stared then 
	Down at the sand where the tide threw forward 
	
	Its cold, unconquered lines, that unceasingly 
	Foamed against hope, and fell. He was calm enough,
	Although he knew he might be silenced 
	Out of all calm; and the night was coming. 
	
	“I climb for you the peak of his infamy 
	That you may choose your fall if you cling to it. 
	No more for me unless you say more.
	All you have left of a dream defends you: 
	
	“The truth may be as evil an augury 
	As it was needful now for the two of us. 
	We cannot have the dead between us. 
	Tell me to go, and I go.”--She pondered:
	
	“What you believe is right for the two of us 
	Makes it as right that you are not one of us. 
	If this be needful truth you tell me, 
	Spare me, and let me have lies hereafter.” 
	
	She gazed away where shadows were covering
	The whole cold ocean’s healing indifference. 
	No ship was coming. When the darkness 
	Fell, she was there, and alone, still gazing.



6. MONADNOCK THROUGH THE TREES

	Before there was in Egypt any sound 
	Of those who reared a more prodigious means 
	For the self-heavy sleep of kings and queens 
	Than hitherto had mocked the most renowned,--
	Unvisioned here and waiting to be found,
	Alone, amid remote and older scenes, 
	You loomed above ancestral evergreens 
	Before there were the first of us around. 
	
	And when the last of us, if we know how, 
	See farther from ourselves than we do now,
	Assured with other sight than heretofore 
	That we have done our mortal best and worst,--
	Your calm will be the same as when the first 
	Assyrians went howling south to war.



7. THE PITY OF THE LEAVES

	Vengeful across the cold November moors, 
	Loud with ancestral shame there came the bleak 
	Sad wind that shrieked, and answered with a shriek, 
	Reverberant through lonely corridors. 
	The old man heard it; and he heard, perforce,
	Words out of lips that were no more to speak--
	Words of the past that shook the old man’s cheek 
	Like dead, remembered footsteps on old floors. 
	
	And then there were the leaves that plagued him so! 
	The brown, thin leaves that on the stones outside
	Skipped with a freezing whisper. Now and then 
	They stopped, and stayed there--just to let him know 
	How dead they were; but if the old man cried, 
	They fluttered off like withered souls of men.



8. RICHARD CORY

	Whenever Richard Cory went down town, 
	We people on the pavement looked at him: 
	He was a gentleman from sole to crown, 
	Clean favored, and imperially slim. 
	
	And he was always quietly arrayed, 
	And he was always human when he talked; 
	But still he fluttered pulses when he said, 
	‘Good-morning,’ and he glittered when he walked. 
	
	And he was rich--yes, richer than a king--
	And admirably schooled in every grace: 
	In fine, we thought that he was everything 
	To make us wish that we were in his place. 
	
	So on we worked, and waited for the light, 
	And went without the meat, and cursed the bread; 
	And Richard Cory, one calm summer night, 
	Went home and put a bullet through his head.



9. STAFFORD’S CABIN

	Once there was a cabin here, and once there was a man; 
	And something happened here before my memory began. 
	Time has made the two of them the fuel of one flame 
	And all we have of them is now a legend and a name. 
	
	All I have to say is what an old man said to me,
	And that would seem to be as much as there will ever be. 
	“Fifty years ago it was we found it where it sat.”--
	And forty years ago it was old Archibald said that. 
	
	“An apple tree that’s yet alive saw something, I suppose, 
	Of what it was that happened there, and what no mortal knows.
	Some one on the mountain heard far off a master shriek, 
	And then there was a light that showed the way for men to seek. 
	
	“We found it in the morning with an iron bar behind, 
	And there were chains around it; but no search could ever find, 
	Either in the ashes that were left, or anywhere,
	A sign to tell of who or what had been with Stafford there. 
	
	“Stafford was a likely man with ideas of his own--
	Though I could never like the kind that likes to live alone; 
	And when you met, you found his eyes were always on your shoes, 
	As if they did the talking when he asked you for the news.
	
	“That’s all, my son. Were I to talk for half a hundred years 
	I’d never clear away from there the cloud that never clears. 
	We buried what was left of it,—the bar, too, and the chains; 
	And only for the apple tree there’s nothing that remains.” 
	
	Forty years ago it was I heard the old man say,
	“That’s all, my son.”--And here again I find the place to-day, 
	Deserted and told only by the tree that knows the most, 
	And overgrown with golden-rod as if there were no ghost.

