*** Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828 - 1882)

1. THE CLOUD CONFINES

	The day is dark and the night
	        To him that would search their heart;
	        No lips of cloud that will part
	Nor morning song in the light:
	        Only, gazing alone,
	        To him wild shadows are shown,
	        Deep under deep unknown
	And height above unknown height.
	               Still we say as we go,
	                       “Strange to think by the way,
	               Whatever there is to know,
	                       That shall we know one day.”
	
	The Past is over and fled;
	        Nam’d new, we name it the old;
	        Thereof some tale hath been told,
	But no word comes from the dead;
	        Whether at all they be,
	        Or whether as bond or free,
	        Or whether they too were we,
	Or by what spell they have sped.
	               Still we say as we go,
	                       “Strange to think by the way,
	               Whatever there is to know,
	                       That shall we know one day.”
	
	What of the heart of hate
	        That beats in thy breast, O Time?
	        Red strife from the furthest prime,
	And anguish of fierce debate;
	        War that shatters her slain,
	        And peace that grinds them as grain,
	        And eyes fix’d ever in vain
	On the pitiless eyes of Fate.
	               Still we say as we go,
	                       “Strange to think by the way,
	               Whatever there is to know,
	                       That shall we know one day.”
	
	What of the heart of love
	        That bleeds in thy breast, O Man?i
	        Thy kisses snatch’d ‘neath the ban
	Of fangs that mock them above;
	        Thy bells prolong’d unto knells,
	        Thy hope that a breath dispels,
	        Thy bitter forlorn farewells
	And the empty echoes thereof?
	               Still we say as we go,
	                       “Strange to think by the way,
	               Whatever there is to know,
	                       That shall we know one day.”
	
	The sky leans dumb on the sea,
	        Aweary with all its wings;
	        And oh! the song the sea sings
	Is dark everlastingly.
	        Our past is clean forgot,
	        Our present is and is not,
	        Our future’s a seal’d seedplot,
	And what betwixt them are we?i
	               We who say as we go,
	                       “Strange to think by the way,
	               Whatever there is to know,
	                          That shall we know one day.”



2. THE HONEYSUCKLE

	I PLUCKED a honeysuckle where
	    The hedge on high is quick with thorn,
	    And climbing for the prize, was torn,
	And fouled my feet in quag-water;
	    And by the thorns and by the wind
	    The blossom that I took was thinn’d,
	And yet I found it sweet and fair.
	Thence to a richer growth I came,
	    Where, nursed in mellow intercourse,
	The honeysuckles sprang by scores,
	Not harried like my single stem,
	    All virgin lamps of scent and dew.
	    So from my hand that first I threw,
	Yet plucked not any more of them.



3. INSOMNIA

	Thin are the night-skirts left behind
	By daybreak hours that onward creep,
	And thin, alas! the shred of sleep
	That wavers with the spirit’s wind:
	But in half-dreams that shift and roll
	And still remember and forget,
	My soul this hour has drawn your soul
	A little nearer yet.
	
	Our lives, most dear, are never near,
	Our thoughts are never far apart,
	Though all that draws us heart to heart
	Seems fainter now and now more clear.
	To-night Love claims his full control,
	And with desire and with regret
	My soul this hour has drawn your soul
	A little nearer yet.
	
	Is there a home where heavy earth
	Melts to bright air that breathes no pain,
	Where water leaves no thirst again
	And springing fire is Love’s new birth?
	If faith long bound to one true goal
	May there at length its hope beget,
	My soul that hour shall draw your soul
	For ever nearer yet.



4. A LAST CONFESSION

	Our Lombard country-girls along the coast
	Wear daggers in their garters: for they know
	That they might hate another girl to death
	Or meet a German lover. Such a knife
	I bought her, with a hilt of horn and pearl.
	Father, you cannot know of all my thoughts
	That day in going to meet her,--that last day
	For the last time, she said;--of all the love
	And all the hopeless hope that she might change
	And go back with me. Ah! and everywhere,
	At places we both knew along the road,
	Some fresh shape of herself as once she was
	Grew present at my side; until it seemed--
	So close they gathered round me--they would all
	Be with me when I reached the spot at last,
	To plead my cause with her against herself
	So changed. O Father, if you knew all this
	You cannot know, then you would know too, Father,
	And only then, if God can pardon me.
	What can be told I’ll tell, if you will hear.
	I passed a village-fair upon my road,
	And thought, being empty-handed, I would take
	Some little present: such might prove, I said,
	Either a pledge between us, or (God help me!)
	A parting gift. And there it was I bought
	The knife I spoke of, such as women wear.
	That day, some three hours afterwards, I found
	For certain, it must be a parting gift.
	And, standing silent now at last, I looked
	Into her scornful face; and heard the sea
	Still trying hard to din into my ears
	Some speech it knew which still might change her heart,
	If only it could make me understand.
	One moment thus. Another, and her face
	Seemed further off than the last line of sea,
	So that I thought, if now she were to speak
	I could not hear her. Then again I knew
	All, as we stood together on the sand
	At Iglio, in the first thin shade o’ the hills.
	“Take it,” I said, and held it out to her,
	While the hilt glanced within my trembling hold;
	“Take it and keep it for my sake,” I said.
	Her neck unbent not, neither did her eyes
	Move, nor her foot left beating of the sand;
	Only she put it by from her and laughed.
	Father, you hear my speech and not her laugh;
	But God heard that. Will God remember all?
	It was another laugh than the sweet sound
	Which rose from her sweet childish heart, that day
	Eleven years before, when first I found her
	Alone upon the hill-side; and her curls
	Shook down in the warm grass as she looked up
	Out of her curls in my eyes bent to hers.
	She might have served a painter to pourtray
	That heavenly child which in the latter days
	Shall walk between the lion and the lamb.
	I had been for nights in hiding, worn and sick
	And hardly fed; and so her words at first
	Seemed fiftul like the talking of the trees
	And voices in the air that knew my name.
	And I remember that I sat me down
	Upon the slope with her, and thought the world
	Must be all over or had never been,
	We seemed there so alone. And soon she told me
	Her parents both were gone away from her.
	I thought perhaps she meant that they had died;
	But when I asked her this, she looked again
	Into my face and said that yestereve
	They kissed her long, and wept and made her weep,
	And gave her all the bread they had with them,
	And then had gone together up the hill
	Where we were sitting now, and had walked on
	Into the great red light; “and so,” she said,
	“I have come up here too; and when this evening
	They step out of the light as they stepped in,
	I shall be here to kiss them.” And she laughed.
	Then I bethought me suddenly of the famine;
	And how the church-steps throughout all the town,
	When last I had been there a month ago,
	Swarmed with starved folk; and how the bread was weighed
	By Austrians armed; and women that I knew
	For wives and mothers walked the public street,
	Saying aloud that if their husbands feared
	To snatch the children’s food, themselves would stay
	Till they had earned it there. So then this child
	Was piteous to me; for all told me then
	Her parents must have left her to God’s chance,
	To man’s or to the Church’s charity,
	Because of the great famine, rather than
	To watch her growing thin between their knees.
	With that, God took my mother’s voice and spoke,
	And sights and sounds came back and things long since,
	And all my childhood found me on the hills;
	And so I took her with me.
	I was young.
	Scarce man then, Father: but the cause which gave
	The wounds I die of now had brought me then
	Some wounds already; and I lived alone,
	As any hiding hunted man must live.
	It was no easy thing to keep a child
	In safety; for herself it was not safe,
	And doubled my own danger: but I knew
	That God would help me.
	Yet a little while
	Pardon me, Father, if I pause. I think
	I have been speaking to you of some matters
	There was no need to speak of, have I not?
	You do not know how clearly those things stood
	Within my mind, which I have spoken of,
	Nor how they strove for utterance. Life all past
	Is like the sky when the sun sets in it,
	Clearest where furthest off.
	I told you how
	She scorned my parting gift and laughed. And yet
	A woman’s laugh’s another thing sometimes:
	I think they laugh in Heaven. I know last night
	I dreamed I saw into the garden of God,
	Where women walked whose painted images
	I have seen with candles round them in the church.
	They bent this way and that, one to another,
	Playing: and over the long golden hair
	Of each there floated like a ring of fire
	Which when she stooped stooped with her, and when she rose
	Rose with her. Then a breeze flew in among them,
	As if a window had been opened in heaven
	For God to give His blessing from, before
	This world of ours should set; (for in my dream
	I thought our world was setting, and the sun
	Flared, a spent taper; ) and beneath that gust
	The rings of light quivered like forest-leaves.
	Then all the blessed maidens who were there
	Stood up together, as it were a voice
	That called them; and they threw their tresses back,
	And smote their palms, and all laughed up at once,
	For the strong heavenly joy they had in them
	To hear God bless the world. Wherewith I woke:
	And looking round, I saw as usual
	That she was standing there with her long locks
	Pressed to her side; and her laugh ended theirs.
	For always when I see her now, she laughs.
	And yet her childish laughter haunts me too,
	The life of this dead terror; as in days
	When she, a child, dwelt with me. I must tell
	Something of those days yet before the end.
	I brought her from the city--one such day
	When she was still a merry loving child,--
	The earliest gift I mind my giving her;
	A little image of a flying Love
	Made of our coloured glass-ware, in his hands
	A dart of gilded metal and a torch.
	And him she kissed and me, and fain would know
	Why were his poor eyes blindfold, why the wings
	And why the arrow. What I knew I told
	Of Venus and of Cupid,--strange old tales.
	And when she heard that he could rule the loves
	Of men and women, still she shook her head
	And wondered; and, “Nay, nay,” she murmured still,
	“So strong, and he a younger child than I!”
	And then she’d have me fix him on the wall
	Fronting her little bed; and then again
	She needs must fix him there herself, because
	I gave him to her and she loved him so,
	And he should make her love me better yet,
	If women loved the more, the more they grew.
	But the fit place upon the wall was high
	For her, and so I held her in my arms:
	And each time that the heavy pruning-hook
	I gave her for a hammer slipped away
	As it would often, still she laughed and laughed
	And kissed and kissed me. But amid her mirth,
	Just as she hung the image on the nail,
	It slipped and all its fragments strewed the ground:
	And as it fell she screamed, for in her hand
	The dart had entered deeply and drawn blood.
	And so her laughter turned to tears: and “Oh!”
	I said, the while I bandaged the small hand,--
	“That I should be the first to make you bleed,
	Who love and love and love you!”--kissing still
	The fingers till I got her safe to bed.
	And still she sobbed,--“not for the pain at all,”
	She said, “but for the Love, the poor good Love
	You gave me.” So she cried herself to sleep.
	Another later thing comes back to me.
	‘Twas in those hardest foulest days of all,
	When still from his shut palace, sitting clean
	Above the splash of blood, old Metternich
	(May his soul die, and never-dying worms
	Feast on its pain for ever! ) used to thin
	His year’s doomed hundreds daintily, each month
	Thirties and fifties. This time, as I think,
	Was when his thrift forbad the poor to take
	That evil brackish salt which the dry rocks
	Keep all through winter when the sea draws in.
	The first I heard of it was a chance shot
	In the street here and there, and on the stones
	A stumbling clatter as of horse hemmed round.
	Then, when she saw me hurry out of doors,
	My gun slung at my shoulder and my knife
	Stuck in my girdle, she smoothed down my hair
	And laughed to see me look so brave, and leaped
	Up to my neck and kissed me. She was still
	A child; and yet that kiss was on my lips
	So hot all day where the smoke shut us in.
	For now, being always with her, the first love
	I had--the father’s, brother’s love--was changed,
	I think, in somewise; like a holy thought
	Which is a prayer before one knows of it.
	The first time I perceived this, I remember,
	Was once when after hunting I came home
	Weary, and she brought food and fruit for me,
	And sat down at my feet upon the floor
	Leaning against my side. But when I felt
	Her sweet head reach from that low seat of hers
	So high as to be laid upon my heart,
	I turned and looked upon my darling there
	And marked for the first time how tall she was;
	And my heart beat with so much violence
	Under her cheek, I thought she could not choose
	But wonder at it soon and ask me why;
	And so I bade her rise and eat with me.
	And when, remembering all and counting back
	The time, I made out fourteen years for her
	And told her so, she gazed at me with eyes
	As of the sky and sea on a grey day,
	And drew her long hands through her hair, and asked me
	If she was not a woman; and then laughed:
	And as she stooped in laughing, I could see
	Beneath the growing throat the breasts half-globed
	Like folded lilies deepset in the stream.
	Yes, let me think of her as then; for so
	Her image, Father, is not like the sights
	Which come when you are gone. She had a mouth
	Made to bring death to life,--the underlip
	Sucked in, as if it strove to kiss itself.
	Her face was pearly pale, as when one stoops
	Over wan water; and the dark crisped hair
	And the hair’s shadow made it paler still:--
	Deep-serried locks, the dimness of the cloud
	Where the moon’s gaze is set in eddying gloom.
	Her body bore her neck as the tree’s stem
	Bears the top branch; and as the branch sustains
	The flower of the year’s pride, her high neck bore
	That face made wonderful with night and day.
	Her voice was swift, yet ever the last words
	Fell lingeringly; and rounded finger-tips
	She had, that clung a little where they touched
	And then were gone o’ the instant. Her great eyes,
	That sometimes turned half dizzily beneath
	The passionate lids, as faint, when she would speak,
	Had also in them hidden springs of mirth,
	Which under the dark lashes evermore
	Shook to her laugh, as when a bird flies low
	Between the water and the willow-leaves,
	And the shade quivers till he wins the light.
	I was a moody comrade to her then,
	For all the love I bore her. Italy,
	The weeping desolate mother, long has claimed
	Her sons’ strong arms to lean on, and their hands
	To lop the poisonous thicket from her path,
	Cleaving her way to light. And from her need
	Had grown the fashion of my whole poor life
	Which I was proud to yield her, as my father
	Had yielded his. And this had come to be
	A game to play, a love to clasp, a hate
	To wreak, all things together that a man
	Needs for his blood to ripen; till at times
	All else seemed shadows, and I wondered still
	To see such life pass muster and be deemed
	Time’s bodily substance. In those hours, no doubt,
	To the young girl my eyes were like my soul,--
	Dark wells of death-in-life that yearned for day.
	Sig.
	And though she ruled me always, I remember
	That once when I was thus and she still kept
	Leaping about the place and laughing, I
	Did almost chide her; whereupon she knelt
	And putting her two hands into my breast
	Sang me a song. Are these tears in my eyes?
	‘Tis long since I have wept for anything.
	I thought that song forgotten out of mind;
	And now, just as I spoke of it, it came
	All back. It is but a rude thing, ill rhymed,
	Such as a blind man chaunts and his dog hears
	Holding the platter, when the children run
	To merrier sport and leave him. Thus it goes:--
	La bella donna*
	Piangendo disse:
	“Come son fisse
	Le stelle in cielo!
	Quel fiato anelo
	Dello stanco sole,
	Quanto m’ assonna!
	E la luna, macchiata
	Come uno specchio
	Logoro e vecchio,--
	Faccia affannata,
	Che cosa vuole?
	“Chè stelle, luna, e sole,
	Ciascun m’ annoja
	E m’ annojano insieme;
	Non me ne preme
	Nè ci prendo gioja.
	E veramente,
	Che le spalle sien franche
	E la braccia bianche
	She wept, sweet lady,
	And said in weeping:
	“What spell is keeping
	The stars so steady?
	Why does the power
	Of the sun’s noon-hour
	To sleep so move me?
	And the moon in heaven,
	Stained where she passes
	As a worn-out glass is,--
	Wearily driven,
	Why walks she above me?
	“Stars, moon, and sun too,
	I’m tired of either
	And all together!
	Whom speak they unto
	That I should listen?
	For very surely,
	Though my arms and shoulders
	Dazzle beholders,
	And my eyes glisten,
	All’s nothing purely!
	What are words said for
	At all about them,
	If he they are made for
	Can do without them?”
	She laughed, sweet lady,
	And said in laughing:
	“His hand clings half in
	My own already!
	Oh! do you love me?
	Oh! speak of passion
	In no new fashion,
	No loud inveighings,
	But the old sayings
	You once said of me.
	“You said: ‘As summer,
	Through boughs grown brittle,
	Comes back a little
	Ere frosts benumb her,--
	So bring’st thou to me
	All leaves and flowers,
	Though autumn’s gloomy
	To-day in the bowers.’
	“Oh! does he love me,
	When my voice teaches
	The very speeches
	He then spoke of me?
	Alas! what flavour
	Still with me lingers?”
	(But she laughed as my kisses
	Glowed in her fingers
	With love’s old blisses.)
	“Oh! what one favour
	Remains to woo him,
	Whose whole poor savour
	Belongs not to him?”
	E il seno caldo e tondo,
	Non mi fa niente.
	Che cosa al mondo
	Posso più far di questi
	Se non piacciono a te, come dicesti?”
	La donna rise
	E riprese ridendo:--
	“Questa mano che prendo
	È dunque mia?
	Tu m’ ami dunque?
	Dimmelo ancora,
	Non in modo qualunque,
	Ma le parole
	Belle e precise
	Che dicesti pria.
	‘Siccome suole
	La state talora
	(Dicesti) un qualche istante
	Tornare innanzi inverno,
	Così tu fai ch’ io scerno
	Le foglie tutte quante,
	Ben ch’ io certo tenessi
	Per passato l’ autunno.’
	“Eccolo il mio alunno!
	Io debbo insegnargli
	Quei cari detti istessi
	Ch’ ei mi disse una volta!
	Oimè! Che cosa dargli,”
	(Ma ridea piano piano
	Dei baci in sulla mano,)
	“Ch’ ei non m’abbia da lungo tempo tolta?”
	That I should sing upon this bed!--with you
	To listen, and such words still left to say!
	Yet was it I that sang? The voice seemed hers,
	As on the very day she sang to me;
	When, having done, she took out of my hand
	Something that I had played with all the while
	And laid it down beyond my reach; and so
	Turning my face round till it fronted hers,--
	“Weeping or laughing, which was best?” she said.
	But these are foolish tales. How should I show
	The heart that glowed then with love’s heat, each day
	More and more brightly?--when for long years now
	The very flame that flew about the heart,
	And gave it fiery wings, has come to be
	The lapping blaze of hell’s environment
	Whose tongues all bid the molten heart despair.
	Yet one more thing comes back on me to-night
	Which I may tell you: for it bore my soul
	Dread firstlings of the brood that rend it now.
	It chanced that in our last year’s wanderings
	We dwelt at Monza, far away from home,
	If home we had: and in the Duomo there
	I sometimes entered with her when she prayed.
	An image of Our Lady stands there, wrought
	In marble by some great Italian hand
	In the great days when she and Italy
	Sat on one throne together: and to her
	And to none else my loved one told her heart.
	She was a woman then; and as she knelt,--
	Her sweet brow in the sweet brow’s shadow there,--
	They seemed two kindred forms whereby our land
	(Whose work still serves the world for miracle)
	Made manifest herself in womanhood.
	Father, the day I speak of was the first
	For weeks that I had borne her company
	Into the Duomo; and those weeks had been
	Much troubled, for then first the glimpses came
	Of some impenetrable restlessness
	Growing in her to make her changed and cold.
	And as we entered there that day, I bent
	My eyes on the fair Image, and I said
	Within my heart, “Oh turn her heart to me!”
	And so I left her to her prayers, and went
	To gaze upon the pride of Monza’s shrine,
	Where in the sacristy the light still falls
	Upon the Iron Crown of Italy,
	On whose crowned heads the day has closed, nor yet
	The daybreak gilds another head to crown.
	But coming back, I wondered when I saw
	That the sweet Lady of her prayers now stood
	Alone without her; until further off,
	Before some new Madonna gaily decked,
	Tinselled and gewgawed, a slight German toy,
	I saw her kneel, still praying. At my step
	She rose, and side by side we left the church.
	I was much moved, and sharply questioned her
	Of her transferred devotion; but she seemed
	Stubborn and heedless; till she lightly laughed
	And said: “The old Madonna? Aye indeed,
	She had my old thoughts,--this one has my new.”
	Then silent to the soul I held my way:
	And from the fountains of the public place
	Unto the pigeon-haunted pinnacles,
	Bright wings and water winnowed the bright air;
	And stately with her laugh’s subsiding smile
	She went, with clear-swayed waist and towering neck
	And hands held light before her; and the face
	Which long had made a day in my life’s night
	Was night in day to me; as all men’s eyes
	Turned on her beauty, and she seemed to tread
	Beyond my heart to the world made for her.
	Ah there! my wounds will snatch my sense again:
	The pain comes billowing on like a full cloud
	Of thunder, and the flash that breaks from it
	Leaves my brain burning. That’s the wound he gave,
	The Austrian whose white coat I still made match
	With his white face, only the two grew red
	As suits his trade. The devil makes them wear
	White for a livery, that the blood may show
	Braver that brings them to him. So he looks
	Sheer o’er the field and knows his own at once.
	Give me a draught of water in that cup;
	My voice feels thick; perhaps you do not hear;
	But you must hear. If you mistake my words
	And so absolve me, I am sure the blessing
	Will burn my soul. If you mistake my words
	And so absolve me, Father, the great sin
	Is yours, not mine: mark this: your soul shall burn
	With mine for it. I have seen pictures where
	Souls burned with Latin shriekings in their mouths:
	Shall my end be as theirs? Nay, but I know
	‘Tis you shall shriek in Latin. Some bell rings,
	Rings through my brain: it strikes the hour in hell.
	You see I cannot, Father; I have tried,
	But cannot, as you see. These twenty times
	Beginning, I have come to the same point
	And stopped. Beyond, there are but broken words
	Which will not let you understand my tale.
	It is that then we have her with us here,
	As when she wrung her hair out in my dream
	To-night, till all the darkness reeked of it.
	Her hair is always wet, for she has kept
	Its tresses wrapped about her side for years;
	And when she wrung them round over the floor,
	I heard the blood between her fingers hiss;
	So that I sat up in my bed and screamed
	Once and again; and once to once, she laughed.
	Look that you turn not now,--she’s at your back:
	Gather your robe up, Father, and keep close,
	Or she’ll sit down on it and send you mad.
	At Iglio in the first thin shade o’ the hills
	The sand is black and red. The black was black
	When what was spilt that day sank into it,
	And the red scarcely darkened. There I stood
	This night with her, and saw the sand the same.
	What would you have me tell you? Father, father,
	How shall I make you know? You have not known
	The dreadful soul of woman, who one day
	Forgets the old and takes the new to heart,
	Forgets what man remembers, and therewith
	Forgets the man. Nor can I clearly tell
	How the change happened between her and me.
	Her eyes looked on me from an emptied heart
	When most my heart was full of her; and still
	In every corner of myself I sought
	To find what service failed her; and no less
	Than in the good time past, there all was hers.
	What do you love? Your Heaven? Conceive it spread
	For one first year of all eternity
	All round you with all joys and gifts of God;
	And then when most your soul is blent with it
	And all yields song together,--then it stands
	O’ the sudden like a pool that once gave back
	Your image, but now drowns it and is clear
	Again,--or like a sun bewitched, that burns
	Your shadow from you, and still shines in sight.
	How could you bear it? Would you not cry out,
	Among those eyes grown blind to you, those ears
	That hear no more your voice you hear the same,--
	“God! what is left but hell for company,
	But hell, hell, hell?”--until the name so breathed
	Whirled with hot wind and sucked you down in fire?
	Even so I stood the day her empty heart
	Left her place empty in our home, while yet
	I knew not why she went nor where she went
	Nor how to reach her: so I stood the day
	When to my prayers at last one sight of her
	Was granted, and I looked on heaven made pale
	With scorn, and heard heaven mock me in that laugh.
	O sweet, long sweet! Was that some ghost of you,
	Even as your ghost that haunts me now,--twin shapes
	Of fear and hatred? May I find you yet
	Mine when death wakes? Ah! be it even in flame,
	We may have sweetness yet, if you but say
	As once in childish sorrow: “Not my pain,
	My pain was nothing: oh your poor poor love,
	Your broken love!”
	My Father, have I not
	Yet told you the last things of that last day
	On which I went to meet her by the sea?
	O God, O God! but I must tell you all.
	Midway upon my journey, when I stopped
	To buy the dagger at the village fair,
	I saw two cursed rats about the place
	I knew for spies--blood-sellers both. That day
	Was not yet over; for three hours to come
	I prized my life: and so I looked around
	For safety. A poor painted mountebank
	Was playing tricks and shouting in a crowd.
	I knew he must have heard my name, so I
	Pushed past and whispered to him who I was,
	And of my danger. Straight he hustled me
	Into his booth, as it were in the trick,
	And brought me out next minute with my face
	All smeared in patches and a zany’s gown;
	And there I handed him his cups and balls
	And swung the sand-bags round to clear the ring
	For half an hour. The spies came once and looked;
	And while they stopped, and made all sights and sounds
	Sharp to my startled senses, I remember
	A woman laughed above me. I looked up
	And saw where a brown-shouldered harlot leaned
	Half through a tavern window thick with vine.
	Some man had come behind her in the room
	And caught her by her arms, and she had turned
	With that coarse empty laugh on him, as now
	He munched her neck with kisses, while the vine
	Crawled in her back.
	And three hours afterwards,
	When she that I had run all risks to meet
	Laughed as I told you, my life burned to death
	Within me, for I thought it like the laugh
	Heard at the fair. She had not left me long;
	But all she might have changed to, or might change to,
	(I know nought since--she never speaks a word--)
	Seemed in that laugh. Have I not told you yet,
	Not told you all this time what happened, Father,
	When I had offered her the little knife,
	And bade her keep it for my sake that loved her,
	And she had laughed? Have I not told you yet?
	“Take it,” I said to her the second time,
	“Take it and keep it.” And then came a fire
	That burnt my hand; and then the fire was blood,
	And sea and sky were blood and fire, and all
	The day was one red blindness; till it seemed,
	Within the whirling brain’s eclipse, that she
	Or I or all things bled or burned to death.
	And then I found her laid against my feet
	And knew that I had stabbed her, and saw still
	Her look in falling. For she took the knife
	Deep in her heart, even as I bade her then,
	And fell; and her stiff bodice scooped the sand
	Into her bosom.
	And she keeps it, see,
	Do you not see she keeps it?--there, beneath
	Wet fingers and wet tresses, in her heart.
	For look you, when she stirs her hand, it shows
	The little hilt of horn and pearl,--even such
	A dagger as our women of the coast
	Twist in their garters.
	Father, I have done:
	And from her side now she unwinds the thick
	Dark hair; all round her side it is wet through,
	But, like the sand at Iglio, does not change.
	Now you may see the dagger clearly. Father,
	I have told all: tell me at once what hope
	Can reach me still. For now she draws it out
	Slowly, and only smiles as yet: look, Father,
	She scarcely smiles: but I shall hear her laugh
	Soon, when she shows the crimson steel to God.



5. THE ORCHARD-PIT

	Piled deep below the screening apple-branch
	They lie with bitter apples in their hands:
	And some are only ancient bones that blanch,
	And some had ships that last year’s wind did launch,
	And some were yesterday the lords of lands.
	
	In the soft dell, among the apple-trees,
	High up above the hidden pit she stands,
	And there for ever sings, who gave to these,
	That lie below, her magic hour of ease,
	And those her apples holden in their hands.
	
	This in my dreams is shown me; and her hair
	Crosses my lips and draws my burning breath;
	Her song spreads golden wings upon the air,
	Life’s eyes are gleaming from her forehead fair,
	And from her breasts the ravishing eyes of Death.
	
	Men say to me that sleep hath many dreams,
	Yet I knew never but this dream alone:
	There, from a dried-up channel, once the stream’s,
	The glen slopes up; even such in sleep it seems
	As to my waking sight the place well known.
	
	My love I call her, and she loves me well:
	But I love her as in the maelstrom’s cup
	The whirled stone loves the leaf inseparable
	That clings to it round all the circling swell,
	And that the same last eddy swallows up.



6. SILENT NOON

	Your hands lie open in the long fresh grass,--
	  The finger-points look through like rosy blooms:
	  Your eyes smile peace. The pasture gleams and glooms
	‘Neath billowing skies that scatter and amass.
	All round our nest, far as the eye can pass,
	  Are golden kingcup fields with silver edge
	  Where the cow-parsley skirts the hawthorn-hedge.
	‘Tis visible silence, still as the hour-glass.
	
	Deep in the sun-searched growths the dragon-fly
	Hangs like a blue thread loosened from the sky:--
	  So this wing’d hour is dropt to us from above.
	Oh! clasp we to our hearts, for deathless dower,
	This close-companioned inarticulate hour
	  When twofold silence was the song of love.



7. SUDDEN LIGHT

	I have been here before,
	But when or how I cannot tell:
	I know the grass beyond the door,
	The sweet keen smell,
	The sighing sound, the lights around the shore.
	
	You have been mine before,--
	How long ago I may not know:
	But just when at that swallow’s soar
	Your neck turn’d so,
	Some veil did fall,--I knew it all of yore.
	
	Has this been thus before?
	And shall not thus time’s eddying flight
	Still with our lives our love restore
	In death’s despite,
	And day and night yield one delight once more?

