*** Carl Sandburg (1878 - 1967)

1. A. E. F. 

	There will be a rusty gun on the wall, sweetheart,
	The rifle grooves curling with flakes of rust.
	A spider will make a silver string nest in the
	darkest, warmest corner of it.
	The trigger and the range-finder, they too will be rusty.
	And no hands will polish the gun, and it will hang on the wall.
	Forefingers and thumbs will point casually toward it.
	It will be spoken among half-forgotten, whished-to-be-forgotten things.
	They will tell the spider: Go on, you’re doing good work.



2. THE ABRACADABRA BOYS

	The abracadabra boys--have they been in the stacks and cloisters? Have they picked up languages for throwing into chow mein poems?
	Have they been to a sea of jargons and brought back jargons? Their salutations go: Who cometh? and, It ith I cometh.
	They know postures from impostures, pistils from pustules, to hear them tell it. They foregather and make pitty pat with each other in Latin and in their private pig Latin, very ofay.
	They give with passwords. “Who cometh?” “A kumquat cometh.” “And how cometh the kumquat?” “On an abbadabba, ancient and honorable sire, ever and ever on an abbadabba.”
	Do they have fun? Sure--their fun is being what they are, like our fun is being what we are--only they are more sorry for us being what we are than we are for them being what they are.
	Pointing at you, at us, at the rabble, they sigh and say, these abracadabra boys, “They lack jargons. They fail to distinguish between pustules and pistils. They knoweth not how the kumquat cometh.”



3. ACCOMPLISHED FACTS

	Every year Emily Dickinson sent one friend
	the first arbutus bud in her garden.
	
	In a last will and testament Andrew Jackson
	remembered a friend with the gift of George
	Washington’s pocket spy-glass.
	
	Napoleon too, in a last testament, mentioned a silver
	watch taken from the bedroom of Frederick the Great,
	and passed along this trophy to a particular friend.
	
	O. Henry took a blood carnation from his coat lapel
	and handed it to a country girl starting work in a
	bean bazaar, and scribbled: “Peach blossoms may or
	may not stay pink in city dust.”
	
	So it goes. Some things we buy, some not.
	Tom Jefferson was proud of his radishes and Abe Lincoln
	blacked his own boots, and Bismarck called Berlin a wilderness of brick and newspapers.
	
	So it goes. There are accomplished facts.
	Ride, ride, ride on in the great new blimps--
	Cross unheard-of oceans, circle the planet.
	When you come back we may sit by five hollyhocks.
	We might listen to boys fighting for marbles.
	The grasshopper will look good to us.
	
	So it goes . . .



4. ADELAIDE CRAPSEY

	Among the bumble-bees in red-top hay, a freckled field of
	brown-eyed Susans dripping yellow leaves in July,
	I read your heart in a book.
	
	And your mouth of blue pansy--I know somewhere I have
	seen it rain-shattered.
	
	And I have seen a woman with her head Ang between her
	naked knees, and her head held there listening to the
	sea, the great naked sea shouldering a load of salt.
	
	And the blue pansy mouth sang to the sea:
	_Mother of God, I’m so little a thing,
	Let me sing longer,
	Only a little longer._
	
	And the sea shouldered its salt in long gray combers hauling 
	new shapes on the beach sand.



5. ALICE CORBIN IS GONE

	Alice Corbin is gone
	and the Indians tell us where.
	    She trusted the Indians
	    and they kept a trust in her
	She took a four-line Indian song 
	    and put it into English.
	You can sing it over and over and 
	    no harm done:
	
	The wind is carrying me round the sky;
	The wind is carrying me round the sky.
	    My body is here in the valley--
	The wind is carrying me round the sky.



6. ALIX

	The mare Alix breaks the world’s trotting record one day.
	I see her heels flash down the dust of an Illinois race
	track on a summer afternoon. I see the timekeepers
	put their heads together over stop-watches, and call
	to the grand stand a split second is clipped off the old
	world’s record and a new world’s record fixed.
	
	I see the mare Alix led away by men in undershirts and
	streaked faces. Dripping Alix in foam of white on
	the harness and shafts. And the men in undershirts
	kiss her ears and rub her nose, and tie blankets on
	her, and take her away to have the sweat sponged.
	
	I see the grand stand jammed with prairie people yelling
	themselves hoarse. Almost the grand stand and the
	crowd of thousands are one pair of legs and one voice
	standing up and yelling hurrah.
	
	I see the driver of Alix and the owner smothered in a fury
	of handshakes, a mob of caresses. I see the wives of
	the driver and owner smothered in a crush of white
	summer dresses and parasols.
	
	Hours later, at sundown, gray dew creeping on the sod and sheds, I see Alix again:
	_Dark, shining-velvet Alix,
	Night-sky Alix in a gray blanket,
	Led back and forth by a nigger.
	Velvet and night-eyed Alix
	With slim legs of steel._
	
	And I want to rub my nose against the nose of the mare Alix.



7. ALONE

	Naked I stood on the soft shingle of sand where the sea swept my legs with salt and wet.
	Alone I walked under the arch of night where stars fluttered between treetops in the wind.
	And a long memory it is I have how the sea and the night were kind.



8. AMONG THE RED GUNS

	_After waking at dawn one morning when the wind sang low among dry leaves in an elm_
	
	Among the red guns,
	In the hearts of soldiers
	Running free blood
	In the long, long campaign:
	    Dreams go on.
	
	Among the leather saddles,
	In the heads of soldiers
	Heavy in the wracks and kills
	Of all straight fighting:
	    Dreams go on.
	
	Among the hot muzzles,
	In the hands of soldiers
	Brought from flesh--folds of women--
	Soft amid the blood and crying
	In all your hearts and heads
	Among the guns and saddles and muzzles:
	
	    Dreams,
	Dreams go on,
	Out of the dead on their backs,
	Broken and no use any more:
	Dreams of the way and the end go on.



9. ARITHMETIC

	Arithmetic is where numbers fly like pigeons in and out of your head. 
	Arithmetic tell you how many you lose or win if you know how many you had before you lost or won. 
	Arithmetic is seven eleven all good children go to heaven--or five six bundle of sticks. 
	Arithmetic is numbers you squeeze from your head to your hand to your pencil to your paper till you get the answer. 
	Arithmetic is where the answer is right and everything is nice and you can look out of the window and see the blue sky--or the answer is wrong and you have to start all over and try again and see how it comes out this time. 
	If you take a number and double it and double it again and then double it a few more times, the number gets bigger and bigger and goes higher and higher and only arithmetic can tell you what the number is when you decide to quit doubling. 
	Arithmetic is where you have to multiply--and you carry the multiplication table in your head and hope you won’t lose it. 
	If you have two animal crackers, one good and one bad, and you eat one and a striped zebra with streaks all over him eats the other, how many animal crackers will you have if somebody offers you five six seven and you say No no no and you say Nay nay nay and you say Nix nix nix? 
	If you ask your mother for one fried egg for breakfast and she gives you two fried eggs and you eat both of them, who is better in arithmetic, you or your mother?



10. ASHURNATSIRPAL THE THIRD

	Three walls around the town of Tela when I came.
	They expected everything of those walls; nobody in the town came out to kiss my feet.
	
	I knocked the walls down, killed three thousand soldiers,
	Took away cattle and sheep, took all the loot in sight,
	And burned special captives.
	
	Some of the soldiers--I cut off hands and feet.
	Others--I cut off nose, ears, fingers.
	Some--I put out the eyes.
	I made a pyramid of heads.
	I strung heads on trees circling the town.
	
	When I got through with it
	There wasn’t much left of the town of Tela.



11. AT A WINDOW

	Give me hunger, 
	O you gods that sit and give 
	The world its orders. 
	Give me hunger, pain and want, 
	Shut me out with shame and failure 
	From your doors of gold and fame, 
	Give me your shabbiest, weariest hunger! 
	
	But leave me a little love, 
	A voice to speak to me in the day end, 
	A hand to touch me in the dark room 
	Breaking the long loneliness. 
	In the dusk of day-shapes 
	Blurring the sunset, 
	One little wandering, western star 
	Thrust out from the changing shores of shadow. 
	Let me go to the window, 
	Watch there the day-shapes of dusk 
	And wait and know the coming 
	Of a little love. 



12. AUTUMN MOVEMENT

	I cried over beautiful things knowing no beautiful thing lasts. 
	
	The field of cornflower yellow is a scarf at the neck of the copper sunburned woman, the mother of the year, the taker of seeds. 
	
	The northwest wind comes and the yellow is torn full of holes, new beautiful things come in the first spit of snow on the northwest wind, and the old things go, not one lasts.



13. BABY FACE

	White Moon comes in on a baby face.
	The shafts across her bed are flimmering.
	
	Out on the land White Moon shines,
	Shines and glimmers against gnarled shadows,
	All silver to slow twisted shadows
	Falling across the long road that runs from the house.
	
	Keep a little of your beauty
	And some of your flimmering silver
	For her by the window to-night
	Where vou come in, White Moon.



14. BACK YARD

	Shine on, O moon of summer.
	Shine to the leaves of grass, catalpa and oak,
	All silver under your rain to-night.
	
	An Italian boy is sending songs to you tonight from an accordion.
	
	A Polish boy is out with his best girl;
	They marry next month;
	tonight they are throwing you kisses.
	
	An old man next door is dreaming over a sheen
	That sits in a cherry tree in his back yard.
	
	The clocks say I must go--
	I stay here sitting on the back porch
	drinking white thoughts you rain down.
	
	Shine on, O moon,
	Shake out more and more silver changes.



15. BAS-RELIEF

	Five geese deploy mysteriously.
	Onward proudly with flagstaffs,
	Hearses with silver bugles,
	Bushels of plum-blossoms dropping
	For ten mystic web-feet--
	Each his own drum-major,
	Each charged with the honor
	Of the ancient goose nation,
	Each with a nose-length surpassing
	The nose-lengths of rival nations.
	Somberly, slowly, unimpeachably,
	Five geese deploy mysteriously.



16. BE READY

	Be land ready
	for you shall go back to land.
	
	Be sea ready
	for you have been nine-tenths water
	and the salt taste shall cling to your mouth.
	
	Be sky ready
	for air, air, has been so needful to you--
	you shall go back, back to the sky.



17. BILBEA

	Bilbea, I was in Babylon on Saturday night.
	I saw nothing of you anywhere.
	I was at the old place and the other girls were there, 
	But no Bilbea.
	
	Have you gone to another house? or city?
	Why don’t you write?
	I was sorry. I walked home half-sick.
	
	Tell me how it goes.
	Send me some kind of a letter.
	And take care of yourself.



18. BOY AND FATHER

	The boy Alexander understands his father to be a famous lawyer.
	The leather law books of Alexander’s father fill a room like hay in a barn.
	Alexander has asked his father to let him build a house like bricklayers build, a house with walls and roofs made of big leather law books. 
	
	   The rain beats on the windows
	   And the raindrops run down the window glass
	   And the raindrops slide off the green blinds down the siding.
	
	The boy Alexander dreams of Napoleon in John C. Abbott’s history, Napoleon the grand and lonely man wronged, Napoleon in his life wronged and in his memory wronged.
	The boy Alexander dreams of the cat Alice saw, the cat fading off into the dark and leaving the teeth of its Cheshire smile lighting the gloom.
	
	Buffaloes, blizzards, way down in Texas, in the panhandle of Texas snuggling close to New Mexico,
	These creep into Alexander’s dreaming by the window when his father talks with strange men about land down in Deaf Smith County.
	Alexander’s father tells the strange men: Five years ago we ran a Ford out on the prairie and chased antelopes.
	
	Only once or twice in a long while has Alexander heard his father say ‘my first wife’ so-and-so and such-and-such.
	A few times softly the father has told Alexander, ‘Your mother . . . was a beautiful woman . . . but we won’t talk about her.’
	Always Alexander listens with a keen listen when he hears his father mention ‘my first wife’ or ‘Alexander’s mother.’
	
	Alexander’s father smokes a cigar and the Episcopal rector smokes a cigar, and the words come often: mystery of life, mystery of life.
	These two come into Alexander’s head blurry and grey while the rain beats on the windows and the raindrops run down the window glass and the raindrops slide off the green blinds and down the siding.
	These and: There is a God, there must be a God, how can there be rain or sun unless there is a God?
	
	So from the wrongs of Napoleon and the Cheshire cat smile on to the buffaloes and blizzards of Texas and on to his mother and to God, so the blurry grey rain dreams of Alexander have gone on five minutes, maybe ten, keeping slow easy time to the raindrops on the window glass and the raindrops sliding off the green blinds and down the siding.



19. BRINGERS

	Cover me over
	In dusk and dust and dreams.
	
	Cover me over
	And leave me alone.
	
	Cover me over,
	You tireless, great.
	
	Hear me and cover me,
	Bringers of dusk and dust and dreams.



20. BROKEN SONNET

	May the weather next week be good to us.
	The strong fighting birds, so often ugly,
	Jab the songsters and bleed them
	And send them away; the wranglers rule,
	The fast breeders, the winter sparrows,
	The crows. The weeds, the quack grass,
	The tough wire-grass, they have it all
	Their way. May the weather next week
	Be good to us.



21. BRONZES

	I 
	
	The bronze General Grant riding a bronze horse in Lincoln Park 
	Shrivels in the sun by day when the motor cars whirr by in long processions going somewhere to keep apppointment for dinner and matineés and buying and selling 
	Though in the dusk and nightfall when high waves are piling 
	On the slabs of the promenade along the lake shore near by 
	   I have seen the general dare the combers come closer 
	And make to ride his bronze horse out into the hoofs and guns of the storm. 
	
	
	II 
	
	I cross Lincoln Park on a winter night when the snow is falling. 
	Lincoln in bronze stands among the white lines of snow, his bronze forehead meeting soft echoes of the newsies crying forty thousand men are dead along the Yser, his bronze ears listening to the mumbled roar of the city at his bronze feet. 
	A lithe Indian on a bronze pony, Shakespeare seated with long legs in bronze, Garibaldi in a bronze cape, they hold places in the cold, lonely snow to-night on their pedestals and so they will hold them past midnight and into the dawn. 



22. BROOM

	Tomorrow waits with a big broom.
	Pray now for once.
	
	Three things are better than any other.
	Silence. Low laughter. Sleep.
	How much am I offered?
	Can I get any bids? Will anybody sell?
	
	Tomorrow waits with a big broom.



23. BUFFALO DUSK

	The buffaloes are gone.
	And those who saw the buffaloes are gone.
	Those who saw the buffaloes by thousands and how they pawed the prairie sod into dust with their hoofs, their great heads down pawing on in a great pageant of dusk,
	Those who saw the buffaloes are gone.
	And the buffaloes are gone.



24. CALLS

	Because I have called to you
	as the fame flamingo calls,
	or the want of a spotted hawk
	is called--because in the dusk
	the warblers shoot the running
	waters of short songs to the
	homecoming warblers--because
	the cry here is wing to wing
	and song to song--I am waiting,
	waiting with the flame flamingo,
	the spotted hawk, the running water
	warbler--waiting for you.



25. CHICAGO

	Hog Butcher for the World,
	   Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat,
	   Player with Railroads and the Nation’s Freight Handler;
	   Stormy, husky, brawling,
	   City of the Big Shoulders:
	
	They tell me you are wicked and I believe them, for I have seen your painted women under the gas lamps luring the farm boys.
	And they tell me you are crooked and I answer: Yes, it is true I have seen the gunman kill and go free to kill again.
	And they tell me you are brutal and my reply is: On the faces of women and children I have seen the marks of wanton hunger.
	And having answered so I turn once more to those who sneer at this my city, and I give them back the sneer and say to them:
	Come and show me another city with lifted head singing so proud to be alive and coarse and strong and cunning.
	Flinging magnetic curses amid the toil of piling job on job, here is a tall bold slugger set vivid against the little soft cities;
	Fierce as a dog with tongue lapping for action, cunning as a savage pitted against the wilderness,
	   Bareheaded,
	   Shoveling,
	   Wrecking,
	   Planning,
	   Building, breaking, rebuilding,
	Under the smoke, dust all over his mouth, laughing with white teeth,
	Under the terrible burden of destiny laughing as a young man laughs,
	Laughing even as an ignorant fighter laughs who has never lost a battle,
	Bragging and laughing that under his wrist is the pulse, and under his ribs the heart of the people,
	                   Laughing!
	Laughing the stormy, husky, brawling laughter of Youth, half-naked, sweating, proud to be Hog Butcher, Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat, Player with Railroads and Freight Handler to the Nation.



26. CHICAGO POET

	I saluted a nobody.
	I saw him in a looking-glass.
	He smiled-so did I.
	He crumpled the skin on his forehead,
	frowning--so did I.
	Everything I did he did.
	I said,
	“Hello, I know you.”
	And I was a liar to sav so.
	
	Ah, this looking-glass man!
	Liar, fool, dreamer, play-actor,
	Soldier, dusty drinker of dust--
	Ah! he will go with me
	Down the dark stairway
	When nobody else is looking,
	When everybody else is gone.
	
	He locks his elbow in mine.
	I lose all-but not him.



27. CHOOSE

	The single clenched fist lifted and ready,
	Or the open asking hand held out and waiting.
	    Choose:
	For we meet by one or the other.



28. CHROMO

	This old river town saw the
	Early steamboats.
	The line of wharf and houses
	Is a faded chromo.
	It is bleached and bitten standing
	To steady sunrises.



29. COOL TOMBS

	When Abraham Lincoln was shoveled into the tombs, he forgot the copperheads and the assassin . . . in the dust, in the cool tombs. 
	
	And Ulysses Grant lost all thought of con men and Wall Street, cash and collateral turned ashes . . . in the dust, in the cool tombs. 
	
	Pocahontas’ body, lovely as a poplar, sweet as a red haw in November or a pawpaw in May, did she wonder? does she remember? . . . in the dust, in the cool tombs? 
	
	Take any streetful of people buying clothes and groceries, cheering a hero or throwing confetti and blowing tin horns . . . tell me if the lovers are losers . . . tell me if any get more than the lovers . . . in the dust . . . in the cool tombs. 



30. DAYS

	I will keep you and bring hands to hold you against a great hunger.
	I will run a spear in you for a great gladness to die with.
	I will stab you between the ribs of the left side with a great love worth remembering.



31. DOOR

	An open door says, “Come in.”
	A shut door says, “Who are you?”
	Shadows and ghosts go through shut doors.
	If   a door is shut and you want it shut,
	     why open it?
	If   a door is open and you want it open,
	     why shut it?
	Doors forget but only doors know what it is
	     doors forget.



32. A DREAM GIRL

	You will come one day in a waver of love,
	Tender as dew, impetuous as rain,
	The tan of the sun will be on your skin,
	The purr of the breeze in your murmuring speech,
	You will pose with a hill-flower grace.
	
	You will come, with your slim, expressive arms,
	A poise of the head no sculptor has caught
	And nuances spoken with shoulder and neck,
	Your face in pass-and-repass of moods
	As many as skies in delicate change
	Of cloud and blue and flimmering sun.
	
	Yet,
	You may not come, O girl of a dream,
	We may but pass as the world goes by
	And take from a look of eyes into eyes,
	A film of hope and a memoried day.



33. EARLY MOON

	The baby moon, a canoe, a silver papoose canoe, sails and sails in the Indian west.
	A ring of silver foxes, a mist of silver foxes, sit and sit around the Indian moon.
	
	One yellow star for a runner, and rows of blue stars for more runners, keep a line of watchers.
	O foxes, baby moon, runners, you are the panel of memory, fire-white writing to-night of the Red Man’s dreams.
	Who squats, legs crossed and arms folded, matching its look against the moon-face, the star-faces, of the West?
	Who are the Mississippi Valley ghosts, of copper foreheads, riding wiry ponies in the night?--no bridles, love-arms on the pony necks, riding in the night a long old trail?
	Why do they always come back when the silver foxes sit around the early moon, a silver papoose, in the Indian west?



34. EVENING WATERFALL

	What was the name you called me?--
	And why did you go so soon?
	
	The crows lift their caw on the wind,
	And the wind changed and was lonely.
	
	The warblers cry their sleepy-songs
	Across the valley gloaming,
	Across the cattle-horns of early stars.
	
	feathers and people in the crotch of a treetop
	Throw an evening waterfall of sleepy-songs.
	
	What was the name you called me?--
	And why did you go so soon?



35. FALLTIME

	Gold of a ripe oat straw, gold of a southwest moon,
	Canada-thistle blue and Aimmering larkspur blue,
	Tomatoes shining in the October sun with red hearts,
	Shining five and six in a row on a wooden fence,
	Why do you keep wishes shining on your faces all day long,
	Wishes like women with half-forgotten lovers going to new cities?
	What is there for you in the birds, the birds, the birds, crying down on the north wind in September--acres of birds spotting the air going south?
	
	Is there something finished? And some new beginning on the way?



36. A FATHER TO HIS SON

	A father sees his son nearing manhood. 
	What shall he tell that son? 
	‘Life is hard; be steel; be a rock.‘ 
	And this might stand him for the storms 
	and serve him for humdrum monotony 
	and guide him among sudden betrayals 
	and tighten him for slack moments. 
	‘Life is a soft loam; be gentle; go easy.‘ 
	And this too might serve him. 
	Brutes have been gentled where lashes failed. 
	The growth of a frail flower in a path up 
	has sometimes shattered and split a rock. 
	A tough will counts. So does desire. 
	So does a rich soft wanting. 
	Without rich wanting nothing arrives. 
	Tell him too much money has killed men 
	and left them dead years before burial: 
	the quest of lucre beyond a few easy needs 
	has twisted good enough men 
	sometimes into dry thwarted worms. 
	Tell him time as a stuff can be wasted. 
	Tell him to be a fool every so often 
	and to have no shame over having been a fool 
	yet learning something out of every folly 
	hoping to repeat none of the cheap follies 
	thus arriving at intimate understanding 
	of a world numbering many fools. 
	Tell him to be alone often and get at himself 
	and above all tell himself no lies about himself 
	whatever the white lies and protective fronts 
	he may use against other people. 
	Tell him solitude is creative if he is strong 
	and the final decisions are made in silent rooms. 
	Tell him to be different from other people 
	if it comes natural and easy being different. 
	Let him have lazy days seeking his deeper motives. 
	Let him seek deep for where he is born natural. 
	Then he may understand Shakespeare 
	and the Wright brothers, Pasteur, Pavlov, 
	Michael Faraday and free imaginations 
	Bringing changes into a world resenting change. 
	He will be lonely enough 
	to have time for the work 
	he knows as his own.



37. FEATHER LIGHTS

	Macabre and golden the moon opened a slant of light.
	
	A triangle for an oriole to stand and sing, “Take me home.”
	
	A layer of thin white gold feathers for a child queen of gypsies.
	
	So the moon opened a slant of light and let it go.
	
	So the lonesome dogs, the fog moon, the pearl mist, came back.



38. A FENCE

	Now the stone house on the lake front is finished and the workmen are beginning the fence.
	The palings are made of iron bars with steel points that can stab the life out of any man who falls on them.
	As a fence, it is a masterpiece, and will shut off the rabble and all vagabonds and hungry men and all wandering children looking for a place to play.
	Passing through the bars and over the steel points will go nothing except Death and the Rain and To-morrow.



39. FIRE-LOGS

	Nancy Hanks dreams by the fire;
	Dreams, and the logs sputter,
	And the yellow tongues climb.
	Red lines lick their way in flickers.
	
	Oh, sputter, logs. Oh, dream, Nancy.
	Time now for a beautiful child.
	Time now for a tall man to come.



40. FOG

	THE fog comes
	on little cat feet.
	
	It sits looking
	over harbor and city
	on silent haunches
	and then moves on.



41. THE FOUR BROTHERS

	Make war songs out of these;
	Make chants that repeat and weave.
	Make rhythms up to the ragtime chatter of the machine guns;
	Make slow-booming psalms up to the boom of the big guns.
	Make a marching song of swinging arms and swinging legs,
	   Going along,
	   Going along,
	On the roads from San Antonio to Athens, from Seattle to Bagdad--
	The boys and men in winding lines of khaki, the circling squares of bayonet points.
	
	Cowpunchers, cornhuskers, shopmen, ready in khaki;
	Ballplayers, lumberjacks, ironworkers, ready in khaki;
	
	A million, ten million, singing, “I am ready.”
	This the sun looks on between two seaboards,
	In the land of Lincoln, in the land of Grant and Lee.
	
	I heard one say,
	“I am ready to be killed.”
	I heard another say,
	“I am ready to be killed.”
	O sunburned clear-eved boys!
	I stand on sidewalks and you go by with drums and guns and bugles,
	You--and the flag!
	And my heart tightens, a fist of something feels my throat
	When you go by,
	You on the kaiser hunt, you and your faces saying, “I am ready to be killed.”
	
	They are hunting death,
	Death for the one-armed mastoid kaiser.
	They are after a Hohenzollern head:
	There is no man-hunt of men remembered like this.
	
	The four big brothers are out to kill.
	France, Russia, Britain, America--
	The four republics are sworn brothers to kill the kaiser.
	
	Yes, this is the great man-hunt;
	And the sun has never seen till now
	Such a line of toothed and tusked man-killers,
	In the blue of the upper sky,
	
	In the green of the undersea,
	In the red of winter dawns.
	Eating to kill,
	Sleeping to kill,
	Asked by their mothers to kill,
	Wished by four-fifths of the world to kill--
	To cut the kaiser’s throat,
	To hack the kaisel’s head,
	To hang the kaiser on a high-horizon gibbet.
	
	And is it nothing else than this?
	Three times ten million men thirsting the blood
	Of a half-cracked one-armed child of the German kings?
	Three times ten million men asking the blood
	Of a child born with his head wrong-shaped,
	The blood of rotted kings in his veins?
	If this were all, O God,
	I would go to the far timbers
	And look on the grey wolves
	Tearing the throats of moose:
	I would ask a wilder drunk of blood.
	
	Look! It is four brothers in joined hands together.
	   The people of bleeding France,
	   The people of bleeding Russia,
	   The people of Britain, the people of America--
	These are the four brothers, these are the four republics.
	
	At first I said it in anger as one who clenches his fist in wrath to fling his knuckles into the face of someone taunting;
	Now I say it calmly as one who has thought it over and over again at night, among the mountains, by the sea-combers in storm.
	I say now, by God, only fighters today will save the world, nothing but fighters will keep alive the names of those who left red prints of bleeding feet at Valley Forge in Christmas snow.
	On the cross of Jesus, the sword of Napoleon, the skull of Shakespere, the pen of Tom Jefferson, the ashes of Abraham Lincoln, or any sign of the red and running life poured out by the mothers of the world,
	By the God of morning glories climbing blue the doors of quiet homes, by the God of tall hollyhocks laughing glad to children in peaceful valleys, by the God of new mothers wishing peace to sit at windows nursing babies,
	I swear only reckless men, ready to throw away their lives by hunger, deprivation, desperate clinging to a single pur. pose imperturbable and undaunted, men with the primitive guts of rebellion,
	Only fighters gaunt with the red brand of labor’s sorrow on their brows and labor’s terrible pride in their blood, men with souls asking danger-only these will save and keep the four big brothers.
	
	Good-night is the word, good-night to the kings, to the czars,
	Good-night to the kaiser.
	The breakdown and the fade-away begins.
	The shadow of a great broom, ready to sweep out the trash, is here.
	
	One finger is raised that counts the czar,
	The ghost who beckoned men who come no more--
	The czar gone to the winds on God’s great dustpan,
	The czar a pinch of nothing,
	The last of the gibbering Romanoffs.
	
	Out and good-night--
	The ghosts of the summer palaces
	And the ghosts of the winter palaces!
	Out and out, good-night to the kings, the czars, the kaisers.
	
	Another finger will speak,
	And the kaiser, the ghost who gestures a hundred million sleeping-waking ghosts,
	The kaiser will go onto God’s great dustpan--
	The last of the gibbering Hohenzollerns.
	Look! God pities this trash, God waits with a broom and a dustpan,
	God knows a finger will speak and count them out.
	
	It is written in the stars;
	It is spoken on the walls;
	It clicks in the fire-white zigzag of the Atlantic wireless;
	It mutters in the bastions of thousand-mile continents;
	It sings in a whistle on the midnight winds from Walla Walla to Mesopotamia:
	Out and good-night.
	
	The millions slow in khaki,
	The millions learning _Turkey in the Straw_ and _John Brown’s Body_,
	The millions remembering windrows of dead at Gettysburg, Chickamauga and Spottsylvania Court House,
	The millions dreaming of the morningstar of Appomattox,
	The millions easy and calm with guns and steel, planes and prows:
	   There is a hammering, drumming hell to come
	   The killing gangs are on the way.
	
	God takes one year for a job.
	God takes ten years or a million.
	God knows when a doom is written.
	God knows this job will be done and the words spoken:
	Out and good-night.
	   The red tubes will run,
	   And the great price be paid,
	   And the homes empty,
	   And the wives wishing,
	   And the mothers wishing.
	There is only one way now, only the way of the red tubes and the great price.
	
	   Well . . .
	Maybe the morning sun is a five-cent yellow balloon,
	And the evening stars the joke of a God gone crazy.
	Maybe the mothers of the world,
	And the life that pours from their torsal folds--
	Maybe it’s all a lie sworn by liars,
	And a God with a cackling laughter says:
	“I, the Almighty God,
	I have made all this,
	I have made it for kaisers, czars and kings.”
	
	Three times ten million men say: No.
	Three times ten million men sav:
	   God is a God of the People.
	And the God who made the world
	   And fixed the morning sun,
	   And flung the evening stars,
	   And shaped the baby hands of life,
	This is the God of the Four Brothers;
	This is the God of bleeding France and bleeding Russia;
	This is the God of the people of Britain and America.
	
	The graves from the Irish Sea to the Caucasus peaks are ten times a million.
	The stubs and stumps of arms and legs, the eyesockets empty, the cripples, ten times a million.
	The crimson thumb-print of this anathema is on the door panels of a hundred million homes.
	
	Cows gone, mothers on sick-beds, children cry a hunger and no milk comes in the noon-time or at night.
	The death-yells of it all, the torn throats of men in ditches calling for water, the shadows and the hacking lungs in dugouts, the steel paws that clutch and squeeze scarlet drain day by day--the storm of it is hell.
	But look! child! the storm is blowing for a clean air.
	
	Look! the four brothers march
	And hurl their big shoulders
	And swear the job shall be done.
	
	Out of the wild finger-writing north and south, east and west, over the blood-crossed, blood-dusty ball of earth,
	Out of it all a God who knows is sweeping clean,
	Out of it all a God who sees and pierces through, is breaking and cleaning out an old thousand years, is making ready for a new thousand years.
	The four brothers shall be five and more.
	
	Under the chimneys of the winter time the children of the world shall sing new songs.
	Among the rocking restless cradles the mothers of the world shall sing new sleepy-time songs.



42. GARDEN WIRELESS

	How many feet ran with sunlight, water and air?
	
	What little devils shaken of laughter, cramming their little ribs with chuckles,
	
	Fixed this lone red tulip, a woman’s mouth of passion kisses, a nun’s mouth of sweet thinking, here topping a straight line of green, a pillar stem?
	
	Who hurled this bomb of red caresses?--nodding balloon-film shooting its wireless every fraction of a second these June days:
	
	   _Love me before I die;
	   Love me--love me now._



43. GARGOYLE

	I saw a mouth jeering. A smile of melted red iron ran over it. Its laugh was full of nails rattling. It was a child’s dream of a mouth.
	A fist hit the mouth: knuckles of gun-metal driven by an electric wrist and shoulder. It was a child’s dream of an arm.



44. GOVERNMENT

	The Government--I heard about the Government and I went out to find it. I said I would look closely at it when I saw it.
	Then I saw a policeman dragging a drunken man to the callaboose. It was the Government in action.
	I saw a ward alderman slip into an office one morning and talk with a judge. Later in the day the judge dismissed a case against a pickpocket who was a live ward worker for the alderman. Again I saw this was the Government, doing things.
	I saw militiamen level their rifles at a crowd of workingmen who were trying to get other workingmen to stay away from a shop where there was a strike on. Government in action.
	
	Everywhere I saw that Government is a thing made of men, that Government has blood and bones, it is many mouths whispering into many ears, sending telegrams, aiming rifles, writing orders, saying “yes” and “no.”
	
	Government dies as the men who form it die and are laid away in their graves and the new Government that comes after is human, made of heartbeats of blood, ambitions, lusts, and money running through it all, money paid and money taken, and money covered up and spoken of with hushed voices.
	A Government is just as secret and mysterious and sensitive as any human sinner carrying a load of germs, traditions and corpuscles handed down from fathers and mothers away back.



45. GRACELAND

	Tomb of a millionaire,
	A multi-millionaire, ladies and gentlemen,
	Place of the dead where they spend every year
	The usury of twenty-five thousand dollars
	For upkeep and flowers
	To keep fresh the memory of the dead.
	The merchant prince gone to dust
	Commanded in his written will
	Over the signed name of his last testament
	Twenty-five thousand dollars be set aside
	For roses, lilacs, hydrangeas, tulips,
	For perfume and color, sweetness of remembrance
	Around his last long home.
	
	(A hundred cash girls want nickels to go to the movies to-night.
	In the back stalls of a hundred saloons, women are at tables
	Drinking with men or waiting for men jingling loose silver dollars in their pockets.
	In a hundred furnished rooms is a girl who sells silk or dress goods or leather stuff for
	six dollars a week wages
	And when she pulls on her stockings in the morning she is reckless about God and the
	newspapers and the police, the talk of her home town or the name people call her.)



46. GRASS

	Pile the bodies high at Austerlitz and Waterloo. 
	Shovel them under and let me work--
	
	   I am the grass; I cover all. 
	
	And pile them high at Gettysburg 
	And pile them high at Ypres and Verdun. 
	Shovel them under and let me work. 
	Two years, ten years, and passengers ask the conductor: 
	
	   What place is this? 
	   Where are we now? 
	
	   I am the grass. 
	   Let me work.



47. THE GREAT HUNT

	I can not tell you now;
	When the wind’s drive and whirl
	Blow me along no longer,
	And the wind’s a whisper at last--
	Maybe I’ll tell you then--some other time.
	
	When the rose’s flash to the sunset
	Reels to the wrack and the twist,
	And the rose is a red bygone,
	When the face I love is going
	And the gate to the end shall clang,
	And it’s no use to beckon or say, “So long”--
	Maybe I’ll tell you then--some other time.
	
	I never knew any more beautiful than you:
	I have hunted you under my thoughts,
	I have broken down under the wind
	And into the roses looking for you.
	I shall never find any greater than you.



48. GYPSY MOTHER

	In a hole-in-a-wall on Halsted Street sits a gypsy woman,
	In a garish, gas-lit rendezvous, in a humpback higgling hole-in-a-wall.
	
	The left hand is a tattler; stars and oaths and alphabets
	Commit themselves and tell happenings gone, happenings to come, pathways of honest people, hypocrites.
	
	“Long pointed fingers mean imagination; a star on the third finger says a black shadow walks near.”
	Cross the gypsy’s hand with fifty cents, and she takes your left hand and reads how you shall be happy in love, or not, and whether you die rich, or not.
	Signs outside the hole-in-a-wall say so, misspell the promises, scrawl the superior gypsy mysteries.
	
	A red shawl on her shoulders falls with a fringe hem to a green skirt.
	Chains of yellow beads sweep from her neck to her tawny hands.
	Fifty springtimes must have kissed her mouth holding a calabash pipe.
	
	She pulls slow contemplative puffs of smoke. She is a shape for ghosts of contemplation to sit around and ask why something cheap as happiness is here; and more besides than plain happiness, chapped lips, rough eyes, red shawl, gypsy perfection of offhand insolence.
	She is thinking about somebody and something--the same as Whistler’s mother sat and thought about somebody and something.
	
	In a hole-in-a-wall on Halted Street are stars, oaths, alphabets.



49. THE HAMMER

	I have seen 
	The old gods go 
	And the new gods come. 
	
	Day by day 
	And year by year 
	The idols fall 
	And the idols rise. 
	
	Today 
	I worship the hammer. 



50. THE HARBOR

	Passing through huddled and ugly walls, 
	By doorways where women haggard 
	Looked from their hunger-deep eyes, 
	Haunted with shadows of hunger-hands, 
	Out from the huddled and ugly walls, 
	I came sudden, at the city’s edge, 
	On a blue burst of lake, 
	Long lake waves breaking under the sun 
	On a spray-flung curve of shore; 
	And a fluttering storm of gulls, 
	Masses of great gray wings 
	And flying white bellies 
	Veering and wheeling free in the open. 



51. HARMONICA HUMDRUMS

	And so the days pass
	and so we drift and dawdle.
	Bright stood the mountains,
	brighter loomed the sea
	And so the nights go
	And so we flash and fade.
	Green lay the hills,
	greener a river evening.
	Stones wore gray lichen
	and trees a morn mist.
	And so the gold be gone
	and so the harm be ashes.
	First moved the moonrise.
	Later dropped the moondown.
	Handy shoved the dawn.
	Handydandy shone the sun.



52. HARRISON STREET COURT

	I heard a woman’s lips 
	Speaking to a companion 
	Say these words: 
	
	“A woman what hustles 
	Never keeps nothin’ 
	For all her hustlin’. 
	Somebody always gets 
	What she goes on the street for. 
	If it ain’t a pimp 
	It’s a bull what gets it. 
	I been hustlin’ now 
	Till I ain’t much good any more. 
	I got nothin’ to show for it. 
	Some man got it all, 
	Every night’s hustlin’ I ever did.” 



53. HOW MUCH?

	How much do you love me, a million bushels?
	Oh, a lot more than that, Oh, a lot more.
	
	And tomorrow maybe only half a bushel?
	Tomorrow maybe not even a half a bushel.
	
	And is this your heart arithmetic?
	This is the way the wind measures the weather.



54. I AM THE PEOPLE, THE MOB

	I am the people--the mob--the crowd--the mass.
	Do you know that all the great work of the world is done through me?
	I am the workingman, the inventor, the maker of the world’s food and clothes.
	I am the audience that witnesses history. The Napoleons come from me and the Lincolns. They die. And then I send forth more Napoleons and Lincolns.
	I am the seed ground. I am a prairie that will stand for much plowing. Terrible storms pass over me. I forget. The best of me is sucked out and wasted. I forget. Everything but Death comes to me and makes me work and give up what I have. And I forget.
	Sometimes I growl, shake myself and spatter a few red drops for history to remember. Then--I forget.
	When I, the People, learn to remember, when I, the People, use the lessons of yesterday and no longer forget who robbed me last year, who played me for a fool--then there will be no speaker in all the world say the name: “The People,” with any fleck of a sneer in his voice or any far-off smile of derision.
	The mob--the crowd--the mass--will arrive then.



55. IMPOSSIBLE IAMBICS

	He saw a fire dancer take two flambeaus
	And do red shadows with her shoulders.
	And he met two fools looking on and saying
	Horsefeathers horsefeathers, and he said
	I must bethink myself, I must throw seven
	Eleven, O God am I a two-spot or what am
	I? a who or a what or a which am I?
	   And the next day it rained,
	   the next day was something
	   else again.
	
	Well, hibiscus, what would you?
	The fambeau dancer did it,
	   she and the red shadows she threw.



56. IN TALL GRASS

	Bees and a honeycomb in the dried head of a horse in a pasture corner--a skull in the tall grass and a buzz and a buzz of the yellow honey-hunters.
	
	And I ask no better a winding sheet over the earth and under the sun.
	
	Let the bees go honey-hunting with yellow blur of wings in the dome of my head, in the rumbling, singing arch of my skull.



57. IRON

	Guns,
	Long, steel guns,
	Pointed from the war ships
	In the name of the war god.
	Straight, shining, polished guns,
	Clambered over with jackies in white blouses,
	Glory of tan faces, tousled hair, white teeth,
	Laughing lithe jackies in white blouses,
	Sitting on the guns singing war songs, war chanties.
	
	Shovels,
	Broad, iron shovels,
	Scooping out oblong vaults,
	Loosening turf and leveling sod.
	
	I ask you
	To witness--
	The shovel is brother to the gun.



58. JAN KUBELIK

	Your bow swept over a string, and a long low note quivered to the air. 
	(A mother of Bohemia sobs over a new child perfect learning to suck milk.) 
	
	Your bow ran fast over all the high strings fluttering and wild. 
	(All the girls in Bohemia are laughing on a Sunday afternoon in the hills with their lovers.) 



59. JAZZ FANTASIA

	Drum on your drums, batter on your banjoes,
	Sob on the long cool winding saxophones.
	Go to it, O jazzmen.
	
	Sling your knuckles on the bottoms of the happy tin pans,
	Let your trombones ooze,
	And go hushahusha-hush with the slippery sand-paper.
	
	Moan like an autumn wind high in the lonesome tree-tops,
	Moan soft like you wanted somebody terrible,
	Cry like a racing car slipping away from a motorcycle cop,
	Bang-bang! you jazzmen,
	Bang altogether drums, traps, banjoes, horns, tin cans--
	Make two people fight on the top of a stairway
	And scratch each other's eyes in a clinch tumbling down the stairs.
	
	Can the rough stuff . . .
	Now a Mississippi steamboat pushes up the night river
	With a hoo-hoo-hoo-oo . . .
	And the green lanterns calling to the high soft stars . . .
	A red moon rides on the humps of the low river hills . . .
	Go to it, O jazzmen.



60. JOY

	Let a joy keep you.
	Reach out your hands
	And take it when it runs by,
	As the Apache dancer
	Clutches his woman.
	I have seen them
	Live long and laugh loud,
	Sent on singing, singing,
	Smashed to the heart
	Under the ribs
	With a terrible love.
	Joy always,
	Joy everywhere--
	Let joy kill you!
	Keep away from the little deaths.



61. KILLERS

	I am singing to you
	Soft as a man with a dead child speaks;
	Hard as a man in handcuffs,
	Held where he can not move:
	
	Under the sun
	Are sixteen million men,
	Chosen for shining teeth,
	Sharp eyes, hard legs,
	And a running of young warm blood in their wrists.
	
	And a red juice runs on the green grass;
	And a red juice soaks the dark soil
	And the sixteen million are killing and killing . . . and killing.
	
	I never forget them day or night:
	They beat on my head for memory of them;
	They pound on my heart and I cry back to them,
	To their homes and women, dreams and games.
	
	I wake in the night and smell the trenches,
	And hear the low stir of sleepers in lines-
	Sixteen million sleepers and pickets in the dark:
	Some of them long sleepers for always,
	Some of them tumbling to sleep to-morrow for always,
	Fixed in the drag of the world’s heartbreak,
	Eating and drinking, toiling . . . on a long job of killing.
	
	Sixteen million men.



62. KIN

	Brother, I am fire
	Surging under the ocean floor.
	I shall never meet you, brother--
	Not for years, anyhow;
	Maybe thousands of years, brother.
	Then I will warm you,
	Hold you close, wrap you in circles,
	Use you and change you--
	Maybe thousands of years, brother.



63. KNUCKS

	In Abraham Lincoln’s city, 
	Where they remember his lawyer’s shingle, 
	The place where they brought him 
	Wrapped in battle flags, 
	Wrapped in the smoke of memories 
	From Tallahassee to the Yukon, 
	The place now where the shaft of his tomb 
	Points white against the blue prairie dome, 
	In Abraham Lincoln’s city . . . I saw knucks 
	In the window of Mister Fischman’s second-hand store 
	On Second Street. 
	
	I went in and asked, “How much?” 
	“Thirty cents apiece,” answered Mister Fischman. 
	And taking a box of new ones off a shelf 
	He filled anew the box in the showcase 
	And said incidentally, most casually 
	And incidentally: 
	“I sell a carload a month of these.” 
	
	I slipped my fingers into a set of knucks, 
	Cast-iron knucks molded in a foundry pattern, 
	And there came to me a set of thoughts like these: 
	Mister Fischman is for Abe and the “malice to none” stuff, 
	And the street car strikers and the strike-breakers, 
	And the sluggers, gunmen, detectives, policemen, 
	Judges, utility heads, newspapers, priests, lawyers, 
	They are all for Abe and the “malice to none” stuff. 
	
	I started for the door. 
	“Maybe you want a lighter pair,” 
	Came Mister Fischman’s voice. 
	I opened the door . . . and the voice again: 
	“You are a funny customer.” 
	
	Wrapped in battle flags, 
	Wrapped in the smoke of memories, 
	This is the place they brought him, 
	This is Abraham Lincoln’s home town. 



64. LANGUAGES

	THERE are no handles upon a language 
	Whereby men take hold of it 
	And mark it with signs for its remembrance. 
	It is a river, this language, 
	Once in a thousand years 
	Breaking a new course 
	Changing its way to the ocean. 
	It is mountain effluvia 
	Moving to valleys 
	And from nation to nation 
	Crossing borders and mixing. 
	Languages die like rivers. 
	Words wrapped round your tongue today 
	And broken to shape of thought 
	Between your teeth and lips speaking 
	Now and today 
	Shall be faded hieroglyphics 
	Ten thousand years from now. 
	Sing--and singing--remember 
	Your song dies and changes 
	And is not here to-morrow 
	Any more than the wind 
	Blowing ten thousand years ago. 



65. THE LAW SAYS

	The law says you and I belong to each other, George.
	The law says you are mine and I am yours, George.
	And there are a million miles of white snowstorms, a million furnaces of hell,
	Between the chair where you sit and the chair where I sit.
	The law says two strangers shall eat breakfast together after nights on the horn of an Arctic moon.



66. LI PO AND LAO TSE COME TO NEBRASKA

	1
	
	Make a daily memo of your eggs.
	Give up something you love to get something better to love.
	Throw away your last hope rather than undersell.
	
	
	2
	
	Loosen a sprig of cherry blossom and see how it smells.
	Break off a line of lilacs long as your arm.
	
	
	3
	
	Stage your fat steers for the butcher’s eye
	Stand at a hog-tight fence and count your hams,
	Reckon on the sagging corn-fed flanks.



67. THE LONG SHADOW OF LINCOLN

	_We can succeed only by concert . . . The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present. The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion. As our case is new so we must think anew and act anew. We must disenthrall ourselves . . . December 1, 1862._
	   --The President’s Message to Congress.
	
	Be sad, be cool, be kind,
	remembering those now dreamdust
	hallowed in the ruts and gullies,
	solemn bones under the smooth blue sea,
	faces warblown in a falling rain.
	
	Be a brother, if so can be,
	to those beyond battle fatigue
	each in his own corner of earth
	   or forty fathoms undersea
	   beyond all boom of guns,
	   beyond any bong of a great bell,
	   each with a bosom and number,
	   each with a pack of secrets,
	each with a personal dream and doorway
	and over them now the long endless winds
	   with the low healing song of time,
	   the hush and sleep murmur of time.
	
	Make your wit a guard and cover.
	Sing low, sing high, sing wide.
	Let your laughter come free
	remembering looking toward peace:
	“We must disenthrall ourselves.”
	
	Be a brother, if so can be,
	to those thrown forward
	for taking hardwon lines,
	for holding hardwon points
	   and their reward so-so,
	little they care to talk about,
	their pay held in a mute calm,
	highspot memories going unspoken,
	what they did being past words,
	what they took being hardwon.
	   Be sad, be kind, be cool.
	   Weep if you must
	   And weep open and shameless
	   before these altars.
	
	There are wounds past words.
	There are cripples less broken
	than many who walk whole.
	   There are dead youths
	   with wrists of silence
	   who keep a vast music
	   under their shut lips,
	what they did being past words,
	their dreams like their deaths
	beyond any smooth and easy telling,
	having given till no more to give.
	
	   There is dust alive
	with dreams of The Republic,
	with dreams of the Family of Man
	flung wide on a shrinking globe
	   with old timetables,
	   old maps, old guide-posts
	   torn into shreds,
	   shot into tatters
	   burnt in a firewind,
	   lost in the shambles,
	   faded in rubble and ashes.
	
	   There is dust alive.
	Out of a granite tomb,
	Out of a bronze sarcophagus,
	Loose from the stone and copper
	Steps a whitesmoke ghost
	Lifting an authoritative hand
	In the name of dreams worth dying for,
	In the name of men whose dust breathes
	   of those dreams so worth dying for,
	what they did being past words,
	beyond all smooth and easy telling.
	
	Be sad, be kind, be cool,
	remembering, under God, a dreamdust
	hallowed in the ruts and gullies,
	solemn bones under the smooth blue sea,
	faces warblown in a falling rain.
	
	Sing low, sing high, sing wide.
	Make your wit a guard and cover.
	Let your laughter come free
	like a help and a brace of comfort.
	
	   The earth laughs, the sun laughs
	over every wise harvest of man,
	over man looking toward peace
	by the light of the hard old teaching:
	   “We must disenthrall ourselves.”



68. LOSERS

	If I should pass the tomb of Jonah
	I would stop there and sit for awhile;
	Because I was swallowed one time deep in the dark
	And came out alive after all.
	
	If I pass the burial spot of Nero
	I shall say to the wind, “Well, well!”
	I who have fiddled in a world on fire,
	I who have done so many stunts not worth doing.
	
	I am looking for the grave of Sinbad too.
	I want to shake his ghost-hand and say,
	“Neither of us died very early, did we?”
	
	And the last sleeping-place of Nebuchadnezzar--
	When I arrive there I shall tell the wind:
	“You ate grass; I have eaten crow--
	Who is better off now or next year?”
	
	Jack Cade, John Brown, Jesse James,
	There too I could sit down and stop for awhile.
	I think I could tell their headstones:
	“God, let me remember all good losers.”
	
	I could ask people to throw ashes on their heads
	In the name of that sergeant at Belleau Woods.
	Walking into the drumfires, calling his men,
	“Come on, you--! Do you want to live forever?”



69. MEDLEY

	Ignorance came in stones of gold;
	The ignorant slept while the hangmen
	Hanged the keepers of the lights
	Of sweet stars: such were the apothegms,
	Offhand offerings of mule-drivers
	Eating sandwiches of rye bread,
	Salami and onions.
	
	“Too Many Books,” we always called him;
	A landscape of masterpieces and old favorites
	Fished with their titles for his eyes
	In the upstairs and downstairs rooms
	Of his house. Whenever he passed
	The old-time bar-room where Pete Morehouse
	Shot the chief of police, where
	The sponge squads shot two bootleggers,
	He always remembered the verse story,
	The Face on the Bar-room Floor-
	The tramp on a winter night,
	Saddened and warmed with whiskey,
	Telling of a woman he wanted
	And a woman who wanted him,
	How whiskey wrecked it all;
	Taking a piece of chalk,
	Picturing her face on the bar-room floor,
	Fixing the lines of her face
	While he told the story,
	Then gasping and falling with finished heartbeats,
	Dead.
	
	And whenever he passed over the bridge at night
	And took the look up the river to smaller bridges,
	Barge lights, and looming shores,
	He always thought of Edgar Allan Poe,
	With a load of hootch in him,
	Going to a party of respectable people
	Who called for a speech,
	Who listened to Poe recite the Lord’s Prayer,
	Correctly, word for word, yet with lush, unmistakable
	Intonations, so haunting the dinner-party people
	All excused themselves to each other.
	
	Whenever Too Many Books
	Passed over the town bridge in the gloaming,
	He thought of Poe breaking up that party
	Of respectable people. Such was Too Many Books-
	We called him that.



70. MOMUS

	Momus is the name men give your face, 
	The brag of its tone, like a long low steamboat whistle 
	Finding a way mid mist on a shoreland, 
	Where gray rocks let the salt water shatter spray Against horizons purple, silent. 
	
	Yes, Momus, 
	Men have flung your face in bronze 
	To gaze in gargoyle downward on a street-whirl of folk. 
	They were artists did this, shaped your sad mouth, 
	Gave you a tall forehead slanted with calm, broad wisdom; 
	All your lips to the corners and your cheeks to the high bones 
	Thrown over and through with a smile that forever wishes and wishes, purple, silent, fled from all the iron things of life, evaded like a sought bandit, gone into dreams, by God. 
	
	I wonder, Momus, 
	Whether shadows of the dead sit somewhere and look with deep laughter 
	On men who play in terrible earnest the old, known, solemn repetitions of history. 
	A droning monotone soft as sea laughter hovers from your kindliness of bronze, 
	You give me the human ease of a mountain peak, purple, silent; 
	Granite shoulders heaving above the earth curves, 
	Careless eye-witness of the spawning tides of men and women 
	Swarming always in a drift of millions to the dust of toil, the salt of tears, 
	And blood drops of undiminishing war.



71. MONOTONE

	The monotone of the rain is beautiful,
	And the sudden rise and slow relapse
	Of the long multitudinous rain.
	The sun on the hills is beautiful,
	Or a captured sunset sea-flung,
	Bannered with fire and gold.
	A face I know is beautiful--
	With fire and gold of sky and sea,
	And the peace of long warm rain.



72. MOON-RIDERS

	I
	
	WHAT have I saved out of a morning?
	The earliest of the morning came with moon-mist
	And the travel of a moon-spilt purple:
	Bars, horse-shoes, Texas long-horns,
	Linked in night silver,
	Linked under leaves in moonlit silver,
	Linked in rags and patches
	Out of the ice-houses of the morning moon.
	Yes, this was the earliest--
	Before the cowpunchers on the eastern rims
	Began riding into the sun,
	Riding the roan mustangs of morning,
	Roping the mavericks after the latest stars.
	What have I saved out of a morning?
	Was there a child face I saw once
	Smiling up a stairway of the morning moon?
	
	
	II
	
	“It is time for work,” said a man in the morning.
	He opened the faces of the clocks, saw their works,
	Saw the wheels oiled and fitted, running smooth.
	“It is time to begin a day‘s work,” he said again,
	Watching a bullfinch hop on the rain-worn boards
	Of a beaten fence counting its bitter winters.
	The clinging feet of the bullfinch and the flash
	Of its flying feathers as it fipped away
	Took his eyes away from the clocks--his flying eyes.
	He walked over, stood in front of the clocks again,
	And said, “I‘m sorry; I apologize forty ways.
	
	
	III
	
	The morning paper lay bundled,
	Like a spear in a museum,
	Across the broken sleeping-room
	Of a moon-sheet spider.
	The spinning work of the morning spider‘s feet
	Left off where the morning paper‘s pages lay
	In the shine of the web in the summer-dew grass.
	The man opened the morning paper: saw the first page,
	The back page, the inside pages, the editorials;
	Saw the world go by, eating, stealing, fighting;
	Saw the headlines, date-lines, funnies, ads,
	The marching movies of the workmen going to work, the workmen striking,
	The workmen asking jobs--five million pairs of eyes look for a boss and say, “Take me”:
	People eating with too much to eat, people eating with nothing in sight to eat tomorrow, eating as though eating belongs where people belong.
	
	“Hustle, you hustlers, while the hustling‘s good,”
	Said the man, turning the morning paper‘s pages,
	Turning among headlines, date-lines, funnies, ads.
	“Hustlers carrying the banner,” said the man,
	Dropping the paper and beginning to hunt the city;
	Hunting the alleys, boulevards, back-door by-ways;
	Hunting till he found a blind horse dying alone,
	Telling the horse, “Two legs or four legs--it‘s all the same with a work plug.”
	
	A hayfield mist of evening saw him
	Watching the moon-riders lose the moon
	For new shooting-stars. He asked,
	“Christ, what have I saved out of a morning?“
	He called up a stairway of the morning moon
	And he remembered a child face smiling up that same stairway.



73. MR. ATTILA

	They made a myth of you, professor,
	     you of the gentle voice,
	     the books, the specs,
	     the furitive rabbit manners
	     in the mortar-board cap
	     and the medieval gown.
	
	They didn’t think it, eh professor?
	On account of you’re so absent-minded,
	you bumping into the tree and saying,
	“Excuse me, I thought you were a tree,”
	passing on again blank and absent-minded.
	
	Now it’s “Mr. Attila, how do you do?”
	Do you pack wallops of wholesale death?
	Are you the practical dynamic son-of-a-gun?
	Have you come through with a few abstractions?
	Is it you Mr. Attila we hear saying,
	“I beg your pardon but we believe we have made some degree of progress on the residual qualities of the atom”?



74. THE NAKED STRANGER

	It is five months off.
	Knit, stitch, and hemstitch:
	Sheets, bags, towels, these are the offerings.
	When he is older, or she is a big girl,
	There may be flowers or ribbons or money
	For birthday offerings. Now, however,
	We must remember it is a naked stranger
	Coming to us; and the sheath of the arrival
	Is so soft we must be ready, and soft too.
	
	Knit, stitch, hemstitch, it is only five months.
	
	It would be easy to pick a lucky star for this baby
	If a choice of two stars lay before our eyes--
	One a pearl-gold star and one pearl-silver--
	And the offer of a chance to pick a lucky star.
	
	When the high hour comes
	Let there be a light furry of snow,
	A little zigzag of white spots
	   Against the gray roofs.
	The snow-born all understand this as a luck-wish.



75. THE NEXT CHILD WAITS

	I know the city waits . . . the next child waits . . . there is a great singing Mother.
	
	Our earth of a turning ball--who set it swinging? A great Nobody? Who put the People down on the wire-grass wilderness? A great Nobody?
	
	I have listened to the tides of the sea trying to spell the word. I have walked under tall trees and heard winter winds trying to write the high sign of it. I have felt the magnet pull of it under the shoes of my feet in the dirt of a prairie road.
	
	I know the city waits . . . the next child waits . . . there is a great singing Mother.



76. NIGHT BELLS

	Two bells six bells
	two bells six bells
	on a blue pavilion
	Out across a smooth blue pavilion
	And between each bell
	One clear cry of a woman
	“Lord God you made the night
	too long too long.”



77. NIGHT MOVEMENT

	In the night, when the sea-winds take the city in their arms,
	And cool the loud streets that kept their dust noon and afternoon:
	In the night, when the sea-birds call to the lights of the city,
	The lights that cut on the skyline their name of a city;
	In the night, when the trains and wagons start from a long way off
	For the city where the people ask bread and want letters;
	In the night the city lives too--the day is not all.
	In the night there are dancers dancing and singers singing,
	And the sailors and soldiers look for numbers on doors.
	In the night the sea-winds take the city in their arms.



78. NUMBER MAN

	_for the ghost of Johann Sebastian Bach_
	
	He was born to wonder about numbers.
	
	He balanced fives against tens
	and made them sleep together
	and love each other.
	
	He took sixes and sevens
	and set them wrangling and fighting
	over raw bones.
	
	He woke up twos and fours
	out of baby sleep
	and touched them back to sleep.
	
	He managed eights and nines,
	gave them prophet beards,
	marched them into mists and mountains.
	
	He added all the numbers he knew,
	multiplied them by new-found numbers
	and called it a prayer of Numbers.
	
	For each of a million cipher silences
	he dug up a mate number
	for a candle light in the dark.
	
	He knew love numbers, luck numbers,
	how the sea and the stars
	are made and held by numbers.
	
	He died from the wonder of numbering.
	He said good-by as if good-by is a number.



79. OLD TIMERS

	I am an ancient reluctant conscript.
	
	On the soup wagons of Xerxes I was a cleaner of pans.
	
	On the march of Miltiades‘ phalanx I had a haft and head;
	I had a bristling gleaming spear-handle.
	
	Red-headed Caesar picked me for a teamster,
	He said, “Go to work, you Tuscan bastard!
	Rome calls for a man who can drive horses.”
	
	The units of conquest led by Charles the Twelfth,
	The whirling whimsical Napoleonic columns:
	They saw me one of the horseshoers.
	
	I trimmed the feet of a white horse Bonaparte swept the night stars with.
	
	Lincoln said, “Get into the game; your nation takes you.”
	And I drove a wagon and team and I had my arm shot off
	At Spottsylvania Court House.
	
	I am an ancient reluctant conscript.



80. OLD-FASHIONED REQUITED LOVE

	I have ransacked the encyclopedias,
	And slid my fingers among topics and titles,
	Looking for you.
	
	And the answer comes slow.
	There seems to be no answer.
	
	I shall ask the next banana peddler the who and why of it.
	
	Or--the iceman with his iron tongs gripping a clear cube in summer sunlight--maybe he will know.



81. ON A FLIMMERING FLOOM YOU SHALL RIDE

	_Summary and footnote of and on
	the testimony of the poet
	MacLeish under oath before a
	Congressional examining committee
	pressing him to divulge the.
	portents and meanings of his poems._
	
	Nobody noogers the shaff of a sloo.
	Nobody slimbers a wench with a winch
	Nor higgles armed each with a niggle
	and each the Aimdrat of a smee,
	each the inbiddy hum of a smoo.
	
	Then slong me dorst with the flagdarsh.
	Then creep me deep with the crawbright.
	Let idle winds ploodaddle the dorshes.
	And you in the gold of the gloaming
	You shall be sloam with the hoolriffs.
	
	On a flimmering floom you shall ride.
	They shall tell you bedish and desist.
	On a flimmering floom you shall ride.



82. OUR HELLS

	Milton unlocked hell for us
	And let us have a look.
	Dante did the same.
	Each of these hells is special-
	One is Milton‘s, one Dante‘s.
	Milton put in all that for him was hell on earth.
	Dante put in all that for him was hell on earth.
	Each of the demons was done in a dear personal idiom.
	
	If you unlock your hell for me
	And I unlock my hell for you
	They will be two special hells
	Done in our dear personal idioms,
	Each of us showing what for us is hell on earth.



83. OUR PRAYER OF THANKS

	God,
	For the gladness here where the sun is shining at evening on the weeds at the river,
	Our prayer of thanks.
	
	God,
	For the laughter of children who tumble barefooted and bareheaded in the summer grass,
	Our prayer of thanks.
	
	God,
	For the sunset and the stars, the women and their white arms that hold us,
	Our prayer of thanks.
	
	God,
	If you are deaf and blind, if this is all lost to you,
	God, if the dead in their coffins amid the silver handles on the edge of town, or the reckless dead of war days thrown unknown in pits, if these dead are forever deaf and blind and lost,
	Our prayer of thanks.
	
	God,
	The game is all your way, the secrets and the signals and the system; and so for the break of the game and the first play and the last,
	Our prayer of thanks.



84. PEOPLE WHO MUST

	I put my easel on the roof of a skyscraper.
	I painted a long while and called it a day‘s work.
	The people on a corner swarmed and the traffic cop‘s whistle never let up all afternoon.
	They were the same as bugs, many bugs on their way--
	Those people on the go or at a standstill;
	And the traffic cop a spot of blue, a splinter of brass,
	Where the black tides ran around him
	And he kept the street. I painted a long while
	And called it a day‘s work.



85. PERSONALITY

	YOU have loved forty women, but you have only one thumb.
	You have led a hundred secret lives, but you mark only one thumb.
	You go round the world and fight in a thousand wars and win all the world’s honors, but when you come back home the print of the one thumb your mother gave you is the same print of thumb you had in the old home when your mother kissed you and said good-by.
	Out of the whirling womb of time come millions of men
	and their feet crowd the earth and they cut one anothers’ throats for room to stand and among them all are not two thumbs alike.
	Somewhere is a Great God of Thumbs who can tell the inside story of this.



86. PLACES

	Roses and gold
	For you today,
	And the flash of flying flags.
	I will have
	Ashes,
	Dust in my hair,
	Crushes of hoofs.
	
	Your name
	Fills the mouth
	Of rich man and poor.
	Women bring
	Armfuls of flowers
	And throw on you.
	
	I go hungry
	Down in dreams
	And loneliness,
	Across the rain
	To slashed hills
	Where men wait and hope for me.



87. THE POOR

	Among the mountains I wandered and saw blue haze and red crag and was amazed;
	On the beach where the long push under the endless tide maneuvers, I stool silent;
	Under the stars on the prairie watching the Dipper slant over the horizon‘s grass, I was full of thoughts.
	Great men, pageants of war and labor, soldiers and workers, mothers lifting their children--these all I touched, and felt the solemn thrill of them.
	And then one day I got a true look at the Poor, millions of the Poor, patient and toiling; more patient than crags, tides, and stars; innumerable, patient as the darkness of night--and all broken, humble ruins of nations.



88. POTOMAC TOWN IN FEBRUARY

	The bridge says:
	Come across, try me; see how good I am.
	The big rock in the river says:
	Look at me; learn how to stand up.
	The white water says:
	I go on; around, under, over, I go on.
	A kneeling, scraggly pine says:
	I am here yet; they nearly got me last year.
	A sliver of moon slides by on a high wind calling:
	I know why; I'll see you to-morrow;
	I'll tell you everything to-morrow.



89. PRARIE WATERS BY NIGHT

	Chatter of birds two by two raises a night song joining a litany of running water--sheer waters showing the russet of old stones remembering many rains.
	And the long willows drowse on the shoulders of the running water, and sleep from much music; joined songs of day-end, feathery throats and stony waters, in a choir chanting new psalms.
	It is too much for the long willows when low laughter of a red moon comes down; and the willows drowse and sleep on the shoulders of the running water.



90. PRAYERS OF STEEL

	Lay me on an anvil, O God.
	Beat me and hammer me into a crowbar.
	Let me pry loose old walls.
	Let me lift and loosen old foundations.
	
	Lay me on an anvil, O God.
	Beat me and hammer me into a steel spike.
	Drive me into the girders that hold a skyscraper together.
	Take red-hot rivets and fasten me into the central girders.
	Let me be the great nail holding a skyscraper
	through blue nights into white stars.



91. THE ROAD AND THE END

	I SHALL foot it
	Down the roadway in the dusk,
	Where shapes of hunger wander
	And the fugitives of pain go by.
	I shall foot it
	In the silence of the morning,
	See the night slur into dawn,
	Hear the slow great winds arise
	Where tall trees flank the way
	And shoulder toward the sky.
	
	The broken boulders by the road
	Shall not commemorate my ruin.
	Regret shall be the gravel under foot.
	I shall watch for
	Slim birds swift of wing
	That go where wind and ranks of thunder
	Drive the wild processionals of rain.
	
	The dust of the traveled road
	Shall touch my hands and face.



92. THE SEA-WASH

	The sea-wash never ends.
	The sea-wash repeats, repeats.
	Only old songs? Is that all the sea knows?
	             Only the old strong songs?
	             Is that all?
	The sea-wash repeats, repeats.



93. SELLING SPIEL

	This blanket is a tough weave, sir.
	Those blood spots were woven into it by design.
	The yarns were chosen from sheep and goats tried by zero weather, blizzards, undiminishing wind and hard usage.
	You will not wear out this blanket in your lifetime, sir, nor mine
	The weaving was done slowly; they took their time, sir; they were stubborn about the materials; just one of those accidental-looking blood spots took ten years, sir.



94. SKETCH

	The shadows of the ships
	Rock on the crest
	In the low blue lustre
	Of the tardy and the soft inrolling tide.
	
	A long brown bar at the dip of the sky
	Puts an arm of sand in the span of salt.
	
	The lucid and endless wrinkles
	Draw in, lapse and withdraw.
	Wavelets crumble and white spent bubbles
	Wash on the floor of the beach.
	
	Rocking on the crest
	In the low blue lustre
	Are the shadows of the ships.



95. SMOKE AND STEEL

	SMOKE of the fields in spring is one,
	Smoke of the leaves in autumn another.
	Smoke of a steel-mill roof or a battleship funnel,
	They all go up in a line with a smokestack,
	Or they twist . . . in the slow twist . . . of the wind.
	
	If the north wind comes they run to the south.
	If the west wind comes they run to the east.
	By this sign
	all smokes
	know each other.
	Smoke of the fields in spring and leaves in autumn,
	Smoke of the finished steel, chilled and blue,
	By the oath of work they swear: “I know you.”
	
	Hunted and hissed from the center
	Deep down long ago when God made us over,
	Deep down are the cinders we came from--
	You and I and our heads of smoke.
	
	Some of the smokes God dropped on the job
	Cross on the sky and count our years
	And sing in the secrets of our numbers;
	Sing their dawns and sing their evenings,
	Sing an old log-fire song:
	
	You may put the damper up,
	You may put the damper down,
	The smoke goes up the chimney just the same.
	
	Smoke of a city sunset skyline,
	Smoke of a country dusk horizon--
	They cross on the sky and count our years.
	
	Smoke of a brick-red dust
	Winds on a spiral
	Out of the stacks
	For a hidden and glimpsing moon.
	This, said the bar-iron shed to the blooming mill,
	This is the slang of coal and steel.
	The day-gang hands it to the night-gang,
	The night-gang hands it back.
	
	Stammer at the slang of this--
	Let us understand half of it.
	In the rolling mills and sheet mills,
	In the harr and boom of the blast fires,
	The smoke changes its shadow
	And men change their shadow;
	A nigger, a wop, a bohunk changes.
	
	A bar of steel--it is only
	Smoke at the heart of it, smoke and the blood of a man.
	A runner of fire ran in it, ran out, ran somewhere else,
	And left--smoke and the blood of a man
	And the finished steel, chilled and blue.
	
	So fire runs in, runs out, runs somewhere else again,
	And the bar of steel is a gun, a wheel, a nail, a shovel,
	A rudder under the sea, a steering-gear in the sky;
	And always dark in the heart and through it,
	Smoke and the blood of a man.
	Pittsburg, Youngstown, Gary--they make their steel with men.
	
	In the blood of men and the ink of chimneys
	The smoke nights write their oaths:
	Smoke into steel and blood into steel;
	Homestead, Braddock, Birmingham, they make their steel with men.
	Smoke and blood is the mix of steel.
	
	The birdmen drone
	in the blue; it is steel
	a motor sings and zooms.
	
	Steel barb-wire around The Works.
	Steel guns in the holsters of the guards at the gates of The Works.
	Steel ore-boats bring the loads clawed from the earth by steel, lifted and lugged by arms of steel, sung on its way by the clanking clam-shells.
	The runners now, the handlers now, are steel; they dig and clutch and haul; they hoist their automatic knuckles from job to job; they are steel making steel.
	Fire and dust and air fight in the furnaces; the pour is timed, the billets wriggle; the clinkers are dumped:
	Liners on the sea, skyscrapers on the land; diving steel in the sea, climbing steel in the sky.
	
	Finders in the dark, you Steve with a dinner bucket, you Steve clumping in the dusk on the sidewalks with an evening paper for the woman and kids, you Steve with your head wondering where we all end up--
	Finders in the dark, Steve: I hook my arm in cinder sleeves; we go down the street together; it is all the same to us; you Steve and the rest of us end on the same stars; we all wear a hat in hell together, in hell or heaven.
	
	Smoke nights now, Steve.
	Smoke, smoke, lost in the sieves of yesterday;
	Dumped again to the scoops and hooks today.
	Smoke like the clocks and whistles, always.
	Smoke nights now.
	To-morrow something else.
	
	Luck moons come and go:
	Five men swim in a pot of red steel.
	Their bones are kneaded into the bread of steel:
	Their bones are knocked into coils and anvils
	And the sucking plungers of sea-fighting turbines.
	Look for them in the woven frame of a wireless station.
	So ghosts hide in steel like heavy-armed men in mirrors.
	Peepers, skulkers--they shadow-dance in laughing tombs.
	They are always there and they never answer.
	
	One of them said: “I like my job, the company is good to me, America is a wonderful country.”
	One: “Jesus, my bones ache; the company is a liar; this is a free country, like hell.”
	One: “I got a girl, a peach; we save up and go on a farm and raise pigs and be the boss ourselves.”
	And the others were roughneck singers a long ways from home.
	Look for them back of a steel vault door.
	
	They laugh at the cost.
	They lift the birdmen into the blue.
	It is steel a motor sings and zooms.
	
	In the subway plugs and drums,
	In the slow hydraulic drills, in gumbo or gravel,
	Under dynamo shafts in the webs of armature spiders,
	They shadow-dance and laugh at the cost.
	
	The ovens light a red dome.
	Spools of fire wind and wind.
	Quadrangles of crimson sputter.
	The lashes of dying maroon let down.
	Fire and wind wash out the slag.
	Forever the slag gets washed in fire and wind.
	The anthem learned by the steel is:
	Do this or go hungry.
	Look for our rust on a plow.
	Listen to us in a threshing-engine razz.
	Look at our job in the running wagon wheat.
	
	Fire and wind wash at the slag.
	Box-cars, clocks, steam-shovels, churns, pistons, boilers, scissors--
	Oh, the sleeping slag from the mountains, the slag-heavy pig-iron will go down many roads.
	Men will stab and shoot with it, and make butter and tunnel rivers, and mow hay in swaths, and slit hogs and skin beeves, and steer airplanes across North America, Europe, Asia, round the world.
	
	Hacked from a hard rock country, broken and baked in mills and smelters, the rusty dust waits
	Till the clean hard weave of its atoms cripples and blunts the drills chewing a hole in it.
	The steel of its plinths and flanges is reckoned, O God, in one-millionth of an inch.
	
	Once when I saw the curves of fire, the rough scarf women dancing,
	Dancing out of the flues and smoke-stacks--flying hair of fire, flying feet upside down;
	Buckets and baskets of fire exploding and chortling, fire running wild out of the steady and fastened ovens;
	Sparks cracking a harr-harr-huff from a solar-plexus of rock-ribs of the earth taking a laugh for themselves;
	Ears and noses of fire, gibbering gorilla arms of fire, gold mud-pies, gold bird-wings, red jackets riding purple mules, scarlet autocrats tumbling from the humps of camels, assassinated czars straddling vermillion balloons;
	I saw then the fires flash one by one: good-by: then smoke, smoke;
	And in the screens the great sisters of night and cool stars, sitting women arranging their hair,
	Waiting in the sky, waiting with slow easy eyes, waiting and half-murmuring:
	“Since you know all
	and I know nothing,
	tell me what I dreamed last night.”
	
	Pearl cobwebs in the windy rain,
	in only a flicker of wind,
	are caught and lost and never known again.
	
	A pool of moonshine comes and waits,
	but never waits long: the wind picks up
	loose gold like this and is gone.
	
	A bar of steel sleeps and looks slant-eyed
	on the pearl cobwebs, the pools of moonshine;
	sleeps slant-eyed a million years,
	sleeps with a coat of rust, a vest of moths,
	a shirt of gathering sod and loam.
	
	The wind never bothers . . . a bar of steel.
	The wind picks only . . . pearl cobwebs . . . pools of moonshine.



96. SUMMER STARS

	Bend low again, night of summer stars.
	So near you are, sky of summer stars,
	So near, a long arm man can pick off stars,
	Pick off what he wants in the sky bowl,
	So near you are, summer stars,
	So near, strumming, strumming,
	So lazy and hum-strumming.



97. (FROM) THE PEOPLE, YES

	Lincoln? 
	He was a mystery in smoke and flags 
	Saying yes to the smoke, yes to the flags, 
	Yes to the paradoxes of democracy, 
	Yes to the hopes of government 
	Of the people by the people for the people, 
	No to debauchery of the public mind, 
	No to personal malice nursed and fed, 
	Yes to the Constitution when a help, 
	No to the Constitution when a hindrance 
	Yes to man as a struggler amid illusions, 
	Each man fated to answer for himself: 
	Which of the faiths and illusions of mankind 
	Must I choose for my own sustaining light 
	To bring me beyond the present wilderness? 
	
	       Lincoln? Was he a poet? 
	       And did he write verses? 
	“I have not willingly planted a thorn 
	       in any man’s bosom.” 
	I shall do nothing through malice: what 
	       I deal with is too vast for malice.” 
	
	Death was in the air. 
	So was birth.



98. THEME IN YELLOW

	I spot the hills
	With yellow balls in autumn.
	I light the prairie cornfields
	Orange and tawny gold clusters
	And I am called pumpkins.
	On the last of October
	When dusk is fallen
	Children join hands
	And circle round me
	Singing ghost songs
	And love to the harvest moon;
	I am a jack-o‘-lantern
	With terrible teeth
	And the children know
	I am fooling.



99. THEY WILL SAY

	Of my city the worst that men will ever say is this:
	You took little children away from the sun and the dew,
	And the glimmers that played in the grass under the great sky
	And the reckless rain; you put them between walls
	To work, broken and smothered, for bread and wages,
	To eat dust in their throats and die empty-hearted
	For a little handful of pay on a few Saturday nights.



100. WHO AM I?

	My head knocks against the stars. 
	My feet are on the hilltops. 
	My finger-tips are in the valleys and shores of universal life. 
	Down in the sounding foam of primal things I reach my hands and play with pebbles of destiny. 
	I have been to hell and back many times. 
	I know all about heaven, for I have talked with God. 
	I dabble in the blood and guts of the terrible. 
	I know the passionate seizure of beauty 
	And the marvelous rebellion of man at all signs reading “Keep Off.“ 
	
	My name is Truth and I am the most elusive captive in the universe.



101. WILDERNESS MAN

	Whiskers a wren could nest in.
	Cheekbones with an inlay of sun tan.
	Shrewd eyes . . . ox shoulders . . .
	He passed us in the rain tonight
	Among the ragtags of South State Street
	And he had a big red umbrella keeping off the rain
	And a gunny sack under his left arm.
	
	I could understand the old wilderness man
	And the wish of his heart for a spot of red
	In the mass of dark umbrellas
	And I don‘t care what he had in the gunny sack.
	Kittens, pups, bread scraps--I don‘t care.
	But why did he rush along like a city-broke newspaper delivery horse?
	Why did he walk furiously like a messenger boy after a tip or detectives going to make a raid?
	
	I saw the smut of the city on the wilderness.
	
	I said here‘s a wolf turned alley dog.



102. THE WINDY CITY

	1 
	
	The lean hands of wagon men 
	put out pointing fingers here, 
	picked this crossway, put it on a map, 
	set up their sawbucks, fixed their shotguns, 
	found a hitching place for the pony express, 
	made a hitching place for the iron horse, 
	the one-eyed horse with the fire-spiThead, 
	found a homelike spot and said, “Make a home,”
	saw this corner with a mesh of rails, shuttling 
	people, shunting cars, shaping the junk of 
	the earth to a new city. 
	
	The hands of men took hold and tugged 
	And the breaths of men went into the junk 
	And the junk stood up into skyscrapers and asked: 
	Who am I? Am I a city? And if I am what is my name? 
	And once while the time whistles blew and blew again 
	The men answered: Long ago we gave you a name, 
	Long ago we laughed and said: You? Your name is Chicago. 
	
	Early the red men gave a name to a river, 
	the place of the skunk, 
	the river of the wild onion smell, 
	Shee-caw-go. 
	
	Out of the payday songs of steam shovels, 
	Out of the wages of structural iron rivets, 
	The living lighted skyscrapers tell it now as a name, 
	Tell it across miles of sea blue water, gray blue land: 
	I am Chicago, I am a name given out by the breaths of working men, 
	laughing men, a child, a belonging. 
	
	So between the Great Lakes, 
	The Grand De Tour, and the Grand Prairie, 
	The living lighted skyscrapers stand, 
	Spotting the blue dusk with checkers of yellow, 
	streamers of smoke and silver, 
	parallelograms of night-gray watchmen, 
	Singing a soft moaning song: I am a child, a belonging. 
	
	
	2 
	
	How should the wind songs of a windy city go? 
	Singing in a high wind the dirty chatter gets blown 
	away on the wind--the clean shovel, 
	the clean pickax, 
	lasts. 
	
	It is easy for a child to get breakfast and pack off 
	to school with a pair of roller skates, 
	buns for lunch, and a geography. 
	Riding through a tunnel under a river running backward, 
	to school to listen . . . how the Pottawatomies . . . 
	and the Blackhawks . . . ran on moccasins . . . 
	between Kaskaskia, Peoria, Kankakee, and Chicago. 
	
	It is easy to sit listening to a boy babbling 
	of the Pottawatomie moccasins in Illinois, 
	how now the roofs and smokestacks cover miles 
	where the deerfoot left its writing 
	and the foxpaw put its initials 
	in the snow . . . for the early moccasins . . . to read. 
	
	It is easy for the respectable taxpayers to sit in the 
	streetcars and read the papers, faces of burglars, 
	the prison escapes, the hunger strikes, the cost of 
	living, the price of dying, the shop gate battles of 
	strikers and strikebreakers, the strikers killing 
	scabs and the police killing strikers--the strongest, 
	the strongest, always the strongest. 
	
	It is easy to listen to the haberdasher customers hand each other their 
	easy chatter--it is easy to die 
	alive--to register a living thumbprint and be dead 
	from the neck up. 
	And there are sidewalks polished with the footfalls of 
	undertakers‘ stiffs, greased mannikins, wearing up-to-
	the-minute sox, lifting heels across doorsills, 
	shoving their faces ahead of them--dead from the 
	neck up--proud of their sox--their sox are the last 
	word--dead from the neck up--it is easy. 
	
	
	3 
	
	Lash yourself to the bastion of a bridge 
	and listen while the black cataracts of people go by, 
	baggage, bundles, balloons, 
	listen while they jazz the classics: 
	
	“Since when did you kiss yourself in 
	And who do you think you are? 
	Come across, kick in, loosen up. 
	Where do you get that chatter?”
	
	“Beat up the short-change artists. 
	They never did nothin‘ for you. 
	How do you get that way? 
	Tell me and I‘ll tell the world. 
	I‘ll say so, I‘ll say it is.”
	
	“You‘re trying to crab my act. 
	You poor fish, you mackerel, 
	You ain‘t got the sense God 
	Gave an oyster--it‘s raining--
	What you want is an umbrella.”
	
	“Hush baby--
	I don‘t know a thing. 
	I don‘t know a thing. 
	Hush baby.”
	
	“Hush baby, 
	It ain‘t how old you are, 
	It‘s how old you look. 
	It ain‘t what you got, 
	It‘s what you can get away with.”
	
	“Bring home the bacon. 
	Put it over, shoot it across. 
	Send ‘em to the cleaners. 
	What we want is results, re-sults 
	And damn the consequences. 
	Sh . . . sh. . . . 
	You can fix anything 
	If you got the right fixers.”
	
	“Kid each other, you cheap skates. 
	Tell each other you‘re all to the mustard--
	You‘re the gravy.”
	
	“Tell ‘em, honey. 
	Ain‘t it the truth, sweetheart? 
	Watch your step. 
	You said it. 
	You said a mouthful. 
	We‘re all a lot of damn fourflushers.”
	
	“Hush baby! 
	Shoot it, 
	Shoot it all! 
	Coo coo, coo coo”--
	This is one song of Chicago. 
	
	
	4 
	
	It is easy to come here a stranger and show the whole works, write a book, fix it all up--it is easy to come and go away a muddle-headed pig, a bum and a bag of wind. 
	
	Go to it and remember this city fished from its depths a text: “independent as a hog on ice. “
	
	
	Venice is a dream of soft waters, Vienna and Bagdad recollections of dark spears and wild turbans; Paris is a thought in Monet gray on scabbards, fabrics, fa├ºades; London is a fact in a fog filled with the moaning of transatlantic whistles; Berlin sits amid white scrubbed quadrangles and torn arithmetics and testaments; Moscow brandishes a flag and repeats a dance figure of a man who walks like a bear. 
	Chicago fished from its depths a text: Independent as a hog on ice. 
	
	
	5 
	
	Forgive us if the monotonous houses go mile on mile 
	Along monotonous streets out to the prairies--
	If the faces of the houses mumble hard words 
	At the streets--and the street voices only say: 
	“Dust and a bitter wind shall come.”
	Forgive us if the lumber porches and doorsteps 
	Snarl at each other--
	And the brick chimneys cough in a close-up of 
	Each other‘s faces--
	And the ramshackle stairways watch each other 
	As thieves watch--
	And dooryard lilacs near a malleable iron works 
	Long ago languished 
	In a short whispering purple. 
	
	And if the alley ash cans 
	Tell the garbage-wagon drivers 
	The children play the alley is Heaven 
	And the streets of Heaven shine 
	With a grand dazzle of stones of gold 
	And there are no policemen in Heaven--
	Let the rag-tags have it their way. 
	
	And if the geraniums 
	In the tin cans of the window sills 
	Ask questions not worth answering--
	And if a boy and a girl hunt the sun 
	With a sieve for sifting smoke--
	Let it pass--let the answer be--
	“Dust and a bitter wind shall come.”
	Forgive us if the jazz timebeats 
	Of these clumsy mass shadows 
	Moan in saxophone undertones, 
	And the footsteps of the jungle, 
	The fang cry, the rip claw hiss, 
	The sneak-up and the still watch, 
	The slant of the slit eyes waiting--
	If these bother respectable people 
	with the right crimp in their napkins 
	reading breakfast menu cards--
	forgive us--let it pass--let be. 
	
	If cripples sit on their stumps 
	And joke with the newsies bawling, 
	“Many lives lost! many lives lost! 
	Ter-ri-ble ac-ci-dent! many lives lost!”--
	If again twelve men let a woman go, 
	“He done me wrong; I shot him”--
	Or the blood of a child‘s head 
	Spatters on the hub of a motor truck--
	Or a 44-gat cracks and lets the skylights 
	Into one more bank messenger--
	Or if boys steal coal in a railroad yard 
	And run with humped gunnysacks 
	While a bull picks off one of the kids 
	And the kid wriggles with an ear in cinders 
	And a mother comes to carry home 
	A bundle, a limp bundle, 
	To have his face washed, for the last time, 
	Forgive us if it happens--and happens again--
	And happens again. 
	
	Forgive the jazz timebeat 
	of clumsy mass shadows, 
	footsteps of the jungle, 
	the fang cry, the rip claw hiss, 
	the slant of the slit eyes waiting. 
	
	Forgive us if we work so hard 
	And the muscles bunch clumsy on us 
	And we never know why we work so hard--
	If the big houses with little families 
	And the little houses with big families 
	Sneer at each other‘s bars of misunderstanding; 
	Pity us when we shackle and kill each other 
	And believe at first we understand 
	And later say we wonder why. 
	
	Take home the monotonous patter 
	Of the elevated railroad guard in the rush hours: 
	“Watch your step. Watch your step. Watch your step.”
	Or write on a pocket pad what a pauper said 
	To a patch of purple asters at a whitewashed wall: 
	“Let every man be his own Jesus--that‘s enough.”
	
	
	6 
	
	The wheelbarrows grin, the shovels and the mortar hoist an exploit. 
	The stone shanks of the Monadnock, the Transportation, the People‘s Gas Building, stand up and scrape at the sky.
	
	
	The wheelbarrows sing, the bevels and the blueprints whisper. 
	The library building named after Crerar, naked as a stock farm silo, light as a single eagle feather, stripped like an airplane propeller, takes a path up. 
	Two cool new rivets say, “Maybe it is morning,”
	“God knows.”
	
	Put the city up; tear the city down; 
	put it up again; let us find a city. 
	Let us remember the little violet-eyed 
	man who gave all, praying, “Dig and 
	dream, dream and hammer, till your 
	city comes.”
	
	Every day the people sleep and the city dies; 
	every day the people shake loose, awake and 
	build the city again. 
	
	The city is a tool chest opened every day, 
	a time clock punched every morning, 
	a shop door, bunkers and overalls 
	counting every day. 
	
	The city is a balloon and a bubble plaything 
	shot to the sky every evening, whistled in 
	a ragtime jig down the sunset. 
	
	The city is made, forgotten, and made again, 
	trucks hauling it away haul it back 
	steered by drivers whistling ragtime 
	against the sunsets. 
	
	Every day the people get up and carry the city, 
	carry the bunkers and balloons of the city, 
	lift it and put it down. 
	
	“I will die as many times 
	as you make me over again, 
	says the city to the people, 
	I am the woman, the home, the family, 
	I get breakfast and pay the rent; 
	I telephone the doctor, the milkman, the undertaker; 
	I fix the streets 
	for your first and your last ride--
	Come clean with me, come clean or dirty, 
	I am stone and steel of your sleeping numbers; 
	I remember all you forget. 
	I will die as many times 
	as you make me over again.”
	
	Under the foundations, 
	Over the roofs, 
	The bevels and the blueprints talk it over. 
	The wind of the lake shore waits and wanders. 
	The heave of the shore wind hunches the sand piles. 
	The winkers of the morning stars count out cities 
	And forget the numbers. 
	
	
	7 
	
	At the white clock-tower 
	lighted in night purples 
	over the boulevard link bridge 
	only the blind get by without acknowledgments. 
	
	The passers-by, factory punch-clock numbers, 
	hotel girls out for the air, teameoes, 
	coal passers, taxi drivers, window washers, 
	paperhangers, floorwalkers, bill collectors, 
	burglar alarm salesmen, massage students, 
	manicure girls, chiropodists, bath rubbers, 
	booze runners, hat cleaners, armhole basters, 
	delicatessen clerks, shovel stiffs, work plugs--
	They all pass over the bridge, they all look up 
	at the white clock-tower 
	lighted in night purples 
	over the boulevard link bridge--
	And sometimes one says, “Well, we hand it to ‘em.”
	
	Mention proud things, catalogue them. 
	The jack-knife bridge opening, the ore boats, 
	the wheat barges passing through. 
	Three overland trains arriving the same hour, 
	one from Memphis and the cotton belt, 
	one from Omaha and the corn belt, 
	one from Duluth, the lumberjack and the iron range. 
	Mention a carload of shorthorns taken off the valleys of Wyoming last week, arriving yesterday, knocked in the head, stripped, quartered, hung in ice boxes today, mention the daily melodrama of this humdrum, rhythms of heads, hides, heels, hoofs hung up. 
	
	
	8 
	
	It is wisdom to think the people are the city. 
	It is wisdom to think the city would fall to pieces 
	and die and be dust in the wind. 
	If the people of the city all move away and leave no people at all to watch and keep the city. 
	
	It is wisdom to think no city stood here at all until the working men, the laughing men, came.
	
	
	It is wisdom to think tomorrow new working men, new laughing men, may come and put up a new city--
	Living lighted skyscrapers and a night lingo of lanterns testify tomorrow shall have its own say-so. 
	
	
	9 
	
	Night gathers itself into a ball of dark yarn. 
	Night loosens the ball and it spreads. 
	The lookouts from the shores of Lake Michigan 
	find night follows day, and ping! ping! across 
	sheet gray the boat lights put their signals. 
	Night lets the dark yarn unravel, Night speaks and the yarns change to fog and blue strands. 
	
	The lookouts turn to the city. 
	The canyons swarm with red sand lights 
	of the sunset. 
	The atoms drop and sift, blues cross over, 
	yellows plunge. 
	Mixed light shafts stack their bayonets, 
	pledge with crossed handles. 
	So, when the canyons swarm, it is then the 
	lookouts speak 
	Of the high spots over a street . . . mountain language 
	Of skyscrapers in dusk, the Railway Exchange, 
	The People‘s Gas, the Monadnock, the Transportation, 
	Gone to the gloaming. 
	
	The river turns in a half circle. 
	The Goose Island bridges curve 
	over the river curve. 
	Then the river panorama 
	performs for the bridge, 
	dots . . . lights . . . dots . . . lights, 
	sixes and sevens of dots and lights, 
	a lingo of lanterns and searchlights, 
	circling sprays of gray and yellow. 
	
	
	10 
	
	A man came as a witness saying: 
	“I listened to the Great Lakes 
	And I listened to the Grand Prairie, 
	And they had little to say to each other, 
	A whisper or so in a thousand years. 
	“Some of the cities are big,” said one. 
	“And some not so big,” said another, 
	“And sometimes the cities are all gone,” 
	Said a black knob bluff to a light green sea.”
	
	Winds of the Windy City, come out of the prairie, 
	all the way from Medicine Hat. 
	Come out of the inland sea blue water, come where 
	they nickname a city for you. 
	
	Corn wind in the fall, come off the black lands, 
	come off the whisper of the silk hangers, 
	the lap of the flat spear leaves. 
	
	Blue water wind in summer, come off the blue miles 
	of lake, carry your inland sea blue fingers, 
	carry us cool, carry your blue to our homes. 
	
	White spring winds, come off the bag wool clouds, 
	come off the running melted snow, come white 
	as the arms of snow-born children. 
	
	Gray fighting winter winds, come along on the tear--
	ing blizzard tails, the snouts of the hungry 
	hunting storms, come fighting gray in winter. 
	
	Winds of the Windy City, 
	Winds of corn and sea blue, 
	Spring wind white and fighting winter gray, 
	Come home here--they nickname a city for you. 
	
	The wind of the lake shore waits and wanders. 
	The heave of the shore wind hunches the sand piles. 
	The winkers of the morning stars count out cities 
	And forget the numbers.



103. THE YEAR

	I
	
	A storm of white petals,
	Buds throwing open baby fists
	Into hands of broad flowers.
	
	
	II
	
	Red roses running upward,
	Clambering to the clutches of life
	Soaked in crimson.
	
	
	III
	
	Rabbles of tattered leaves
	Holding golden flimsy hopes
	Against the tramplings
	Into the pits and gullies.
	
	
	IV
	
	Hoarfrost and silence:
	Only the muffling
	Of winds dark and lonesome--
	Great lullabies to the long sleepers.

