*** Delmore Schwartz (1913 - 1966)

1. CALMLY WE WALK THROUGH THIS APRIL’S DAY

	Calmly we walk through this April’s day,
	Metropolitan poetry here and there,
	In the park sit pauper and rentier,
	The screaming children, the motor-car
	Fugitive about us, running away,
	Between the worker and the millionaire
	Number provides all distances,
	It is Nineteen Thirty-Seven now,
	Many great dears are taken away,
	What will become of you and me
	(This is the school in which we learn...)
	Besides the photo and the memory?
	(...that time is the fire in which we burn.)
	
	(This is the school in which we learn...)
	What is the self amid this blaze?
	What am I now that I was then
	Which I shall suffer and act again,
	The theodicy I wrote in my high school days
	Restored all life from infancy,
	The children shouting are bright as they run
	(This is the school in which they learn . . .)
	Ravished entirely in their passing play!
	(...that time is the fire in which they burn.)
	
	Avid its rush, that reeling blaze!
	Where is my father and Eleanor?
	Not where are they now, dead seven years,
	But what they were then?
	No more? No more?
	From Nineteen-Fourteen to the present day,
	Bert Spira and Rhoda consume, consume
	Not where they are now (where are they now?)
	But what they were then, both beautiful;
	
	Each minute bursts in the burning room,
	The great globe reels in the solar fire,
	Spinning the trivial and unique away.
	(How all things flash! How all things flare!)
	What am I now that I was then?
	May memory restore again and again
	The smallest color of the smallest day:
	Time is the school in which we learn,
	Time is the fire in which we burn.



2. CAMBRIDGE, SPRING 1937

	At last the air fragrant, the bird’s bubbling whistle
	Succinct in the unknown unsettled trees:
	O little Charles, beside the Georgian colleges
	And milltown New England; at last the wind soft,
	The sky unmoving, and the dead look
	Of factory windows separate, at last,
	From windows gray and wet:
	for now the sunlight
	Thrashes its wet shellac on brickwalk and gutter,
	White splinters streak midmorning and doorstep,
	Winter passes as the lighted streetcar
	Moves at midnight, one scene of the past,
	Droll and unreal, stiff, stilted and hooded.



3. FAITHFUL TO YOUR COMMANDS, O CONSCIOUSNESS

	Faithful to your commands, o consciousness, o
	
	Beating wings, I studied
	
	the roses and the muses of reality,
	
	the deceptions and the deceptive elation of the redness of the growing morning,
	
	and all the greened and thomed variety of the vines of error, which begin by promising
	
	Everything and more than everything, and then suddenly,
	
	At the height of noon seem to rise to the peak or dune-like moon of no return
	
	So that everything is or seems to have become nothing, or of no genuine importance:
	
	And it is not that the departure of hope or its sleep has made it inconceivable
	
	That anything should be or should have been important:
	
	It is the belief that hope itself was not, from the beginning,
	before believing, the most important of all beliefs.



4. THE FIRST NIGHT OF FALL AND FALLING RAIN

	The common rain had come again
	Slanting and colorless, pale and anonymous,
	Fainting falling in the first evening
	Of the first perception of the actual fall,
	The long and late light had slowly gathered up
	A sooty wood of clouded sky, dim and distant more and
	more
	Until, at dusk, the very sense of selfhood waned,
	A weakening nothing halted, diminished or denied or set
	aside,
	Neither tea, nor, after an hour, whiskey,
	Ice and then a pleasant glow, a burning,
	And the first leaping wood fire
	Since a cold night in May, too long ago to be more than
	Merely a cold and vivid memory.
	Staring, empty, and without thought
	Beyond the rising mists of the emotion of causeless
	sadness,
	How suddenly all consciousness leaped in spontaneous
	gladness,
	Knowing without thinking how the falling rain (outside, all
	over)
	In slow sustained consistent vibration all over outside
	Tapping window, streaking roof,
	running down runnel and drain
	Waking a sense, once more, of all that lived outside of us,
	Beyond emotion, for beyond the swollen
	distorted shadows and lights
	Of the toy town and the vanity fair
	of waking consciousness!



5. FOR THE ONE WHO WOULD TAKE MAN’S LIFE IN HIS HANDS

	Tiger Christ unsheathed his sword,
	Threw it down, became a lamb.
	Swift spat upon the species, but
	Took two women to his heart.
	Samson who was strong as death
	Paid his strength to kiss a slut.
	Othello that stiff warrior
	Was broken by a woman’s heart.
	Troy burned for a sea-tax, also for
	Possession of a charming whore.
	What do all examples show?
	What must the finished murderer know?
	
	You cannot sit on bayonets,
	Nor can you eat among the dead.
	When all are killed, you are alone,
	A vacuum comes where hate has fed.
	Murder’s fruit is silent stone,
	The gun increases poverty.
	With what do these examples shine?
	The soldier turned to girls and wine.
	Love is the tact of every good,
	The only warmth, the only peace.
	
	“What have I said?” asked Socrates.
	“Affirmed extremes, cried yes and no,
	Taken all parts, denied myself,
	Praised the caress, extolled the blow,
	Soldier and lover quite deranged
	Until their motions are exchanged.
	-What do all examples show?
	What can any actor know?
	The contradiction in every act,
	The infinite task of the human heart.”



6. THE HEAVY BEAR WHO GOES WITH ME

	_“the withness of the body”_ --Whitehead
	
	The heavy bear who goes with me,
	A manifold honey to smear his face,
	Clumsy and lumbering here and there,
	The central ton of every place,
	The hungry beating brutish one
	In love with candy, anger, and sleep,
	Crazy factotum, dishevelling all,
	Climbs the building, kicks the football,
	Boxes his brother in the hate-ridden city.
	
	Breathing at my side, that heavy animal,
	That heavy bear who sleeps with me,
	Howls in his sleep for a world of sugar,
	A sweetness intimate as the water’s clasp,
	Howls in his sleep because the tight-rope
	Trembles and shows the darkness beneath.
	--The strutting show-off is terrified,
	Dressed in his dress-suit, bulging his pants,
	Trembles to think that his quivering meat
	Must finally wince to nothing at all.
	
	That inescapable animal walks with me,
	Has followed me since the black womb held,
	Moves where I move, distorting my gesture,
	A caricature, a swollen shadow,
	A stupid clown of the spirit’s motive,
	Perplexes and affronts with his own darkness,
	The secret life of belly and bone,
	Opaque, too near, my private, yet unknown,
	Stretches to embrace the very dear
	With whom I would walk without him near,
	Touches her grossly, although a word
	Would bare my heart and make me clear,
	Stumbles, flounders, and strives to be fed
	Dragging me with him in his mouthing care,
	Amid the hundred million of his kind,
	the scrimmage of appetite everywhere.



7. IN THE NAKED BED, IN PLATO’S CAVE

	In the naked bed, in Plato’s cave,
	Reflected headlights slowly slid the wall,
	Carpenters hammered under the shaded window,
	Wind troubled the window curtains all night long,
	A fleet of trucks strained uphill, grinding,
	Their freights covered, as usual.
	The ceiling lightened again, the slanting diagram
	Slid slowly forth.
	Hearing the milkman’s clop,
	his striving up the stair, the bottle’s chink,
	I rose from bed, lit a cigarette,
	And walked to the window. The stony street
	Displayed the stillness in which buildings stand,
	The street-lamp’s vigil and the horse’s patience.
	The winter sky’s pure capital
	Turned me back to bed with exhausted eyes.
	
	Strangeness grew in the motionless air. The loose
	Film grayed. Shaking wagons, hooves’ waterfalls,
	Sounded far off, increasing, louder and nearer.
	A car coughed, starting. Morning softly
	Melting the air, lifted the half-covered chair
	From underseas, kindled the looking-glass,
	Distinguished the dresser and the white wall.
	The bird called tentatively, whistled, called,
	Bubbled and whistled, so! Perplexed, still wet
	With sleep, affectionate, hungry and cold. So, so,
	O son of man, the ignorant night, the travail
	Of early morning, the mystery of the beginning
	Again and again,
	while history is unforgiven.



8. NEWS OF THE GOLD WORLD OF MAY

	News of the Gold World of May in Holland Michigan:
	“Wooden shoes will clatter again
	on freshly scrubbed streets--”
	
	The tulip will arise and reign again from awnings and
	windows
	of all colors and forms
	its vine, verve and valentine curves
	
	upon the city streets, the public grounds
	and private lawns
	(wherever it is conceivable
	that a bulb might take root
	and the two lips, softly curved, come up
	possessed by the skilled love and will of a ballerina.)
	
	The citizens will dance in folk dances.
	They will thump, they will pump,
	thudding and shoving
	elbow and thigh,
	bumping and laughing, like barrels and bells.
	
	Vast fields of tulips in full bloom,
	the reproduction of a miniature Dutch village,
	part of a gigantic flower show.



9. SPRING

	Spring has returned! Everything has returned!
	The earth, just like a schoolgirl, memorizes
	Poems, so many poems. ... Look, she has learned
	So many famous poems, she has earned so many prizes!
	
	Teacher was strict. We delighted in the white
	Of the old man’s beard, bright like the snow’s:
	Now we may ask which names are wrong, or right
	For “blue,” for “apple,” for “ripe.” She knows, she knows!
	
	Lucky earth, let out of school, now you must play
	Hide-and-seek with all the children every day:
	You must hide that we may seek you: we will! We will!
	
	The happiest child will hold you. She knows all the things
	You taught her: the word for “hope,” and for “believe,”
	Are still upon her tongue. She sings and sings and sings.

