*** Stephen Spender (1909 - 1995)

1. DAYBREAK

	At Dawn she lay with her profile at that angle 
	Which, when she sleeps, seems the carved face of an angel. 
	Her hair a harp, the hand of a breeze follows 
	And plays, against the white cloud of the pillows. 
	Then, in a flush of rose, she woke, and her eyes that opened 
	Swam in blue through her rose flesh that dawned. 
	From her dew of lips, the drop of one word 
	Fell like the first of fountains: murmured 
	‘Darling’, upon my ears the song of the first bird. 
	‘My dream becomes my dream,‘ she said, ‘come true. 
	I waken from you to my dream of you.‘ 
	Oh, my own wakened dream then dared assume 
	The audacity of her sleep. Our dreams 
	Poured into each other’s arms, like streams.



2. I THINK CONTINUALLY

	I think continually of those who were truly great. 
	Who, from the womb, remembered the soul’s history 
	Through corridors of light where the hours are suns 
	Endless and singing. Whose lovely ambition 
	Was that their lips, still touched with fire, 
	Should tell of the Spirit clothed from head to foot in song. 
	And who hoarded from the Spring branches 
	The desires falling across their bodies like blossoms. 
	
	What is precious is never to forget 
	The essential delight of the blood drawn from ageless springs 
	Breaking through rocks in worlds before our earth. 
	Never to deny its pleasure in the morning simple light 
	Nor its grave evening demand for love. 
	Never to allow gradually the traffic to smother 
	With noise and fog the flowering of the spirit. 
	
	Near the snow, near the sun, in the highest fields 
	See how these names are feted by the waving grass 
	And by the streamers of white cloud 
	And whispers of wind in the listening sky. 
	The names of those who in their lives fought for life 
	Who wore at their hearts the fire’s centre. 
	Born of the sun they travelled a short while towards the sun, 
	And left the vivid air signed with their honour.



3. ON THE PILOTS WHO DESTROYED GERMANY

	I stood on a roof top and they wove their cage 
	Their murmuring throbbing cage, in the air of blue crystal. 
	I saw them gleam above the town like diamond bolts 
	Conjoining invisible struts of wire, 
	Carrying through the sky their geometric cage 
	Woven by senses delicate as a shoal of flashing fish. 
	
	They went. They left a silence in our streets below 
	Which boys gone to schoolroom leave in their playground. 
	A silence of asphalt, of privet hedge, of staring wall. 
	In the glass emptied sky their diamonds had scratched 
	Long curving finest whitest lines. 
	These the day soon melted into satin ribbons 
	Falling over heaven’s terraces near the golden sun. 
	
	Oh that April morning they carried my will 
	Exalted expanding singing in their aeriel cage. 
	They carried my will. They dropped it on a German town. 
	My will expanded and tall buildings fell down. 
	
	Then, when die ribbons faded and the sky forgot, 
	And April was concerned with building nests and being hot 
	I began to remember the lost names and faces. 
	
	Now I tie the ribbons torn down from those terraces 
	Around the most hidden image in my lines, 
	And my life, which never paid the price of their wounds, 
	Turns thoughts over and over like a propellor 
	Assumes their guilt, honours, repents, prays for them.



4. A STOPWATCH AND AN ORDNANCE MAP

	A stopwatch and an ordnance map. 
	At five a man fell to the ground 
	And the watch flew off his wrist 
	Like a moon struck from the earth 
	Marking a blank time that stares 
	On the tides of change beneath. 
	All under the olive trees. 
	A stopwatch and an ordnance map. 
	He stayed faithfully in that place 
	From his living comrade split 
	By dividers of the bullet 
	Opening wide the distances 
	Of his final loneliness. 
	
	All under the olive trees. 
	A stopwatch and an ordnance map. 
	And the bones are fixed at five 
	Under the moon’s timelessness; 
	But another who lives on 
	Wears within his heart forever 
	Space split open by the bullet. 
	All under the olive trees.



5. THREE SUMMER DAYS

	On the first summer day I lay in the valley. 
	Above rocks the sky sealed my eyes with a leaf 
	The grass licked my skin. The flowers bound my nostrils 
	With scented cotton threads. The soil invited 
	My hands and feet to grow down and have roots. 
	Bees and grass-hoppers drummed over 
	Crepitations of thirst rising from dry stones, 
	And the ants rearranged my ceaseless thoughts 
	Into different patterns for ever the same. 
	Then the blue wind fell out of the air 
	And the sun hammered down till I became of wood 
	Glistening brown beginning to warp. 
	
	On the second summer day I climbed through the forest’s 
	Huge tent pegged to the mountain-side by roots. 
	My direction was cancelled by that great sum of trees. 
	Here darkness lay under the leaves in a war 
	Against light, which occasionally penetrated 
	Splintering spears through several interstices 
	And dropping white clanging shields on the soil. 
	Silence was stitched through with thinnest pine needles 
	And bird songs were stifled behind a hot hedge. 
	My feet became as heavy as logs. 
	I drank up all the air of the forest. 
	My mind changed to amber transfixed with dead flies. 
	
	On the third summer day I sprang from the forest 
	Into the wonder of a white snow-tide. 
	Alone with the sun’s wild whispering wheel, 
	Grinding seeds of secret light on frozen fields, 
	Every burden fell from me, the forest from my back, 
	The valley dwindled to bewildering visions 
	Seen through torn shreds of the sailing clouds. 
	Above the snowfield one rock against the sky 
	Shaped out of pure silence a naked tune 
	Like a violin when the tune forsakes the instrument 
	And the pure sound flies through the ears’ gate 
	And a whole sky floods the pool of one mind.



6. ULTIMA RATIO REGUM

	The guns spell money’s ultimate reason 
	In letters of lead on the spring hillside. 
	But the boy lying dead under the olive trees 
	Was too young and too silly 
	To have been notable to their important eye. 
	He was a better target for a kiss. 
	
	When he lived, tall factory hooters never summoned him. 
	Nor did restaurant plate-glass doors revolve to wave him in. 
	His name never appeared in the papers. 
	The world maintained its traditional wall 
	Round the dead with their gold sunk deep as a well, 
	Whilst his life, intangible as a Stock Exchange rumour, drifted outside. 
	
	O too lightly he threw down his cap 
	One day when the breeze threw petals from the trees. 
	The unflowering wall sprouted with guns, 
	Machine-gun anger quickly scythed the grasses; 
	Flags and leaves fell from hands and branches; 
	The tweed cap rotted in the nettles. 
	
	Consider his life which was valueless 
	In terms of employment, hotel ledgers, news files. 
	Consider. One bullet in ten thousand kills a man. 
	Ask. Was so much expenditure justified 
	On the death of one so young and so silly 
	Lying under the olive tree, O world, O death?

