*** Galaktion Tabidze (1892 - 1959)

1. BLUE HORSES

	Like snowdrifts of mist gilded in sunset,
	the shore was sun-lit in eternity’s realm.
	No promise in sight, nothing to look at,
	Only the quiet--nomadic and numb.
	Only the quiet: the cold, rampant storm
	of eternity’s realm holding nothing but grief.
	Eyes covered in ash, you lie prone in your tomb,
	lying in heaven, and still your soul grieves.
	Through a thin forest of disfigured faces
	each barren day races: hurrying, gone.
	I’ve terrible visions of my blue stallions
	bearing your coffin, as the world looks on.
	And seconds race by. I am not concerned:
	those immortal linens won’t shine with your tears.
	The tortures that churned in you died--all illusions
	of night: a burning soul howling with prayer.
	At wildfire’s rate, like a swift turn of fate,
	my blue horses dart with a thunderous roar!
	There are no bouquets, no calm reveries,
	only your new home--this grave’s sepulcher.
	Who’ll remember your face? Who’ll speak your name?
	If you moan, who’ll come? Who’ll hear you whisper?
	There’s no one for solace upon those strange shores,
	where cryptic chimeras sleep, darkly twisted.
	Nothing could block out the light from this chamber:
	from only dry numbers, still, desert winds rise!
	Through a thin forest of disfigured faces
	each barren day surges then, hurrying, dies.
	In the mist’s rampant storm, eternity’s realm,
	In heaven or tomb, by dark curse deplored:
	at a hurricane’s rate, like a swift turn of fate,
	my blue horses dart with a thunderous roar!



2. THE FIELDS

	Swaying, a slender figure appears
	walking alone, sickle in hand,
	singing a song, her voice is the pasture
	at village’s edge, where an old outpost stands.
	The song is a soulful hymn of farewell
	sung to a row of cranes facing the sea,
	while the sun, like a spider is closing itself
	in the delicate criss-crossing thicket of trees.
	But what does the soul know of slavery? Nothing!
	The rustle and braying of sheep fill the streets:
	a young village virgin and flock are returning.
	And the Virgin will soon return to the huts.



3. UNCERTAINTY

	There is inside your heart
	a bitter, brutal death,
	a place of deep upset
	where the lyre cannot breathe.
	
	Once a boiling fire,
	now your blood is frozen.
	And your eye has no tear,
	your heart--no compassion.
	
	And when asked: “What occured,
	what does your heart yearn for?”
	He raises his arms skyward
	yet gives to men no answer.



4. THE WIND BLOWS

	Blowing wind, blowing wind, blowing wind,
	In the breeze flying leaves night through . . .
	Group of trees, troop of trees roundly swaying, 
	Where are you, where are you, where are you?
	
	Falling rain, falling snow, falling snow, 
	How to find, when to find never know! 
	Pure of yours image rolls tired my mind
	Everyday, every step, every time! 
	
	Drizzling sky misty thoughts on the field . . .
	Blowing wind, blowing wind, blowing wind!



5. YOU’RE THIRTEEN

	You’re thirteen and you’ve ensnared
	a graying lover’s evil dreams.
	Line up thirteen bullets here:
	I’ll kill myself thirteen times.
	
	Another thirteen years go by,
	soon you’ll arrive at twenty-six.
	The tallest iris gets the scythe:
	time and poem mourn their necks.
	
	How hastily youth slips away--
	remorseless wishes of the lion.
	And everything glows tenderly
	when Autumn sunlight’s pouring in.

