*** Dylan Thomas (1915 - 1953)

1. DO NOT GO GENTLE INTO THAT GOOD NIGHT

	Do not go gentle into that good night,
	Old age should burn and rave at close of day;
	Rage, rage against the dying of the light.
	
	Though wise men at their end know dark is right,
	Because their words had forked no lightning they
	Do not go gentle into that good night.
	
	Good men, the last wave by, crying how bright
	Their frail deeds might have danced in a green bay,
	Rage, rage against the dying of the light.
	
	Wild men who caught and sang the sun in flight,
	And learn, too late, they grieved it on its way,
	Do not go gentle into that good night.
	
	Grave men, near death, who see with blinding sight
	Blind eyes could blaze like meteors and be gay,
	Rage, rage against the dying of the light.
	
	And you, my father, there on the sad height,
	Curse, bless, me now with your fierce tears, I pray.
	Do not go gentle into that good night.
	Rage, rage against the dying of the light.



2. ESPECIALLY WHEN THE OCTOBER WIND

	Especially when the October wind 
	With frosty fingers punishes my hair, 
	Caught by the crabbing sun I walk on fire 
	And cast a shadow crab upon the land, 
	By the sea’s side, hearing the noise of birds, 
	Hearing the raven cough in winter sticks, 
	My busy heart who shudders as she talks 
	Sheds the syllabic blood and drains her words. 
	
	Shut, too, in a tower of words, I mark 
	On the horizon walking like the trees 
	The wordy shapes of women, and the rows 
	Of the star-gestured children in the park. 
	Some let me make you of the vowelled beeches, 
	Some of the oaken voices, from the roots 
	Of many a thorny shire tell you notes, 
	Some let me make you of the water’s speeches. 
	
	Behind a pot of ferns the wagging clock 
	Tells me the hour’s word, the neural meaning 
	Flies on the shafted disk, declaims the morning 
	And tells the windy weather in the cock. 
	Some let me make you of the meadow’s signs; 
	The signal grass that tells me all I know 
	Breaks with the wormy winter through the eye. 
	Some let me tell you of the raven’s sins. 
	
	Especially when the October wind 
	(Some let me make you of autumnal spells, 
	The spider-tongued, and the loud hill of Wales) 
	With fists of turnips punishes the land, 
	Some let me make you of the heartless words. 
	The heart is drained that, spelling in the scurry 
	Of chemic blood, warned of the coming fury. 
	By the sea’s side hear the dark-vowelled birds.



3. FERN HILL

	Now as I was young and easy under the apple boughs
	About the lilting house and happy as the grass was green,
	   The night above the dingle starry,
	        Time let me hail and climb
	   Golden in the heydays of his eyes,
	And honoured among wagons I was prince of the apple towns
	And once below a time I lordly had the trees and leaves
	        Trail with daisies and barley
	   Down the rivers of the windfall light.
	
	And as I was green and carefree, famous among the barns
	About the happy yard and singing as the farm was home,
	   In the sun that is young once only,
	        Time let me play and be
	   Golden in the mercy of his means,
	And green and golden I was huntsman and herdsman, the calves
	Sang to my horn, the foxes on the hills barked clear and cold,
	        And the sabbath rang slowly
	   In the pebbles of the holy streams.
	
	All the sun long it was running, it was lovely, the hay
	Fields high as the house, the tunes from the chimneys, it was air
	   And playing, lovely and watery
	        And fire green as grass.
	   And nightly under the simple stars
	As I rode to sleep the owls were bearing the farm away,
	All the moon long I heard, blessed among stables, the nightjars
	   Flying with the ricks, and the horses
	        Flashing into the dark.
	
	And then to awake, and the farm, like a wanderer white
	With the dew, come back, the cock on his shoulder: it was all
	   Shining, it was Adam and maiden,
	        The sky gathered again
	   And the sun grew round that very day.
	So it must have been after the birth of the simple light
	In the first, spinning place, the spellbound horses walking warm
	   Out of the whinnying green stable
	        On to the fields of praise.
	
	And honoured among foxes and pheasants by the gay house
	Under the new made clouds and happy as the heart was long,
	   In the sun born over and over,
	        I ran my heedless ways,
	   My wishes raced through the house high hay
	And nothing I cared, at my sky blue trades, that time allows
	In all his tuneful turning so few and such morning songs
	   Before the children green and golden
	        Follow him out of grace,
	
	Nothing I cared, in the lamb white days, that time would take me
	Up to the swallow thronged loft by the shadow of my hand,
	   In the moon that is always rising,
	        Nor that riding to sleep
	   I should hear him fly with the high fields
	And wake to the farm forever fled from the childless land.
	Oh as I was young and easy in the mercy of his means,
	        Time held me green and dying
	   Though I sang in my chains like the sea.



4. I SEE THE BOYS OF SUMMER

	I
	
	I see the boys of summer in their ruin
	Lay the gold tithings barren,
	Setting no store by harvest, freeze the soils;
	There in their heat the winter floods
	Of frozen loves they fetch their girls,
	And drown the cargoed apples in their tides.
	
	These boys of light are curdlers in their folly,
	Sour the boiling honey;
	The jacks of frost they finger in the hives;
	There in the sun the frigid threads
	Of doubt and dark they feed their nerves;
	The signal moon is zero in their voids.
	
	I see the summer children in their mothers
	Split up the brawned womb’s weathers,
	Divide the night and day with fairy thumbs;
	There in the deep with quartered shades
	Of sun and moon they paint their dams
	As sunlight paints the shelling of their heads.
	
	I see that from these boys shall men of nothing
	Stature by seedy shifting,
	Or lame the air with leaping from its heats;
	There from their hearts the dogdayed pulse
	Of love and light bursts in their throats.
	O see the pulse of summer in the ice.
	
	
	II
	
	But seasons must be challenged or they totter
	Into a chiming quarter
	Where, punctual as death, we ring the stars;
	There, in his night, the black-tongued bells
	The sleepy man of winter pulls,
	Nor blows back moon-and-midnight as she blows.
	
	We are the dark derniers let us summon
	Death from a summer woman,
	A muscling life from lovers in their cramp
	From the fair dead who flush the sea
	The bright-eyed worm on Davy’s lamp
	And from the planted womb the man of straw.
	
	We summer boys in this four-winded spinning,
	Green of the seaweeds’ iron,
	Hold up the noisy sea and drop her birds,
	Pick the world’s ball of wave and froth
	To choke the deserts with her tides,
	And comb the county gardens for a wreath.
	
	In spring we cross our foreheads with the holly,
	Heigh ho the blood and berry,
	And nail the merry squires to the trees;
	Here love’s damp muscle dries and dies
	Here break a kiss in no love’s quarry,
	O see the poles of promise in the boys.
	
	
	III
	
	I see you boys of summer in your ruin.
	Man in his maggot’s barren.
	And boys are full and foreign to the pouch.
	I am the man your father was.
	We are the sons of flint and pitch.
	O see the poles are kissing as they cross.



5. MY HERO BARES HIS NERVES

	My hero bares his nerves along my wrist
	That rules from wrist to shoulder,
	Unpacks the head that, like a sleepy ghost,
	Leans on my mortal ruler,
	The proud spine spurning turn and twist.
	
	And these poor nerves so wired to the skull
	Ache on the lovelorn paper
	I hug to love with my unruly scrawl
	That utters all love hunger
	And tells the page the empty ill.
	
	My hero bares my side and sees his heart
	Tread, like a naked Venus,
	The beach of flesh, and wind her bloodred plait;
	Stripping my loin of promise,
	He promises a secret heat.
	
	He holds the wire from the box of nerves
	Praising the mortal error
	Of birth and death, the two sad knaves of thieves,
	And the hunger’s emperor;
	He pulls the chain, the cistern moves.



6. OUR EUNUCH DREAMS

	I
	
	Our eunuch dreams, all seedless in the light,
	Of light and love the tempers of the heart,
	Whack their boys’ limbs,
	And, winding-footed in their shawl and sheet,
	Groom the dark brides, the widows of the night
	Fold in their arms.
	
	The shades of girls, all flavoured from their shrouds,
	When sunlight goes are sundered from the worm,
	The bones of men, the broken in their beds,
	By midnight pulleys that unhouse the tomb.
	
	
	II
	
	In this our age the gunman and his moll
	Two one-dimensional ghosts, love on a reel,
	Strange to our solid eye,
	And speak their midnight nothings as they swell;
	When cameras shut they hurry to their hole
	down in the yard of day.
	
	They dance between their arclamps and our skull,
	Impose their shots, showing the nights away;
	We watch the show of shadows kiss or kill
	Flavoured of celluloid give love the lie.
	
	
	III
	
	Which is the world? Of our two sleepings, which
	Shall fall awake when cures and their itch
	Raise up this red-eyed earth?
	Pack off the shapes of daylight and their starch,
	The sunny gentlemen, the Welshing rich,
	Or drive the night-geared forth.
	
	The photograph is married to the eye,
	Grafts on its bride one-sided skins of truth;
	The dream has sucked the sleeper of his faith
	That shrouded men might marrow as they fly.
	
	
	IV
	
	This is the world; the lying likeness of
	Our strips of stuff that tatter as we move
	Loving and being loth;
	The dream that kicks the buried from their sack
	And lets their trash be honoured as the quick.
	This is the world. Have faith.
	
	For we shall be a shouter like the cock,
	Blowing the old dead back; our shots shall smack
	The image from the plates;
	And we shall be fit fellows for a life,
	And who remains shall flower as they love,
	Praise to our faring hearts.



7. THE SONG OF THE MISCHIEVOUS DOG

	There are many who say that a dog has its day,
	And a cat  has a number of lives;
	There are others who think that a lobster is pink,
	And that bees never work in their hives.
	There are fewer, of course, who insist that a horse
	Has a horn and two humps on its head,
	And a fellow who jests that a mare can build nests
	Is as rare as a donkey that’s red.
	Yet in spite of all this, I have moments of bliss,
	For I cherish a passion for bones,
	And though doubtful of biscuit, I’m willing to risk it,
	And I love to chase rabbits and stones.
	But my greatest delight is to take a good bite
	At a calf that is plump and delicious;
	And if I indulge in a bite at a bulge,
	Let’s hope you won’t think me too vicious.



8. YOUR BREATH WAS SHED

	Your breath was shed
	Invisible to make
	About the soiled undead
	Night for my sake,
	
	A raining trail
	Intangible to them
	With biter’s tooth and tail
	And cobweb drum,
	
	A dark as deep
	My love as a round wave
	To hide the wolves of sleep
	And mask the grave.

