*** Robert Penn Warren (1905 - 1989)

1. ASPEN LEAF IN WINDLESS WORLD

	Watch how the aspen leaf, pale and windless, waggles,
	While one white cloud loiters motionless over Wyoming,
	And think how delicately the heart may flutter
	In the windless joy of unworded revelation.
	
	Look how the sea-foam, white, makes its Arabic scrawl
	On the unruffled sand of the beach’s faint-tilted plane.
	Is there a message there for you to decipher?
	Or only the joy of its sunlit intricacy?
	
	Is there a sign Truth gives that we recognize?
	Can we fix our eyes on the flight of birds for answer?
	Can the bloody-armed augurs declare expediency?
	What does dew on stretched woolfleece, the grass dry, mean?
	
	Have you stood on the night-lawn, in blackness of oaks, and heard
	From bough-crotch to bough-crotch, the moon-eyed tree toad utter,
	Again and again, that quavery croak, and asked
	If it means there’ll be rain? Toward dawn? Or early tomorrow?
	
	We were not by when Aaron laid down his rod
	That suddenly twisted, went scaley, and heaved the fanged head,
	And when Egypt’s high magi probed their own lore for the trick.
	Well, the sacred serpent devoured that brood. What, then,
	
	Would you’ve made of that? Yes, we wander our world
	Of miracles, whispers, high-jinks, and metaphor.
	Yes, why is the wind in the cedar the sub-sob of grief?
	And the puppy--why is his tongue on your palm so sweet?
	
	What image--behind blind eyes when the nurse steps back--
	Will loom at the end of your own life’s long sorites?
	Would a sun rise red on an eastern horizon of waters?
	Would you see a face? What face? Would it smile? Can you say?
	
	Or would it be some great, sky-thrusting gray menhir
	Or what, in your long-lost childhood, one morning you saw--
	Tinfoil wrappers of chocolate, tramped popcorn, nut shells, and poorly
	Cleared up, the last elephant turd on the lot where the circus had been?



2. BEARDED OAKS

	The oaks, how subtle and marine!
	Bearded, and all the layered light
	Above them swims; and thus the scene,
	Recessed, awaits the positive night.
	
	So, waiting, we in the grass now lie
	Beneath the langorous tread of light;
	The grasses, kelp-like, satisfy
	The nameless motions of the air.
	
	Upon the floor of light, and time,
	Unmurmuring, of polyp made,
	We rest; we are, as light withdraws,
	Twin atolls on a shelf of shade.
	
	Ages to our construction went,
	Dim architecture, hour by hour;
	And violence, forgot now, lent
	The present stillness all its power.
	
	The storm of noon above us rolled,
	Of light the fury, furious gold,
	The long drag troubling us, the depth
	Unrocked is dark, unrippling, still.
	
	Passion and slaughter, ruth, decay
	Descended, whispered grain by grain,
	Silted down swaying streams, to lay
	Foundation for our voicelessness.



3. THE CARDINAL

	Cardinal, lover of shade,
	Rock and gold is the land in the pulsing noon.
	Lover of cedar, lover of shade . . .
	Blue the shadow of cedar on grey limestone
	Where the lizard, devout as an ikon,
	Is carved on the stone, throat pulsing on lichen.
	
	At the hour of noon I have seen
	The burst of your wings displayed,
	Vision of scarlet devised in the slumberous green . . .
	Lover of cedar and shade.
	
	What if the lizard, my cardinal,
	Depart like a breath its altar, summer westward fall?
	For here is a bough where you can perch, and preen
	Your scarlet that from its landscape shall not fade,
	Lapped in the cool of the mind’s undated shade,
	In a whispering tree, like cedar, evergreen.



4. THE GARDEN

	_On a fine day in early autumn_
	
	How kind, how secretly, the sun
	Has blessed this garden frost has won,
	And touched again, as once it used,
	The furlèd boughs by frost bemused.
	Though summered brilliance had but room
	For blossom, now the leaves will bloom
	Their time, and take from a milder sun
	The unreviving benison.
	
	No marbles whitely gleam among
	These paths where gilt the late pear hung;
	But branches interlace to frame
	An avenue of stately flame
	Where yonder, far more chill and pure
	Than marble, gleams the sycamore,
	Of argent torse and cunning shaft
	Propped nobler than the sculptor’s craft.
	
	The hand that crooked upon the spade
	Here plucked the peach, and thirst allayed;
	Here lovers paused upon the kiss,
	Instructed of what ripeness is.
	Where all who came might stand to try
	The grace of this green empery,
	Now jay and cardinal debate,
	Like twin usurpers, the ruined state.
	
	Then he who sought, not love but peace,
	In such rank plot could take no ease:
	Now poised between the two alarms
	Of summer’s lusts and winter’s harms,
	For him alone these precincts wait
	With sacrament that could translate
	All things that fed luxurious sense
	From appetite to innocence.



5. THE LIMITED

	Since there’s no help, come, let them kiss and part--
	The Pullman step’s as good as any place.
	It’s certain love can scarcely learn the art
	To read the mind’s construction in the face.
	And so he tips the grim white-coated groom,
	Consigns her bags to that black hand of doom;
	Then slick as death the velvet pistons start,
	Like fat blood in a drowning swimmer’s heart.
	
	White Proserpine whirled in the cloudy car
	While brightness drops from star and star:
	Proven--ah, sad sorites of the year--
	For him who turns like that mute Orpheus
	Again to thrust by all the vulgar dead.
	But in his heart the summer’s wrath shall roam
	With burning eyes, as in the vacant house
	The cold and dry-foot cat whose tread
	Wheels from last week’s newspaper to the broom.



6. MAN COMING OF AGE

	What rime, what tinsel pure and chill,
	By dawn adorns the new-spied hill?
	
	This brilliance in the night was wrought:
	From cold and dark a dead world caught
	Such light that glitters past our thought.
	
	So settles on a dying face,
	After the retch and spasm, grace.
	
	(A grace like that did not belong
	In the room of no-love, fret, and wrong:
	The watchers sat heavy, night was long.)
	
	Now standing on his own doorsill,
	He views the woods that crest the hill.
	
	And asks: “Was it I who roamed to prove
	My heart beneath the unwhispering grove
	In season greener and of more love?”
	
	And was it he? Now let him stride
	With crampèd knee the slant hillside,
	
	Pondering what paths he used to know,
	Seeking under the snowy bough
	That frail deceitful alter ego.
	
	Wanderer in woods that bear no leaf,
	Climber of rocks, assume your grief,
	
	And go! lest he, before you tread
	That ground once sweetly tenanted,
	Like mist down the glassy glooms be fled.



7. THE MOONLIGHT’S DREAM

	Why did I wake at night, all the house at rest?
	I could not hear, but knew, what each breath meant
	In each room. My father’s long drag to the depth of chest.
	My mother’s as silky as rustle of lilies that leant
	By the garden pool when night-breeze is merely a whisper.
	But loudest of all that of my old grandfather,
	Who with years struggled, grumbling, croupy, and slow
	But once dreamed forth a yell for blood, at Fort Pillow or Shiloh.
	
	Tonight the house was mouse-still except for some beam
	That, whisper or creak, complained of the years it had borne
	The weight of reality and the human dream
	As the real became more real, and the real more forlorn.
	Outside, I wondered why I had come here and where
	I would go, and back-looking now, saw the tracks of my bare
	Dark footprints set in the moonlit dew like snow,
	And thought: _I must go where they go, for they must know where to go._
	
	It was as though they knew their way in a dream
	The moonlight was having of all the world that night,
	And I took the path it dreamed, which led to the stream
	Where cattle snorted in shadow, and eyes without sight
	Stared through the dream that I was, while a whip-o-will
	Asserted to moonlight its name, while nameless and still,
	I wondered if ever my heart would beat again,
	As I wandered the moonlight’s dream, past pleasure or past pain,
	
	Across the sweet-clover whiteness, then up the hill
	To the darkness that hung from old maples, and lay down to wonder
	If I, being part of the moonlight’s dream, could be real,
	For whatever realness I was, it must lie asleep yonder
	In the far white house that was part of the moonlight’s dream, too.
	Then blankness. At day-streak, in terror, I rose, ran through
	The tangle of clover, the corn balks, the creek--home to bed:
	But no breath could I hear, and all seemed still, as still as the dead.
	
	Not dead! Though long years now are, and the creek bull-dozed dry,
	And their sorrow and joy, their passion and pain and endeavor,
	Have with them gone in whatever reality
	They were, or are, by sunlight or moonlight--whatever.
	The highway has slicked the spot the white farmhouse once stood.
	At sixty per I am whirled past the spot, my blood
	Unwitting of that as of the defunct stream,
	Or of the ignorant night I strayed as part of the moonlight’s dream.



8. MORTAL LIMIT

	I saw the hawk ride updraft in the sunset over Wyoming.
	It rose from coniferous darkness, past gray jags
	Of mercilessness, past whiteness, into the gloaming
	Of dream-spectral light above the lazy purity of snow-snags.
	
	There--west--were the Tetons. Snow-peaks would soon be
	In dark profile to break constellations. Beyond what height
	Hangs now the black speck? Beyond what range will gold eyes see
	New ranges rise to mark a last scrawl of light?
	
	Or, having tasted that atmosphere’s thinness, does it
	Hang motionless in dying vision before
	It knows it will accept the mortal limit,
	And swing into the great circular downwardness that will restore
	
	The breath of earth? Of rock? Of rot? Of other such
	Items, and the darkness of whatever dream we clutch?



9. THE OWL

	Here was the sound of water falling only,
	Which is not sound but silence musical
	Tumbling forever down the gorge’s wall.
	Like late milkweed that blooms beside the lonely
	And sunlit stone, peace bloomed all afternoon.
	Where time is not is peace; and here the shadow,
	That crept to him across the western meadow
	And climbed the hill to mark the dropping sun,
	Seemed held a space, washed downward by the water
	Whose music flowed against the flow of time.
	It could not be. Dark fell along the stream,
	And like a child grown suddenly afraid,
	With shaking knees, hands bloody on the stone,
	Toward the upland gleaming fields he fled.
	
	Light burned against their rim, was quickly gone.
	Later he would remember this, and start.
	And once or twice again his tough old heart
	Knew sickness that the rabbit’s heart must know,
	When star by star the great wings float,
	And down the moonlit track below
	Their mortal silken shadow sweeps the snow.
	O scaled bent claw, infatuate deep throat!



10. QUESTION AN ANSWER

	_What has availed
	Or failed?_
	The firm decision,
	The voices
	Lost,
	And the choices
	Lost,
	Elision
	Of choice and choice
	In the long stammer of chance?
	What has availed
	Or failed?
	_Or will avail?_
	Hawk’s poise,
	The boxer’s stance,
	The sail
	(O true upon the swollen tack! )
	The sprinter’s pace,
	Moonlit the bomber’s bludgeoning grace--
	Or looking back,
	The stainèd face?
	
	Pace forth in dawns
	Of buds unhinged, and dew;
	At dusk pace downs
	To see the sea and view,
	Immense, the casual land:
	For the heart can be held in the hand
	And the hour held in the hand
	And the question held in the hand:
	But never demand
	Of the wave-lipped, sea-tongued sand
	Answer.
	Nor of the gull demand
	Answer,
	Nor of the noble sky
	Where the gull in its integrity
	Will move;
	Nor answer
	Of your true love.
	
	For all--
	Each frescoed figure leaning from the world’s wall
	With tongue too dry and small,
	Blunt eye and ignorant hand--
	Demand
	In truth the true
	Answer of you;
	And each,
	Locked lonely in its valveless speech,
	Speaks,
	And without resting, seeks
	Answer, and seeks to speak:
	Their converse is not loud.
	How painful, intimate, and meek
	Before your face are crag and cloud!
	
	For all
	Rehearse their own simplicity:
	For all--
	The wind-heaved gull,
	The ocean with its blundering garrulity,
	Stony pasture, starving goat,
	Mullein, anemone,
	Groaning gallows and the gallows-meat--
	For all repeat
	In mirrored-mirrored-mirror-wise
	Unto our eyes
	But question, not replies:
	All flower from the stalk, and bend,
	Like you, with what beseeching hand.
	
	Then let the heart be stone,
	And think
	On stone,
	And think
	How once the tribes in dread
	from easy-bellied Egypt fled,
	And when the conniving sea was past,
	Stumbling the waste
	Were led,
	Not to the desert well
	Or green-lipped pool
	Where the moving water sang
	And algae swayed beneath,
	But thirsting and accurst--
	Tongue black between the teeth
	Whence no sweet spittle sprang--
	Under the noon’s flame
	To the rock came:
	And think how the Israelite
	Struck
	And the riven rock
	Like a pealing bell rang
	And in the general sight
	Gave forth to tongue and gut the living stream’s delight.
	
	But if not that, then know
	At least the heart a bow
	Bent,
	And the wood’s tough nerve unspent,
	Cord-kissing notch set now
	Upon the cord
	As on the tongue the word
	The lover at love has heard:
	And once the wide arc is sprung,
	Live in the cord’s long clang,
	Who let the arrow fy
	At God’s black, orbèd, target eye. 



11. THE RETURN: AN ELEGY

	The east wind finds the gap bringing rain--
	Rain in the pine wind shaking the stiff pine.
	Beneath the wind the hollow gorges whine,
	The pines decline.
	Slow film of rain creeps down the loam again
	Where the blind and nameless bones recline.
	
	_they burn like faggots in . . . of damp and dark . . . the monstrous bulging flame.
	calcium-phosphate lust speculation faith treachery:
	it walked upright with habitation and a name
	tell me its name_
	
	The pines, black, like combers plunge with spray,
	Lick the wind’s unceasing keel
	It is not long till day.
	Pines lurch beneath the thunder’s livid heel;
	The long sough, the rent bough’s squeal.
	The pines, black, snore. What does the wind say?
	
	_tell me its name_
	
	I have a name, I am not blind.
	Eyes not blind press to the Pullman pane
	Survey the driving dark and silver taunt of rain.
	What will I find--
	What will I find beyond the snoring pine?
	Oh, eyes locked blind in death’s immaculate design
	Shall fix their last distrust in mine.
	
	_give me the nickels off your eyes
	from your hands the violets
	let me bless your obsequies . . .
	if you possessed conveniently enough three eyes
	then I could buy a pack of cigarettes_
	
	In gorges where the dead fox lies, the fern
	Will rankest loop the battened frond and fall
	Above the bare and tushed jaws that turn
	Their insolence unto the gracious catafalque and pall.
	It would be the season when milkweed blossoms burn.
	
	_the old for is dead
	what have I said!
	I have only said what the wind said
	wind shakes a bell the hollow head_
	
	By dawn the wind, the blown rain,
	Will cease their antique concitation.
	It is the hour when old ladies cough and wake,
	The chair the table take their form again
	And earth begins the matinal exhalation.
	
	_does my mother wake_
	
	Pines drip without motion,
	The hairy boughs no longer shake.
	Mist crook-backed and shagged ascends;
	Round hairy boughs the mist with shaggy fingers bends.
	No wind no rain:
	Why do the steady pines complain?--
	Complain--
	
	_the old for is dead
	what have I said!_
	
	Locked in the roaring cubicle
	Over the mountains through darkness hurled
	I race the daylight’s westward cycle
	Across the groaning roof-tree of the world.
	The mist is furled.
	
	_a hundred years men took this road
	the lank hunters then men hardeyed with hope:
	or--breath whitened the chill air the goad
	fell: here on the western slope
	the hungry beoble the lost ones took their abode
	here they took their stand:
	alders bloomed on the road to the new land._
	
	_here is the barn the broken door the shed
	the old for is dead_
	
	The wheels hum--
	The wheels. I come.
	Whirl out of space through time, O wheels!
	Pursue down backward time the ghostly parallels,
	Pursue past culvert, cut, embankment, semaphore--
	Pursue down time.
	The pines, black, snore--
	
	_turn backward turn backward O time in your flight
	and make me a child again just for tonight
	good lord he’s wet the bed come bring a light_
	
	What grief hath the mind distilled?
	The heart is unfulfilled,
	The hoarse pine stilled.
	I cannot pluck
	Out of this land of pine and rock,
	Of the fallen pine-cone,
	Of redbud (its season not yet gone).
	In drouth the lizard will blink on the hot limestone.
	If I could pluck--
	
	_the old for is dead
	what is said is said
	heaven rest the whorey head
	what have I said!
	only said what the wind said
	honor thy father and mother in the days of thy youth
	look homeward angel let thy heart melt with ruth_
	
	If I could pluck
	Out of the dark that whirls
	Over the hoarse pine, over the rock,
	Out of the mist that furls
	Could I stretch forth like God the hand and gather
	For you my mother--
	If I could pluck
	Against the dry essential of tomorrow
	To lay upon the breast that gave me suck
	Out of the dark
	The dark and swollen orchid of this sorrow.



12. REVELATION

	Because he had spoken harshly to his mother,
	The day became astonishingly bright,
	The enormity of distance crept to him like a dog now,
	And earth’s own luminescence seemed to repel the night.
	
	Roof was rent like the loud paper tearing to admit
	Sun-sulphurous splendor where had been before
	But the submarine glimmer by kindly countenances lit,
	As slow, phosphorescent dignities light the ocean floor.
	
	By walls, by walks, chrysanthemum and aster,
	All hairy, fat-petaled species, lean, confer,
	And his ears, and heart, should burn at that insidious whisper
	Which concerns him so, he knows; but he cannot make out the words.
	
	The peacock screamed, and his feathered fury made
	Legend shake, all day, while the sky ran pale as milk;
	That night, all night, the buck rabbit stamped in the moonlit glade,
	And the owl’s brain glowed like a coal in the grove’s combustible dark.
	
	When Sulla smote and Rome was rent, Augustine
	Recalled how Nature, shuddering, tore her gown,
	And kind changed kind, and the blunt herbivorous tooth dripped blood;
	At Duncan’s death, at Dunsinane, chimneys blew down.
	
	But, oh! his mother was kinder than ever Rome,
	Dearer than Duncan--no wonder, then, Nature’s frame
	Thrilled in voluptuous hemispheres far off from his home;
	But not in terror: only as the bride, as the bride.
	
	In separateness only does love learn definition,
	Though Brahma smiles beneath the dappled shade,
	Though tears, that night, wet the pillow where the boy’s head was laid
	Dreamless of splendid antipodal agitation;
	
	And though across what tide and tooth Time is,
	He was to lean back toward that merciless face,
	He would think, than Sulla more fortunate, how once he had learned
	Something important about love, and about love’s grace.



13. SO FROST ASTOUNDS

	_I have thouaht: this will be so--
	nothing less_
	
	You sat by the window in a dull blue dress;
	it was the season when blackbirds go.
	
	_Shut to light--too much of light--the classic lids_
	
	You were sustained in the green translucence that resides
	all afternoon beneath the maple trees.
	I observed your hands which lay, on the lap, supine.
	
	_So frost astounds the garden caluxes_
	
	They were composed by will which locked the frail
	articulation beneath the pensive skin:
	as though composed by the will of an artist on the dull blue cloth
	forever beyond the accident of fesh and bone,
	or principle of thief and rat and moth,
	or beyond the stately perturbation of the mind.
	
	_I have thought: this I will find._



14. TELL ME A STORY

	Long ago, in Kentucky, I, a boy, stood
	By a dirt road, in first dark, and heard
	The great geese hoot northward.
	
	I could not see them, there being no moon
	And the stars sparse. I heard them.
	
	I did not know what was happening in my heart.
	
	It was the season before the elderberry blooms,
	Therefore they were going north.
	
	The sound was passing northward.



15. TRUE LOVE

	In silence the heart raves. It utters words
	Meaningless, that never had
	A meaning. I was ten, skinny, red-headed,
	
	Freckled. In a big black Buick,
	Driven by a big grown boy, with a necktie, she sat
	In front of the drugstore, sipping something
	
	Through a straw.  There is nothing like
	Beauty.  It stops your heart. It
	Thickens your blood. It stops your breath. It
	
	Makes you feel dirty. You need a hot bath.
	I leaned against a telephone pole, and watched.
	I thought I would die if she saw me.
	
	How could I exist in the same world with that brightness?
	Two years later she smiled at me. She
	Named my name.  I thought I would wake up dead.
	
	Her grown brothers walked with the bent-knee
	Swagger of horsemen. They were slick-faced.
	Told jokes in the barbershop.  Did no work.
	
	Their father was what is called a drunkard.
	Whatever he was he stayed on the third floor
	Of the big white farmhouse under the maples for twenty-five years.
	
	He never came down. They brought everything up to him.
	I did not know what a mortgage was.
	His wife was a good, Christian woman, and prayed.
	
	When the daughter got married, the old man came down wearing
	An old tail coat, the pleated shirt yellowing.
	The sons propped him. I saw the wedding. There were
	
	Engraved invitations, it was so fashionable. I thought
	I would cry. I lay in bed that night
	And wondered if she would cry when something was done to her.
	
	The mortgage was foreclosed.  That last word was whispered.
	She never came back. The family
	Sort of drifted off. Nobody wears shiny boots like that now.
	
	But I know she is beautiful forever, and lives
	In a beautiful house, far away.
	She called my name once. I didn’t even know she knew it.



16. WATERSHED

	From this high place all things flow:
	Land of divided streams, of water spilled
	Eastward, westward without memento;
	Land where the morning mist is curled
	Like smoke about the ridgepole of the world.
	The mist is furled.
	
	The sunset hawk now rides
	The tall light up the climbing deep of air.
	Beneath him swings the rooftree that divides
	The east and west. His gold eyes scan
	The crumpled shade on gorge and crest,
	And streams that creep and disappear, appear,
	Past fingered ridges and their shrivelling span.
	Under the broken eaves men take their rest.
	
	Forever, should they stir, their thought would keep
	This place. Not love, happiness past, constrains,
	But certitude. Enough, and it remains;
	Though they who thread the flood and neap
	Of earth itself have felt the earth creep,
	In pastures hung against the rustling gorge
	Have felt the shudder and the sweat of stone,
	Knowing thereby no constant moon
	Sustains the hill’s lost granite surge.



17. A WAY TO LOVE GOD

	Here is the shadow of truth, for only the shadow is true.
	And the line where the incoming swell from the sunset Pacific
	First leans and staggers to break will tell all you need to know
	About submarine geography, and your father’s death rattle
	Provides all biographical data required for the Who’s Who of the dead.
	
	I cannot recall what I started to tell you, but at least
	I can say how night-long I have lain under the stars and
	Heard mountains moan in their sleep. By daylight,
	They remember nothing, and go about their lawful occasions
	Of not going anywhere except in slow disintegration. At night
	They remember, however, that there is something they cannot remember.
	So moan. Theirs is the perfected pain of conscience that
	Of forgetting the crime, and I hope you have not suffered it. I have.
	
	I do not recall what had burdened my tongue, but urge you
	To think on the slug’s white belly, how sick-slick and soft,
	On the hairiness of stars, silver, silver, while the silence
	Blows like wind by, and on the sea’s virgin bosom unveiled
	To give suck to the wavering serpent of the moon; and,
	In the distance, in plaza, piazza, place, platz, and square,
	Boot heels, like history being born, on cobbles bang.
	
	Everything seems an echo of something else.
	
	And when, by the hair, the headsman held up the head
	Of Mary of Scots, the lips kept on moving,
	But without sound. The lips,
	They were trying to say something very important.
	
	But I had forgotten to mention an upland
	Of wind-tortured stone white in darkness, and tall, but when
	No wind, mist gathers, and once on the Sarré at midnight,
	I watched the sheep huddling. Their eyes
	Stared into nothingness. In that mist-diffused light their eyes
	Were stupid and round like the eyes of fat fish in muddy water,
	Or of a scholar who has lost faith in his calling.
	
	Their jaws did not move. Shreds
	Of dry grass, gray in the gray mist-light, hung
	From the side of a jaw, unmoving.
	
	You would think that nothing would ever again happen.
	
	That may be a way to love God.

