*** John Greenleaf Whittier (1807 - 1892)

1. THE CALL OF THE CHRISTIAN

	Not always as the whirlwind’s rush
	On Horeb’s mount of fear,
	Not always as the burning bush
	To Midian’s shepherd seer,
	Nor as the awful voice which came
	To Israel’s prophet bards,
	Nor as the tongues of cloven flame,
	Nor gift of fearful words,--
	
	Not always thus, with outward sign
	Of fire or voice from Heaven,
	The message of a truth divine,
	The call of God is given!
	Awaking in the human heart
	Love for the true and right,--
	Zeal for the Christian’s better part,
	Strength for the Christian’s fight.
	
	Nor unto manhood’s heart alone
	The holy influence steals
	Warm with a rapture not its own,
	The heart of woman feels!
	As she who by Samaria’s wall
	The Saviour’s errand sought,--
	As those who with the fervent Paul
	And meek Aquila wrought:
	
	Or those meek ones whose martyrdom
	Rome’s gathered grandeur saw
	Or those who in their Alpine home
	Braved the Crusader’s war,
	When the green Vaudois, trembling, heard,
	Through all its vales of death,
	The martyr’s song of triumph poured
	From woman’s failing breath.
	
	And gently, by a thousand things
	Which o’er our spirits pass,
	Like breezes o’er the harp’s fine strings,
	Or vapors o’er a glass,
	Leaving their token strange and new
	Of music or of shade,
	The summons to the right and true
	And merciful is made.
	
	Oh, then, if gleams of truth and light
	Flash o’er thy waiting mind,
	Unfolding to thy mental sight
	The wants of human-kind;
	If, brooding over human grief,
	The earnest wish is known
	To soothe and gladden with relief
	An anguish not thine own;
	
	Though heralded with naught of fear,
	Or outward sign or show;
	Though only to the inward ear
	It whispers soft and low;
	Though dropping, as the manna fell,
	Unseen, yet from above,
	Noiseless as dew-fall, heed it well,---
	Thy Father’s call of love!



2. THE COMMON QUESTION

	Behind us at our evening meal
	The gray bird ate his fill,
	Swung downward by a single claw,
	And wiped his hooked bill.
	
	He shook his wings and crimson tail,
	And set his head aslant,
	And, in his sharp, impatient way,
	Asked, “What does Charlie want?”
	
	“Fie, silly bird!“ I answered, “tuck
	Your head beneath your wing,
	And go to sleep;“--but o’er and o’er
	He asked the self-same thing.
	
	Then, smiling, to myself I said
	How like are men and birds!
	We all are saying what he says,
	In action or in words.
	
	The boy with whip and top and drum,
	The girl with hoop and doll,
	And men with lands and houses, ask
	The question of Poor Poll.
	
	However full, with something more
	We fain the bag would cram;
	We sigh above our crowded nets
	For fish that never swam.
	
	No bounty of indulgent Heaven
	The vague desire can stay;
	Self-love is still a Tartar mill
	For grinding prayers alway.
	
	The dear God hears and pities all;
	He knoweth all our wants;
	And what we blindly ask of Him
	His love withholds or grants.
	
	And so I sometimes think our prayers
	Might well be merged in one;
	And nest and perch and hearth and church
	Repeat, “Thy will be done.”



3. THE CRUCIFIXION

	Sunlight upon Judha’s hills!
	And on the waves of Galilee;
	On Jordan’s stream, and on the rills
	That feed the dead and sleeping sea!
	Most freshly from the green wood springs
	The light breeze on its scented wings;
	And gayly quiver in the sun
	The cedar tops of Lebanon!
	
	A few more hours,--a change hath come!
	The sky is dark without a cloud!
	The shouts of wrath and joy are dumb,
	And proud knees unto earth are bowed.
	A change is on the hill of Death,
	The helmed watchers pant for breath,
	And turn with wild and maniac eyes
	From the dark scene of sacrifice!
	
	That Sacrifice!--the death of Him,--
	The Christ of God, the holy One!
	Well may the conscious Heaven grow dim,
	And blacken the beholding, Sun.
	The wonted light hath fled away,
	Night settles on the middle day,
	And earthquake from his caverned bed
	Is waking with a thrill of dread!
	
	The dead are waking underneath!
	Their prison door is rent away!
	And, ghastly with the seal of death,
	They wander in the eye of day!
	The temple of the Cherubim,
	The House of God is cold and dim;
	A curse is on its trembling walls,
	Its mighty veil asunder falls!
	
	Well may the cavern-depths of Earth
	Be shaken, and her mountains nod;
	Well may the sheeted dead come forth
	To see the suffering son of God!
	Well may the temple-shrine grow dim,
	And shadows veil the Cherubim,
	When He, the chosen one of Heaven,
	A sacrifice for guilt is given!
	
	And shall the sinful heart, alone,
	Behold unmoved the fearful hour,
	When Nature trembled on her throne,
	And Death resigned his iron power?
	Oh, shall the heart--whose sinfulness
	Gave keenness to His sore distress,
	And added to His tears of blood--
	Refuse its trembling gratitude!



4. DIVINE COMPASSION

	Long since, a dream of heaven I had,
	And still the vision haunts me oft;
	I see the saints in white robes clad,
	The martyrs with their palms aloft;
	But hearing still, in middle song,
	The ceaseless dissonance of wrong;
	And shrinking, with hid faces, from the strain
	Of sad, beseeching eyes, full of remorse and pain.
	
	The glad song falters to a wail,
	The harping sinks to low lament;
	Before the still unlifted veil
	I see the crowned foreheads bent,
	Making more sweet the heavenly air,
	With breathings of unselfish prayer;
	And a Voice saith: “O Pity which is pain,
	O Love that weeps, fill up my sufferings which remain!
	
	“Shall souls redeemed by me refuse
	To share my sorrow in their turn?
	Or, sin-forgiven, my gift abuse
	Of peace with selfish unconcern?
	Has saintly ease no pitying care?
	Has faith no work, and love no prayer?
	While sin remains, and souls in darkness dwell,
	Can heaven itself be heaven, and look unmoved on hell?”
	
	Then through the Gates of Pain, I dream,
	A wind of heaven blows coolly in;
	Fainter the awful discords seem,
	The smoke of torment grows more thin,
	Tears quench the burning soil, and thence
	Spring sweet, pale flowers of penitence
	And through the dreary realm of man’s despair,
	Star-crowned an angel walks, and to! God’s hope is there!
	
	Is it a dream? Is heaven so high
	That pity cannot breathe its air?
	Its happy eyes forever dry,
	Its holy lips without a prayer!
	My God! my God! if thither led
	By Thy free grace unmerited,
	No crown nor palm be mine, but let me keep
	A heart that still can feel, and eyes that still can weep.



5. A DREAM OF SUMMER

	Bland as the morning breath of June
	The southwest breezes play;
	And, through its haze, the winter noon
	Seems warm as summer’s day.
	The snow-plumed Angel of the North
	Has dropped his icy spear;
	Again the mossy earth looks forth,
	Again the streams gush clear.
	
	The fox his hillside cell forsakes,
	The muskrat leaves his nook,
	The bluebird in the meadow brakes
	Is singing with the brook.
	“Bear up, O Mother Nature!“ cry
	Bird, breeze, and streamlet free;
	“Our winter voices prophesy
	Of summer days to thee!”
	
	So, in those winters of the soul,
	By bitter blasts and drear
	O’erswept from Memory’s frozen pole,
	Will sunny days appear.
	Reviving Hope and Faith, they show
	The soul its living powers,
	And how beneath the winter’s snow
	Lie germs of summer flowers!
	
	The Night is mother of the Day,
	The Winter of the Spring,
	And ever upon old Decay
	The greenest mosses cling.
	Behind the cloud the starlight lurks,
	Through showers the sunbeams fall;
	For God, who loveth all His works,
	Has left His hope with all!



6. AN EASTER FLOWER GIFT

	O dearest bloom the seasons know,
	Flowers of the Resurrection blow,
	Our hope and faith restore;
	And through the bitterness of death
	And loss and sorrow, breathe a breath
	Of life forevermore!
	
	The thought of Love Immortal blends
	With fond remembrances of friends;
	In you, O sacred flowers,
	By human love made doubly sweet,
	The heavenly and the earthly meet,
	The heart of Christ and ours!



7. FORGIVENESS

	My heart was heavy, for its trust had been
	Abused, its kindness answered with foul wrong;
	So, turning gloomily from my fellow-men,
	One summer Sabbath day I strolled among
	The green mounds of the village burial-place;
	Where, pondering how all human love and hate
	Find one sad level; and how, soon or late,
	Wronged and wrongdoer, each with meekened face,
	And cold hands folded over a still heart,
	Pass the green threshold of our common grave,
	Whither all footsteps tend, whence none depart,
	Awed for myself, and pitying my race,
	Our common sorrow, like a nighty wave,
	Swept all my pride away, and trembling I forgave!



8. HAMPTON BEACH

	The sunlight glitters keen and bright,
	Where, miles away,
	Lies stretching to my dazzled sight
	A luminous belt, a misty light,
	Beyond the dark pine bluffs and wastes of sandy gray.
	
	The tremulous shadow of the Sea!
	Against its ground
	Of silvery light, rock, hill, and tree,
	Still as a picture, clear and free,
	With varying outline mark the coast for miles around.
	
	On--on--we tread with loose-flung rein
	Our seaward way,
	Through dark-green fields and blossoming grain,
	Where the wild brier-rose skirts the lane,
	And bends above our heads the flowering locust spray.
	
	Ha! like a kind hand on my brow
	Comes this fresh breeze,
	Cooling its dull and feverish glow,
	While through my being seems to flow
	The breath of a new life, the healing of the seas!
	
	Now rest we, where this grassy mound
	His feet hath set
	In the great waters, which have bound
	His granite ankles greenly round
	With long and tangled moss, and weeds with cool spray wet.
	
	Good-by to Pain and Care! I take
	Mine ease to-day
	Here where these sunny waters break,
	And ripples this keen breeze, I shake
	All burdens from the heart, all weary thoughts away.
	
	I draw a freer breath, I seem
	Like all I see--
	Waves in the sun, the white-winged gleam
	Of sea-birds in the slanting beam,
	And far-off sails which flit before the south-wind free.
	
	So when Time’s veil shall fall asunder,
	The soul may know
	No fearful change, nor sudden wonder,
	Nor sink the weight of mystery under,
	But with the upward rise, and with the vastness grow.
	
	And all we shrink from now may seem
	No new revealing;
	Familiar as our childhood’s stream,
	Or pleasant memory of a dream
	The loved and cherished Past upon the new life stealing.
	
	Serene and mild the untried light
	May have its dawning;
	And, as in summer’s northern night
	The evening and the dawn unite,
	The sunset hues of Time blend with the soul’s new morning.
	
	I sit alone; in foam and spray
	Wave after wave
	Breaks on the rocks which, stern and gray,
	Shoulder the broken tide away,
	Or murmurs hoarse and strong through mossy cleft and cave.
	
	What heed I of the dusty land
	And noisy town?
	I see the mighty deep expand
	From its white line of glimmering sand
	To where the blue of heaven on bluer waves shuts down!
	
	In listless quietude of mind,
	I yield to all
	The change of cloud and wave and wind
	And passive on the flood reclined,
	I wander with the waves, and with them rise and fall.
	
	But look, thou dreamer! wave and shore
	In shadow lie;
	The night-wind warns me back once more
	To where, my native hill-tops o’er,
	Bends like an arch of fire the glowing sunset sky.
	
	So then, beach, bluff, and wave, farewell!
	I bear with me
	No token stone nor glittering shell,
	But long and oft shall Memory tell
	Of this brief thoughtful hour of musing by the Sea.



9. A MEMORY

	Here, while the loom of Winter weaves
	The shroud of flowers and fountains,
	I think of thee and summer eves
	Among the Northern mountains.
	
	When thunder tolled the twilight’s close,
	And winds the lake were rude on,
	And thou wert singing, _Ca’ the Yowes_,
	The bonny yowes of Cluden!
	
	When, close and closer, hushing breath,
	Our circle narrowed round thee,
	And smiles and tears made up the wreath
	Wherewith our silence crowned thee;
	
	And, strangers all, we felt the ties
	Of sisters and of brothers;
	Ah! whose of all those kindly eyes
	Now smile upon another’s?
	
	The sport of Time, who still apart
	The waifs of life is flinging;
	Oh, nevermore shall heart to heart
	Draw nearer for that singing!
	
	Yet when the panes are frosty-starred,
	And twilight’s fire is gleaming,
	I hear the songs of Scotland’s bard
	Sound softly through my dreaming!
	
	A song that lends to winter snows
	The glow of summer weather,--
	Again I hear thee ca’ the yowes
	To Cluden’s hills of heather.



10. THE MYSTIC’S CHRISTMAS

	“All hail!“ the bells of Christmas rang,
	“All hail!“ the monks at Christmas sang,
	The merry monks who kept with cheer
	The gladdest day of all their year.
	
	But still apart, unmoved thereat,
	A pious elder brother sat
	Silent, in his accustomed place,
	With God’s sweet peace upon his face.
	
	“Why sitt’st thou thus?“ his brethren cried.
	“It is the blessed Christmas-tide;
	The Christmas lights are all aglow,
	The sacred lilies bud and blow.
	
	“Above our heads the joy-bells ring,
	Without the happy children sing,
	And all God’s creatures hail the morn
	On which the holy Christ was born!
	
	“Rejoice with us; no more rebuke
	Our gladness with thy quiet look.”
	The gray monk answered: “Keep, I pray,
	Even as ye list, the Lord’s birthday.
	
	“Let heathen Yule fires flicker red
	Where thronged refectory feasts are spread;
	With mystery-play and masque and mime
	And wait-songs speed the holy time!
	
	“The blindest faith may haply save;
	The Lord accepts the things we have;
	And reverence, howsoe’er it strays,
	May find at last the shining ways.
	
	“They needs must grope who cannot see,
	The blade before the ear must be;
	As ye are feeling I have felt,
	And where ye dwell I too have dwelt.
	
	“But now, beyond the things of sense,
	Beyond occasions and events,
	I know, through God’s exceeding grace,
	Release from form and time and place.
	
	“I listen, from no mortal tongue,
	To hear the song the angels sung;
	And wait within myself to know
	The Christmas lilies bud and blow.
	
	“The outward symbols disappear
	From him whose inward sight is clear;
	And small must be the choice of clays
	To him who fills them all with praise!
	
	“Keep while you need it, brothers mine,
	With honest zeal your Christmas sign,
	But judge not him who every morn
	Feels in his heart the Lord Christ born!”



11. THE PRAYER-SEEKER

	Along the aisle where prayer was made,
	A woman, all in black arrayed,
	Close-veiled, between the kneeling host,
	With gliding motion of a ghost,
	Passed to the desk, and laid thereon
	A scroll which bore these words alone,
	_Pray for me_!
	
	Back from the place of worshipping
	She glided like a guilty thing
	The rustle of her draperies, stirred
	By hurrying feet, alone was heard;
	While, full of awe, the preacher read,
	As out into the dark she sped:
	“_Pray for me_!”
	
	Back to the night from whence she came,
	To unimagined grief or shame!
	Across the threshold of that door
	None knew the burden that she bore;
	Alone she left the written scroll,
	The legend of a troubled soul,--
	_Pray for me_!
	
	Glide on, poor ghost of woe or sin!
	Thou leav’st a common need within;
	Each bears, like thee, some nameless weight,
	Some misery inarticulate,
	Some secret sin, some shrouded dread,
	Some household sorrow all unsaid.
	_Pray for us_!
	
	Pass on! The type of all thou art,
	Sad witness to the common heart!
	With face in veil and seal on lip,
	In mute and strange companionship,
	Like thee we wander to and fro,
	Dumbly imploring as we go
	_Pray for us_!
	
	Ah, who shall pray, since he who pleads
	Our want perchance hath greater needs?
	Yet they who make their loss the gain
	Of others shall not ask in vain,
	And Heaven bends low to hear the prayer
	Of love from lips of self-despair
	_Pray for us_!
	
	In vain remorse and fear and hate
	Beat with bruised bands against a fate
	Whose walls of iron only move
	And open to the touch of love.
	He only feels his burdens fall
	Who, taught by suffering, pities all.
	_Pray for us_!
	
	He prayeth best who leaves unguessed
	The mystery of another’s breast.
	Why cheeks grow pale, why eyes o’erflow,
	Or heads are white, thou need’st not know.
	Enough to note by many a sign
	That every heart hath needs like thine.
	_Pray for us_!



12. THE REWARD

	Who, looking backward from his manhood’s prime,
	Sees not the spectre of his misspent time?
	And, through the shade
	Of funeral cypress planted thick behind,
	Hears no reproachful whisper on the wind
	From his loved dead?
	
	Who bears no trace of passion’s evil force?
	Who shuns thy sting, O terrible Remorse?
	Who does not cast
	On the thronged pages of his memory’s book,
	At times, a sad and half-reluctant look,
	Regretful of the past?
	
	Alas! the evil which we fain would shun
	We do, and leave the wished-for good undone
	Our strength to-day
	Is but to-morrow’s weakness, prone to fall;
	Poor, blind, unprofitable servants all
	Are we alway.
	
	Yet who, thus looking backward o’er his years,
	Feels not his eyelids wet with grateful tears,
	If he hath been
	Permitted, weak and sinful as he was,
	To cheer and aid, in some ennobling cause,
	His fellow-men?
	
	If he hath hidden the outcast, or let in
	A ray of sunshine to the cell of sin;
	If he hath lent
	Strength to the weak, and, in an hour of need,
	Over the suffering, mindless of his creed
	Or home, hath bent;
	
	He has not lived in vain, and while he gives
	The praise to Him, in whom he moves and lives,
	With thankful heart;
	He gazes backward, and with hope before,
	Knowing that from his works he nevermore
	Can henceforth part.



13. THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM

	Where Time the measure of his hours
	By changeful bud and blossom keeps,
	And, like a young bride crowned with flowers,
	Fair Shiraz in her garden sleeps;
	
	Where, to her poet’s turban stone,
	The Spring her gift of flowers imparts,
	Less sweet than those his thoughts have sown
	In the warm soil of Persian hearts:
	
	There sat the stranger, where the shade
	Of scattered date-trees thinly lay,
	While in the hot clear heaven delayed
	The long and still and weary day.
	
	Strange trees and fruits above him hung,
	Strange odors filled the sultry air,
	Strange birds upon the branches swung,
	Strange insect voices murmured there.
	
	And strange bright blossoms shone around,
	Turned sunward from the shadowy bowers,
	As if the Gheber’s soul had found
	A fitting home in Iran’s flowers.
	
	Whate’er he saw, whate’er he heard,
	Awakened feelings new and sad,--
	No Christian garb, nor Christian word,
	Nor church with Sabbath-bell chimes glad,
	
	But Moslem graves, with turban stones,
	And mosque-spires gleaming white, in view,
	And graybeard Mollahs in low tones
	Chanting their Koran service through.
	
	The flowers which smiled on either hand,
	Like tempting fiends, were such as they
	Which once, o’er all that Eastern land,
	As gifts on demon altars lay.
	
	As if the burning eye of Baal
	The servant of his Conqueror knew,
	From skies which knew no cloudy veil,
	The Sun’s hot glances smote him through.
	
	“Ah me!“ the lonely stranger said,
	“The hope which led my footsteps on,
	And light from heaven around them shed,
	O’er weary wave and waste, is gone!
	
	“Where are the harvest fields all white,
	For Truth to thrust her sickle in?
	Where flock the souls, like doves in flight,
	From the dark hiding-place of sin?
	
	“A silent-horror broods o’er all,--
	The burden of a hateful spell,--
	The very flowers around recall
	The hoary magi’s rites of hell!
	
	“And what am I, o’er such a land
	The banner of the Cross to bear?
	Dear Lord, uphold me with Thy hand,
	Thy strength with human weakness share!”
	
	He ceased; for at his very feet
	In mild rebuke a floweret smiled;
	How thrilled his sinking heart to greet
	The Star-flower of the Virgin’s child!
	
	Sown by some wandering Frank, it drew
	Its life from alien air and earth,
	And told to Paynim sun and dew
	The story of the Saviour’s birth.
	
	From scorching beams, in kindly mood,
	The Persian plants its beauty screened,
	And on its pagan sisterhood,
	In love, the Christian floweret leaned.
	
	With tears of joy the wanderer felt
	The darkness of his long despair
	Before that hallowed symbol melt,
	Which God’s dear love had nurtured there.
	
	From Nature’s face, that simple flower
	The lines of sin and sadness swept;
	And Magian pile and Paynim bower
	In peace like that of Eden slept.
	
	Each Moslem tomb, and cypress old,
	Looked holy through the sunset air;
	And, angel-like, the Muezzin told
	From tower and mosque the hour of prayer.
	
	With cheerful steps, the morrow’s dawn
	From Shiraz saw the stranger part;
	The Star-flower of the Virgin-Born
	Still blooming in his hopeful heart!

