*** C. K. Williams (1936 - 2015)

1. APES

	One branch, I read, of a species of chimpanzees has something like territorial wars,
	and when the . . . army, I suppose you’d call it, of one tribe prevails and captures an enemy, 
	“Several males hold a hand or foot of the rival so the victim can be damaged at will.”
	
	This is so disquieting: if beings with whom we share so many genes can be this cruel,
	what hope for us? Still, “rival,” “victim,” “will”--don’t such anthropomorphic terms
	make those simians’ social-political conflicts sound more brutal than they are?
	
	The chimps Catherine and I saw on their island sanctuary in Uganda we loathed.
	Unlike the pacific gorillas in the forest of Bwindi, they fought, dementedly shrieked,
	the dominant male lorded it over the rest; they were, in all, too much like us.
	
	Another island from my recent reading, where Columbus, on his last voyage,
	encountering some “Indians” who’d greeted him with curiosity and warmth, wrote,
	before he chained and enslaved them, “They don’t even know how to kill each other.”
	
	It’s occurred to me I’ve read enough--at my age all it does is confirm my sadness.
	Surely the papers: war, terror, torture, corruption--they’re like broken glass in the mind.
	Back when I knew I knew nothing, I read all the time, poems, novels, philosophy, myth,
	
	but I hardly glanced at the news, there was a distance between what could happen
	and the part of myself I felt with: now everything’s so tight against me I hardly can move.
	The Analects say people in the golden age weren’t aware they were governed; they just lived.
	
	Could I have passed through my own golden age and not even known I was there?
	Some gold: nuclear rockets aimed at your head, racism, sexism, contempt for the poor.
	And there I was, reading. What did I learn? Everything, nothing, too little, too much . . .
	Just enough to get me here: a long-faced, white-haired ape with a book, still turning the page.



2. BLADES

	When I was about eight, I once stabbed somebody, another kid, a little girl.
	I’d been hanging around in front of the supermarket near our house
	and when she walked by, I let her have it, right in the gap between her shirt and her shorts
	with a piece of broken-off car antenna I used to carry around in my pocket.
	It happened so fast I still don’t know how I did it: I was as shocked as she was
	except she squealed and started yelling as though I’d plunged a knife in her
	and everybody in the neighborhood gathered around us, then they called the cops,
	then the girl’s mother came running out of the store saying “What happened? What happened?”
	and the girl screamed, “He stabbed me!” and I screamed back, “I did not!” and she said did too
	and me I didn’t and we were both crying hysterically by that time.
	Somebody pulled her shirt up and it was just a scratch but we went on and on
	and the mother, standing between us, seemed to be absolutely terrified.
	I still remember how she watched first one of us and then the other with a look of complete horror--
	You did too! I did not!--as though we were both strangers, as though it was some natural disaster
	she was beholding that was beyond any mode of comprehension so all she could do
	was stare speechlessly at us, and then another expression came over her face,
	one that I’d never seen before, that made me think she was going to cry herself
	and sweep both of us, the girl and me, into her arms and hold us against her.
	The police came just then, though, quieted everyone down, put the girl and the mother
	into a squad-car to take to the hospital and me in another to take to jail
	except they really only took me around the corner and let me go because the mother and daughter were black
	and in those days you had to do something pretty terrible to get into trouble that way.
	
	I don’t understand how we twist these things or how we get them straight again
	but I relived that day I don’t know how many times before I realized I had it all wrong.
	The boy wasn’t me at all, he was another kid: I was just there.
	And it wasn’t the girl who was black, but him. The mother was real, though.
	I really had thought she was going to embrace them both
	and I had dreams about her for years afterwards: that I’d be being born again
	and she’d be lifting me with that same wounded sorrow or she would suddenly appear out of nowhere,
	blotting out everything but a single, blazing wing of holiness.
	Who knows the rest? I can still remember how it felt the old way.
	How I make my little thrust, how she crushes us against her, how I turn and snarl
	at the cold circle of faces around us because something’s torn in me,
	some ancient cloak of terror we keep on ourselves because we’ll do anything,
	anything, not to know how silently we knell in the mouth of death
	and not to obliterate the forgiveness and the lies we offer one another and call innocence.
	This is innocence. I touch her, we kiss.
	And this. I’m here or not here. I can’t tell. I stab her. I stab her again. I still can’t.



3. BUTCHERS

	1
	
	Thank goodness we were able to wipe the Neanderthals out, beastly things,
	from our mountains, our tundra--that way we had all the meat we might need.
	
	Thus the butcher can display under our very eyes his hands on the block,
	and never refer to the rooms hidden behind where dissections are effected,
	
	where flesh is reduced to its shivering atoms and remade for our delectation
	as cubes, cylinders, barely material puddles of admixtured horror and blood.
	
	Rembrandt knew of all this--isn’t his flayed beef carcass really a caveman?
	It’s Christ also, of course, but much more a troglodyte such as we no longer are.
	
	Vanished those species--begone!--those tribes, those peoples, those nations--
	Myrmidon, Ottoman, Olmec, Huron, and Kush: gone, gone, and goodbye.
	
	
	2
	
	But back to the chamber of torture, to Rembrandt, who was telling us surely
	that hoisted with such cables and hung from such hooks we too would reveal
	
	within us intricate layerings of color and pain: alive the brush is with pain,
	aglow with the cruelties of crimson, the cooled, oblivious ivory of our innards.
	
	Fling out the hooves of your hands! Open your breast, pluck out like an Aztec
	your heart howling its Cro-Magnon cries that compel to battles of riddance!
	
	Our own planet at last, where purged of wilderness, homesickness, prowling,
	we’re no longer compelled to devour our enemies’ brains, thanks to our butcher,
	
	who inhabits this palace, this senate, this sentried, barbed-wire enclosure
	where dare enter none but subservient breeze; bent, broken blossom; dry rain.



4. CLAWS

	_from the Sanskrit of Mayura_
	
	The claws of the mighty nation dabble the gore-pools
	and wallow the muddy flesh of the horrible enemy.
	
	Human mouthfuls plucked like reeds. Hearts, plucked.
	
	The claws dancing in the torn chest like herons.
	
	May the mighty nation protect you!



5. CLAY OUT OF SILENCE

	chances are we will sink quietly back
	into oblivion without a ripple
	we will go back into the face
	down through the mortars as though it hadn’t happened
	
	earth: I’ll remember you
	you were the mother you made pain
	I’ll grind my thorax against you for the last time
	and put my hand on you again to comfort you
	
	sky: could we forget?
	we were the same as you were
	we couldn’t wait to get back sleeping
	we’d have done anything to be sleeping
	
	and trees angels for being thrust up here
	and stones for cracking in my bare hands
	because you foreknew
	there was no vengeance for being here
	
	when we were flesh we were eaten
	when we were metal we were burned back
	there was no death anywhere but now
	when we were men when we became it



6. DROPLETS

	Even when the rain falls relatively hard,
	only one leaf at a time of the little tree
	you planted on the balcony last year,
	then another leaf at its time, and one more,
	is set trembling by the constant droplets,
	
	but the rain, the clouds flocked over the city,
	you at the piano inside, your hesitant music
	mingling with the din of the downpour,
	the gush of rivulets loosed from the eaves,
	the iron railings and flowing gutters,
	
	all of it fuses in me with such intensity
	that I can’t help wondering why my longing
	to live forever has so abated that it hardly
	comes to me anymore, and never as it did,
	as regret for what I might not live to live,
	
	but rather as a layering of instants like this,
	transient as the mist drawn from the rooftops,
	yet emphatic as any note of the nocturne
	you practice, and, the storm faltering, fading
	into its own radiant passing, you practice again.



7. DUST

	Face powder, gun powder, talcum of anthrax,
	shavings of steel, crematoria ash, chips
	of crumbling poetry paper--all these in my lock-box,
	and dust, tanks, tempests, temples of dust.
	
	Saw-, silk-, chalk-dust and chaff,
	the dust the drool of a bull swinging its head
	as it dreams its death
	slobs out on; dust even from that scoured,
	
	scraped littoral of the Aegean,
	troops streaming screaming across it
	at those who that day, that age or forever
	would be foe, worthy of being dust for.
	
	Last, hovering dust of the harvest, brief
	as the half-instant hitch in the flight
	of the hawk, as the poplets of light
	through the leaves of the bronzing maples.
	
	Animal dust, mineral, mental, all hoarded
	not in the jar of sexy Pandora, not
	in the ark where the dust of the holy aspiring
	to congeal as glorious mud-thing still writhes--
	
	Just this leathery, crackled, obsolete box,
	heart-sized or brain, rusted lock shattered,
	hinge howling with glee to be lifted again . . .
	Face powder, gun powder, dust, darling dust.



8. FIRE

	An ax-shattered
	bedroom window
	the wall above
	still smutted with
	soot the wall
	beneath still
	soiled with
	soak and down
	
	on the black
	of the pavement
	a mattress its ticking
	half eaten away
	the end where
	the head would
	have been with
	a nauseous bite
	
	burnt away
	and beside it
	an all at once
	meaningless heap
	of soiled sodden
	clothing one
	shoe a jacket
	once white
	
	the vain matters
	a life gathers
	about it symbols
	of having once
	cried out to itself
	who art thou?
	then again who
	wouldst thou be?



9. FROM MY WINDOW

	Spring: the first morning when that one true block of sweet, laminar, complex scent arrives
	from somewhere west and I keep coming to lean on the sill, glorying in the end of the wretched winter.
	The scabby-barked sycamores ringing the empty lot across the way are budded--I hadn’t noticed--
	and the thick spikes of the unlikely urban crocuses have already broken the gritty soil.
	Up the street, some surveyors with tripods are waving each other left and right the way they do.
	A girl in a gym suit jogged by a while ago, some kids passed, playing hooky, I imagine,
	and now the paraplegic Vietnam vet who lives in a half-converted warehouse down the block
	and the friend who stays with him and seems to help him out come weaving towards me,
	their battered wheelchair lurching uncertainly from one edge of the sidewalk to the other.
	I know where they’re going--to the “Legion“: once, when I was putting something out, they stopped,
	both drunk that time, too, both reeking--it wasn’t ten o’clock--and we chatted for a bit.
	I don’t know how they stay alive--on benefits most likely. I wonder if they’re lovers?
	They don’t look it. Right now, in fact, they look a wreck, careening haphazardly along,
	contriving, as they reach beneath me, to dip a wheel from the curb so that the chair skewers, teeters,
	tips, and they both tumble, the one slowly, almost gracefully sliding in stages from his seat,
	his expression hardly marking it, the other staggering over him, spinning heavily down,
	to lie on the asphalt, his mouth working, his feet shoving weakly and fruitlessly against the curb.
	In the storefront office on the corner, Reed and Son, Real Estate, have come to see the show.
	Gazing through the golden letters of their name, they’re not, at least, thank god, laughing.
	Now the buddy, grabbing at a hydrant, gets himself erect and stands there for a moment, panting.
	Now he has to lift the other, who lies utterly still, a forearm shielding his eyes from the sun.
	He hauls him partly upright, then hefts him almost all the way into the chair, but a dangling foot
	catches a support-plate, jerking everything around so that he has to put him down,
	set the chair to rights, and hoist him again and as he does he jerks the grimy jeans right off him.
	No drawers, shrunken, blotchy thighs: under the thick, white coils of belly blubber,
	the poor, blunt pud, tiny, terrified, retracted, is almost invisible in the sparse genital hair,
	then his friend pulls his pants up, he slumps wholly back as though he were, at last, to be let be,
	and the friend leans against the cyclone fence, suddenly staring up at me as though he’d known,
	all along, that I was watching and I can’t help wondering if he knows that in the winter, too,
	I watched, the night he went out to the lot and walked, paced rather, almost ran, for how many hours.
	It was snowing, the city in that holy silence, the last we have, when the storm takes hold,
	and he was making patterns that I thought at first were circles, then realized made a figure eight,
	what must have been to him a perfect symmetry but which, from where I was, shivered, bent,
	and lay on its side: a warped, unclear infinity, slowly, as the snow came faster, going out.
	Over and over again, his head lowered to the task, he slogged the path he’d blazed,
	but the race was lost, his prints were filling faster than he made them
	now and I looked away, up across the skeletal trees to the tall center city buildings, some, though it was midnight,
	with all their offices still gleaming, their scarlet warning beacons signaling erratically
	against the thickening flakes, their smoldering auras softening portions of the dim, milky sky.
	In the morning, nothing: every trace of him effaced, all the field pure white,
	its surface glittering, the dawn, glancing from its glaze, oblique, relentless, unadorned.



10. THE GAFFE

	1
	
	If that someone who’s me yet not me yet who judges me is always with me,   
	as he is, shouldn’t he have been there when I said so long ago that thing I said?   
	
	If he who rakes me with such not trivial shame for minor sins now were there then,   
	shouldn’t he have warned me he’d even now devastate me for my unpardonable affront?   
	
	I’m a child then, yet already I’ve composed this conscience-beast, who harries me:   
	is there anything else I can say with certainty about who I was, except that I, that he,   
	
	could already draw from infinitesimal transgressions complex chords of remorse,   
	and orchestrate ever undiminishing retribution from the hapless rest of myself?   
	
	
	2
	
	The son of some friends of my parents has died, and my parents, paying their call,   
	take me along, and I’m sent out with the dead boy’s brother and some others to play.   
	
	We’re joking around, and some words come to my mind, which to my amazement are said.   
	_How do you know when you can laugh when somebody dies, your brother dies?_
	
	is what’s said, and the others go quiet, the backyard goes quiet, everyone stares,   
	and I want to know now why that someone in me who’s me yet not me let me say it.   
	
	Shouldn’t he have told me the contrition cycle would from then be ever upon me,   
	it didn’t matter that I’d really only wanted to know how grief ends, and when?   
	
	
	3
	
	I could hear the boy’s mother sobbing inside, then stopping, sobbing then stopping.   
	Was the end of her grief already there? Had her someone in her told her it would end?   
	
	Was her someone in her kinder to her, not tearing at her, as mine did, still does, me,   
	for guessing grief someday ends? Is that why her sobbing stopped sometimes?   
	
	She didn’t laugh, though, or I never heard her. _How do you know when you can laugh?_
	Why couldn’t someone have been there in me not just to accuse me, but to explain?   
	
	The kids were playing again, I was playing, I didn’t hear anything more from inside.   
	The way now sometimes what’s in me is silent, too, and sometimes, though never really, forgets.



11. THE GAS STATION

	This is before I’d read Nietzsche. Before Kant or Kierkegaard, even before Whitman and Yeats.
	I don’t think there were three words in my head yet. I knew perhaps, that I should suffer,
	I can remember I almost cried for this or for that, nothing special, nothing to speak of.
	Probably I was mad with grief for the loss of my childhood, but I wouldn’t have known that.
	It’s dawn. A gas station. Route twenty-two. I remember exactly: route twenty-two curved,
	there was a squat, striped concrete divider they’d put in after a plague of collisions.
	The gas station? Texaco, Esso--I don’t know. They were just words anyway then, just what their signs said.
	I wouldn’t have understood the first thing about monopoly or imperialist or oppression.
	It’s dawn. It’s so late. Even then, when I was never tired, I’m just holding on.
	Slumped on my friend’s shoulder, I watch the relentless, wordless misery of the route twenty-two sky
	that seems to be filming my face with a grainy oil I keep trying to rub off or in.
	Why are we here? Because one of my friends, in the men’s room over there, has blue balls.
	He has to jerk off. I don’t know what that means, “blue balls,” or why he has to do that--
	It must be important to have to stop here after this long night, but I don’t ask.
	I’m just trying, I think, to keep my head as empty as I can for as long as I can.
	One of my other friends is asleep. He’s so ugly, his mouth hanging, slack and wet.
	Another--I’ll never see this one again--stares from the window as though he were frightened.
	Here’s what we’ve done. We were in Times Square, a pimp found us, corralled us, led us somewhere,
	down a dark street, another dark street, up dark stairs, dark hall, dark apartment,
	where his whore, his girl, or his wife or his mother for all I know dragged herself from her sleep,
	propped herself on an elbow, gazed into the dark hall, and agreed, for two dollars each, to take care of us.
	Take care of us. Some of the words that come through me now seem to stay, to hook in.
	My friend in the bathroom is taking so long. The filthy sky must be starting to lighten.
	It took me a long time, too, with the woman, I mean. Did I mention that she, the woman, the whore or the mother,
	was having her time and all she would deign to do was to blow us? Did I say that? Deign? Blow?
	What a joy, though, the idea was in those days. Blown! What a thing to tell the next day.
	She only deigned, though, no more. She was like a machine. When I lift her back to me now,
	there’s nothing there but that dark, curly head, working, a machine, up and down, and now,
	Freud, Marx, Fathers, tell me, what am I, doing this, telling this, on her, on myself,
	hammering it down, cementing it, sealing it in, but a machine, too? Why am I doing this?
	I still haven’t read Augustine. I don’t understand Chomsky that well. Should I?
	My friend at last comes back. Maybe the right words were there all along. Complicity. Wonder.
	How pure we were then, before Rimbaud, before Blake. Grace. Love. Take care of us. Please.



12. HOG HEAVEN

	It stinks. It stinks and it stinks and it stinks and it stinks.
	It stinks in the mansions and it stinks in the shacks and the carpeted offices,
	in the beds and the classrooms and out in the fields where there’s no one.
	It just stinks. Sniff and feel it come up: it’s like death coming up.
	Take one foot, ignore it long enough, leave it on the ground long enough
	because you’re afraid to stop, even to love, even to be loved,
	it’ll stink worse than you can imagine, as though the whole air was meat pressing your eyelids,
	as though you’d been caught, hung up from the earth
	and all the stinks of the fear drain down and your toes are the valves dripping
	the giant stinks of the pain and the death and the radiance.
	Old people stink, with their teeth and their hot rooms, and the kiss,
	the age-kiss, the death-kiss, it comes like a wave and you want to fall down and be over.
	And money stinks: the little threads that go through it like veins through an eye,
	each stinks--if you hold it onto your lip it goes bad, it stinks like a vein going bad.
	And Christ stank: he knew how the slaves would be stacked into the holds and he took it--
	the stink of the vomit and shit and of somebody just rolling over and plunging in with his miserable seed.
	And the seed stinks. And the fish carrying it upstream and the bird eating the fish
	and you the bird’s egg, the dribbles of yolk, the cycle: the whole thing stinks.
	The intellect stinks and the moral faculty, like things burning, like the cave under justice,
	and the good quiet men, like oceans of tears squeezed into one handful, they stink,
	and the whole consciousness, like something plugged up, stinks, like something cut off.
	Life stinks and death stinks and god and your hand touching your face
	and every breath, daring to turn, daring to come back from the stop: the turn stinks
	and the last breath, the real one, the one where everyone troops into your bed
	and piles on--oh, that one stinks best! It stays on your mouth
	and who you kiss now knows life and knows death, knows how it would be to fume in a nostril
	and the thousand desires that stink like the stars and the voice heard through the stars
	and each time--milk sour, egg sour, sperm sour--each time--dirt, friend, father--
	each time--mother, tree, breath,--each time, breath and breath and breath--
	each time the same stink, the amazement, the wonder to do this and it flares,
	this, and it stinks, this: it stinks and it stinks and it stinks and it stinks. 



13. I HATE

	I hate how this unsummoned sigh-sound, sob-sound, 
	not sound really, feeling, sigh-feeling, sob-feeling, 
	keeps rising in me, rasping in me, not in its old disguise 
	as nostalgia, sweet crazed call of the blackbird; 
	
	not as remembrance, grief for so many gone, 
	nor either that other tangle of recall, regret   
	for unredeemed wrongs, errors, omissions, 
	petrified roots too deep to ever excise; 
	
	a mingling rather, a melding, inextricable mesh   
	of delight in astonishing being, of being in being, 
	with a fear of and fear for I can barely think what, 
	not non-existence, of self, loved ones, love; 
	
	not even war, fuck war, sighing for war, 
	sobbing for war, for no war, peace, surcease; 
	more than all that, some ground-sound, ground-note,   
	sown in us now, that swells in us, all of us,   
	
	echo of love we had, have, for world, for our world, 
	on which we seem finally mere swarm, mere deluge, 
	mere matter self-altered to tumult, to noise, 
	cacophonous blitz of destruction, despoilment, 
	
	din from which every emotion henceforth emerges, 
	and into which falters, slides, sinks, and subsides: 
	sigh-sound of lament, of remorse; sob-sound of rue,   
	of, still, always, ever sadder and sadder sad joy.



14. ICE

	That astonishing thing that happens when you crack a needle-awl into a block of ice:
	the way a perfect section through it crazes into gleaming fault-lines, fractures, facets;
	dazzling silvery deltas that in one too-quick-to-capture instant madly complicate the cosmos of its innards.
	Radiant now with spines and spikes, aggressive barbs of glittering light, a treasure horde of light,
	when you stab it with the awl again it comes apart in nearly equal segments, both faces sadly grainy, gnawed at, dull.
	
	What was called an ice-house was a dark, low place, of raw, unpainted wood,
	always black with melted ice or ice as yet ungelled;
	there was saw-dust, and saw-dust’s tantalizing, half-sweet odor, which, so cold, seemed to pierce directly to the brain.
	You’d step onto a low-roofed porch, someone would materialize,
	take up great tongs and with precise, placating movements like a lion-tamer’s slide an ice block from its row.
	
	Take the awl again yourself now, thrust, and when the block splits do it yet again, again;
	watch it disassemble into smaller fragments, crystal after fissured crystal.
	Or if not the puncturing blade, try to make a metaphor, like Kaka’s frozen sea within:
	take into your arms the cake of actual ice, make a figure of its ponderous inertness,
	of the way its quickly wetting chill against your breast would frighten you and make you let it drop.
	
	Imagine then how even if it shattered and began to liquefy,
	the hope would still remain that if you acted quickly, gathering up the slithery, perversely skittish ovals,
	they might be refrozen and the mass reconstituted, with precious little of its brilliance lost,
	just this lucent shimmer on the rough, raised grain of water-rotten floor,
	just this drop as sweet and warm as blood evaporating on your tongue.



15. INNINGS

	somebody keeps track of how many times
	I make love don’t you god don’t you?
	and how good it is telling me
	it’s marked down where I can’t see
	right underneath me so the next time
	something unreal happens in the papers
	I don’t understand it it doesn’t touch
	me I start thinking
	everyone’s heart might be pure
	after all because what the hell
	they don’t kill me just each other
	they don’t actually try making me sad
	just do things make things happen
	suffer things I erupt
	into the feminine like a lion don’t
	I god? among doves? so even being with me
	is like beauty? I move under this god
	like a whore I gurgle I roll
	like a toy boat what’s the score
	now god? am I winning?



16. LAST THINGS

	In a tray of dried fixative in a photographer friend’s darkroom,
	I found a curled-up photo of his son the instant after his death,
	his glasses still on, a drop of blood caught at his mouth.
	
	Recently, my friend put a book together to commemorate his son;
	near the end, there’s a picture taken the day before the son died;
	the caption says: “This is the last photo of Alex.”
	
	I’m sure my friend doesn’t know I’ve seen the other picture.
	Is telling about it a violation of confidence?
	Before I show this to anyone else, I’ll have to ask his permission.
	
	If you’re reading it, you’ll know my friend pardoned me,
	that he found whatever small truth his story might embody
	was worth the anguish of remembering that reflexive moment
	
	when after fifty years of bringing reality into himself through a lens,
	his camera doubtlessly came to his eye as though by itself,
	and his finger, surely also of its own accord, convulsed the shutter.



17. LIGHT

	Another drought morning after a too brief dawn downpour,
	unaccountable silvery glitterings on the leaves of the withering maples--
	
	I think of a troop of the blissful blessed approaching Dante,
	“a hundred spheres shining,” he rhapsodizes, “the purest pearls . . .”
	
	then of the frightening brilliants myriad gleam in my lamp
	of the eyes of the vast swarm of bats I found once in a cave,
	
	a chamber whose walls seethed with a spaceless carpet of creatures,
	their cacophonous, keen, insistent, incessant squeakings and squealings
	
	churning the warm, rank, cloying air; of how one,
	perfectly still among all the fitfully twitching others,
	
	was looking straight at me, gazing solemnly, thoughtfully up
	from beneath the intricate furl of its leathery wings
	
	as though it couldn’t believe I was there, or were trying to place me,
	to situate me in the gnarl we’d evolved from, and now,
	
	the trees still heartrendingly asparkle, Dante again,
	this time the way he’ll refer to a figure he meets as “the life of . . .”
	
	not the soul, or person, the _life_, and once more the bat, and I,
	our lives in that moment together, our lives, our _lives_,
	
	his with no vision of celestial splendor, no poem,
	mine with no flight, no unblundering dash through the dark,
	
	his without realizing it would, so soon, no longer exist,
	mine having to know for us both that everything ends,
	
	world, after-world, even their memory, steamed away
	like the film of uncertain vapor of the last of the luscious rain.



18. THE NAIL

	Some dictator or other had gone into exile, and now reports were coming about his regime, the usual crimes, torture, false imprisonment, cruelty and corruption, but then a detail: that the way his henchmen had disposed of enemies was by hammering nails into their skulls. Horror, then, what mind does after horror, after that first feeling that you’ll never catch your breath, mind imagines--how not be annihilated by it?--the preliminary tap, feels it in the tendons of the hand, feels the way you do with _your_ nail when you’re fixing something, making something, shelves, a bed; the first light tap to set the slant, and then the slightly harder tap, to em-bed the tip a little more . . .
	
	No, no more: this should be happening in myth, in stone, or paint, not in reality, not here; it should be an emblem of itself, not itself, something that would mean, not really have to happen, something to go out, expand in implication from that unmoved mass of matter in the breast; as in the image of an anguished face, in grief for us, not us as us, us as in a myth, a moral tale, a way to tell the truth that grief is limitless, a way to tell us we must always understand it’s we who do such things, we who set the slant, embed the tip, lift the sledge and drive the nail, drive the nail which is the axis upon which turns the brutal human world upon the world.



19. ON THE METRO

	On the metro, I have to ask a young woman to move the packages beside her to make room for me;
	she’s reading, her foot propped on the seat in front of her, and barely looks up as she pulls them to her.
	I sit, take out my own book--Cioran, The Temptation to Exist--and notice her glancing up from hers
	to take in the title of mine, and then, as Gombrowicz puts it, she “affirms herself physically,” that is,
	becomes present in a way she hadn’t been before: though she hasn’t moved, she’s allowed herself
	to come more sharply into focus, be more accessible to my sensual perception, so I can’t help but remark
	her strong figure and very tan skin--(how literally golden young women can look at the end of summer.)
	She leans back now, and as the train rocks and her arm brushes mine she doesn’t pull it away;
	she seems to be allowing our surfaces to unite: the fine hairs on both our forearms, sensitive, alive,
	achingly alive, bring news of someone touched, someone sensed, and thus acknowledged, known.
	
	I understand that in no way is she offering more than this, and in truth I have no desire for more,
	but it’s still enough for me to be taken by a surge, first of warmth then of something like its opposite:
	a memory--a girl I’d mooned for from afar, across the table from me in the library in school now,
	our feet I thought touching, touching even again, and then, with all I craved that touch to mean,
	my having to realize it wasn’t her flesh my flesh for that gleaming time had pressed, but a table leg.
	The young woman today removes her arm now, stands, swaying against the lurch of the slowing train,
	and crossing before me brushes my knee and does that thing again, asserts her bodily being again,
	(Gombrowicz again), then quickly moves to the door of the car and descends, not once looking back,
	(to my relief not looking back), and I allow myself the thought that though I must be to her again
	as senseless as that table of my youth, as wooden, as unfeeling, perhaps there was a moment I was not.



20. ON THE ROOF

	The trouble with me is that whether I get love or not
	I suffer from it. My heart always seems to be prowling
	a mile ahead of me, and, by the time I get there to surround it,
	it’s chewing fences in the next county, clawing
	the bank-vault wall down or smashing in the window
	I’d just started etching my name on with my diamond.
	
	And that’s how come I end up on the roof. Because even if I talk
	into my fist everyone still hears my voice like the ocean
	in theirs, and so they solace me and I have to keep
	breaking toes with my gun-boots and coming up here
	to live--by myself, like an aerial, with a hand on the ledge,
	one eye glued to the tin door and one to the skylight.



21. THE RAMPAGE

	a baby got here once who before
	he was all the way out and could already feel the hindu
	pain inside him and the hebrew and the iliad
	decided he was never going to stop crying no matter what
	until they did something he wasn’t going
	to turn the horror
	off in their fat sentences
	and in the light bulb how much murder to get light
	and in the walls agony agony for the bricks for the glaze
	he was going to keep screaming
	until they made death little like he was
	and loved him too and sent
	him back to undo all this
	and it happened
	he kept screaming he scared them he saw them
	filling with womb-light again like stadiums
	he saw the tears sucked back into the story the smiles
	opening like sandwiches
	so he stopped
	and looked up and said all right
	it’s better now
	I’m hungry now I want just to sleep
	and they let him



22. RISK

	Difficult to know whether humans are inordinately anxious
	about crisis, calamity, disaster, or unknowingly crave them.
	These horrific conditionals, these expected unexpecteds,
	we dwell on them, flinch, feint, steel ourselves:
	but mightn’t our forebodings actually precede anxiety?
	Isn’t so much sheer heedfulness emblematic of _desire_?
	
	How do we come to believe that wrenching ourselves to attention
	is the most effective way for dealing with intimations of catastrophe?
	Consciousness tremble: might what makes it so
	not be the fear of what the future might or might not bring,
	but the wish for fear, for concentration, vigilance?
	As though life were more convincing resonating like a blade.
	
	Of course, we’re rarely swept into events, other than domestic tumult,
	from which awful consequences will ensue. Fortunately rarely.
	And yet we sweat as fervently 
	for the most insipid issues of honor and unrealized ambition.
	Lost brothership. Lost lust. We engorge our little sorrows, 
	beat our drums, perform our dances of aversion.
	
	Always, “These gigantic inconceivables.”
	Always, “What will have been done to me?”
	And so we don our mental armor,
	flex, thrill, pay the strict attention we always knew we should.
	A violent alertness, the muscularity of risk,
	though still the secret inward cry: What else, what more?



23. THE SANCTITY

	The men working on the building going up here have got these great,
	little motorized wheelbarrows that’re supposed to be for lugging bricks and mortar
	but that they seem to spend most of their time barrel-assing up the street in,
	racing each other or trying to con the local secretaries into taking rides in the bucket.
	I used to work on jobs like that and now when I pass by the skeleton of the girders
	and the tangled heaps of translucent brick wrappings, I remember the guys I was with then
	and how hard they were to know. Some of them would be so good to be with at work,
	slamming things around, playing practical jokes, laughing all the time, but they could be miserable,
	touchy and sullen, always ready to imagine an insult or get into a fight anywhere else.
	If something went wrong, if a compressor blew or a truck backed over somebody,
	they’d be the first ones to risk their lives dragging you out
	but later you’d see them and they’d be drunk, looking for trouble, almost murderous,
	and it would be frightening trying to figure out which person they really were.
	Once I went home to dinner with a carpenter who’d taken me under his wing
	and was keeping everyone off my back while he helped me. He was beautiful but at his house, he sulked.
	After dinner, he and the kids and I were watching television while his wife washed the dishes
	and his mother, who lived with them, sat at the table holding a big cantaloupe in her lap,
	fondling it and staring at it with the kind of intensity people usually only look into fires with.
	The wife kept trying to take it away from her but the old lady squawked
	and my friend said, “Leave her alone, will you?” “But she’s doing it on purpose,” the wife said.
	I was watching. The mother put both her hands on it then, with her thumbs spread
	as though the melon were a head and her thumbs were covering the eyes and she was aiming it like a gun or a camera.
	Suddenly the wife muttered, “You bitch!” ran over to the bookshelf, took a book down--
	A History of Revolutions--rattled through the pages and triumphantly handed it to her husband.
	A photograph: someone who’s been garroted and the executioner, standing behind him in a business hat,
	has his thumbs just like that over the person’s eyes, straightening the head,
	so that you thought the thumbs were going to move away because they were only pointing
	the person at something they wanted him to see and the one with the hands was going to say, “Look! Right there!”
	“I told you,” the wife said. “I swear to god she’s trying to drive me crazy.”
	I didn’t know what it all meant but my friend went wild, started breaking things, I went home
	and when I saw him the next morning at breakfast he acted as though nothing had happened.
	We used to eat at the Westfield truck stop, but I remember Fritz’s, The Victory, The Eagle,
	and I think I’ve never had as much contentment as I did then, before work, the light just up,
	everyone sipping their coffee out of the heavy white cups and teasing the middle-aged waitresses
	who always acted vaguely in love with whoever was on jobs around there right then
	besides the regular farmers on their way back from the markets and the long-haul truckers.
	Listen: sometimes when you go to speak about life it’s as though your mouth’s full of nails
	but other times it’s so easy that it’s ridiculous to even bother.
	The eggs and the toast could fly out of the plates and it wouldn’t matter
	and the bubbles in the level could blow sky high and it still wouldn’t. 
	Listen to the back-hoes gearing up and the shouts and somebody cracking his sledge into the mortar pan.
	Listen again. He’ll do it all day if you want him to. Listen again.



24. SHAME

	A girl who, in 1971, when I was living by myself, painfully lonely, bereft, depressed, offhandedly mentioned to me in a conversation with some friends that although at first she’d found me--
	
	I can’t remember the term, some dated colloquialism signifying odd, unacceptable, out-of-things--she’d decided that I was after all all right . . . twelve years later she comes back to me from nowhere and I realize that it wasn’t my then irrepressible, unselective, incessant sexual want she meant, which, when we’d been introduced, I’d naturally aimed at her and which she’d easily deflected, but that she’d thought I really was, in myself, the way I looked and spoke and acted, what she was saying, creepy, weird, whatever, and I am taken with a terrible humiliation.



25. SHOCK

	Furiously a crane
	in the scrapyard out of whose grasp
	a car it meant to pick up slipped,
	lifts and lets fall, lifts and lets fall
	the steel ton of its clenched pincers
	onto the shuddering carcass
	which spurts fragments of anguished glass
	until it’s sufficiently crushed
	to be hauled up and flung onto
	the heap from which one imagines
	it’ll move on to the shredding
	or melting down that awaits it.
	
	Also somewhere a crow
	with less evident emotion
	punches its beak through the dead
	breast of a dove or albino
	sparrow until it arrives at
	a coil of gut it can extract,
	then undo with a dexterous twist
	an oily stretch just the right length
	to be devoured, the only
	suggestion of violation
	the carrion jerked to one side
	in involuntary dismay.
	
	Splayed on the soiled pavement
	the dove or sparrow; dismembered
	in the tangled remnants of itself
	the wreck, the crane slamming once more
	for good measure into the all
	but dematerialized hulk,
	then luxuriously swaying
	away, as, gorged, glutted, the crow
	with savage care unfurls the full,
	luminous glitter of its wings,
	so we can preen, too, for so much
	so well accomplished, so well seen.



26. THE SINGING

	I was walking home down a hill near our house
	on a balmy afternoon
	under the blossoms
	Of the pear trees that go flamboyantly mad here
	every spring with
	their burgeoning forth
	
	When a young man turned in from a corner singing
	no it was more of
	a cadenced shouting
	Most of which I couldn’t catch I thought because
	the young man was
	black speaking black
	
	It didn’t matter I could tell he was making his
	song up which pleased
	me he was nice-looking
	Husky dressed in some style of big pants obviously
	full of himself
	hence his lyrical flowing over
	
	We went along in the same direction then he noticed
	me there almost
	beside him and “Big”
	He shouted-sang “Big” and I thought how droll
	to have my height
	incorporated in his song
	
	So I smiled but the face of the young man showed nothing
	he looked
	in fact pointedly away
	And his song changed “I’m not a nice person”
	he chanted “I’m not
	I’m not a nice person”
	
	No menace was meant I gathered no particular threat
	but he did want
	to be certain I knew
	That if my smile implied I conceived of anything like concord
	between us I should forget it
	
	That’s all nothing else happened his song became
	indecipherable to
	me again he arrived
	Where he was going a house where a girl in braids
	waited for him on
	the porch that was all
	
	No one saw no one heard all the unasked and
	unanswered questions
	were left where they were
	It occurred to me to sing back “I’m not a nice
	person either” but I
	couldn’t come up with a tune
	
	Besides I wouldn’t have meant it nor he have believed
	it both of us
	knew just where we were
	In the duet we composed the equation we made
	the conventions to
	which we were condemned
	
	Sometimes it feels even when no one is there that
	someone something
	is watching and listening
	Someone to rectify redo remake this time again though
	no one saw nor
	heard no one was there



27. SLEEPING OVER

	There hasn’t been any rain
	since I arrived. The lawns
	are bleached and tonight goldenrod
	and burnt grass reflect
	across my walls like ponds.
	After all these days
	the textures and scents of my room
	are still strange and comforting.
	The pines outside, immobile
	as chessmen, fume turps
	that blend with the soap taste
	of the sheets and with the rot
	of camphor and old newspapers
	in the bare bureau drawers.
	Jarred by a headlight’s glare
	from the county road, the crumbling
	plaster swarms with shadows.
	The bulb in the barn, dull
	and eternal, sways and flickers
	as though its long drool
	of cobwebs had been touched,
	and the house loosens, unmoors,
	and, distending and shuddering, rocks
	me until I fall asleep.
	
	Last December the mare
	I learned to ride on died.
	On the frozen paddock hill,
	down, she moaned all night
	before the mink farmers
	came in their pick-up
	truck, sat on her dark
	head and cut her throat.
	I dream winter. Shutters
	slamming apart. Bags
	crammed with beer bottles
	tipping against clapboard
	walls. Owls in chimneys.
	Drafts; thieves; snow.
	Over the crusty fields
	scraps of blue loveletters
	mill wildly like children,
	and a fat woman, her rough
	stockings tattered away
	at a knee, sprints in high,
	lumbering bounds among
	the skating papers. Out
	to the road-red hydrant,
	bus bench, asphalt-
	a wasp twirling at her feet,
	she is running back.
	
	My first kiss was here.
	I can remember the spot-
	next to a path, next
	to a cabin, to a garden patch-
	but not how it happened
	or what I felt, except
	amazement that a kiss
	could be soundless. Now,
	propped up on an elbow,
	I smoke through the dawn, smudging
	the gritty sheets with ashes,
	wondering what if that night
	someone nearby had snorted
	aloud, had groaned or even
	had only rustled a branch.
	Maybe someone did.
	
	Day finally. The trees
	and fences clarify, unsnarl.
	Flagstones, coins, splash
	across the driveway crowns
	and the stark underbrush
	animals go away.
	A rickety screendoor bangs,
	slaps its own echo
	twice. There were no footsteps
	but someone is out sifting
	ashes in the garbage pit.
	Suddenly dishes jangle
	the bright middle distances
	and the heat begins again:
	by now the ground must be
	hard and untillable as ice.
	Far off from the house,
	the lake, jellied with umbre
	weed scum, tilts toward
	the light like a tin tray.
	Dead rowboats clog
	the parched timber dam
	and along the low banks
	the mounds of water rubble
	I gathered yesterday
	have dried and shrunk down
	to a weak path wobbling
	back and forth from the edge.



28. SPIT

	After this much time, it’s still impossible. The SS man with his stiff hair and his uniform;
	the Rabbi, probably in a torn overcoat, probably with a stained beard the other would be clutching;
	the Torah, God’s word, on the altar, the letters blurring under the blended phlegm;
	the Rabbi’s parched mouth, the SS man perfectly absorbed, obsessed with perfect humiliation.
	So many years and what is there to say still about the soldiers waiting impatiently in the snow,
	about the one stamping his feet, thinking, “Kill him! Get it over with!”
	while back there the lips of the Rabbi and the other would have brushed
	and if time had stopped you would have thought they were lovers,
	so lightly kissing, the sharp, luger hand under the dear chin,
	the eyes furled slightly and then when it started again the eyelashes of both of them
	shyly fluttering as wonderfully as the pulse of a baby.
	Maybe we don’t have to speak of it at all, it’s still the same.
	War, that happens and stops happening but is always somehow right there, twisting and hardening us;
	then what we make of God--words, spit, degradation, murder, shame; every conceivable torment.
	All these ways to live that have something to do with how we live
	and that we’re almost ashamed to use as metaphors for what goes on in us
	but that we do anyway, so that love is battle and we watch ourselves in love
	become maddened with pride and incompletion, and God is what it is when we’re alone
	wrestling with solitude and everything speaking in our souls turns against us like His fury
	and just facing another person, there is so much terror and hatred that yes,
	spitting in someone’s mouth, trying to make him defile his own meaning,
	would signify the struggle to survive each other and what we’ll enact to accomplish it.
	​
	There’s another legend.
	It’s about Moses, that when they first brought him as a child before Pharaoh,
	the king tested him by putting a diamond and a live coal in front of him
	and Moses picked up the red ember and popped it into his mouth
	so for the rest of his life he was tongue-tied and Aaron had to speak for him.
	What must his scarred tongue have felt like in his mouth?
	It must have been like always carrying something there that weighed too much, 
	something leathery and dead whose greatest gravity was to loll out like an ox’s,
	and when it moved, it must have been like a thick embryo slowly coming alive,
	butting itself against the inner sides of his teeth and cheeks.
	And when God burned in the bush, how could he not cleave to him?
	How could he not know that all of us were on fire and that every word we said would burn forever,
	in pain, unquenchably, and that God knew it, too, and would say nothing Himself ever again beyond this,
	ever, but would only live in the flesh that we use like firewood,
	in all the caves of the body, the gut cave, the speech cave:
	He would slobber and howl like something just barely a man that beats itself again and again onto the dark,
	moist walls away from the light, away from whatever would be light for this last eternity.
	“Now therefore go,” He said, “and I will be with thy mouth.”



29. TANTRUM

	A child’s cry out in the street, not of pain or fear,
	rather one of those vividly inarticulate
	yet perfectly expressive trumpet thumps of indignation:
	something wished for has been denied,
	something wanted now delayed.
	
	So useful it would be to carry that preemptive howl
	always with you; all the functions it performs,
	its equivalents in words are so unwieldy,
	take up so much emotive time,
	entail such muffling, qualifying, attenuation.
	
	And in our cries out to the cosmos, our exasperation
	with imperfection, our theodicies, betrayed ideals:
	to keep that rocky core of rage within one’s rage
	with which to blame, confront, accuse, bewail
	all that needs retaliation for our absurdly thwarted wants.



30. TAR

	The first morning of Three Mile Island: those first disquieting, uncertain, mystifying hours.
	All morning a crew of workmen have been tearing the old decrepit roof off our building,
	and all morning, trying to distract myself, I’ve been wandering out to watch them
	as they hack away the leaden layers of asbestos paper and disassemble the disintegrating drains.
	After half a night of listening to the news, wondering how to know a hundred miles downwind
	if and when to make a run for it and where, then a coming bolt awake at seven
	when the roofers we’ve been waiting for since winter sent their ladders shrieking up our wall,
	we still know less than nothing: the utility company continues making little of the accident,
	the slick federal spokesmen still have their evasions in some semblance of order.
	Surely we suspect now we’re being lied to, but in the meantime, there are the roofers,
	setting winch-frames, sledging rounds of tar apart, and there I am, on the curb across, gawking.
	
	I never realized what brutal work it is, how matter-of-factly and harrowingly dangerous.
	The ladders flex and quiver, things skid from the edge, the materials are bulky and recalcitrant.
	When the rusty, antique nails are levered out, their heads pull off; the underroofing crumbles.
	Even the battered little furnace, roaring along as patient as a donkey, chokes and clogs,
	a dense, malignant smoke shoots up, and someone has to fiddle with a cock, then hammer it,
	before the gush and stench will deintensify, the dark, Dantean broth wearily subside.
	In its crucible, the stuff looks bland, like licorice, spill it, though, on your boots or coveralls,
	it sears, and everything is permeated with it, the furnace gunked with burst and half-burst bubbles,
	the men themselves so completely slashed and mucked they seem almost from another realm, like trolls.
	When they take their break, they leave their brooms standing at attention in the asphalt pails,
	work gloves clinging like Br’er Rabbit to the bitten shafts, and they slouch along the precipitous lip,
	the enormous sky behind them, the heavy noontime air alive with shimmers and mirages.
	
	Sometime in the afternoon I had to go inside: the advent of our vigil was upon us.
	However much we didn’t want to, however little we would do about it, we’d understood:
	we were going to perish of all this, if not now, then soon, if not soon, then someday.
	Someday, some final generation, hysterically aswarm beneath an atmosphere as unrelenting as rock,
	would rue us all, anathematize our earthly comforts, curse our surfeits and submissions.
	I think I know, though I might rather not, why my roofers stay so clear to me and why the rest,
	the terror of that time, the reflexive disbelief and distancing, all we should hold on to, dims so.
	I remember the president in his absurd protective booties, looking absolutely unafraid, the fool.
	I remember a woman on the front page glaring across the misty Susquehanna at those looming stacks.
	But, more vividly, the men, silvered with glitter from the shingles, clinging like starlings beneath the eaves.
	Even the leftover carats of tar in the gutter, so black they seemed to suck the light out of the air.
	By nightfall kids had come across them: every sidewalk on the block was scribbled with obscenities and hearts.



31. WAIT

	Chop, hack, slash; chop, hack, slash; cleaver, boning knife, ax-- 
	not even the clumsiest clod of a butcher could do this so crudely,   
	time, as do you, dismember me, render me, leave me slop in a pail, 
	one part of my body a hundred years old, one not even there anymore,   
	another still riven with idiot vigor, voracious as the youth I was   
	for whom everything always was going too slowly, too slowly. 
	
	It was me then who chopped, slashed, through you, across you,   
	relished you, gorged on you, slugged your invisible liquor down raw. 
	Now you’re polluted; pulse, clock, calendar taint you, befoul you, 
	you suck at me, pull at me, barbed wire knots of memory tear me,   
	my heart hangs, inert, a tag-end of tissue, firing, misfiring,   
	trying to heave itself back to its other way with you. 
	
	But was there ever really any other way with you? When I ran 
	as though for my life, wasn’t I fleeing from you, or for you? 
	Wasn’t I frightened you’d fray, leave me nothing but shreds? 
	Aren’t I still? When I snatch at one of your moments, and clutch it, 
	a pebble, a planet, isn’t it wearing away in my hand as though I,   
	not you, were the ocean of acid, the corrosive in I which dissolve? 
	
	Wait, though, wait: I should tell you too how happy I am, 
	how I love it so much, all of it, chopping and slashing and all. 
	Please know I love especially you, how every morning you turn over 
	the languorous earth, for how would she know otherwise to do dawn, 
	to do dusk, when all she hears from her speech-creatures is “Wait!”?   
	We whose anguished wish is that our last word not be “Wait.”



32. ZEBRA

	Kids once carried tin soldiers in their pockets as charms   
	against being afraid, but how trust soldiers these days   
	not to load up, aim, blast the pants off your legs? 
	
	I have a key-chain zebra I bought at the Thanksgiving fair. 
	How do I know she won’t kick, or bite at my crotch? 
	Because she’s been murdered, machine-gunned: she’s dead. 
	
	Also, she’s a she: even so crudely carved, you can tell   
	by the sway of her belly a foal’s inside her. 
	Even murdered mothers don’t hurt people, do they?   
	
	And how know she’s murdered? Isn’t everything murdered? 
	Some dictator’s thugs, some rebels, some poachers; 
	some drought, world-drought, world-rot, pollution, extinction. 
	
	Everything’s murdered, but still, not good, a dead thing   
	in with your ID and change. I fling her away, but the death   
	of her clings, the death of her death, her murder, her slaughter. 
	
	The best part of Thanksgiving Day, though--the parade! 
	Mickey Mouse, Snoopy, Kermit the Frog, enormous as clouds! 
	And the marching bands, majorettes, anthems and drums! 
	
	When the great bass stomped its galloping boom out 
	to the crowd, my heart swelled with valor and pride. 
	I remembered when we saluted, when we took off our hat.

