*** W. B. Yeats (1865 - 1939)

1. ADAM’S CURSE

	We sat together at one summer’s end,
	That beautiful mild woman, your close friend,   
	And you and I, and talked of poetry.
	I said, ‘A line will take us hours maybe;
	Yet if it does not seem a moment’s thought,   
	Our stitching and unstitching has been naught.   
	Better go down upon your marrow-bones   
	And scrub a kitchen pavement, or break stones   
	Like an old pauper, in all kinds of weather;   
	For to articulate sweet sounds together
	Is to work harder than all these, and yet   
	Be thought an idler by the noisy set
	Of bankers, schoolmasters, and clergymen   
	The martyrs call the world.’
	
	                            And thereupon
	That beautiful mild woman for whose sake   
	There’s many a one shall find out all heartache   
	On finding that her voice is sweet and low   
	Replied, ‘To be born woman is to know--
	Although they do not talk of it at school--
	That we must labour to be beautiful.’
	I said, ‘It’s certain there is no fine thing   
	Since Adam’s fall but needs much labouring.
	There have been lovers who thought love should be   
	So much compounded of high courtesy   
	That they would sigh and quote with learned looks   
	Precedents out of beautiful old books;   
	Yet now it seems an idle trade enough.’
	
	We sat grown quiet at the name of love;   
	We saw the last embers of daylight die,   
	And in the trembling blue-green of the sky   
	A moon, worn as if it had been a shell   
	Washed by time’s waters as they rose and fell   
	About the stars and broke in days and years.
	
	I had a thought for no one’s but your ears:   
	That you were beautiful, and that I strove   
	To love you in the old high way of love;
	That it had all seemed happy, and yet we’d grown   
	As weary-hearted as that hollow moon.



2. AMONG SCHOOL CHILDREN

	I
	
	I walk through the long schoolroom questioning;
	A kind old nun in a white hood replies;
	The children learn to cipher and to sing,
	To study reading-books and history,
	To cut and sew, be neat in everything
	In the best modern way--the children’s eyes
	In momentary wonder stare upon
	A sixty-year-old smiling public man.
	
	
	II
	
	I dream of a Ledaean body, bent
	Above a sinking fire, a tale that she
	Told of a harsh reproof, or trivial event
	That changed some childish day to tragedy--
	Told, and it seemed that our two natures blent
	Into a sphere from youthful sympathy,
	Or else, to alter Plato’s parable,
	Into the yolk and white of the one shell.
	
	
	III
	
	And thinking of that fit of grief or rage
	I look upon one child or t’other there
	And wonder if she stood so at that age--
	For even daughters of the swan can share
	Something of every paddler’s heritage--
	And had that colour upon cheek or hair,
	And thereupon my heart is driven wild:
	She stands before me as a living child.
	
	
	IV
	
	Her present image floats into the mind--
	Did Quattrocento finger fashion it
	Hollow of cheek as though it drank the wind
	And took a mess of shadows for its meat?
	And I though never of Ledaean kind
	Had pretty plumage once--enough of that,
	Better to smile on all that smile, and show
	There is a comfortable kind of old scarecrow.
	
	
	V
	
	What youthful mother, a shape upon her lap
	Honey of generation had betrayed,
	And that must sleep, shriek, struggle to escape
	As recollection or the drug decide,
	Would think her son, did she but see that shape
	With sixty or more winters on its head,
	A compensation for the pang of his birth,
	Or the uncertainty of his setting forth?
	
	
	VI
	
	Plato thought nature but a spume that plays
	Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;
	Solider Aristotle played the taws
	Upon the bottom of a king of kings;
	World-famous golden-thighed Pythagoras
	Fingered upon a fiddle-stick or strings
	What a star sang and careless Muses heard:
	Old clothes upon old sticks to scare a bird.
	
	
	VII
	
	Both nuns and mothers worship images,
	But those the candles light are not as those
	That animate a mother’s reveries,
	But keep a marble or a bronze repose.
	And yet they too break hearts--O Presences
	That passion, piety or affection knows,
	And that all heavenly glory symbolise--
	O self-born mockers of man’s enterprise;
	
	
	VIII
	
	Labour is blossoming or dancing where
	The body is not bruised to pleasure soul,
	Nor beauty born out of its own despair,
	Nor blear-eyed wisdom out of midnight oil.
	O chestnut tree, great rooted blossomer,
	Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?
	O body swayed to music, O brightening glance,
	How can we know the dancer from the dance?



3. THE BALLAD OF FATHER GILLIGAN

	The old priest Peter Gilligan
	Was weary night and day;
	For half his flock were in their beds
	Or under green sods lay.
	
	Once while he nodded on a chair
	At the moth-hour of eve
	Another poor man sent for him
	And he began to grieve.
	
	“I have no rest nor joy nor peace
	For people die and die;”
	And after cried he “God forgive!
	“My body spake not I!”
	
	He knelt and leaning on the chair
	He prayed and fell asleep;
	And the moth-hour went from the fields
	And stars began to peep.
	
	They slowly into millions grew
	And leaves shook in the wind;
	And God covered the world with shade
	And whispered to mankind.
	
	Upon the time of sparrow chirp
	When the moths came once more
	The old priest Peter Gilligan
	Stood upright on the floor.
	
	“Mavrone mavrone! the man has died
	“While I slept on the chair;”
	He roused his horse out of its sleep
	And rode with little care.
	
	He rode now as he never rode
	By rocky lane and fen;
	The sick man’s wife opened the door:
	“Father! you come again!”
	
	“And is the poor man dead?“ he cried
	“He died an hour ago”
	The old priest Peter Gilligan
	In grief swayed to and fro.
	
	“When you were gone he turned and died
	As merry as a bird.”
	The old priest Peter Gilligan
	He knelt him at that word.
	
	“He who hath made the night of stars
	For souls who tire and bleed
	Sent one of His great angels down
	To help me in my need.”
	
	“He who is wrapped in purple robes
	With planets in His care
	Had pity on the least of things
	Asleep upon a chair.”



4. THE BALLAD OF FATHER O’HART

	Good Father John O’Hart
	In penal days rode out
	To a shoneen who had free lands
	And his own snipe and trout.
	
	In trust took he John’s lands;
	Sleiveens were all his race;
	And he gave them as dowers to his daughters
	And they married beyond their place.
	
	But Father John went up
	And Father John went down;
	And he wore small holes in his shoes
	And he wore large holes in his gown.
	
	All loved him only the shoneen
	Whom the devils have by the hair
	From the wives and the cats and the children
	To the birds in the white of the air.
	
	The birds for he opened their cages
	As he went up and down;
	And he said with a smile “Have peace now“;
	And he went his way with a frown.
	
	But if when any one died
	Came keeners hoarser than rooks
	He bade them give over their keening;
	For he was a man of books.
	
	And these were the works of John
	When weeping score by score
	People came into Coloony;
	For he’d died at ninety-four.
	
	There was no human keening;
	The birds from Knocknarea
	And the world round Knocknashee
	Came keening in that day.
	
	The young birds and old birds
	Came flying heavy and sad;
	Keening in from Tiraragh
	Keening from Ballinafad;
	
	Keening from Inishmurray
	Nor stayed for bite or sup;
	This way were all reproved
	Who dig old customs up.



5. THE BALLAD OF THE FOXHUNTER

	“Now lay me in a cushioned chair
	“And carry me you four
	“With cushions here and cushions there
	“To see the world once more.
	
	“And some one from the stables bring
	“My Dermot dear and brown
	“And lead him gently in a ring
	“And gently up and down.
	
	“Now leave the chair upon the grass:
	“Bring hound and huntsman here
	“And I on this strange road will pass
	“Filled full of ancient cheer.”
	
	His eyelids droop his head falls low
	His old eyes cloud with dreams;
	The sun upon all things that grow
	Pours round in sleepy streams.
	
	Brown Dermot treads upon the lawn
	And to the armchair goes
	And now the old man’s dreams are gone
	He smooths the long brown nose.
	
	And now moves many a pleasant tongue
	Upon his wasted hands
	For leading aged hounds and young
	The huntsman near him stands.
	
	“My huntsman Rody blow the horn
	“And make the hills reply.”
	The huntsman loosens on the morn
	A gay and wandering cry.
	
	A fire is in the old man’s eyes
	His fingers move and sway
	And when the wandering music dies
	They hear him feebly say
	
	“My huntsman Rody blow the horn
	“And make the hills reply.”
	“I cannot blow upon my horn
	“I can but weep and sigh.”
	
	The servants round his cushioned place
	Are with new sorrow wrung;
	And hounds are gazing on his face
	Both aged hounds and young.
	
	One blind hound only lies apart
	On the sun-smitten grass;
	He holds deep commune with his heart:
	The moments pass and pass;
	
	The blind hound with a mournful din
	Lifts slow his wintry head;
	The servants bear the body in;
	The hounds wail for the dead.



6. BEGGAR TO BEGGAR CRIED

	“Time to put off the world and go somewhere
	And find my health again in the sea air,”
	Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
	“And make my soul before my pate is bare;
	
	“And get a comfortable wife and house
	To rid me of the devil in my shoes,
	Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
	“And the worse devil that is between my thighs.
	
	“And though I’d marry with a comely lass,
	She need not be too comely--let it pass,”
	Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
	“But there’s a devil in a looking-glass.”
	
	“Nor should she be too rich, because the rich
	Are driven by wealth as beggars by the itch,”
	Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
	“And cannot have a humorous happy speech.”
	
	“And there I’ll grow respected at my ease,
	And hear amid the garden’s nightly peace,”
	Beggar to beggar cried, being frenzy-struck,
	“The wind-blown clamor of the barnacle-geese.”



7. BYZANTIUM

	The unpurged images of day recede;
	The Emperor’s drunken soldiery are abed;
	Night resonance recedes, night-walkers’ song
	After great cathedral gong;
	A starlit or a moonlit dome disdains
	All that man is,
	All mere complexities,
	The fury and the mire of human veins.
	
	Before me floats an image, man or shade,
	Shade more than man, more image than a shade;
	For Hades’ bobbin bound in mummy-cloth
	May unwind the winding path;
	A mouth that has no moisture and no breath
	Breathless mouths may summon;
	I hail the superhuman;
	I call it death-in-life and life-in-death.
	
	Miracle, bird or golden handiwork,
	More miracle than bird or handiwork,
	Planted on the starlit golden bough,
	Can like the cocks of Hades crow,
	Or, by the moon embittered, scorn aloud
	In glory of changeless metal
	Common bird or petal
	And all complexities of mire or blood.
	
	At midnight on the Emperor’s pavement flit
	Flames that no faggot feeds, nor steel has lit,
	Nor storm disturbs, flames begotten of flame,
	Where blood-begotten spirits come
	And all complexities of fury leave,
	Dying into a dance,
	An agony of trance,
	An agony of flame that cannot singe a sleeve.
	
	Astraddle on the dolphin’s mire and blood,
	Spirit after spirit! The smithies break the flood,
	The golden smithies of the Emperor!
	Marbles of the dancing floor
	Break bitter furies of complexity,
	Those images that yet
	Fresh images beget,
	That dolphin-torn, that gong-tormented sea.



8. THE CAP AND BELLS

	The jester walked in the garden:
	The garden had fallen still;
	He bade his soul rise upward
	And stand on her window-sill.
	
	It rose in a straight blue garment,
	When owls began to call:
	It had grown wise-tongued by thinking
	Of a quiet and light footfall;
	
	But the young queen would not listen;
	She rose in her pale night-gown;
	She drew in the heavy casement
	And pushed the latches down.
	
	He bade his heart go to her,
	When the owls called out no more;
	In a red and quivering garment
	It sang to her through the door.
	
	It had grown sweet-tongued by dreaming
	Of a flutter of flower-like hair;
	But she took up her fan from the table
	And waved it off on the air.
	
	‘I have cap and bells,’ he pondered,
	‘I will send them to her and die’;
	And when the morning whitened
	He left them where she went by.
	
	She laid them upon her bosom,
	Under a cloud of her hair,
	And her red lips sang them a love-song
	Till stars grew out of the air.
	
	She opened her door and her window,
	And the heart and the soul came through,
	To her right hand came the red one,
	To her left hand came the blue.
	
	They set up a noise like crickets,
	A chattering wise and sweet,
	And her hair was a folded flower
	And the quiet of love in her feet.



9. THE CIRCUS ANIMAL’S DESERTION

	I
	
	I sought a theme and sought for it in vain,
	I sought it daily for six weeks or so.
	Maybe at last being but a broken man
	I must be satisfied with my heart, although
	Winter and summer till old age began
	My circus animals were all on show,
	Those stilted boys, that burnished chariot,
	Lion and woman and the Lord knows what.
	
	
	II
	
	What can I but enumerate old themes,
	First that sea-rider Oisin led by the nose
	Through three enchanted islands, allegorical dreams,
	Vain gaiety, vain battle, vain repose,
	Themes of the embittered heart, or so it seems,
	That might adorn old songs or courtly shows;
	But what cared I that set him on to ride,
	I, starved for the bosom of his fairy bride.
	
	And then a counter-truth filled out its play,
	‘The Countess Cathleen’ was the name I gave it,
	She, pity-crazed, had given her soul away
	But masterful Heaven had intervened to save it.
	I thought my dear must her own soul destroy
	So did fanaticism and hate enslave it,
	And this brought forth a dream and soon enough
	This dream itself had all my thought and love.
	
	And when the Fool and Blind Man stole the bread
	Cuchulain fought the ungovernable sea;
	Heart mysteries there, and yet when all is said
	It was the dream itself enchanted me:
	Character isolated by a deed
	To engross the present and dominate memory.
	Players and painted stage took all my love
	And not those things that they were emblems of.
	
	
	III
	
	Those masterful images because complete
	Grew in pure mind but out of what began?
	A mound of refuse or the sweepings of a street,
	Old kettles, old bottles, and a broken can,
	Old iron, old bones, old rags, that raving slut
	Who keeps the till. Now that my ladder’s gone
	I must lie down where all the ladders start
	In the foul rag and bone shop of the heart.



10. A COAT

	I made my song a coat 
	Covered with embroideries 
	Out of old mythologies 
	From heel to throat; 
	But the fools caught it, 
	Wore it in the world’s eyes 
	As though they’d wrought it. 
	Song, let them take it
	For there’s more enterprise 
	In walking naked.



11. COLD HEAVEN

	Suddenly I saw the cold and rook-delighting heaven
	That seemed as though ice burned and was but the more ice,
	And thereupon imagination and heart were driven
	So wild that every casual thought of that and this
	Vanished, and left but memories, that should be out of season
	With the hot blood of youth, of love crossed long ago;
	And I took all the blame out of all sense and reason,
	Until I cried and trembled and rocked to and fro,
	Riddled with light. Ah! when the ghost begins to quicken,
	Confusion of the death-bed over, is it sent
	Out naked on the roads, as the books say, and stricken
	By the injustice of the skies for punishment?



12. CRAZY JANE TALKS WITH THE BISHOP

	I met the Bishop on the road
	And much said he and I.
	‘Those breasts are flat and fallen now
	Those veins must soon be dry;
	Live in a heavenly mansion,
	Not in some foul sty.’
	
	‘Fair and foul are near of kin,
	And fair needs foul,’ I cried.
	‘My friends are gone, but that’s a truth
	Nor grave nor bed denied,
	Learned in bodily lowliness
	And in the heart’s pride.
	
	‘A woman can be proud and stiff
	When on love intent;
	But Love has pitched his mansion in
	The place of excrement;
	For nothing can be sole or whole
	That has not been rent.’



13. THE DAWN

	I would be as ignorant as the dawn,
	That has looked down
	On that old queen measuring a town
	With the pin of a brooch,
	Or on the withered men that saw
	From their pedantic Babylon
	The careless planets in their courses,
	The stars fade out where the moon comes,
	And took their tablets and made sums--
	Yet did but look, rocking the glittering coach
	Above the cloudy shoulders of the horses.
	I would be--for no knowledge is worth a straw--
	Ignorant and wanton as the dawn.



14. THE DEATH OF CUCHULAIN

	A man came slowly from the setting sun
	To Forgail’s daughter Emer in her dun
	And found her dyeing cloth with subtle care
	And said casting aside his draggled hair:
	“I am Aleel the swineherd whom you bid
	“Go dwell upon the sea cliffs vapour hid;
	“But now my years of watching are no more.”
	
	Then Emer cast the web upon the floor
	And stretching out her arms red with the dye
	Parted her lips with a loud sudden cry.
	
	Looking on her Aleel the swineherd said:
	“Not any god alive nor mortal dead
	“Has slain so mighty armies so great kings
	“Nor won the gold that now Cuchulain brings.”
	
	“Why do you tremble thus from feet to crown?”
	
	Aleel the swineherd wept and cast him down
	Upon the web-heaped floor and thus his word:
	“With him is one sweet-throated like a bird.”
	
	“Who bade you tell these things?“ and then she cried
	To those about “Beat him with thongs of hide
	“And drive him from the door.”
	
	                               And thus it was:
	And where her son Finmole on the smooth grass
	Was driving cattle came she with swift feet
	And called out to him “Son it is not meet
	“That you stay idling here with flocks and herds.”
	
	“I have long waited mother for those words:
	“But wherefore now?”
	
	                       “There is a man to die;
	“You have the heaviest arm under the sky.”
	
	“My father dwells among the sea-worn bands
	“And breaks the ridge of battle with his hands.”
	
	“Nay you are taller than Cuchulain son.”
	
	“He is the mightiest man in ship or dun.”
	
	“Nay he is old and sad with many wars
	“And weary of the crash of battle cars.”
	
	“I only ask what way my journey lies
	“For God who made you bitter made you wise.”
	
	“The Red Branch kings a tireless banquet keep
	“Where the sun falls into the Western deep.
	“Go there and dwell on the green forest rim;
	“But tell alone your name and house to him
	“Whose blade compels and bid them send you one
	“Who has a like vow from their triple dun.”
	
	Between the lavish shelter of a wood
	And the gray tide the Red Branch multitude
	Feasted and with them old Cuchulain dwelt
	And his young dear one close beside him knelt
	And gazed upon the wisdom of his eyes
	More mournful than the depth of starry skies
	And pondered on the wonder of his days;
	And all around the harp-string told his praise
	And Concobar the Red Branch king of kings
	With his own fingers touched the brazen strings.
	At last Cuchulain spake “A young man strays
	“Driving the deer along the woody ways.
	“I often hear him singing to and fro
	“I often hear the sweet sound of his bow
	“Seek out what man he is.”
	
	                           One went and came.
	“He bade me let all know he gives his name
	“At the sword point and bade me bring him one
	“Who had a like vow from our triple dun.”
	
	“I only of the Red Branch hosted now”
	Cuchulain cried “have made and keep that vow.”
	
	After short fighting in the leafy shade
	He spake to the young man “Is there no maid
	“Who loves you no white arms to wrap you round
	“Or do you long for the dim sleepy ground
	“That you come here to meet this ancient sword?”
	
	“The dooms of men are in God’s hidden hoard.”
	
	“Your head a while seemed like a woman’s head
	“That I loved once.”
	
	                     Again the fighting sped
	But now the war rage in Cuchulain woke
	And through the other’s shield his long blade broke
	And pierced him.
	
	               “Speak before your breath is done.”
	“I am Finmole mighty Cuchulain’s son.”
	
	“I put you from your pain. I can no more.”
	
	While day its burden on to evening bore
	With head bowed on his knees Cuchulain stayed;
	Then Concobar sent that sweet-throated maid
	And she to win him his gray hair caressed;
	In vain her arms in vain her soft white breast.
	Then Concobar the subtlest of all men
	Ranking his Druids round him ten by ten
	Spake thus “Cuchulain will dwell there and brood
	“For three days more in dreadful quietude
	“And then arise and raving slay us all.
	“Go cast on him delusions magical
	“That he might fight the waves of the loud sea.”
	And ten by ten under a quicken tree
	The Druids chaunted swaying in their hands
	Tall wands of alder and white quicken wands.
	
	In three days’ time Cuchulain with a moan
	Stood up and came to the long sands alone:
	For four days warred he with the bitter tide;
	And the waves flowed above him and he died.



15. A DIALOGUE OF SELF AND SOUL

	I
	
	_My Soul:_
	
	I summon to the winding ancient stair;
	Set all your mind upon the steep ascent,
	Upon the broken, crumbling battlement,
	Upon the breathless starlit air,
	Upon the star that marks the hidden pole;
	Fix every wandering thought upon
	That quarter where all thought is done:
	Who can distinguish darkness from the soul?
	
	
	_My Self:_
	
	The consecrated blade upon my knees
	Is Sato’s ancient blade, still as it was,
	Still razor-keen, still like a looking-glass
	Unspotted by the centuries;
	That flowering, silken, old embroidery, torn
	From some court-lady’s dress and round
	The wooden scabbard bound and wound,
	Can, tattered, still protect, faded adorn.
	
	
	_My Soul:_
	
	Why should the imagination of a man
	Long past his prime remember things that are
	Emblematical of love and war?
	Think of ancestral night that can,
	If but imagination scorn the earth
	And intellect its wandering
	To this and that and t’other thing,
	Deliver from the crime of death and birth.
	
	
	_My Self:_
	
	Montashigi, third of his family, fashioned it
	Five hundred years ago, about it lie
	Flowers from I know not what embroidery--
	Heart’s purple--and all these I set
	For emblems of the day against the tower
	Emblematical of the night,
	And claim as by a soldier’s right
	A charter to commit the crime once more.
	
	
	_My Soul:_
	
	Such fullness in that quarter overflows
	And falls into the basin of the mind
	That man is stricken deaf and dumb and blind,
	For intellect no longer knows
	Is from the Ought, or Knower from the Known--
	That is to say, ascends to Heaven;
	Only the dead can be forgiven;
	But when I think of that my tongue’s a stone.
	
	
	II
	
	_My Self:_
	
	A living man is blind and drinks his drop.
	What matter if the ditches are impure?
	What matter if I live it all once more?
	Endure that toil of growing up;
	The ignominy of boyhood; the distress
	Of boyhood changing into man;
	The unfinished man and his pain
	Brought face to face with his own clumsiness;
	
	The finished man among his enemies?--
	How in the name of Heaven can he escape
	That defiling and disfigured shape
	The mirror of malicious eyes
	Casts upon his eyes until at last
	He thinks that shape must be his shape?
	And what’s the good of an escape
	If honour find him in the wintry blast?
	
	I am content to live it all again
	And yet again, if it be life to pitch
	Into the frog-spawn of a blind man’s ditch,
	A blind man battering blind men;
	Or into that most fecund ditch of all,
	The folly that man does
	Or must suffer, if he woos
	A proud woman not kindred of his soul.
	
	I am content to follow to its source
	Every event in action or in thought;
	Measure the lot; forgive myself the lot!
	When such as I cast out remorse
	So great a sweetness flows into the breast
	We must laugh and we must sing,
	We are blest by everything,
	Everything we look upon is blest.



16. DOWN BY THE SALLEY GARDENS

	Down by the salley gardens
	   my love and I did meet;
	She passed the salley gardens
	   with little snow-white feet.
	She bid me take love easy,
	   as the leaves grow on the tree;
	But I, being young and foolish,
	   with her would not agree.
	
	In a field by the river
	   my love and I did stand,
	And on my leaning shoulder
	   she laid her snow-white hand.
	She bid me take life easy,
	   as the grass grows on the weirs;
	But I was young and foolish,
	   and now am full of tears.



17. A DREAM OF DEATH

	I dreamed that one had died in a strange place
	Near no accustomed hand;
	And they had nailed the boards above her face
	The peasants of that land
	Wondering to lay her in that solitude
	And raised above her mound
	A cross they had made out of two bits of wood
	And planted cypress round;
	And left her to the indifferent stars above
	Until I carved these words:
	_She was more beautiful than thy first love
	But now lies under boards_.



18. A DRINKING SONG

	Wine comes in at the mouth
	And love comes in at the eye;
	That’s all we shall know for truth
	Before we grow old and die.
	I lift the glass to my mouth,
	I look at you, and I sigh.



19. EASTER, 1916

	I have met them at close of day   
	Coming with vivid faces
	From counter or desk among grey   
	Eighteenth-century houses.
	I have passed with a nod of the head   
	Or polite meaningless words,   
	Or have lingered awhile and said   
	Polite meaningless words,
	And thought before I had done   
	Of a mocking tale or a gibe   
	To please a companion
	Around the fire at the club,   
	Being certain that they and I   
	But lived where motley is worn:   
	All changed, changed utterly:   
	A terrible beauty is born.
	
	That woman’s days were spent   
	In ignorant good-will,
	Her nights in argument
	Until her voice grew shrill.
	What voice more sweet than hers   
	When, young and beautiful,   
	She rode to harriers?
	This man had kept a school   
	And rode our wingèd horse;   
	This other his helper and friend   
	Was coming into his force;
	He might have won fame in the end,   
	So sensitive his nature seemed,   
	So daring and sweet his thought.
	This other man I had dreamed
	A drunken, vainglorious lout.
	He had done most bitter wrong
	To some who are near my heart,   
	Yet I number him in the song;
	He, too, has resigned his part
	In the casual comedy;
	He, too, has been changed in his turn,   
	Transformed utterly:
	A terrible beauty is born.
	
	Hearts with one purpose alone   
	Through summer and winter seem   
	Enchanted to a stone
	To trouble the living stream.
	The horse that comes from the road,   
	The rider, the birds that range   
	From cloud to tumbling cloud,   
	Minute by minute they change;   
	A shadow of cloud on the stream   
	Changes minute by minute;   
	A horse-hoof slides on the brim,   
	And a horse plashes within it;   
	The long-legged moor-hens dive,   
	And hens to moor-cocks call;   
	Minute by minute they live:   
	The stone’s in the midst of all.
	
	Too long a sacrifice
	Can make a stone of the heart.   
	O when may it suffice?
	That is Heaven’s part, our part   
	To murmur name upon name,   
	As a mother names her child   
	When sleep at last has come   
	On limbs that had run wild.   
	What is it but nightfall?
	No, no, not night but death;   
	Was it needless death after all?
	For England may keep faith   
	For all that is done and said.   
	We know their dream; enough
	To know they dreamed and are dead;   
	And what if excess of love   
	Bewildered them till they died?   
	I write it out in a verse--
	MacDonagh and MacBride   
	And Connolly and Pearse
	Now and in time to be,
	Wherever green is worn,
	Are changed, changed utterly:   
	A terrible beauty is born.



20. EGO DOMINUS TUUS

	_Hic_
	
	On the grey sand beside the shallow stream,
	Under your old wind-beaten tower, where still
	A lamp burns on beside the open book
	That Michael Robartes left, you walk in the moon;
	And though you have passed the best of life still trace,
	Enthralled by the unconquerable delusion,
	Magical shapes.
	
	
	_Ille_
	
	By the help of an image
	I call to my own opposite, summon all
	That I have handled least, least looked upon.
	
	
	_Hic_
	
	And I would find myself and not an image.
	
	
	_Ille_
	
	That is our modern hope, and by its light
	We have lit upon the gentle, sensitive mind
	And lost the old nonchalance of the hand.
	Whether we have chosen chisel, pen or brush
	We are but critics, or but half create,
	Timid, entangled, empty and abashed,
	Lacking the countenance of our friends.
	
	
	_Hic_
	
	And yet
	The chief imagination of christendom
	Dante Alighieri so utterly found himself
	That he has made that hollow face of his
	More plain to the mind’s eye than any face
	But that of Christ.
	
	
	_Ille_
	
	And did he find himself,
	Or was the hunger that had made it hollow
	A hunger for the apple on the bough
	Most out of reach? and is that spectral image
	The man that Lapo and that Guido knew?
	I think he fashioned from his opposite
	An image that might have been a stony face,
	Staring upon a bedouin’s horse-hair roof
	From doored and windowed cliff, or half upturned
	Among the coarse grass and the camel dung.
	He set his chisel to the hardest stone.
	Being mocked by Guido for his lecherous life,
	Derided and deriding, driven out
	To climb that stair and eat that bitter bread,
	He found the unpersuadable justice, he found
	The most exalted lady loved by a man.
	
	
	_Hic_
	
	Yet surely there are men who have made their art
	Out of no tragic war--lovers of life,
	Impulsive men that look for happiness
	And sing when they have found it.
	
	
	_Ille_
	
	No, not sing;
	For those that love the world serve it in action,
	Grow rich, popular and full of influence,
	And should they paint or write still it is action:
	The struggle of the fly in marmalade.
	The rhetorician would deceive his neighbors,
	The sentimentalist himself; while art
	Is but a vision of reality.
	What portion in the world can the artist have
	Who has awakened from the common dream,
	But dissipation and despair?
	
	
	_Hic_
	
	And yet
	No one denies to Keats love of the world.
	Remember his deliberate happiness.
	
	
	_Ille_
	
	His art is happy, but who knows his mind?
	I see a school-boy when I think of him
	With face and nose pressed to a sweet-shop window.
	For certainly he sank into his grave
	His senses and his heart unsatisfied,
	And made--being poor, ailing and ignorant,
	Shut out from all the luxury of the world,
	The ill-bred son of a livery-stable keeper-
	Luxuriant song.
	
	
	_Hic_
	
	Why should you leave the lamp
	Burning alone beside an open book,
	And trace these characters upon the sands?
	A style is found by sedentary toil
	And by the imitation of great masters.
	
	
	_Ille_
	
	Because I seek an image not a book,
	Those men that in their writings are most wise
	Own nothing but their blind, stupified hearts.
	I call to the mysterious one who yet
	Shall walk the wet sands by the edge of the stream
	And look most like me, being indeed my double,
	And prove if all imaginable things
	The most unlike, being my anti-self,
	And standing by these characters disclose
	All that I seek: and whisper it as though
	He were afraid the birds, who cry aloud
	Their momentary cries before it is dawn,
	Would carry it away to blasphemous men.



21. EPHEMERA

	“Your eyes that once were never weary of mine
	“Are bowed in sorrow under pendulous lids
	“Because our love is waning.”
	
	                             And then she:
	“Although our love is waning let us stand
	“By the lone border of the lake once more
	“Together in that hour of gentleness
	“When the poor tired child Passion falls asleep:
	“How far away the stars seem and how far
	“Is our first kiss and ah how old my heart!”
	
	Pensive they paced along the faded leaves
	While slowly he whose hand held hers replied:
	“Passion has often worn our wandering hearts.”
	
	The woods were round them and the yellow leaves
	Fell like faint meteors in the gloom and once
	A rabbit old and lame limped down the path;
	Autumn was over him: and now they stood
	On the lone border of the lake once more:
	Turning he saw that she had thrust dead leaves
	Gathered in silence dewy as her eyes
	In bosom and hair.
	
	                  “Ah do not mourn“ he said
	“That we are tired for other loves await us;
	“Hate on and love through unrepining hours.
	“Before us lies eternity; our souls
	“Are love and a continual farewell.”



22. THE EVERLASTING VOICES

	O sweet everlasting Voices, be still; 
	Go to the guards of the heavenly fold 
	And bid them wander obeying your will, 
	Flame under flame, till Time be no more; 
	Have you not heard that our hearts are old, 
	That you call in birds, in wind on the hill, 
	In shaken boughs, in tide on the shore? 
	O sweet everlasting Voices, be still.



23. THE FALLEN MAJESTY

	Although crowds gathered once if she but showed her face
	And even old men’s eyes grew dim, this hand alone,
	Like some last courtier at a gipsy camping place
	Babbling of fallen majesty, records what’s gone.
	The lineaments, the heart that laughter has made sweet,
	These, these remain, but I record what’s gone. A crowd
	Will gather and not know that through its very street
	Once walked a thing that seemed, as it were, a burning
	cloud.



24. THE FALLING OF THE LEAVES

	Autumn is over the long leaves that love us
	And over the mice in the barley sheaves;
	Yellow the leaves of the rowan above us
	And yellow the wet wild-strawberry leaves.
	
	The hour of the waning of love has beset us
	And weary and worn are our sad souls now;
	Let us part ere the season of passion forget us
	With a kiss and a tear on thy drooping brow.



25. THE FASCINATION OF WHAT’S DIFFICULT

	The fascination of what’s difficult
	Has dried the sap out of my veins, and rent
	Spontaneous joy and natural content
	Out of my heart. There’s something ails our colt
	That must, as if it had not holy blood
	Nor on Olympus leaped from cloud to cloud,
	Shiver under the lash, strain, sweat and jolt
	As though it dragged road metal. My curse on plays
	That have to be set up in fifty ways,
	On the day’s war with every knave and dolt,
	Theatre business, management of men.
	I swear before the dawn comes round again
	I’ll find the stable and pull out the bolt.



26. THE FISH

	Although you hide in the ebb and flow 
	Of the pale tide when the moon has set, 
	The people of coming days will know 
	About the casting out of my net, 
	And how you have leaped times out of mind 
	Over the little silver cords, 
	And think that you were hard and unkind, 
	And blame you with many bitter words.



27. THE FISHERMAN

	Although I can see him still-- 
	The freckled man who goes 
	To a gray place on a hill 
	In gray Connemara clothes 
	At dawn to cast his flies-- 
	It’s long since I began 
	To call up to the eyes 
	This wise and simple man. 
	All day I’d looked in the face 
	What I had hoped it would be 
	To write for my own race 
	And the reality: 
	The living men that I hate, 
	The dead man that I loved, 
	The craven man in his seat, 
	The insolent unreproved-- 
	And no knave brought to book 
	Who has won a drunken cheer-- 
	The witty man and his joke 
	Aimed at the commonest ear, 
	The clever man who cries 
	The catch cries of the clown, 
	The beating down of the wise 
	And great Art beaten down. 
	
	Maybe a twelve-month since 
	Suddenly I began, 
	In scorn of this audience, 
	Imagining a man, 
	And his sun-freckled face 
	And gray Connemara cloth, 
	Climbing up to a place 
	Where stone is dark with froth, 
	And the down turn of his wrist 
	When the flies drop in the stream-- 
	A man who does not exist, 
	A man who is but a dream; 
	And cried, “Before I am old 
	I shall have written him one 
	Poem maybe as cold 
	And passionate as the dawn.”



28. THE FOUR AGES OF MAN

	He with body waged a fight,
	But body won; it walks upright.
	
	Then he struggled with the heart,
	Innocence and peace depart.
	
	Then he struggled with the mind;
	His proud heart he left behind.
	
	Now his wars on God begin,
	At stroke of midnight God shall win.



29. THE GREY ROCK

	_Here’s an old story I’ve remade,
	Imagining ’twould better please
	Your ears than stories now in fashion.
	Though you may think I waste my breath
	Pretending that there can be passion
	That has more life in it than death,
	Though at the bottling of your wine
	The bow-legged Goban had no say;
	The moral’s yours because it’s mine._
	
	When cups went round at close of day
	Is not that how good stories run?
	Somewhere within some hollow hill,
	If books speak truth, in Slievenamon
	But let that be--the gods were still
	And sleepy having had their meal:
	And smoky torches made a glare
	On painted pillars, on a deal
	Of old stringed instruments, hung there
	By the ancient holy hands that brought them
	From murmuring Murias; on cups
	Old Goban hammered them and wrought them,
	And put his pattern round their tops
	To hold the wine they buy of him.
	But from the juice that made them wise
	All those had lifted up the dim
	Imaginations of their eyes;
	For one that was like woman made
	Before their sleepy eyelids ran,
	And trembling with her passion said:
	“Come out and dig for a dead man,
	Who’s burrowing somewhere in the ground;
	And mock him to his face, and then
	Hollo him on with horse and hound,
	For he is the worst of all dead men.”
	
	_We should be dared and terror struck
	If we but saw in dreams that room
	And those fierce eyes, and curse our luck
	That emptied all our days to come.
	I knew a woman none could please
	Because she dreamed when but a child
	Of men and women made like these;
	And after, when her blood ran wild,
	Had ravelled her own story out,
	And said, “In two or in three years
	I need must marry some poor lout,”
	And having said it burst in tears.
	Since, tavern comrades, you have died
	Maybe your images have stood,
	Mere bone and muscle thrown aside,
	Before that roomful or as good.
	“Twas wine or women or some curse
	But never made a boorer song
	That you might have a heavier purse;
	Nor gave loud service to a cause
	That you might have a troop of friends.
	You kept the Muses’ sterner laws
	And unrepenting faced your ends;
	And therefore earned the right
	and yet
	Dowson and Tohnson most I praise
	To troop with those the world’s forgot,
	And copy their proud steady gaze._
	
	“The Danish troop was driven put
	Between the dawn and dusk,” she said;
	“Although the event was long in doubt,
	Although the King of Ireland’s dead
	And half his kings, before sundown
	All was accomplished.”
	
	When this day
	Murrough the King of Ireland’s son
	Foot after foot was giving way,
	He and his best troops back to back
	Had perished there, but the Danes ran
	Stricken with panic from the attack,
	The shouting of an unseen man;
	And, being thankful, Murrough found,
	Led by a foot-sole dipped in blood
	That had made prints upon the ground,
	Where by old thorn trees that man stood;
	And though when he gazed here and there
	He had but gazed on thorn trees, spoke:
	“Who is the friend that seems but air
	And yet could give so fine a stroke?’
	Thereon a young man met his eye
	Who said, ‘Because she held me in
	Her love and would not have me die,
	Rock-nurtured Aoife took a pin
	And pushing it into my shirt
	Promised that for a pin’s sake
	No man should see to do me hurt;
	But there it’s gone; I will not take
	The fortune that had been my shame,
	Seeing, King’s son, what wounds you have.
	’Twas roundly spoke, but when night came
	He had betrayed me to his grave,
	For he and the King’s son were dead.
	I’d promised him two hundred years,
	And when, for all I’d done or said
	And these immortal eyes shed tears
	He claimed his country’s need was most.
	I’d saved his life, yet for the sake
	Of a new friend he has turned a ghost.
	What does he care if my heart break?
	I call for spade and horse and hound
	That we may harry him.” Thereon
	She cast herself upon the ground
	And rent her clothes and made her moan:
	“Why are they faithless when their might
	Is from the holy shades that rove
	The grey rock and the windy light?
	Why should the faithfulest heart most love
	The bitter sweetness of false faces?
	Why must the lasting love what passes?
	Why are the gods by men betrayed!”
	But thereon every god stood up
	With a slow smile and without sound,
	And, stretching forth his arm and cup
	To where she moaned upon the ground,
	Suddenly drenched her to the skin;
	And she with Goban’s wine adrip,
	No more remembering what had been,
	Stared at the gods with laughing lip.
	
	_I have kept my faith, though faith was tried,
	To that rock-born, rock-wandering foot;
	And the world’s altered since you died,
	And I am in no good repute
	With the loud host before the sea,
	That think sword strokes were better meant
	Than lover’s music:--let that be,
	So that the wandering foot’s content._



30. THE HAWK

	Call down the hawk from the air-
	Let him be hooded or caged
	Till the yellow eye has grown mild.
	For larder and spit are bare,
	The old cook enraged,
	The scullion gone wild.
	I will not be clapped in a hood,
	Nor a cage, nor alight upon wrist,
	Now I have learnt to be proud
	Hovering over the wood
	In the broken mist
	Or tumbling cloud.
	What tumbling cloud did you cleave,
	Yellow-eyed hawk of the mind,
	Last evening, that I, who had sat
	Dumbfounded before a knave
	Should give to my friend
	A pretence of wit?



31. HE AND SHE

	As the moon sidles up
	Must she sidle up,
	As trips the scared moon
	Away must she trip,
	“His light had struck me blind
	Dared I stop.”
	She sings as the moon sings
	“I am I, am I;
	The greater grows my light
	The further that I Aly.”
	All creation shivers
	With that sweet cry.



32. HE WISHES HIS BELOVED WERE DEAD

	Were you but lying cold and dead, 
	And lights were paling out of the West, 
	You would come hither, and bend your head, 
	And I would lay my head on your breast; 
	And you would murmur tender words, 
	Forgiving me, because you were dead: 
	Nor would you rise and hasten away, 
	Though you have the will of wild birds, 
	But know your hair was bound and wound 
	About the stars and moon and sun: 
	O would, beloved, that you lay 
	Under the dock-leaves in the ground, 
	While lights were paling one by one.



33. HER PRAISE

	She is foremost of those that I would hear praised.
	I have gone about the house, gone up and down
	As a man does who has published a new book,
	Or a young girl dressed out in her new gown,
	And though I have turned the talk by hook or crook
	Until her praise should be the uppermost theme,
	A woman spoke of some new tale she had read,
	A man confusedly in a half dream
	As though some other name ran in his head.
	She is foremost of those that I would hear praised.
	I will talk no more of books or the long war
	But walk by the dry thorn until I have found
	Some beggar sheltering from the wind, and there
	Manage the talk until her name come round.
	If there be rags enough he will know her name
	And be well pleased remembering it, for in the old days,
	Though she had young men’s praise and old men’s blame,
	Among the poor both old and young gave her praise.



34. IN MEMORY

	The light of evening, Lissadell,
	Great windows open to the south,
	Two girls in silk kimonos, both
	Beautiful, one a gazelle.
	But a raving autumn shears
	Blossom from the summer’s wreath;
	The older is condemned to death,
	Pardoned, drags out lonely years
	Conspiring among the ignorant.
	I know not what the younger dreams--
	Some vague Utopia--and she seems,
	When withered old and skeleton-gaunt,
	An image of such politics.
	Many a time I think to seek
	One or the other out and speak
	Of that old Georgian mansion, mix
	Pictures of the mind, recall
	That table and the talk of youth,
	Two girls in silk kimonos, both
	Beautiful, one a gazelle.
	
	Dear shadows, now you know it all,
	All the folly of a fight
	With a common wrong or right.
	The innocent and the beautiful
	Have no enemy but time;
	Arise and bid me strike a match
	And strike another till time catch;
	Should the conflagration climb,
	Run till all the sages know.
	We the great gazebo built,
	They convicted us of guilt;
	Bid me strike a match and blow.



35. THE INDIAN UPON GOD

	I passed along the water’s edge below the humid trees
	My spirit rocked in evening light the rushes round my knees
	My spirit rocked in sleep and sighs; and saw the moorfowl pace
	All dripping on a grassy slope and saw them cease to chase
	Each other round in circles and heard the eldest speak:
	_Who holds the world between His bill and made us strong or weak
	Is an undying moorfowl and He lives beyond the sky.
	The rains are from His dripping wing the moonbeams from His eye._
	I passed a little further on and heard a lotus talk:
	_Who made the world and ruleth it He hangeth on a stalk_
	_For I am in His image made and all this tinkling tide
	Is but a sliding drop of rain between His petals wide._
	A little way within the gloom a roebuck raised his eyes
	Brimful of starlight and he said: _The Stamper of the Skies
	He is a gentle roebuck; for how else I pray could He
	Conceive a thing so sad and soft a gentle thing like me?_
	I passed a little further on and heard a peacock say:
	_Who made the grass and made the worms and made my feathers gay
	He is a monstrous peacock and He waveth all the night
	His languid tail above us lit with myriad spots of light._



36. AN IRISH AIRMAN FORESEES HIS DEATH

	I know that I shall meet my fate 
	Somewhere among the clouds above; 
	Those that I fight I do not hate, 
	Those that I guard I do not love; 
	My country is Kiltartan Cross, 
	My countrymen Kiltartan’s poor, 
	No likely end could bring them loss 
	Or leave them happier than before. 
	Nor law, nor duty bade me fight, 
	Nor public men, nor cheering crowds, 
	A lonely impulse of delight 
	Drove to this tumult in the clouds; 
	I balanced all, brought all to mind, 
	The years to come seemed waste of breath, 
	A waste of breath the years behind 
	In balance with this life, this death.



37. THE LAKE ISLE OF INNISFREE

	I will arise and go now and go to Innisfree
	And a small cabin build there of clay and wattles made:
	Nine bean rows will I have there a hive for the honey bee
	And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
	
	And I shall have some peace there for peace comes dropping slow
	Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings;
	There midnight’s all a glimmer and noon a purple glow
	And evening full of the linnet’s wings.
	
	I will arise and go now for always night and day
	I hear lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
	While I stand on the roadway or on the pavements gray
	I hear it in the deep heart’s core.



38. THE LAMENTATION OF THE OLD PENSIONER

	I had a chair at every hearth
	When no one turned to see
	With “Look at that old fellow there
	“And who may he be?”
	And therefore do I wander now
	And the fret lies on me.
	
	The road-side trees keep murmuring
	Ah wherefore murmur ye
	As in the old days long gone by
	Green oak and poplar tree?
	The well-known faces are all gone
	And the fret lies on me.



39. LAPIS LAZULI

	I have heard that hysterical women say
	They are sick of the palette and fiddle-bow,
	Of poets that are always gay,
	For everybody knows or else should know
	That if nothing drastic is done
	Aeroplane and Zeppelin will come out,
	Pitch like King Billy bomb-balls in
	Until the town lie beaten flat.
	
	All perform their tragic play,
	There struts Hamlet, there is Lear,
	That’s Ophelia, that Cordelia;
	Yet they, should the last scene be there,
	The great stage curtain about to drop,
	If worthy their prominent part in the play,
	Do not break up their lines to weep.
	They know that Hamlet and Lear are gay;
	Gaiety transfiguring all that dread.
	All men have aimed at, found and lost;
	Black out; Heaven blazing into the head:
	Tragedy wrought to its uttermost.
	Though Hamlet rambles and Lear rages,
	And all the drop scenes drop at once
	Upon a hundred thousand stages,
	It cannot grow by an inch or an ounce.
	
	On their own feet they came, or on shipboard,
	Camel-back, horse-back, ass-back, mule-back,
	Old civilisations put to the sword.
	Then they and their wisdom went to rack:
	No handiwork of Callimachus
	Who handled marble as if it were bronze,
	Made draperies that seemed to rise
	When sea-wind swept the corner, stands;
	His long lamp chimney shaped like the stem
	Of a slender palm, stood but a day;
	All things fall and are built again
	And those that build them again are gay.
	
	Two Chinamen, behind them a third,
	Are carved in Lapis Lazuli,
	Over them flies a long-legged bird
	A symbol of longevity;
	The third, doubtless a serving-man,
	Carries a musical instrument.
	
	Every discolouration of the stone,
	Every accidental crack or dent
	Seems a water-course or an avalanche,
	Or lofty slope where it still snows
	Though doubtless plum or cherry-branch
	Sweetens the little half-way house
	Those Chinamen climb towards, and I
	Delight to imagine them seated there;
	There, on the mountain and the sky,
	On all the tragic scene they stare.
	One asks for mournful melodies;
	Accomplished fingers begin to play.
	Their eyes mid many wrinkles, their eyes,
	Their ancient, glittering eyes, are gay.



40. LEDA AND THE SWAN

	A sudden blow: the great wings beating still
	Above the staggering girl, her thighs caressed
	By the dark webs, her nape caught in his bill,
	He holds her helpless breast upon his breast.
	
	How can those terrified vague fingers push
	The feathered glory from her loosening thighs?
	And how can body, laid in that white rush,
	But feel the strange heart beating where it lies?
	
	A shudder in the loins engenders there
	The broken wall, the burning roof and tower
	And Agamemnon dead.
	                                  Being so caught up,
	So mastered by the brute blood of the air,
	Did she put on his knowledge with his power
	Before the indifferent beak could let her drop?



41. LOVE AND THE BIRD

	The moments passed as at a play,
	I had the wisdom love can bring,
	I had my share of mother wit;
	And yet for all that I could say,
	And though I had her praise for it,
	And she seemed happy as a king,
	Love’s moon was withering away.
	Believing every word I said
	I praised her body and her mind,
	Till pride had made her eyes grow bright,
	And pleasure made her cheeks grow red,
	And vanity her footfall light;
	Yet we, for all that praise, could find
	Nothing but darkness overhead.
	I sat as silent as a stone
	And knew, though she’d not said a word,
	That even the best of love must die,
	And had been savagely undone
	Were it not that love, upon the cry
	Of a most ridiculous little bird,
	Threw up in the air his marvellous moon.



42. THE MADNESS OF KING GOLL

	I sat on cushioned otter skin:
	My word was law from Ith to Emen
	And shook at Invar Amargin
	The hearts of the world-troubling seamen.
	And drove tumult and war away
	From girl and boy and man and beast;
	The fields grew fatter day by day
	The wild fowl of the air increased;
	And every ancient Ollave said
	While he bent down his fading head
	“He drives away the Northern cold.”
	_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
	 the beech leaves old._
	
	I sat and mused and drank sweet wine;
	A herdsman came from inland valleys
	Crying the pirates drove his swine
	To fill their dark-beaked hollow galleys.
	I called my battle-breaking men
	And my loud brazen battle-cars
	From rolling vale and rivery glen
	And under the blinking of the stars
	Fell on the pirates by the deep
	And hurled them in the gulph of sleep:
	These hands won many a torque of gold.
	_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
	 the beech leaves old._
	
	But slowly as I shouting slew
	And trampled in the bubbling mire
	In my most secret spirit grew
	A whirling and a wandering fire:
	I stood: keen stars above me shone
	Around me shone keen eyes of men:
	I laughed aloud and hurried on
	By rocky shore and rushy fen;
	I laughed because birds fluttered by
	And starlight gleamed and clouds flew high
	And rushes waved and waters rolled.
	_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
	 the beech leaves old._
	
	And now I wander in the woods
	When summer gluts the golden bees
	Or in autumnal solitudes
	Arise the leopard-coloured trees;
	Or when along the wintry strands
	The cormorants shiver on their rocks;
	I wander on and wave my hands
	And sing and shake my heavy locks.
	The gray wolf knows me; by one ear
	I lead along the woodland deer;
	The hares run by me growing bold.
	_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
	 the beech leaves old._
	
	I came upon a little town
	That slumbered in the harvest moon
	And passed a-tiptoe up and down
	Murmuring to a fitful tune
	How I have followed night and day
	A tramping of tremendous feet
	And saw where this old tympan lay
	Deserted on a doorway seat
	And bore it to the woods with me;
	Of some unhuman misery
	Our married voiced wildly trolled.
	_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
	 the beech leaves old._
	
	I sang how when day’s toil is done
	Orchil shakes out her long dark hair
	That hides away the dying sun
	And sheds faint odours through the air:
	When my hand passed from wire to wire
	It quenched with sound like falling dew
	The whirling and the wandering fire;
	But lift a mournful ulalu
	For the kind wires are torn and still
	And I must wander wood and hill
	Through summer’s heat and winter’s cold.
	_They will not hush the leaves a-flutter round me
	 the beech leaves old._



43. THE MAGI

	Now as at all times I can see in the mind’s eye,
	In their stiff, painted clothes, the pale unsatisfied ones
	Appear and disappear in the blue depths of the sky
	With all their ancient faces like rain-beaten stones,
	And all their helms of silver hovering side by side,
	And all their eyes still fixed, hoping to find once more,
	Being by Calvary’s turbulence unsatisfied,
	The uncontrollable mystery on the bestial floor.



44. THE MAN WHO DREAMED OF FAERYLAND

	He stood among a crowd at Drumahair;
	His heart hung all upon a silken dress
	And he had known at last some tenderness
	Before earth made of him her sleepy care;
	But when a man poured fish into a pile
	It seemed they raised their little silver heads
	And sang how day a Druid twilight sheds
	Upon a dim green well-beloved isle
	Where people love beside star-laden seas;
	How Time may never mar their faery vows
	Under the woven roofs of quicken boughs:
	The singing shook him out of his new ease.
	
	He wandered by the sands of Lisadill;
	His mind ran all on money cares and fears
	And he had known at last some prudent years
	Before they heaped his grave under the hill;
	But while he passed before a plashy place
	A lug-worm with its gray and muddy mouth
	Sang how somewhere to north or west or south
	There dwelt a gay exulting gentle race;
	And how beneath those three times blessed skies
	A Danaan fruitage makes a shower of moons
	And as it falls awakens leafy tunes:
	And at that singing he was no more wise.
	
	He mused beside the well of Scanavin
	He mused upon his mockers: without fail
	His sudden vengeance were a country tale
	Now that deep earth has drunk his body in;
	But one small knot-grass growing by the pool
	Told where ah little all-unneeded voice!
	Old Silence bids a lonely folk rejoice
	And chaplet their calm brows with leafage cool
	And how when fades the sea-strewn rose of day
	A gentle feeling wraps them like a fleece
	And all their trouble dies into its peace:
	The tale drove his fine angry mood away.
	
	He slept under the hill of Lugnagall;
	And might have known at last unhaunted sleep
	Under that cold and vapour-turbaned steep
	Now that old earth had taken man and all:
	Were not the worms that spired about his bones
	A-telling with their low and reedy cry
	Of how God leans His hands out of the sky
	To bless that isle with honey in His tones;
	That none may feel the power of squall and wave
	And no one any leaf-crowned dancer miss
	Until He burn up Nature with a kiss:
	The man has found no comfort in the grave.



45. A MEDITATION IN TIME OF WAR

	For one throb of the artery, 
	While on that old grey stone I sat 
	Under the old wind-broken tree, 
	I knew that One is animate 
	Mankind inanimate phantasy.



46. THE MEDITATION OF THE OLD FISHERMAN

	You waves though you dance by my feet like children at play
	Though you glow and you glance though you purr and you dart;
	In the Junes that were warmer than these are the waves were more gay
	_When I was a boy with never a crack in my heart_.
	
	The herring are not in the tides as they were of old;
	My sorrow! for many a creak gave the creel in the cart
	That carried the take to Sligo town to be sold
	_When I was a boy with never a crack in my heart_.
	
	And ah you proud maiden you are not so fair when his oar
	Is heard on the water as they were the proud and apart
	Who paced in the eve by the nets on the pebbly shore
	_When I was a boy with never a crack in my heart_.



47. MERU

	Civilization is hooped together, brought
	Under a rule, under the semblance of peace
	By manifold illusion; but man’s life is thought
	And he, despite his terror, cannot cease
	Ravening through century after century,
	Ravening, raging and uprooting that he may come
	Into the desolation of reality:
	Egypt and Greece, good-bye, and good-bye, Rome.
	
	Hermits upon Mount Meru or Everest
	Caverned in night under the drifted snow,
	Or where that snow and winter’s dreadful blast
	Beat down upon their naked bodies, know
	That day brings round the night, that before dawn
	His glory and his monuments are gone.



48. THE MOUNTAIN TOMB

	POUR wine and dance, if manhood still have pride,
	Bring roses, if the rose be yet in bloom;
	The cataract smokes on the mountainside.
	Our Father Rosicross is in his tomb.
	
	Pull down the blinds, bring fiddle and clarionet,
	Let there be no foot silent in the room,
	Nor mouth with kissing nor the wine unwet.
	Our Father Rosicross is in his tomb.
	
	In vain, in vain; the cataract still cries,
	The everlasting taper lights the gloom,
	All wisdom shut into its onyx eyes.
	Our Father Rosicross sleeps in his tomb.



49. NEVER GIVE ALL THE HEART

	Never give all the heart, for love 
	Will hardly seem worth thinking of 
	To passionate women if it seem 
	Certain, and they never dream 
	That it fades out from kiss to kiss; 
	For everything that’s lovely is 
	But a brief, dreamy, kind delight. 
	O never give the heart outright, 
	For they, for all smooth lips can say, 
	Have given their hearts up to the play. 
	And who could play it well enough
	If deaf and dumb and blind with love? 
	He that made this knows all the cost, 
	For he gave all his heart and lost.



50. NO SECOND TROY

	Why should I blame her that she filled my days 
	With misery, or that she would of late 
	Have taught to ignorant men most violent ways, 
	Or hurled the little streets upon the great, 
	Had they but courage equal to desire? 
	What could have made her peaceful with a mind 
	That nobleness made simple as a fire, 
	With beauty like a tightened bow, a kind 
	That is not natural in an age like this, 
	Being high and solitary and most stern? 
	Why, what could she have done, being what she is? 
	Was there another Troy for her to burn?



51. THE PHOENIX

	“What have I earned for all that work,” I said,
	“For all that I have done at my own charge?
	The daily spite of this unmannerly town
	Where who has served the most is most defamed,
	The reputation of his lifetime lost
	Between the night and morning. I might have lived--
	And you know well how great the longing has been--
	Where every day my footfall should have lit
	In the green shadow on Ferrara wall;
	Or climbed among the images of the past,
	The unperturbed and courtly images,
	Evening and morn, the steep street of Urbino
	To where the duchess and her people talked
	The stately midnight through until they stood
	In their great window looking at the dawn.
	I might have had no friend that could not mix
	Courtesy and passion into one, like those
	That saw the wicks grow yellow in the dawn.
	I might have used the one substantial right
	My trade allows--chosen my company,
	And chosen what scenery had pleased me best.”
	
	Theron my phoenix answered in reproof:
	“The drunkards, pilferers of public funds--
	All the dishonest crowd I had driven away.
	When my luck changed and they dared to meet my face,
	Crawled from obscurity and set upon me
	Those I had served and some that I had fed;
	Yet never have I, now nor any time,
	Complained of the people.”
	
	All I could reply
	Was: “You that have not lived in thought but deed
	Can have the purity of a natural force;
	But I, whose virtues are the definitions
	Of the analytic mind, can neither close
	The eye of the mind nor keep my tongue from speech.”
	
	And yet, because my heart leaped at her words,
	I was abashed, and now they come to mind
	After nine years, I sink my head abashed.



52. A PRAYER FOR MY DAUGHTER

	Once more the storm is howling, and half hid   
	Under this cradle-hood and coverlid   
	My child sleeps on. There is no obstacle   
	But Gregory’s Wood and one bare hill   
	Whereby the haystack and roof-levelling wind,   
	Bred on the Atlantic, can be stayed;   
	And for an hour I have walked and prayed   
	Because of the great gloom that is in my mind. 
	
	I have walked and prayed for this young child an hour, 
	And heard the sea-wind scream upon the tower, 
	And under the arches of the bridge, and scream 
	In the elms above the flooded stream; 
	Imagining in excited reverie 
	That the future years had come   
	Dancing to a frenzied drum   
	Out of the murderous innocence of the sea. 
	
	May she be granted beauty, and yet not   
	Beauty to make a stranger’s eye distraught,   
	Or hers before a looking-glass; for such,   
	Being made beautiful overmuch,   
	Consider beauty a sufficient end,   
	Lose natural kindness, and maybe   
	The heart-revealing intimacy   
	That chooses right, and never find a friend. 
	
	Helen, being chosen, found life flat and dull,   
	And later had much trouble from a fool;   
	While that great Queen that rose out of the spray,   
	Being fatherless, could have her way,   
	Yet chose a bandy-leggèd smith for man.   
	It’s certain that fine women eat   
	A crazy salad with their meat   
	Whereby the Horn of Plenty is undone. 
	
	In courtesy I’d have her chiefly learned;   
	Hearts are not had as a gift, but hearts are earned   
	By those that are not entirely beautiful.   
	Yet many, that have played the fool 
	For beauty’s very self, has charm made wise;   
	And many a poor man that has roved,   
	Loved and thought himself beloved,   
	From a glad kindness cannot take his eyes. 
	
	May she become a flourishing hidden tree,   
	That all her thoughts may like the linnet be,   
	And have no business but dispensing round   
	Their magnanimities of sound;   
	Nor but in merriment begin a chase,   
	Nor but in merriment a quarrel.   
	Oh, may she live like some green laurel   
	Rooted in one dear perpetual place. 
	
	My mind, because the minds that I have loved,   
	The sort of beauty that I have approved,   
	Prosper but little, has dried up of late,   
	Yet knows that to be choked with hate   
	May well be of all evil chances chief.   
	If there’s no hatred in a mind   
	Assault and battery of the wind   
	Can never tear the linnet from the leaf. 
	
	An intellectual hatred is the worst,   
	So let her think opinions are accursed.   
	Have I not seen the loveliest woman born 
	Out of the mouth of Plenty’s horn,   
	Because of her opinionated mind   
	Barter that horn and every good   
	By quiet natures understood   
	For an old bellows full of angry wind? 
	
	Considering that, all hatred driven hence,   
	The soul recovers radical innocence   
	And learns at last that it is self-delighting, 
	Self-appeasing, self-affrighting,   
	And that its own sweet will is heaven’s will,   
	She can, though every face should scowl   
	And every windy quarter howl   
	Or every bellows burst, be happy still. 
	
	And may her bridegroom bring her to a house   
	Where all’s accustomed, ceremonious;   
	For arrogance and hatred are the wares   
	Peddled in the thoroughfares.   
	How but in custom and in ceremony   
	Are innocence and beauty born?   
	Ceremony’s a name for the rich horn,   
	And custom for the spreading laurel tree.



53. THE REALISTS

	Hope that you may understand.
	What can books, of men that wive
	In a dragon-guarded land;
	Paintings of the dolphin drawn;
	Sea nymphs, in their pearly waggons,
	Do but wake the hope to live
	That had gone
	With the dragons.



54. RECONCILIATION

	Some may have blamed you that you took away 
	The verses that could move them on the day 
	When, the ears being deafened, the sight of the eyes blind 
	With lightning, you went from me, and I could find 
	Nothing to make a song about but kings, 
	Helmets, and swords, and half-forgotten things 
	That were like memories of you--but now 
	We’ll out, for the world lives as long ago; 
	And while we’re in our laughing, weeping fit, 
	Hurl helmets, crowns, and swords into the pit. 
	But, dear, cling close to me; since you were gone, 
	My barren thoughts have chilled me to the bone.



55. THE ROSE OF PEACE

	If Michael leader of God’s host
	When Heaven and Hell are met
	Looked down on you from Heaven’s door-post
	He would his deeds forget.
	
	Brooding no more upon God’s wars
	In his Divine homestead
	He would go weave out of the stars
	A chaplet for your head.
	
	And all folk seeing him bow down
	And white stars tell your praise
	Would come at last to God’s great town
	Led on by gentle ways;
	
	And God would bid His warfare cease.
	Saying all things were well;
	And softly make a rosy peace
	A peace of Heaven with Hell.



56. THE ROSE OF THE WORLD

	Who dreamed that beauty passes like a dream?
	For these red lips with all their mournful pride
	Mournful that no new wonder may betide
	Troy passed away in one high funeral gleam
	And Usna’s children died.
	
	We and the labouring world are passing by:
	Amid men’s souls that waver and give place
	Like the pale waters in their wintry race
	Under the passing stars foam of the sky
	Lives on this lonely face.
	
	Bow down archangels in your dim abode:
	Before you were or any hearts to beat
	Weary and kind one lingered by His seat;
	He made the world to be a grassy road
	Before her wandering feet.



57. THE ROSE TREE

	‘O words are lightly spoken,’ 
	Said Pearse to Connolly, 
	‘Maybe a breath of politic words 
	Has withered our Rose Tree; 
	Or maybe but a wind that blows 
	Across the bitter sea.’ 
	
	‘It needs to be but watered,’ 
	James Connolly replied, 
	‘To make the green come out again 
	And spread on every side, 
	And shake the blossom from the bud 
	To be the garden’s pride.’ 
	
	‘But where can we draw water,’ 
	Said Pearse to Connolly, 
	‘When all the wells are parched away? 
	O plain as plain can be 
	There’s nothing but our own red blood 
	Can make a right Rose Tree.’



58. RUNNING TO PARADISE

	As I came over Windy Gap
	They threw a halfpenny into my cap,
	For I am running to Paradise.
	And all that I need do is to wish,
	And somebody puts his hand in the dish
	To throw me a bit of salted fish,
	And there the king is but as the beggar.
	
	My brother Mourteen is worn out
	With skelping his big brawling lout,
	While I am running to Paradise.
	A poor life, do what he can,
	And though he keep a dog and a gun,
	A serving maid and a serving man,
	And there the king is but as the beggar.
	
	Poor men have grown to be rich men,
	And rich men grown to be poor again,
	While I am running to Paradise.
	And many a darling wit’s grown dull
	That tossed a bare heel when at school;
	Now it has filled an old sock full,
	And there the king is but as the beggar.
	
	The wind is old and still at play
	While I must hurry upon my way
	For I am running to Paradise.
	Yet never have I lit on a friend
	To take my fancy like the wind
	That nobody can buy or bind-
	And there the king is but as the beggar.



59. THE SAD SHEPHERD

	There was a man whom Sorrow named his friend
	And he of his high comrade Sorrow dreaming
	Went walking with slow steps along the gleaming
	And humming sands where windy surges wend:
	And he called loudly to the stars to bend
	From their pale thrones and comfort him but they
	Among themselves laugh on and sing alway:
	And then the man whom Sorrow named his friend
	Cried out _Dim sea hear my most piteous story!_
	The sea swept on and cried her old cry still
	Rolling along in dreams from hill to hill;
	He fled the persecution of her glory
	And in a far-off gentle valley stopping
	Cried all his story to the dewdrops glistening
	But naught they heard for they are always listening
	The dewdrops for the sound of their own dropping.
	And then the man whom Sorrow named his friend
	Sought once again the shore and found a shell
	And thought _I will my heavy story tell
	Till my own words re-echoing shall send
	Their sadness through a hollow pearly heart;
	And my own tale again for me shall sing
	And my own whispering words be comforting
	And lo! my ancient burden may depart_.
	Then he sang softly nigh the pearly rim;
	But the sad dweller by the sea-ways lone
	Changed all he sang to inarticulate moan
	Among her wildering whirls forgetting him.



60. SAILING TO BYZANTIUM

	I
	
	That is no country for old men. The young
	In one another’s arms, birds in the trees,
	--Those dying generations--at their song,
	The salmon-falls, the mackerel-crowded seas,
	Fish, flesh, or fowl, commend all summer long
	Whatever is begotten, born, and dies.
	Caught in that sensual music all neglect
	Monuments of unageing intellect.
	
	
	II
	
	An aged man is but a paltry thing,
	A tattered coat upon a stick, unless
	Soul clap its hands and sing, and louder sing
	For every tatter in its mortal dress,
	Nor is there singing school but studying
	Monuments of its own magnificence;
	And therefore I have sailed the seas and come
	To the holy city of Byzantium.
	
	
	III
	
	O sages standing in God’s holy fire
	As in the gold mosaic of a wall,
	Come from the holy fire, perne in a gyre,
	And be the singing-masters of my soul.
	Consume my heart away; sick with desire
	And fastened to a dying animal
	It knows not what it is; and gather me
	Into the artifice of eternity.
	
	
	IV
	
	Once out of nature I shall never take
	My bodily form from any natural thing,
	But such a form as Grecian goldsmiths make
	Of hammered gold and gold enamelling
	To keep a drowsy Emperor awake;
	Or set upon a golden bough to sing
	To lords and ladies of Byzantium
	Of what is past, or passing, or to come.



61. THE SECOND COMING

	Turning and turning in the widening gyre   
	The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
	Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
	Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
	The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere   
	The ceremony of innocence is drowned;
	The best lack all conviction, while the worst   
	Are full of passionate intensity.
	
	Surely some revelation is at hand;
	Surely the Second Coming is at hand.   
	The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out   
	When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi
	Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert   
	A shape with lion body and the head of a man,   
	A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,   
	Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it   
	Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.   
	The darkness drops again; but now I know   
	That twenty centuries of stony sleep
	Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,   
	And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,   
	Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?



62. SEPTEMBER 1913

	What need you, being come to sense, 
	But fumble in a greasy till 
	And add the halfpence to the pence 
	And prayer to shivering prayer, until 
	You have dried the marrow from the bone; 
	For men were born to pray and save: 
	Romantic Ireland’s dead and gone, 
	It’s with O’Leary in the grave. 
	
	Yet they were of a different kind, 
	The names that stilled your childish play, 
	They have gone about the world like wind, 
	But little time had they to pray 
	For whom the hangman’s rope was spun, 
	And what, God help us, could they save? 
	Romantic Ireland’s dead and gone, 
	It’s with O’Leary in the grave. 
	
	Was it for this the wild geese spread 
	The grey wing upon every tide; 
	For this that all that blood was shed, 
	For this Edward Fitzgerald died, 
	And Robert Emmet and Wolfe Tone, 
	All that delirium of the brave? 
	Romantic Ireland’s dead and gone, 
	It’s with O’Leary in the grave. 
	
	Yet could we turn the years again, 
	And call those exiles as they were
	In all their loneliness and pain, 
	You’d cry, ‘Some woman’s yellow hair 
	Has maddened every mother’s son’: 
	They weighed so lightly what they gave. 
	But let them be, they’re dead and gone, 
	They’re with O’Leary in the grave.



63. SIXTEEN DEAD MEN

	O but we talked at large before 
	The sixteen men were shot, 
	But who can talk of give and take, 
	What should be and what not 
	While those dead men are loitering there 
	To stir the boiling pot? 
	
	You say that we should still the land 
	Till Germany’s overcome; 
	But who is there to argue that 
	Now Pearse is deaf and dumb? 
	And is their logic to outweigh 
	MacDonagh’s bony thumb? 
	
	How could you dream they’d listen 
	That have an ear alone 
	For those new comrades they have found, 
	Lord Edward and Wolfe Tone, 
	Or meddle with our give and take 
	That converse bone to bone?



64. THE SONG OF THE HAPPY SHEPHERD

	The woods of Arcady are dead
	And over is their antique joy;
	Of old the world on dreaming fed;
	Gray Truth is now her painted toy;
	Yet still she turns her restless head:
	But O sick children of the world
	Of all the many changing things
	In dreary dancing past us whirled
	To the cracked tune that Chronos sings
	Words alone are certain good.
	Where are now the warring kings
	Word be-mockers?--By the Rood
	Where are now the warring kings?
	An idle word is now their glory
	By the stammering schoolboy said
	Reading some entangled story:
	The kings of the old time are fled
	The wandering earth herself may be
	Only a sudden flaming word
	In clanging space a moment heard
	Troubling the endless reverie.
	
	Then nowise worship dusty deeds
	Nor seek; for this is also sooth;
	To hunger fiercely after truth
	Lest all thy toiling only breeds
	New dreams new dreams; there is no truth
	Saving in thine own heart. Seek then
	No learning from the starry men
	Who follow with the optic glass
	The whirling ways of stars that pass--
	Seek then for this is also sooth
	No word of theirs--the cold star-bane
	Has cloven and rent their hearts in twain
	And dead is all their human truth.
	Go gather by the humming-sea
	Some twisted echo-harbouring shell
	And to its lips thy story tell
	And they thy comforters will be
	Rewarding in melodious guile
	Thy fretful words a little while
	Till they shall singing fade in ruth
	And die a pearly brotherhood;
	For words alone are certain good:
	Sing then for this is also sooth.
	
	I must be gone: there is a grave
	Where daffodil and lily wave
	And I would please the hapless faun
	Buried under the sleepy ground
	With mirthful songs before the dawn.
	His shouting days with mirth were crowned;
	And still I dream he treads the lawn
	Walking ghostly in the dew
	Pierced by my glad singing through
	My songs of old earth’s dreamy youth:
	But ah! she dreams not now; dream thou!
	For fair are poppies on the brow:
	Dream dream for this is also sooth.



65. THE SONG OF WANDERING AENGUS

	I went out to the hazel wood,
	Because a fire was in my head,
	And cut and peeled a hazel wand,
	And hooked a berry to a thread;
	And when white moths were on the wing,
	And moth-like stars were flickering out,
	I dropped the berry in a stream
	And caught a little silver trout.
	
	When I had laid it on the floor
	I went to blow the fire a-flame,
	But something rustled on the floor,
	And someone called me by my name:
	It had become a glimmering girl
	With apple blossom in her hair
	Who called me by my name and ran
	And faded through the brightening air.
	
	Though I am old with wandering
	Through hollow lands and hilly lands,
	I will find out where she has gone,
	And kiss her lips and take her hands;
	And walk among long dappled grass,
	And pluck till time and times are done,
	The silver apples of the moon,
	The golden apples of the sun.



66. THE SORROW OF LOVE

	The quarrel of the sparrows in the eaves
	The full round moon and the star-laden sky
	And the loud song of the ever-singing leaves
	Had hid away earth’s old and weary cry.
	
	And then you came with those red mournful lips
	And with you came the whole of the world’s tears
	And all the trouble of her labouring ships
	And all the trouble of her myriad years.
	
	And now the sparrows warring in the eaves
	The curd-pale moon the white stars in the sky
	And the loud chaunting of the unquiet leaves
	Are shaken with earth’s old and weary cry.



67. THE STOLEN CHILD

	Where dips the rocky highland
	Of Sleuth Wood in the lake
	There lies a leafy island
	Where flapping herons wake
	The drowsy water rats;
	There we’ve hid our faery vats
	Full of berries
	And of reddest stolen cherries.
	_Come away O human child!
	To the waters and the wild
	With a faery hand in hand
	For the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand._
	
	Where the wave of moonlight glosses
	The dim gray sands with light
	Far off by furthest Rosses
	We foot it all the night
	Weaving olden dances
	Mingling hands and mingling glances
	Till the moon has taken flight;
	To and fro we leap
	And chase the frothy bubbles
	While the world is full of troubles
	And is anxious in its sleep.
	_Come away O human child!
	To the waters and the wild
	With a faery hand in hand
	For the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand._
	
	Where the wandering water gushes
	From the hills above Glen-Car
	In pools among the rushes
	That scarce could bathe a star
	We seek for slumbering trout
	And whispering in their ears
	Give them unquiet dreams;
	Leaning softly out
	From ferns that drop their tears
	Over the young streams
	_Come away O human child!
	To the waters and the wild
	With a faery hand in hand
	For the world’s more full of weeping than you can understand._
	
	Away with us he’s going
	The solemn-eyed:
	He’ll hear no more the lowing
	Of the calves on the warm hillside
	Or the kettle on the hob
	Sing peace into his breast
	Or see the brown mice bob
	Round and round the oatmeal-chest.
	_For he comes the human child
	To the waters and the wild
	With a faery hand in hand
	From a world more full of weeping than he can understand._



68. THE THORN TREE

	She is foremost of those that I would hear praised.
	I have gone about the house, gone up and down
	As a man does who has published a new book
	Or a young girl dressed out in her new gown,
	And though I have turned the talk by hook or crook
	Until her praise should be the uppermost theme,
	A woman spoke of some new tale she had read;
	A man--so vaguely that he seemed to dream--
	Of some strange woman’s name that ran in his head.
	She is foremost of those that I would hear praised.
	I will talk no more of books or the long war,
	But walk by the dry thorn until I have found
	Some beggar sheltering from the wind, and there
	If there be rags enough he will know her name
	And be well pleased remembering it, for in the old days,
	Though she had young men’s praise and old men’s blame,
	Among the poor both old and young gave her praise.



69. THREE SONGS TO THE SAME TUNE

	I
	
	Grandfather sang it under the gallows
	“Hear gentlemen, ladies and all mankind
	Money is good and a girl might be better
	But good strong blows are delights to the mind.”
	There, standing on the cart,
	He sang it from his heart.
	
	Those fanatics all that we do would undo:
	Down the fanatic, down the clown;
	Down, down, hammer them down,
	Down to the tune of O’Donnell Abu.
	
	“A girl I had, but she followed another,
	Money I had and it went in the night,
	Strong drink I had, and it brought me to sorrow,
	But a good strong cause and blows are delight.”
	All there caught up the tune:
	“On, on my darling man.”
	
	Those fanatics all that we do would undo;
	Down the fanatic, down the clown;
	Down, down, hammer them down,
	Down to the tune of O’Donnell Abu.
	
	“Money is good and a girl might be better
	No matter what happens and who takes the fall,
	But a good strong cause”-the rope gave a jerk there
	No more sang he for his throat was too small;
	But he kicked before he died;
	He did it out of pride.
	
	Those fanatics all that we do would undo :
	Down the fanatic, down the clown;
	Down, down, hammer them down,
	Down to the tune of O’Donnell Abu.
	
	
	II
	
	Justify all those renowned generations;
	They left their bodies to fatten the wolves,
	They left their homesteads to fatten the foxes,
	Fled to far countries, or sheltered themselves
	In cavern, crevice, hole,
	Defending Ireland’s soul.
	
	“Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman,
	“They killed my goose and a cat.
	Drown, drown in the water butt,
	Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman.
	
	Justify all those renowned generations,
	Justify all that have sunk in their blood,
	Justify all that have died on the scaffold,
	Justify all that have fled or have stood
	Or have marched the night long
	Singing, singing a song.
	
	“Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman,
	“They killed my goose and a cat.
	Drown, drown in the water butt,
	Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman.
	
	Fail, and that history turns into rubbish,
	All that great past to a trouble of fools;
	Those that come after shall mock at O’Donnell,
	Mock at the memory of both O’Neills,
	Mock Emmet, mock Parnell:
	All the renown that fell.
	
	“Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman,
	“They killed my goose and a cat.
	Drown, drown in the water butt,
	Drown all the dogs,” said the fierce young woman.
	
	
	III
	
	The soldier takes pride in saluting his Captain,
	The devotee proffers a knee to his Lord,
	Some back a mare thrown from a thoroughbred,
	Troy looked on Helen, it died and adored;
	Great nations, blossom above;
	A slave bows down to a slave.
	
	“Who’d care to dig ’em,” said the old, old man,
	“Those six feet marked in chalk;
	Much I talk, more I walk;
	Time I were buried,” said the old, old man.
	
	When nations are empty up there at the top,
	When order has weakened or faction is strong,
	Time for us all to pick out a good tune,
	Take to the roads and go marching along.
	March, march-How does it run-
	O any old words to a tune.
	
	“Who’d care to dig ’em,” said the old, old man,
	“Those six feet marked in chalk;
	Much I talk, more I walk,
	Time I were buried,” said the old, old man.
	
	Soldiers take pride in saluting their captain,
	Where are the captains that govern mankind?
	What happens a tree that has nothing within it?
	O marching wind, O a blast of the wind,
	Marching, marching along,
	March, march, lift up the song:
	
	“Who’d care to dig ’em,” said the old, old man,
	“Those six feet marked in chalk;
	Much I talk, more I walk;
	Time I were buried,” said the old, old man.



70. TO A CHILD DANCING IN THE WIND

	Has no one said those daring
	Kind eyes should be more learned?
	I have found out how despairing
	The moths are when they are burned.
	But I am old and you are young,
	So we speak a different tongue.
	Oh you will take whatever’s offered
	And dream that all the world’s a friend,
	Suffer as your mother suffered,
	Be as broken in the end.
	I could have warned you--but you are young,
	And I speak a barbarous tongue.



71. TO A CHILD DANCING UPON THE SHORE

	Dance there upon the shore;
	What need have you to care
	For wind or water’s roar?
	And tumble out your hair
	That the salt drops have wet;
	Being young you have not known
	The fool’s triumph, nor yet
	Love lost as soon as won.
	And he, the best warrior, dead
	And all the sheaves to bind!
	What need that you should dread
	The monstrous crying of wind?



72. TO A FRIEND WHOSE WORK HAS COME TO NOTHING

	Now all the truth is out,
	Be secret and take defeat
	From any brazen throat,
	For how can you compete,
	Being honor bred, with one
	Who were it proved he lies
	Were neither shamed in his own
	Nor in his neighbors’ eyes;
	Bred to a harder thing
	Than Triumph, turn away
	And like a laughing string
	Whereon mad fingers play
	Amid a place of stone,
	Be secret and exult,
	Because of all things known
	That is most difficult.



73. TO AN ISLE IN THE WATER

	Shy one, shy one, 
	Shy one of my heart, 
	She moves in the firelight 
	Pensively apart. 
	
	She carries in the dishes, 
	And lays them in a row. 
	To an isle in the water 
	With her would I go. 
	
	She carries in the candles, 
	And lights the curtained room, 
	Shy in the doorway 
	And shy in the gloom; 
	
	And shy as a rabbit, 
	Helpful and shy. 
	To an isle in the water 
	With her would I fly.



74. TO IRELAND IN THE COMING TIMES

	Know, that I would accounted be 
	True brother of a company 
	That sang, to sweeten Ireland’s wrong, 
	Ballad and story, rann and song; 
	Nor be I any less of them, 
	Because the red-rose-bordered hem 
	Of her, whose history began 
	Before God made the angelic clan, 
	Trails all about the written page. 
	When Time began to rant and rage 
	The measure of her flying feet 
	Made Ireland’s heart begin to beat; 
	And Time bade all his candles flare 
	To light a measure here and there; 
	And may the thoughts of Ireland brood 
	Upon a measured quietude. 
	
	Nor may I less be counted one 
	With Davis, Mangan, Ferguson, 
	Because, to him who ponders well, 
	My rhymes more than their rhyming tell 
	Of things discovered in the deep, 
	Where only body’s laid asleep. 
	For the elemental creatures go 
	About my table to and fro, 
	That hurry from unmeasured mind 
	To rant and rage in flood and wind; 
	Yet he who treads in measured ways 
	May surely barter gaze for gaze. 
	Man ever journeys on with them 
	After the red-rose-bordered hem. 
	Ah, faeries, dancing under the moon, 
	A Druid land, a Druid tune! 
	
	While still I may, I write for you 
	The love I lived, the dream I knew. 
	From our birthday, until we die, 
	Is but the winking of an eye; 
	And we, our singing and our love, 
	What measurer Time has lit above, 
	And all benighted things that go 
	About my table to and fro, 
	Are passing on to where may be, 
	In truth’s consuming ecstasy, 
	No place for love and dream at all; 
	For God goes by with white footfall. 
	I cast my heart into my rhymes, 
	That you, in the dim coming times, 
	May know how my heart went with them 
	After the red-rose-bordered hem.



75. TO THE ROSE UPON THE ROOD OF TIME

	Red Rose, proud Rose, sad Rose of all my days!
	Come near me, while I sing the ancient ways:
	Cuchulain battling with the bitter tide;
	The Druid, grey, wood-nurtured, quiet-eyed,
	Who cast round Fergus dreams, and ruin untold;
	And thine own sadness, whereof stars, grown old
	In dancing silver-sandalled on the sea,
	Sing in their high and lonely melody.
	Come near, that no more blinded by man’s fate,
	I find under the boughs of love and hate,
	In all poor foolish things that live a day,
	Eternal beauty wandering on her way.
	
	Come near, come near, come near--Ah, leave me still
	A little space for the rose-breath to fill!
	Lest I no more hear common things that crave;
	The weak worm hiding down in its small cave,
	The field-mouse running by me in the grass,
	And heavy mortal hopes that toil and pass;
	But seek alone to hear the strange things said
	By God to the bright hearts of those long dead,
	And learn to chaunt a tongue men do not know.
	Come near; I would, before my time to go,
	Sing of old Eire and the ancient ways:
	Red Rose, proud Rose, sad Rose of all my days.



76. THE TOWER

	        I
	
	What shall I do with this absurdity--
	O heart, O troubled heart--this caricature,
	Decrepit age that has been tied to me
	As to a dog’s tail?
	                                 Never had I more
	Excited, passionate, fantastical
	Imagination, nor an ear and eye
	That more expected the impossible--
	No, not in boyhood when with rod and fly,
	Or the humbler worm, I climbed Ben Bulben’s back
	And had the livelong summer day to spend.
	It seems that I must bid the Muse go pack,
	Choose Plato and Plotinus for a friend
	Until imagination, ear and eye,
	Can be content with argument and deal
	In abstract things; or be derided by
	A sort of battered kettle at the heel.
	
	                                      II
	
	I pace upon the battlements and stare
	On the foundations of a house, or where
	Tree, like a sooty finger, starts from the earth;
	And send imagination forth
	Under the day’s declining beam, and call
	Images and memories
	From ruin or from ancient trees,
	For I would ask a question of them all.
	
	Beyond that ridge lived Mrs. French, and once
	When every silver candlestick or sconce
	Lit up the dark mahogany and the wine,
	A serving-man, that could divine
	That most respected lady’s every wish,
	Ran and with the garden shears
	Clipped an insolent farmer’s ears
	And brought them in a little covered dish.
	
	Some few remembered still when I was young
	A peasant girl commended by a song,
	Who’d lived somewhere upon that rocky place,
	And praised the colour of her face,
	And had the greater joy in praising her,
	Remembering that, if walked she there,
	Farmers jostled at the fair
	So great a glory did the song confer.
	
	And certain men, being maddened by those rhymes,
	Or else by toasting her a score of times,
	Rose from the table and declared it right
	To test their fancy by their sight;
	But they mistook the brightness of the moon
	For the prosaic light of day--
	Music had driven their wits astray--
	And one was drowned in the great bog of Cloone.
	
	Strange, but the man who made the song was blind; 
	Yet, now I have considered it, I find 
	That nothing strange; the tragedy began 
	With Homer that was a blind man,
	And Helen has all living hearts betrayed. 
	O may the moon and sunlight seem 
	One inextricable beam, 
	For if I triumph I must make men mad.
	
	And I myself created Hanrahan
	And drove him drunk or sober through the dawn
	From somewhere in the neighbouring cottages.
	Caught by an old man’s juggleries
	He stumbled, tumbled, fumbled to and fro
	And had but broken knees for hire
	And horrible splendour of desire;
	I thought it all out twenty years ago:
	
	Good fellows shuffled cards in an old bawn;
	And when that ancient ruffian’s turn was on
	He so bewitched the cards under his thumb
	That all but the one card became
	A pack of hounds and not a pack of cards,
	And that he changed into a hare.
	Hanrahan rose in frenzy there
	And followed up those baying creatures towards--
	
	O towards I have forgotten what--enough!
	I must recall a man that neither love
	Nor music nor an enemy’s clipped ear
	Could, he was so harried, cheer;
	A figure that has grown so fabulous
	There’s not a neighbour left to say
	When he finished his dog’s day:
	An ancient bankrupt master of this house.
	
	Before that ruin came, for centuries,
	Rough men-at-arms, cross-gartered to the knees
	Or shod in iron, climbed the narrow stairs,
	And certain men-at-arms there were
	Whose images, in the Great Memory stored,
	Come with loud cry and panting breast
	To break upon a sleeper’s rest
	While their great wooden dice beat on the board.
	
	As I would question all, come all who can;
	Come old, necessitous, half-mounted man;
	And bring beauty’s blind rambling celebrant;
	The red man the juggler sent
	Through God-forsaken meadows; Mrs. French,
	Gifted with so fine an ear;
	The man drowned in a bog’s mire,
	When mocking muses chose the country wench.
	
	Did all old men and women, rich and poor,
	Who trod upon these rocks or passed this door,
	Whether in public or in secret rage
	As I do now against old age?
	But I have found an answer in those eyes
	That are impatient to be gone;
	Go therefore; but leave Hanrahan,
	For I need all his mighty memories.
	
	Old lecher with a love on every wind,
	Bring up out of that deep considering mind
	All that you have discovered in the grave,
	For it is certain that you have
	Reckoned up every unforeknown, unseeing
	Plunge, lured by a softening eye,
	Or by a touch or a sigh,
	Into the labyrinth of another’s being;
	
	Does the imagination dwell the most 
	Upon a woman won or woman lost? 
	If on the lost, admit you turned aside 
	From a great labyrinth out of pride, 
	Cowardice, some silly over-subtle thought 
	Or anything called conscience once; 
	And that if memory recur, the sun’s 
	Under eclipse and the day blotted out.
	
	                          III
	
	It is time that I wrote my will;
	I choose upstanding men
	That climb the streams until
	The fountain leap, and at dawn
	Drop their cast at the side
	Of dripping stone; I declare
	They shall inherit my pride,
	The pride of people that were
	Bound neither to Cause nor to State,
	Neither to slaves that were spat on,
	Nor to the tyrants that spat,
	The people of Burke and of Grattan
	That gave, though free to refuse--
	Pride, like that of the morn,
	When the headlong light is loose,
	Or that of the fabulous horn,
	Or that of the sudden shower
	When all streams are dry,
	Or that of the hour
	When the swan must fix his eye
	Upon a fading gleam,
	Float out upon a long
	Last reach of glittering stream
	And there sing his last song.
	And I declare my faith:
	I mock Plotinus’ thought
	And cry in Plato’s teeth,
	Death and life were not
	Till man made up the whole,
	Made lock, stock and barrel
	Out of his bitter soul,
	Aye, sun and moon and star, all,
	And further add to that
	That, being dead, we rise,
	Dream and so create
	Translunar Paradise.
	I have prepared my peace
	With learned Italian things 
	And the proud stones of Greece, 
	Poet’s imaginings 
	And memories of love, 
	Memories of the words of women, 
	All those things whereof 
	Man makes a superhuman 
	Mirror-resembling dream.
	
	As at the loophole there
	The daws chatter and scream,
	And drop twigs layer upon layer.
	When they have mounted up,
	The mother bird will rest
	On their hollow top,
	And so warm her wild nest.
	
	I leave both faith and pride 
	To young upstanding men 
	Climbing the mountain side, 
	That under bursting dawn 
	They may drop a fly; 
	Being of that metal made 
	Till it was broken by 
	This sedentary trade.
	
	Now shall I make my soul,
	Compelling it to study
	In a learned school
	Till the wreck of body,
	Slow decay of blood,
	Testy delirium
	Or dull decrepitude,
	Or what worse evil come--
	The death of friends, or death
	Of every brilliant eye
	That made a catch in the breath-- 
	Seem but the clouds of the sky 
	When the horizon fades;
	Or a bird’s sleepy cry 
	Among the deepening shades.



77. THE TWO TREES

	Beloved gaze in thine own heart
	The holy tree is growing there;
	From joy the holy branches start
	And all the trembling flowers they bear.
	The changing colours of its fruit
	Have dowered the stars with merry light;
	The surety of its hidden root
	Has planted quiet in the night;
	The shaking of its leafy head
	Has given the waves their melody
	And made my lips and music wed
	Murmuring a wizard song for thee.
	There through bewildered branches go
	Winged Loves borne on in gentle strife
	Tossing and tossing to and fro
	The flaming circle of our life.
	When looking on their shaken hair
	And dreaming how they dance and dart
	Thine eyes grow full of tender care:
	Beloved gaze in thine own heart.
	
	Gaze no more in the bitter glass
	The demons with their subtle guile
	Lift up before us when they pass
	Or only gaze a little while;
	For there a fatal image grows
	With broken boughs and blackened leaves
	And roots half hidden under snows
	Driven by a storm that ever grieves.
	For all things turn to barrenness
	In the dim glass the demons hold
	The glass of outer weariness
	Made when God slept in times of old.
	There through the broken branches go
	The ravens of unresting thought;
	Peering and flying to and fro
	To see men’s souls bartered and bought.
	When they are heard upon the wind
	And when they shake their wings; alas!
	Thy tender eyes grow all unkind:
	Gaze no more in the bitter glass.



78. UNDER BEN BULBEN

	I
	
	Swear by what the Sages spoke   
	Round the Mareotic Lake
	That the Witch of Atlas knew,   
	Spoke and set the cocks a-crow.
	
	Swear by those horsemen, by those women,   
	Complexion and form prove superhuman,   
	That pale, long visaged company
	That airs an immortality
	Completeness of their passions won;   
	Now they ride the wintry dawn
	Where Ben Bulben sets the scene.
	
	Here’s the gist of what they mean.   
	
	
	II
	
	Many times man lives and dies   
	Between his two eternities,   
	That of race and that of soul,   
	And ancient Ireland knew it all.   
	Whether man dies in his bed   
	Or the rifle knocks him dead,
	A brief parting from those dear   
	Is the worst man has to fear.   
	Though grave-diggers’ toil is long,   
	Sharp their spades, their muscle strong,   
	They but thrust their buried men   
	Back in the human mind again.
	
	
	III
	
	You that Mitchel’s prayer have heard   
	‘Send war in our time, O Lord!’   
	Know that when all words are said   
	And a man is fighting mad,   
	Something drops from eyes long blind   
	He completes his partial mind,   
	For an instant stands at ease,   
	Laughs aloud, his heart at peace,   
	Even the wisest man grows tense   
	With some sort of violence   
	Before he can accomplish fate   
	Know his work or choose his mate.
	
	
	IV
	
	Poet and sculptor do the work   
	Nor let the modish painter shirk   
	What his great forefathers did,   
	Bring the soul of man to God,   
	Make him fill the cradles right.
	
	Measurement began our might:   
	Forms a stark Egyptian thought,   
	Forms that gentler Phidias wrought.
	
	Michael Angelo left a proof   
	On the Sistine Chapel roof,   
	Where but half-awakened Adam   
	Can disturb globe-trotting Madam   
	Till her bowels are in heat,   
	Proof that there’s a purpose set   
	Before the secret working mind:   
	Profane perfection of mankind.
	
	Quattrocento put in paint,
	On backgrounds for a God or Saint,   
	Gardens where a soul’s at ease;   
	Where everything that meets the eye
	Flowers and grass and cloudless sky   
	Resemble forms that are, or seem   
	When sleepers wake and yet still dream,   
	And when it’s vanished still declare,   
	With only bed and bedstead there,   
	That Heavens had opened.
	
	                                        Gyres run on;
	When that greater dream had gone   
	Calvert and Wilson, Blake and Claude   
	Prepared a rest for the people of God,   
	Palmer’s phrase, but after that
	Confusion fell upon our thought.
	
	
	V
	
	Irish poets learn your trade   
	Sing whatever is well made,   
	Scorn the sort now growing up   
	All out of shape from toe to top,
	Their unremembering hearts and heads   
	Base-born products of base beds.   
	Sing the peasantry, and then   
	Hard-riding country gentlemen,   
	The holiness of monks, and after   
	Porter-drinkers’ randy laughter;   
	Sing the lords and ladies gay   
	That were beaten into the clay   
	Through seven heroic centuries;   
	Cast your mind on other days   
	That we in coming days may be   
	Still the indomitable Irishry.
	
	
	VI
	
	Under bare Ben Bulben’s head
	In Drumcliff churchyard Yeats is laid,   
	An ancestor was rector there
	Long years ago; a church stands near,
	By the road an ancient Cross.
	No marble, no conventional phrase,   
	On limestone quarried near the spot   
	By his command these words are cut:
	
	               Cast a cold eye   
	               On life, on death.   
	               Horseman, pass by!



79. WHEN YOU ARE OLD

	When you are old and gray and full of sleep
	And nodding by the fire take down this book
	And slowly read and dream of the soft look
	Your eyes had once and of their shadows deep;
	
	How many loved your moments of glad grace
	And loved your beauty will love false or true;
	But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you
	And loved the sorrows of your changing face.
	
	And bending down beside the glowing bars
	Murmur a little sadly how love fled
	And paced upon the mountains overhead
	And hid his face amid a crowd of stars.



80. THE WHITE BIRDS

	I would that we were my beloved white birds on the foam of the sea!
	We tire of the flame of the meteor before it can fade and flee;
	And the flame of the blue star of twilight hung low
	 on the rim of the sky
	Has awaked in our hearts my beloved a sadness that may not die.
	
	A weariness comes from those dreamers dew dabbled the lily and rose;
	Ah dream not of them my beloved the flame of the meteor that goes
	Or the flame of the blue star that lingers hung low
	 in the fall of the dew:
	For I would we were changed to white birds on the
	 wandering foam: I and you!
	
	I am haunted by numberless islands and many a Danaan shore
	Where Time would surely forget us and Sorrow come near us no more;
	Soon far from the rose and the lily and fret of the flames would we be
	Were we only white birds my beloved buoyed out on the foam of the sea!



81. THE WILD OLD WICKED MAN

	‘Because I am mad about women
	I am mad about the hills,’
	Said that wild old wicked man
	Who travels where God wills.
	‘Not to die on the straw at home,
	Those hands to close the eyes,
	That is all I ask, my dear,
	From the old man in the skies.
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
	
	‘Kind are all your words, my dear,
	Do not the rest withhold.
	Who can know the year, my dear,
	When an old man’s blood grows cold?
	I have what no young man can have
	Because he loves too much.
	Words I have that can pierce the heart,
	But what can he do but touch?’
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
	
	Then said she to that wild old man,
	his stout stick under his hand,
	‘Love to give or to withhold
	Is not at my command.
	I gave it all to an older man:
	That old man in the skies.
	Hands that are busy with His beads
	can never close those eyes.’
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
	
	‘Go your ways, O go your ways,
	I choose another mark,
	Girls down on the seashore
	Who understand the dark;
	Bawdy talk for the fishermen;
	A dance for the fisher-lads;
	When dark hangs upon the water
	They turn down their beds.
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
	
	‘A young man in the dark am I,
	But a wild old man in the light,
	That can make a cat laugh, or
	Can touch by mother wit
	Things hid in their marrow-bones
	From time long passed away,
	Hid from all those warty lads
	That by their bodies lay.
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
	
	‘All men live in suffering,
	I know as few can know,
	Whether they take the upper road
	Or stay content on the low,
	Rower bent in his row-boat
	Or weaver bent at his loom,
	Horseman erect upon horseback
	Or child hid in the womb.
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._
	
	‘That some stream of lightning
	From the old man in the skies
	Can burn out that suffering
	No right-taught man denies.
	But a coarse old man am I,
	I choose the second-best,
	I forget it all a while
	Upon a woman’s breast.’
	                                _Daybreak and a candle-end._



82. THE WILD SWANS AT COOLE

	The trees are in their autumn beauty,
	The woodland paths are dry,
	Under the October twilight the water
	Mirrors a still sky;
	Upon the brimming water among the stones
	Are nine-and-fifty swans.
	
	The nineteenth autumn has come upon me
	Since I first made my count;
	I saw, before I had well finished,
	All suddenly mount
	And scatter wheeling in great broken rings
	Upon their clamorous wings.
	
	I have looked upon those brilliant creatures,
	And now my heart is sore.
	All’s changed since I, hearing at twilight,
	The first time on this shore,
	The bell-beat of their wings above my head,
	Trod with a lighter tread.
	
	Unwearied still, lover by lover,
	They paddle in the cold
	Companionable streams or climb the air;
	Their hearts have not grown old;
	Passion or conquest, wander where they will,
	Attend upon them still.
	
	But now they drift on the still water,
	Mysterious, beautiful;
	Among what rushes will they build,
	By what lake’s edge or pool
	Delight men’s eyes when I awake some day
	To find they have flown away?



83. THE WITCH

	Toil and grow rich,
	What’s that but to lie
	With a foul witch
	And after, drained dry,
	To be brought
	To the chamber where
	Lies one long sought
	With despair.

