*** Conrad Aiken (1889 - 1973)


1. ALL LOVELY THINGS

	All lovely things will have an ending, 
	All lovely things will fade and die, 
	And youth, that’s now so bravely spending, 
	Will beg a penny by and by.
	
	Fine ladies soon are all forgotten, 
	And goldenrod is dust when dead, 
	The sweetest flesh and flowers are rotten 
	And cobwebs tent the brightest head.
	
	Come back, true love! Sweet youth, return!-- 
	But time goes on, and will, unheeding, 
	Though hands will reach, and eyes will yearn, 
	And the wild days set true hearts bleeding.
	
	Come back, true love! Sweet youth, remain!-- 
	But goldenrod and daisies wither, 
	And over them blows autumn rain, 
	They pass, they pass, and know not whither.



2. ANNIHILATION

	While the blue noon above us arches, 
	And the poplar sheds disconsolate leaves, 
	Tell me again why love bewitches, 
	And what love gives. 
	
	It is the trembling finger that traces 
	The eyebrow’s curve, the curve of the cheek? 
	The mouth that quivers, when the hand caresses, 
	But cannot speak? 
	
	No, not these, not in these is hidden 
	The secret, more than in other things: 
	Not only the touch of a hand can gladden 
	Till the blood sings. 
	
	It is the leaf that falls between us, 
	The bells that murmur, the shadows that move, 
	The autumnal sunlight that fades upon us: 
	These things are love. 
	
	It is the ‘No, let us sit here longer,’ 
	The ‘Wait till tomorrow,’ the ‘Once I knew--’ 
	These trifles, said as I touch your finger, 
	And the clock strikes two. 
	
	The world is intricate, and we are nothing. 
	It is the complex world of grass, 
	A twig on the path, a look of loathing, 
	Feelings that pass--
	
	These are the secret! And I could hate you, 
	When, as I lean for another kiss, 
	I see in your eyes that I do not meet you, 
	And that love is this. 
	
	Rock meeting rock can know love better 
	Than eyes that stare or lips that touch. 
	All that we know in love is bitter, 
	And it is not much.



3. BALLAD

	Into the wood the old king went
	And greeted an ash and touched an oak.
	Out of his sore soul’s discontent
	He sighed and spoke:
	
	“Children I had, and they are dead.
	A wife I had, and she is lost.
	What do you do, good trees,” he said,
	“At the hour of frost?”
	
	The oak-trees soughed, the ash-tree sighed,
	But never a word they gave that king.
	The crow in the ash-tree cawed and cried,
	But did not sing.
	
	The old king shut his two eyes fast,
	And leant his forehead against the tree,
	And thought of all the dead leaves past-
	A marvellous company.
	
	They came, they came, like waves of the sea,
	These ghosts of leaves came round that king.
	They hushed, they whispered, ceaselessly;
	And he heard them sing:
	
	_Children and bright-eyed wives we were,
	But Time forgot us, and no one grieves.
	Who remembers us? Who will stir
	The ghosts of leaves?_



4. BELOVED, LET US ONCE MORE PRAISE THE RAIN

	Beloved, let us once more praise the rain. 
	Let us discover some new alphabet, 
	For this, the often praised; and be ourselves, 
	The rain, the chickweed, and the burdock leaf, 
	The green-white privet flower, the spotted stone, 
	And all that welcomes the rain; the sparrow too,-- 
	Who watches with a hard eye from seclusion, 
	Beneath the elm-tree bough, till rain is done. 
	There is an oriole who, upside down, 
	Hangs at his nest, and flicks an orange wing,-- 
	Under a tree as dead and still as lead; 
	There is a single leaf, in all this heaven 
	Of leaves, which rain has loosened from its twig: 
	The stem breaks, and it falls, but it is caught 
	Upon a sister leaf, and thus she hangs; 
	There is an acorn cup, beside a mushroom 
	Which catches three drops from the stooping cloud. 
	The timid bee goes back to the hive; the fly 
	Under the broad leaf of the hollyhock 
	Perpends stupid with cold; the raindark snail 
	Surveys the wet world from a watery stone . . .
	And still the syllables of water whisper: 
	The wheel of cloud whirs slowly: while we wait 
	In the dark room; and in your heart I find 
	One silver raindrop,--on a hawthorn leaf,-- 
	Orion in a cobweb, and the World.



5. BLUES FOR RUBY MATRIX

	I
	
	Where’s Ruby, where has she gone this evening?
	what has her heart done, is it enlarged,
	is she so flown with sombre magnificence,
	is the web wrapped round her and she mad?
	Why, she should have been here hours ago
	and this a snowy night too and the soul starving--
	
	Where’s Ruby where has she gone today?
	is she so glorious, is she so beautiful,
	has she wings that thus abruptly she has gone?
	come back Ruby, you are my light-of-love
	(and her with a carbuncle too and no money)
	where has she gone where has she gone?
	
	I saw her once at a soda fountain,
	you don’t believe it you don’t believe it do you?
	I saw her once at a soda fountain
	strangling sarsaparilla through a paper straw.
	Where’s Ruby gone where is she gone this evening--
	incandescence has stopped, the night is dark.
	
	I was a driver once and knew a thing or two,
	the rails were right but everything else was wrong,
	come back Ruby I will unwrap the web around you,
	Oh I will blow the snow off your brain tonight
	and polish your conscience for you and give you a tip
	and show you the stairs to the bright door of hell.
	
	Come Ruby, I will undo your rubber goloshes,
	come Ruby, I will undo the clasps,
	let us walk along the track of ice a little way
	and talk a little way of ice and icicles
	for you too knew the way the hoarfrost grew
	on God’s terrific wings
	
	how in the heart’s horn comes the prince of pauses,
	the peace between the agonies--O you
	who found the stepping stone and brought it back,
	gave it to me because I stood and loved you,
	you who stood, when others stood no more,
	on the abandoned and unprosperous shore.
	
	Why it was you I loved and knew, and
	it was, the speechless and inalterable you
	the one of the Aprils and the one of June,
	O undiscoverable and unpursuable one
	and one that was not one but two and three
	or three that was not three but you and me.
	
	Thus it comes, thus it comes Ruby,
	woman who art not woman but a wound,
	wound who art not wound but indeed a word,
	word that art not word but truly a world
	sprung spoken speaking spoiled and spent
	in the brief darkness that the darkness meant.
	
	
	II
	
	But I was not convinced and said so too,
	there among marigolds with Easter coming,
	no I was not convinced had no convictions
	and she was not convincing in the spring,
	it was the wrong time, it was spring.
	
	What I said was nobody’s business, no,
	nobody’s business, I said the words straight out
	and made no mention of the nightingale
	nor of the willow buds or pines or palms
	nor of the pleasure parks on Coney Isle
	which Ikey Cohn decreed,
	
	but I was blue and made no bones about it,
	I was blue and said so to her face
	there by the hot-dog stand beneath the lamp
	and not so far from the filling-station
	I held her hand and told her face to face--
	
	What did I tell her? Oh ask me something easy
	why should I say the primrose has an eye,
	why should I say the goldenrod is dusty
	or the railroad long as hell from here to there,
	why should I make remarks about her hair?
	
	Tell me, brother, the little word to whisper,
	tell me, brother, the little word to say,
	tell me, sisters, the grand technique of love
	or how to speak of beauty when you see it,
	for what I said was angry that was all,
	I told her to go to hell and well-damned stay there.
	
	She made no mention of the nightingale,
	why should she with no nightingales about,
	nor of that other bird that burns to death.
	The sidewalk was red brick beneath our feet,
	the hot dog stand bright as the mouth of hell
	
	but she was part and parcel of the brightness
	that hell is said to have,
	swallowed the night and smiled it back again,
	laughed like a million lights, spoke like a cannon
	she was a scenic railway crashing downward,
	my straw hat blew awav.
	
	Pennies dimes nickels and quarters gone
	and midnight come and the last boat so bright
	so bright so light so cheap and full of people
	all with their mouths and hands--Oh come and see
	the world that lies behind the primrose eye
	under the gilded teeth of Ikey Cohn--
	
	come and see the water beside the ship,
	see the white lines of foam that cross the brain
	and break against the skulltop and are bitter,
	come and join us in the convincing spring
	and learn how sad it is to stay out late.
	
	Good-bye, Ruby, I am fed up with you,
	good-bye Ruby, your nose needs powder,
	I’ve got that midnight feeling in my heart.
	I’ll hate you till breakfast-time, till the poached eggs
	make peace between us,
	
	but you were behind the primrose eye and saw
	the sunrise world and all the wings--and you
	had known the ultimate and called it nothing
	and you have sightseen God with tired eyes
	and now come back to toast our daily bread.
	
	
	III
	
	What she had was something with no name,
	if she were dead I’d carve it on a stone,
	it was as right as rain as true as time,
	necessary as rhythm in a tune,
	what she had was only a word or two
	spoken under the clock.
	
	Delay was precious and we both delayed,
	come on, Ruby, and hold on clock,
	but there were springs unsprung or half-sprung, still
	compelling mechanism to its stillness
	and in the reading-room we read the word,
	the silent word that silent spoke of meaning.
	
	it was the now, it was the then, it was the when,
	it was the snow, the rain, the wind,
	the name and then the where, the name, the street,
	the hearse, the cradle, the all-knowing judge--
	and I unerring knew the pressing word
	and she receptive knew it--
	
	the midnight took my meaning, and the noon
	engulfed it in broad sunlight, the swift cloud
	carried it northward like a handkerchief
	to lose it in the eventualness of time
	while I with equal steps climbed up the stairs
	away from the remembered, to descend--
	
	and she ascending too, with equal steps,
	and she descending too, before and after,
	bearing the blossom, her angelic heart,
	the thurible, the incense, her quick eyes
	knowing the known and guessing the unknown
	searching the shadow which my mind betrayed.
	
	Why, we were here before, but now remember
	you at your time and I at mine,
	both of us here to know this selfsame thing--
	and now together know it, now together,
	and in this pause together of the wings
	
	touch the feathers, let the snow touch snow,
	whisper recoil from whisper, frost shun frost,
	that we may know what we have known already
	but never with each other in this place,
	or at this time, or even in this world,
	and never with remembrance of before.
	
	What she had was an evening paper, a purse,
	a hat, a cape, and what I had was purpose,
	but now, the purpose gone, I have--what have I Ruby,
	if not a phrase of ice to carve on stone,
	ambiguous skeleton of a whisper, gone
	as soon as spoken, and myself alone?
	
	
	IV
	
	Boy, if I told you half of what I know--
	the gulfs we cross by day to meet at night,
	the Lincoln Highway and the Big Rock Candy mountains,
	the deserts of the Gulf of Mexico,
	
	boy, if I told you how I spend my time
	at night-school learning all the stars of love
	
	propound the constellations of her heart,
	the North Star and the Southern Cross
	voyage to regions of the albatross
	and come back spangled with bright frost of death--
	boy, if you carved with me the curves I carve
	against the dark undaunted ice of time
	
	and knew those curves of hers that curve beyond
	geometry of hand or eye or mind
	into the bloodstream and above again,
	westward under the sea with setting suns
	oblique dishonest and profound as hell,
	corrupt unchanging changing choice as steel--
	
	Boy, if you went with me along her streets
	under the windows of her lighted eyes,
	saw the foul doors the purlieus and the cats,
	the filth put out the food received the money
	the evil music grinning all its teeth,
	cachinnations above the sauerkraut!
	
	This is where she lives and loves, that Ruby,
	this is where she lives and pays her way
	among the unborn and the dead and dying,
	the dirty and the sweating, pays her way
	with sweat and guile and triumph and deceit
	burning the empty paper bags and scraps.
	
	Boy, if I told you where the money comes from
	out of a silver mine in Colorado,
	the unrefined refined and the bright goddess
	brought all the way from chaos to Mike’s Alley
	and on her hand at noon to pay the rent
	roof to prevent the rage of heaven’s tent--
	
	but if I told you half of what I know
	I’d have to be the gulf of Mexico
	the Big Rock Candy Mountains in the spring
	and every other big or little thing.
	I’d wear the Milky Way out with my walking,
	wear out my shoes with the walking blues.
	
	Hush Ruby, I meant these words for someone else,
	hush Ruby, it’s all right now,
	only a little student of geometry
	who wanted to know the why and where of curves
	went out and came back frozen by the stars
	with geometric frostbite in his brain.
	
	Take him in with you and warm him Ruby,
	take him in with you put him to sleep,
	tell him the difference between truth and lying,
	tell him where you’ve been and what you mean,
	the clock, the closet, horror’s cloaca too
	and wake him, when his heart is fed and dead.
	
	
	V
	
	But this was nothing boy, and I said nothing,
	no leaf or love was born but it took time.
	Come on and shake the cosmic dice, come seven,
	come on and shake the bones for odd or even
	but this was nothing and no one said a word.
	
	I saw the palm leaf and I took it down, Ruby,
	I saw the gold leaf and I took it down.
	I saw the heaven leaf and I took it down, honey,
	I saw the dead leaf and I took it down.
	
	I saw the word that shaped the lips of water,
	I saw the idea that shaped the mind of water,
	I saw the thought of time that shaped the face,
	I saw the face that brought disgrace to space
	
	but this was nothing, girl, and I said nothing,
	nothing I thought, what could I think but nothing?
	who nothing knew and was the seed of nothing,
	the conscious No One watching Naught from Nowhere.
	
	Take the palm leaf for what it is no other,
	take the gold-leaf and put it down,
	take the heaven-leaf and put it down, Ruby,
	take the dead leaf and put it down
	
	for what is wisdom, wisdom is only this--
	history of the world in a deathbed kiss,
	past and to be in agony brought home,
	and kingdom of darkness come.
	
	
	VI
	
	No use hanging round we must be going,
	no use waiting before the evening altar
	green screen of evening sky between paired stars
	where the cloud worships and the wind is bowed,
	there’s no use waiting Ruby we must be moving.
	
	You are a rock like that blue mountain too
	jagged and scarred like that where the snow lingers
	and I have seen the sunrise on white shoulders,
	the orchid among the boulders,
	the edelweiss and ewigkeit
	and the retreating armies of the night.
	
	No use waiting, Ruby, we will not hear,
	the proud hosanna of the stars is not for us,
	we will not hear them sing the silver word
	nor see the angelic wings ascend between
	the silver trumpets against a sky of icy green.
	
	This we abandon, and though this have seen
	see it no more, but take our evening down
	along dark streets that you have made your own,
	the wretched streets that in-and-out are you,
	there where the cry of pain is in the bone
	
	and where your darkness prowls around us nightlong,
	approaches and retreats, confronts us snarling,
	devours the hours--is this your house Ruby,
	are these your stairs, is that your window open,
	is there a bed a ceiling above the bed?
	
	do voices come and go and slam of doors?
	Smells of fecundity, the human spawn,
	far off the cries of trains, the taxi’s ticking
	is all coincidence that thus together
	everything meets upon this tip of time--
	
	your hand that murdered men or drew the morning
	out of the seventh vial, or rolled the mountains
	against the tombs of all the gods, or poured
	the zeros one on other and destroyed
	the indestructible to create the new--
	
	came like a flame from sand, reentered water,
	was braided like the ice, became a wall
	sang through the trumpet of eternity
	and now, descended, holds a greasy key
	and presses it against a greasy lock--
	
	Farewell Ruby, for this is where I leave you
	your hand releases me its filth is on me,
	the holy filth of long corruption comes
	coldly upon me as an absolution,
	sharply we flower in this foul farewell.
	
	But God’s terrific wing that day came down,
	loud on the world as loud and white as snow
	out of the blue the white and then the silence.
	O Ruby, come again and turn the time.
	
	Ruby, your name is matrix rock of ages
	cloven by lightning, smitten by thunder,
	the surged upon deep shore interminable,
	the long the nebulous waves, the foam of time
	
	beating upon you breaking upon you foaming,
	the worldlong fruitfulness of assuaging sea,
	hammers of foam, O Ruby come again
	be broken for our simple coming forth--
	
	let the rocks fall upon us with fearful sound,
	the long bright glacier of the stars be broken,
	the beginning and the final word be spoken,
	come again come again and turn the world.
	
	This world that is your turning and returning,
	matrix mother mistress menstrual moon,
	wafer of scarlet in the virgin void,
	Oh come again and turn the world to thought.
	
	But God’s terrific wing that day came down
	snow on the world and Ruby you were snow,
	deceitful whiteness and the blood concealed
	so that the world might know how worlds will end.



6. BROAD ON THE SUNBURNT HILL

	BROAD on the sunburnt hill the bright moon comes,
	And cuts with silver horn the hurrying cloud;
	And the cold Pole Star, in the dusk, resumes
	His last night’s light, which light alone could shroud.
	And legion other stars, that torch pursuing,
	Take each their stations in the deepening night,
	Lifting pale tapers for the Watch, renewing
	Their glorious foreheads in the Infinite.
	Never before had night so many eyes!
	Never was darkness so divinely thronged,
	As now--my love! bright star!--that you arise,
	Giving me back that night which I had wronged.
	Now with your voice sings all that immortal host,
	That god of myriad stars whom I thought lost.



7. CHANCE MEETING

	In the mazes of loitering people, the watchful and furtive, 
	The shadows of tree-trunks and shadows of leaves, 
	In the drowse of the sunlight, among the low voices, 
	I suddenly face you, 
	
	Your dark eyes return for a space from her who is with you, 
	They shine into mine with a sunlit desire, 
	They say an ‘I love you, what star do you live on?’ 
	They smile and then darken, 
	
	And silent, I answer ‘You too--I have known you,--I love you!--’ 
	And the shadows of tree-trunks and shadows of leaves 
	Interlace with low voices and footsteps and sunlight 
	To divide us forever.



8. COUNTERPOINT: TWO ROOMS

	He, in the room above, grown old and tired;
	She, in the room below, his floor her ceiling,
	Pursue their separate dreams. He turns his light,
	And throws himself on the bed, face down, in laughter.
	She, by the window, smiles at a starlight night.
	
	His watch--the same he has heard these cycles of ages
	Wearily chimes at seconds beneath his pillow.
	The clock upon her mantelpiece strikes nine.
	The night wears on. She hears dull steps above her.
	The world whirs on. New stars come up to shine.
	
	His youth--far off--he sees it brightly walking
	In a golden cloud . . . . wings flashing about it . . . Darkness
	Walls it around with dripping enormous walls.
	Old age, far off--or death--what do thev matter?
	Down the smooth purple night a streaked star falls.
	
	She hears slow steps in the street; they chime like music,
	They climb to her heart, they break and flower in beauty,
	Along her veins they glisten and ring and burn.
	He hears his own slow steps tread down to silence.
	Far off they pass. He knows they will never return.
	
	Far off, on a smooth dark road, he hears them faintly.
	The road, like a sombre river, quietly flowing,
	Moves among murmurous walls. A deeper breath
	Swells them to sound: he hears his steps more clearly.
	And death seems nearer to him; or he to death.
	
	What’s death?--she smiles.
	The cool stone hurts her elbow,
	The last few raindrops gather and fall from elm-boughs,
	She sees them glisten and break. The arc-lamp sings,
	The new leaves dip in the warm wet air and fragrance,
	A sparrow whirs to the eaves and shakes its wings.
	
	What’s death--what’s death? The spring returns like music;
	The trees are like dark lovers who dream in starlight;
	The soft grey clouds go over the stars like dreams.
	The cool stone wounds her arms to pain, to pleasure.
	Under the lamp a circle of wet street gleams.
	And death seems far away--a thing of roses,
	A golden portal where golden music closes,
	Death seems far away;
	And spring returns, the countless singing of lovers,
	And spring returns to stay.
	
	He, in the room above, grown old and tired,
	Flings himself on the bed, face down, in laughter,
	And clenches his hands, and remembers, and desires to die.
	And she, by the window, smiles at a night of starlight . . .
	The soft grey clouds go slowly across the sky.



9. THE CYCLADS

	They have been no longer than usual, in coming to this place.
	Terror of time, they murmur, equals the terror of space.
	All cancels out, in the end, they say, and the end is nothing.
	And all between, a nothing in borrowed clothing.
	Here we have stars, even of the first magnitude,
	(how flattering our human terms) doomed to decrepitude:
	all things, even the little atom, in its slow dying, arrive here,
	and then slip silently--ward to a predestined year.
	Who would plant trees, here? Is it an honest man?
	Would he shade coming chaos in his wistful plan?
	God knows, not we. At least, we plant no tree.
	We only wait in the Absolute, and see.
	
	Yes, Old Repetition, they have been no longer than usual.
	Only to itself, perhaps, does time’s cycle seem casual.
	And space, this horrid cloaca which we must share,
	finds no mirror in which to face its face in when or where.
	Not in us, surely? But perhaps in these, who seem
	the endless repetition of our dream:
	cold algebra brought round again in a concentric hell,
	convolute whirlwind in an invisible shell.
	How vast, how still, how slow! We sleep, and wake, and then,
	cloud-walking, see our dream flow past again.
	
	They have been no longer than usual, this time, in coming.
	Here are the shadows of spokes, the wheels are humming.
	Street-lights, and neon monsters, glare on the cloud.
	From violet dynamos, an endless belt, pours out the crowd.
	And all at once: dim past, faint future, all at once:
	the moral histories, the cracked applause, the festered battle-fronts:
	the corner drug-store, where the lyric cash-tray sings,
	and the amateur astronomer, peeping at Saturn’s rings.
	But this is not all. By no means, nol This is not all.
	No, choose your own show, midway or sideshow: from Adam’s Fall
	to ill-starred Lucifer, or the blind poet’s dictated dream.
	O purblind, blind, panhandler of the siltage in time’s stream.



10. DISCORDANTS

	I
	
	Music I heard with you was more than music, 
	And bread I broke with you was more than bread; 
	Now that I am without you, all is desolate; 
	All that was once so beautiful is dead. 
	
	Your hands once touched this table and this silver, 
	And I have seen your fingers hold this glass. 
	These things do not remember you, belovèd, 
	And yet your touch upon them will not pass. 
	
	For it was in my heart you moved among them, 
	And blessed them with your hands and with your eyes; 
	And in my heart they will remember always,-- 
	They knew you once, O beautiful and wise. 
	
	
	II
	
	My heart has become as hard as a city street, 
	The horses trample upon it, it sings like iron, 
	All day long and all night long they beat, 
	They ring like the hooves of time. 
	
	My heart has become as drab as a city park, 
	The grass is worn with the feet of shameless lovers, 
	A match is struck, there is kissing in the dark, 
	The moon comes, pale with sleep. 
	
	My heart is torn with the sound of raucous voices, 
	They shout from the slums, from the streets, from the crowded places, 
	And tunes from the hurdy-gurdy that coldly rejoices 
	Shoot arrows into my heart. 
	
	
	III
	
	Dead Cleopatra lies in a crystal casket, 
	Wrapped and spiced by the cunningest of hands. 
	Around her neck they have put a golden necklace, 
	Her tatbebs, it is said, are worn with sands. 
	
	Dead Cleopatra was once revered in Egypt, 
	Warm-eyed she was, this princess of the South. 
	Now she is old and dry and faded, 
	With black bitumen they have sealed up her mouth. 
	
	O sweet clean earth, from whom the green blade cometh! 
	When we are dead, my best belovèd and I, 
	Close well above us, that we may rest forever, 
	Sending up grass and blossoms to the sky. 
	
	
	IV
	
	In the noisy street, 
	Where the sifted sunlight yellows the pallid faces, 
	Sudden I close my eyes, and on my eyelids 
	Feel from the far-off sea a cool faint spray,-- 
	
	A breath on my cheek, 
	From the tumbling breakers and foam, the hard sand shattered, 
	Gulls in the high wind whistling, flashing waters, 
	Smoke from the flashing waters blown on rocks; 
	
	--And I know once more, 
	O dearly belovèd! that all these seas are between us, 
	Tumult and madness, desolate save for the sea-gulls, 
	You on the farther shore, and I in this street.



11. THE EGO

	Ego! Ego! Burning blind
	in the forest of the mind
	what immortal alchemy
	or what immoral chemistry
	dared shape thy fearful symmetry
	dared dream thy fearful liberty
	and in the eye
	conceived the I
	and in the ‘Aye!’
	a Me!



12. EXILE

	These hills are sandy. Trees are dwarfed here. Crows
	Caw dismally in skies of an arid brilliance,
	Complain in dusty pine-trees. Yellow daybreak
	Lights on the long brown slopes a frost--like dew,
	Dew as heavy as rain; the rabbit tracks
	Show sharply in it, as they might in snow.
	But it’s soon gone in the sun--what good does it do?
	The houses, on the slope, or among brown trees,
	Are grey and shrivelled. And the men who live here
	Are small and withered, spider-like, with large eyes.
	
	Bring water with you if you come to live here--
	Cold tinkling cisterns, or else wells so deep
	That one looks down to Ganges or Himalayas.
	Yes, and bring mountains with you, white, moon-bearing,
	Mountains of ice. You will have need of these
	Profundities and peaks of wet and cold.
	
	Bring also, in a cage of wire or osier,
	Birds of a golden colour, who will sing
	Of leaves that do not wither, watery fruits
	That heavily hang on long melodious boughs
	In the blue-silver forests of deep valleys.
	
	I have now been here--how many years? Years unnumbered.
	My hands grow clawlike. My eyes are large and starved.
	I brought no bird with me, I have no cistern
	Where I might find the moon, or river, or snow.
	Some day, for lack of these, I’ll spin a web
	Between two dusty pine-tree tops, and hang there
	Face downward, like a spider, blown as lightly
	As ghost of leaf. Crows will caw about me.
	Morning and evening I shall drink the dew.



13. GOYA

	Goya drew a pig on a wall.
	The five-year-old hairdresser’s son
	Saw, graved on a silver tray,
	The lion; and sunsets were begun.
	
	Goya smelt the bull-fight blood.
	The pupil of the Carmelite
	Gave his hands to a goldsmith, learned
	To gild an aureole aright.
	
	Goya saw the Puzzel’s eyes:
	Sang in the street (with a guitar)
	And climbed the balcony; but Keats
	(Under the halyards) wrote ‘Bright star.’
	
	Goya saw the Great Slut pick
	The chirping human puppets up,
	And laugh, with pendulous mountain lip,
	And drown them in a coffee cup;
	
	Or squeeze their little juices out
	In arid hands, insensitive,
	To make them gibber . . . Goya went
	Among the catacombs to live.
	
	He saw gross Ronyons of the air,
	Harelipped and goitered, raped in flight
	By hairless pimps, umbrella-winged:
	Tumult above Madrid at night.
	
	He heard the seconds in his clock
	Crack like seeds, divulge, and pour
	Abysmal filth of Nothingness
	Between the pendulum and the floor:
	
	Torrents of dead veins, rotted cells,
	Tonsils decayed, and fingernails:
	Dead hair, dead fur, dead claws, dead skin:
	Nostrils and lids; and cauls and veils;
	
	And eyes that still, in death, remained
	(Unlidded and unlashed) aware
	Of the foul core, and, fouler yet,
	The region worm that ravins there.
	
	Stench flowed out of the second’s tick.
	And Goya swam with it through Space,
	Sweating the fetor from his limbs,
	And stared upon the unfeatured face
	
	That did not see, and sheltered naught,
	But was, and is. The second gone,
	Goya returned, and drew the face;
	And scrawled beneath it, ‘This I have known’ . . .
	
	And drew four slatterns, in an attic,
	Heavy, with heads on arms, asleep:
	And underscribed it, ‘Let them slumber,
	Who, if they woke, could only weep’ . . .



14. HAUNTED CHAMBERS

	The lamp-lit page is turned, the dream forgotten;
	The music changes tone, you wake, remember
	Deep worlds you lived before, deep worlds hereafter
	Of leaf on falling leaf, music on music,
	Rain and sorrow and wind and dust and laughter.
	
	Helen was late, and Miriam came too soon;
	Joseph was dead, his wife and children starving;
	Elaine was married and soon to have a child.
	You dreamed last night of fiddler crabs with fiddles.
	They played a buzzing melody, and you smiled.
	
	Tomorrow--what? And what of vesterday?
	Through soundless labyrinths of dream you pass,
	Through many doors to the one door of all.
	Soon as it’s opened we shall hear a music:
	Or see a skeleton fall.
	
	We walk with you. Where is it that you lead us?
	We climbed the muffled stairs beneath high lanterns.
	We descend again. We grope through darkened cells.
	You say: “This darkness, here, will slowly kill me--
	It creeps and weighs upon me . . . is full of bells.”
	
	“This is the thing remembered I would forget:
	No matter where I go, how soft I tread,
	This windy gesture menaces me with death.
	‘Fatigue!’ it says--and points its finger at me:
	Touches my throat and stops my breath.”
	
	“My fans, my jewels, the portrait of my husband,
	The torn certificate for my daughter’s grave--
	These are but mortal seconds in immortal time.
	They brush me, fade away--like drops of water.
	They signify no crime.”
	
	“Let us retrace our steps: I have deceived you!
	Nothing is here I could not frankly tell you--
	No hint of guilt, or faithlessness, or threat.
	Dreams--they are madness; staring eyes--illusion.
	Let us return, hear music, and forget.”



15. MELODY IN A RESTAURANT

	The cigarette smoke loops and slides above us,
	Dipping and swirling as the waiter passes.
	You strike a match and stare upon the flame.
	The tiny firelight leaps in your eyes a moment
	And dies away as silently as it came.
	
	This melody, you say, has certain voices--
	They rise like nereids from a river, singing,
	Lift white faces, and dive to darkness again.
	Wherever you go you bear this river with you:
	A leaf falls, and it flows, and you have pain.
	
	So says the tune to you--but what to me?
	What to the waiter, as he pours your coffee?
	The violinist who suavely draws his bow?
	That man, who folds his paper, overhears it.
	A thousand dreams revolve and fall and flow.
	
	Someone there is who sees a virgin stepping
	Down marble stairs to a deep tomb of roses:
	At the last moment she lifts remembering eyes.
	Green leaves blow down; the place is checked with shadows;
	A long-drawn murmur of rain goes down the skies.
	And oaks are stripped and bare, and smoke with lightning;
	And clouds are blown and torn upon high forests;
	And the great sea shakes its walls.
	And then falls silence . . . And through long silence falls
	This melody once more:
	Down endless stairs she goes, as once before.
	
	So says the tune to him--but what to me?
	What are the worlds I see?
	What shapes fantastic, terrible dreams?
	I go my secret way, down secret alleys.
	My errand is not so simple as it seems.



16. MULTITUDES TURN IN DARKNESS

	The half-shut doors through which we heard that music
	Are softly closed. Horns mutter down to silence,
	The stars wheel out, the night grows deep.
	Darkness settles upon us; a vague refrain
	Drowsily teases at the drowsy brain.
	In numberless rooms we stretch ourselves and sleep.
	
	Where have we been? What savage chaos of music
	Whirls in our dreams? We suddenly rise in darkness,
	Open our eyes, cry out, and sleep once more.
	We dream we are numberless sea-waves, languidly foaming
	A warm white moonlit shore;
	
	Or clouds blown windily over a sky at midnight,
	Or chords of music scattered in hurrying darkness,
	Or a singing sound of rain . . .
	We open our eyes and stare at the coiling darkness,
	And enter our dreams again.



17. MY LOVE, I HAVE BETRAYED YOU

	My love, I have betrayed you seventy times
	In this brief period since our hearts were met;
	Against your ghost contrived unnumbered crimes,
	And many times your image overset;
	Forgot you, worshipped elsewhere, flung a flower
	To meaner beauty, proved an infidel;
	Showing my heart not loyal beyond an hour,
	Forswearing Paradise, and invoking Hell.
	Alas! What chains of thought can thinking bind?
	It is in thought alone that I have faltered;
	It is my faithless, vain, quicksilver mind,
	By every chance and change too lightly altered.
	Can we absolve, from this all-staining sin,
	The angelic love who sits, ashamed, within?



18. PRELUDE

	AS evening falls,
	And the yellow lights leap one by one
	Along high walls
	And along black streets that glisten as if with rain,
	The muted city seems
	Like one in a restless sleep who lies and dreams
	Of vague desires, vague memories, and half-forgotten pain . . .
	Along dark veins like lights the quick dreams run,
	Flash, are extinguished, flash again,
	To mingle and glow at last in the enormous brain
	And die away . . .
	As evening falls,
	A dream dissolves these insubstantial walls,
	A myriad secretly gliding lights lie bare.
	The lover rises, the harlot combs her hair,
	The dead man’s face grows blue in the dizzy lamplight,
	The watchman climbs the stair . . .
	The bank-defaulter leers at a chaos of figures
	And runs among them and is beaten down;
	The sick man coughs, and hears the chisels ringing;
	The tired clown
	Sees the enormous crowd--a million faces
	Motionless in their places,
	Ready to laugh, and seize, and crush, and tear . . .
	The dancer smooths her hair,
	Laces her golden slippers and runs through the door
	To dance once more,
	Hearing swift music like an enchantment rise,
	Feeling the praise of a thousand eyes.
	
	As darkness falls,
	The walls grow luminous and warm, the walls
	Tremble and glow with the lives within them moving,
	Moving like music, secret and rich and warm.
	How shall we live tonight, where shall we turn?
	To what new light or darkness yearn?
	A thousand winding stairs lead down before us;
	And one by one in myriads we descend
	By lamp-lit flowered walls, long balustrades,
	Through half-lit halls which reach no end.



19. SONNET

	_Imprimis:_ I forgot all day your face,
	Eyes, eyebrows, gentle mouth, and cheek--all faded;
	Nor could I in the mind’s deep forest trace
	The haunted path whereby that dream evaded.
	_Secundus:_ I forgot all night your laughter,
	In vain evoked it with strong charms of thought;
	Gone, like a cry that leaves no image after,
	Phoenix of sound which no hand ever caught.
	_Tertius:_ my wanton mind and heart, together,
	Forgetting you, you absent, have delighted
	For no more cause than bright or stormy weather,
	Singing for joy; in truth, I am benighted.
	Yet, when I home once more from breach of faith,
	Love there awaits me with a joy like death.



20. SUMMER

	Absolute zero: the locust sings:
	summer’s caught in eternity’s rings:
	the rock explodes, the planet dies,
	we shovel up our verities.
	
	The razor rasps across the face
	and in the glass our fleeting race
	lit by infinity’s lightning wink
	under the thunder tries to think.
	
	In this frail gourd the granite pours
	the timeless howls like all outdoors
	the sensuous moment builds a wall
	open as wind, no wall at all:
	
	while still obedient to valves and knobs
	the vascular jukebox throbs and sobs
	expounding hope propounding yearning
	proposing love, but never learning
	
	or only learning at zero’s gate
	like summer’s locust the final hate
	formless ice on a formless plain
	that was and is and comes again.



21. THE THINGS

	The house in Broad Street, red brick, with nine rooms
	the weedgrown graveyard with its rows of tombs
	the jail from which imprisoned faces grinned
	at stiff palmettos flashing in the wind
	
	the engine-house, with engines, and a tank
	in which young alligators swam and stank,
	the bell-tower, of red iron, where the bell
	gonged of the fires in a tone from hell
	
	magnolia trees with whitehot torch of bud
	the yellow river between banks of mud
	the tall striped lighthouse like a barber’s pole
	snake in the bog and locust in the hole
	
	worn cigarette cards, of white battleships,
	or flags, or chorus girls with scarlet lips,
	jackstones of copper, peach tree in the yard
	splashing ripe peaches on an earth baked hard
	
	children beneath the arc-light in a romp
	with Run sheep Run, and rice-birds in the swamp,
	the organ-grinder’s monkey, dancing bears,
	okras in baskets, Psyche on the stairs--
	
	and then the north star nearer, and the snow
	silent between the now and long ago
	time like a train that roared from place to place
	new crowds, new faces, for a single face
	
	no longer then the chinaberry tree
	nor the dark mockingbird to sing his glee
	nor prawns nor catfish; icicles instead
	and Indian-pipes, and cider in the shed
	
	arbutus under pinewoods in the spring
	and death remembered as a tropic thing
	with picture postcard angels to upraise it
	and trumpet vines and hummingbirds to phrase it
	
	then wisdom come, and Shakspere’s voice far off,
	to be or not, upon the teacher’s cough,
	the latent heat of melting ice, the brief
	hypotenuse from ecstasy to grief
	
	amo amas, and then the cras amet,
	the new-found eyes no slumber could forget,
	Vivien, the affliction of the senses,
	and conjugation of historic tenses
	
	and Shakspere nearer come, and louder heard,
	and the disparateness of flesh and word,
	time growing swifter, and the pendulums
	in shorter savage arcs that beat like drums--
	
	hands held, relinquished, faces come and gone,
	kissed and forgotten, and become but one,
	old shoes worn out, and new ones bought, the gloves
	soiled, and so lost in limbo, like the loves--
	
	then Shakspere in the heart, the instant speech
	parting the conscious terrors each from each--
	wisdom’s dishevelment, the purpose lamed,
	and purposeless the footsteps eastward aimed
	
	the bloodstream always slower, while the clock
	followed the tired heart with louder knock,
	fatigue upon the eye, the tardy springs
	inviting to no longer longed-for things--
	
	the birdsong nearer now than Shakspere’s voice,
	whispers of comfort--Death is near, rejoice!--
	remember now the red house with nine rooms
	the graveyard with its trumpetvines and tombs--
	
	play jackstones now and let your jackstones be
	the stars that make Orion’s galaxy
	so to deceive yourself until you move
	into that house whose tenants do not love.



22. THINK, LOVE

	Think, love, how when a starry night of frost
	Is ended, and the small pale winter sun
	Shines on the garden trellis, ice-embossed,
	And the stiff frozen flower-stalks, every one;
	And turns their fine embroideries of ice
	Into a loosening silver, skein by skein,
	Warming cold leaves and stones, till, in a trice,
	The garden smiles, and breathes, and lives again;
	And further think, how the poor frozen snail
	Creeps out with trembling horn to feel that heat,
	And thaws the snowy mildew from his mail,
	And stretches with all his length from his retreat:
	Will he not praise, with his whole heart, the sun?
	Then think, at last, I too am such an one.



23. WHAT LUNACY IS THIS

	What lunacy is this, that night-long tries,
	With seven or seventy or ten thousand words,
	To compass God in heaven, the loved one’s eyes?
	Alas! were the whole language changed to birds,
	And I Prince Prospero to set them free,
	Though I should hide all heaven with beating wings,
	Still the essential would escape, still be
	Unspoken, dumb, like all essential things.
	Love, let me be the beginning world, and grow
	To Time from Timelessness, and out of Time
	Create magnificent Chaos, and there sow
	The immortal stars, and teach those stars to rhyme--
	Even so, alas, I could in no sense move
	From the begin-all-end-all phrase, “I love.”



24. WHAT MUSIC’S DEVIOUS VOICE CAN SAY

	What music’s devious voice can say, beguiling
	The flattered spirit, your voice can richlier say,
	Moving the happy creature to such smiling
	As the young sun brings flowers at break of day.
	Nor can the southwest wind, who turns green boughs,
	And sings in watery reeds, outvie your voice--
	No, though the whole wide world of birds he rouse,
	And boughs and birds, together, all rejoice.
	Not water’s self, shy singer among stones,
	Vowelling softly of his secret love,
	Can murmur to green roots such undertones,
	Nor with low laughter have such power to move.
	No rival-none. There is no help for us.
	Be it confessed--I am idolatrous.



25. WHEN YOU ARE NOT SURPRISED

	When you are not surprised, not surprised,
	nor leap in imagination from sunlight into shadow   
	or from shadow into sunlight   
	suiting the color of fright or delight   
	to the bewildering circumstance   
	when you are no longer surprised   
	by the quiet or fury of daybreak   
	the stormy uprush of the sun’s rage   
	over the edges of torn trees
	torrents of living and dying flung
	upward and outward inward and downward to space
	or else
	peace peace peace peace
	the wood-thrush speaking his holy holy
	far hidden in the forest of the mind   
	while slowly
	the limbs of light unwind
	and the world’s surface dreams again of night
	as the center dreams of light   
	when you are not surprised
	by breath and breath and breath
	the first unconscious morning breath
	the tap of the bird’s beak on the pane
	and do not cry out come again   
	blest blest that you are come again   
	o light o sound o voice of bird o light   
	and memory too o memory blest   
	and curst with the debts of yesterday   
	that would not stay, or stay
	
	when you are not surprised
	by death and death and death
	death of the bee in the daffodil
	death of color in the child’s cheek
	on the young mother’s breast
	death of sense of touch of sight
	death of delight
	and the inward death the inward turning night
	when the heart hardens itself with hate and indifference   
	for hated self and beloved not-self
	when you are not surprised
	by wheel’s turn or turn of season
	the winged and orbed chariot tilt of time   
	the halcyon pause, the blue caesura of spring   
	and solar rhyme
	woven into the divinely remembered nest   
	by the dark-eyed love in the oriole’s breast   
	and the tides of space that ring the heart
	while still, while still, the wave of the invisible world   
	breaks into consciousness in the mind of god
	then welcome death and be by death benignly welcomed   
	and join again in the ceaseless know-nothing   
	from which you awoke to the first surprise.
