*** Anna Akhmatova (1889 - 1966)


1. I DON’T KNOW IF YOU’RE ALIVE OR DEAD

	I don’t know if you’re alive or dead.
	Can you on earth be sought,
	Or only when the sunsets fade
	Be mourned serenely in my thought?

	All is for you: the daily prayer,
	The sleepless heat at night,
	And of my verses, the white
	Flock, and of my eyes, the blue fire.

	No-one was more cherished, no-one tortured
	Me more, not
	Even the one who betrayed me to torture,
	Not even the one who caressed me and forgot.



2. I HEAR THE ORIOLE’S ALWAYS-GRIEVING VOICE

	I hear the oriole’s always-grieving voice,
	And the rich summer’s welcome loss I hear
	In the sickle’s serpentine hiss
	Cutting the corn’s ear tightly pressed to ear.
	And the short skirts of the slim reapers
	Fly in the wind like holiday pennants,
	The clash of joyful cymbals, and creeping
	From under dusty lashes, the long glance.

	I don’t expect love’s tender flatteries,
	In premonition of some dark event,
	But come, come and see this paradise
	Where together we were blessed and innocent.



3. IN MEMORIAM

	We aged a hundred years and this descended
	In just one hour, as at a stroke.
	The summer had been brief and now was ended;
	The body of the ploughed plains lay in smoke.

	The hushed road burst in colors then, a soaring
	Lament rose, ringing silver like a bell.
	And so I covered up my face, imploring
	God to destroy me before battle fell.

	And from my memory the shadows vanished
	Of songs and passions--burdens I’d not need.
	The Almighty bade it be--with all else banished--
	A book of portents terrible to read.



4. LOT’S WIFE

	And the just man trailed God’s shining agent,
	over a black mountain, in his giant track,
	while a restless voice kept harrying his woman:
	“It’s not too late, you can still look back

	at the red towers of your native Sodom,
	the square where once you sang, the spinning-shed,
	at the empty windows set in the tall house
	where sons and daughters blessed your marriage-bed.”

	A single glance: a sudden dart of pain
	stitching her eyes before she made a sound . . .
	Her body flaked into transparent salt,
	and her swift legs rooted to the ground.

	Who will grieve for this woman? Does she not seem
	too insignificant for our concern?
	Yet in my heart I never will deny her,
	who suffered death because she chose to turn.



5. MARCH ELEGY

	I have enough treasures from the past
	to last me longer than I need, or want.
	You know as well as I . . . malevolent memory
	won’t let go of half of them:
	a modest church, with its gold cupola
	slightly askew; a harsh chorus
	of crows; the whistle of a train;
	a birch tree haggard in a field
	as if it had just been sprung from jail;
	a secret midnight conclave
	of monumental Bible-oaks;
	and a tiny rowboat that comes drifting out
	of somebody’s dreams, slowly foundering.
	Winter has already loitered here,
	lightly powdering these fields,
	casting an impenetrable haze
	that fills the world as far as the horizon.
	I used to think that after we are gone
	there’s nothing, simply nothing at all.
	Then who’s that wandering by the porch
	again and calling us by name?
	Whose face is pressed against the frosted pane?
	What hand out there is waving like a branch?
	By way of reply, in that cobwebbed corner
	a sunstruck tatter dances in the mirror.



6. THE MUSE

	All that I am hangs by a thread tonight
	as I wait for her whom no one can command.
	Whatever I cherish most--youth, freedom, glory--
	fades before her who bears the flute in her hand.

	And look! she comes . . . she tosses back her veil,
	staring me down, serene and pitiless.
	“Are you the one,” I ask, “whom Dante heard dictate
	the lines of his _Inferno_?” She answers: “Yes.”



7. REQUIEM

	Not under foreign skies
	Nor under foreign wings protected--
	I shared all this with my own people
	There, where misfortune had abandoned us.


	_Instead of a Preface_

	During the frightening years of the Yezhov terror, I
	spent seventeen months waiting in prison queues in
	Leningrad. One day, somehow, someone ‘picked me out’.
	On that occasion there was a woman standing behind me,
	her lips blue with cold, who, of course, had never in
	her life heard my name. Jolted out of the torpor
	characteristic of all of us, she said into my ear
	(everyone whispered there)--‘Could one ever describe
	this?’ And I answered--‘I can.’ It was then that
	something like a smile slid across what had previously
	been just a face.


	_Dedication_

	Mountains fall before this grief,
	A mighty river stops its flow,
	But prison doors stay firmly bolted
	Shutting off the convict burrows
	And an anguish close to death.
	Fresh winds softly blow for someone,
	Gentle sunsets warm them through; we don’t know this,
	We are everywhere the same, listening
	To the scrape and turn of hateful keys
	And the heavy tread of marching soldiers.
	Waking early, as if for early mass,
	Walking through the capital run wild, gone to seed,
	We’d meet--the dead, lifeless; the sun,
	Lower every day; the Neva, mistier:
	But hope still sings forever in the distance.
	The verdict. Immediately a flood of tears,
	Followed by a total isolation,
	As if a beating heart is painfully ripped out, or,
	Thumped, she lies there brutally laid out,
	But she still manages to walk, hesitantly, alone.
	Where are you, my unwilling friends,
	Captives of my two satanic years?
	What miracle do you see in a Siberian blizzard?
	What shimmering mirage around the circle of the moon?
	I send each one of you my salutation, and farewell.


	_Introduction_

	It happened like this when only the dead
	Were smiling, glad of their release,
	That Leningrad hung around its prisons
	Like a worthless emblem, flapping its piece.
	Shrill and sharp, the steam-whistles sang
	Short songs of farewell
	To the ranks of convicted, demented by suffering,
	As they, in regiments, walked along--
	Stars of death stood over us
	As innocent Russia squirmed
	Under the blood-spattered boots and tyres
	Of the black marias.


	i.

	You were taken away at dawn. I followed you
	As one does when a corpse is being removed.
	Children were crying in the darkened house.
	A candle flared, illuminating the Mother of God. . .
	The cold of an icon was on your lips, a death-cold
	sweat
	On your brow--I will never forget this; I will gather

	To wail with the wives of the murdered streltsy
	Inconsolably, beneath the Kremlin towers.


	ii

	Silent flows the river Don
	A yellow moon looks quietly on
	Swanking about, with cap askew
	It sees through the window a shadow of you
	Gravely ill, all alone
	The moon sees a woman lying at home
	Her son is in jail, her husband is dead
	Say a prayer for her instead.


	iii

	It isn’t me, someone else is suffering. I couldn’t.
	Not like this. Everything that has happened,
	Cover it with a black cloth,
	Then let the torches be removed. . .
	Night.


	iv

	Giggling, poking fun, everyone’s darling,
	The carefree sinner of Tsarskoye Selo
	If only you could have foreseen
	What life would do with you--
	That you would stand, parcel in hand,
	Beneath the Crosses, three hundredth in
	line,
	Burning the new year’s ice
	With your hot tears.
	Back and forth the prison poplar sways
	With not a sound--how many innocent
	Blameless lives are being taken away . . .


	v

	For seventeen months I have been screaming,
	Calling you home.
	I’ve thrown myself at the feet of butchers
	For you, my son and my horror.
	Everything has become muddled forever--
	I can no longer distinguish
	Who is an animal, who a person, and how long
	The wait can be for an execution.
	There are now only dusty flowers,
	The chinking of the thurible,
	Tracks from somewhere into nowhere
	And, staring me in the face
	And threatening me with swift annihilation,
	An enormous star.


	vi

	Weeks fly lightly by. Even so,
	I cannot understand what has arisen,
	How, my son, into your prison
	White nights stare so brilliantly.
	Now once more they burn,
	Eyes that focus like a hawk,
	And, upon your cross, the talk
	Is again of death.


	vii. _The Verdict_

	The word landed with a stony thud
	Onto my still-beating breast.
	Nevermind, I was prepared,
	I will manage with the rest.

	I have a lot of work to do today;
	I need to slaughter memory,
	Turn my living soul to stone
	Then teach myself to live again . . .

	But how. The hot summer rustles
	Like a carnival outside my window;
	I have long had this premonition
	Of a bright day and a deserted house.


	viii. _To Death_

	You will come anyway--so why not now?
	I wait for you; things have become too hard.
	I have turned out the lights and opened the door
	For you, so simple and so wonderful.
	Assume whatever shape you wish. Burst in
	Like a shell of noxious gas. Creep up on me
	Like a practised bandit with a heavy weapon.
	Poison me, if you want, with a typhoid exhalation,
	Or, with a simple tale prepared by you
	(And known by all to the point of nausea), take me
	Before the commander of the blue caps and let me
	glimpse
	The house administrator’s terrified white face.
	I don’t care anymore. The river Yenisey
	Swirls on. The Pole star blazes.
	The blue sparks of those much-loved eyes
	Close over and cover the final horror.


	ix

	Madness with its wings
	Has covered half my soul
	It feeds me fiery wine
	And lures me into the abyss.

	That’s when I understood
	While listening to my alien delirium
	That I must hand the victory
	To it.

	However much I nag
	However much I beg
	It will not let me take
	One single thing away:

	Not my son’s frightening eyes--
	A suffering set in stone,
	Or prison visiting hours
	Or days that end in storms

	Nor the sweet coolness of a hand
	The anxious shade of lime trees
	Nor the light distant sound
	Of final comforting words.


	x. _Crucifixion_

	Weep not for me, mother.
	I am alive in my grave.

	A choir of angels glorified the greatest hour,
	The heavens melted into flames.
	To his father he said, ‘Why hast thou forsaken me!’
	But to his mother, ‘Weep not for me . . .’

	Magdalena smote herself and wept,
	The favourite disciple turned to stone,
	But there, where the mother stood silent,
	Not one person dared to look.


	_Epilogue_

	i

	I have learned how faces fall,
	How terror can escape from lowered eyes,
	How suffering can etch cruel pages
	Of cuneiform-like marks upon the cheeks.
	I know how dark or ash-blond strands of hair
	Can suddenly turn white. I’ve learned to recognise
	The fading smiles upon submissive lips,
	The trembling fear inside a hollow laugh.
	That’s why I pray not for myself
	But all of you who stood there with me
	Through fiercest cold and scorching July heat
	Under a towering, completely blind red wall.


	ii

	The hour has come to remember the dead.
	I see you, I hear you, I feel you:
	The one who resisted the long drag to the open window;
	The one who could no longer feel the kick of familiar
	soil beneath her feet;
	The one who, with a sudden flick of her head, replied,

	‘I arrive here as if I’ve come home!’
	I’d like to name you all by name, but the list
	Has been removed and there is nowhere else to look.
	So,
	I have woven you this wide shroud out of the humble
	words
	I overheard you use. Everywhere, forever and always,
	I will never forget one single thing. Even in new
	grief.
	Even if they clamp shut my tormented mouth
	Through which one hundred million people scream;
	That’s how I wish them to remember me when I am dead
	On the eve of my remembrance day.
	If someone someday in this country
	Decides to raise a memorial to me,
	I give my consent to this festivity
	But only on this condition--do not build it
	By the sea where I was born,
	I have severed my last ties with the sea;
	Nor in the Tsar’s Park by the hallowed stump
	Where an inconsolable shadow looks for me;
	Build it here where I stood for three hundred hours
	And no-one slid open the bolt.
	Listen, even in blissful death I fear
	That I will forget the Black Marias,
	Forget how hatefully the door slammed and an old woman
	Howled like a wounded beast.
	Let the thawing ice flow like tears
	From my immovable bronze eyelids
	And let the prison dove coo in the distance
	While ships sail quietly along the river.



8. SNOW

	Upon the hard crest of a snow-drift
	We tread, and grown quiet, we walk
	On towards my house, white, enchanted;
	Our mood is too tender for talk.



9. WILLOW

	_. . . and a decrepit handful of trees._
	--Aleksandr Pushkin

	And I matured in peace born of command,
	in the nursery of the infant century,
	and the voice of man was never dear to me,
	but the breeze’s voice--that I could understand.
	The burdock and the nettle I preferred,
	but best of all the silver willow tree.
	Its weeping limbs fanned my unrest with dreams;
	it lived here all my life, obligingly.
	I have outlived it now, and with surprise.
	There stands the stump; with foreign voices other
	willows converse, beneath our, beneath those skies,
	and I am hushed, as if I’d lost a brother.
