*** John Ashbery (1927 - 2017)


1. ABSTENTIONS

	Not the shy tourist, hopping up the salty steps of Rome-
	The Piazza Venezia from a bus, the transparent emotions go by.
	The old mines. Not
	Just something resembling a part of it
	But all of it as it is not. The voice
	“Please tell me that you love me” said,
	The iron monuments drift by,
	The arches nailed to wood,
	The caves, blind fists,
	Green seaweed on the black and blue water
	And the friends’ precision with excitement,
	“The man who sees a cloud in Schenectady
	Affects someone he does not know on the other side of the globe, who wants him
	And we shall have that rose, Dutch work apart.”
	Blue towers, squeals, the blind roses go by.
	
	Therefore we have these few things.
	It was a summer afternoon or night, glory was in the gondola
	On the percussive honeymoon.
	But he thought of the nights the ruined homes
	The gold tears shed for him.
	Therefore we have these white bricks.
	The bride wore white . . .
	
	He wears a white suit, carries a white newspaper and apple, his hands and face are white;
	The clouds sneer but go sailing into the white sky.



2. ADAM SNOW

	Let’s try the ingenuous mode, if for no better
	Reason than its staying power: locked into a continuum
	That rises and falls with the contours of this earth,
	Inhabiting a Tom Tiddler’s ground of special pleading
	And cash and carry. Long lines at the checkout counter
	Are a reason to behave, sad and dramatic, silhouetted
	Against the tidal wave. For what must be, must be,
	The old priest said, his face a maze
	Of claw-prints in the snow
	Which always arrives in time to antagonize
	Or humor, before bedtime, it’s your choice.
	And suddenly outlines unlock
	The forms they were sequestering, just to make it simple
	And equal.
	
	Ah, but all fakes aren’t alike.
	I think we must settle for the big thing
	Since quality, though a matter of survival,
	Is such a personal call. Sometimes it’s nowhere at all
	Or a faint girl will make light of it, saying
	In the sprockets in the backwoods there are no noticeable
	Standards, nothing to judge one or be judged by.
	It’s true the refreshing absence of color
	Produces an effect like that of time;
	That you may be running through thistles one moment
	And across a sheet of thin ice the next and not be aware
	Of any difference, only that you have been granted an extension.
	Make sure you clean up this mess. Other than that
	Listening to widely spaced catcalls is OK
	The livelong day, and sleep isn’t rationed.
	Yet one can only question how the system arose,
	Creating itself, I suppose,
	Since nothing else has yet taken that responsibility.
	If it makes you happier to feel, to see the horror
	Of living one’s life alone for something, what the heck,
	Be my guest, it takes two to tango
	After all, or something, doesn’t it?
	And you get right back on that conveyor belt
	Of dreams to tip the scale modestly
	Into your own enterprise, nest-egg, portfolio
	Of standard greetings and uncommon manners.
	The ending can’t take the blame.
	
	It read like the cubist diary of a brook
	That sidled past the house one day
	On its way to a rendezvous with some river
	We can never cross twice. And the gradual
	Escalation lay near by: we cannot call it back
	Yet may meet it again, in other times, under different auspices.



3. ALCOVE

	Is it possible that spring could be
	once more approaching? We forget each time
	what a mindless business it is, porous like sleep,
	adrift on the horizon, refusing to take sides, “mugwump
	of the final hour,“ lest an agenda--horrors!--be imputed to it,
	and the whole point of its being spring collapse
	like a hole dug in sand. It’s breathy, though,
	you have to say that for it.
	And should further seasons coagulate
	into years, like spilled, dried paint, why,
	who’s to say we weren’t provident? We indeed
	looked out for others as though they mattered, and they,
	catching the spirit, came home with us, spent the night
	in an alcove from which their breathing could be heard clearly.
	But it’s not over yet. Terrible incidents happen
	daily. That’s how we get around obstacles.



4. ALMS FOR THE BEEKEEPER

	He makes better errors that way.
	Pass it around at breakfast:
	the family and all, down there with a proximate sense of power,
	lawyering up. Less log-heavy, your text-strategy
	beat out other options, is languid.
	Duets in the dust start up,
	begin. Again.
	
	He entered the firm at night.
	The 26th is a Monday.



5. AMID MOUNTING EVIDENCE

	I was reading about dinosaurs:
	Once the scratching phase is over, and the mirage
	Or menage has begun, and the world lies open
	To the radiation theory (tons of radiation, think of it,
	Reversing all normal procedures
	So that the pessimistic ball of wax begins
	To slide down the inclined plane again
	Bringing further concepts to their doom while encouraging
	The infinity of loose ends that
	Is taking over our government and threatening to become life as we know it!)
	It is time to slink off to one’s post in some cold desert
	(Not the Sahara, more like the Gobi actually)
	And wait amid that sadness known as banishment
	For the point to reappear, though it may never do so,
	And what was that strange uniform?
	
	Only that we lived happily in ever-after land
	And the fire of my mind was still with us then
	Prevented the object of these negotiations from becoming a toy
	Farther down the keyboard (and of course this did happen
	Later on, every potential is realized if one waits long enough,
	Only by that time the context may have faded, fragile
	As summersweet or the light on a windowsill, and then,
	And then, why the text will be seen as regular
	Only no one wants to play anymore; games
	Have their fashions much as truth does) and our lives from
	Being turned into a shambles too large to deal with, unreasonable;
	And as masonry weathers, as moths are silently at work in blankets
	Even as you read this, I saw no reason for complaint
	Or murmur and the entourage liked me, agreeing
	With me that this wasn’t the right time nor place,
	That arguments would be foreshortened if initiated now.
	Yet this toothache that never seems to go away,
	Burning mildly through the night, heartbeat
	Of something, augurs no calamity unless leagues
	And leagues of silent forest canopied by matte-gray
	Sky are to be construed as such, but I think our peace
	Should be given the benefit of a doubt and allowances
	Surely made for all our thoughts and daily activities
	If peace is what we really want, Roman
	Candles ripping open the evening notwithstanding.
	It’s so easy to trudge and pretend to be a boy
	When deep down what you want is asking,
	Not rich assurances that are autumnal
	In the way they finally work out and become a sad
	Though voluminous and vital commentary on our standing
	Impatiently, waiting for the weather to make the first move,
	And when this happens, be the first to scurry away
	Complaining inaudibly and in general installing
	Oneself as a capital nuisance, never to be given the time of day again.
	
	And if this should happen there are always windows
	With flower-boxes and dreamy young girls just behind them.
	There are birds who stop by for one last agitated farewell
	Before the long flight to the south, and so much more
	To prevent the ultimatum from being drawn up that really
	In the first falling flakes a job does get done:
	Energy left over from some previous and saucy commitment
	Turns out not to have been such a bad option. The drilling
	Of noon insects in high summer had to precede this or something
	Else, the dream be given texture and further substance
	Because of something. It seems
	Shipshape now. Everything seems to be all right.
	The storm, you see, told none of its secrets,
	Gave nothing away. There would have been no one to repeat it to
	In any case. And the signs of stress that follow
	In the wake of confusion are there to be read
	If that is what one wants, but the electricity
	Bakes them into shapes of its own cognizance, its wanting
	To give us something a little better to spend
	The rest of our lives looking for, wondering whether it got misplaced.
	In the old days this would have been on the house.



6. AND YOU KNOW

	The girls, protected by gold wire from the gaze
	Of the onrushing students, live in an atmosphere of vacuum
	In the old schoolhouse covered with nasturtiums.
	At night, comets, shooting stars, twirling planets,
	Suns, bits of illuminated pumice, and spooks hang over the old place;
	The atmosphere is breathless. Some find the summer light
	Nauseous and damp, but there are those
	Who are charmed by it, going out in the morning.
	We must rest here, for this is where the teacher comes.
	On his desk stands a vase of tears.
	A quiet feeling pervades the playroom. His voice clears
	Through the interminable afternoon: “I was a child once
	Under the spangled sun. Now I do what must be done.
	I teach reading and writing and flaming arithmetic. Those
	In my home come to me anxiously at night, asking how it goes.
	My door is always open. I never lie, and the great heat warms me.”
	
	His door is always open, the fond schoolmaster!
	We ought to imitate him in our lives,
	For as a man lives, he dies. To pass away
	In the afternoon, on the vast vapid bank
	You think is coming to crown you with hollyhocks and lilacs, or in gold at the opera,
	Requires that one shall have lived so much! And not
	Answering questions and giving answers, but grandly sitting,
	Like a great rock, through many years.
	It is the erratic path of time we trace
	On the globe, with moist fingertip, and surely, the globe stops;
	We are pointing to England, to Africa, to Nigeria;
	And we shall visit these places, you and I, and other places,
	Including heavenly Naples, queen of the sea, where shall be king and you will be queen,
	And all the places around Naples.
	So the good old teacher is right, to stop with his finger on Naples, gazing out into the mild December afternoon
	As his star pupil enters the classroom in that elaborate black and yellow creation.
	He is thinking of her flounces, and is caught in them
	as if they were made of iron, they will crush him to death!
	Goodbye, old teacher, we must travel on, not to a better land, perhaps,
	But to the England of the sonnets, Paris, Colombia and Switzerland
	And all the places with names, that we wish to visit--
	
	Strasbourg, Albania,
	The coast of Holland, Madrid, Singapore, Naples, Salonika, Liberia, and Turkey.
	So we leave you behind with her of the black and yellow flounces,
	You were always a good friend, but a special one.
	Now as we brush through the clinging leaves we seem to hear you crying;
	You want us to come back, but it is too late to come back, isn’t it?
	It is too late to go to the places with the names (what were they, anyway? just names).
	It is too late to go anywhere but to the nearest star, that one, that hangs just over the hill, beckoning
	Like a hand of which the arm is not visible. Goodbye, Father! Goodbye, pupils. Goodbye, my master and my dame.
	We fly to the nearest star, whether it be red like a furnace, or yellow,
	And we carry your lessons in our hearts (the lessons and our hearts are the same)
	Out of the humid classroom, into the forever. Goodbye, Old Dog Tray.
	And so they have left us feeling cross and tired.
	They never cared for school anyway.
	And they have left us with the things pinned on the bulletin board,
	And the night, the endless, muggy night that is invading our school.



7. AND ‘UT PICTURA POESIS’ IS HER NAME

	You can’t say it that way any more.   
	Bothered about beauty you have to   
	Come out into the open, into a clearing,
	And rest. Certainly whatever funny happens to you
	Is OK. To demand more than this would be strange
	Of you, you who have so many lovers,   
	People who look up to you and are willing   
	To do things for you, but you think
	It’s not right, that if they really knew you . . .
	So much for self-analysis. Now,
	About what to put in your poem-painting:   
	Flowers are always nice, particularly delphinium.   
	Names of boys you once knew and their sleds,   
	Skyrockets are good--do they still exist?
	There are a lot of other things of the same quality   
	As those I’ve mentioned. Now one must
	Find a few important words, and a lot of low-keyed,
	Dull-sounding ones. She approached me
	About buying her desk. Suddenly the street was   
	Bananas and the clangor of Japanese instruments.   
	Humdrum testaments were scattered around. His head
	Locked into mine. We were a seesaw. Something   
	Ought to be written about how this affects   
	You when you write poetry:
	The extreme austerity of an almost empty mind
	Colliding with the lush, Rousseau-like foliage of its desire to communicate   
	Something between breaths, if only for the sake   
	Of others and their desire to understand you and desert you
	For other centers of communication, so that understanding
	May begin, and in doing so be undone.



8. ANTICIPATED STRANGER

	the bruise will stop by later.
	For now, the pain pauses in its round,
	notes the time of day, the patient’s temperature,
	leaves a memo for the surrogate: What the _hell_
	did you think you were doing? I mean . . .
	Oh well, less said the better, they all say.
	I’ll post this at the desk.
	
	God will find the pattern and break it.



9. AS YOU CAME FROM THE HOLY LAND

	of western New York state
	were the graves all right in their bushings
	was there a note of panic in the late August air
	because the old man had peed in his pants again
	was there turning away from the late afternoon glare
	as though it too could be wished away
	was any of this present
	and how could this be
	the magic solution to what you are in now
	whatever has held you motionless
	like this so long through the dark season
	until now the women come out in navy blue
	and the worms come out of the compost to die
	it is the end of any season
	
	you reading there so accurately
	sitting not wanting to be disturbed
	as you came from that holy land
	what other signs of earth’s dependency were upon you
	what fixed sign at the crossroads
	what lethargy in the avenues
	where all is said in a whisper
	what tone of voice among the hedges
	what tone under the apple trees
	the numbered land stretches away
	and your house is built in tomorrow
	but surely not before the examination
	of what is right and will befall
	not before the census
	and the writing down of names
	
	remember you are free to wander away
	as from other times other scenes that were taking place
	the history of someone who came too late
	the time is ripe now and the adage
	is hatching as the seasons change and tremble
	it is finally as though that thing of monstrous interest
	were happening in the sky
	but the sun is setting and prevents you from seeing it
	
	out of night the token emerges
	its leaves like birds alighting all at once under a tree
	taken up and shaken again
	put down in weak rage
	knowing as the brain does it can never come about
	not here not yesterday in the past
	only in the gap of today filling itself
	as emptiness is distributed
	in the idea of what time it is
	when that time is already past



10. A BLESSING IN DISGUISE

	Yes, they are alive and can have those colors,
	But I, in my soul, am alive too.
	I feel I must sing and dance, to tell
	Of this in a way, that knowing you may be drawn to me.
	
	And I sing amid despair and isolation
	Of the chance to know you, to sing of me
	Which are you. You see,
	You hold me up to the light in a way
	
	I should never have expected, or suspected, perhaps
	Because you always tell me I am you,
	And right. The great spruces loom.
	I am yours to die with, to desire.
	
	I cannot ever think of me, I desire you
	For a room in which the chairs ever
	Have their backs turned to the light
	Inflicted on the stone and paths, the real trees
	
	That seem to shine at me through a lattice toward you.
	If the wild light of this January day is true
	I pledge me to be truthful unto you
	Whom I cannot ever stop remembering.
	
	Remembering to forgive. Remember to pass beyond you into the day
	On the wings of the secret you will never know.
	Taking me from myself, in the path
	Which the pastel girth of the day has assigned to me.
	
	I prefer “you” in the plural, I want “you,”
	You must come to me, all golden and pale
	Like the dew and the air.
	And then I start getting this feeling of exaltation.



11. BLUE SONATA

	Long ago was the then beginning to seem like now
	As now is but the setting out on a new but still
	Undefined way. _That_ now, the one once
	Seen from far away, is our destiny
	No matter what else may happen to us. It is
	The present past of which our features,
	Our opinions are made. We are half it and we
	Care nothing about the rest of it. We
	Can see far enough ahead for the rest of us to be
	Implicit in the surroundings that twilight is.
	We know that this part of the day comes every day
	And we feel that, as it has its rights, so
	We have our right to be ourselves in the measure
	That we are in it and not some other day, or in
	Some other place. The time suits us
	Tust as it fancies itself, but just so far
	As we not give up that inch, breath
	Of becoming before becoming may be seen,
	Or come to seem all that it seems to mean now.
	
	The things that were coming to be talked about
	Have come and gone and are still remembered
	As being recent. There is a grain of curiosity
	At the base of some new thing, that unrolls
	Its question mark like a new wave on the shore.
	In coming to give, to give up what we had,
	We have, we understand, gained or been gained
	By what was passing through, bright with the sheen
	Of things recently forgotten and revived.
	Each image fits into place, with the calm
	Of not having too many, of having just enough.
	We live in the sigh of our present.
	If that was all there was to have
	We could re-imagine the other half, deducing it
	From the shape of what is seen, thus
	Being inserted into its idea of how we
	Ought to proceed. It would be tragic to fit
	Into the space created by our not having arrived yet,
	To utter the speech that belongs there,
	For progress occurs through reinventing
	These words from a dim recollection of them,
	In violating that space in such a way as
	To leave it intact. Yet we do after all
	Belong here, and have moved a considerable
	Distance; our passing is a facade.
	But our understanding of it is justified.



12. BLUEPRINTS AND OTHERS

	The man across the street seems happy,
	or pleased. Sometimes a porter evades the grounds.
	After you play a lot with the military
	you are my own best customer.
	
	I’ve done five of that.
	Make my halloween. Ask me not to say it.
	The old man wants to see you--_now_.
	That’s all right, but find your own.
	Do you want to stop using these?
	
	Last winning people told me to sit on the urinal.
	Do not put on others what you can put on yourself.
	_How to be in the city my loved one._
	Men in underwear . . . A biography field
	like where we live in the mountains,
	
	a falling. Yes I know you have.
	Troves of merchandise, you know, “boomer buzz.”
	Hillbilly sculptures of the outside.
	(They won’t see anybody.)



13. BOUNDARY ISSUES

	Here in life, they would understand.   
	How could it be otherwise? We had groped too,   
	unwise, till the margin began to give way,   
	at which point all was sullen, or lost, or both.   
	
	Now it was time, and there was nothing for it.   
	
	We had a good meal, I and my friend,   
	slurping from the milk pail, grabbing at newer vegetables.   
	Yet life was a desert. Come home, in good faith.   
	You can still decide to. But it wanted warmth.   
	Otherwise ruse and subtlety would become impossible   
	in the few years or hours left to us. “Yes, but . . .”   
	The iconic beggars shuffled off   too. I told you,   
	once a breach emerges it will become a chasm   
	before anyone’s had a chance to waver. A dispute   
	on the far side of town erupts into a war   
	in no time at all, and ends as abruptly. The tendency to heal   
	sweeps all before it, into the arroyo, the mine shaft,   
	into whatever pocket you were contemplating. And the truly lost   
	make up for it. It’s always us that has to pay.   
	
	I have a suggestion to make: draw the sting out   
	as probingly as you please. Plaster the windows over   
	with wood pulp against the noon gloom proposing its enigmas,   
	its elixirs. Banish truth-telling. 
	That’s the whole point, as I understand it.   
	Each new investigation rebuilds the urgency,   
	like a sand rampart. And further reflection undermines it,   
	causing its eventual collapse. We could see all that   
	from a distance, as on a curving abacus, in urgency mode   
	from day one, but by then dispatches hardly mattered.   
	It was camaraderie, or something like it, that did,   
	poring over us like we were papyri, hoping to find one   
	correct attitude sketched on the gaslit air, night’s friendly takeover.



14. BUNCH OF STUFF

	To all events I squirted you
	knowing this not to be this came to pass
	when we were out and it looked good.
	Why wouldn’t you want a fresh piece
	of outlook to stand in down the years?
	See, your house, a former human energy construction,
	crashed with us for a few days in May
	and sure enough, the polar inscape
	brought about some easier poems,
	which I guessed was a good thing. At least
	some of us were relaxed, Steamboat Bill included.
	
	He didn’t drink nothing.
	It was one thing
	to be ready for their challenge, quite another to accept it.
	And if I had a piece of advice for you, this is it:
	Poke fun at balm, then suffer lethargy
	to irradiate its shallow flood in the new packaging
	our enemies processed. They should know.
	
	The Gold Dust Twins never stopped supplicating Hoosiers
	to limn the trail. There’s no Shakespeare.
	Through the window, Casanova.
	Couldn’t get to sleep in the dumb incident
	of those days, crimping the frozen feet of Lincoln.



15. THE BUNGALOWS

	Impatient as we were for all of them to join us,
	The land had not yet risen into view: gulls had swept the gray steel towers away
	So that it profited less to go searching, away over the humming earth
	Than to stay in immediate relation to these other things--boxes, store parts, whatever you wanted to call them--
	Whose installedness was the price of further revolutions, so you knew this combat was the last.
	And still the relationship waxed, billowed like scenery on the breeze.
	
	They are the same aren’t they,
	The presumed landscape and the dream of home
	Because the people are all homesick today or desperately sleeping,   
	Trying to remember how those rectangular shapes
	Became so extraneous and so near
	To create a foreground of quiet knowledge
	In which youth had grown old, chanting and singing wise hymns that   
	Will sign for old age
	And so lift up the past to be persuaded, and be put down again.
	
	The warning is nothing more than an aspirate “h”;
	The problem is sketched completely, like fireworks mounted on poles:   
	Complexion of evening, the accurate voices of the others.
	During Coca-Cola lessons it becomes patent
	Of noise on the left, and we had so skipped a stage that   
	The great wave of the past, compounded in derision,   
	Submerged idea and non-dreamer alike   
	In falsetto starlight like “purity”
	Of design that had been the first danger sign
	To wash the sticky, icky stuff down the drain--pfui!
	
	How does it feel to be outside and inside at the same time,
	The delicious feeling of the air contradicting and secretly abetting
	The interior warmth? But the land curdles the dismay in which it’s written   
	Bearing to a final point of folly and doom
	The wisdom of these generations.
	Look at what you’ve done to the landscape--
	The ice cube, the olive--
	There is a perfect tri-city mesh of things
	Extending all the way along the river on both sides
	With the end left for thoughts on construction
	That are always turning to alps and thresholds
	Above the tide of others, feeding a European moss rose without glory.
	
	We shall very soon have the pleasure of recording
	A period of unanimous tergiversation in this respect
	And to make that pleasure the greater, it is worth while
	At the risk of tedious iteration, to put first upon record a final protest:   
	Rather decaying art, genius, inspiration to hold to
	An impossible “calque” of reality, than
	“The new school of the trivial, rising up on the field of battle,   
	Something of sludge and leaf-mold,” and life
	Goes trickling out through the holes, like water through a sieve,   
	All in one direction.
	
	You who were directionless, and thought it would solve everything if you found one,
	What do you make of this? Just because a thing is immortal
	Is that any reason to worship it? Death, after all, is immortal.   
	But you have gone into your houses and shut the doors, meaning   
	There can be no further discussion.
	And the river pursues its lonely course
	With the sky and the trees cast up from the landscape
	For green brings unhappiness--_le vert Porte malheur_.
	“The chartreuse mountain on the absinthe plain
	Makes the strong man’s tears tumble down like rain.”
	
	All this came to pass eons ago.
	Your program worked out perfectly. You even avoided
	The monotony of perfection by leaving in certain flaws:
	A backward way of becoming, a forced handshake,
	An absent-minded smile, though in fact nothing was left to chance.
	Each detail was startlingly clear, as though seen through a magnifying glass,   
	Or would have been to an ideal observer, namely yourself--
	For only you could watch yourself so patiently from afar
	The way God watches a sinner on the path to redemption,
	Sometimes disappearing into valleys, _but always on the way_,
	For it all builds up into something, meaningless or meaningful
	As architecture, because planned and then abandoned when completed,   
	To live afterwards, in sunlight and shadow, a certain amount of years.   
	Who cares about what was there before? There is no going back,   
	For standing still means death, and life is moving on,
	Moving on towards death. But sometimes standing still is also life.



16. BY AN EARTHQUAKE

	A hears by chance a familiar name, and the name involves a riddle of the past.
	B, in love with A, receives an unsigned letter in which the writer states that she is the mistress of A and begs B not to take him away from her.
	B, compelled by circumstances to be a companion of A in an isolated place, alters her rosy views of love and marriage when she discovers, through A, the selfishness of men.
	A, an intruder in a strange house, is discovered; he flees through the nearest door into a windowless closet and is trapped by a spring lock.
	A is so content with what he has that any impulse toward enterprise is throttled.
	A solves an important mystery when falling plaster reveals the place where some old love letters are concealed.
	A-4, missing food from his larder, half believes it was taken by a “ghost.”
	A, a crook, seeks unlawful gain by selling A-8 an object, X, which A-8 already owns.
	A sees a stranger, A-5, stealthily remove papers, X, from the pocket of another stranger, A-8, who is asleep. A follows A-5.
	A sends an infernal machine, X, to his enemy, A-3, and it falls into the hands of A’s friend, A-2.
	Angela tells Philip of her husband’s enlarged prostate, and asks for money.
	Philip, ignorant of her request, has the money placed in an escrow account.
	A discovers that his pal, W, is a girl masquerading as a boy.
	A, discovering that W is a girl masquerading as a boy, keeps the knowledge to himself and does his utmost to save the masquerader from annoying experiences.
	A, giving ten years of his life to a miserly uncle, U, in exchange for a college education, loses his ambition and enterprise.
	
	A, undergoing a strange experience among a people weirdly deluded, discovers the secret of the delusion from Herschel, one of the victims who has died. By means of information obtained from the notebook, A succeeds in rescuing the other victims of the delusion.
	A dies of psychic shock.
	Albert has a dream, or an unusual experience, psychic or otherwise, which enables him to conquer a serious character weakness and become successful in his new narrative, “Boris Karloff.”
	
	Silver coins from the Mojave Desert turn up in the possession of a sinister jeweler.
	Three musicians wager that one will win the affections of the local kapellmeister’s wife; the losers must drown themselves in a nearby stream.
	Ardis, caught in a trap and held powerless under a huge burning glass, is saved by an eclipse of the sun.
	Kent has a dream so vivid that it seems a part of his waking experience.   
	A and A-2 meet with a tragic adventure, and A-2 is killed.
	Elvira, seeking to unravel the mystery of a strange house in the hills, is caught in an electrical storm. During the storm the house vanishes and the site on which it stood becomes a lake.
	Alphonse has a wound, a terrible psychic wound, an invisible psychic wound, which causes pain in flesh and tissue which, otherwise, are perfectly healthy and normal.
	A has a dream which he conceives to be an actual experience.   
	Jenny, homeward bound, drives and drives, and is still driving, no nearer to her home than she was when she first started.
	Petronius B. Furlong’s friend, Morgan Windhover, receives a wound from which he dies.
	Thirteen guests, unknown to one another, gather in a spooky house to hear Toe reading Buster’s will.
	Buster has left everything to Lydia, a beautiful Siamese girl poet of whom no one has heard.
	Lassie and Rex tussle together politely; Lassie, wounded, is forced to limp home.
	In the Mexican gold rush a city planner is found imprisoned by outlaws in a crude cage of sticks.
	More people flow over the dam and more is learned about the missing electric cactus.
	Too many passengers have piled onto a cable car in San Francisco; the conductor is obliged to push some of them off.
	Maddalena, because of certain revelations she has received, firmly resolves that she will not carry out an enterprise that had formerly been dear to her heart.
	
	Fog enters into the shaft of a coal mine in Wales.
	A violent wind blows the fog around.
	Two miners, Shawn and Hillary, are pursued by fumes.
	Perhaps Emily’s datebook holds the clue to the mystery of the seven swans under the upas tree.
	Jarvis seeks to manage Emily’s dress shop and place it on a paying basis. Jarvis’s bibulous friend, Emily, influences Jarvis to take to drink, scoffing at the doctor who has forbidden Jarvis to indulge in spirituous liquors.
	Jarvis, because of a disturbing experience, is compelled to turn against his friend, Emily.
	A ham has his double, “Donnie,” take his place in an important enterprise.
	Jarvis loses his small fortune in trying to help a friend.
	Lodovico’s friend, Ambrosius, goes insane from eating the berries of a strange plant, and makes a murderous attack on Lodovico.
	“New narrative” is judged seditious. Hogs from all over go squealing down the street.
	Ambrosius, suffering misfortune, seeks happiness in the companionship of Joe, and in playing golf.
	Arthur, in a city street, has a glimpse of Cathy, a strange woman who has caused him to become involved in a puzzling mystery.   
	Cathy, walking in the street, sees Arthur, a stranger, weeping.
	Cathy abandons Arthur after he loses his money and is injured and sent to a hospital.
	Arthur, married to Beatrice, is haunted by memories of a former sweetheart, Cornelia, a heartless coquette whom Alvin loves.
	
	Sauntering in a park on a fine day in spring, Tricia and Plotinus encounter a little girl grabbing a rabbit by its ears. As they remonstrate with her, the girl is transformed into a mature woman who regrets her feverish act.
	Running up to the girl, Alvin stumbles and loses his coins.
	In a nearby dell, two murderers are plotting to execute a third.   
	Beatrice loved Alvin before he married.
	B, second wife of A, discovers that B-3, A’s first wife, was unfaithful.   
	B, wife of A, dons the mask and costume of B-3, A’s paramour, and meets A as B-3; his memory returns and he forgets B-3, and goes back to B.
	A discovers the “Hortensius,” a lost dialogue of Cicero, and returns it to the crevice where it lay.
	Ambrose marries Phyllis, a nice girl from another town.
	Donnie and Charlene are among the guests invited to the window.   
	No one remembers old Everett, who is left to shrivel in a tower.   
	Pellegrino, a rough frontiersman in a rough frontier camp, undertakes to care for an orphan.
	Ildebrando constructs a concealed trap, and a person near to him, Gwen, falls into the trap and cannot escape.



17. BY GUESS AND BY GOSH

	O awaken with me
	the inquiring goodbyes.
	Ooh what a messy business
	a tangle and a muddle
	(and made it seem quite interesting).
	
	He ticks them off:
	leisure top,
	a different ride home,
	whispering, in a way,
	whispered whiskers,
	so many of the things you have to share.
	
	But I was getting on,
	and that’s what you don’t need.
	I’m certainly sorry about scaring your king,
	if indeed that’s what happened to him.
	You get Peanuts and War and Peace,
	some in rags, some in jags, some in
	velvet gown. They want
	the other side of the printing plant.
	
	There were concerns.
	Say hi to jock itch, leadership principles,
	urinary incompetence.
	Take that, perfect pitch.
	And say a word for the president,
	for the scholar magazines, papers, a streaming.
	Then you are interested in poetry.



18. CHINESE WHISPERS

	And in a little while we broke under the strain:   
	suppurations _ad nauseam_, the wanting to be taller,   
	though it‘s simply about being mysterious, i.e., not taller,   
	like any tree in any forest.
	                                           Mute, the pancake describes you.
	It had tiny roman numerals embedded in its rim.
	It was a pancake clock. They had ’em in those days,
	always getting smaller, which is why they finally became extinct.   
	It was a hundred years before anyone noticed.
	                                                                     The governor general
	called it “sinuous.” But we, we had other names for it,   
	knew it was going to be around for a long time,
	even though extinct. And sure as shillelaghs fall from trees   
	onto frozen doorsteps, it came round again
	when all memory of it had been expunged
	                                                            from the common brain.
	Everybody wants to try one of those new pancake clocks.   
	A boyfriend in the next town had one
	but conveniently forgot to bring it over each time we invited him.   
	Finally the rumors grew more fabulous than the real thing:   
	I hear they are encrusted with tangles of briar rose,
	                                                                                 so dense
	not even a prince seeking the Sleeping Beauty could get inside.   
	What’s more, there are more of them than when they were extinct,
	yet the prices keep on rising. They have them in the Hesperides   
	and in shantytowns on the edge of the known world,   
	blue with cold. All downtowns used to feature them.
	                                                                              Camera obscuras,
	too, were big that year. But why is it that with so many people
	who want to know what a shout is about, nobody can find the original recipe?
	All too soon, no one cares. We go back to doing little things for each other,
	pasting stamps together to form a tiny train track, and other,
	less noticeable things. And the past is forgotten till next time.
	How to describe the years? Some were like blocks of the palest halvah,
	careless of being touched. Some took each others’ trash out,   
	put each other’s eyes out. So many got thrown out
	before anyone noticed, that it was like a chiaroscuro
	                                                                                 of collapsing clouds.
	How I longed to visit you again in that old house! But you were deaf,   
	or dead. Our letters crossed. A motorboat was ferrying me out past   
	the reef, people on shore looked like dolls fingering stuffs.
	                                                                                             More
	keeps coming out, about the dogs I mean. Surely a simple embrace
	from an itinerant fish would have been spurned at certain periods. Not now.
	There is a famine of years in the land, the women are beautiful,   
	but prematurely old and worn. It doesn’t get better. Rocks half-buried   
	in bands of sand, and spontaneous execrations.
	                                                                      I yell to the ship’s front door,
	wanting to be taller, and somewhere in the middle all this gets lost.   
	I was a phantom for a day. My friends carried me around with them.
	
	It always turns out that much is salvageable.
	                                                                     Chicken coops
	haven’t floated away on the flood. Lacemakers are back in business   
	with a vengeance. All the locksmiths had left town during the night.   
	It happened to be a beautiful time of season, spring or fall,   
	the air was digestible, the fish tied in love-knots
	on their gurneys. Yes, and journeys
	
	were palpable too: Someone had spoken of saving appearances   
	and the walls were just a little too blue in mid-morning.   
	Was there ever such a time? I’d like to handle you,
	bruise you with kisses for it, yet something always stops me short:   
	the knowledge that this isn‘t history,
	                                                          no matter how many
	times we keep mistaking it for the present, that headlines
	trumpet each day. But behind the unsightly school building, now a pickle
	warehouse, the true nature of things is known, is not overrided:   
	Yours is a vote like any other. And there is fraud at the ballot boxes,
	stuffed with lace valentines and fortunes from automatic scales,   
	dispensed with a lofty kind of charity, as though this could matter   
	to us, these tunes
	                            carried by the wind
	from a barrel organ several leagues away. No, this is not the time   
	to reveal your deception to us. Wait till rain and old age   
	have softened us up a little more.
	                                                    Then we’ll see how extinct
	the various races have become, how the years stand up   
	to their descriptions, no matter how misleading,
	and how long the disbanded armies stay around. I must congratulate you   
	on your detective work, for I am a connoisseur
	of close embroidery, though I don’t have a diploma to show for it.
	
	The trees, the barren trees, have been described more than once.   
	Always they are taller, it seems, and the river passes them   
	without noticing. We, too, are taller,
	our ceilings higher, our walls more tinctured
	with telling frescoes, our dooryards both airier and vaguer,
	according as time passes and weaves its minute deceptions in and out,   
	a secret thread.
	Peace is a full stop.
	And though we had some chance of slipping past the blockade,   
	now only time will consent to have anything to do with us,   
	for what purposes we do not know.



19. CIVILIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS

	A people chained to aurora
	I alone disarming you
	
	Millions of facts of distributed light
	
	Helping myself with some big boxes
	Up the steps, then turning to no neighborhood;
	The child’s psalm, slightly sung
	In the hall rushing into the small room.
	Such fire! leading away from destruction.
	Somewhere in outer ether I glimpsed you
	Coming at me, the solo barrier did it this time,
	Guessing us staying, true to be at the blue mark
	Of threshold. Tired of planning it again and again
	The cool boy distant, and the soaked-up
	Afterthought, like so much rain, or roof.
	
	The miracle took you in beside him.
	Leaves rushed the window, there was clear water and the sound of a lock.
	Now I never see you much any more.
	The summers are much colder than they used to be
	In that other time, when you and I were young.
	I miss the human truth of your smile,
	The half-hearted gaze of your palms,
	And all things together, but there is no comic reign
	Only the facts you put to me. You must not, then,
	Be very surprised if I am alone: it is all for you,
	The night, and the stars, and the way we used to be.
	
	There is no longer any use in harping on
	The incredible principle of daylong silence, the dark sunlight
	As only the grass is beginning to know it,
	The wreath of the north pole,
	Festoons for the late return, the shy pensioners
	Agasp on the lamplit air. What is agreeable
	Is to hold your hand. The gravel
	Underfoot. The time for coming near is close. Useless
	Verbs shooting the other words far away.
	
	Since I had already swallowed the poison
	I could only gaze into the distance at my life
	Like a saint’s, with each day distinct.
	No heaviness in the upland pastures. Nothing
	In the forest. Only life under the huge trees
	Like a coat that has grown too big, moving far away,
	Cutting swamps for men like lapdogs, holding its own,
	Performing once again, for you and for me.



20. CROSSROADS IN THE PAST

	That night the wind stirred in the forsythia bushes,
	but it was a wrong one, blowing in the wrong direction.
	“That’s silly. How can there be a wrong direction?
	‘It bloweth where it listeth,’ as you know, just as we do
	when we make love or do something else there are no rules for.”
	
	I tell you, something went wrong there a while back.
	Just don’t ask me what it was. Pretend I’ve dropped the subject.
	No, now you’ve got me interested, I want to know
	exactly what seems wrong to you, how something could
	
	seem wrong to you. In what way do things get to be wrong?
	I’m sitting here dialing my cellphone
	with one hand, digging at some obscure pebbles with my shovel
	with the other. And then something like braids will stand out,
	
	on horsehair cushions. That armchair is really too lugubrious.
	We’ve got to change all the furniture, fumigate the house,
	talk our relationship back to its beginnings. Say, you know
	that’s probably what’s wrong--the beginnings concept, I mean.
	I aver there are no beginnings, though there were perhaps some
	sometime. We’d stopped, to look at the poster the movie theater
	
	had placed freestanding on the sidewalk. The lobby cards
	drew us in. It was afternoon, we found ourselves
	sitting at the end of a row in the balcony; the theater was unexpectedly
	crowded. That was the day we first realized we didn’t fully
	know our names, yours or mine, and we left quietly
	amid the gray snow falling. Twilight had already set in.



21. DAY BUMP

	Whether the harborline or the east shoreline
	consummated it was nobody’s biz until you got there,
	eyelids ashimmer, content with one more dispensation
	from blue above. And just like we were saying,
	the people began to show some interest
	in the mud-choked harbor. It could be summer again
	for all anyone in our class knew.
	Yeah, that’s right. Bumped from our dog-perch,
	we’d had to roil with the last of them.
	
	It’s taken a while since I’ve been here,
	but I’m resolved. What, didn’t I print,
	little piles of notes, slopes almost Sicilian?
	Here is my friend:
	Socks for comfort (now boys) will see later. Did they come?
	The inner grocery had to take three sets of clips away.
	Speaking to him of intricate family affairs.
	I’m not what you think. Stay preconscious.
	It’s just the “flooding of the council.” No need to feel afraid.



22. DRAMEDY

	Things I left on your paper:
	one of the craziest episodes that ever overtook me.
	Do you like espionage? A watered charm?
	My pod cast aside, I’ll walk in the human street,
	protect the old jib from new miniseries.
	
	I could swear it moved
	in incomplete back yards
	to endorse the conversation, request to be strapped in.
	Then it will be time to take the step
	giving fragile responses,
	and finally he wrote the day.
	
	It happened in the water
	so that was nice.
	
	It comes ready conflated:
	vanilla for get lost, flavor of the time
	of his sponsor’s destiny. Be on that sofa.
	
	I was crossing the state line as they were reburying the stuff.
	You break the time lock, the bride’s canister . . .
	but we did say that we’d be back.



23. EL DORADO

	We have a friend in common, the retired sophomore.   
	His concern: that I shall get it like that,   
	in the right and righter of a green bush   
	chomping on future considerations. In the ghostly   
	dreams of others it appears I am all right,   
	and even going on tomorrow there is much   
	to be said on all these matters, “issues,” like   
	“No rest for the weary.” (And yet--why not?)   
	Feeling under orders is a way of showing up,   
	but stepping on Earth--she’s not going to.   
	Ten shades of pleasing himself brings us to tomorrow   
	evening and will be back for more. I disagree   
	with you completely but couldn’t be prouder   
	and fonder of you. So drink up. Feel good for two.   
	
	I do it in a lot of places. Subfusc El Dorado   
	is only one that I know something about.   
	Others are recently lost cities   
	where we used to live--they keep the names   
	we knew, sometimes. I do it in a lot of places.   
	Brash brats offer laughing advice,   
	as though anything I cared about could be difficult   
	or complicated now. That’s the rub. Gusts of up   
	to forty-five miles an hour will be dropping in later   
	on tonight. No reason not to. So point at the luck   
	we know about. Living is a meatloaf sandwich.   
	I had a good time up there.



24. ELECTIVE INFINITIES

	Thirsty? They race across ampersands,
	scrolling. He isn’t sure it’s his head.
	There’s a delay right now. Smoke backed up.
	Ladies please remove hats.
	
	It was all over by morning. The village idiot
	was surprised to see us. “. . . thought you were in Normandy.”
	Like all pendulums we were surprised,
	then slightly miffed at what seemed to be happening
	back in the bushes. Keep your ornaments,
	if that’s what they are. Return to sender, arse.
	
	At the intersection a statue of a policeman
	was directing traffic. It seemed likale a vacation,
	halloween or something. Process 
	was the only real thing that happened.
	We wove closer to the abyss, a maze of sunflowers.
	The dauphin said to take our time.



25. FARM IMPLEMENTS AND RUTABAGAS IN A LANDSCAPE

	The first of the undecoded messages read: “Popeye sits in thunder,   
	Unthought of. From that shoebox of an apartment,
	From livid curtain’s hue, a tangram emerges: a country.”
	Meanwhile the Sea Hag was relaxing on a green couch: “How pleasant   
	To spend one’s vacation _en la casa de Popeye_,” she scratched
	Her cleft chin’s solitary hair. She remembered spinach
	
	And was going to ask Wimpy if he had bought any spinach.   
	“M’love,” he intercepted, “the plains are decked out in thunder   
	Today, and it shall be as you wish.” He scratched
	The part of his head under his hat. The apartment
	Seemed to grow smaller. “But what if no pleasant
	Inspiration plunge us now to the stars? _For this is my country_.”
	
	Suddenly they remembered how it was cheaper in the country.   
	Wimpy was thoughtfully cutting open a number 2 can of spinach   
	When the door opened and Swee’pea crept in. “How pleasant!”
	But Swee’pea looked morose. A note was pinned to his bib. “Thunder   
	And tears are unavailing,” it read. “Henceforth shall Popeye’s apartment   
	Be but remembered space, toxic or salubrious, whole or scratched.”
	
	Olive came hurtling through the window; its geraniums scratched
	Her long thigh. “I have news!” she gasped. “Popeye, forced as you know to flee the country
	One musty gusty evening, by the schemes of his wizened, duplicate father, jealous of the apartment
	And all that it contains, myself and spinach
	In particular, heaves bolts of loving thunder
	At his own astonished becoming, rupturing the pleasant
	
	Arpeggio of our years. No more shall pleasant
	Rays of the sun refresh your sense of growing old, nor the scratched   
	Tree-trunks and mossy foliage, only immaculate darkness and thunder.”   
	She grabbed Swee’pea. “I’m taking the brat to the country.”
	“But you can’t do that--he hasn’t even finished his spinach,”   
	Urged the Sea Hag, looking fearfully around at the apartment.
	
	But Olive was already out of earshot. Now the apartment
	Succumbed to a strange new hush. “Actually it’s quite pleasant
	Here,” thought the Sea Hag. “If this is all we need fear from spinach
	Then I don’t mind so much. Perhaps we could invite Alice the Goon over”--she scratched
	One dug pensively--“but Wimpy is such a country
	Bumpkin, always burping like that.” Minute at first, the thunder
	
	Soon filled the apartment. It was domestic thunder,   
	The color of spinach. Popeye chuckled and scratched
	His balls: it sure was pleasant to spend a day in the country.



26. FIVE PEDANTIC PIECES

	An idea I had and talked about
	Became the things I do.
	
	The poem of these things takes them apart,
	And I tremble. Sparse winter, less vulnerable
	Than deflated summer, the nests of words.
	
	Some of the tribes believe the spirit
	Is immanent in a person’s nail-parings.
	They gather up their dead swiftly,
	At sundown. And this will be
	Some forgotten day three years ago:
	Startling evidence of light after death
	
	Another person. The yellow-brick and masonry
	Wall, deeper, duller all afternoon
	And a voice waltzing, fabricating works
	Of sentimental gadgetry--messes he’d cook up.
	
	And the little hotel looked all right
	And well-lit, in the dark, on the flat
	Beach behind the breakers, stiff, harmless.
	And you are amazed that so much flimsy stuff
	Stays erect, trapped in our mummery.



27. FLOWERING DEATH

	Ahead, starting from the far north, it wanders.
	Its radish-strong gasoline fumes have probably been
	Locked into your sinuses while you were away.
	You will have to deliver it.
	The flowers exist on the edge of breath, loose,
	Having been laid there.
	One gives pause to the other,
	Or there will be a symmetry about their movements
	Through which each is also an individual.
	
	It is their collective blankness, however,
	That betrays the notion of a thing not to be destroyed
	In this, how many facts we have fallen through
	And still the old facade glimmers there,
	A mirage, but permanent. We must first trick the idea
	Into being, then dismantle it,
	Scattering the pieces on the wind,
	So that the old joy, modest as cake, as wine and friendship
	Will stay with us at the last, backed by the night
	Whose ruse gave it our final meaning.



28. FOR JOHN CLARE

	Kind of empty in the way it sees everything, the earth gets to its feet and salutes the sky. More of a success at it this time than most others it is. The feeling that the sky might be in the back of someone’s mind. Then there is no telling how many there are. They grace everything--bush and tree-to take the roisterer’s mind off his caroling- so it’s like a smooth switch back. To what was aired in their previous conniption fit. There is so much to be seen everywhere that it’s like not getting used to it, only there is so much it never feels new, never any different. You are standing looking at that building and you cannot take it all in, certain details are already hazy and the mind boggles. What will it all be like in five years’ time when you try to remember? Will there have been boards in between the grass part and the edge of the street? As long as that couple is stopping to look in that window over there we cannot go. We feel like they have to tell us we can, but they never look our way and they are already gone, gone far into the future--the night of time. If we could look at a photograph of it and say there they are, they never really stopped but there they are. There is so much to be said, and on the surface of it very little gets said.
	There ought to be room for more things, for a spreading out, like. Being immersed in the details of rock and field and slope--letting them come to you for once, and then meeting them half-way would be so much easier--if they took an ingenuous pride in being in one’s blood. Alas, we perceive them if at all as those things that were meant to be put aside--costumes of the supporting actors or voice trilling at the end of a narrow enclosed street. You can do nothing with them. Not even offer to pay.
	It is possible that finally, like coming to the end of a long, barely perceptible rise, there is mutual cohesion and interaction. The whole scene is fuxed in your mind, the music all present, as though you could see each note as well as hear it. I say this because there is an uneasiness in things just now. Waiting for something to be over before you are forced to notice it. The pollarded trees scarcely bucking the wind--and yet it’s keen, it makes you fall over. Clabbered sky. Seasons that pass with a rush. After all it’s their time too--nothing says they aren’t to make something of it. As for Jenny Wren, she cares, hopping about on her little twig like she was tryin’ to tell us somethin’, but that’s just it, she couldn’t even if she wanted to--dumb bird. But the others--and they in some way must know too--it would never occur to them to want to, even if they could take the first step of the terrible journey toward feeling somebody should act, that ends in utter confusion and hopelessness, east of the sun and west of the moon. So their comment is: “No comment.” Meanwhile the whole history of probabilities is coming to life, starting in the upper left-hand corner, like a sail.



29. GLAZUNOVIA

	The man with the red hat
	And the polar bear, is he here too?   
	The window giving on shade,   
	Is that here too?
	And all the little helps,
	My initials in the sky,
	The hay of an arctic summer night?
	
	The bear
	Drops dead in sight of the window.
	Lovely tribes have just moved to the north.
	In the flickering evening the martins grow denser.   
	Rivers of wings surround us and vast tribulation.



30. GRAND ABACUS

	Perhaps this valley too leads into the head of long-ago days.
	What, if not its commercial and etiolated visage, could break through the meadow wires?
	It placed a chair in the meadow and then went far away.
	People come to visit in summer, they do not think about the head.
	Soldiers come down to see the head. The stick hides from them.
	The heavens say, “Here I am, boys and girls!”
	The stick tries to hide in the noise. The leaves, happy, drift over the dusty meadow.
	“I’d like to see it,” someone said about the head, which has stopped pretending to be a town.
	Look! A ghastly change has come over it. The ears fall off--they are laughing people.
	The skin is perhaps children, they say, “We children, and are vague near the sea. The eyes--
	Wait! What large raindrops! The eyes--
	Wait, can’t you see them pattering, in the meadow, like a dog?
	The eyes are all glorious! And now the river comes to sweep away the last of us.
	Who knew it, at the beginning of the day?
	It is best to travel like a comet, with the others, though one does not see them.
	How far that bridle flashed! “Hurry up, children!”
	The birds fly back, they say, “We were lying,
	We do not want to fly away.” But it is already too late. The children have vanished.



31. GRAND GALOP

	All things seem mention of themselves
	And the names which stem from them branch out to other referents.
	Hugely, spring exists again. The weigila does its dusty thing
	In fire-hammered air. And garbage cans are heaved against
	The railing as the tulips yawn and crack open and fall apart.
	And today is Monday. Today’s lunch is: Spanish omelet, lettuce and tomato salad,
	Jello, milk and cookies. Tomorrow’s: sloppy joe on bun,
	Scalloped corn, stewed tomatoes, rice pudding and milk.
	The names we stole don’t remove us:
	We have moved on a little ahead of them
	And now it is time to wait again.
	Only waiting, the waiting: what fills up the time between?
	It is another kind of wait, waiting for the wait to be ended.
	Nothing takes up its fair share of time,
	The wait is built into the things just coming into their own.
	Nothing is partially incomplete, but the wait
	Invests everything like a climate.
	What time of day is it?
	Does anything matter?
	Yes, for you must wait to see what it is really like,
	This event rounding the corner
	Which will be unlike anything else and really
	Cause no surprise: it’s too ample.
	
	Water
	Drops from an air conditioner
	On those who pass underneath. It’s one of the sights of our town.
	Puaagh. Vomit. Puaaaaagh. More vomit. One who comes
	Walking dog on leash is distant to say how all this
	Changes the minute to an hour, the hour
	To the times of day, days to months, those easy-to-grasp entities,
	And the months to seasons, which are far other, foreign
	To our concept of time. Better the months
	They are almost persons--than these abstractions
	That sift like marble dust across the unfinished works of the studio
	Aging everything into a characterization of itself.
	Better the cleanup committee concern itself with
	Some item that is now little more than a feature
	Of some obsolete style- cornice or spandrel
	Out of the dimly remembered whole
	Which probably lacks true distinction. But if one may pick it up,
	Carry it over there, set it down,
	Then the work is redeemed at the end
	Under the smiling expanse of the sky
	That plays no favorites but in the same way
	Is honor only to those who have sought it.
	
	The dog barks, the caravan passes on.
	The words had a sort of bloom on them
	But were weightless, carrying past what was being said.
	“A nice time,” you think, “to go out:
	The early night is cool, but not
	Too anything. People parading with their pets
	Past lawns and vacant lots, as though these too were somehow imponderables
	Before going home to the decency of one’s private life
	Shut up behind doors, which is nobody’s business.
	It does matter a little to the others
	But only because it makes them realize how far their respect
	Has brought them. No one would dare to intrude.
	It is a night like many another
	With the sky now a bit impatient for today to be over
	Like a bored salesgirl shifting from foot to stockinged foot.”
	These khaki undershorts hung out on lines,
	The wind billowing among them, are we never to make a statement?
	And certain buildings we always pass which are never mentioned-
	It’s getting out of hand.
	As long as one has some sense that each thing knows its place
	All is well, but with the arrival and departure
	Of each new one overlapping so intensely in the semi-darkness
	It’s a bit mad. Too bad, I mean, that getting to know
	each just for a fleeting second
	Must be replaced by imperfect knowledge of the featureless whole,
	Like some pocket history of the world, so general
	As to constitute a sob or wail unrelated
	To any attempt at definition. And the minor eras
	Take on an importance out of all proportion to the story
	For it can no longer unwind, but must be kept on hand
	Indefinitely, like a first-aid kit no one ever uses
	Or a word in the dictionary that no one will ever look up.
	The custard is setting; meanwhile
	I not only have my own history to worry about
	But am forced to fret over insufficient details related to large
	Unfinished concepts that can never bring themselves to the point
	Of being, with or without my help, if any were forth-coming.
	
	It is just the movement of the caravan away
	Into an abstract night, with no
	Precise goal in view, and indeed not caring,
	That distributes this pause. Why be in a hurry
	To speed away in the opposite direction, toward the other end of infinity?
	For things can harden meaningfully in the moment of indecision.
	I cannot decide in which direction to walk
	But this doesn’t matter to me, and I might as well
	Decide to climb a mountain (it looks almost flat)
	As decide to go home
	Or to a bar or restaurant or to the home
	Of some friend as charming and ineffectual as I am
	Because these pauses are supposed to be life
	And they sink steel needles deep into the pores, as though to say
	There is no use trying to escape
	And it is all here anyway. And their steep, slippery sides defy
	Any notion of continuity. It is this
	That takes us back into what really is, it seems, history
	The lackluster, disorganized kind without dates
	That speaks out of the hollow trunk of a tree
	To warn away the merely polite, or those whose destiny
	Leaves them no time to quibble about the means,
	Which are not ends, and yet . . . What precisely is it
	About the time of day it is, the weather, that causes
	people to note it painstakingly in their diaries
	For them to read who shall come after?
	Surely it is because the ray of light
	Or gloom striking you this moment is hope
	In all its mature, matronly form, taking all things into account
	And reapportioning them according to size
	So that if one can’t say that this is the natural way
	It should have happened, at least one can have no cause for complaint
	Which is the same as having reached the end, wise
	In that expectation and enhanced by its fulfillment, or the absence of it.
	But we say, it cannot come to any such end
	As long as we are left around with no place to go.
	And yet it has ended, and the thing we have fulfilled we have become.
	
	Now it is the impulse of morning that makes
	My watch tick. As one who pokes his head
	Out from under a pile of blankets, the good and bad together,
	So this tangle of impossible resolutions and irresolutions:
	The desire to have fun, to make noise, and so to
	Add to the already all-but-illegible scrub-forest of
	graffiti on the shithouse wall.
	Someone is coming to get you:
	The mailman, or a butler enters with a letter on a tray
	Whose message is to change everything, but in the meantime
	One is to worry about one’s smell or dandruff or lost glasses-
	If only the curtain-raiser would end, but it is interminable.
	But there is this consolation:
	If it turns out to be not worth doing, I haven’t done it;
	If the sight appalls me, I have seen nothing;
	If the victory is pyrrhic, I haven’t won it.
	And so from a day replete with rumors
	Of things being done on the other side of the mountains
	A nucleus remains, a still-perfect possibility
	That can be kept indefinitely. And yet
	The groans of labor pains are deafening; one must
	Get up, get out and be on with it. Morning is for sissies like you
	But the real trials, the ones that separate the men from
	the boys, come later.
	
	Oregon was kinder to us. The streets
	Offered a variety of directions to the foot
	And bookstores where pornography is sold. But then
	One whiffs just a slight odor of madness in the air.
	They all got into their cars and drove away
	As in the end of a movie. So that it finally made no difference
	Whether this were the end or it was somewhere else:
	If it had to be somewhere it might as well be
	Here, on top of one. Here, as elsewhere,
	April advances new suggestions, and one may as well
	Move along with them, especially in view of
	The midnight-blue light that in turning itself inside out
	Offers something strange to the attention, a thing
	That is not itself, gnat whirling before my eyes
	At an incredible, tame velocity. Too pronounced after all
	To be that meaningless. And so on to afternoon
	On the desert, with oneself cleaned up, and the location
	Almost brand new what with the removal of gum wrappers, etc.
	But I was trying to tell you about a strange thing
	That happened to me, but this is no way to tell about it,
	By making it truly happen. It drifts away in fragments.
	And one is left sitting in the yard
	To try to write poetry
	Using what Wyatt and Surrey left around,
	Took up and put down again
	Like so much gorgeous raw material,
	As though it would always happen in some way
	And meanwhile since we are all advancing
	It is sure to come about in spite of everything
	On a Sunday, where you are left sitting
	In the shade that, as always, is just a little too cool.
	
	So there is whirling out at you from the not deep
	Emptiness the word “cock” or some other, brother and sister words
	With not much to be expected from them, though these
	Are the ones that waited so long for you and finally left, having given up hope.
	There is a note of desperation in one’s voice, pleading for them,
	And meanwhile the intensity thins and sharpens
	Its point, that is the thing it was going to ask.
	One has been waiting around all evening for it
	Before sleep had stopped definitively the eyes and ears
	Of all those who came as an audience.
	Still, that poetry does sometimes occur
	If only in creases in forgotten letters
	Packed away in trunks in the attic-things you forgot you had
	And what would it matter anyway,
	That recompense so precisely dosed
	As to seem the falling true of a perverse judgment.
	You forget how there could be a gasp of a new air
	Hidden in that jumble. And of course your forgetting
	Is a sign of just how much it matters to you:
	“It must have been important.”
	The lies fall like flaxen threads from the skies
	All over America, and the fact that some of them are true of course
	Doesn’t so much not matter as serve to justify
	The whole mad organizing force under the billows of correct delight.
	Surrey, your lute is getting an attack of nervous paralysis
	But there are, again, things to be sung of
	And this is one of them, only I would not dream of intruding on
	The frantic completeness, the all-purpose benevolence
	Of that still-moist garden where the tooting originates:
	Between intervals of clenched teeth, your venomous rondelay.
	
	Ask a hog what is happening. Go on. Ask him.
	The road just seems to vanish
	And not that far in the distance, either. The horizon must have been moved up.
	So it is that by limping carefully
	From one day to the next, one approaches a worn, round stone tower
	Crouching low in the hollow of a gulley
	With no door or window but a lot of old license plates
	Tacked up over a slit too narrow for a wrist to pass through
	And a sign:
	“Van Camp’s Pork and Beans,”
	From then on in: _angst_-colored skies, emotional withdrawals
	As the whole business starts to frighten even you,
	Its originator and promoter. The horizon returns
	As a smile of recognition this time, polite, unquestioning.
	How long ago high school graduation seems
	Yet it cannot have been so very long:
	One has traveled such a short distance.
	The styles haven’t changed much,
	And I still have a sweater and one or two other things I had then.
	It seems only yesterday that we saw
	The movie with the cows in it
	And turned to one at your side, who burped
	As morning saw a new garnet-and-pea-green order propose
	Itself out of the endless bathos, like science-fiction lumps.
	Impossible not to be moved by the tiny number
	Those people wore, indicating they should be raised to this or that power.
	But now we are at Cape Fear and the overland trail
	Is impassible, and a dense curtain of mist hangs over the sea.



32. HONESTLY,

	we could send you out there
	to join the cackle squad,
	but hey, that highly accomplished,
	thinly regarded equestrian--well there was no way
	he was going to join the others’ field trip.
	Wouldn’t put his head on the table.
	But here’s the thing:
	
	They had owned great dread,
	knew of a way to get away from here
	through ice and smoke
	always clutching her fingers, like it says
	to do.
	
	Once we were passionate about the police,
	yawned in the teeth of pixels,
	but a far rumor blanked us out.
	We bathed in moonshine.
	Now, experts disagree.
	Were we unhappy or sublime?
	We’ll have to wait until the next time
	an angel comes rapping at the door
	to rejoice docently.
	
	(I know there’s a way to do this.)



33. HOTEL LAUTRÉAMONT

	1
	
	Research has shown that ballads were produced by all of society
	working as a team. They didn’t just happen. There was no guesswork.
	The people, then, knew what they wanted and how to get it.
	We see the results in works as diverse as “Windsor Forest” and “The Wife of Usher’s Well.”   
	
	Working as a team, they didn’t just happen. There was no guesswork.
	The horns of elfland swing past, and in a few seconds
	we see the results in works as diverse as “Windsor Forest” and “The Wife of Usher’s Well,”
	or, on a more modern note, in the finale of the Sibelius violin concerto.
	
	The horns of elfland swing past, and in a few seconds
	the world, as we know it, sinks into dementia, proving narrative passé,
	or in the finale of the Sibelius violin concerto.
	Not to worry, many hands are making work light again.
	
	The world, as we know it, sinks into dementia, proving narrative passé.
	In any case the ruling was long overdue.
	Not to worry, many hands are making work light again,
	so we stay indoors. The quest was only another adventure.
	
	
	2
	
	In any case, the ruling was long overdue.
	The people are beside themselves with rapture
	so we stay indoors. The quest was only another adventure
	and the solution problematic, at any rate far off in the future.
	
	The people are beside themselves with rapture
	yet no one thinks to question the source of so much collective euphoria,
	and the solution: problematic, at any rate far off in the future.
	The saxophone wails, the martini glass is drained.
	
	Yet no one thinks to question the source of so much collective euphoria.
	In troubled times one looked to the shaman or priest for comfort and counsel.
	The saxophone wails, the martini glass is drained,
	and night like black swansdown settles on the city.
	
	In troubled times one looked to the shaman or priest for comfort and counsel.
	Now, only the willing are fated to receive death as a reward,
	and night like black swansdown settles on the city.
	If we tried to leave, would being naked help us?
	
	
	3
	
	Now, only the willing are fated to receive death as a reward.
	Children twist hula-hoops, imagining a door to the outside.
	If we tried to leave, would being naked help us?
	And what of older, lighter concerns? What of the river?
	
	Children twist hula-hoops, imagining a door to the outside,
	when all we think of is how much we can carry with us.
	And what of older, lighter concerns? What of the river?
	All the behemoths have filed through the maze of time.
	
	When all we think of is how much we can carry with us
	small wonder that those at home sit, nervous, by the unlit grate.
	All the behemoths have filed through the maze of time.
	It remains for us to come to terms with our commonality.
	
	Small wonder that those at home sit nervous by the unlit grate.
	It was their choice, after all, that spurred us to feats of the imagination.
	It remains for us to come to terms with our commonality
	and in so doing deprive time of further hostages.
	
	
	4
	
	It was their choice, after all, that spurred us to feats of the imagination.
	Now, silently as one mounts a stair we emerge into the open
	and in so doing deprive time of further hostages,
	to end the standoff that history long ago began.
	
	Now, silently as one mounts a stair we emerge into the open
	but it is shrouded, veiled: We must have made some ghastly error.
	To end the standoff that history long ago began
	must we thrust ever onward, into perversity?
	
	But it is shrouded, veiled: We must have made some ghastly error.
	You mop your forehead with a rose, recommending its thorns.
	Must we thrust ever onward, into perversity?
	Only night knows for sure; the secret is safe with her.
	
	You mop your forehead with a rose, recommending its thorns.
	Research has shown that ballads were produced by all of society;
	only night knows for sure. The secret is safe with her:
	The people, then, knew what they wanted and how to get it.



34. HOW TO CONTINUE

	Oh there once was a woman
	and she kept a shop
	selling trinkets to tourists
	not far from a dock
	who came to see what life could be
	far back on the island.
	
	And it was always a party there
	always different but very nice
	New friends to give you advice
	or fall in love with you which is nice
	and each grew so perfectly from the other
	it was a marvel of poetry
	and irony
	
	And in this unsafe quarter
	much was scary and dirty
	but no one seemed to mind
	very much
	the parties went on from house to house
	There were friends and lovers galore
	all around the store
	There was moonshine in winter
	and starshine in summer
	and everybody was happy to have discovered
	what they discovered
	
	And then one day the ship sailed away
	There were no more dreamers just sleepers
	in heavy attitudes on the dock
	moving as if they knew how
	among the trinkets and the souvenirs
	the random shops of modern furniture
	and a gale came and said
	it is time to take all of you away
	from the tops of the trees to the little houses
	on little paths so startled
	
	And when it became time to go
	they none of them would leave without the other
	for they said we are all one here
	and if one of us goes the other will not go
	and the wind whispered it to the stars
	the people all got up to go
	and looked back on love



35. THE ICE-CREAM WARS

	Although I mean it, and project the meaning
	As hard as I can into its brushed-metal surface,
	It cannot, in this deteriorating climate, pick up
	Where I leave off. It sees the Japanese text
	(About two men making love on a foam-rubber bed)
	As among the most massive secretions of the human spirit.
	Its part is in the shade, beyond the iron spikes of the fence,
	Mixing red with blue. As the day wears on
	Those who come to seem reasonable are shouted down
	(_Why you old goat!_ Look who’s talkin’. Let’s see you
	Climb off that tower--the waterworks architecture, both stupid and
	Grandly humorous at the same time, is a kind of mask for him,
	Like a seal’s face. Time and the weather
	Don’t always go hand in hand, as here: sometimes
	One is slanted sideways, disappears for awhile.
	Then later it’s forget-me-not time, and rapturous
	Clouds appear above the lawn, and the rose tells
	The old old story, the pearl of the orient, occluded
	And still apt to rise at times).
	
	A few black smudges
	On the outer boulevards, like squashed midges
	And the truth becomes a hole, something one has always known,
	A heaviness in the trees, and no one can say
	Where it comes from, or how long it will stay--
	
	A randomness, a darkness of one’s own.



36. THE IDIOT

	Oh how this sullen, careless world
	Ignorant of me is! Those rocks, those homes
	Know not the touch of my flesh, nor is there one tree
	Whose shade has known me for a friend.
	I’ve wandered the wide world over.
	No man I’ve known, no friendly beast
	Has come and put its nose into my hands.
	No maid has welcomed my face with a kiss.
	
	Yet once, as I took passage
	From Gibraltar to Cape Horn
	I met some friendly mariners on the boat
	And as we struggled to keep the ship from sinking
	In a storm, the very waves seemed friendly, and the sound
	The spray made as it hit the front of the boat.



37. IF THE BIRDS KNEW

	It is better this year.
	And the clothes they wear
	In the gray unweeded sky of our earth
	There is no possibility of change
	Because all of the true fragments are here.
	So I was glad of the fog’s
	Taking me to you
	Undetermined summer thing eaten
	Of grief and passage--where you stay,
	The wheel is ready to turn again.
	When you have gone it will light up,
	The shadow of the spokes to drown
	Your departure where the summer knells
	Speak to grown dawn.
	There is after all a kind of promise
	To the affair of the waiting weather.
	We have learned not to be tired
	Among the lanterns of this year of sleep
	But someone pays--no transparency
	Has ever hardened us before
	To long piers of silence, and hedges
	Of understanding, difficult passing
	From one lesson to the next and the coldness
	Of the consistency of our lives
	Devotion to immaculate danger.
	A leaf would have settled the disturbance
	Of the atmosphere, but at that high
	Valley’s point disbanded
	Clouds that rocks smote newly
	The person or persons involved
	Parading slowly through the sunlit fields
	Not only as though the danger did not exist
	But as though the birds were in on the secret.



38. IF YOU SAID YOU WOULD COME WITH ME

	In town it was very urban but in the country cows were covering the hills. The clouds were near and very moist. I was walking along the pavement with Anna, enjoying the scattered scenery. Suddenly a sound like a deep bell came from behind us. We both turned to look. “It’s the words you spoke in the past, coming back to haunt you,” Anna explained. “They always do, you know.”
	Indeed I did. Many times this deep bell-like tone had intruded itself on my thoughts, scrambling them at first, then rearranging them in apple-pie order. “Two crows,” the voice seemed to say, “were sitting on a sundial in the God-given sunlight. Then one flew away.”
	“Yes . . . _and then_?” I wanted to ask, but I kept silent. We turned into a courtyard and walked up several flights of stairs to the roof, where a party was in progress. “This is my friend Hans,” Anna said by way of introduction. No one paid much attention and several guests moved away to the balustrade to admire the view of orchards and vineyards, approaching their autumn glory. One of the women however came to greet us in a friendly manner. I was wondering if this was a “harvest home,” a phrase I had often heard but never understood.
	“Welcome to my home . . . well, to our home,” the woman said gaily. “As you can see, the grapes are being harvested.” It seemed she could read my mind. “They say this year’s vintage will be a mediocre one, but the sight is lovely, nonetheless. Don’t you agree, Mr. . . .”
	“Hans,” I replied curtly. The prospect was indeed a lovely one, but I wanted to leave. Making some excuse I guided Anna by the elbow toward the stairs and we left.
	“That wasn’t polite of you,” she said dryly.
	“Honey, I’ve had enough of people who can read your mind. When I want it done I’ll go to a mind reader.”
	“I happen to be one and I can tell you what you’re thinking is false. Listen to what the big bell says: ‘We are all strangers on our own turf, in our own time.’ You should have paid attention. Now adjustments will have to be made.”



39. INSTEAD OF LOSING

	Anyone, growing up in a space you hadn’t used yet
	would’ve done the same: bother the family’s bickering
	to head straight into the channel. My, those times
	crackled near about us, from sickly melodrama
	instead of losing, and the odd confusion . . . confusion.
	
	I thought of it then, and in the mountains.
	During the day we perforated the eponymous city limits
	and then some. No one knew all about us
	but some knew plenty. It was time to leave that town
	for an empty drawer
	into which they sailed. Some of the eleven thousand
	virgins were getting queasy. I say, stop the ship!
	No can do. Here come the bald arbiters
	with their eyes on chains, just so, like glasses.
	Heck, it’s only a muskrat
	that’s seen better years, when things were medieval
	and gold . . .
	
	So you people in the front,
	leave. You see them. And you understand it all.
	It doesn’t end, night’s sorcery notwithstanding.
	Would you have preferred to be a grownup in earlier times
	than the child can contain or imagine?
	Or is right now the answer--you know, the radio
	we heard news on late at night,
	our checkered fortunes so pretty.
	Here’s your ton of plumes, and your Red Seal Records.
	The whole embrace.



40. THE INSTRUCTION MANUAL

	As I sit looking out of a window of the building
	I wish I did not have to write the instruction manual on the uses of a new metal.
	I look down into the street and see people, each walking with an inner peace,   
	And envy them--they are so far away from me!
	Not one of them has to worry about getting out this manual on schedule.   
	And, as my way is, I begin to dream, resting my elbows on the desk and leaning out of the window a little,
	Of dim Guadalajara! City of rose-colored flowers!
	City I wanted most to see, and most did not see, in Mexico!
	But I fancy I see, under the press of having to write the instruction manual,   
	Your public square, city, with its elaborate little bandstand!
	The band is playing _Scheherazade_ by Rimsky-Korsakov.
	Around stand the flower girls, handing out rose- and lemon-colored flowers,   
	Each attractive in her rose-and-blue striped dress (Oh! such shades of rose and blue),
	And nearby is the little white booth where women in green serve you green and yellow fruit.
	The couples are parading; everyone is in a holiday mood.
	First, leading the parade, is a dapper fellow
	Clothed in deep blue. On his head sits a white hat
	And he wears a mustache, which has been trimmed for the occasion.
	His dear one, his wife, is young and pretty; her shawl is rose, pink, and white.   
	Her slippers are patent leather, in the American fashion,
	And she carries a fan, for she is modest, and does not want the crowd to see her face too often.
	But everybody is so busy with his wife or loved one
	I doubt they would notice the mustachioed man’s wife.
	Here come the boys! They are skipping and throwing little things on the sidewalk
	Which is made of gray tile. One of them, a little older, has a toothpick in his teeth.
	He is silenter than the rest, and affects not to notice the pretty young girls in white.
	But his friends notice them, and shout their jeers at the laughing girls.   
	Yet soon all this will cease, with the deepening of their years,
	And love bring each to the parade grounds for another reason.
	But I have lost sight of the young fellow with the toothpick.
	Wait--there he is--on the other side of the bandstand,
	Secluded from his friends, in earnest talk with a young girl
	Of fourteen or fifteen. I try to hear what they are saying
	But it seems they are just mumbling something--shy words of love, probably.
	She is slightly taller than he, and looks quietly down into his sincere eyes.   
	She is wearing white. The breeze ruffles her long fine black hair against her olive cheek.
	Obviously she is in love. The boy, the young boy with the toothpick, he is in love too;
	His eyes show it. Turning from this couple,
	I see there is an intermission in the concert.
	The paraders are resting and sipping drinks through straws
	(The drinks are dispensed from a large glass crock by a lady in dark blue),   
	And the musicians mingle among them, in their creamy white uniforms, and talk
	About the weather, perhaps, or how their kids are doing at school.
	
	Let us take this opportunity to tiptoe into one of the side streets.   
	Here you may see one of those white houses with green trim   
	That are so popular here. Look--I told you!
	It is cool and dim inside, but the patio is sunny.
	An old woman in gray sits there, fanning herself with a palm leaf fan.   
	She welcomes us to her patio, and offers us a cooling drink.   
	“My son is in Mexico City,” she says. “He would welcome you too   
	If he were here. But his job is with a bank there.
	Look, here is a photograph of him.”
	And a dark-skinned lad with pearly teeth grins out at us from the worn leather frame.
	We thank her for her hospitality, for it is getting late
	And we must catch a view of the city, before we leave, from a good high place.
	That church tower will do--the faded pink one, there against the fierce blue of the sky. Slowly we enter.
	The caretaker, an old man dressed in brown and gray, asks us how long we have been in the city, and how we like it here.
	His daughter is scrubbing the steps--she nods to us as we pass into the tower.
	Soon we have reached the top, and the whole network of the city extends before us.
	There is the rich quarter, with its houses of pink and white, and its crumbling, leafy terraces.
	There is the poorer quarter, its homes a deep blue.
	There is the market, where men are selling hats and swatting flies
	And there is the public library, painted several shades of pale green and beige.
	Look! There is the square we just came from, with the promenaders.   
	There are fewer of them, now that the heat of the day has increased,   
	But the young boy and girl still lurk in the shadows of the bandstand.   
	And there is the home of the little old lady--
	She is still sitting in the patio, fanning herself.
	How limited, but how complete withal, has been our experience of Guadalajara!
	We have seen young love, married love, and the love of an aged mother for her son.
	We have heard the music, tasted the drinks, and looked at colored houses.   
	What more is there to do, except stay? And that we cannot do.
	And as a last breeze freshens the top of the weathered old tower, I turn my gaze
	Back to the instruction manual which has made me dream of Guadalajara.



41. IT WAS RAINING IN THE CAPITAL

	It was raining in the capital
	And for many days and nights
	The one they called the Aquarian
	Had stayed alone with her delight.
	
	What with the winter and its business
	It had fallen to one side
	And she had only recently picked it up
	Where the other had died.
	
	Between the pages of the newspaper
	It smiled like a face.
	Next to the drugstore on the corner
	It looked to another place.
	
	Or it would just hang around
	Like sullen clouds over the sun.
	But--this was the point--it was real
	To her and to everyone.
	
	For spring had entered the capital
	Walking on gigantic feet.
	The smell of witch hazel indoors
	Changed to narcissus in the street.
	
	She thought she had seen all this before:
	Bundles of new, fresh flowers,
	All changing, pressing upward
	To the distant office towers.
	
	Until now nothing had been easy,
	Hemmed in by all that shit--
	Horseshit, dogshit, birdshit, manshit-
	Yes, she remembered having said it,
	
	Having spoken in that way, thinking
	There could be no road ahead,
	Sobbing into the intractable presence of it
	As one weeps alone in bed.
	
	Its chamber was narrower than a seed
	Yet when the doorbell rang
	It reduced all that living to air
	As “kyrie eleison” it sang.
	
	Hearing that music he had once known
	But now forgotten, the man,
	The one who had waited casually in the dark
	Turned to smile at the door’s span.
	
	He smiled and shrugged--a lesson
	In the newspaper no longer
	But fed by the ink and paper
	Into a sign of something stronger
	
	Who reads the news and takes the bus
	Going to work each day
	But who was never born of woman
	Nor formed of the earth’s clay.
	
	Then what unholy bridegroom
	Did the Aquarian foretell?
	Or was such lively intelligence
	Only the breath of hell?
	
	It scarcely mattered at the moment
	And it shall never matter at all
	Since the moment will not be replaced
	But stand, poised for its fall,
	
	Forever. “This is what my learning
	Teaches,” the Aquarian said,
	“To absorb life through the pores
	For the life around you is dead.”
	
	The sun came out in the capital
	Just before it set.
	The lovely death’s head shone in the sky
	As though these two had never met.



42. LAST MONTH

	No changes of support--only
	Patches of gray, here where sunlight fell.
	The house seems heavier
	Now that they have gone away.   
	In fact it emptied in record time.   
	When the flat table used to result
	A match recedes, slowly, into the night.
	The academy of the future is   
	Opening its doors and willing
	The fruitless sunlight streams into domes,   
	The chairs piled high with books and papers.
	
	The sedate one is this month’s skittish one   
	Confirming the property that,
	A timeless value, has changed hands.
	And you could have a new automobile
	Ping pong set and garage, but the thief   
	Stole everything like a miracle.
	In his book there was a picture of treason only   
	And in the garden, cries and colors.



43. LATE ECHO

	Alone with our madness and favorite flower
	We see that there really is nothing left to write about.
	Or rather, it is necessary to write about the same old things
	In the same way, repeating the same things over and over
	For love to continue and be gradually different.
	
	Beehives and ants have to be re-examined eternally
	And the color of the day put in
	Hundreds of times and varied from summer to winter
	For it to get slowed down to the pace of an authentic
	Saraband and huddle there, alive and resting.
	
	Only then can the chronic inattention
	Of our lives drape itself around us, conciliatory
	And with one eye on those long tan plush shadows
	That speak so deeply into our unprepared knowledge
	Of ourselves, the talking engines of our day.



44. LATE-ISH

	The girl in the green ski chasuble
	hasn’t yet graduated from radio school.
	Let’s pay attention.
	
	Looking ahead, why, he waved his mouth along.
	Doesn’t life get difficult in the summer?
	The divine medicine for it collapsed
	in front of the shortstop,
	who took off like a battalion.
	
	Crowds of older people who would read this
	happily, willingly, then walking into night’s embrace,
	then kiss. _“To turn you out, to turn you out!”_
	Sometimes an arm is accused:
	You could have felt it, the blue shirts,
	phlegm central, four times a night.
	But what does that get me?
	Light refreshments.
	
	When the suburban demonstration kind of shrunk
	you put your foot out,
	leave it or kiss it
	or even two years ago,
	Charmaine here tells us.
	I think I should stay . . .    
	
	Cross-eyed sonofabitch . . .    
	He liked him, he could tell. A de-happening.
	The gangster no longer wanted to sleep with him,
	but what the heck. With time off
	for actual fuzz collected . . . All right, boys.
	Cheap murders, peach driven . . . I seen enough of those
	samples along the way.



45. LEAVE THE HAND IN

	Furthermore, Mr. Tuttle used to have to run in the streets.   
	Now, each time friendship happens, they’re fully booked.   
	Sporting with amaryllis in the shade is all fine and good,   
	but when your sparring partner gets there first   
	you wonder if it was all worth it. “Yes, why do it?”   
	I’m on hold. It will take quite a lot for this music   
	to grow on me. I meant no harm. I’ve helped him   
	from getting stuck before. Dumb thing. All my appetites are friendly.   
	Children too are free to go and come as they please.   
	I ask you only to choose between us, then shut down this election.   
	But don’t reveal too much of your hand at any given time.   
	Then up and pipes the major, leave the hand in,   
	or change the vows. The bold, enduring menace of courtship is upon us   
	like the plague, and none of us can say what trouble   
	will be precipitated once it has had its way with us.   
	Our home is marshland. After dinner was wraparound.   
	You got a tender little look at it.   
	
	Outside, it never did turn golden.



46. LEEWARD

	Up, up it rises,
	the penumbra,
	for all to see.
	
	Heaven is open--
	make no mistake.
	That row of books
	just slid over by itself,
	and a guy, a tubby guy,
	came to look at it, sneer,
	snicker, be off again-only,
	ouch! There are other strands
	in that equation, he sees now, not
	too late. The green spoilage,
	all other things being equal,
	may be contained.
	
	Only wear your shirt right.
	Wash it again
	and yet again.
	The bear is still around
	whose hide you sold,
	wondering why children fear him.
	Is it too much to ask
	safe conduct, yes, for him too
	the travesty of night
	we all must wear
	for awhile?



47. LIKE A SENTENCE

	How little we know,   
	and when we know it!
	
	It was prettily said that “No man
	hath an abundance of cows on the plain, nor shards
	in his cupboard.” Wait! I think I know who said that! It was . . .
	
	Never mind, dears, the afternoon
	will fold you up, along with preoccupations   
	that now seem so important, until only a child   
	running around on a unicycle occupies center stage.   
	Then what will you make of walls? And I fear you   
	will have to come up with something,
	
	be it a terraced gambit above the sea
	or gossip overheard in the marketplace.
	For you see, it becomes you to be chastened:
	for the old to envy the young,
	and for youth to fear not getting older,
	where the paths through the elms, the carnivals, begin.
	
	And it was said of Gyges that his ring
	attracted those who saw him not,
	just as those who wandered through him were aware
	only of a certain stillness, such as precedes an earache,
	while lumberjacks in headbands came down to see what all the fuss was about,
	whether it was something they could be part of
	_sans_ affront to self-esteem.
	And those temple hyenas who had seen enough,
	nostrils aflare, fur backing up in the breeze,
	were no place you could count on,
	having taken a proverbial powder
	as rifle butts received another notch.
	I, meanwhile . . . I was going to say I had squandered spring   
	when summer came along and took it from me   
	like a terrier a lady has asked one to hold for a moment
	while she adjusts her stocking in the mirror of a weighing machine.   
	But here it is winter, and wrong
	to speak of other seasons as though they exist.   
	Time has only an agenda
	in the wallet at his back, while we
	who think we know where we are going unfazed
	end up in brilliant woods, nourished more than we can know
	by the unexpectedness of ice and stars
	and crackling tears. We’ll just have to make a go of it,
	a run for it. And should the smell of baking cookies appease
	one or the other of the olfactory senses, climb down   
	into this wagonload of prisoners.
	
	The meter will be screamingly clear then,
	the rhythms unbounced, for though we came
	to life as to a school, we must leave it without graduating   
	even as an ominous wind puffs out the sails
	of proud feluccas who don’t know where they’re headed,   
	only that a motion is etched there, shaking to be free.



48. A MAN OF WORDS

	His case inspires interest
	But little sympathy; it is smaller
	Than at first appeared. Does the furst nettle
	Make any difference as what grows
	Becomes a skit? Three sides enclosed,
	The fourth open to a wash of the weather,
	Exits and entrances, gestures theatrically meant
	To punctuate like doubled-over weeds as
	The garden fills up with snow?
	Ah, but this would have been another, quite other
	Entertainment, not the metallic taste
	In my mouth as I look away, density black as gunpowder
	In the angles where the grass writing goes on,
	Rose-red in unexpected places like the pressure
	Of fingers on a book suddenly snapped shut.
	
	Those tangled versions of the truth are
	Combed out, the snarls ripped out
	And spread around. Behind the mask
	Is still a continental appreciation
	Of what is fine, rarely appears and when it does is already
	Dying on the breeze that brought it to the threshold
	Of speech. The story worn out from telling.
	All diaries are alike, clear and cold, with
	The outlook for continued cold. They are placed
	Horizontal, parallel to the earth,
	Like the unencumbering dead. Just time to reread this
	And the past slips through your fingers, wishing you were
	 there.



49. MANY WAGONS AGO

	At furst it was as though you had passed,
	But then no, I said, he is still here.
	Forehead refreshed. A light is kindled. And
	Another. But no I said
	
	Nothing in this wide berth of lights like weeds
	Stays to listen. Doubled up, fun is inside,
	The lair a surface compact with the night.
	It needs only one intervention,
	
	A stitch, two, three, and then you see
	How it is all false equation planted with
	Enchanting blue shrubbery on each terrace
	That night produces, and they are backing up.
	
	How easily we could spell if we could follow,
	Like thread looped through the eye of a needle,
	The grooves of light. It resists. But we stay behind, among them,
	The injured, the adored.



50. THE MAUVE NOTEBOOK

	 “Say it enough times and it’s August.”
	 _--Geoffrey G. O’Brien, “Three Years”_
	
	On a set you need bush rebels,
	that numbing little chair while passing.
	If we knock ‘em out
	seven precincts are going to show up.
	It looks like you don’t need oil.
	I think it’ll be fine.
	Did she think that might be good,
	or for the man who listens to it,
	nothing to be done or thought,
	(section pending)?
	
	Or for the man who listens to it,
	an abrupt yawn, history or the other.
	Home economics.  Dr. Singalong
	can’t find his way back.
	I don’t know about that, but
	at her lamps do you still see
	the awkward ceremony, too serious?
	Leave it that way, imperfect start beyond
	where I was going.
	Prison outside the perpetual sonata,
	the only anxiety,
	since you wonder what they don’t do,
	from your red zero heart page
	waiting to touch your face.
	
	Although they know about it and
	it literally doesn’t exist,
	no, stay up and go to sleep,
	unless it falls on the right side of the brain
	positioned for so many forgeries,
	moon nugget . . .
	
	I don’t cut ‘em any slack.
	Assault on a clean front,
	that’s a lot to be turning into.
	
	These residents, they start throwing ‘em early.
	Continue to open your door to mud!                                                          
	
	Take the noon balloon to Rangoon,
	gutta percha academy,
	to the place of ice cream,
	
	because, really, what difference does it make?
	When it was time you went home.
	Tears and flowers,
	
	see how dirty your hands are.
	We had a lovely dime.
	Soon it will be seven I ask you.



51. MEAN PARTICLES

	Sometimes something like a second
	washes the base of this street.
	The father and his two assistants
	are given permission to go.
	One of them, a woman, asks, “Why
	did we come here in the first place,
	to this citadel of dampness?”
	
	Some days are worse than others,
	even if we can’t believe in them.
	But that was never a concern of mine,
	reasoned the patient.
	
	Sing, scroll, or never be blasted by us
	into marmoreal meaning, or the fist for it.
	Kudos to the prince who journeyed here
	to negotiate our release, if you can believe it.
	
	You’re right. The ballads are retreating
	back into the atmosphere.
	They won’t be coming round again.
	Make your peace.



52. MEANINGFUL LOVE

	What the bad news was
	became apparent too late
	for us to do anything good about it.
	
	I was offered no urgent dreaming,
	didn’t need a name or anything.
	Everything was taken care of.
	
	In the medium-size city of my awareness
	voles are building colossi.
	The blue room is over there.
	
	He put out no feelers.
	The day was all as one to him.
	Some days he never leaves his room
	and those are the best days,
	by far.
	
	There were morose gardens farther down the slope,
	anthills that looked like they belonged there.
	The sausages were undercooked, 
	the wine too cold, the bread molten.
	Who said to bring sweaters?
	The climate’s not that dependable.
	
	The Atlantic crawled slowly to the left
	pinning a message on the unbound golden hair of sleeping maidens,
	a ruse for next time,
	
	where fire and water are rampant in the streets,
	the gate closed--no visitors today
	or any evident heartbeat.
	
	I got rid of the book of fairy tales,
	pawned my old car, bought a ticket to the funhouse,
	found myself back here at six o’clock,
	pondering “possible side effects.”
	
	There was no harm in loving then,
	no certain good either. But love was loving servants
	or bosses. No straight road issuing from it.
	Leaves around the door are penciled losses.
	Twenty years to fix it.
	Asters bloom one way or another.



53. MORNING JITTERS

	And the storm re-established itself
	As a hole in the sheet of time
	And of the weariness of the world,
	And all the old work that remains to be done on its surface.
	Came morning and the husband was back on the shore
	To ask another favor of the fish,
	Leviathan now, patience wearing thin. Whose answer
	Bubbled out of the waves’ crenellations:
	
	_“Too late! Yet if you analyze
	The abstract good fortune that has brought you
	To this floor, you must also unpluck the bees
	Immured in the hive of your mind and bring the nuisance
	And the glory into sharper focus. Why,
	Others too will have implored before forgetting
	To remove a stick of night from the scrub-forest
	That keeps us wondering about ourselves
	Until luck or nepotism has run its course! Only I say,
	Your uniqueness isn’t that unique
	And doors must close in the shaved head
	Before they can spring ajar. Take this.
	Its promise equals power.”_ To be shaken thus
	Vehemently back into one’s trance doesn’t promise
	Any petitioner much, even the servile ones. But night in its singleness
	Of motive rewards all equally for what cannot
	Appear disinterested survival tactics from the vantage
	Point of some rival planet. Things go on being the same,
	As darkness and ships ruffle the sky.



54. MOTTLED TUESDAY

	Something was about to go laughably wrong,
	whether directly at home or here,
	on this random shoal pleading with its eyes
	till it too breaks loose, caught in a hail of references.
	I’ll add one more scoop
	to the pile of retail.
	
	Hey, you’re doing it, like I didn’t tell you
	to, my sinking laundry boat, point of departure,
	my white pomegranate, my swizzle stick.
	We’re leaving again of our own volition
	for bogus patterned plains streaked by canals,
	maybe. Amorous ghosts will pursue us
	for a time, but sometimes they get, you know, confused and
	forget to stop when we do, as they continue to populate this
	fertile land with their own bizarre self-imaginings.
	Here’s hoping the referral goes tidily, O brother.
	Chime authoritatively with the pop-ups and extras.
	Keep your units pliable and folded,
	the recourse a mere specter, like you have it coming to you,
	awash with the new day and its abominable antithesis,
	OK? Don’t be able to make that distinction.



55. MY EROTIC DOUBLE

	He says he doesn’t feel like working today.
	It’s just as well. Here in the shade
	Behind the house, protected from street noises,   
	One can go over all kinds of old feeling,
	Throw some away, keep others.
	                                             The wordplay
	Between us gets very intense when there are   
	Fewer feelings around to confuse things.
	Another go-round? No, but the last things
	You always find to say are charming, and rescue me   
	Before the night does. We are afloat
	On our dreams as on a barge made of ice,
	Shot through with questions and fissures of starlight   
	That keep us awake, thinking about the dreams
	As they are happening. Some occurrence. You said it.
	
	I said it but I can hide it. But I choose not to.   
	Thank you. You are a very pleasant person.   
	Thank you. You are too.



56. THE NEW HIGHER

	You meant more than life to me. I lived through
	you not knowing, not knowing I was living.
	I learned that you called for me. I came to where
	you were living, up a stair. There was no one there.
	No one to appreciate me. The legality of it
	upset a chair. Many times to celebrate
	we were called together and where
	we had been there was nothing there,
	nothing that is anywhere. We passed obliquely,
	leaving no stare. When the sun was done muttering,
	in an optimistic way, it was time to leave that there.
	
	Blithely passing in and out of where, blushing shyly
	at the tag on the overcoat near the window where
	the outside crept away, I put aside the there and now.
	Now it was time to stumble anew,
	blacking out when time came in the window.
	There was not much of it left.
	I laughed and put my hands shyly
	across your eyes. Can you see now?
	Yes I can see I am only in the where
	where the blossoming stream takes off, under your window.
	Go presently you said. Go from my window.
	I am in love with your window I cannot undermine
	it, I said.



57. NOT ONLY / BUT ALSO 

	Having transferred the one to the other
	And living on the plain of insistent self-knowledge
	Just outside the great city, I see many
	Who come and go, and being myself involved in distant places
	
	Ask how they adjust to
	The light that rains on the traveller’s back
	And pushes out before him. It is always “the journey;
	And we are never sure if these are preparations
	Or a welcome back to the old circle of stone posts
	
	That was there before the first invention
	And now seems a place of vines and muted shimmers
	And sighing at noon
	As opposed to
	
	The terrain of stars, the robe
	Of only that journey. You adjusted to all that
	Over a long period of years. When we next set out
	I had spent years in your company
	And was now turning back, half amused, half afraid,
	Having in any case left something important back home
	Which I could not continue without,
	An invention so simple I could never figure out
	How they spent so many ages without discovering it.
	I would have found it, altered it
	To be my shape, probably in my own lifetime,
	In a decade, in just a few years.



58. THE ONE THING THAT CAN SAVE AMERICA

	Is anything central?
	Orchards flung out on the land,
	Urban forests, rustic plantations, knee-high hills?
	Are place names central?
	Elm Grove, Adcock Corner, Story Book Farm?
	As they concur with a rush at eye level
	Beating themselves into eyes which have had enough
	Thank you, no more thank you.
	And they come on like scenery mingled with darkness
	The damp plains, overgrown suburbs,
	Places of known civic pride, of civil obscurity.
	
	These are connected to my version of America
	But the juice is elsewhere.
	This morning as I walked out of your room
	After breakfast crosshatched with
	Backward and forward glances, backward into light,
	Forward into unfamiliar light,
	Was it our doing, and was it
	The material, the lumber of life, or of lives
	We were measuring, counting?
	A mood soon to be forgotten
	In crossed girders of light, cool downtown shadow
	In this morning that has seized us again?
	
	I know that I braid too much on my own
	Snapped-off perceptions of things as they come to me.
	They are private and always will be.
	Where then are the private turns of event
	Destined to bloom later like golden chimes
	Released over a city from a highest tower?
	The quirky things that happen to me, and I tell you,
	And you know instantly what I mean?
	What remote orchard reached by winding roads
	Hides them? Where are these roots?
	
	It is the lumps and trials
	That tell us whether we shall be known
	And whether our fate can be exemplary, like a star.
	All the rest is waiting
	For a letter that never arrives,
	Day after day, the exasperation
	Until finally you have ripped it open not knowing what it is,
	The two envelope halves lying on a plate.
	The message was wise, and seemingly
	Dictated a long time ago.
	Its truth is timeless, but its time has still
	Not arrived, telling of danger, and the mostly limited
	Steps that can be taken against danger
	Now and in the future, in cool yards,
	In quiet small houses in the country,
	Our country, in fenced areas, in cool shady streets.



59. OSTENSIBLY

	One might like to rest or read.
	Take walks, celebrate the kitchen table,
	Pat the dog absent-mindedly, meanwhile
	Thinking gloomy thoughts--so many separate
	Ways of doing, one is uncertain
	What the future is going to do
	About this. Will it reveal itself again,
	Or only in the artificial calm
	Of one person’s resolve to do better
	Yet strike a harder bargain,
	Next time?
	
	Gardeners cannot make the world
	Nor witches undo it, yet
	The mad doctor is secure
	In his thick-walled laboratory,
	Behind evergreen borders black now
	Against the snow, precise as stocking seams
	Pulled straight again. There is never
	Any news from that side.
	
	A rigidity that may well be permanent
	Seems to have taken over. The pendulum
	Is stilled; the rush
	Of season into season ostensibly incomplete.
	A perverse order has been laid
	There at the joint where the year branches
	Into artifice one way, into a votive
	Lassitude the other way, but that is stalled:
	An old discolored snapshot
	That soon fades away.
	
	And so there is no spectator
	And no agent to cry Enough,
	That the battle chime is stilled,
	The defeated memory gracious as flowers
	And therefore also permanent in its way--
	I mean they endure, are always around,
	And even when they are not, their names are,
	A fortified dose of the solid,
	Livable adventure.
	
	And from growing dim, the coals
	Fall alight. There are two ways to be.
	You must try getting up from the table
	And sitting down relaxed in another country
	Wearing red suspenders
	Toward one’s own space and time.



60. OUR YOUTH

	of bricks . . . Who built it? Like some crazy balloon
	When love leans on us
	Its nights . . . The velvety pavement sticks to our feet.
	The dead puppies turn us back on love.
	
	Where we are. Sometimes
	The brick arches led to a room like a bubble, that broke when you entered it
	And sometimes to a fallen leaf.
	We got crazy with emotion, showing how much we knew.
	
	The Arabs took us. We knew
	The dead horses. We were discovering coffee,
	How it is to be drunk hot, with bare feet
	In Canada. And the immortal music of Chopin
	
	Which we had been discovering for several months
	Since we were fourteen years old. And coffee grounds,
	And the wonder of hands, and the wonder of the day
	When the child discovers her first dead hand.
	
	Do you know it? Hasn’t she
	Observed you too? Haven’t you been observed to her?
	My, haven’t the fowers been? Is the evil
	In’t? What window? What did you say there?



61. AN OUTING

	“These things . . . that you are going to have--
	Are you paid specially for them?”
	
	“Yes.”
	
	“And when it is over, do you insist,
	Do you insist that the visitor leave the room?”
	“My activity is as random as the wind.
	Why should I insist? The visitor is free to go,
	Or to stay, as he chooses.”
	
	Are you folks just going out for a walk
	And if you are would you check the time
	On your way back? It’s too late to do anything today.
	I would just take a pratfall if I stepped outside that door.
	
	“I don’t know whether I should apply or nothing.
	“I think you shd make yr decision.
	
	So it was by chance we found ourselves
	Gumshod on the pebbled path, Denmark O Denmark
	Flat, rounded eyes, Denmark Denmark
	Gray parchment landscape Denmark O Denmark
	Unmanageable sky, Denmark that cannot shift
	The faucet drips, the minutes apply, Denmark.



62. THE PAINTER

	Sitting between the sea and the buildings
	He enjoyed painting the sea’s portrait.
	But just as children imagine a prayer
	Is merely silence, he expected his subject
	To rush up the sand, and, seizing a brush,
	Plaster its own portrait on the canvas.
	
	So there was never any paint on his canvas
	Until the people who lived in the buildings
	Put him to work: “Try using the brush
	As a means to an end. Select, for a portrait,
	Something less angry and large, and more subject
	To a painter’s moods, or, perhaps, to a prayer.”
	
	How could he explain to them his prayer
	That nature, not art, might usurp the canvas?
	He chose his wife for a new subject,
	Making her vast, like ruined buildings,
	As if, forgetting itself, the portrait
	Had expressed itself without a brush.
	
	Slightly encouraged, he dipped his brush
	In the sea, murmuring a heartfelt prayer:
	“My soul, when I paint this next portrait
	Let it be you who wrecks the canvas.”
	The news spread like wildfire through the buildings:
	He had gone back to the sea for his subject.
	
	Imagine a painter crucified by his subject!
	Too exhausted even to lift his brush,
	He provoked some artists leaning from the buildings
	To malicious mirth: “We haven’t a prayer
	Now, of putting ourselves on canvas,
	Or getting the sea to sit for a portrait!”
	
	Others declared it a self-portrait.
	Finally all indications of a subject
	Began to fade, leaving the canvas
	Perfectly white. He put down the brush.
	At once a howl, that was also a prayer,
	Arose from the overcrowded buildings.
	
	They tossed him, the portrait, from the tallest of the buildings;
	And the sea devoured the canvas and the brush
	As though his subject had decided to remain a prayer.



63. PARADOXES AND OXYMORONS

	This poem is concerned with language on a very plain level.
	Look at it talking to you. You look out a window
	Or pretend to fidget. You have it but you don’t have it.
	You miss it, it misses you. You miss each other.
	
	The poem is sad because it wants to be yours, and cannot.
	What’s a plain level? It is that and other things,
	Bringing a system of them into play. Play?
	Well, actually, yes, but I consider play to be
	
	A deeper outside thing, a dreamed role-pattern,
	As in the division of grace these long August days
	Without proof. Open-ended. And before you know 
	It gets lost in the steam and chatter of typewriters.
	
	It has been played once more. I think you exist only
	To tease me into doing it, on your level, and then you aren’t there
	Or have adopted a different attitude. And the poem
	Has set me softly down beside you. The poem is you.



64. PEOPLE BEHAVING BADLY A CONCERN

	Aggressive panhandling, public urination, verbal threats,
	public nudity and violation of the open container law
	followed us down the days, for why
	are we here much longer,
	or even this long? I ask you
	to be civil and not interrupt night’s business.
	
	It was fun getting used to you,
	who couldn’t have been more nicer.
	This was as modern as it had ever been.
	They were influenced by him: some dirty magazine
	on the air tonight. (Amid the chaos, reports of survivors.)
	
	Didn’t the flowers’ restoration cat fugue keep spilling,
	and like that? It wouldn’t be the first time, either.
	The pro-taffeta get up and laugh,
	investigate or communicate. The night you were
	going to stay up late, others will kiss,
	and he talks about you, and I don’t know what.
	Come in, anyway,
	and don’t lack for tales of the Assertion.
	
	We’re talking civilian unrest.
	Yes, well, maybe you should take one.
	
	(Do not bite or chew.)



65. THE PIED PIPER

	Under the day’s crust a half-eaten child
	And further sores which eyesight shall reveal
	And they live. But what of dark elders
	Whose touch at nightfall must now be
	To keep their promise? Misery
	Starches the host’s one bed, his hand
	Falls like an axe on her curls:
	“Come in, come in! Better that the winter
	Blaze unseen, than we two sleep apart!”
	
	Who in their old age will often part
	From single sleep at the murmur
	Of acerb revels under the hill;
	Whose children couple as the earth crumbles,
	In vanity forever going down
	A sunlit road, for his love was strongest
	Who never loved them at all, and his stiff tune
	Most civil, laughing not to return.



66. A POEM OF UNREST

	Men duly understand the river of life,
	misconstruing it, as it widens and its cities grow
	dark and denser, always farther away.
	
	And of course that remote denseness suits
	us, as lambs and clover might have
	if things had been built to order differently.
	
	But since I don’t understand myself, only segments
	of myself that misunderstand each other, there’s no
	reason for you to want to, no way you could
	
	even if we both wanted it. Do those towers even exist?
	We must look at it that way, along those lines
	so the thought can erect itself, like plywood battlements.



67. PROXIMITY

	It was great to see you the other day
	at the carnival. My enchiladas were delicious,
	
	and I hope that yours were too.
	I wanted to fulfill your dream of me
	
	in some suitable way. Giving away my new gloves,
	for instance, or putting a box around all that’s wrong with us.
	
	But these gutta percha lamps do not whisper on our behalf.
	Now sometimes in the evenings, I am lonely
	
	with dread. A rambunctious wind fills the pine
	at my doorstep, the woodbine is enchanted,
	
	and I must be off before the clock strikes
	whatever hour it is intent on.
	
	Do not leave me in this wilderness!
	Or, if you do, pay me to stay behind.



68. PYROGRAPHY

	Out here on Cottage Grove it matters. The galloping
	Wind balks at its shadow. The carriages
	Are drawn forward under a sky of fumed oak.
	This is America calling:
	The mirroring of state to state,   
	Of voice to voice on the wires,
	The force of colloquial greetings like golden
	Pollen sinking on the afternoon breeze.
	In service stairs the sweet corruption thrives;
	The page of dusk turns like a creaking revolving stage in Warren, Ohio.
	
	If this is the way it is let’s leave,
	They agree, and soon the slow boxcar journey begins,   
	Gradually accelerating until the gyrating fans of suburbs   
	Enfolding the darkness of cities are remembered   
	Only as a recurring tic. And midway
	We meet the disappointed, returning ones, without its   
	Being able to stop us in the headlong night
	Toward the nothing of the coast. At Bolinas
	The houses doze and seem to wonder why through the   
	Pacific haze, and the dreams alternately glow and grow dull.   
	Why be hanging on here? Like kites, circling,   
	Slipping on a ramp of air, but always circling?
	
	But the variable cloudiness is pouring it on,
	Flooding back to you like the meaning of a joke.
	The land wasn’t immediately appealing; we built it
	Partly over with fake ruins, in the image of ourselves:
	An arch that terminates in mid-keystone, a crumbling stone pier   
	For laundresses, an open-air theater, never completed
	And only partially designed. How are we to inhabit
	This space from which the fourth wall is invariably missing,   
	As in a stage-set or dollhouse, except by staying as we are,   
	In lost profile, facing the stars, with dozens of as yet
	Unrealized projects, and a strict sense
	Of time running out, of evening presenting   
	The tactfully folded-over bill? And we fit   
	Rather too easily into it, become transparent,   
	Almost ghosts. One day
	The birds and animals in the pasture have absorbed   
	The color, the density of the surroundings,   
	The leaves are alive, and too heavy with life.
	
	A long period of adjustment followed.
	In the cities at the turn of the century they knew about it   
	But were careful not to let on as the iceman and the milkman   
	Disappeared down the block and the postman shouted   
	His daily rounds. The children under the trees knew it   
	But all the fathers returning home
	On streetcars after a satisfying day at the office undid it:   
	The climate was still floral and all the wallpaper   
	In a million homes all over the land conspired to hide it.   
	One day we thought of painted furniture, of how   
	It just slightly changes everything in the room
	And in the yard outside, and how, if we were going
	To be able to write the history of our time, starting with today,   
	It would be necessary to model all these unimportant details   
	So as to be able to include them; otherwise the narrative   
	Would have that flat, sandpapered look the sky gets   
	Out in the middle west toward the end of summer,   
	The look of wanting to back out before the argument   
	Has been resolved, and at the same time to save appearances
	So that tomorrow will be pure. Therefore, since we have to do our business   
	In spite of things, why not make it in spite of everything?   
	That way, maybe the feeble lakes and swamps
	Of the back country will get plugged into the circuit   
	And not just the major events but the whole incredible
	Mass of everything happening simultaneously and pairing off,
	Channeling itself into history, will unroll
	As carefully and as casually as a conversation in the next room,   
	And the purity of today will invest us like a breeze,
	Only be hard, spare, ironical: something one can
	Tip one’s hat to and still get some use out of.
	
	The parade is turning into our street.
	My stars, the burnished uniforms and prismatic   
	Features of this instant belong here. The land
	Is pulling away from the magic, glittering coastal towns
	To an aforementioned rendezvous with August and December.   
	The hunch is it will always be this way,   
	The look, the way things first scared you   
	In the night light, and later turned out to be,   
	Yet still capable, all the same, of a narrow fidelity   
	To what you and they wanted to become:   
	No sighs like Russian music, only a vast unravelling   
	Out toward the junctions and to the darkness beyond   
	To these bare fields, built at today’s expense.



69. THE RECENT PAST

	Perhaps we ought to feel with more imagination.
	As today the sky o degrees above zero with lines falling
	The way September moves a lace curtain to be near a pear
	The oddest device can’t be usual. And that is where
	The pejorative sense of fear moves axles. In the stars
	There is no longer any peace, emptied like a cup of coffee
	Between the blinding rain that interviews.
	
	You were my quintuplets when I decided to leave you
	Opening a picture book the pictures were all of grass
	Slowly the book was on fire, you the reader
	Sitting with specs full of smoke exclaimed
	How it was a rhyme for “brick” or “redder.”
	The next chapter told all about a brook.
	You were beginning to see the relation when a tidal wave
	Arrived with sinking ships that spelled out “Aladdin”.
	I thought about the Arab boy in his cave
	But the thoughts came faster than advice
	If you knew that snow was a still toboggan in space
	The print could rhyme with “fallen star.”



70. RIDDLE ME

	Rainy days are best,
	There is some permanence in the angle
	That things make with the ground;
	In not taking off after apologies.
	The speedometer’s at sundown.
	
	Even as they spoke the sun was beginning to disappear behind a cloud.
	All right so it’s better to have vague outlines
	But wrapped, tightly, around one’s mood
	Of something like vengeful joy. And in the wood
	It’s all the same too.
	
	I think I liked you better when I seldom knew you.
	But lovers are like hermits or cats: they
	Don’t know when to come in, to stop
	Breaking off twigs for dinner.
	In the little station I waited for you
	
	And shall, what with all the interest
	I bear toward plans of yours and the future
	Of stars it makes me thirsty
	Just to go down on my knees looking
	In the sawdust for joy.
	
	June and the nippers will scarcely look our way.
	And be bold then it’s then
	This cloud imagines us and all that our story
	Was ever going to be, and we catch up
	To ourselves, but they are the selves of others.
	
	And with it all the city starts to live
	As a place where one can believe in moving
	To a particular name and be there, and then
	It’s more action falling back refreshed into death.
	We can survive the storms, wearing us
	
	Like rainbow hats, afraid to retrace steps
	To the past that was only recently ours,
	Afraid of finding a party there.
	O in all your life were you ever teased
	Like this, and it became your mind?
	
	Where still some saunter on the bank in mixed
	Plum shade and weary sun, resigned
	To the installations on the opposite bank, we mix
	Breathless greetings and tears and lately taste
	The precious supplies.



71. RITUAL II

	When the maids returned with the oil they’d bought
	from some place that was officially closed, it was too late.
	the door was locked, the bridegroom wouldn’t let them in.
	He said he didn’t know them. And it was true: He didn’t.
	It wasn’t just their falling asleep and forgetting about the oil.
	They had officially changed. They were different persons,
	excluded just for wanting to be part of the crisis.
	
	Not having you desire the house
	the days of these last weeks
	has swept into disruptive cinema.
	They came from all over to view, some stayed
	in droves. Envy, of course.
	My fingers never had to deal with this puzzle
	before. It was like taking off too many rings.
	In the thoroughly rinsed sky a zeppelin passed, smiling,
	knowing it would all be on the evening news.



72. RIVERS AND MOUNTAINS

	On the secret map the assassins   
	Cloistered, the Moon River was marked   
	Near the eighteen peaks and the city
	Of humiliation and defeat--wan ending   
	Of the trail among dry, papery leaves   
	Gray-brown quills like thoughts
	In the melodious but vast mass of today’s   
	Writing through fields and swamps
	Marked, on the map, with little bunches of weeds.   
	Certainly squirrels lived in the woods   
	But devastation and dull sleep still   
	Hung over the land, quelled
	The rioters turned out of sleep in the peace of prisons   
	Singing on marble factory walls   
	Deaf consolation of minor tunes that pack   
	The air with heavy invisible rods   
	Pent in some sand valley from
	Which only quiet walking ever instructs.   
	The bird flew over and
	Sat--there was nothing else to do.
	Do not mistake its silence for pride or strength
	Or the waterfall for a harbor
	Full of light boats that is there
	Performing for thousands of people   
	In clothes some with places to go   
	Or games. Sometimes over the pillar   
	Of square stones its impact
	Makes a light print.
	So going around cities
	To get to other places you found   
	It all on paper but the land
	Was made of paper processed   
	To look like ferns, mud or other   
	Whose sea unrolled its magic   
	Distances and then rolled them up   
	Its secret was only a pocket
	After all but some corners are darker
	Than these moonless nights spent as on a raft
	In the seclusion of a melody heard   
	As though through trees
	And you can never ignite their touch   
	Long but there were homes
	Flung far out near the asperities   
	Of a sharp, rocky pinnacle
	And other collective places
	Shadows of vineyards whose wine   
	Tasted of the forest floor
	Fisheries and oyster beds
	Tides under the pole
	Seminaries of instruction, public   
	Places for electric light
	And the major tax assessment area   
	Wrinkled on the plan
	Of election to public office
	Sixty-two years old bath and breakfast   
	The formal traffic, shadows
	To make it not worth joining
	After the ox had pulled away the cart.
	
	Your plan was to separate the enemy into two groups   
	With the razor-edged mountains between.
	It worked well on paper
	But their camp had grown
	To be the mountains and the map   
	Carefully peeled away and not torn   
	Was the light, a tender but tough bark
	On everything. Fortunately the war was solved   
	In another way by isolating the two sections   
	Of the enemy’s navy so that the mainland   
	Warded away the big floating ships.   
	Light bounced off the ends   
	Of the small gray waves to tell   
	Them in the observatory   
	About the great drama that was being won
	To turn off the machinery
	And quietly move among the rustic landscape   
	Scooping snow off the mountains rinsing
	The coarser ones that love had   
	Slowly risen in the night to overflow   
	Wetting pillow and petal   
	Determined to place the letter
	On the unassassinated president’s desk
	So that a stamp could reproduce all this
	In detail, down to the last autumn leaf
	And the affliction of June ride
	Slowly out into the sun-blackened landscape.



73. ROOF ARTIST

	Crash baby, the new recruits have arrived.
	Along one road traipses the always stubborn and solitary
	man; he has seen the truth and turned away.
	Otherwise, many more would have seen it and crowed.
	This is the fashion: frugal and far-off.
	
	I am always this diurnal.
	I forget what I was going to say.
	Nothing is best in times as sad as these.
	
	I stick to the motivation that begot us
	and thus am willing to talk.
	Bright beaches looped away
	into playgrounds and the dark.
	Comfort me with excess hilarity.
	Moss grows in the lamplight,
	an aphorism hems me in.
	
	I would be glad to die for the old folks
	but they don’t seem to want it.
	Fine, this will be for our later days
	no sorehead will sully. Going back a bit
	
	it looks as though fish inhabit that aquarium.
	The afternoon density has closed again.
	Children in patches return from school;
	the candy striped school bus stops at the intersection.
	People are tactful and talkative.
	The car sees what is coming,
	
	what a great burden has been lifted from its head.
	Some wish it. Many are calm.
	We feed the birds against an office rainy afternoon.
	All the phones are tapped.
	The chord desires resolution.



74. SCHEHERAZADE

	Unsupported by reason’s enigma
	Water collects in squared stone catch basins.
	The land is dry. Under it moves
	The water. Fish live in the wells. The leaves,
	A concerned green, are scrawled on the light. Bad
	Bindweed and rank ragweed somehow forget to flourish here.
	An inexhaustible wardrobe has been placed at the disposal
	Of each new occurrence. It can be itself now.
	Day is almost reluctant to decline
	And slowing down opens out new avenues
	That don’t infringe on space but are living here with us.
	Other dreams came and left while the bank
	Of colored verbs and adjectives was shrinking from the light
	To nurse in shade their want of a method
	But most of all she loved the particles
	That transform objects of the same category
	Into particular ones, each distinct
	Within and apart from its own class.
	In all this springing up was no hint
	Of a tide, only a pleasant wavering of the air
	In which all things seemed present, whether
	Just past or soon to come. It was all invitation.
	So much the flowers outlined along the night
	Alleys when few were visible, yet
	Their story sounded louder than the hum
	Of bug and stick noises that brought up the rear
	Trundling it along into a new fact of day.
	These were meant to be read as any
	Salutation before getting down to business,
	But they stuck to their guns, and so much
	Was their obstinacy in keeping with the rest
	(Like long flashes of white birds that refuse to die
	When day does) that none knew the warp
	Which presented this major movement as a firm
	Digression, a plain that slowly becomes a mountain.
	
	So each found himself caught in a net
	As a fashion, and all efforts to wriggle free
	Involved him further, inexorably, since all
	Existed there to be told, shot through
	From border to border. Here were stones
	That read as patches of sunlight: there was the story
	Of the grandparents, of the vigorous young champion
	(The lines once given to another, now
	Restored to the new speaker), dinners and assemblies,
	The light in the old home, the secret way
	The rooms fed into each other, but all
	Was wariness of time watching itself
	For nothing in the complex story grew outside;
	The greatness in the moment of telling stayed unresolved
	Until its wealth of incident, pain mixed with pleasure,
	Faded in the precise moment of bursting
	Into bloom, its growth a static lament.
	
	Some stories survived the dynasty of the builders
	But their echo was itself locked in, became
	Anticipation that was only memory after all,
	For the possibilities are limited. It is seen
	At the end that the kind and good are rewarded,
	That the unjust one is doomed to burn forever
	Around his error, sadder and wiser anyway.
	Between these extremes the other muddle through
	Like us, uncertain but wearing artlessly
	Their function of minor characters who must
	Be kept in mind. It is we who make this
	Jungle and call it space, naming each root,
	Each serpent, for the sound of the name
	As it clinks dully against our pleasure,
	Indifference that is pleasure. And what would they be
	Without an audience to restrict the innumerable
	Passes and swipes, restored to good humor at it issues
	Into the impervious evening air? So in some way
	Although the arithmetic is incorrect
	The balance is restored because it
	Balances, knowing it prevails,
	And the man who made the same mistake twice is exonerated.



75. THE SHORT ANSWER

	I am forced to sleepwalk much of the time.
	We hold on to these old ways, are troubled
	sometimes and then the geyser goes away,
	time gutted. In and of itself there is
	no great roar, force pitted against force that
	makes up in time what it loses in speed.
	The waterfalls, the canyon, a royal I-told-you-so
	comes back to greet us at the beginning.
	How was your trip? Oh I didn’t last
	you see, folded over like the margin
	of a dream of the thing-in-itself. Well, and
	what have we come to? A paper-thin past,
	just so, and ‘tis pity. We regurgitate
	old anthems and what has come to pass, and why
	dwell on these. Why make things more difficult
	than they already are? Because if it’s boring
	in a different way, that’ll be interesting too.
	That’s what I say.
	
	That rascal, he jumped over the fence.
	I’m wiping my pince-nez now. Did you ever hear from
	the one who said he’d be back once it was over,
	who eluded me even in my sleep? That was a particularly
	promising time, we thought. Now the sun’s out
	and it’s raining again. Just like a day from
	the compendium. I’ll vouch for you,
	and we can go on scrolling as though nothing had risen,
	the horizon forest looks back at us. The preacher
	shook his head, the evangelist balanced two spools
	at the end of his little makeshift rope. We’d gone too far.
	We’d have to come back in a day or so.



76. SLEEPERS AWAKE

	Cervantes was asleep when he wrote _Don Quixote_.
	Joyce slept during the Wandering Rocks section of _Ulysses_.
	Homer nodded and occasionally slept during the greater part of the _Iliad_; he was awake however when he wrote the _Odyssey_.
	Proust snored his way through _The Captive_, as have legions of his readers after him.
	Melville was asleep at the wheel for much of _Moby-Dick_.
	Fitzgerald slept through _Tender Is the Night_, which is perhaps not so surprising,
	but the fact that Mann slumbered on the very slopes of _The Magic Mountain_ is quite extraordinary--that he wrote it, even more so.   
	Kafka, of course, never slept, even while not writing or on bank holidays.
	No one knows too much about George Eliot’s writing habits--my guess is she would sleep a few minutes, wake up and write something, then pop back to sleep again.
	Lew Wallace’s forty winks came, incredibly, during the chariot race in _Ben-Hur_.
	Emily Dickinson slept on her cold, narrow bed in Amherst.
	When she awoke there would be a new poem inscribed by Jack Frost on the windowpane; outside, glass foliage chimed.
	Good old Walt snored as he wrote and, like so many of us, insisted he didn’t.
	Maugham snored on the Riviera.
	Agatha Christie slept daintily, as a woman sleeps, which is why her novels are like tea sandwiches--artistic, for the most part.
	I sleep when I cannot avoid it; my writing and sleeping are constantly improving.
	
	I have other things to say, but shall not detain you much.
	Never go out in a boat with an author--they cannot tell when they are over water.
	Birds make poor role models.
	A philosopher should be shown the door, but don’t, under any circumstances, try it.
	Slaves make good servants.
	Brushing the teeth may not always improve the appearance.
	Store clean rags in old pillow cases.
	Feed a dog only when he barks.
	Flush tea leaves down the toilet, coffee grounds down the sink.
	Beware of anonymous letters--you may have written them, in a wordless implosion of sleep.



77. SNOW FENCE

	Dieting aids posture,
	as reading helps thought.
	They may be forced
	into another shape, and the world
	around us becomes black
	with notions of the ground.
	
	A snow fence imposes that sleep
	All along it snow has chosen different shapes
	of busyness. It has been prevented
	from staying where it wanted to.
	Blue sky will pay for this
	music from an old Victrola
	singing about a lover and his henchman
	and the woman hiding in a barrel
	under the bridge.
	
	In the west it all turns to meat.
	A few are grateful, more are bored.
	We could have lunch by that lake,
	drink beer from a nearby farm.
	And the actors walked with me
	to those calms.



78. SOONEST MENDED

	Barely tolerated, living on the margin
	In our technological society, we were always having to be rescued   
	On the brink of destruction, like heroines in _Orlando Furioso_
	Before it was time to start all over again.
	There would be thunder in the bushes, a rustling of coils,   
	And Angelica, in the Ingres painting, was considering
	The colorful but small monster near her toe, as though wondering whether forgetting
	The whole thing might not, in the end, be the only solution.   
	And then there always came a time when
	Happy Hooligan in his rusted green automobile
	Came plowing down the course, just to make sure everything was O.K.,   
	Only by that time we were in another chapter and confused   
	About how to receive this latest piece of information.   
	_Was_ it information? Weren’t we rather acting this out   
	For someone else’s benefit, thoughts in a mind
	With room enough and to spare for our little problems (so they began to seem),
	Our daily quandary about food and the rent and bills to be paid?   
	To reduce all this to a small variant,
	To step free at last, minuscule on the gigantic plateau--
	This was our ambition: to be small and clear and free.   
	Alas, the summer’s energy wanes quickly,
	A moment and it is gone. And no longer
	May we make the necessary arrangements, simple as they are.   
	Our star was brighter perhaps when it had water in it.   
	Now there is no question even of that, but only
	Of holding on to the hard earth so as not to get thrown off,   
	With an occasional dream, a vision: a robin flies across   
	The upper corner of the window, you brush your hair away
	And cannot quite see, or a wound will flash
	Against the sweet faces of the others, something like:   
	This is what you wanted to hear, so why
	Did you think of listening to something else? We are all talkers   
	It is true, but underneath the talk lies
	The moving and not wanting to be moved, the loose
	Meaning, untidy and simple like a threshing floor.
	
	These then were some hazards of the course,
	Yet though we knew the course was hazards and nothing else   
	It was still a shock when, almost a quarter of a century later,   
	The clarity of the rules dawned on you for the first time.   
	_They_ were the players, and we who had struggled at the game   
	Were merely spectators, though subject to its vicissitudes
	And moving with it out of the tearful stadium, borne on shoulders, at last.
	Night after night this message returns, repeated
	In the flickering bulbs of the sky, raised past us, taken away from us,   
	Yet ours over and over until the end that is past truth,   
	The being of our sentences, in the climate that fostered them,   
	Not ours to own, like a book, but to be with, and sometimes   
	To be without, alone and desperate.
	But the fantasy makes it ours, a kind of fence-sitting
	Raised to the level of an esthetic ideal. These were moments, years,   
	Solid with reality, faces, namable events, kisses, heroic acts,   
	But like the friendly beginning of a geometrical progression
	Not too reassuring, as though meaning could be cast aside some day   
	When it had been outgrown. Better, you said, to stay cowering   
	Like this in the early lessons, since the promise of learning   
	Is a delusion, and I agreed, adding that
	Tomorrow would alter the sense of what had already been learned,   
	That the learning process is extended in this way, so that from this standpoint
	None of us ever graduates from college,
	For time is an emulsion, and probably thinking not to grow up   
	Is the brightest kind of maturity for us, right now at any rate.
	And you see, both of us were right, though nothing
	Has somehow come to nothing; the avatars
	Of our conforming to the rules and living
	Around the home have made--well, in a sense, “good citizens” of us,   
	Brushing the teeth and all that, and learning to accept
	The charity of the hard moments as they are doled out,
	For this is action, this not being sure, this careless
	Preparing, sowing the seeds crooked in the furrow,
	Making ready to forget, and always coming back
	To the mooring of starting out, that day so long ago.



79. SORTES VERGILIANAE

	You have been living now for a long time and there is nothing you do not know.
	Perhaps something you read in the newspaper influenced you and that was very frequently.
	They have left you to think along these lines and you have gone your own way because you guessed that
	Under their hiding was the secret, casual as breath, betrayed for the asking.
	Then the sky opened up, revealing much more than any of you were intended to know.
	It is a strange thing how fast the growth is, almost as fast as the light from polar regions
	Reflected off the arctic ice-cap in summer. When you know where it is heading
	You have to follow it, though at a sadly reduced rate of speed,
	Hence folly and idleness, raging at the confines of some miserable sunlit alley or court.
	It is the nature of these people to embrace each other, they know no other kind but themselves.
	Things pass quickly out of sight and the best is to be forgotten quickly
	For it is wretchedness that endures, shedding its cancerous light on all it approaches:
	Words spoken in the heat of passion, that might have been retracted in good time,
	All good intentions, all that was arguable. These are stilled now, as the embrace in the hollow of its Aux
	And can never be revived except as perverse notations on an indisputable state of things,
	As conduct in the past, vanished from the reckoning long before it was time.
	Lately you’ve found the dull fevers still inflict their round, only they are unassimilable
	Now that newness or importance has worn away. It is with us like day and night,
	The surge upward through the grade school positioning and bursting into soft gray blooms
	Like vacuum-cleaner sweepings, the opulent fuzz of our cage, or like an excited insect
	In nervous scrimmage for the head, etching its none-too-complex ordinances into the matter of the day.
	Presently all will go off satisfied, leaving the millpond bare, a site for new picnics,
	As they came, naked, to explore all the possible grounds on which exchanges could be set up.
	It is “No Fishing” in modest capital letters, and getting out from under the major weight of the thing
	As it was being indoctrinated and dropped, heavy as a branch with apples,
	And as it started to sigh, just before tumbling into your lap, chagrined and satisfied at the same time,
	Knowing its day over and your patience only beginning, toward what marvels of speculation, auscultation, world-view,
	Satisfied with the entourage. It is this blank carcass of whims and tentative afterthoughts
	Which is being delivered into your hand like a letter some forty-odd years after the day it was posted.
	Strange, isn’t it, that the message makes some sense, if only a relative one in the larger context of message-receiving
	That you will be called to account for just as the purpose of it is becoming plain,
	Being one and the same with the day it set out, though you cannot imagine this.
	There was a time when the words dug in, and you laughed and joked, accomplice
	Of all the possibilities of their journey through the night and the stars, creature
	Who looked to the abandonment of such archaic forms as these, and meanwhile
	Supported them as the tools that made you. The rut became apparent only later
	And by then it was too late to check such expansive aspects as what to do while waiting
	For the others to show: unfortunately no pile of tattered magazines was in evidence,
	Such dramas sleeping below the surface of the every-day machinery; besides
	Quality is not given to everybody, and who are you to have been supposing you had it?
	So the journey grew ever slower; the battlements of the city could now be discerned from afar
	But meanwhile the water was giving out and malaria had decimated their ranks and undermined their morale,
	You know the story, so that if turning back was unthinkable, so was victorious conquest of the great brazen gates.
	Best perhaps to fold up right here, but even that was not to be granted.
	Some days later in the pulsating of orchestras someone asked for a drink:
	The music stopped and those who had been confidently counting the rhythms grew pale.
	This is just a footnote, though a microcosmic one perhaps, to the greater curve
	Of the elaboration; it asks no place in it, only insertion hors-texte as the invisible notion of how that day grew
	From planisphere to heaven, and what part in it all the “I” had, the insatiable researcher of learned trivia, bookworm,
	And one who marched along with, “made common cause”,
	yet had neither the gumption nor the desire to trick the thing into happening,
	Only long patience, as the star climbs and sinks, leaving illumination to the setting sun.



80. STRANGE THINGS HAPPEN AT NIGHT

	Without thinking too much about it,
	prepare to go out into the city of your dreams.
	Now, look up. At first they cannot see you.
	Later, the adjustment will be made.
	Your boyfriend sips bark tea.
	
	The number should’ve turned up by now.
	Perhaps the driving rain impedes it,
	the recession. In any case there are two too many of
	 us here.
	We must double up, or die.
	
	And that might be a practical if remote solution.
	It’s not every day you get to bicycle past the ribbons
	of people, watch the grand hotels
	for some event thought imminent--not lost.
	
	If ever I was going to turn up your volume--
	but this isn’t about living, is it?
	Or is it? I mean, many suppers in the seven modes
	or grades, as many as can be made to last
	once the bosses and their beagles have passed through.



81. STREET MUSICIANS

	One died, and the soul was wrenched out   
	Of the other in life, who, walking the streets   
	Wrapped in an identity like a coat, sees on and on   
	The same corners, volumetrics, shadows   
	Under trees. Farther than anyone was ever   
	Called, through increasingly suburban airs   
	And ways, with autumn falling over everything:   
	The plush leaves the chattels in barrels   
	Of an obscure family being evicted
	Into the way it was, and is. The other beached   
	Glimpses of what the other was up to:
	Revelations at last. So they grew to hate and forget each other.
	
	So I cradle this average violin that knows   
	Only forgotten showtunes, but argues
	The possibility of free declamation anchored
	To a dull refrain, the year turning over on itself   
	In November, with the spaces among the days   
	More literal, the meat more visible on the bone.   
	Our question of a place of origin hangs
	Like smoke: how we picnicked in pine forests,
	In coves with the water always seeping up, and left   
	Our trash, sperm and excrement everywhere, smeared   
	On the landscape, to make of us what we could.



82. THE SUN

	The watermark said it was alone with us,
	“To do your keeping and comparing.
	But there were bushes
	On the horizon shaped like hearts, spades, clubs and diamonds.
	They were considered
	To belong to a second class, to which lower standards
	Were applied, as called for in the original rule,
	And these standards were now bent inward to become
	The invariable law, to which exceptions
	Were sometimes apposite, and they liked the new clime,
	
	So bracing here on the indigo slopes
	To which families of fathers and daughters have come
	Summer after summer, decade after decade, and it never stops
	Being refreshing. It is a sign of maturity,
	This stationary innocence, and a proof
	Of our slow, millennial growth, ring after ring
	Just inside the bark. Yet we get along well without it.
	Water boils more slowly, and then faster
	At these altitudes, and slowness need never be something
	To criticize, for it has an investment in its own weight,
	Rare bird. We know we can never be anything but parallel
	And proximate in our relations, but we are linked up
	Anyway in the sun’s equation, the house from which
	It steals forth on occasion, pretending, isn’t
	It funny, to pass unnoticed, until the deeply shelving
	Darker pastures project their own reflection
	And are caught in history,
	
	Transfixed, like caves against the sky
	Or rotting spars sketched in phosphorus, for what we
	did.



83. SYRINGA

	Orpheus liked the glad personal quality
	Of the things beneath the sky. Of course, Eurydice was a part   
	Of this. Then one day, everything changed. He rends   
	Rocks into fissures with lament. Gullies, hummocks   
	Can’t withstand it. The sky shudders from one horizon   
	To the other, almost ready to give up wholeness.   
	Then Apollo quietly told him: “Leave it all on earth.   
	Your lute, what point? Why pick at a dull pavan few care to   
	Follow, except a few birds of dusty feather,
	Not vivid performances of the past.” But why not?   
	All other things must change too.
	The seasons are no longer what they once were,   
	But it is the nature of things to be seen only once,
	As they happen along, bumping into other things, getting along   
	Somehow. That’s where Orpheus made his mistake.   
	Of course Eurydice vanished into the shade;
	She would have even if he hadn’t turned around.
	No use standing there like a gray stone toga as the whole wheel   
	Of recorded history flashes past, struck dumb, unable to utter an intelligent
	Comment on the most thought-provoking element in its train.   
	Only love stays on the brain, and something these people,   
	These other ones, call life. Singing accurately
	So that the notes mount straight up out of the well of   
	Dim noon and rival the tiny, sparkling yellow flowers   
	Growing around the brink of the quarry, encapsulates   
	The different weights of the things.
	                                                      But it isn’t enough   
	To just go on singing. Orpheus realized this
	And didn’t mind so much about his reward being in heaven   
	After the Bacchantes had torn him apart, driven   
	Half out of their minds by his music, what it was doing to them.
	Some say it was for his treatment of Eurydice.
	But probably the music had more to do with it, and   
	The way music passes, emblematic
	Of life and how you cannot isolate a note of it
	And say it is good or bad. You must
	Wait till it’s over. “The end crowns all,”
	Meaning also that the “tableau”
	Is wrong. For although memories, of a season, for example,   
	Melt into a single snapshot, one cannot guard, treasure   
	That stalled moment. It too is flowing, fleeting;   
	It is a picture of flowing, scenery, though living, mortal,   
	Over which an abstract action is laid out in blunt,   
	Harsh strokes. And to ask more than this
	Is to become the tossing reeds of that slow,
	Powerful stream, the trailing grasses
	Playfully tugged at, but to participate in the action   
	No more than this. Then in the lowering gentian sky   
	Electric twitches are faintly apparent first, then burst forth   
	Into a shower of fixed, cream-colored flares. The horses   
	Have each seen a share of the truth, though each thinks,   
	“I’m a maverick. Nothing of this is happening to me,   
	Though I can understand the language of birds, and   
	The itinerary of the lights caught in the storm is fully apparent to me.
	Their jousting ends in music much
	As trees move more easily in the wind after a summer storm   
	And is happening in lacy shadows of shore-trees, now, day after day.”
	
	But how late to be regretting all this, even
	Bearing in mind that regrets are always late, too late!   
	To which Orpheus, a bluish cloud with white contours,   
	Replies that these are of course not regrets at all,   
	Merely a careful, scholarly setting down of
	Unquestioned facts, a record of pebbles along the way.
	And no matter how all this disappeared,   
	Or got where it was going, it is no longer   
	Material for a poem. Its subject
	Matters too much, and not enough, standing there helplessly   
	While the poem streaked by, its tail afire, a bad   
	Comet screaming hate and disaster, but so turned inward   
	That the meaning, good or other, can never   
	Become known. The singer thinks
	Constructively, builds up his chant in progressive stages   
	Like a skyscraper, but at the last minute turns away.   
	The song is engulfed in an instant in blackness   
	Which must in turn flood the whole continent   
	With blackness, for it cannot see. The singer   
	Must then pass out of sight, not even relieved   
	Of the evil burthen of the words. Stellification   
	Is for the few, and comes about much later   
	When all record of these people and their lives   
	Has disappeared into libraries, onto microfilm.   
	A few are still interested in them. “But what about   
	So-and-so?” is still asked on occasion. But they lie   
	Frozen and out of touch until an arbitrary chorus
	Speaks of a totally different incident with a similar name   
	In whose tale are hidden syllables
	
	Of what happened so long before that
	In some small town, one indifferent summer.



84. TAHITI TROT

	We close in on ourselves,
	then yelp that the world is awry.
	If one person could see his (or her)
	reflection outlined in the mirror
	
	the last knot would come untied,
	the great ship slip into the depths
	of the Atlantic Ocean. Who told you
	to say that? Why have you come here?
	
	We need more people like you
	to tell us what we’re not like. True,
	aging would get lost in the process.
	We’d be sitting on the grass like young
	
	idiots, involved in some personal spell
	when the boiler exploded. You’d say,
	“I can’t get over that hat,” and I.
	pretending not to understand, would say,
	 “Can I get you anything?”



85. THE TENNIS COURT OATH

	What had you been thinking about
	the face studiously bloodied
	heaven blotted region
	I go on loving you like water but
	there is a terrible breath in the way all of this
	You were not elected president, yet won the race
	All the way through fog and drizzle
	When you read it was sincere the coasts
	stammered with unintentional villages the
	horse strains fatigued I guess . . . the calls . . .
	I worry
	
	the water beetle head
	why of course reflecting all
	then you redid you were breathing
	I thought going down to mail this
	of the kettle you jabbered as easily in the yard
	you come through but
	are incomparable the lovely tent
	mystery you don’t want surrounded the real
	you dance
	in the spring there was clouds
	
	The mulatress approached in the hall--the
	lettering easily visible along the edge of the _Times_
	in a moment the bell would ring but there was time
	for the carnation laughed here are a couple of “other”
	
	to one in yon house
	The doctor and Philip had come over the road
	Turning in toward the corner of the wall his hat on
	reading it carelessly as if to tell you your fears were justified
	the blood shifted you know those walls
	wind off the earth had made him shrink
	undeniably an oboe now the young
	were there there was candy
	to decide the sharp edge of the garment
	like a particular cry not intervening called the dog “he’s coming! he’s coming” with an emotion felt it sink into peace
	there was no turning back but the end was in sight
	he chose this moment to ask her in detail about her family and the others
	The person.   pleaded--“have more of these
	not stripes on the tunic--or the porch chairs
	will teach you about men--what it means”
	to be one in a million pink stripe
	and now could go away the three approached the doghouse
	the reef.   Your daughter’s
	dream of my son understand prejudice
	darkness in the hole
	the patient finished
	They could all go home now the hole was dark
	lilacs blowing across his face glad he brought you



86. THEME

	If I were a piano shawl
	a porch on someone’s house
	flooding the suave timbre.
	
	Then forty, he,
	a unique monsieur
	and yet he never wanted to look into it.
	
	“Have you forgotten your little Kiki?”
	Smoke from the horses’ nostrils
	wreathed the pump by the well.
	
	The stink of snow
	was everywhere. Too bad it looks
	so good.
	
	O beautiful and true
	thou that glitterest
	, in storms,
	
	starting to discuss gardening. I don’t
	want to throw cold water
	on this.
	
	That music has changed my life
	a lot, since I made the
	mistake of learning it.
	
	Another passionless day. The peach
	forms a stain
	at the end of the line.
	
	Learn to lock love enjoy:
	“The dream I dreamed
	was not denied me;
	
	hence my love is mad--
	a castle’s satin walls
	folded in blood.”
	
	The deputy returned
	the pea shooter. I have learned
	to plait wasps
	
	into a bronze necropolis.
	The ticket and the water
	only endure, as one can
	
	in the right circumstances,
	mon cher Tommy. I think the theme
	created itself somewhere
	
	around here and cannot find itself.



87. THESE LACUSTRINE CITIES

	These lacustrine cities grew out of loathing
	Into something forgetful, although angry with history.
	They are the product of an idea: that man is horrible, for instance,   
	Though this is only one example.
	
	They emerged until a tower
	Controlled the sky, and with artifice dipped back
	Into the past for swans and tapering branches,
	Burning, until all that hate was transformed into useless love.
	
	Then you are left with an idea of yourself
	And the feeling of ascending emptiness of the afternoon   
	Which must be charged to the embarrassment of others   
	Who fly by you like beacons.
	
	The night is a sentinel.
	Much of your time has been occupied by creative games
	Until now, but we have all-inclusive plans for you.
	We had thought, for instance, of sending you to the middle of the desert,
	
	To a violent sea, or of having the closeness of the others be air   
	To you, pressing you back into a startled dream
	As sea-breezes greet a child’s face.
	But the past is already here, and you are nursing some private project.
	
	The worst is not over, yet I know
	You will be happy here. Because of the logic
	Of your situation, which is something no climate can outsmart.   
	Tender and insouciant by turns, you see
	
	You have built a mountain of something,
	Thoughtfully pouring all your energy into this single monument,   
	Whose wind is desire starching a petal,
	Whose disappointment broke into a rainbow of tears.



88. THIS ROOM

	The room I entered was a dream of this room.
	Surely all those feet on the sofa were mine.
	The oval portrait
	of a dog was me at an early age.
	Something shimmers, something is hushed up.
	
	We had macaroni for lunch every day
	except Sunday, when a small quail was induced
	to be served to us. Why do I tell you these things?
	You are not even here.



89. TO REDOUTÉ

	To true roses uplifted on the bilious tide of evening
	To morning-glories dotting the crescent day
	The oval shape responds:
	My first is a haunting face
	In the hanging-down hair.
	My second is wine:
	I am a sieve.
	
	My only new thing:
	The penalty of light forever
	Over the heads of those who were there
	And back into the night, the cough of the finishing petal.
	
	Once approved the magentas must continue,
	But the bark island sees
	Into the light.
	It grieves for what it gives:
	Tears that streak the dusty firmament.



90. TOO MUCH SLEEP IS BAD

	I don’t have a chronic cough.
	Cats don’t drool over me.
	You can’t listen to the change that’s being monitored.
	You can only participate in your life
	
	_mutatis mutandis--_
	
	and they finally get it wrong.



91. TOWER OF DARKNESS

	I cannot remain outside any longer
	in the cold and pervasive rain.
	I grab my crotch wishing for a ball of light
	in the shaggy interior other people have.
	I shall go away without fetching a grain
	from the earth, compact,
	with the climbing design
	we knew and hated so well, and when it was our turn
	to die we just gave up, mumbling some excuse.
	
	Do you often go to see them?
	They can’t have much cause
	to journey here, yet their footprints,
	foreclosed by snow . . .
	
	It was the barker whose patter started it
	well before we were awake, into the dawn
	that grizzles, now, a fright
	to be wished, to be read.
	unlike the old healing that will come again in time.



92. TRAIN RISING OUT OF THE SEA

	It is written in the Book of Usable Minutes
	That all things have their center in their dying,
	That each is discrete and diaphanous and
	Has pointed its prow away from the sand for the next trillion years.
	
	After that, we may be friends,
	Recognizing in each other the precedents that make us truly social.
	Do you hear the wind? It’s not dying,
	It’s singing, weaving a song about the president saluting the trust.
	
	The past in each of us, until so much memory becomes an institution,
	Through sheer weight, the persistence of it, no,
	Not the persistence, that makes it seem a deliberate act
	Of duration, much too deliberate for this ingenuous being
	
	Like an era that refuses to come to an end or be born again.
	We need more night for the sky, more blue for the daylight
	That inundates our remarks before we can make them
	Taking away a little bit of us each time
	
	To be deposited elsewhere
	In the place of our involvement
	With the core that brought excessive flowering this year
	Of enormous sunsets and big breezes
	
	That left you feeling too simple
	Like an island just off the shore, one of many, that no one
	Notices, though it has a certain function, though an abstract one
	Built to prevent you from being towed to shore.



93. UNRELEASED MOVIE

	Let’s start in the middle, as usual. Ever since I burnt my mouth
	I talk two ways, first as reluctant explainer, then as someone offstage
	In a dream, hushing those who might wake you from this dream,
	Imperfectly got up as a lutanist. Then sighs, whirrs, screeches
	Become so much its fabric that one listens to see what words materialize
	On the windowpane this time. I don’t want to make an uneasy habit
	Of this though, because when the universe does turn into a horror movie
	It will mean Japanese undershirts for the kiddies and unusual, invisible
	Demerits for those of us caught talking back at the screen, unless, of course.
	The unnatural peace God predicted for us has settled like a giant shell
	Over the ocean floor, in which case we shall all be forgiven and forgotten,
	Like students in a correspondence school. And I mean what shall be saved
	Of us as we live aimed at some near but unattainable mark on the wall?
	Not, one fears, a thing of hitherto unheard-of compacted density
	That might relieve all the years with spaces in them, years of leggy growth,
	Too much foliage, the wrong light, the wrong taste to things.
	
	There is so much we know, too much, cruelly, to be expressed in any medium,
	Including silence. And to harbor it means having it eventually leach under
	The spiritual retaining wall that so commends itself to us we can never
	Be other, and become a different habitat altogether in which these transactions
	Are the brittle sounds of insect wings, robbed of the solid clink of something
	Like the reality that now accosts one. It is all, we see too late, a question
	Of having the knack, but the knack is as universal as the wind that now protects,
	Now buffets, and is not ours. Thus, we are more formal this year, can escape
	Certain confrontations, obtain the release of certain compro- mised acquaintances
	Without looking at what they may have become, foil the plans of a few
	Middle-echelon apparatchiks until the day that finally does come to rest, busily,
	At your doorstep. Put it into a clean jar. Save it from the time which
	Has been, without promoting it too far beyond the venetian blind of that
	Future’s early demise, in which we saw ourselves pre-figured dimly and what would
	Happen to us scattered all over the ground like bruised rinds. Only say what
	Cannot be done to us, for now, and keep us ever straying over the border into
	Insanity and back, and by then, becalmed, we shall know the superior discipline
	As something lived within us, something that magnetizes everything toward us.
	But beware the merely frivolous gesture, token of its own smile, which clamps
	One supremely to one’s own past, in which one is lost. Better the negative
	Volumes of the lives of strangers carried out to a certain point just this side of
	Emptiness, so as to be done with it. And those who may be hungry, or thirsty,
	Or tired; those who lived in a landscape without fully understanding it, may,
	By their ignorance and needing help blossom again in the same season into a new
	Angle or knot, without feeling unwanted again. So, at any rate, it is written
	And believed by some few, a hundred or maybe a thousand of the summarily instructed.
	
	Doors will forever bang in that wind, night moths assault the screens until
	We know what we are thinking about once more. And that day may guide us.
	So the dream curved back into something natural (it always does!), beached us
	Where we started, furious at being safe and sound again. The old oar-locks
	Encased in moss, the same tire marks in the gravel. And we come together
	To quarrel or make love without any memory of the crabbed ambitions that were there
	Before us, and may outlive us but we shan’t know this, it won’t make any difference
	Even tonight as I lie here placing a finger now on one page of the book, now
	On another, as though by planting it there I might outgrow the busy destiny
	Predicted in those teeming lines. Really, it makes no difference:
	If we are all going to be one, or together, in the space between the moment
	I had this imperfect vision and tomorrow. Yet, as marble
	Dust is gradually brushed away one does come upon it, that split-second
	Interval as formal as a jewel, that an army of well-meaning enemies couldn’t
	Possibly displace. I hear it calling to me. I must turn over a new leaf.
	It is the extreme last chance for doing so. I want it so much. And then the world is
	Shredded as a blanket waiting for this to happen, returns to it like a kiss,
	To that agreeable triangle in a sea of asphalt where one so rarely has difficulty
	Getting a taxi, and all magic works, the wicked and the only misguided.
	I am recreated in the short-sleeved pajamas of my youth.



94. UPTICK

	We were sitting there, and   
	I made a joke about how   
	it doesn’t dovetail: time,   
	one minute running out   
	faster than the one in front   
	it catches up to.   
	That way, I said,   
	there can be no waste.   
	Waste is virtually eliminated.   
	
	To come back for a few hours to   
	the present subject, a painting,   
	looking like it was seen,   
	half turning around, slightly apprehensive,   
	but it has to pay attention   
	to what’s up ahead: a vision.   
	Therefore poetry dissolves in   
	brilliant moisture and reads us   
	to us.   
	A faint notion. Too many words,   
	but precious.



95. VETIVER

	Ages passed slowly, like a load of hay,
	As the flowers recited their lines
	And pike stirred at the bottom of the pond.
	The pen was cool to the touch.
	The staircase swept upward
	Through fragmented garlands, keeping the melancholy
	Already distilled in letters of the alphabet.
	
	It would be time for winter now, its spun-sugar
	Palaces and also lines of care
	At the mouth, pink smudges on the forehead and cheeks,
	The color once known as “ashes of roses.”
	How many snakes and lizards shed their skins
	For time to be passing on like this,
	Sinking deeper in the sand as it wound toward
	The conclusion. It had all been working so well and now,
	Well, it just kind of came apart in the hand
	As a change is voiced, sharp
	As a fishhook in the throat, and decorative tears flowed
	Past us into a basin called infinity.
	
	There was no charge for anything, the gates
	Had been left open intentionally.
	Don’t follow, you can have whatever it is.
	And in some room someone examines his youth,
	Finds it dry and hollow, porous to the touch.
	O keep me with you, unless the outdoors
	Embraces both of us, unites us, unless
	The birdcatchers put away their twigs,
	The fishermen haul in their sleek empty nets
	And others become part of the immense crowd
	Around this bonfire, a situation
	That has come to mean us to us, and the crying
	In the leaves is saved, the last silver drops.



96. A WORLDLY COUNTRY

	Not the smoothness, not the insane clocks on the square,
	the scent of manure in the municipal parterre,
	not the fabrics, the sullen mockery of Tweety Bird,
	not the fresh troops that needed freshening up. If it occurred
	in real time, it was OK, and if it was time in a novel
	that was OK too. From palace and hovel
	the great parade flooded avenue and byway
	and turnip fields became just another highway.
	Leftover bonbons were thrown to the chickens
	and geese, who squawked like the very dickens.
	There was no peace in the bathroom, none in the china closet
	or the banks, where no one came to make a deposit.
	In short all hell broke loose that wide afternoon.
	By evening all was calm again. A crescent moon
	hung in the sky like a parrot on its perch.
	Departing guests smiled and called, “See you in church!”
	For night, as usual, knew what it was doing,
	providing sleep to offset the great ungluing
	that tomorrow again would surely bring.
	As I gazed at the quiet rubble, one thing
	puzzled me: What had happened, and why?
	One minute we were up to our necks in rebelliousness,
	and the next, peace had subdued the ranks of hellishness.
	
	So often it happens that the time we turn around in
	soon becomes the shoal our pathetic skiff will run aground in.
	And just as waves are anchored to the bottom of the sea
	we must reach the shallows before God cuts us free.
