*** Maurice Baring (1874 - 1945)


1. DIFFUGERE NIVES

	The snows have fled, the hail, the lashing rain,
	       Before the Spring.
	The grass is starred with buttercups again,
	       The blackbirds sing.
	
	Now spreads the month that feast of lovely things
	       We loved of old.
	Once more the swallow glides with darkling wings
	       Against the gold.
	
	Now the brown bees about the peach trees boom
	       Upon the walls;
	And far away beyond the orchard’s bloom
	       The cuckoo calls.
	
	The season holds a festival of light,
	       For you, for me,
	The shadows are abroad, there falls a blight
	       On each green tree.
	
	And every leaf unfolding, every flower
	       Brings bitter meed;
	Beauty of the morning and the evening hour
	       Quickens our need.
	
	All is reborn, but never any Spring
	       Can bring back this;
	Nor any fullness of midsummer bring
	       The voice we miss.
	
	The smiling eyes shall smile on us no more;
	       The laughter clear,
	Too far away on the forbidden shore,
	       We shall not hear.
	
	Bereft of these until the day we die,
	       We both must dwell;
	Alone, alone, and haunted by the cry:
	       “Hail and farewell!”
	
	Yet when the scythe of Death shall near us hiss
	       Through the cold air,
	Then on the shuddering marge of the abyss
	       They will be there.
	
	They will be there to lift us from sheer space
	       And empty night;
	And we shall turn and see them face to face
	       In the new light.
	
	So shall we pay the unabated price
	       Of their release,
	And found on our consenting sacrifice
	       Their lasting peace.
	
	The hopes that fall like leaves before the wind,
	       The baffling waste,
	And every earthly joy that leaves behind
	       A mortal taste.
	
	The uncompleted end of all things dear,
	       The clanging door
	Of Death, forever loud with the last fear,
	       Haunt them no more.
	
	Without them the awakening world is dark
	       With dust and mire;
	Yet as they went they flung to us a spark,
	       A thread of fire.
	
	To guide us while beneath the sombre skies
	       Faltering we tread,
	Until for us like morning stars shall rise
	       The deathless dead.


2. DOSTOYEVSKY

	You healed the sore, you made the fearful brave,
	They bless you for your lasting legacy;
	The balm, the tears, the fragrant charity
	You sought and treasured in your living grave.
	The gifts you humbly took you greatly gave,
	For solace of the soul in agony,
	When through the bars the brutal passions pry,
	And mock the bonds of the celestial slave.
	
	You wandered in the uttermost abyss;
	And there, amidst the ashes and the dust,
	You spoke no word of anger or of pride;
	You found the prints of steps divine to kiss;
	You looked right upwards to the stars, you cried:
	“_Hosanna to the Lord, for He is just._”


3. GREECE

	The Spring had scattered poppies on the land,
	The Spring was saying her secret to the breeze;
	In the translucent shallows of green seas,
	A fisherman, a trident in his hand,
	Was casting shining fishes to the sand,
	And wading in the water to his knees;
	And still I hear the crickets and the bees,
	The hidden hoofs, the ringing saraband.
	
	I see the temples above the breaking foam,
	The pillars pink as dawn in the silver dust;
	The Parthenon at sunset large and dim,
	Smouldering against the purple mountain’s crust;
	And far away on the ocean’s blazing rim,
	The phantom ship that brought Ulysses home.


4. A JUNE NIGHT IN RUSSIA

	A concert. Hark to the prelude’s opening bar!
	Played by the sheep bells tinkling on the hill;
	Dogs bark and frogs are croaking near the mill,
	The watchman’s rattle beats the time afar.
	Like water bubbling in a magic jar,
	The nightingale begins a liquid trill,
	Another answers; and the world’s so still,
	You’d think that you could hear that falling star.
	
	I scarcely see for light the stars that swim
	Aloof in skies not dark but only dim.
	The women’s voices echo far away.
	And on the road two lovers sing a song:
	They sing the joy of love that lasts a day:
	The sorrow of love that lasts a whole life long.


5. SEVILLE

	The orange blossoms in the Alcazar,
	Where roses and syringas are in flower;
	The blinding glory of the morning hour;
	The eyes that gleam behind a twisted bar;
	The women on the balconies,--a smile;
	The barrel-organs, and the blazing heat;
	The awning hanging high across the street;
	A dark mantilla in a sombre aisle.
	
	A fountain tinkling in a shady court;
	The gold arena of the bull-ring’s feast;
	The coloured crowd acclaiming perilous sport;
	The sudden silence when they hold their breath,
	While the _torero_ gently plays with death,
	And flicks the horns of the tremendous beast.


6. VITA NUOVA

	I watched you in the distance tall and pale,
	Like a swift swallow in a pearly sky;
	Your eyelids drooped like petals wearily,
	Your face was like a lily of the vale.
	You had the softness of all Summer days,
	The silver radiance of the twilight hour,
	The mystery of bluebell-haunted ways,
	The passion of the white syringa’s flower.
	
	I watched you, and I knew that I had found
	The long-delaying, long-expected Spring;
	I knew my heart had found a tune to sing;
	That strength to soar was in my spirit’s wing;
	That life was full of a triumphant sound,
	That death could only be a little thing.


7. YOU WERE BLESSED

	I saw you by the Summer candlelight:--
	You put to shame the sparkle of the gems,
	The lights, the flashing of the diadems,
	The moon and all the stars of Summer night.
	I saw you in the radiant morning hour:--
	You put to shame the white rose and the red;
	Your chiselled lips, your little lovely head,
	Were fairer than the petals of a flower.
	
	And on the shaven surface of the lawn,
	You moved like music, and you smiled like dawn,--
	The leaves, the flowers, the dragon-flies, the dew,
	Beside you seemed the stuff of coarser clay;
	And all the glory of the Summer day
	A background for the wonder that was you.