*** Charles Baudelaire (1821 - 1867)


1. ALBATROSS

	Often, to amuse themselves, sailors
	snare that great seabird, the albatross,
	that flies with these indolent companions as their ship
	glides over the depths of boredom and despair.
	
	Once they have set their captive on the deck,
	the king of the sky, awkward and in shame,
	piteously drags along his great white wings,
	like idle oars bouncing useless on the foam.
	
	The winged voyager looks foolish now and weak--
	yesterday he was beautiful; today, ugly and ridiculous.
	One tries to force a burning pipe into his beak.
	Another mimes the limp of one that used to fly.
	
	The Poet resembles this prince from the clouds:
	Each hangs in the tempest and laughs at the archer,
	and finds his exile in a circle of hooting humans
	where his wide wings are impediments.


2. AUTUMN

	Soon we will plunge ourselves into cold shadows, 
	And all of summer’s stunning afternoons will be gone. 
	I already hear the dead thuds of logs below 
	Falling on the cobblestones and the lawn. 
	
	All of winter will return to me 
	derision, Hate, shuddering, horror, drudgery and vice, 
	And exiled, like the sun, to a polar prison, 
	My soul will harden into a block of red ice. 
	
	I shiver as I listen to each log crash and slam 
	The echoes are as dull as executioners’ drums. 
	My mind is like a tower that slowly succumbs 
	To the blows of a relentless battering ram. 
	
	It seems to me, swaying to these shocks, that someone 
	Is nailing down a coffin in a hurry somewhere. 
	For whom? It was summer yesterday; now it’s autumn. 
	Echoes of departure keep resounding in the air.


3. I LOVE THE NAKED AGES LONG AGO

	I love the naked ages long ago 
	When statues were gilded by Apollo, 
	When men and women of agility 
	Could play without lies and anxiety, 
	And the sky lovingly caressed their spines, 
	As it exercised its noble machine. 
	Fertile Cybele, mother of nature, then, 
	Would not place on her daughters a burden, 
	But, she-wolf sharing her heart with the people, 
	Would feed creation from her brown nipples. 
	Men, elegant and strong, would have the right 
	To be proud to have beauty named their king; 
	Virgin fruit free of blemish and cracking, 
	Whose flesh smooth and firm would summon a bite! 
	The Poet today, when he would convey 
	This native grandeur, would not be swept away 
	By man free and woman natural, 
	But would feel darkness envelop his soul 
	Before this black tableau full of loathing. 
	O malformed monsters crying for clothing! 
	O ludicrous heads! Torsos needing disguise! 
	O poor writhing bodies of every wrong size, 
	Children that the god of the Useful swaths 
	In the language of bronze and brass! 
	And women, alas! You shadow your heredity, 
	You gnaw nourishment from debauchery, 
	A virgin holds maternal lechery 
	And all the horrors of fecundity! 
	
	We have, it is true, corrupt nations, 
	Beauty unknown to the radiant ancients: 
	Faces that gnaw through the heart’s cankers, 
	And talk with the cool beauty of languor; 
	But these inventions of our backward muses 
	Are never hindered in their morbid uses 
	Of the old for profound homage to youth, 
	--To the young saint, the sweet air, the simple truth, 
	To the eye as limpid as the water current, 
	To spread out over all, insouciant 
	Like the blue sky, the birds and the flowers, 
	Its perfumes, its songs and its sweet fervors.


4. MEDITATION

	Wise up, Sorrow. Calm down.
	You always lay claim to twilight. Well, here it is, brother,
	It descends. Obscurity settles over the town,
	bringing peace to one, worry to another.
	
	The restless crowd, whipped on by pleasure--
	our dogged torturer--carry their hearts’ raw
	remorse with them as they serve their vapid leisure,
	while you, my Sorrow, drop by here, take my hand, and draw
	
	me apart from them. We watch the dying years
	in faded gowns lean out from heaven’s balconies, as Regret rears,
	smiling, out of the deep dark where the dead ones march.
	
	Dragging its long train--now a shroud--from its early light
	in the East, the sun goes to sleep under an arch.
	Listen, Sorrow, beloved, to the soft approach of Night.


5. WHEN A HEAVY LID OF LOW SKY

	When a heavy lid of low sky
	covers a soul moaning with ennui and fright,
	and the whole horizon is rounded by
	a black day pouring down, sadder than any night;
	
	When the earth is turned to a muggy dungeon
	where Hope is the shadow of a bat, feeling
	with feeble, flapping wings along the grunge on
	walls and bumping its head against a putrid ceiling;
	
	When the crawling spiders of scattershot rains
	drop cold bars that imprison us,
	water trickles along the channels in our brains,
	and the people around us feel poisonous--
	
	the bells speak out suddenly with fury
	and lance the sky with dreadful howls,
	and frightened strays and exiles, sorry
	and homeless, rage from deep within their bowels.
	
	Long hearses roll, slow, silent, hypnotic,
	through my soul. Hope, defeated, cries
	out its atrocious anguish--despotic.
	A black hood slides over my ferocious eyes.

