*** Stephen Vincent Benét (1898 - 1943)


1. THE CITY REVISITED

	The grey gulls drift across the bay
	Softly and still as flakes of snow
	Against the thinning fog. All day
	I sat and watched them come and go;
	And now at last the sun was set,
	Filling the waves with colored fire
	Till each seemed like a jewelled spire
	Thrust up from some drowned city. Soon
	From peak and cliff and minaret
	The city’s lights began to wink,
	Each like a friendly word. The moon
	Began to broaden out her shield,
	Spurting with silver. Straight before
	The brown hills lay like quiet beasts
	Stretched out beside a well-loved door,
	And filling earth and sky and field
	With the calm heaving of their breasts.
	
	Nothing was gone, nothing was changed,
	The smallest wave was unestranged
	By all the long ache of the years
	Since last I saw them, blind with tears.
	Their welcome like the hills stood fast:
	And I, I had come home at last.
	
	So I laughed out with them aloud
	To think that now the sun was broad,
	And climbing up the iron sky,
	Where the raw streets stretched sullenly
	About another room I knew,
	In a mean house--and soon there, too,
	The smith would burst the flimsy door
	And find me lying on the floor.
	Just where I fell the other night,
	After that breaking wave of pain.--
	How they will storm and rage and fight,
	Servants and mistress, one and all,
	“No money for the funeral!”
	
	I broke my life there. Let it stand
	At that.
	The waters are a plain,
	Heaving and bright on either hand,
	A tremulous and lustral peace
	Which shall endure though all things cease,
	Filling my heart as water fills
	A cup. There stand the quiet hills.
	So, waiting for my wings to grow,
	I watch the gulls sail to and fro,
	Rising and falling, soft and swift,
	Drifting along as bubbles drift.
	And, though I see the face of God
	Hereafter--this day have I trod
	Nearer to Him than I shall tread
	Ever again. The night is dead.
	And there’s the dawn, poured out like wine
	Along the dim horizon-line.
	And from the city comes the chimes--
	
	We have our heaven on earth--sometimes!


2. LONELY BURIAL

	There were not many at that lonely place,
	Where two scourged hills met in a little plain.
	The wind cried loud in gusts, then low again.
	Three pines strained darkly, runners in a race
	Unseen by any. Toward the further woods
	A dim harsh noise of voices rose and ceased.
	--We were most silent in those solitudes--
	Then, sudden as a flame, the black-robed priest,
	
	The clotted earth piled roughly up about
	The hacked red oblong of the new-made thing,
	Short words in swordlike Latin--and a rout
	Of dreams most impotent, unwearying.
	Then, like a blind door shut on a carouse,
	The terrible bareness of the soul’s last house.


3. LOVE IN TWILIGHT

	There is darkness behind the light--and the pale light drips
	Cold on vague shapes and figures, that, half-seen loom
	Like the carven prows of proud, far-triumphing ships--
	And the firelight wavers and changes about the room,
	
	As the three logs crackle and burn with a small still sound;
	Half-blotting with dark the deeper dark of her hair,
	Where she lies, head pillowed on arm, and one hand curved round
	To shield the white face and neck from the faint thin glare.
	
	Gently she breathes--and the long limbs lie at ease,
	And the rise and fall of the young, slim, virginal breast
	Is as certain-sweet as the march of slow wind through trees,
	Or the great soft passage of clouds in a sky at rest.
	
	I kneel, and our arms enlace, and we kiss long, long.
	I am drowned in her as in sleep. There is no more pain.
	Only the rustle of flames like a broken song
	That rings half-heard through the dusty halls of the brain.
	
	One shaking and fragile moment of ecstasy,
	While the grey gloom flutters and beats like an owl above.
	And I would not move or speak for the sea or the sky
	Or the flame-bright wings of the miraculous Dove!


4. MAY MORNING

	I lie stretched out upon the window-seat
	And doze, and read a page or two, and doze,
	And feel the air like water on me close,
	Great waves of sunny air that lip and beat
	With a small noise, monotonous and sweet,
	Against the window--and the scent of cool,
	Frail flowers by some brown and dew-drenched pool
	Possesses me from drowsy head to feet.
	
	This is the time of all-sufficing laughter
	At idiotic things some one has done,
	And there is neither past nor vague hereafter.
	And all your body stretches in the sun
	And drinks the light in like a liquid thing;
	Filled with the divine languor of late spring.


5. POOR DEVIL!

	Well, I was tired of life; the silly folk,
	The tiresome noises, all the common things
	I loved once, crushed me with an iron yoke.
	I longed for the cool quiet and the dark,
	Under the common sod where louts and kings
	Lie down, serene, unheeding, careless, stark,
	Never to rise or move or feel again,
	Filled with the ecstasy of being dead . . .
	
	I put the shining pistol to my head
	And pulled the trigger hard--I felt no pain,
	No pain at all; the pistol had missed fire
	I thought; then, looking at the floor, I saw
	My huddled body lying there--and awe
	Swept over me. I trembled--and looked up.
	About me was--not that, my heart’s desire,
	That small and dark abode of death and peace--
	But all from which I sought a vain release!
	The sky, the people and the staring sun
	Glared at me as before. I was undone.
	My last state ten times worse than was my first.
	Helpless I stood, befooled, betrayed, accursed,
	Fettered to Life forever, horribly;
	Caught in the meshes of Eternity,
	No further doors to break or bars to burst!


6. THE QUALITY OF COURAGE

	Black trees against an orange sky,
	Trees that the wind shook terribly,
	Like a harsh spume along the road,
	Quavering up like withered arms,
	Writhing like streams, like twisted charms
	Of hot lead flung in snow. Below
	The iron ice stung like a goad,
	Slashing the torn shoes from my feet,
	And all the air was bitter sleet.
	
	And all the land was cramped with snow,
	Steel-strong and fierce and glimmering wan,
	Like pale plains of obsidian.
	--And yet I strove--and I was fire
	And ice--and fire and ice were one
	In one vast hunger of desire.
	A dim desire, of pleasant places,
	And lush fields in the summer sun,
	And logs aflame, and walls, and faces,
	--And wine, and old ambrosial talk,
	A golden ball in fountains dancing,
	And unforgotten hands. (Ah, God,
	I trod them down where I have trod,
	And they remain, and they remain,
	Etched in unutterable pain,
	Loved lips and faces now apart,
	That once were closer than my heart--
	In agony, in agony,
	And horribly a part of me . . .
	For Lethe is for no man set,
	And in Hell may no man forget.)
	
	And there were flowers, and jugs, bright-glancing,
	And old Italian swords--and looks,
	A moment’s glance of fire, of fire,
	Spiring, leaping, flaming higher,
	Into the intense, the cloudless blue,
	Until two souls were one, and flame,
	And very flesh, and yet the same!
	As if all springs were crushed anew
	Into one globed drop of dew!
	But for the most I thought of heat,
	Desiring greatly . . . Hot white sand
	The lazy body lies at rest in,
	Or sun-dried, scented grass to nest in,
	And fires, innumerable fires,
	Great fagots hurling golden gyres
	Of sparks far up, and the red heart
	In sea-coals, crashing as they part
	To tiny flares, and kindling snapping,
	Bunched sticks that burst their string and wrapping
	And fall like jackstraws; green and blue
	The evil flames of driftwood too,
	And heavy, sullen lumps of coke
	With still, fierce heat and ugly smoke. . . .
	. . . And then the vision of his face,
	And theirs, all theirs, came like a sword,
	Thrice, to the heart--and as I fell
	I thought I saw a light before.
	
	I woke. My hands were blue and sore,
	Torn on the ice. I scarcely felt
	The frozen sleet begin to melt
	Upon my face as I breathed deeper,
	But lay there warmly, like a sleeper
	Who shifts his arm once, and moans low,
	And then sinks back to night. Slow, slow,
	And still as Death, came Sleep and Death
	And looked at me with quiet breath.
	Unbending figures, black and stark
	Against the intense deeps of the dark.
	Tall and like trees. Like sweet and fire
	Rest crept and crept along my veins,
	Gently. And there were no more pains . . .
	
	Was it not better so to lie?
	The fight was done. Even gods tire
	Of fighting . . . My way was the wrong.
	Now I should drift and drift along
	To endless quiet, golden peace . . .
	And let the tortured body cease.
	
	And then a light winked like an eye.
	. . . And very many miles away
	A girl stood at a warm, lit door,
	Holding a lamp. Ray upon ray
	It cloaked the snow with perfect light.
	And where she was there was no night
	Nor could be, ever. God is sure,
	And in his hands are things secure.
	It is not given me to trace
	The lovely laughter of that face,
	Like a clear brook most full of light,
	Or olives swaying on a height,
	So silver they have wings, almost;
	Like a great word once known and lost
	And meaning all things. Nor her voice
	A happy sound where larks rejoice,
	Her body, that great loveliness,
	The tender fashion of her dress,
	I may not paint them.
	These I see,
	Blazing through all eternity,
	A fire-winged sign, a glorious tree!
	
	She stood there, and at once I knew
	The bitter thing that I must do.
	There could be no surrender now;
	Though Sleep and Death were whispering low.
	My way was wrong. So. Would it mend
	If I shrank back before the end?
	And sank to death and cowardice?
	No, the last lees must be drained up,
	Base wine from an ignoble cup;
	(Yet not so base as sleek content
	When I had shrunk from punishment)
	The wretched body strain anew!
	Life was a storm to wander through.
	I took the wrong way. Good and well,
	At least my feet sought out not Hell!
	Though night were one consuming flame
	I must go on for my base aim,
	And so, perhaps, make evil grow
	To something clean by agony . . .
	And reach that light upon the snow . . .
	And touch her dress at last . . .
	So, so,
	I crawled. I could not speak or see
	Save dimly. The ice glared like fire,
	A long bright Hell of choking cold,
	And each vein was a tautened wire,
	Throbbing with torture--and I crawled.
	My hands were wounds.
	So I attained
	The second Hell. The snow was stained
	I thought, and shook my head at it
	How red it was! Black tree-roots clutched
	And tore--and soon the snow was smutched
	Anew; and I lurched babbling on,
	And then fell down to rest a bit,
	And came upon another Hell . . .
	Loose stones that ice made terrible,
	That rolled and gashed men as they fell.
	I stumbled, slipped . . . and all was gone
	That I had gained. Once more I lay
	Before the long bright Hell of ice.
	And still the light was far away.
	There was red mist before my eyes
	Or I could tell you how I went
	Across the swaying firmament,
	A glittering torture of cold stars,
	And how I fought in Titan wars . . .
	And died . . . and lived again upon
	The rack . . . and how the horses strain
	When their red task is nearly done . . .
	
	I only know that there was Pain,
	Infinite and eternal Pain.
	And that I fell--and rose again.
	
	So she was walking in the road.
	And I stood upright like a man,
	Once, and fell blind, and heard her cry . . .
	And then there came long agony.
	There was no pain when I awoke,
	No pain at all. Rest, like a goad,
	Spurred my eyes open--and light broke
	Upon them like a million swords:
	And she was there. There are no words.
	
	Heaven is for a moment’s span.
	And ever.
	So I spoke and said,
	“My honor stands up unbetrayed,
	And I have seen you. Dear . . .”
	Sharp pain
	Closed like a cloak . . .
	I moaned and died.
	
	Here, even here, these things remain.
	I shall draw nearer to her side.
	
	Oh dear and laughing, lost to me,
	Hidden in grey Eternity,
	I shall attain, with burning feet,
	To you and to the mercy-seat!
	The ages crumble down like dust,
	Dark roses, deviously thrust
	And scattered in sweet wine--but I,
	I shall lift up to you my cry,
	And kiss your wet lips presently
	Beneath the ever-living Tree.
	
	This in my heart I keep for goad!
	Somewhere, in Heaven she walks that road.
	Somewhere . . . in Heaven . . . she walks . . . that . . . road . . .