*** John Berryman (1914 - 1972)


1. THE BALL POEM

	What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
	What, what is he to do? I saw it go
	Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
	Merrily over—there it is in the water!
	No use to say ‘O there are other balls’:
	An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
	As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
	All his young days into the harbour where
	His ball went. I would not intrude on him,
	A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
	He senses first responsibility
	In a world of possessions. People will take balls,
	Balls will be lost always, little boy,
	And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
	He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
	The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
	Knowing what every man must one day know
	And most know many days, how to stand up
	And gradually light returns to the street
	A whistle blows, the ball is out of sight,
	Soon part of me will explore the deep and dark
	Floor of the harbour . . . I am everywhere,
	I suffer and move, my mind and my heart move
	With all that move me, under the water
	Or whistling, I am not a little boy.



2. THE DISPOSSESSED

	‘and something that . . . that is theirs--no longer ours’
	stammered to me the Italian page. A wood
	seeded & towered suddenly. I understood.--

	The Leading Man’s especially, and the Juvenile Lead’s,
	and the Leading Lady’s thigh that switches and warms,
	and their grimaces, and their flying arms:

	_our_ arms, our story. Every seat was sold.
	A crone met in a clearing sprouts a beard
	and has a tirade. Not a word we heard.

	Movement of stone within a woman’s heart,
	abrupt and dominant. They gesture how
	fings really are. Rarely a child sings now.

	My harpsichord weird as a koto drums
	_adagio_ for twilight, for the storm-worn dove
	no more de-iced, and the spidery business of love.

	The Juvenile Lead’s the Leader’s arm, one arm
	running the whole bole, branches, roots, (O watch)
	and the faceless fellow waving from her crotch,

	Stalin-unanimous! who procured a vote
	and care not use it, who have kept an eye
	and care not use it, percussive vote, clear eye.

	That which a captain and a weaponeer
	one day and one more day did, we did, _ach_
	we did not, _They_ did . . . cam slid, the great lock

	lodged, and no soul of us all was near was near,--
	an evil sky (where the umbrella bloomed)
	twirled its mustaches, hissed, the ingenue fumed,

	poor virgin, and no hero rides. The race
	is done. Drifts through, between the cold black trunks,
	the peachblow glory of the perishing sun

	in empty houses where old things take place.



3. DREAM SONG 1

	Huffy Henry hid the day,
	unappeasable Henry sulked.
	I see his point,--a trying to put things over.
	It was the thought that they thought
	they could do it made Henry wicked & away.
	But he should have come out and talked.

	All the world like a woolen lover
	once did seem on Henry’s side.
	Then came a departure.
	Thereafter nothing fell out as it might or ought.
	I don’t see how Henry, pried
	open for all the world to see, survived.

	What he has now to say is a long
	wonder the world can bear & be.
	Once in a sycamore I was glad
	all at the top, and I sang.
	Hard on the land wears the strong sea
	and empty grows every bed.



4. DREAM SONG 10

	There were strange gatherings. A vote would come
	that would be no vote. There would come a rope.
	Yes. There would come a rope.
	Men have their hats down. "Dancing in the Dark"
	will see him up, car-radio-wise. So many, some
	won’t find a rut to park.

	It is in the occasions, that--not the fathomless heart--
	the thinky death consists;
	his chest is pinched. The enemy are sick,
	and so is us of. Often, to rising trysts,
	like this one, drove he out

	and gasps of love, after all, had got him ready.
	However things hurt, men hurt worse. He’s stark
	to be jerked onward?
	Yes. In the headlights he got’ keep him steady,
	leak not, look out over. This’ hard work,
	boss, wait’ for The Word.



5. DREAM SONG 100

	How this woman came by the courage, how she got
	the courage, Henry bemused himself in a frantic hot
	night of the eight of July,
	where it came from, did once the Lord frown down
	upon her ancient cradle thinking ‘This one
	will do before she die

	for two and seventy years of chipped indignities
	at least,’ and with his thunder clapped a promise?
	In that far away town
	who looky upon my mother with shame & rage
	that any should endure such pilgrimage,
	growled Henry sweating, grown

	but not grown used to the goodness of this woman
	in her great strength, in her hope superhuman,
	no, no, not used at all.
	I declare a mystery, he mumbled to himself,
	of love, and took the bourbon from the shelf
	and drank her a tall one, tall.



6. DREAM SONG 101

	A shallow lake, with many waterbirds,
	especially egrets: I was showing Mother around,
	An extraordinary vivid dream
	of Betty & Douglass, and Don--his mother’s estate
	was on the grounds of a lunatic asylum.
	He showed me around.

	A policeman trundled a siren up the walk.
	It was 6:05 p.m., Don was late home.
	I askt if he ever saw
	the inmates--‘No, they never leave their cells.’
	Betty was downstairs, Don called down ‘A drink’
	while showering.

	I can’t go into the meaning of the dream
	except to say a sense of total Loss
	afflicted me therof:
	an absolute disappearance of continuity & love
	and children away at school, the weight of the cross,
	and everything is what it seems.



7. DREAM SONG 102

	The sunburnt terraces which swans make home
	with water purling, Macchu Pichu died
	like Delphi long ago--
	a message to Justinian closing it out,
	the thousand years’ authority, although
	tho’ never found exactly wrong

	political patterns did indeed emerge;
	the Oracle was conservative, like Lippmann,
	roared the winds on the height,
	The Shining Ones behind the shrine, whose verge
	saw the impious plunged, 6000 statures
	above the Temple shone

	plundered, centuries plundered, first the gold
	then bronze & marble, then the plinths,
	then the dead nerve--
	root-canal-work, ugh. I--I still hold
	for the saviour of teeth, & I embrace
	only he threw me a vicious



8. DREAM SONG 103

	I consider a song will be as humming-bird
	swift, down-light, missile-metal-hard, & strange
	as the world of anti-matter
	where they are wondering: does time run backward--
	which the poet thought was true; Scarlatti-supple;
	but can Henry write it?

	Wreckt, in deep danger, he shook once his head,
	returning to meditation. And word had sped
	all from the farthest West
	that Henry was desired: can he get free
	of the hanging menace, & this all, and go?
	He doesn’t think so.

	Therefore he shakes and he will sing no more,
	much less a song as fast as said, as light,
	so deep, so flexing. He broods.
	He may, rehearsing, here of his bad year
	at the very end, in squalor, ill, outside.
	--Happy New Year, Mr Bones.



9. DREAM SONG 104

	Welcome, grinned Henry, welcome, fifty-one!
	I never cared for fifty, when nothing got done.
	The hospitals were fun
	in certain ways, and an honour or so,
	but on the whole fifty was a mess as though
	heavy clubs from below

	and from--God save the bloody mark--above
	were loosed upon his skull & soles. O love,
	what was you loafing of
	that fifty put you off, out & away,
	leaving the pounding, horrid sleep by day,
	nights naught but fits. I pray

	the opening decade contravene its promise
	to be as bad as all the others. Is
	there something Henry miss
	in the jungle of the gods whom Henry’s prayer to?
	Empty temples--a decade of dark-blue
	sins, son, worse than you.



10. DREAM SONG 105

	As a kid I believed in democracy: I
	‘saw no alternative’--teaching at The Big Place I ah
	put it in practice:
	we’d time for one long novel: to a vote--
	Gone with the Wind they voted: I crunched ‘No’
	and we sat down with War & Peace.

	As a man I believed in democracy (nobody
	ever learns anything): only one lazy day
	my assistant, called James Dow,
	& I were chatting, in a failure of meeting of minds,
	and I said curious ‘What are your real politics?’
	‘Oh, I’m a monarchist.’

	Finishing his dissertation, in Political Science.
	I resign. The universal contempt for Mr Nixon,
	whom never I liked but who
	alert & gutsy served us years under a dope,
	since dynasty K swarmed in. Let’s have a King
	maybe, before a few mindless votes.



11. DREAM SONG 106

	28 July

	Calmly, while sat up friendlies & made noise
	delight fuller than he can ready sing
	or studiously say,
	on hearing that the year had swung to pause
	and culminated in an abundant thing,
	came his Lady’s birthday.

	Dogs fill daylight, doing each other ill:
	my own in love was lugged so many blocks
	we had to have a vet.
	Comes unrepentant round the lustful mongrel
	again today, glaring at her bandages & locks:
	his bark has grit.

	This screen-porch where my puppy suffers and
	I swarm I hope with heartless love is now
	towards the close of day
	the scene of a vision of friendlies who withstand
	animal nature so far as to allow
	grace awhile to stay.



12. DREAM SONG 107

	Three ’coons come at his garbage. He be cross,
	I figuring porcupine & took Sir poker
	unbarring Mr door,
	& then screen door. Ah, but the little ’coon,
	hardly a foot (not counting tail) got in with
	two more at the porch-edge

	and they swirled, before some two swerve off
	this side of crab tree, and my dear friend held
	with the torch in his tiny eyes
	two feet off, banded, but then he gave &
	shot away too. They were all the same size,
	maybe they were brothers,

	it seems, and is, clear to me we are brothers.
	I wish the rabbit & the ’coons could be friends,
	I’m sorry about the poker
	but I’m too busy now for nipping or quills
	I’ve given up literature & taken down pills,
	and that rabbit doesn’t trust me



13. DREAM SONG 108

	Sixteen below. Our care like stranded hulls
	litter all day our little Avenues.
	It was 28 below.
	No one goes anywhere. Fabulous calls
	to duty clank. Icy dungeons, though,
	have much to mention to you.

	At Harvard & Yale must Pussy-cat be heard
	in the dead of winter when we must be sad
	and feel by the weather had.
	Chrysanthemums crest, far way, in the Emperor’s garden
	and, whenever we are, we must beg always pardon
	Pardon was the word.

	Pardon was the only word, in ferocious cold
	like Asiatic prisons, where we live
	and strive and strive to forgive.
	Melted my honey, summers ago. I told
	her true & summer things. She leaned an ear
	in my direction, here.



14. DREAM SONG 109

	She mentioned ‘worthless’ & he took it in,
	degraded Henry, at the ebb of love--
	O at the end of love--
	in undershorts, with visitors, whereof
	we can say their childlessness is ending. Love
	finally took over,

	after their two adopted: she has a month to go
	and Henry has (perhaps) many months to go
	until another Spring
	wakens another Henry, with far to go;
	far to go, pal.
	My pussy-willow ceased. The tiger-lily dreamed.

	All we dream, uncertain, in Syracuse & here
	& there: dread we our loves, whereas the National Geographic
	is on its way somewhere.
	We’re not. We’re on our way to the little fair
	and the cops & the flicks & the single flick
	who’ll solve our intolerable problem.



15. DREAM SONG 11

	His mother goes. The mother comes & goes.
	Chen Lung’s too came, came and crampt & then
	that dragoner’s mother was gone.
	It seem we don’t have no good bed to lie on,
	forever. While he drawing his first breath,
	while skinning his knees,

	while he was so beastly with love for Charlotte Coquet
	he skated up & down in front of her house
	wishing he could, sir, die,
	while being bullied & he dreamt he could fly--
	during irregular verbs--them world-sought bodies
	safe in the Arctic lay:

	Strindberg rocked in his niche, the great Andrée
	by muscled Fraenkel under what’s of the tent,
	torn like then limbs, by bears
	over fierce decades, harmless. Up in pairs
	go we not, but we have a good bed.
	I have said what I had to say.



16. DREAM SONG 110

	It was the blue & plain ones. I forget all that.
	My own clouds darkening hung.
	Besides, it wasn’t serious.
	They took them in different rooms & fed them lies.
	‘She admitted you wanted to get rid of it.’
	‘He told us he told you to.’

	The Force, with its rapists con-men murderers,
	has been our Pride (trust Henry) eighty years;--
	now Teddy was hard on.
	Still the tradition persists, beat up, beat on,
	take, take. Frame. Get set; cover up.
	The Saturday confessions are really something.

	Here was there less or nothing in question but horror.
	She left his brother’s son two minutes but--
	as I say I forget that--
	during the time he drowned. The laundry lived
	and they lived, uncharged, and went their ways apart
	with the blessing of the N.Y. Police Force.



17. DREAM SONG 111

	I miss him. When I get back to camp
	I’ll dig him up. Well, he can prop & watch,
	can’t he, pink or blue,
	and I will talk to him. I miss him. Slams,
	grand or any, aren’t for the tundra much.
	One face-card will do.

	It’s marvellous how four sit down--beyond
	my thought how many tables sometimes are
	in forgotten clubs
	across & down the world. Your fever conned
	us, pal. Will it work out, my solitaire?
	The blubber’s safe in the tubs,

	the dogs are still, & all’s well . . . nine long times
	I loosed & buried. Then I shot him dead.
	I don’t remember why.
	The Captain of the supply ship, playing for dimes,
	thinks I killed him. The black cards are red
	and where’s the others? I--



18. DREAM SONG 112

	My framework is broken, I am coming to an end,
	God send it soon. When I had most to say
	my tongue clung to the roof
	I mean of my mouth. It is my Lady’s birthday
	which must be honoured, and has been. God send
	it soon.

	I now must speak to my disciples, west
	and east. I say to you, Do not delay
	I say, expectation is vain.
	I say again, It is my Lady’s birthday
	which must be honoured. Bring her to the test
	at once.

	I say again, It is my Lady’s birthday
	which must be honoured, for her high black hair
	but not for that alone:
	for every word she utters everywhere
	shows her good soul, as true as a healed bone,--
	being part of what I meant to say.



19. DREAM SONG 113

	or Amy Vladeck or Riva Freifeld

	That isna Henry limping. That’s a hobble
	clapped on mere Henry by the most high GOD
	for the freedom of Henry’s soul.
	--The body’s foul, cried god, once, twice, & bound it--
	For many years I hid it from him successfully--
	I’m not clear how he found it

	But now he has it--much good may it do him
	in the vacant spiritual of space--
	only Russians & Americans
	to as it were converse with--weel, one Frenchman
	to liven up the airless with one nose
	& opinions clever & grim.

	God declared war on Valerie Trueblood,
	against Miss Kaplan he had much to say
	O much to say too.
	My memory of his kindness comes like a flood
	for which I flush with gratitude; yet away
	he shouldna have put down Miss Trueblood.



20. DREAM SONG 114

	Henry in trouble whirped out lonely whines.
	When ich when was ever not in trouble?
	But did he whip out whines
	afore? And when check in wif ales & lifelines
	anyone earlier O?--Some, now, Mr Bones,
	many.--I am fleeing double:

	Mr Past being no friends of mine,
	all them around: Sir Future Dubious,
	calamitous & grand:
	I can no foothold here; wherefore I pines
	for Dr Present, who won’t thrive to us
	hand over neither hand

	from them blue depths nor choppering down skies
	does Dr Present vault unto his task.
	Henry is weft on his own.
	Pluck Dr Present. Let his grievous wives
	thrall lie to livey toads. May his chains bask.
	lower him, Capt Owen, into the sun.



21. DREAM SONG 115

	Her properties, like her of course & frisky & new:
	a stale cake sold to kids, a 7-foot weed
	inside in the Great Neck night,
	a record (‘great’), her work all over as u-
	sual rejected. She odd in a bakery.
	The owner stand beside her

	and she have to sell to the brother & sister jumping
	without say ‘One week old.’ Her indifference
	to the fate of her manuscripts
	(which flash) to a old hand is truly somefing.
	I guess: she’ll take the National Book Award
	presently, with like flare & indifference.

	A massive, unpremeditated, instantaneous
	transfer of solicitude from the thing to the creature
	Henry sometimes felt.
	A state of chancy mind when facts stick out
	frequent was his, while that this shrugging girl,
	keen, do not quit, he knelt.

	(Having so swiftly, and been by, let down.)



22. DREAM SONG 116

	Through the forest, followed, Henry made his silky way,
	No chickadee was troubled, small moss smiled
	on his swift passage.
	But there were those ahead when at midday
	they met in a clearing and lookt at each other awhile.
	To kill was not the message.

	He only could go with them--odds? 20 to one-and-a-half;
	pointless. Besides, palaver with the High Chief
	might advance THE CAUSE.
	Undoubtedly down they sat and they did talk
	and one did balk & stuck but one did stalk
	a creation of new laws.

	He smoked the pipe of peace--the sceen? tepees,
	wigwams, papooses, buffalo hides, a high fire--
	with everyone,
	even that abnormally scrubbed & powerful one,
	shivering with power, held together with wires,
	his worst enemy.



23. DREAM SONG 117

	Disturbed, when Henry’s love returned with a hubby,--
	I see that, Henry, I don’t put that down,--
	he thought he had to think
	or with a razor like a skating-rink
	have more to say or more to them downtown
	in the Christmas season, like a hobby.

	Their letters will, released, shake the mapped world
	at some point, in the National Geographic.
	(Friend, that hurt.)
	It’s horrible how near she was my hurt
	in the old days--now she’s a lawyer twirled
	halfway around her finger

	and I am elated & vague for love of her
	and she is chilly & lost for love of me
	and we are for each other
	that which needs which, corresponding to Henry’s mother
	but which can not have, like the lifting sea
	over each other’s fur.



24. DREAM SONG 118

	He wondered: Do I love? all this applause,
	young beauties sitting at my feet & all,
	and all.
	It tires me out, he pondered: I’m tempted to break laws
	and love myself, or the stupid questions asked me
	move me to homicide--

	so many beauties, one on either side,
	the wall’s behind me, into which I crawl
	out of my repeating voice--
	the mike folds down, the foolish askers fall
	over theirselves in an audience of ashes
	and Henry returns to rejoice

	in dark & and still, and one sole beauty only
	who never walked near Henry while the mob
	was at him like a club:
	she saw through things, she saw that he was lonely
	and waited while he hid behind the wall
	and all.



25. DREAM SONG 119

	Fresh-shaven, past months & a picture in New York
	of Beard Two, I did have Three took off. Well . . .
	Shadow & act, shadow & act,
	Better get white or you’ get whacked,
	or keep so-called black
	& raise new hell.

	I’ve had enough of this dying.
	You’ve done me a dozen goodnesses; get well.
	Fight again for our own.
	Henry felt baffled, in the middle of the thing.
	He spent his whole time in Ireland on the Book of Kells,
	the jackass, made of bone.

	No tremor, no perspire: Heaven is here
	now, in Minneapolis.
	It’s easier to vomit than it was,
	beardless.
	There’s always the cruelty of scholarship.
	I once was a slip.



26. DREAM SONG 12

	There is an eye, there was a slit.
	Nights walk, and confer on him fear.
	The strangler tree, the dancing mouse
	confound his vision; then they loosen it.
	Henry widens. How did Henry House
	himself ever come here?

	Nights run. Tes yeux bizarres me suivent
	when loth at landfall soft I leave.
	The soldiers, Coleridge Rilke Poe,
	shout commands I never heard.
	They march about, dying & absurd.
	Toddlers are taking over. O

	ver! Sabbath belling. Snoods converge
	on a weary-daring man.
	What now can be cleard up? from the Yard the visitors urge.
	Belle thro’ the graves in a blast of sun
	to the kirk moves the youngest witch.
	Watch.



27. DREAM SONG 120

	Foes I sniff, when I have less to shout
	or murmur. Pals alone enormous sounds
	downward & up bring real.
	Loss, deaths, terror. Over & out,
	beloved: thanks for cabbage on my wounds:
	I’ll feed you how I feel:--

	of avocado moist with lemon, yea
	formaldehyde & rotting sardines O
	in our appointed time
	I would I could a touch more fully say
	my consentless mind. The senses are below,
	which in this air sublime

	do I repudiate. But foes I sniff!
	My nose in all directions! I be so brave
	I creep into an Arctic cave
	for the rectal temperature of the biggest bear,
	hibernating--in my left hand sugar.
	I totter to the lip of the cliff.



28. DREAM SONG 121

	Grief is fatiguing. He is out of it,
	the whole humiliating Human round,
	out of this & that.
	He made a-many hearts go pit-a-pat
	who now need never mind his nostril-hair
	nor a critical error laid bare.

	He endured fifty years. He was Randall Jarrell
	and wrote a-many books & he wrote well.
	Peace to the bearded corpse.
	His last book was his best. His wives loved him.
	He saw in the forest something coming, grim,
	but did not change his purpose.

	Honest & cruel, peace now to his soul.
	He never loved his body, being full of dents.
	A wrinkled peace to this good man.
	Henry is half in love with one of his students
	and the sad process continues to the whole
	as it swarmed & began.



29. DREAM SONG 122

	He published his girl’s bottom in staid pages
	of an old weekly. Where will next his rages
	ridiculous Henry land?
	Tranquil & chaste, de-hammocked, he descended--
	upon which note the fable should have ended--
	towards the ground, and

	while fable wound itself upon him thick
	and coats upon his tongue formed, white, terrific:
	he stretched out still.
	Assembled bands to do obsequious music
	at hopeless noon. He bayed before he obeyed,
	doing at last their will.

	This seemed perhaps one of the best of dogs
	during his barking. Many thronged & lapped
	at his delicious stone.
	Cats to a distance kept--one of their own--
	having in mind that down he lay & napped
	in the realm of whiskers & fogs.



30. DREAM SONG 123

	Dapples my floor the eastern sun, my house faces north,
	I have nothing to say except that it dapples my floor
	and it would dapple me
	if I lay on that floor, as-well-forthwith
	I have done, trying well to mount a thought
	not carelessly

	in times forgotten, except by the New York Times
	which can’t forget. There is always the morgue.
	There are men in the morgue.
	These men have access. Sleepless, in position,
	they dream the past forever
	Colossal in the dawn comes the second light

	we do all die, in the floor, in the morgue
	and we must die forever, c’est la mort
	a heady brilliance
	the ultimate gloire
	post-mach, probably in underwear
	as we met each other once.



31. DREAM SONG 124

	Behold I bring you tidings of great joy--
	especially now that the snow & gale are still--
	for Henry is delivered.
	Not only is he delivered from the gale
	but he has a little one. He’s out of jail
	also. It is a boy.

	Henry’s pleasure in this unusual event
	reminds me of the extra told at Hollywood & Vine
	that TV cameras
	were focussed on him personally then & there
	and ‘Just a few words . . . Is it what you meant?
	Was there a genuine sign?’

	Couvade was always Henry’s favourite custom,
	better than the bride biting off the penises, pal,
	remember? All the brothers
	marrying her in turn & dying mutilated
	until the youngest put in instead a crowbar, pal,
	and pulled out not only her teeth but also his brothers’ dongs & no doubt others’.



32. DREAM SONG 125

	Bards freezing, naked, up to the neck in water,
	wholly in dark, time limited, different from
	initiations now:
	the class in writing, clothed & dry & light,
	unlimited time, till Poetry takes some,
	nobody reads them though,

	no trumpets, no solemn instauration, no change;
	no commissions, ladies high in soulful praise
	(pal) none,
	costumes as usual, turtleneck sweaters, loafers,
	in & among the busy Many who brays
	art is if anything fun.

	I say the subject was given as of old,
	prescribed the technical treatment, tests really tests
	were set by the masters & graded.
	I say the paralyzed fear lest one’s not one
	is back with us forever, worsts & bests
	spring for the public, faded.



33. DREAM SONG 126

	A Thurn

	Among them marble where the man may lie
	lie chieftains grand in final phase, or pause,
	‘O rare Ben Jonson’,
	dictator too, & the thinky other Johnson,
	dictator too, backhanders down of laws,
	men of fears, weird & sly.

	Not of these least is borne to rest.
	If grandeur & mettle prompted his lone journey
	neither oh crowded shelved
	nor this slab I celebrates attest
	his complex slow fame forever (more or less).
	I imagine the Abbey

	among their wonders will be glad of him
	whom some are sorry for his griefs across the world
	grievously understated
	and grateful for that bounty, for bright whims
	of heavy mind across the tiresome world
	which the tiresome world debated, complicated.



34. DREAM SONG 127

	Again, his friend’s death made the man sit still
	and freeze inside--his daughter won first price--
	his wife scowled over at him--
	It seemed to be Hallowe’en.
	His friend’s death had been adjudged suicide,
	which dangles a trail

	longer than Henry’s chill, longer than his loss
	and longer than the letter that he wrote
	that day to the widow
	to find out what the hell had happened thus.
	All souls converge upon a hopeless mote
	tonight, as though

	the throngs of souls in hopeless pain rise up
	to say they cannot care, to say they abide
	whatever is to come.
	My air is flung with souls which will not stop
	and among them hangs a soul that has not died
	and refuses to come home.



35. DREAM SONG 128

	A hemorrhage of his left ear of Good Friday--
	so help me Jesus--then made funny too
	the other, further one.
	There must have been a bit. Sheets scrubbed away
	soon all but three nails. Doctors in this city O
	will not (his wife cried) come.

	Perhaps he’s for it. IF that Filipino doc
	had diagnosed ah here in Washington
	that ear-infection ha
	he’d have been grounded, so in a hall for the ill
	in Southern California, they opined.
	The cabins at eight thou’

	are pressurized, they swore, my love, bad for--
	ten days ago--a dim & bloody ear,
	or ears.
	They say are sympathetic, ears, & hears
	more than they should or
	did.



36. DREAM SONG 129

	Thin as a sheet his mother came to him
	during the screaming evenings after he did it,
	touched F.J.’s dead hand.
	The parlour was dark, he was the first pall-bearer in,
	he gave himself a dare & then did it,
	the thing was quite unplanned,

	riots for Henry the unstructured dead,
	his older playmate fouled, reaching for him
	and never will he be free
	from the older boy who died by the cottonwood
	& now is to be planted, wise & slim,
	as part of Henry’s history.

	Christ waits. That boy was good beyond his years,
	he served at Mass like Henry, he never did
	one extreme thing wrong
	but tender his cold hand, latent with Henry’s fears
	to Henry’s shocking touch, whereat he fled
	and woke screaming, young & strong.



37. DREAM SONG 13

	God bless Henry. He lived like a rat,
	with a thatch of hair on his head
	in the beginning.
	Henry was not a coward. Much.
	He never deserted anything; instead
	he stuck, when things like pity were thinning.

	So may be Henry was a human being.
	Let’s investigate that.
	. . . We did; okay.
	He is a human American man.
	That’s true. My lass is braking.
	My brass is aching. Come & diminish me, & map my way.

	God’s Henry’s enemy. We’re in business . . . Why,
	what business must be clear.
	A cornering.
	I couldn’t feel more like it. --Mr. Bones,
	as I look on the saffron sky,
	you strikes me as ornery.



38. DREAM SONG 130

	When I saw my friend covered with blood, I thought
	This is the end of the dream, now I’ll wake up.
	That was more years ago
	than I care to reckon, and my friend is not
	dying but adhering to an élite group
	in California O.

	Why did I never wake, when covered with blood
	I saw my fearful friend, his nerves are bad
	with the large strain of moving,
	I see his motions, stretcht on his own rack,
	our book is coming out in paperback,
	Henry has not ceased loving

	but wishes all that blood would flow away
	leaving his friend crisp, ready for all
	in the new world O.
	I see him brace, and on that note I pray
	the blood recede like an old folderol
	and he spring up & go.



39. DREAM SONG 131

	Come touch me baby in his waking dream
	disordered Henry murmured. I’ll read you Hegel
	and that will hurt your mind
	I can’t remember when you were unkind
	but I will clear that block, I’ll set you on fire
	along with our babies

	to save them up the high & ruined stairs,
	my growing daughters. I am insane, I think,
	they say & act so.
	But then they let me out, and I must save them,
	High fires will help, at this time, in my affairs.
	I am insane, I know

	and many of my close friends were half-sane
	I see the rorschach for the dead on its way
	Prop them up!
	Trade us a lesson, pour me down a sink
	I swear I’ll love her always, like a drink
	Let pass from me this cup



40. DREAM SONG 132

	A Small Dream

	It was only a small dream of the Golden World,
	now you trot off to bed. I’ll turn the machine off,
	you’ve danced & trickt us enough.
	Unintelligible whines & imprecations, hurled
	from the second floor, fail to impress your mother
	and I am the only other

	and I say go to bed! We’ll meet tomorrow,
	acres of threats dissolve into a smile,
	you’ll be the Little Baby
	again, while I pursue my path of sorrow
	& bodies, bodies, to be carried a mile
	& dropt. Maybe

	if frozen slush will represent the soul
	which is to represented in the hereafter
	I ask for a decree
	dooming my bitter enemies to laughter
	advanced against them. If the dream was small
	it was my dream also, Henry’s.



41. DREAM SONG 133

	As he grew famous--ah, but what is fame?--
	he lost his old obsession with his name,
	things seemed to matter less,
	including the fame--a television team came
	from another country to make a film of him
	which did not him distress:

	he enjoyed the hard work & he was good at that,
	so they all said--the charming Englishman
	among the camera & the lights
	mathematically wandered in his pub & livingroom
	doing their duty, as too he did it,
	but where are the delights

	of long-for fame, unless fame makes him feel easy?
	I am cold & weary, said Henry, fame makes me feel lazy,
	yet i must do my best.
	It doesn’t matter, truly. It doesn’t matter truly.
	It seems to be solely a matter of continuing Henry
	voicing & obsessed.



42. DREAM SONG 134

	Sick at 6 & sick again at 9
	was Henry’s gloomy Monday morning oh.
	Still he had to lecture.
	They waited, his little children, for stricken Henry
	to rise up yet once more again and come oh.
	They figured he was a fixture,

	nuts to their bolds, keys to their bloody locks.
	One day the whole affair will fall apart
	with a rustle of fire,
	a wrestle of undoing, as of tossed clocks,
	and somewhere not far off a broken heart
	for hire.

	He had smoked a pack of cigarettes by 10
	& was ready to go. Peace to his ashes then,
	poor Henry,
	with all this gas & shit blowing through it
	four times in 2 hours, his tail ached.
	He arose, benign, & performed.



43. DREAM SONG 135

	I heard said ‘Cats that walk by their wild lone’
	but Henry had need of friends. They disappeared
	Shall I follow my dream?
	Clothes disappeared in a backward sliding, zones
	shot into view, pocked, exact & weird:
	who is what he seem?

	I will tell you now a story about Speck:
	after other cuts, he put the knife in her eye,
	one of the eight:
	he was troubled, missionary: and Whitman
	of the tower murdered his wife & mother
	before (mercy-killings) he set out.

	Not every shot went in. But most went in:
	in just over an hour
	with the tumor thudding in his brain
	he killed 13, hit 33:
	his empty father said he taught him to respect guns
	(not persons).



44. DREAM SONG 136

	While his wife earned the living, Rabbi Henry
	studied the Torah, writing commentaries
	more likely to be burnt than printed.
	It was rumoured that they needed revision.
	Smiling, kissing, he bent his head not with ‘Please’
	but with austere requests barely hinted,

	like a dog with a bone he worried the Sacred Book
	and often taught its fringes.
	Imperishable enthusiasms.
	I have only one request to make of the Lord,
	that I may no longer have to earn my living as a rabbi
	‘Thou shalt make unto thee any graven image’

	The sage said ‘I merit long life if only because
	I have never left bread-crumbs lying on the ground.
	We were tested yesterday & are sound,
	Henry’s lady & Henry.
	It all centered in the end on the suicide
	in which I am an expert, deep & wide.’



45. DREAM SONG 14

	Life, friends, is boring. We must not say so.
	After all, the sky flashes, the great sea yearns,
	we ourselves flash and yearn,
	and moreover my mother told me as a boy
	(repeatedly) ‘Ever to confess you’re bored
	means you have no

	Inner Resources.’ I conclude now I have no
	inner resources, because I am heavy bored.
	Peoples bore me,
	literature bores me, especially great literature,
	Henry bores me, with his plights & gripes
	as bad as achilles,

	Who loves people and valiant art, which bores me.
	And the tranquil hills, & gin, look like a drag
	and somehow a dog
	has taken itself & its tail considerably away
	into mountains or sea or sky, leaving
	behind: me, wag.



46. DREAM SONG 15

	Let us suppose, valleys & such ago,
	one pal unwinding from his labours in
	one bar of Chicago
	and this did actually happen. This was so.
	And many graces are slipped, & many a sin
	even that laid man low

	but this will be remembered & told over,
	that she was heard at last, haughtful & greasy,
	to brawl in that low bar:
	‘You can biff me, you can bang me, get it you’ll never.
	I may be only a Polack broad but I don’t lay easy.
	Kiss my ass, that’s what you are.’

	Women is better, braver. In a foehn of loss
	entire, which too they hotter understand,
	having had it,
	we struggle. Some hang heavy on the sauce,
	some invest in the past, one hides in the land.
	Henry was not his favourite.



47. DREAM SONG 16

	Henry’s pelt was put on sundry walls
	where it did much resemble Henry and
	them persons was delighted.
	Especially his long & glowing tail
	by all them was admired, and visitors.
	They whistled: This is it!

	Golden, whilst your frozen daiquiris
	whir at midnight, gleams on you his fur
	& silky & black.
	Mission accomplished, pal.
	My molten yellow & moonless bag,
	drained, hangs at rest.

	Collect in the cold depths barracuda. Ay,
	in Sealdah Station some possessionless
	children survive to die.
	The Chinese communes hum. Two daiquiris
	withdrew into a corner of the gorgeous room
	and one told the other a lie.



48. DREAM SONG 17

	Muttered Henry:--Lord of matter, thus:
	upon some more unquiet spirit knock,
	my madnesses have cease.
	All the quarter astonishes a lonely out & back.
	They set their clocks by Henry House,
	the steadiest man on the block.

	And Lucifer:--I smell you for my own,
	by smug.--What have I tossed you but the least
	(tho’ hard); fit for your ears.
	Your servant, bored with horror, sat alone
	with busy teeth while his dislike increased
	unto himself, in tears.

	And he:--O promising despair,
	in solitude-- --End there.
	Your avenues are dying: leave me: I dove
	under the oaken arms of Brother Martin,
	St Simeon the Lesser Theologian,
	Bodhidharma, and Baal Shem Tov.



49. DREAM SONG 171

	Go, ill-sped book, and whisper to her or
	storm out the message for her only ear
	that she is beautiful.
	Mention sunsets, be not silent of her eyes
	and mouth and other prospects, praise her size,
	say her figure is full.

	Say her small figure is heavenly & full,
	so as stunned Henry yatters like a fool
	& maketh little sense.
	Say she is soft in speech, stately in walking,
	modest at gatherings, and in every thing
	declare her excellence.

	And forget not, when the rest is wholly done
	and all of her splendors opened, one by one,
	to add that she likes Henry,
	for reasons unknown, and fate has bound them fast
	one to another in linkages that last
	and that are fair to see.



50. DREAM SONG 172

	Your face broods from my table, Suicide.
	Your force came on like a torrent toward the end
	of agony and wrath.
	You were christened in the beginning Sylvia Plath
	and changed that name for Mrs Hughes and bred
	and went on round the bend

	till the oven seemed the proper place for you.
	I brood upon your face, the geography of grief,
	hooded, till I allow
	again your resignation from us now
	though the screams of orphaned children fix me anew.
	Your torment here was brief,

	long falls your exit all repeatingly,
	a poor exemplum, one more suicide,
	to stack upon the others
	till stricken Henry with his sisters & brothers
	suddenly gone pauses to wonder why he
	alone breasts the wronging tide.



51. DREAM SONG 176

	All that hair flashing over the Atlantic,
	Henry’s girl’s gone. She’ll find Paris a sweet place
	as many times he did.
	She’s there now, having left yesterday. I held
	her cousin’s hand, all innocence, on the climb to the tower.
	Her cousin is if possible more beautiful than she is.

	All over the world grades are being turned in,
	and isn’t that a truly gloomy thought.
	It’s June, God help us, when the sight we fought
	clears. One day when I take my sock
	off the skin will come with it

	and I’ll run blood, horrible on the floor
	the streaming blood reminds me of my love.
	Wolves run in & out
	take wolves, but terrible enough
	I am dreaming of my love’s hair & all her front teeth are false
	as were my anti-hopes.



52. DREAM SONG 18

	Westward, hit a low note, for a roarer lost
	across the Sound but north from Bremerton,
	hit a way down note.
	And never cadenza again of flowers, or cost.
	Him who could really do that cleared his throat
	& staggered on.

	The bluebells, pool-shallows, saluted his over-needs,
	while the clouds growled, heh-heh, & snapped, & crashed.

	No stunt he’ll ever unflinch once more will fail
	(O lucky fellow, eh Bones?)--drifted off upstairs,
	downstairs, somewheres.
	No more daily, trying to hit the head on the nail:
	thirstless: without a think in his head:
	back from wherever, with it said.

	Hit a high long note, for a lover found
	needing a lower into friendlier ground
	to bug among worms no more
	around um jungles where ah blurt ‘What for?’
	Weeds, too, he favoured as most men don’t favour men.
	The Garden Master’s gone.



53. DREAM SONG 19

	Here, whence
	all have departed orwill do, here airless, where
	that witchy ball
	wanted, fought toward, dreamed of, all a green living
	drops limply into one’s hands
	without pleasure or interest

	Figurez-vous, a time swarms when the word
	‘happy’ sheds its whole meaning, like to come and
	like for memory too
	That morning arrived to Henry as well a great cheque
	eaten out already by the Government & State &
	other strange matters

	Gentle friendly Henry Pussy-cat
	smiled into his mirror, a murderer’s
	(at Stillwater), at himself alone
	and said across a plink to that desolate fellow
	said a little hail & buck-you-up
	upon his triumph



54. DREAM SONG 2

	The jane is zoned! no nightspot here, no bar
	there, no sweet freeway, and no premises
	for business purposes,
	no loiterers or needers. Henry are
	baffled. Have ev’ybody head for Maine,
	utility-man take a train?

	Arrive a time when all coons lose dere grip,
	but is he come? Le’s do a hoedown, gal,
	one blue, one shuffle,
	if them is all you seem to réquire. Strip,
	ol benger, skip us we, sugar; so hang on
	one chaste evenin.

	--Sir Bones, or Galahad: astonishin
	yo legal & yo good. Is you feel well?
	Honey dusk do sprawl.
	--Hit’s hard. Kinged or thinged, though, fling & wing.
	Poll-cats are coming, hurrah, hurray.
	I votes in my hole.



55. DREAM SONG 20

	When worst got things, how was you? Steady on?
	Wheedling, or shockt her &
	you have been bad to your friend,
	whom not you writing to. You have not listened.
	A pelican of lies
	you loosed: where are you?

	Down weeks of evenings of longing
	by hours, NOW, a stoned bell,
	you did somebody: others you hurt short:
	anyone ever did you do good?
	You licking your own old hurt,
	what?

	An evil kneel & adore.
	This is human. Hurl, God who found
	us in this, down
	something . . . We hear the more
	sin has increast, the more
	grace has been caused to abound.



56. DREAM SONG 21

	Some good people, daring & subtle voices
	and their tense faces, as I think of it
	I see sank underground.
	I see. My radar digs. I do not dig.
	Cool their flushing blood, them eyes is shut--
	eyes?

	Appalled: by all the dead: Henry brooded.
	Without exception! All.
	ALL.
	The senior population waits. Come down! come down!
	A ghastly & flashing pause, clothed,
	life called; us do.

	In a madhouse heard I an ancient man
	tube-fed who had not said for fifteen years
	(they said) one canny word,
	senile forever, who a heart might pierce,
	mutter ‘O come on down. O come on down.’
	Clear whom he meant.



57. DREAM SONG 22

	I am the little man who smokes & smokes.
	I am the girl who does know better but.
	I am the king of the pool.
	I am so wise I had my mouth sewn shut.
	I am a government official & a goddamned fool.
	I am a lady who takes jokes.

	I am the enemy of the mind.
	I am the auto salesman and lóve you.
	I am a teenage cancer, with a plan.
	I am the blackt-out man.
	I am the woman powerful as a zoo.
	I am two eyes screwed to my set, whose blind--

	It is the Fourth of July.
	Collect: while the dying man,
	forgone by you creator, who forgives,
	is gasping ‘Thomas Jefferson still lives’
	in vain, in vain, in vain.
	I am Henry Pussy-cat! My whiskers fly.



58. DREAM SONG 224

	Eighty

	Lonely in his great age, Henry’s old friend
	leaned on his burning cane while hí­s old friend
	was hymnéd out of living.
	The Abbey rang with sound. Pound white as snow
	bowed to them with his thoughts--it’s hard to know them though
	for the old man sang no word.

	Dry, ripe with pain, busy with loss, let’s guess.
	Gone. Gone them wine-meetings, gone green grasses
	of the picnics of rising youth.
	Gone all slowly. Stately, not as the tongue
	worries the loose tooth, wits as strong as young,
	only the albino body failing.

	Where the smother clusters pinpoint insights clear.
	The tennis is over. The last words are here?
	What, in the world, will they be?
	White is the hue of death & victory,
	all the old generosities dismissed,
	while the white years insist.



59. DREAM SONG 23

	This is the lay of Ike.
	Here’s to the glory of the Grewt White--awk--
	who has been running--er--er--things in recent--ech--
	in the United--If your screen is black,
	ladies & gentlemen, we--I like--
	at the Point he was already terrific--sick

	to a second term, having done no wrong--
	no right--no Â· right--having let the Army--bang--
	defend itself from Joe, let venom’ Strauss
	bile Oppenheimer out of use--use Robb,
	who’ll later fend for Goldfine--Breaking no laws,
	he lay in the White House--sob!!--

	who never understood his own strategy--whee--
	so Monty’s memoirs--nor any strategy,
	wanting the ball bulled thro’ all parts of the line
	at once--proving, by his refusal to take Berlin,
	he misread even Clauswitz--wide empty grin
	that never lost a vote (O Adlai mine).



60. DREAM SONG 24

	Oh servant Henry lectured till
	the crows commenced and then
	he bulbed his voice & lectured on some more.
	This happened again & again, like war,--
	the Indian p.a.’s, such as they were,
	a weapon on his side, for the birds.

	Vexations held a field-monsoon.
	He was Introduced, and then he was Summed-up.
	He was put questions on race bigotry;
	he put no questions on race bigotry
	constantly.
	The mad sun rose though on the ghats
	& the saddhu in maha mudra, the great River,

	and Henry was happy & beside him with excitement.
	Beside himself, his possibilities;
	salaaming hours of half-blind morning
	while the rainy lepers salaamed back,
	smiles & a passion of their & his eyes flew
	in feelings not ever accorded solely to oneself.



61. DREAM SONG 25

	Henry, edged, decidedly, made up stories
	lighting the past of Henry, of his glorious
	present, and his hoaries,
	all the bight heals he tamped-- --Euphoria,
	Mr Bones, euphoria. Fate clobber all.
	--Hand me back my crawl,

	condign Heaven. Tighten into a ball
	elongate & valved Henry. Tuck him peace.
	Render him sightless,
	or ruin at high rate his crampon focus,
	wipe out his need. Reduce him to the rest of us.
	--But, Bones, you is that.

	--I cannot remember. I am going away.
	There was something in my dream about a Cat,
	which fought and sang.
	Something about a lyre, an island. Unstrung.
	Linked to the land at low tide. Cables fray.
	Thank you for everything.



62. DREAM SONG 26

	The glories of the world struck me, made me aria, once.
	--What happen then, Mr Bones?
	if be you cares to say.
	--Henry. Henry became interested in women’s bodies,
	his loins were & were the scene of stupendous achievement.
	Stupor. Knees, dear. Pray.

	All the knobs & softnesses of, my God,
	the ducking & trouble it swarm on Henry,
	at one time.
	--What happen then, Mr Bones?
	you seems excited-like.
	--Fell Henry back into the original crime: art, rime

	besides a sense of others, my God, my God,
	and a jealousy for the honour (alive) of his country,
	what can get more odd?
	and discontent with the thriving gangs & pride.
	--What happen then, Mr Bones?
	--I had a most marvellous piece of luck. I died.



63. DREAM SONG 265

	I don’t know one damned butterfly from another
	my ignorance of the stars is formidable,
	also of dogs & ferns
	except that around my house one destroys the other
	When I reckon up my real ignorance, pal,
	I mumble "many returns"--

	next time it will be nature & Thoreau
	this time is Baudelaire if one had the skill
	and even those problems O
	At the mysterious urging of the body or Poe
	reeled I with chance, insubordinate & a killer
	O formal & elaborate I choose you

	but I love too the spare, the hit-or-miss,
	the mad, I sometimes can’t always tell them apart
	As we fall apart, will you let me hear?
	That would be good, that would be halfway to bliss
	You said will you answer back? I cross my heart
	& hope to die but not this year.



64. DREAM SONG 27

	The greens of the Ganges delta foliate.
	Of heartless youth made late aware he pled:
	Brownies, please come.
	To Henry in his sparest times sometimes
	the little people spread, & did friendly things;
	then he was glad.

	Pleased, at the worst, except with the man, he shook
	the brightest winter sun.
	All the green lives
	of the great delta, hours, hurt his migrant heart
	in a safety of the steady ’plane. Please, please
	come.

	My friends,--he has been known to mourn,--I’ll die;
	live you, in the most wild, kindly, green
	partly forgiving wood,
	sort of forever and all those human sings
	close not your better ears to, while good Spring
	returns with a dance and a sigh.



65. DREAM SONG 28

	It was wet & white & swift and where I am
	we don’t know. It was dark and then
	it isn’t.
	I wish the barker would come. There seems to be eat
	nothing. I am usually tired.
	I’m alone too.

	If only the strange one with so few legs would come,
	I’d say my prayers out of my mouth, as usual.
	Where are his note I loved?
	There may be horribles; it’s hard to tell.
	The barker nips me but somehow I feel
	he too is on my side.

	I’m too alone. I see no end. If we could all
	run, even that would be better. I am hungry.
	The sun is not hot.
	It’s not a good position I am in.
	If I had to do the whole thing over again
	I wouldn’t.



66. DREAM SONG 29

	There sat down, once, a thing on Henry’s heart
	só heavy, if he had a hundred years
	& more, & weeping, sleepless, in all them time
	Henry could not make good.
	Starts again always in Henry’s ears
	the little cough somewhere, an odour, a chime.

	And there is another thing he has in mind
	like a grave Sienese face a thousand years
	would fail to blur the still profiled reproach of. Ghastly,
	with open eyes, he attends, blind.
	All the bells say: too late. This is not for tears;
	thinking.

	But never did Henry, as he thought he did,
	end anyone and hacks her body up
	and hide the pieces, where they may be found.
	He knows: he went over everyone, & nobody’s missing.
	Often he reckons, in the dawn, them up.
	Nobody is ever missing.



67. DREAM SONG 3

	Acacia, burnt myrrh, velvet, pricky stings.
	--I’m not so young but not so very old,
	said screwed-up lovely 23.
	A final sense of being right out in the cold,
	unkissed.
	(--My psychiatrist can lick your psychiatrist.) Women get under things.

	All these old criminals sooner or later
	have had it. I’ve been reading old journals.
	Gottwald & Co., out of business now.
	Thick chests quit. Double agent, Joe.
	She holds her breath like a seal
	and is whiter & smoother.

	Rilke was a jerk.
	I admit his griefs & music
	& titled spelled all-disappointed ladies.
	A threshold worse than the circles
	where the vile settle & lurk,
	Rilke’s. As I said,--



68. DREAM SONG 30

	Collating bones: I would have liked to do.
	Henry would have been hot at that.
	I missed his profession.
	As a little boy I always thought
	‘I’m an archeologist’; who
	could be more respected peaceful serious than that?

	Hell talkt my brain awake.
	Bluffed to the ends of me pain
	& I took up a pencil;
	like this I’m longing with. One sign
	would snow me back, back.
	is there anyone in the audience who has lived in vain?

	A Chinese tooth! African jaw!
	Drool, says a nervous system,
	for a joyous replacing. Heat burns off dew.
	Between the Ices (Mindel-Würm)
	in a world I ever saw
	some of my drying people indexed: "Warm."



69. DREAM SONG 31

	Henry Hankovitch, con guí­tar,
	did a short Zen pray,
	on his tatami in a relaxed lotos
	fixin his mind on nuffin, rose-blue breasts,
	and gave his parnel one French kiss;
	enslaving himself he withdrew from his blue

	Florentine leather case an Egyptian black
	& flickt a zippo.
	Henry & Phoebe happy as cockroaches
	in the world-kitchen woofed, with all away.
	The International flame, like despair, rose
	or like the foolish Paks or Sudanese

	Henry Hankovitch, con guí­tar,
	did a praying mantis pray
	who even more obviously than the increasingly fanatical Americans
	cannot govern themselves. Swedes don’t exist,
	Scandanavians in general do not exist,
	take it from there.



70. DREAM SONG 32

	And where, friend Quo, lay you hiding
	across malignant half my years or so?
	One evil faery
	it was workt night, with amoroso pleasing
	menace, the panes shake
	where Lie-by-the-fire is waiting for his cream.

	A tiger by a torrent in rain, wind,
	narrows fiend’s eyes for grief
	in an old ink-on-silk,
	reminding me of Delphi, and,
	friend Quo, once was safe
	imagination as sweet milk.

	Let all the flowers wither like a party.
	And now you have abandoned
	own your young & old, the oldest, people
	to a solitudinem of mournful communes,
	mournful communes.
	Status, Status, come home.



71. DREAM SONG 324

	Henry in Ireland to Bill underground:
	Rest well, who worked so hard, who made a good sound
	constantly, for so many years:
	your high-jinks delighted the continents & our ears:
	you had so many girls your life was a triumph
	and you loved your one wife.

	At dawn you rose & wrote--the books poured forth--
	you delivered infinite babies, in one great birth--
	and your generosity
	to juniors made you deeply loved, deeply:
	if envy was a Henry trademark, he would envy you,
	especially the being through.

	Too many journeys lie for him ahead,
	too many galleys & page-proofs to be read,
	he would like to lie down
	in your sweet silence, to whom was not denied
	the mysterious late excellence which is the crown
	of our trials & our last bride.



72. DREAM SONG 33

	An apple arc’d toward Kleitos; whose great King
	wroth & of wine did study where his sword,
	sneaked away, might be . . .
	with swollen lids staggered up and clung
	dim to the cloth of gold. An un-Greek word
	blister, to him guard,

	and the trumpeter would not sound, fisted. Ha,
	they hustle Clitus out; by another door,
	loaded, crowds he back in
	who now must, chopped, fall to the spear-ax ah
	grabbed from an extra by the boy-god, sore
	for weapons. For the sin:

	little it is gross Henry has to say.
	The King heaved. Pluckt out, the ax-end would
	he jab in his sole throat.
	As if an end. A baby, the guard may
	squire him to his apartments. Weeping & blood
	wound round his one friend.



73. DREAM SONG 34

	My mother has your shotgun. One man, wide
	in the mind, and tendoned like a grizzly, pried
	to his trigger-digit, pal.
	He should not have done that, but, I guess,
	he didn’t feel the best, Sister,--felt less
	and more about less than us . . . ?

	Now--tell me, my love, if you recall
	the dove light after dawn at the island and all--
	here is the story, Jack:
	he verbed for forty years, very enough,
	& shot & buckt--and, baby, there was of
	schist but small there (some).

	Why should I tell a truth? when in the crack
	of the dooming & emptying news I did hold back--
	in the taxi too, sick--
	silent--it’s so I broke down here, in his mind
	whose sire as mine one same way--I refuse,
	hoping the guy go home.



74. DREAM SONG 35

	Hey, out there!--assistant professors, full,
	associates,--instructors--others--any--
	I have a sing to shay.
	We are assembled here in the capital
	city for Dull--and one professor’s wife is Mary--
	at Christmastide, hey!

	and all of you did theses or are doing
	and the moral history of what we were up to
	thrives in Sir Wilson’s hands--
	who I don’t see here--only deals go screwing
	some of you out, some up--the chairmen too
	are nervous, little friends--

	a chairman’s not a chairman, son, forever,
	and hurts with his appointments; ha, but circle--
	take my word for it--
	though maybe Frost is dying--around Mary;
	forget your footnotes on the old gentleman;
	dance around Mary.



75. DREAM SONG 36

	The high ones die, die. They die. You look up and who’s there?
	--Easy, easy, Mr Bones. I is on your side.
	I smell your grief.
	--I sent my grief away. I cannot care
	forever. With them all align & again I died
	and cried, and I have to live.

	--Now there you exaggerate, Sah. We hafta die.
	That is our ’pointed task. Love & die.
	--Yes; that makes sense.
	But what makes sense between, then? What if I
	roiling & babbling & braining, brood on why and
	just sat on the fence?

	--I doubts you did or do. De choice is lost.
	--It’s fool’s gold. But I go in for that.
	The boy & the bear
	looked at each other. Man all is tossed
	& lost with groin-wounds by the grand bulls, cat.
	William Falukner’s where?

	(Frost being still around.)



76. DREAM SONG 37

	His malice was a pimple down his good
	big face, with its sly eyes. I must be sorry
	Mr Frost has left:
	I like it so less I don’t understood--
	he couldn’t hear or see well--all we sift--
	but this is a bad story.

	He had fine stories and was another man
	in private; difficult, always. Courteous,
	on the whole, in private.
	He apologize to Henry, off & on,
	for two blue slanders; which was good of him.
	I don’t know how he made it.

	Quickly, off stage with all but kindness, now.
	I can’t say what I have in mind. Bless Frost,
	any odd god around.
	Gentle his shift, I decussate & command,
	stoic deity. For a while here we possessed
	an unusual man.



77. DREAM SONG 38

	The Russian grin bellows his condolence
	tó the family: ah but it’s Kay,
	& Ted, & Chris & Anne,
	Henry thinks of: who eased his fearful way
	from here, in here, to there. This wants thought.
	I won’t make it out.

	Maybe the source of noble such may come
	clearer to dazzled Henry. It may come.
	I’d say it will come with pain,
	in mystery. I’d rather leave it alone.
	I do leave it alone.
	And down with the listener.

	Now he has become, abrupt, an industry.
	Professional-Friends-Of-Robert-Frost all over
	gap wide their mouths
	while the quirky medium of so many truths
	is quiet. Let’s be quiet. Let us listen:
	--What for, Mr Bones?
	--while he begins to have it out with Horace.



78. DREAM SONG 39

	Goodbye, sir, & fare well. You’re in the clear.
	‘Nobody (Mark says you said) ‘is ever found out.’
	I figure you were right,
	having as Henry got away with murder
	for long. Some jarred clock tell me it’s late,
	not for you who went straight

	but for the lorn. Our roof is lefted off
	lately: the shooter, and the bourbon man,
	and then you got tired.
	I’m afraid that’s it. I figure you with love,
	lifey, deathy, but I have a little sense
	the rest of us are fired

	or fired: be with us: we will blow our best,
	our sad wil riffs come easy in that case,
	thinking you over,
	knowing you resting, who was reborn to rest,
	your gorgeous sentence is done. Nothing’s the same,
	sir,--taking cover.



79. DREAM SONG 4

	Filling her compact & delicious body
	with chicken páprika, she glanced at me
	twice.
	Fainting with interest, I hungered back
	and only the fact of her husband & four other people
	kept me from springing on her

	or falling at her little feet and crying
	‘You are the hottest one for years of night
	Henry’s dazed eyes
	have enjoyed, Brilliance.’ I advanced upon
	(despairing) my spumoni.--Sir Bones: is stuffed,
	de world, wif feeding girls.

	--Black hair, complexion Latin, jewelled eyes
	downcast . . . The slob beside her feasts . . . What wonders is
	she sitting on, over there?
	The restaurant buzzes. She might as well be on Mars.
	Where did it all go wrong? There ought to be a law against Henry.
	--Mr. Bones: there is.



80. DREAM SONG 40

	I’m scared a lonely. Never see my son,
	easy be not to see anyone,
	combers out to sea
	know they’re goin somewhere but not me.
	Got a little poison, got a little gun,
	I’m scared a lonely.

	I’m scared a only one thing, which is me,
	from othering I don’t take nothin, see,
	for any hound dog’s sake.
	But this is where I livin, where I rake
	my leaves and cop my promise, this’ where we
	cry oursel’s awake.

	Wishin was dyin but I gotta make
	it all this way to that bed on these feet
	where peoples said to meet.
	Maybe but even if I see my son
	forever never, get back on the take,
	free, black & forty-one.



81. DREAM SONG 41

	If we sang in the wood (and Death is a German expert)
	while snows flies, chill, after so frequent knew
	so many all nothing,
	for lead & fire, it’s not we would assert
	particulars, but animal; cats mew,
	horses scream, man sing.

	Or: men pslam. Man palms his ears and moans.
	Death is a German expert. Scrambling, sitting,
	spattering, we hurry.
	I try to. Odd & trivial, atones
	somehow for my escape a bullet splitting
	my trod-on instep, fiery.

	The cantor bubbled, rattled. The Temple burned.
	Lurch with me! phantoms of Varshava. Slop!
	When I used to be,
	who haunted, stumbling, sewers, my sacked shop,
	roofs, a dis-world ai! Death was a German
	home-country.



82. DREAM SONG 42

	O journeyer, deaf in the mould, insane
	with violent travel & death: consider me
	in my cast, your first son.
	Would you were I by now another one,
	witted, legged? I see you before me plain
	(I am skilled: I hear, I see)--

	your honour was troubled: when you wondered--‘No’.
	I hear. I think I hear. Now full craze down
	across our continent
	all storms since you gave in, on my pup-tent.
	I have of blast & counter to remercy you
	for hurling me downtown.

	We dream of honour, and we get along.
	Fate winged me, in the person of a cab
	and your stance on the sand.
	Think it across, in freezing wind: withstand
	my blistered wish: flop, there, to his blind song
	who pick up the tab.



83. DREAM SONG 43

	‘Oyez, oyez!’ The Man Who Did Not Deliver
	is before you for his deliverance, my lords.
	He stands, as charged
	for This by banks, That cops, by lawyers, by
	publishingers for Them. I doubt he’ll make
	old bones.

	Be.
	I warned him, of a summer night: consist,
	consist. Ex-wives roar.
	Further, the Crown holds that they split himself,
	splitting his manward chances, to his shame,
	my lords, & our horror.

	Behind, oh worst lean backward them who bring
	un-charges: hundreds & one, children,
	the pillars & the sot.
	Henry thought. It is so. I must sting.
	Listen! the grave ground-rhythm of a gone
	. . . makar? So what.



84. DREAM SONG 44

	Tell it to the forest fire, tell it to the moon,
	mention it in general to the moon
	on the way down,
	he’s about to have his lady, permanent;
	and this is the worst of all came ever sent
	writhing Henry’s way.

	Ha ha, fifth column, quisling, genocide,
	he held his hands & laught from side to side
	a loverly time.
	The berries & the rods left him alone less.
	Thro’ a race of water once I went: happiness.
	I’ll walk into the sky.

	There the great flare & stench, O flying creatures,
	surely will dim-dim? Bars will be closed.
	No girl will again
	conceive above your throes. A fine thunder peals
	will with its friends and soon, from agony
	put the fire out.



85. DREAM SONG 45

	He stared at ruin. Ruin stared straight back.
	He thought they was old friends. He felt on the stair
	where her papa found them bare
	they became familiar. When the papers were lost
	rich with pals’ secrets, he thought he had the knack
	of ruin. Their paths crossed

	and once they crossed in jail; they crossed in bed;
	and over an unsigned letter their eyes met,
	and in an Asian city
	directionless & lurchy at two & three,
	or trembling to a telephone’s fresh threat,
	and when some wired his head

	to reach a wrong opinion, ‘Epileptic’.
	But he noted now that: they were not old friends.
	He did not know this one.
	This one was a stranger, come to make amends
	for all the imposters, and to make it stick.
	Henry nodded, un-.



86. DREAM SONG 46

	I am, outside. Incredible panic rules.
	People are blowing and beating each other without mercy.
	Drinks are boiling. Iced
	drinks are boiling. The worse anyone feels, the worse
	treated he is. Fools elect fools.
	A harmless man at an intersection said, under his breath, "Christ!"

	That word, so spoken, affected the vision
	of, when they trod to work next day, shopkeepers
	who went and were fitted for glasses.
	Enjoyed they then an appearance of love & law.
	Millenia whift & waft--one, one--er, er. . .
	Their glasses were taken from them, & they saw.

	Man has undertaken the top job of all,
	son fin. Good luck.
	I myself walked at the funeral of tenderness.
	Followed other deaths. Among the last,
	like the memory of a lovely fuck,
	was: Do, ut des.



87. DREAM SONG 47

	--Thass a funny title, Mr Bones.
	--When down she saw her feet, sweet fish, on the threshold,
	she considered her fair shoulders
	and all them hundreds who have them, all
	the more who to her mime thickened & maled
	from the supple stage,

	and seeing her feet, in a visit, side by side
	paused on the sill of The Tomb, she shrank: ‘No.
	They are not worthy,
	fondled by many’ and rushed from The Crucified
	back through her followers out of the city ho
	across the suburbs, plucky

	to dare my desert in her late daylight
	of animals and sands. She fall prone.
	Only wind whistled.
	And forty-seven years with our caps on,
	whom God has not visited.



88. DREAM SONG 48

	He yelled at me in Greek,
	my God!--It’s not his language
	and I’m no good at--his Aramaic,
	was--I am a monoglot of English
	(American version) and, say pieces from
	a baker’s dozen others: where’s the bread?

	but rising in the Second Gospel, pal:
	The seed goes down, god dies,
	a rising happens,
	some crust, and then occurs an eating. He said so,
	a Greek idea,
	troublesome to imaginary Jews,

	like a bitter Henry, full of the death of love,
	Cawdor-uneasy, disambitious, mourning
	the whole implausible necessary thing.
	He dropped his voice & sybilled of
	the death of the death of love.
	I óught to get going.



89. DREAM SONG 49

	Old Pussy-cat if he won’t eat, he don’t
	feel good into his tum’, old Pussy-cat.
	He wants to have eaten.
	Tremor, heaves, he sweaterings. He can’t.
	A dizzy swims of where is Henry at;
	. . . somewhere streng verboten.

	How come he sleeps & sleeps and sleeps, waking like death:
	locate the restorations of which we hear
	as of profound sleep.
	From daylight he got maintrackt, from friends’ breath,
	wishes, his hopings. Dreams make crawl with fear
	Henry but not get up.

	The course his mind his body steer, poor Pussy-cat,
	in weakness & disorder, will see him down
	whiskers & tail.
	‘Wastethrift’: Oh one of cunning wives know that
	he hoardy-squander, where is nor downtown
	neither suburba. Braille.



90. DREAM SONG 5

	Henry sats in de bar & was odd,
	off in the glass from the glass,
	at odds wif de world & its god,
	his wife is a complete nothing,
	St Stephen
	getting even.

	Henry sats in de plane & was gay.
	Careful Henry nothing said aloud
	but where a Virgin out of cloud
	to her Mountain dropt in light,
	his thought made pockets & the plane buckt.
	‘Parm me, lady.’ ‘Orright.’

	Henry lay in de netting, wild,
	while the brainfever bird did scales;
	Mr Heartbreak, the New Man,
	come to farm a crazy land;
	an image of the dead on the fingernail
	of a newborn child.



91. DREAM SONG 50

	In a motion of night they massed nearer my post.
	I hummed a short blues. When the stars went out
	I studied my weapons system.
	Grenades, the portable rack, the yellow spout
	of the anthrax-ray: in order. Yes, and most
	of my pencils were sharp.

	This edge of the galaxy has often seen
	a defence so stiff, but it could only go
	one way.
	--Mr Bones, your troubles give me vertigo,
	& backache. Somehow, when I make your scene,
	I cave to feel as if

	de roses of dawns & pearls of dusks, made up
	by some ol’ writer-man, got right forgot
	& the greennesses of ours.
	Springwater grow so thick it gonna clot
	and the pleasing ladies cease. I figure, yup,
	you is bad powers.



92. DREAM SONG 51

	Our wounds to time, from all the other times,
	sea-times slow, the times of galaxies
	fleeing, the dwarfs’ dead times,
	lessen so little that if here in his crude rimes
	Henry them mentions, do not hold it, please,
	for a putting of man down.

	Ol’ Marster, being bound you do your best
	versus we coons, spare now a cagey John
	a whilom bits that whip:
	who’ll tell your fortune, when you have confessed
	whose & whose woundings--against the innocent stars
	& remorseless seas--

	--Are you radioactive, pal? --Pal, radioactive.
	--Has you the night sweats & the day sweats, pal?
	--Pal, I do.
	--Did your gal leave you? --What do you think, pal?
	--Is that thing on the front of your head what it seems to be, pal?
	--Yes, pal.



93. DREAM SONG 52

	Bright-eyed & bushy tailed woke not Henry up.
	Bright though upon his workshop shone a vise
	central, moved in
	while he was doing time down hospital
	and growing wise.
	He gave it the worst look he had left.

	Alone. They all abandoned Henry--wonder! all,
	when most he--under the sun.
	That was all right.
	He can’t work well with it here, or think.
	A bilocation, yellow like catastrophe.
	The name of this was freedom.

	Will Henry again ever be on the lookout for women & milk,
	honour & love again,
	have a buck or three?
	He felt like shrieking but he shuddered as
	(spring mist, warm, rain) an handful with quietness
	vanisht & the thing took hold.



94. DREAM SONG 53

	He lay in the middle of the world, and twicht.
	More Sparine for Pelides,
	human (half) & down here as he is,
	with probably insulting mail to open
	and certainly unworthy words to hear
	and his unforgiving memory.

	--I seldom go to films. They are too exciting,
	said the Honourable Possum.
	--It takes me so long to read the ‘paper,
	said to me one day a novelist hot as a firecracker,
	because I have to identify myself with everyone in it,
	including the corpses, pal.’

	Kierkegaard wanted a society, to refuse to read ’papers,
	and that was not, friends, his worst idea.
	Tiny Hardy, toward the end, refused to say anything,
	a programme adopted early on by long Housman,
	and Gottfried Benn
	said:--We are using our own skins for wallpaper and we cannot win.



95. DREAM SONG 54

	‘NO VISITORS’ I thumb the roller to
	and leans against the door.
	Comfortable in my horseblanket
	I prop on the costly bed & dream of my wife,
	my first wife,
	and my second wife & my son.

	Insulting, they put guardrails up,
	as if it were a crib!
	I growl at the head nurse; we compose on one.
	I have been operating from nothing,
	like a dog after its tail
	more slowly, losing altitude.

	Nitid. They are shooting me full of sings.
	I give no rules. Write as short as you can,
	in order, of what matters.
	I think of my beloved poet
	Issa & his father who
	sat down on the grass and took leave of each other.



96. DREAM SONG 55

	Peter’s not friendly. He gives me sideways looks.
	The architecture is far from reassuring.
	I feel uneasy.
	A pity,--the interview began so well:
	I mentioned fiendish things, he waved them away
	and sloshed out a martini

	strangely needed. We spoke of indifferent matters--
	God’s health, the vague hell of the Congo,
	John’s energy,
	anti-matter matter. I felt fine.
	Then a change came backward. A chill fell.
	Talk slackened,

	died, and began to give me sideways looks.
	‘Chirst,’ I thought ‘what now?’ and would have askt for another
	but didn’t dare.
	I feel my application failing. It’s growing dark,
	some other sound is overcoming. His last words are:
	‘We betrayed me.’



97. DREAM SONG 56

	Hell is empty. O that has come to pass
	which the cut Alexandrian foresaw,
	and Hell is empty.
	Lightning fell silent where the Devil knelt
	and over the whole grave space hath settled awe
	in a full death of guilt.

	The tinchel closes. Terror, & plunging, swipes.
	I lay my ears back. I am about to die.
	My cleft feet drum.
	Fierce, the two-footers club. My green world pipes
	a finish--for us all, my love, not some.
	Crumpling, I--why,--

	So in his crystal ball them two he weighs,
	solidly, dreaming of his sleepy son,
	ah him, and his new wife.
	What roar solved once the dilemma of the Ancient of Days,
	what sigh borrowed His mercy?--Who may, if
	we are all the same, make one.



98. DREAM SONG 57

	In a state of chortle sin--once he reflected,
	swilling tomato juice--live I, and did
	more than my thirstier years.
	To Hell then will it maul me? for good talk,
	and gripe of retail loss? I dare say not.
	I don’t thí­nk there’s that place

	save sullen here, wherefrom she flies tonight
	retrieving her whole body, which I need.
	I recall a ’coon treed,
	flashlights, & barks, and I was in that tree,
	and something can (has) been said for sobriety
	but very little.

	The guns. Ah, darling, it was late for me,
	midnight, at seven. How in famished youth
	could I forsee Henry’s sweet seed
	unspent across so flying barren ground,
	where would my loves dislimn whose dogs abound?
	I fell out of the tree.



99. DREAM SONG 58

	Industrious, affable, having brain on fire,
	Henry perplexed himself; others gave up;
	good girls gave in;
	geography was hard on friendship, Sire;
	marriages lashed & languished, anguished; dearth of group
	and what else had been;

	the splendour & the lose grew all the same,
	Sire. His heart stiffened, and he failed to smile,
	catching (enfit) on.
	The law: we must, owing to chiefly shame
	lacing our pride, down what we did. A mile,
	a mile to Avalon.

	Stuffy & lazy, shaky, making roar
	overseas presses, he quit wondering:
	the mystery is full.
	Sire, damp me down. Me feudal O, me yore
	(male Muse) serf, if anyfing;
	which rank I pull.



100. DREAM SONG 59

	Down on the cathedrals, as from the Giralda
	in a land no crueller, and over the walls
	to domes & river look
	from Great John’s belfry, Ivan-Veliky,
	whose thirty-one are still
	to hail who storms no father’s throne. Bell, book

	& cradle rule, in silence. Hour by hour
	from time to time with holy oil
	touch yet the forehead eyelids nose
	lips ears breast fists of Kruschev, for Christ knows
	poor evil Kadar, cut, is back in power.
	Boils his throne. The moujik kneels & votes.

	South & east of the others’ tombs--where? why,
	in Arkhanghelsky, on the Baptist’s side,
	lies Brother Jonas (fomrerly Ivan the Terrible),
	where Brother Josef came with his friend’s heart
	out of such guilt it proved all bearable,
	and Brother Nikita will come and lie.



101. DREAM SONG 6

	During the father’s walking--how he look
	down by now in soft boards, Henry, pass
	and what he feel or no, who know?--
	as during hí­s broad father’s, all the breaks
	& ill-lucks of a thriving pioneer
	back to the flying boy in mountain air,

	Vermont’s child to go out, and while Keats sweat’
	for hopeless inextricable lust, Henry’s fate,
	and Ethan Allen was a calling man,
	all through the blind one’s dream of the start,
	when Day was killing Porter and had to part
	lovers for ever, fancy if you can,

	while the cardinals’ guile to keep Aeneas out
	was failing, while in some hearts Chinese doubt
	inscrutably was growing, toward its end,
	and a starved lion by a water-hole
	clouded with gall, while Abelard was whole,
	these grapes of stone were being proffered, friend.



102. DREAM SONG 60

	Afters eight years, be less dan eight percent,
	distinguish’ friend, of coloured wif de whites
	in de School, in de Souf.
	--Is coloured gobs, is coloured officers,
	Mr Bones. Dat’s nuffin?--Uncle Tom,
	sweep shut yo mouf,

	is million blocking from de proper job,
	de fairest houses & de churches eben.
	--You may be right, Friend Bones.
	Indeed you is. Defy flyin ober de world,
	de pilots, ober ofays. Bit by bit
	our immemorial moans

	brown down to all dere moans. I flees that, sah.
	They brownin up to ourn. Who gonna win?
	--I wouldn’t predict.
	But I do guess mos peoples gonna lose.
	I never saw no pickle wifout no hand.
	O my, without no hand.



103. DREAM SONG 61

	Full moon. Our Narragansett gales subside
	and the land is celebrating men of war
	more or less, less or more.
	In valleys, thin on headlands, narrow & wide
	our targets rest. In us we trust. Far, near,
	the bivouacs of fear

	are solemn in the moon somewhere tonight,
	in turning time. It’s late for gratitude,
	an annual, rude
	roar of a moment’s turkey’s ‘Thanks’. Bright & white
	their ordered markers undulate away
	awaiting no day.

	Away from us, from Henry’s feel or fail,
	campaigners lie with mouldered toes, disarmed,
	out of order,
	with whom we will one. The war is real,
	and a sullen glory pauses over them harmed,
	incident to murder.



104. DREAM SONG 62

	That dark brown rabbit, lightness in his ears
	& underneath, gladdened our afternoon
	munching a crab-’.
	That rabbit was a fraud, like a black bull
	prudent I admired in Zaragoza, who
	certainly was brave as a demon

	but would not charge, being willing not to die.
	The rabbit’s case, a little different,
	consisted in alert
	& wily looks down the lawn, where nobody was,
	with prickt ears, while rapt but chatting on the porch
	we sat in view nearby.

	Then went he mildly by, and around behind

	my cabin, and when I followed, there he just sat.
	Only at last
	he turned down around, passing my wife at four feet
	and hopped the whole lawn and made thro’ the hedge for the big
	house.
	--Mr Bones, we all brutes & fools.



105. DREAM SONG 63

	Bats have no bankers and they do not drink
	and cannot be arrested and pay no tax
	and, in general, bats have it made.
	Henry for joining the human race is bats,
	known to be so, by few them who think,
	out of the cave.

	Instead of the cave! ah lovely-chilly, dark,
	ur-moist his cousins hang in hundreds or swerve
	with personal radar,
	crisisless, kid. Instead of the cave? I serve,
	inside, my blind term. Filthy four-foot lights
	reflect on the whites of our eyes.

	He then salutes for sixty years of it
	just now a one of valor and insights,
	a theatrical man,
	O scholar & Legionnaire who as quickly might
	have killed as cast you. Olé. Stormed with years
	he tranquil commands and appears.



106. DREAM SONG 64

	Supreme my holdings, greater yet my need,
	thoughtless I go out. Dawn. Have I my cig’s,
	my flaskie O,
	O crystal cock,--my kneel has gone to seed,--
	and anybody’s blessing? (Blast the MIGs
	for making funble so

	my tardy readying.) Yes, utter’ that.
	Anybody’s blessing? --Mr Bones,
	you makes too much
	démand. I might be ’fording you a hat:
	it gonna rain. --I knew a one of groans
	& greed & spite, of a crutch,

	who thought he had, a vile night, been-well-blest.
	He see someone run off. Why not Henry,
	with his grasp of desire?
	--Hear matters hard to manage at de best,
	Mr Bones. Tween what we see, what be,
	is blinds. Them blinds’ on fire.



107. DREAM SONG 65

	A freaking ankle crabbed his blissful trips,
	this whiskey tastes like California
	but is Kentucky,
	like Berkeley where he truly worked at it
	but nothing broke all night--no fires--one dawn,
	crowding his luck,

	flowed down along the cliffs to the Big Sur
	where Henry Miller’s box is vomit-green
	and Henry bathed in sulphur
	lovely, hot, over the sea, like Senator
	Cat, relaxed & sober, watery
	as Tivoli, sir.

	No Christmas jaunts for fractured cats. Hot dog,
	the world is places where he will not go
	this wintertide or again.
	Does Striding Edge block wild the sky as then
	when Henry with his mystery was two
	& twenty, high on the hog?



108. DREAM SONG 66

	‘All virtues enter into this world:’)
	A Buddhist, doused in the street, serenely burned.
	The Secretary of State for War,
	winking it over, screwed a redhaired whore.
	Monsignor Capovilla mourned. What a week.
	A journalism doggy took a leak

	against absconding coon (‘but take one virtue,
	without which a man can hardly hold his own’)
	the sun in the willow
	shivers itself & shakes itself green-yellow
	(Abba Pimen groaned, over the telephone,
	when asked what that was:)

	How feel a fellow then when he arrive
	in fame but lost? but affable, top-shelf.
	Quelle sad semaine.
	He hardly know his selving. (‘that a man’)
	Henry grew hot, got laid, felt bad, survived
	(‘should always reproach himself’.



109. DREAM SONG 67

	I don’t operate often. When I do,
	persons take note.
	Nurses look amazed. They pale.
	The patient is brought back to life, or so.
	The reason I don’t do this more (I quote)
	is: I have a living to fail--

	because of my wife & son--to keep from earning.
	--Mr Bones, I sees that.
	They for these operations thanks you, what?
	not pays you. --Right.
	You have seldom been so understanding.
	Now there is further a difficulty with the light:

	I am obliged to perform in complete darkness
	operations of great delicacy
	on my self.
	--Mr Bones, you terrifies me.
	No wonder they didn’t pay you. Will you die?
	--My
	friend, I succeeded. Later.



110. DREAM SONG 68

	I heard, could be, a Hey there from the wing,
	and I went on: Miss Bessie soundin good
	that one, that night of all,
	I feelin fari myself, taxes & things
	seem to be back in line, like everybody should
	and nobody in the snow on call

	so, as I say, the house is given hell
	to Yellow Dog, I blowin like it too
	and Bessie always do
	when she make a very big sound--after, well,
	no sound--I see she totterin--I cross which stage
	even at Henry’s age

	in 2-3 seconds: then we wait and see.
	I hear strange horns, Pinetop he hit some chords,
	Charlie start Empty Bed,
	they all come hangin Christmas on some tree
	after trees thrown out--sick-house’s white birds’,
	black to the birds instead.



111. DREAM SONG 69

	Love her he doesn’t but the thought he puts
	into that young woman
	would launch a national product
	complete with TV spots & skywriting
	outlets in Bonn & Tokyo
	I mean it

	Let it be known that nine words have not passed
	between herself and Henry;
	looks, smiles.
	God help Henry, who deserves it all
	every least part of that infernal & unconscious
	woman, and the pain.

	I feel as if, unique, she . . . Biddable?
	Fates, conspire.
	--Mr Bones, please.
	--Vouchsafe me, Sleepless One,
	a personal experience of the body of Mrs Boogry
	before I pass from lust!



112. DREAM SONG 7

	Henry is old, old; for Henry remembers
	Mr Deeds’ tuba, & the Cameo,
	& the race in Ben Hur,--The Lost World, with sound,
	& The Man from Blankey’s, which he did not dig,
	nor did he understand one caption of,
	bewildered Henry, while the Big Ones laughed.

	Now Henry is unmistakably a Big One.
	Fúnnee; he don’t féel so.
	He just stuck around.
	The German & the Russian films into
	Italian & Japanese films turned, while many
	were prevented from making it.

	He wishing he could squirm again where Hoot
	is just ahead of rustlers, where William S
	forgoes some deep advantage, & moves on,
	where Hashknife Hartley having the matter taped
	the rats are flying. For the rats
	have moved in, mostly, and this is for real.



113. DREAM SONG 70

	Disengaged, bloody, Henry rose from the shell
	where in theior racing start his seat got wedged
	under his knifing knees,
	he did it on the runners, feathering,
	being bow, catching no crab. The ridges were sore
	& tore chamois. It was not done with ease.

	So Henry was a hero, malgré lui,
	that day, for blundering; until & after the coach
	said this & which to him.
	That happy day, whenas the pregnant back
	of Number Two returned, and he’d no choice
	but to make for it room.

	Therefore he rowed rowed rowed. They did not win.
	Forever in the winning & losing since
	of his own crew, or rather
	in the weird regattas of this afterworld,
	cheer for the foe. He sat himself to time
	the blue father.



114. DREAM SONG 71

	Spellbound held subtle Henry all his four
	hearers in the racket of the market
	with ancient signs, infamous characters,
	new rythms. On the steps he was beloved,
	hours a day, by all his four, or more,
	depending. And they paid him.

	It was not, so, like no one listening
	but critics famed & Henry’s pals or other
	tellers at all
	chiefly in another country. No.
	He by the heart & brains & tail, because
	of their love for it, had them.

	Junk he said to all them open-mouthed.
	Weather wóuld govern. When the monsoon spread
	its floods, few came, two.
	Came a day when none, though he began
	in his accustomed way on the filthy steps
	in a crash of waters, came.



115. DREAM SONG 72

	Shh! on a twine hung from disastered trees
	Henry is swinging his daughter. They seem drunk.
	Over across them look out,
	tranquil, the high statues of the wise.
	Her feet peep, like a lady’s in sleep sunk.
	That which this scene’s about--

	he pushes violent, his calves distend,
	his mouth is open with effort, so is hers,
	in the Supreme Court garden,
	the justices lean, negro, out, the trees bend,
	man’s try began too long ago, with chirrs
	& leapings, begging pardon--

	I will deny the gods of the garden say.
	Henry’s perhaps to break his burnt-cork luck.
	I further will deny
	good got us up that broad shoreline. Greed may
	like a fuse, but with the high shore we is stuck,
	whom they overlook. Why,--



116. DREAM SONG 73

	The taxi makes the vegetables fly.
	‘Dozo kudasai,’ I have him wait.
	Past the bright lake up into the temple,
	shoes off, and
	my right leg swings me left.
	I do survive beside the garden I

	came seven thousand mile the other way
	supplied of energies all to see, to see.
	Differ them photographs, plans lie:
	how big it is!
	austere a sea rectangular of sand by the oiled mud wall,
	and the sand is not quite white: granite sand, grey,

	--from nowhere can one see all the stones--
	but helicopters or a Brooklyn reproduction
	will fix that--

	and the fifteen changeless stones in their five worlds
	with a shelving of moving moss
	stand me the thought of the ancient maker priest.
	Elsewhere occurs--I remember--loss.
	Through awes & weathers neither it increased
	nor did one blow of all his stone & sand thought die.



117. DREAM SONG 74

	Henry hates the world. What the world to Henry
	did will not bear thought.
	Feeling no pain,
	Henry stabbed his arm and wrote a letter
	explaining how bad it had been
	in this world.

	Old yellow, in a gown
	might have made a difference, ‘these lower beauties’,
	and chartreuse could have mattered

	"Kyoto, Toledo,
	Benares--the holy cities--
	and Cambridge shimmering do not make up
	for, well, the horror of unlove,
	nor south from Paris driving in the Spring
	to Siena and on . . ."

	Pulling together Henry, somber Henry
	woofed at things.
	Spry disappointments of men
	and vicing adorable children
	miserable women, Henry mastered, Henry
	tasting all the secret bits of life.



118. DREAM SONG 75

	Turning it over, considering, like a madman
	Henry put forth a book.
	No harm resulted from this.
	Neither the menstruating stars (nor man) was moved
	at once.
	Bare dogs drew closer for a second look

	and performed their friendly operations there.
	Refreshed, the bark rejoiced.
	Seasons went and came.
	Leaves fell, but only a few.
	Something remarkable about this
	unshedding bulky bole-proud blue-green moist

	thing made by savage & thoughtful
	surviving Henry
	began to strike the passers from despair
	so that sore on their shoulders old men hoisted
	six-foot sons and polished women called
	small girls to dream awhile toward the flashing & bursting
	tree!



119. DREAM SONG 76

	Nothin very bad happen to me lately.
	How you explain that? --I explain that, Mr Bones,
	terms o’ your bafflin odd sobriety.
	Sober as man can get, no girls, no telephones,
	what could happen bad to Mr Bones?
	--If life is a handkerchief sandwich,

	in a modesty of death I join my father
	who dared so long agone leave me.
	A bullet on a concrete stoop
	close by a smothering southern sea
	spreadeagled on an island, by my knee.
	--You is from hunger, Mr Bones,

	I offers you this handkerchief, now set
	your left foot by my right foot,
	shoulder to shoulder, all that jazz,
	arm in arm, by the beautiful sea,
	hum a little, Mr Bones.
	--I saw nobody coming, so I went instead.



120. DREAM SONG 77

	Seedy Henry rose up shy in de world
	& shaved & swung his barbells, duded Henry up
	and p.a.’d poor thousands of persons on topics of grand
	moment to Henry, ah to those less & none.
	Wif a book of his in either hand
	he is stript down to move on.

	--Come away, Mr. Bones.

	--Henry is tired of the winter,
	& haircuts, & a squeamish comfy ruin-prone proud national
	mind, & Spring (in the city so called).
	Henry likes Fall.
	Hé would be prepared to líve in a world of Fáll
	for ever, impenitent Henry.
	But the snows and summers grieve & dream;

	thése fierce & airy occupations, and love,
	raved away so many of Henry’s years
	it is a wonder that, with in each hand
	one of his own mad books and all,
	ancient fires for eyes, his head full
	& his heart full, he’s making ready to move on.



121. DREAM SONG 78

	Darkened his eye, his wild smile disappeared,
	inapprehensible his studies grew,
	nourished he less & less
	his subject body with good food & rest,
	something bizarre about Henry, slowly sheared
	off, unlike you & you,

	smaller & smaller, till in question stood
	his eyeteeth and one block of memories
	These were enough for him
	implying commands from upstairs & from down,
	Walt’s ‘orbic flex,’ triads of Hegel would
	incorporate, if you please,

	into the know-how of the American bard
	embarrassed Henry heard himself a-being,
	and the younger Stephen Crane
	of a powerful memory, of pain,
	these stood the ancestors, relaxed & hard,
	whilst Henry’s parts were fleeing.



122. DREAM SONG 79

	Whence flew the litter whereon he was laid?
	Of what heroic stuff was warlock Henry made?
	and questions of that sort
	perplexed the bulging cosmos, O in short
	was sandalwood in good supply when he
	flared out of history

	& the obituary in The New York Times
	into the world of generosity
	creating the air where are
	& can be, only, heroes? Statues & rhymes
	signal his fiery Passage, a mountainous sea,
	the occlusion of a star:

	anything afterward, of a high lament,
	let too his giant faults appear, as sent
	together with his virtues down
	and let this day be his, throughout the town,
	region & cosmos, lest he freeze our blood
	with terrible returns.



123. DREAM SONG 8

	The weather was fine. They took away his teeth,
	white & helpful; bothered his backhand;
	halved his green hair.
	They blew out his loves, his interests. ‘Underneath,’
	(they called in iron voices) ‘understand,
	is nothing. So there.’

	The weather was very fine. They lifted off
	his covers till he showed, and cringed & pled
	to see himself less.
	They instaleld mirrors till he flowed. ‘Enough’
	(murmmered they) ‘if you will watch Us instead,
	yet you may saved be. Yes.’

	The weather fleured. They weakened all his eyes,
	and burning thumbs into his ears, and shook
	his hand like a notch.
	They flung long silent speeches. (Off the hook!)
	They sandpapered his plumpest hope. (So capsize.)
	They took away his crotch.



124. DREAM SONG 80

	It’s buried at a distance, on my insistence, buried.
	Weather’s severe there, which it will not mind.
	I miss it.
	O happies before & during & between the times it got married.
	I hate the love of leaving it behind,
	deteriorating & hopeless that.

	The great Uh climbed above me, far above me,
	doing the north face, or behind it. Does He love me?
	over, & flout.
	Goodness is bits of outer God. The house-guest
	(slimmed-down) with one eye open & one breast
	out.

	Slimmed-down from by-blow; adoptive-up; was white.
	A daughter of a friend. His soul is a sight.
	--Mr Bones, what’s all about?
	Girl have a little: what be wrong with that?
	Yóu free? --Down some many did descend
	from the abominable & semi-mortal Cat.



125. DREAM SONG 81

	He loom’ so cagey he say ‘Leema beans’
	and measured his intake to the atmosphere
	of that fairly stable country.
	His ear hurt. Left. The rock-cliffs, a mite sheer
	at his age, in these places.
	Scrubbing out his fear,--

	the knowledge that they will take off your hands,
	both hands; as well as your both feet, & likewise
	both eyes,
	might be discouraging to a bloddy hero
	Also you stifle, like you can’t draw breath.
	But this is death--

	which in some vain strive many to avoid,
	many. It’s on its way, where you drop at
	who stood up, scrunch down small.
	It wasn’t so much after all to lose, was, Boyd?
	A body.--But, Mr Bones, you needed that.
	Now I put on my tall hat.



126. DREAM SONG 82

	Maskt as honours, insult like behaving
	missiles homes. I bow, & grunt ‘Thank you.
	I’m glad you could come
	so late.’ All loves are gratified. I’m having
	to screw a little thing I have to screw.
	Good nature is over.

	Herewith ill-wishes. From a cozy grave
	rainbow I scornful laughings. Do not do,
	Father, me down.
	Let’s shuck an obligation. O I have
	done. Is the inner-coffin burning blue
	or did Jehovah frown?

	Jehovah. Period. Yahweh. Period. God.
	It is marvellous that views so differay
	(Father is a Jesuit)
	can love so well each other. We was had.
	O visit in my last tomb me.--Perché?
	--Is a nice pit.



127. DREAM SONG 83

	I recall a boil, whereupon as I had to sit,
	just where, and when I had to, for deadlines.
	O I could learn to type standing,
	but isn’t it slim to be slumped off from that,
	problems undignified, fiery dig salt mines?--
	Content on one’s black flat:

	soming no deadline--is all ancient nonsense--
	no typewriters--ha! ha!--no typewriters--
	alas!
	For I have much to open, I know immense
	troubles & wonders to their secret curse.
	Yet when erect on my ass,

	pissed off, I sat two-square, I kept shut my mouth
	and stilled my nimble fingers across keys.
	That is I stood up.
	Now since down I lay, void of love & ruth,
	I’d howl my knowings, only there’s the earth
	overhead. Plop!



128. DREAM SONG 84

	Plop, plop. The lobster toppled in the pot,
	fulfilling, dislike man, his destiny,
	glowing fire-red,
	succulent, and on the whole becoming what
	man wants. I crack my final claw singly,
	wind up the grave, & to bed.

	--Sound good, Mr Bones. I wish I had me some.
	(I spose you got a lessen up your slave.)
	--O no no no.
	Sole I remember; where no lobster swine,--
	pots hot or cold is none. With you I grieve
	lightly, and I have no lesson.

	Bodies are relishy, they say. Here’s mine,
	was. What ever happened to Political Economy,
	leaving me here?
	Is a rare--in my opinion--responsibility.
	The military establishments perpetuate themselves forever.
	Have a bite, for a sign.



129. DREAM SONG 85

	Flak. An eventful thought came to me,
	who squirm in my hole. How will the matter end?
	Who’s king these nights?
	What happened to . . . day? Are ships abroad?
	I would like to but may not entertain a friend.
	Save me from ghastly frights,

	Triune! My wood or word seems to be rotting.
	I daresay I’m collapsing. Worms are at hand.
	No, all that froze,
	I mean the blood. ‘O get up & go in’
	somewhere once I heard. Nowadays I doze.
	It’s cold here.

	The cold is ultimating. The cold is cold.
	I am--I should be held together by--
	but I am breaking up
	and Henry now has come to a full stop--
	vanisht his vision, if there was, & fold
	him over himself quietly.



130. DREAM SONG 86

	The conclusion is growing . . . I feel sure, my lord,
	this august court will entertain the plea
	Not Guilty by reason of death.
	I can say no more except that for the record
	I add that all the crimes since all the times he
	died will be due to the breath

	of unknown others, sweating in theri guilt
	while my client Henry’s brow of stainless steel
	rests free, as well it may,
	of all such turbulence, whereof not built
	Henry lies clear as any onion-peel
	in any sandwich, say.

	He spiced us: there, my lord, the wicked fault
	lodges: we judged him when we did not know
	and we did judge him wrong,
	lying incapable of crime save salt
	preservative in cases here below
	adduced. Not to prolong



131. DREAM SONG 87

	these hearings endlessly, friends, word is had
	Henry may be returning to our life
	adult & difficult.
	There exist rumors that remote and sad
	and quite beyond the knowledge of his wife
	to the foothills of the cult

	will come in silence this distinguished one
	essaying once again the lower slopes
	in triumph, keeping up our hopes,
	and heading not for the highest we have done
	but enigmatic faces, unsurveyed,
	calm as a forest glade

	for him. I only speak of what I hear
	and I have said too much. He may be there
	or he may groan in hospital
	resuming, as the fates decree, our lot.
	I would not interrupt him in whatever, in what
	he’s bracing him to at all.



132. DREAM SONG 88

	In slack times visit I the violent dead
	and pick their awful brains. Most seem to feel
	nothing is secret more
	to my disdain I find, when we who fled
	cherish the knowings of both worlds, conceal
	more, beat on the floor,

	where Bhain is stagnant, dear of Henry’s friends,
	yellow with cancer, paper-thin, & bent
	even in the hospital bed
	racked with high hope, on whom death lay hands
	in weeks, or Yeats in the London spring half-spent,
	only the grand gift in his head

	going for him, a seated ruin of a man
	courteous to a junior, like one of the boarders,
	or Dylan, with more to say
	now there’s no hurry, and we’re all a clan.
	You’d think off here one would be free from orders.
	I didn’t hear a single word. I obeyed.



133. DREAM SONG 89

	In a blue series towards his sleepy eyes
	they slid like wonder, women tall & small,
	of every shape & size,
	in many languages to lisp ‘We do’
	to Henry almost waking. What is the night at all,
	his closed eyes beckon you.

	In the Marriage of the Dead, a new routine,
	he gasped his crowded vows past lids shut tight
	and a-many rings fumbled on.
	His coffin like Grand Central to the brim
	filled up & emptied with the lapse of light.
	Which one will waken him?

	O she must startle like a fallen gown,
	content with speech like an old sacrament
	in deaf ears lying down,
	blazing through darkness till he feels the cold
	& blindness of his hopeless tenement
	while his black arms unfold.



134. DREAM SONG 9

	Deprived of his enemy, shrugged to a standstill
	horrible Henry, foaming. Fan their way
	toward him who will
	in the high wood: the officers, their rest,
	with p. a. echoing: his girl comes, say,
	conned in to test

	if he’s still human, see,
	therefore she get on the Sheriff’s mike & howl
	‘Come down, come down’.
	Therefore he un-budge, furious. He’d flee
	but only Heaven hangs over him foul.
	At the crossways, downtown,

	he dreams the folks are buying parsnips & suds
	and paying rent to foes. He slipt & fell.
	It’s golden here in the snow.
	A mild crack: a far rifle. Bogart’s duds
	truck back to Wardrobe. Fancy the brain from hell
	held out so long. Let go.



135. DREAM SONG 90

	In the night-reaches dreamed he of better graces,
	of liberations, and beloved faces,
	such as now ere dawn he sings.
	It would not be easy, accustomed to these things,
	to give up the old world, but he could try;
	let it all rest, have a good cry.

	Let Randall rest, whom your self-torturing
	cannot restore one instant’s good to, rest:
	he’s left us now.
	The panic died and in the panic’s dying
	so did my old friend. I am headed west
	also, also, somehow.

	In the chambers of the end we’ll meet again
	I will say Randall, he’ll say Pussycat
	and all will be as before
	whenas we sought, among the beloved faces,
	eminence and were dissatisfied with that
	and needed more.



136. DREAM SONG 91

	Noises from underground made gibber some
	others collected & dug henry up
	saying ‘You are a sight.’
	Chilly, he muttered for a double rum
	waving the mikes away, putting a stop
	to rumors, pushing his fright

	off with the now accumulated taxes
	accustomed in his way to solitude
	and no bills.
	Wives came forward, claiming a new Axis,
	fearful for their insurance, though, now, glued
	to disencumbered Henry’s many ills.

	A fortnight, sense a single man
	upon the trampled scene at 2 a.m.
	insomnia-plagued, with a shovel
	digging like mad, Lazarus with a plan
	to get his own back, a plan, a stratagem
	no newsman will unravel.



137. DREAM SONG 92

	Something black somewhere in the vistas of his heart.

	Tulips from Tates teazed Henry in the mood
	to be a tulip and desire no more
	but water, but light, but air.
	Yet his nerves rattled blackly, unsubdued,
	& suffocation called, dream-whiskey’d pour
	sirening. Rosy there

	too fly my Phil & Ellen roses, pal.
	Flesh-coloured men & women come & punt
	under my windows. I rave
	or grunt against it, from a flowerless land.
	For timeless hours wind most, or not at all. I wind
	my clock before I shave.

	Soon it will fall dark. Soon you’ll see stars
	you fevered after, child, man, & did nothing,--
	compass live to the pencil-torch!
	As still as his cadaver, Henry mars
	this surface of an earth or other, feet south
	eyes bleared west, waking to march.



138. DREAM SONG 93

	General Fatigue stalked in, & a Major-General,
	Captain Fatigue, and at the base of all
	pale Corporal Fatigue,
	and curious microbes came, came viruses:
	and the Court conferred on Henry, and conferred on Henry
	the rare Order of Weak.

	--How come dims one these wholesome elsers oh?
	Old polymaths, old trackers, far from home,
	say how thro’ auburn hairtidbits of youth’s grey climb.
	My beauty id off duty!--

	Henry relives a lady, how down vain,
	spruce in her succinct parts, spruce everywhere.
	They fed like muscles and lunched
	after, between, before. He tracks her, hunched
	(propped on red table elbows) at her telephone,
	white rear bare in the air.



139. DREAM SONG 94

	Ill lay he long, upon this last return,
	unvisited. The doctors put everything in the hospital
	into reluctant Henry
	and the nurses took it out & put it back,
	smiling like fiends, with their eternal ‘we.’
	Henry did a slow burn,

	collapsing his dialogue to their white ears
	& shiny on the flanges. Sanka he drank
	until his memories blurred
	& Valerie was coming, lower he sank
	and lovely. Teddy on his handlebars
	perched, her. One word he heard

	insistent his broad shortcomings, then lay still.
	That middle-sized wild man was ill.
	A hospital is where it all has a use,
	so is a makar . . . So is substantial God,
	tuning in from abroad.



140. DREAM SONG 95

	The surly cop looked out at me in sleep
	insect-like. Guess, who was the insect.
	I’d asked him in my robe
	& hospital gown in the elevator politely
	why someone saw so many police around,
	and without speaking he looked.

	A meathead, and of course he was armed, to creep
	across my nervous system some time ago wrecked.
	I saw the point of Loeb
	at last, to give oneself over to crime wholly,
	baffle, torment, roar laughter, or without sound
	attend while he is cooked

	until with trembling hands hoist I my true
	& legal ax, to get at the brains. I never liked brains--
	it’s the texture & the thought--
	but I will like them now, spooning at you,
	my guardian, slowly, until at lenght the rains
	lose heart and the sun flames out.



141. DREAM SONG 96

	Under the table, no. That last was stunning,
	that flagon had breasts. Some men grow down cursed.
	Why drink so, two days running?
	two months, O seasons, years, two decades running?
	I answer (smiles) my question on the cuff:
	Man, I been thirsty.

	The brake is incomplete but white costumes
	threaten his rum, his cointreau, gin-&-sherry,
	his bourbon, bugs um all.
	His go-out privilege led to odd red times,
	since even or especially in hospital things get hairy.
	He makes it back without falling.

	He sleep up a short storm.
	He wolf his meals, lamb-warm.

	Their packs bump on their’ -blades, tan canteens swing,
	for them this day my dawn’s old, Saturday’s IT,
	through town toward a Scout hike.
	For him too, up since two, out for a sit
	now in the emptiest freshest park, one sober fling
	before correspondence & breakfast.



142. DREAM SONG 97

	Henry of Donnybrook bred like a pig,
	bred when he was brittle, bred when big,
	how he’s sweating to support them.
	Which birthday of the brighter darker man,
	the Goya of the Globe & Blackfriars, whom--
	our full earth smiled on him

	squeezing his old heart with a daughter loose
	(hostages they áre)--the world’s produced,
	so far, alarms, alarms.
	Fancy the chill & fatigue four hundred years
	award a warm one. All we know is ears.
	My slab lifts up its arms

	in a solicitude entire, too late.
	Of brutal revelry gap your mouth to state:
	Front back & backside go bare!
	Cats’ blackness, booze,blows, grunts, grand groans.
	Yo-bad yōm i-oowaled bo v’ha’l lail awmer h’re gawber!
	--Now, now, poor Bones.



143. DREAM SONG 98

	I met a junior--not so junior--and
	a-many others, who knew ‘him’ or ‘them’
	long ago, slightly,
	whom I know. It was the usual
	cocktail party, only (my schedule being strict)
	beforehand.

	I worked. Well. Then they kept the kids away
	with their own questions, over briefest coffee.
	Then kids drove me to my city.
	I think of the junior: once my advanced élève,
	sweetnatured, slack a little, never perhaps to make,
	in my opinion then, it.

	In my opinion, after a decade, now.
	He publishes. The place was second-rate
	and is throwing up new buildings.
	He’ll be, with luck, there always.--Mr Bones,
	stop that damn dismal.--Why can’t we all the same
	be? --Dr Bones, how?



144. DREAM SONG 99

	He does not live here but it is the god.
	A priest tools in a top his motorbike.
	You do not enter.
	Us the landscape circles hard abroad,
	sunned, stone. Like calls, too low, to like.

	One submachine-gun cleared the Durga Temple.

	It is very dark here in this groping forth

	Gulp rhubarb for a guilty heart,
	rhubarb for a free, if the world’s sway
	waives customs anywhere that far

	Look on, without pure dismay.
	Unable to account for itself.

	The slave-girl folded her fan & turned on my air-condtioner.
	The lemonade-machine made lemonade.
	I made love, lolled,
	my roundel lowered. I ache less. I purr.
	--Mr Bones, you too advancer with your song,
	muching of which are wrong.



145. ELEVEN ADDRESSES TO THE LORD

	1

	Master of beauty, craftsman of the snowflake,
	inimitable contriver,
	endower of Earth so gorgeous & different from the boring Moon,
	thank you for such as it is my gift.

	I have made up a morning prayer to you
	containing with precision everything that most matters.
	‘According to Thy will’ the thing begins.
	It took me off & on two days. It does not aim at eloquence.

	You have come to my rescue again & again
	in my impassable, sometimes despairing years.
	You have allowed my brilliant friends to destroy themselves
	and I am still here, severely damaged, but functioning.

	Unknowable, as I am unknown to my guinea pigs:
	how can I ‘love’ you?
	I only as far as gratitude & awe
	confidently & absolutely go.

	I have no idea whether we live again.
	It doesn’t seem likely
	from either the scientific or the philosophical point of view
	but certainly all things are possible to you,

	and I believe as fixedly in the Resurrection-appearances to Peter & to Paul
	as I believe I sit in this blue chair.
	Only that may have been a special case
	to establish their initiatory faith.

	Whatever your end may be, accept my amazement.
	May I stand until death forever at attention
	for any your least instruction or enlightenment.
	I even feel sure you will assist me again, Master of insight & beauty.


	2

	Holy, as I suppose I dare to call you
	without pretending to know anything about you
	but infinite capacity everywhere & always
	& in particular certain goodness to me.

	Yours is the crumpling, to my sister-in-law terrifying thunder,
	yours the candelabra buds sticky in Spring,
	Christ’s mercy,
	the gloomy wisdom of godless Freud:

	yours the lost souls in ill-attended wards,
	those agonized thro’ the world
	It this instant of time, all evil men,
	Belsen, Omaha Beach,--

	incomprehensible to man your ways.
	May be the Devil after all exists.
	‘I don’t try to reconcile anything’ said the poet at eighty,
	‘This is a damned strange world.’

	Man is ruining the pleasant earth & man.
	What at last, my Lord, will you allow?
	Postpone till after my children’s deaths your doom
	if it be thy ineffable, inevitable will.

	I say ‘Thy kingdom come’, it means nothing to me.
	Hast Thou prepared astonishments for man?
	One sudden Coming? Many so believe.
	So not, without knowing anything, do I.


	3

	Sole watchman of the flying stars, guard me
	against my flicker of impulse lust: teach me
	to see them as sisters & daughters. Sustain
	my grand endeavours: husbandship & crafting.

	Forsake me not when my wild hours come;
	grant me sleep nightly, grace soften my dreams;
	achieve in me patience till the thing be done,
	a careful view of my achievement come.

	Make me from time to time the gift of the shoulder.
	When all hurt nerves whine shut away the whiskey.
	Empty my heart toward Thee.
	Let me pace without fear the common path of death.

	Cross am I sometimes with my little daughter:
	fill her eyes with tears. Forgive me, Lord.
	Unite my various soul,
	sole watchman of the wide & single stars.


	4

	If I say Thy name, art Thou there? It may be so.
	Thou art not absent-minded, as I am.
	I am so much so I had to give up driving.
	You attend, I feel, to the matters of man.

	Across the ages certain blessings swarm,
	horrors accumulate, the best men fail:
	Socrates, Lincoln, Christ mysterious.
	Who can search Thee out?

	except Isaiah & Pascal, who saw.
	I dare not ask that vision, though a piece of it
	at last in crisis was vouchsafèd me.
	I altered then for good, to become yours.

	Caretaker! take care, for we run in straits.
	Daily, by night, we walk naked to storm,
	some threat of wholesale loss, to ruinous fear.
	Gift us with long cloaks & adrenalin.

	Who haunt the avenues of Angkor Wat
	recalling all that prayer, that glory dispersed,
	haunt me at the corner of Fifth & Hennepin.
	Shield & fresh fountain! Manifester! Even mine.


	5

	Holy, & holy. The damned are said to say
	‘We never thought we would come into this place.’
	I’m fairly clear, my Friend, there’s no such place
	ordained for inappropriate & evil man.

	Surely they fall dull, & forget. We too,
	the more or less just, I feel fall asleep
	dreamless forever while the worlds hurl out.
	Rest may be your ultimate gift.

	Rest or transfiguration! come & come
	whenever Thou wilt. My daughter & my son
	fend will without me, when my work is done
	in Your opinion.

	Strengthen my widow, let her dream on me
	thro’ tranquil hours less & down to less.
	Abrupt elsewhere her heart, I sharply hope.
	I leave her in wise Hands.


	6

	Under new management, Your Majesty:
	Thine. I have solo’d mine since childhood, since
	my father’s suicide when I was twelve
	blew out my most bright candle faith, and look at me.

	I served at Mass six dawns a week from five,
	adoring Father Boniface & you,
	memorizing the Latin he explained.
	Mostly we worked alone. One or two women.

	Then my poor father frantic. Confusions & afflictions
	followed my days. Wives left me.
	Bankrupt I closed my doors. You pierced the roof
	twice & again. Finally you opened my eyes.

	My double nature fused in that point of time
	three weeks ago day before yesterday.
	Now, brooding thro’ a history of the early Church,
	I identify with everybody, even the heresiarchs.


	7

	After a Stoic, a Peripatetic, a Pythagorean,
	Justin Martyr studied the words of the Saviour,
	finding them short, precise, terrible, & full of refreshment.
	I am tickled to learn this.

	Let one day desolate Sherry, fair, thin, tall,
	at 29 today her life the Sahara Desert,
	who has never once enjoyed a significant relation,
	so find His lightning words.


	_A Prayer for the Self_

	Who am I worthless that You spent such pains
	and take may pains again?
	I do not understand; but I believe.
	Jonquils respond with wit to the teasing breeze.

	Induct me down my secrets. Stiffen this heart
	to stand their horrifying cries, O cushion
	the first the second shocks, will to a halt
	in mid-air there demons who would be at me.

	May fade before, sweet morning on sweet morning,
	I wake my dreams, my fan-mail go astray,
	and do me little goods I have not thought of,
	ingenious & beneficial Father.

	Ease in their passing my beloved friends,
	all others too I have cared for in a travelling life,
	anyone anywhere indeed. Lift up
	sober toward truth a scared self-estimate.


	9

	Surprise me on some ordinary day
	with a blessing gratuitous. Even I’ve done good
	beyond their expectations. What count we then
	upon Your bounty?

	Interminable: an old theologian
	asserts that even to say You exist is misleading.
	Uh-huh. I buy that Second-century fellow.
	I press his withered glorifying hand.

	You certainly do not as I exist,
	impersonating as well the meteorite
	& flaring in your sun your waterfall
	or blind in caves pallid fishes.

	Bear in mind me, Who have forgotten nothing,
	& Who continues. I may not foreknow
	& fail much to remember. You sustain
	imperial desuetudes, at the kerb a widow.


	10

	Fearful I peer upon the mountain path
	where once Your shadow passed, Limner of the clouds
	up their phantastic guesses. I am afraid,
	I never until now confessed.

	I fell back in love with you, Father, for two reasons:
	You were good to me, & a delicious author,
	rational & passionate. Come on me again,
	as twice you came to Azarias & Misael.

	President of the brethren, our mild assemblies
	inspire, & bother the priest not to be dull;
	keep us week-long in order; love my children,
	my mother far & ill, far brother, my spouse.

	Oil all my turbulence as at Thy dictation
	I sweat out my wayward works.
	Father Hopkins said the only true literary critic is Christ.
	Let me lie down exhausted, content with that.


	11

	Germanicus leapt upon the wild lion in Smyrna,
	wishing to pass quickly from a lawless life.
	The crowd shook the stadium.
	The proconsul marvelled.

	‘Eighty & six years have I been his servant,
	and he has done me no harm.
	How can I blaspheme my King who saved me?’
	Polycarp, John’s pupil, facing the fire.

	Make too me acceptable at the end of time
	in my degree, which then Thou wilt award.
	Cancer, senility, mania,
	I pray I may be ready with my witness.



146. FARE WELL

	Motions of waking trouble winter air,
	I wonder, and his face as it were forms
	Solemn, canorous, under the howled alarms,--
	The eyes shadowed and shut.
	Certainly for this sort of thing it is very late,
	I shudder, while my love longs and I pour
	My bright eyes towards the moving shadow . . . where?
	Out, like a plucked gut

	What has been taken away will not return,
	I take it, whether upon the crouch of night
	Or for my mountain need to share a morning’s light,--
	No! I am alone.
	What has been taken away should not have been shown,
	I complain, torturing, and then withdrawn.
	After so long, can I still long so and burn,
	Imperishable son?

	O easy the phoenix in the tree of the heart,
	Each in its time, his twigs and spices fixes
	To make a last nest, and marvellously relaxes,--
	Out of the fire, weak peep! . . .
	Father I fought for Mother, sleep where you sleep!
	I slip into a snowbed with no hurt
	Where warm will warm be warm enough to part
	Us. As I sink, I weep.



147. FROM JOB

	_Job:_

	Perish the day’s fire in where I was born, and that night’s joy crying ‘A boy!’
	That day let God enquire not down for, no brightness burn there,
	But a dark of midnight claim, a black cloud seize it wholly,
	Let all that stains & shrouds terrify that day.
	Disjoin from its fellow days it, exiled from the toil of the months.
	Stony that night turn, joyless, empty of all song;
	Enchanters mark it curst, whose baleful power calls up Leviathan;
	Its twilight stars be darkt, unseen the eyelids of its dawn;
	For it shut not the hole of my womb, but let me out to trouble.

	Why died not I from the womb, incht-out still-born,
	Or fail aborted, carelessly buried, like children who never saw light?
	Why my father’s knee accepting, breasts giving me suck,--
	When now I should have lain still, and slept, and slept at rest,
	With kings and the world’s counsellors, who built up ruins to their glory,
	With princes heavy with gold, who houses filled with silver;
	Where the wicked cease from raging, where the exhausted rest,
	Where prisoners glad together hear not the voice of the guard,
	Where small & great are the same, and the slave free from a master.
	Wherefore is light to the miserable, wherefore living to the bitter
	Who long for a death unforthcoming, and dig for it like treasure,
	Whose hearts leap at a mound, a small mound, strain toward a grave,
	Whose way is lockt off, who are hedged in by God himself?
	To me moans came for food, my roars poured forth like drink.
	I fear a fear: it comes. That which I dread comes to me.
	No ease was mine, no quiet, no rest; yet trouble came.


	_Eliphass:_

	Will it do if we speak to you? for who can here be still?
	Lo, you admonisht many, and to the frail sprang support,
	Your speech arrested those falling, you stiffened the folding knees.
	Now it comes on, and you faint; touches you, fear.
	Is not good fear your boldness, this your integrity hope?
	Who perished ever,--remember?--pure? Where were the good destroyed?
	Evil ones I have seen pluckt up, reaping an empty house,
	Their children cast away justiceless in the gates courts;
	I have seen a sowing of evil, until the wind-blast of God.
	The old hoarse lions roar, assailed, and the young lions teeth are broken,
	And starve do old & young, and the lady’s cubs are crusht forth.

	Now secretly a word came, and I gathered a little of it,
	In piecemeal visions of the night, when deep sleep takes men;
	Entered me fear, and trembling, and all my bones shook,
	Before my face a spirit passed, my head’s hair shuddered,
	It stood still, no part of that appearance clear to me,
	A form was before my eyes, in silence, and I heard a voice:
	(_word unclear_) men can be just before God? Can a man be pure as his maker?
	Who can place trust in His servants? His angels fail to you;
	Then what in those whose houses are mud, whose foundations are mud.

	Who crunch like a moth, between the dawn and evening,
	Who are shattered, so, and unseen perish for ever.
	Rage is the foolish man’s enemy, resentment doubles his woe;
	I have seen him taking root, and curst his house suddenly,
	For his children are unsafe, and suffer in the gate, unaided.
	Their harvest any hungry eat--even from thorns, and the snare gapes.
	From the dust woe comes not, nor shoots from the ground.
	But man is born to trouble, as the angels fly off.
	Were it mine, I would seek Shaddai and put the case there,
	Who ancient enigmatic great deeds does, marvellous at, numberless,
	Rain-donor here, prolific of waters elsewhere, anywhere,
	Place-alterer, lifting up the low, restoring the mourning,
	Who moves on the crafty’s schemes, emptying their hands,
	Who takes the wise in their own devices, the wily’s counsels blows away;
	Darkness at noon abruptly they meet, and grope, and grope:
	The Good from their mouths he snatches, the poor from their power,
	So that the poor have hope, and evil shuts its mouth.

	Lo, happy a man whom God corrects, who Shaddai’s training takes;
	For first He hurts, then heals; wounds, and His hands make whole;
	Out from six woes He saves you,--seven, and He saves;
	In famine keeps you from dying, in war from the sword’s power.
	From spells you sheltered, scathless when demons come:
	At them and hunger laugh, look upon beasts without fear,
	For you be in league with the satyrs of the fields, at peace with the wild beasts.
	And your tent shall be at peace, your home-place whole.
	Many your seed, in your confidence, your offspring like the grass.
	You shall die unimpaired, & old, as a shock of corn in its season.
	So: here is our knowing, & truth, & proven: hear it in your heart.



148. FROM THE BLACK BOOK

	_not him_

	Grandfather, sleepless in a room upstairs,
	Seldom came down; so when they tript him down
	We wept. The blind light sang about his ears,
	Later we heard. Brother had pull. In pairs
	He, some, slept upon stone.
	Later they stamped him down in mud.
	The windlass drew him silly & odd-eyed, blood
	Broke from his ears before they quit.
	Before they trucked him home they cleaned him up somewhat.

	Only the loose eyes’ glaze they could not clean
	And soon he died. He howled a night and shook
	Our teeth before the end; we breathed again
	When he stopt. Abraham, what we have seen
	Write, I beg, in your Book.
	No more the solemn and high bells
	Call to our pall; we crawl or gibber; Hell’s
	Irritable & treacherous
	Despairs here here (not him) reach now to shatter us.


	2

	_Luftmenschen_ dream, the men who live on air,
	Of other values, in the blackness watching
	Peaceful for gangs or a quick raid,
	The ghetto nods a mortal head
	Soundless but for a scurry, a sigh, retching,--
	No moan of generation fear.
	Hands hold each other limper
	While the moon lengthens on the sliding river.

	Prolong the woolen night--Solomon sang--
	And never the soul with its own revenge encumber
	But like a cry of cranes dies out,
	Ecstatic, faint, a moment float--
	ing, fying soul, or flares like August timber
	In wild woe vanishing.
	Blue grows from grey, towards slaughter.
	(An Ashkenazi genius stoned Ivan; a sculptor.)

	“Boleslaus brought us here, surnamed the Good,
	Whose dust rolls nearly seven hundred years
	Towards Sirius: we thank that King
	As for the ledge whereto we cling,
	Night in the caves under the ruins; stars,
	Armbands come off, for which we could
	Be glad but the black troops gather.”
	So those who kneel in the paling sky and shiver.

	Dawn like a rose unfolds--flower of parks--
	Alleys of limetrees, villas, ponds, a palace
	Down a deserted riverbed,
	The Lazienki Gardens’ pride,
	Monument to a king able and callous
	Who far Vienna from the Turks
	Bloodily did deliver.
	For foreigners, now, a sort of theatre.

	One officer in black demarches here
	Cupshot, torn collar by a bitch unwilling
	Native & blonde through the debauch
	That kept him all night from his couch,
	Hurts his head and from the others’ howling
	Drove him out for morning air.
	Brooding over the water
	He reddens suddenly. He went back & shot her.


	_the will_

	A frail vague man, in whom our senses ached
	With nothing, began to whisper with himself
	At line-up, from the rear,--
	We trembled for him,--shook the scald that caked
	His skull, totting up phantoms none could solve,
	Fag-end of a career.

	(Shadowless in a cairn, four lights. Farewell,
	The legacy trots off,
	A swimming moment of the stiff’s desire
	Such decades since. Or nothing trots to tell
	Intestate once with love
	Pain brain stood up a bit out of time’s mire.)
	He scrambled one night out
	And dodged between their lights far to the wire,
	Where he lodged. I suppose he crisped, dying in fire;
	A shot or so, a shout;
	But certainly, lifting our scalps, well beyond fear,
	He suddenly sang, sang, hanging on the wire.


	_the waiting_

	Nearer, my heart, to me . . . My cigarette
	Endures an apotheosis; I feel
	More for the grey twirl than I mull or whet
	God’s promise . . . probably the butt is real.
	Now I seem less so. Than tissue & ash
	I am more indistinct, than fire and weed
	Yielding to fire, as fire to the weed’s trash:
	Do pins & feathers kill? Can a root bleed?
	Master my heart will nothing to my side?
	Otherwhere, neither broods nor aches for me
	Regitive by the iron door unterrified
	Foully it leans. That hole, my mystery,

	Which once its bolt, the muscle of their State,
	Opened to drop me in, cannot keep shut!
	Lancet intensities I anticipate!
	Feathery movement twires about my thought!

	The frontier posts, disfigured sphincters, spill
	Invaders home; heart through the ribs returns;
	How corn & wine return, transfigured, fill
	Sleepy lands, our land. Ice on my brow burns,

	Ebbing, blackfellow-dull, when the bolt shoots
	Over the tigerish flood may I soar steady
	Whither the latched starless & heartless roots
	O need blindly night. I am almost ready--



149. INNOCENT

	Cats’ eyes could see a flub of blood.
	Hm. Not her eyes whose pain
	Arched in the dark by the roadside.
	No cats, nothing. She tried, & tried,
	Troubling not Christ’s night in vain.

	Scum of the moon caught on her chin,
	Harmless & sickle moon, a slack
	Drink-dull passer noticed her,
	To gather the beggar out of the blur
	Into his wagon, sick, and track.

	The soft flesh melted from the bones
	Of the child born dead, for days & days
	In the wood’s edge. Birds, nothing came.
	Bones go. All is the same, the same,--
	Except our envy O wintry praise!



150. SONNET 104

	A spot of poontang on a five-foot piece,
	Diminutive, but room enough . . . like clay
	To finger eager on some torrid day . . .
	Who’d throw her black hair back, and hang, and tease.
	Never, not once in all one’s horny lease
	To’have had a demi-lay, a pretty, gay,
	Snug, slim and supple-breasted girl for play . . .
	She bats her big, warm eyes, and slides like grease.

	And cuff her silly-hot again, mouth hot
	And wet her small round writhing—but this screams
	Suddenly awake, unreal as alkahest,
	My god, this isn’t what I want!—You tot
	The harrow-days you hold me to, black dreams,
	The dirty water to get off my chest.



151. SONNET 115

	All we were going strong last night this time,
	the mosts were flying & the frozen daiquiris
	were downing, supine on the floor lay Lise
	listening to Schubert grievous & sublime,
	my head was frantic with a following rime:
	it was a good evening, and evening to please,
	I kissed her in the kitchen -ecstasies-
	among so much good we tamped down the crime.

	The weather’s changing. This morning was cold,
	as I made for the grove, without expectation,
	some hundred Sonnets in my pocket, old,
	to read her if she came. Presently the sun
	yellowed the pines & my lady came not
	in blue jeans & a sweater. I sat down & wrote.



152. SONNET 117

	All we were going strong last night this time,
	the mots were flying & the frozen daiquiris
	were downing, supine on the floor lay Lise
	listening to Schubert grievous & sublime,
	my head was frantic with a following rime:
	it was a good evening, an evening to please,
	I kissed her in the kitchen—ecstasies—
	among so much good we tamped down the crime.

	The weather’s changing. This morning was cold,
	as I made for the grove, without expectation,
	some hundred Sonnets in my pocket, old,
	to read her if she came. Presently the sun
	yellowed the pines & my lady came not
	in blue jeans & a sweater. I sat down & wrote.

	Judges xvi.22



153. SONNET 25

	Sometimes the night echoes to prideless wailing
	Low as I hunch home late and fever-tired,
	Near you not, nearing the sharer I desired,
	Toward whom till now I sailed back . . . but that sailing
	Yaws, from the cabin orders like a failing
	Dribble, the stores disordered and then fired
	Skid wild, the men are glaring, the mate has wired
	_Hopeless:_ Locked in, and humming, the Captain’s nailing
	A false log to the lurching table. Lies
	And passion sing in the cabin on the voyage home,
	The burgee should fly Jolly Roger: wind
	Madness like the tackle of a crane (outcries
	Ascend) around to heave him from the foam
	Irresponsible, since all the stars rain blind.



154. SONNET 96

	It will seem strange, no more this range on range
	Of opening hopes and happenings. Strange to be
	One’s name no longer. Not caught up, not free.
	Strange, not to wish one’s wishes onward. Strange,
	The looseness, slopping, time and space estrange.
	Strangest, and sad as a blind child, not to see
	Ever you, never to hear you, endlessly
	Neither you there, nor coming.. Heavy change!—

	An instant there is, Sophoclean, true,
	When Oedipus must understand: his head—
	When Oedipus believes—tilts like a wave,
	And will not break, only iov iov
	Wells from his dreadful mouth, the love he led:
	Prolong to Procyon this. This begins my grave.



155. SURVIVING LOVE

	The clapper hovers, but why run so hard?
	What he wants, has,--more than will make him ease;
	No god calls down,--he’s not been on his knees
	This man, for years, and he is off his guard.
	What then does he dream of
	Sweating through day?--Surviving love.

	Cold he knows he comes, once to the dark,
	All that waste of cold, leaving all cold
	Behind him hearts, forgotten when he’s tolled,
	His books are split and sold, the pencil mark
	He made erased, his wife
	Gone brave and quick to her new life.

	And so he spins to find out something warm
	To think on when the glaze fastens his eyes
	And he begins to freeze. He slows and tries
	To hear a promise: ‘After, after your storm
	I will grieve and remember,
	Miss you and be warm and remember.’

	But really nothing replies to the poor man,
	He never hears this, or the voice he hears
	(He thinks) he loses ah when next appears
	The hood of the bell, seeing which he began.
	His skull rings with his end,
	He runs on, love for love.



156. THE TRAVELLER

	They pointed me out on the highway, and they said
	‘That man has a curious way of holding his head.’

	They pointed me out on the beach; they said ‘That man
	Will never become as we are, try as he can.’

	They pointed me out at the station, and the guard
	Looked at me twice, thrice, thoughtfully & hard.

	I took the same train that the others took,
	To the same place. Were it not for that look
	And those words, we were all of us the same.
	I studied merely maps. I tried to name
	The effects of motion on the travellers,
	I watched the couple I could see, the curse
	And blessings of that couple, their destination,
	The deception practised on them at the station,
	Their courage. When the train stopped and they knew
	The end of their journey, I descended too.



157. WHOLLY FAIL

	Sir Partofall, our Best, O the Physicist is
	(Wizards of Oak Ridge and Los Alamos)
	Your questrist foxing up a drug that may
	Or may not, who knows . . . so (but not a word)
	“A livens wife’s and mother’s and son’s coffee
	His own, therewith one holy night; next day
	None descends, if the silence in the house
	Is unusual and complete, like a curtain,
	He will know (or will not, will he) he has failed.
	Such a good Doctor nominate a beast
	Or madman: if he reached the Chair alive,
	O lucky Doctor. Let us hang our faith
	--To master the power of the grave, much; more,
	The power to unwit; most, curst and clouded shore,
	The power of despair.--
	Instead on him on to the Grail, throw the State there
	To see what he can find
	Useful for mankind,
	Useful although uncertain:
	Where Partsusall, transfigured, white with joy,
	Smiles thro’ the blast and fiery wind spreading out from zero--



158. WINTER LANDSCAPE

	The three men coming down the winter hill
	In brown, with tall poles and a pack of hounds
	At heel, through the arrangement of the trees,
	Past the five figures at the burning straw,
	Returning cold and silent to their town,

	Returning to the drifted snow, the rink
	Lively with children, to the older men,
	The long companions they can never reach,
	The blue light, men with ladders, by the church
	The sledge and shadow in the twilit street,

	Are not aware that in the sandy time
	To come, the evil waste of history
	Outstretched, they will be seen upon the brow
	Of that same hill: when all their company
	Will have been irrecoverably lost,

	These men, this particular three in brown
	Witnessed by birds will keep the scene and say
	By their configuration with the trees,
	The small bridge, the red houses and the fire,
	What place, what time, what morning occasion

	Sent them into the wood, a pack of hounds
	At heel and the tall poles upon their shoulders,
	Thence to return as now we see them and
	Ankle-deep in snow down the winter hill
	Descend, while three birds watch and the fourth flies.
