*** Elizabeth Bishop (1911 - 1979)


1. THE ARMADILLO

	This is the time of year
	when almost every night
	the frail, illegal fire balloons appear.
	Climbing the mountain height,

	rising toward a saint
	still honored in these parts,
	the paper chambers flush and fill with light
	that comes and goes, like hearts.

	Once up against the sky it’s hard
	to tell them from the stars--
	planets, that is--the tinted ones:
	Venus going down, or Mars,

	or the pale green one. With a wind,
	they flare and falter, wobble and toss;
	but if it’s still they steer between
	the kite sticks of the Southern Cross,

	receding, dwindling, solemnly
	and steadily forsaking us,
	or, in the downdraft from a peak,
	suddenly turning dangerous.

	Last night another big one fell.
	It splattered like an egg of fire
	against the cliff behind the house.
	The flame ran down. We saw the pair

	of owls who nest there flying up
	and up, their whirling black-and-white
	stained bright pink underneath, until
	they shrieked up out of sight.

	The ancient owls’ nest must have burned.
	Hastily, all alone,
	a glistening armadillo left the scene,
	rose-flecked, head down, tail down,

	and then a baby rabbit jumped out,
	_short_-eared, to our surprise.
	So soft!--a handful of intangible ash
	with fixed, ignited eyes.

	_Too pretty, dreamlike mimicry!
	O falling fire and piercing cry
	and panic, and a weak mailed fist
	clenched ignorant against the sky!_



2. ARRIVAL AT SANTOS

	Here is a coast; here is a harbor;
	here, after a meager diet of horizon, is some scenery;
	impractically shaped and--who knows?--self-pitying mountains,
	sad and harsh beneath their frivolous greenery,

	with a little church on top of one. And warehouses,
	some of them painted a feeble pink, or blue,
	and some tall, uncertain palms. Oh, tourist,
	is this how this country is going to answer you

	and your immodest demands for a different world,
	and a better life, and complete comprehension
	of both at last, and immediately,
	after eighteen days of suspension?

	Finish your breakfast. The tender is coming,
	a strange and ancient craft, flying a strange and brilliant rag.
	So that’s the flag. I never saw it before.
	I somehow never thought of there being a flag,

	but of course there was, all along. And coins, I presume,
	and paper money; they remain to be seen.
	And gingerly now we climb down the ladder backward,
	myself and a fellow passenger named Miss Breen,

	descending into the midst of twenty-six freighters
	waiting to be loaded with green coffee beans.
	Please, boy, do be more careful with that boat hook!
	Watch out! Oh! It has caught Miss Breen’s

	skirt! There! Miss Breen is about seventy,
	a retired police lieutenant, six feet tall,
	with beautiful bright blue eyes and a kind expression.
	Her home, when she is at home, is in Glens Fall

	s, New York. There. We are settled.
	The customs officials will speak English, we hope,
	and leave us our bourbon and cigarettes.
	Ports are necessities, like postage stamps, or soap,

	but they seldom seem to care what impression they make,
	or, like this, only attempt, since it does not matter,
	the unassertive colors of soap, or postage stamps--
	wasting away like the former, slipping the way the latter

	do when we mail the letteres we wrote on the boat,
	either because the glue here is very inferior
	or because of the heat. We leave Santos at once;
	we are driving to the interior.



3. AT THE FISHHOUSES

	Although it is a cold evening,
	down by one of the fishhouses
	an old man sits netting,
	his net, in the gloaming almost invisible,
	a dark purple-brown,
	and his shuttle worn and polished.
	The air smells so strong of codfish
	it makes one’s nose run and one’s eyes water.
	The five fishhouses have steeply peaked roofs
	and narrow, cleated gangplanks slant up
	to storerooms in the gables
	for the wheelbarrows to be pushed up and down on.
	All is silver: the heavy surface of the sea,
	swelling slowly as if considering spilling over,
	is opaque, but the silver of the benches,
	the lobster pots, and masts, scattered
	among the wild jagged rocks,
	is of an apparent translucence
	like the small old buildings with an emerald moss
	growing on their shoreward walls.
	The big fish tubs are completely lined
	with layers of beautiful herring scales
	and the wheelbarrows are similarly plastered
	with creamy iridescent coats of mail,
	with small iridescent flies crawling on them.
	Up on the little slope behind the houses,
	set in the sparse bright sprinkle of grass,
	is an ancient wooden capstan,
	cracked, with two long bleached handles
	and some melancholy stains, like dried blood,
	where the ironwork has rusted.
	The old man accepts a Lucky Strike.
	He was a friend of my grandfather.
	We talk of the decline in the population
	and of codfish and herring
	while he waits for a herring boat to come in.
	There are sequins on his vest and on his thumb.
	He has scraped the scales, the principal beauty,
	from unnumbered fish with that black old knife,
	the blade of which is almost worn away.

	Down at the water’s edge, at the place
	where they haul up the boats, up the long ramp
	descending into the water, thin silver
	tree trunks are laid horizontally
	across the gray stones, down and down
	at intervals of four or five feet.

	Cold dark deep and absolutely clear,
	element bearable to no mortal,
	to fish and to seals . . . One seal particularly
	I have seen here evening after evening.
	He was curious about me. He was interested in music;
	like me a believer in total immersion,
	so I used to sing him Baptist hymns.
	I also sang “A Mighty Fortress Is Our God.”
	He stood up in the water and regarded me
	steadily, moving his head a little.
	Then he would disappear, then suddenly emerge
	almost in the same spot, with a sort of shrug
	as if it were against his better judgment.
	Cold dark deep and absolutely clear,
	the clear gray icy water . . . Back, behind us,
	the dignified tall firs begin.
	Bluish, associating with their shadows,
	a million Christmas trees stand
	waiting for Christmas. The water seems suspended
	above the rounded gray and blue-gray stones.
	I have seen it over and over, the same sea, the same,
	slightly, indifferently swinging above the stones,
	icily free above the stones,
	above the stones and then the world.
	If you should dip your hand in,
	your wrist would ache immediately,
	your bones would begin to ache and your hand would burn
	as if the water were a transmutation of fire
	that feeds on stones and burns with a dark gray flame.
	If you tasted it, it would first taste bitter,
	then briny, then surely burn your tongue.
	It is like what we imagine knowledge to be:
	dark, salt, clear, moving, utterly free,
	drawn from the cold hard mouth
	of the world, derived from the rocky breasts
	forever, flowing and drawn, and since
	our knowledge is historical, flowing, and flown.



4. A COLD SPRING

	_Nothing is so beautiful as spring._ --Hopkins

	A cold spring:
	the violet was flawed on the lawn.
	For two weeks or more the trees hesitated;
	the little leaves waited,
	carefully indicating their characteristics.
	Finally a grave green dust
	settled over your big and aimless hills.
	One day, in a chill white blast of sunshine,
	on the side of one a calf was born.
	The mother stopped lowing
	and took a long time eating the after-birth,
	a wretched flag,
	but the calf got up promptly
	and seemed inclined to feel gay.

	The next day
	was much warmer.
	Greenish-white dogwood infiltrated the wood,
	each petal burned, apparently, by a cigarette-butt;
	and the blurred redbud stood
	beside it, motionless, but almost more
	like movement than any placeable color.
	Four deer practiced leaping over your fences.
	The infant oak-leaves swung through the sober oak.
	Song-sparrows were wound up for the summer,
	and in the maple the complementary cardinal
	cracked a whip, and the sleeper awoke,
	stretching miles of green limbs from the south.

	In his cap the lilacs whitened,
	then one day they fell like snow.
	Now, in the evening,
	a new moon comes.
	The hills grow softer. Tufts of long grass show
	where each cow-flop lies.
	The bull-frogs are sounding,
	slack strings plucked by heavy thumbs.
	Beneath the light, against your white front door,
	the smallest moths, like Chinese fans,
	flatten themselves, silver and silver-gilt
	over pale yellow, orange, or gray.
	Now, from the thick grass, the fireflies
	begin to rise:
	up, then down, then up again:
	lit on the ascending flight,
	drifting simultaneously to the same height,
	--exactly like the bubbles in champagne.
	--Later on they rise much higher.
	And your shadowy pastures will be able to offer
	these particular glowing tributes
	every evening now throughout the summer.



5. CRUSOE IN ENGLAND

	A new volcano has erupted,
	the papers say, and last week I was reading
	where some ship saw an island being born:
	at first a breath of steam, ten miles away;
	and then a black fleck--basalt, probably--
	rose in the mate’s binoculars
	and caught on the horizon like a fly.
	They named it. But my poor old island’s still
	un-rediscovered, un-renamable.
	None of the books has ever got it right.

	Well, I had fifty-two
	miserable, small volcanoes I could climb
	with a few slithery strides--
	volcanoes dead as ash heaps.
	I used to sit on the edge of the highest one
	and count the others standing up,
	naked and leaden, with their heads blown off.
	I’d think that if they were the size
	I thought volcanoes should be, then I had
	become a giant;
	and if I had become a giant,
	I couldn’t bear to think what size
	the goats and turtles were,
	or the gulls, or the overlapping rollers
	--a glittering hexagon of rollers
	closing and closing in, but never quite,
	glittering and glittering, though the sky
	was mostly overcast.

	My island seemed to be
	a sort of cloud-dump. All the hemisphere’s
	left-over clouds arrived and hung
	above the craters--their parched throats
	were hot to touch.
	Was that why it rained so much?
	And why sometimes the whole place hissed?
	The turtles lumbered by, high-domed,
	hissing like teakettles.
	(And I’d have given years, or taken a few,
	for any sort of kettle, of course.)
	The folds of lava, running out to sea,
	would hiss. I’d turn. And then they’d prove
	to be more turtles.
	The beaches were all lava, variegated,
	black, red, and white, and gray;
	the marbled colors made a fine display.
	And I had waterspouts. Oh,
	half a dozen at a time, far out,
	they’d come and go, advancing and retreating,
	their heads in cloud, their feet in moving patches
	of scuffed-up white.
	Glass chimneys, flexible, attenuated,
	sacerdotal beings of glass . . . I watched
	the water spiral up in them like smoke.
	Beautiful, yes, but not much company.

	I often gave way to self-pity.
	“Do I deserve this? I suppose I must.
	I wouldn’t be here otherwise. Was there
	a moment when I actually chose this?
	I don’t remember, but there could have been.”
	What’s wrong about self-pity, anyway?
	With my legs dangling down familiarly
	over a crater’s edge, I told myself
	“Pity should begin at home.” So the more
	pity I felt, the more I felt at home.

	The sun set in the sea; the same odd sun
	rose from the sea,
	and there was one of it and one of me.
	The island had one kind of everything:
	one tree snail, a bright violet-blue
	with a thin shell, crept over everything,
	over the one variety of tree,
	a sooty, scrub affair.
	Snail shells lay under these in drifts
	and, at a distance,
	you’d swear that they were beds of irises.
	There was one kind of berry, a dark red.
	I tried it, one by one, and hours apart.
	Sub-acid, and not bad, no ill effects;
	and so I made home-brew. I’d drink
	the awful, fizzy, stinging stuff
	that went straight to my head
	and play my home-made flute
	(I think it had the weirdest scale on earth)
	and, dizzy, whoop and dance among the goats.
	Home-made, home-made! But aren’t we all?
	I felt a deep affection for
	the smallest of my island industries.
	No, not exactly, since the smallest was
	a miserable philosophy.

	Because I didn’t know enough.
	Why didn’t I know enough of something?
	Greek drama or astronomy? The books
	I’d read were full of blanks;
	the poems--well, I tried
	reciting to my iris-beds,
	“They flash upon that inward eye,
	which is the bliss . . .” The bliss of what?
	One of the first things that I did
	when I got back was look it up.

	The island smelled of goat and guano.
	The goats were white, so were the gulls,
	and both too tame, or else they thought
	I was a goat, too, or a gull.
	Baa, baa, baa and shriek, shriek, shriek,
	baa . . . shriek . . . baa . . . I still can’t shake
	them from my ears; they’re hurting now.
	The questioning shrieks, the equivocal replies
	over a ground of hissing rain
	and hissing, ambulating turtles
	got on my nerves.
	When all the gulls flew up at once, they sounded
	like a big tree in a strong wind, its leaves.
	I’d shut my eyes and think about a tree,
	an oak, say, with real shade, somewhere.
	I’d heard of cattle getting island-sick.
	I thought the goats were.
	One billy-goat would stand on the volcano
	I’d christened Mont d’Espoir or Mount Despair
	(I’d time enough to play with names),
	and bleat and bleat, and sniff the air.
	I’d grab his beard and look at him.
	His pupils, horizontal, narrowed up
	and expressed nothing, or a little malice.
	I got so tired of the very colors!
	One day I dyed a baby goat bright red
	with my red berries, just to see
	something a little different.
	And then his mother wouldn’t recognize him.

	Dreams were the worst. Of course I dreamed of food
	and love, but they were pleasant rather
	than otherwise. But then I’d dream of things
	like slitting a baby’s throat, mistaking it
	for a baby goat. I’d have
	nightmares of other islands
	stretching away from mine, infinities
	of islands, islands spawning islands,
	like frogs’ eggs turning into polliwogs
	of islands, knowing that I had to live
	on each and every one, eventually,
	for ages, registering their flora,
	their fauna, their geography.

	Just when I thought I couldn’t stand it
	another minute longer, Friday came.
	(Accounts of that have everything all wrong.)
	Friday was nice.
	Friday was nice, and we were friends.
	If only he had been a woman!
	I wanted to propagate my kind,
	and so did he, I think, poor boy.
	He’d pet the baby goats sometimes,
	and race with them, or carry one around.
	--Pretty to watch; he had a pretty body.

	And then one day they came and took us off.

	Now I live here, another island,
	that doesn’t seem like one, but who decides?
	My blood was full of them; my brain
	bred islands. But that archipelago
	has petered out. I’m old.
	I’m bored, too, drinking my real tea,
	surrounded by uninteresting lumber.
	The knife there on the shelf--
	it reeked of meaning, like a crucifix.
	It lived. How many years did I
	beg it, implore it, not to break?
	I knew each nick and scratch by heart,
	the bluish blade, the broken tip,
	the lines of wood-grain on the handle . . .
	Now it won’t look at me at all.
	The living soul has dribbled away.
	My eyes rest on it and pass on.

	The local museum’s asked me to
	leave everything to them:
	the flute, the knife, the shrivelled shoes,
	my shedding goatskin trousers
	(moths have got in the fur),
	the parasol that took me such a time
	remembering the way the ribs should go.
	It still will work but, folded up,
	looks like a plucked and skinny fowl.
	How can anyone want such things?
	--And Friday, my dear Friday, died of measles
	seventeen years ago come March.



6. FILLING STATION

	Oh, but it is dirty!
	--this little filling station,
	oil-soaked, oil-permeated
	to a disturbing, over-all
	black translucency.
	Be careful with that match!

	Father wears a dirty,
	oil-soaked monkey suit
	that cuts him under the arms,
	and several quick and saucy
	and greasy sons assist him
	(it’s a family filling station),
	all quite thoroughly dirty.

	Do they live in the station?
	It has a cement porch
	behind the pumps, and on it
	a set of crushed and grease-
	impregnated wickerwork;
	on the wicker sofa
	a dirty dog, quite comfy.

	Some comic books provide
	the only note of color--
	of certain color. They lie
	upon a big dim doily
	draping a taboret
	(part of the set), beside
	a big hirsute begonia.

	Why the extraneous plant?
	Why the taboret?
	Why, oh why, the doily?
	(Embroidered in daisy stitch
	with marguerites, I think,
	and heavy with gray crochet.)

	Somebody embroidered the doily.
	Somebody waters the plant,
	or oils it, maybe. Somebody
	arranges the rows of cans
	so that they softly say:
	ESSO--SO--SO--SO
	to high-strung automobiles.
	Somebody loves us all.



7. FROM THE COUNTRY TO THE CITY

	The long, long legs,
	League-boots of land, that carry the city nowhere,
	Nowhere; the lines
	That we drive on (the satin-stripes on harlequin’s
	Trousers, tights) ;
	His tough trunk dressed in tatters, scribbled over with
	Nonsensical signs;
	His shadowy, tall dunce-cap; and best of all his
	Shows and sights,
	His brain appears, throned in “fantastic triumph.”
	And shines through his hat
	With jewelled works at work at intermeshing crowns,
	Lamé with lights.
	As we approach, wickedest clown, your heart and head
	We can see that
	Glittering arrangement of your brain consists, now,
	Of mermaid-like,
	Seated, ravishing sirens, each waving her hand-mirror;
	And we start at
	Series of slight disturbances up in the telephone wires
	On the turnpike.
	Flocks of short, shining wires seem to be flying sidewise.
	Are they birds?
	They flash again. No. They are vibrations of the tuning-fork
	You hold and strike
	Against the mirror-frames, then draw for miles, your dreams,
	Out country-wards.
	We bring a message from the long black length of body:
	“Subside,” it begs and begs.



8. IN THE WAITING ROOM

	In Worcester, Massachusetts,
	I went with Aunt Consuelo
	to keep her dentist’s appointment
	and sat and waited for her
	in the dentist’s waiting room.
	It was winter. It got dark
	early. The waiting room
	was full of grown-up people,
	arctics and overcoats,
	lamps and magazines.
	My aunt was inside
	what seemed like a long time
	and while I waited I read
	the National Geographic
	(I could read) and carefully
	studied the photographs:
	the inside of a volcano,
	black, and full of ashes;
	then it was spilling over
	in rivulets of fire.
	Osa and Martin Johnson
	dressed in riding breeches,
	laced boots, and pith helmets.
	A dead man slung on a pole
	--“Long Pig,“ the caption said.
	Babies with pointed heads
	wound round and round with string;
	black, naked women with necks
	wound round and round with wire
	like the necks of light bulbs.
	Their breasts were horrifying.
	I read it right straight through.
	I was too shy to stop.
	And then I looked at the cover:
	the yellow margins, the date.
	Suddenly, from inside,
	came an oh! of pain
	--Aunt Consuelo’s voice--
	not very loud or long.
	I wasn’t at all surprised;
	even then I knew she was
	a foolish, timid woman.
	I might have been embarrassed,
	but wasn’t. What took me
	completely by surprise
	was that it was me:
	my voice, in my mouth.
	Without thinking at all
	I was my foolish aunt,
	I--we--were falling, falling,
	our eyes glued to the cover
	of the National Geographic,
	February, 1918.

	I said to myself: three days
	and you’ll be seven years old.
	I was saying it to stop
	the sensation of falling off
	the round, turning world.
	into cold, blue-black space.
	But I felt: you are an I,
	you are an Elizabeth,
	you are one of them.
	Why should you be one, too?
	I scarcely dared to look
	to see what it was I was.
	I gave a sidelong glance
	--I couldn’t look any higher--
	at shadowy gray knees,
	trousers and skirts and boots
	and different pairs of hands
	lying under the lamps.
	I knew that nothing stranger
	had ever happened, that nothing
	stranger could ever happen.

	Why should I be my aunt,
	or me, or anyone?
	What similarities--
	boots, hands, the family voice
	I felt in my throat, or even
	the National Geographic
	and those awful hanging breasts--
	held us all together
	or made us all just one?
	How--I didn’t know any
	word for it--how “unlikely” . . .
	How had I come to be here,
	like them, and overhear
	a cry of pain that could have
	got loud and worse but hadn’t?

	The waiting room was bright
	and too hot. It was sliding
	beneath a big black wave,
	another, and another.

	Then I was back in it.
	The War was on. Outside,
	in Worcester, Massachusetts,
	were night and slush and cold,
	and it was still the fifth
	of February, 1918.



9. LITTLE EXERCISE

	Think of the storm roaming the sky uneasily
	like a dog looking for a place to sleep in,
	listen to it growling.

	Think how they must look now, the mangrove keys
	lying out there unresponsive to the lightning
	in dark, coarse-fibred families,

	where occasionally a heron may undo his head,
	shake up his feathers, make an uncertain comment
	when the surrounding water shines.

	Think of the boulevard and the little palm trees
	all stuck in rows, suddenly revealed
	as fistfuls of limp fish-skeletons.

	It is raining there. The boulevard
	and its broken sidewalks with weeds in every crack
	are relieved to be wet, the sea to be freshened.

	Now the storm goes away again in a series
	of small, badly lit battle-scenes,
	each in “Another part of the field.”

	Think of someone sleeping in the bottom of a row-boat
	tied to a mangrove root or the pile of a bridge;
	think of him as uninjured, barely disturbed.



10. THE MAN-MOTH

	_Man-Moth: Newspaper misprint for “mammoth.”_

	Here, above,
	cracks in the buildings are filled with battered moonlight.
	The whole shadow of Man is only as big as his hat.
	It lies at his feet like a circle for a doll to stand on,
	and he makes an inverted pin, the point magnetized to the moon.
	He does not see the moon; he observes only her vast properties,
	feeling the queer light on his hands, neither warm nor cold,
	of a temperature impossible to record in thermometers.

	But when the Man-Moth
	pays his rare, although occasional, visits to the surface,
	the moon looks rather different to him. He emerges
	from an opening under the edge of one of the sidewalks
	and nervously begins to scale the faces of the buildings.
	He thinks the moon is a small hole at the top of the sky,
	proving the sky quite useless for protection.
	He trembles, but must investigate as high as he can climb.

	Up the façades,
	his shadow dragging like a photographer’s cloth behind him
	he climbs fearfully, thinking that this time he will manage
	to push his small head through that round clean opening
	and be forced through, as from a tube, in black scrolls on the light.
	(Man, standing below him, has no such illusions.)
	But what the Man-Moth fears most he must do, although
	he fails, of course, and falls back scared but quite unhurt.

	Then he returns
	to the pale subways of cement he calls his home. He flits,
	he flutters, and cannot get aboard the silent trains
	fast enough to suit him. The doors close swiftly.
	The Man-Moth always seats himself facing the wrong way
	and the train starts at once at its full, terrible speed,
	without a shift in gears or a gradation of any sort.
	He cannot tell the rate at which he travels backwards.

	Each night he must
	be carried through artificial tunnels and dream recurrent dreams.
	Just as the ties recur beneath his train, these underlie
	his rushing brain. He does not dare look out the window,
	for the third rail, the unbroken draught of poison,
	runs there beside him. He regards it as a disease
	he has inherited the susceptibility to. He has to keep
	his hands in his pockets, as others must wear mufflers.

	If you catch him,
	hold up a flashlight to his eye. It’s all dark pupil,
	an entire night itself, whose haired horizon tightens
	as he stares back, and closes up the eye. Then from the lids
	one tear, his only possession, like the bee’s sting, slips.
	Slyly he palms it, and if you’re not paying attention
	he’ll swallow it. However, if you watch, he’ll hand it over,
	cool as from underground springs and pure enough to drink.



11. THE MAP

	Land lies in water; it is shadowed green.
	Shadows, or are they shallows, at its edges
	showing the line of long sea-weeded ledges
	where weeds hang to the simple blue from green.
	Or does the land lean down to lift the sea from under,
	drawing it unperturbed around itself?
	Along the fine tan sandy shelf
	is the land tugging at the sea from under?

	The shadow of Newfoundland lies flat and still.
	Labrador’s yellow, where the moony Eskimo
	has oiled it. We can stroke these lovely bays,
	under a glass as if they were expected to blossom,
	or as if to provide a clean cage for invisible fish.
	The names of seashore towns run out to sea,
	the names of cities cross the neighboring mountains
	--the printer here experiencing the same excitement
	as when emotion too far exceeds its cause.
	These peninsulas take the water between thumb and finger
	like women feeling for the smoothness of yard-goods.

	Mapped waters are more quiet than the land is,
	lending the land their waves’ own conformation:
	and Norway’s hare runs south in agitation,
	profiles investigate the sea, where land is.
	Are they assigned, or can the countries pick their colors?
	--What suits the character or the native waters best.
	Topography displays no favorites; North’s as near as West.
	More delicate than the historians’ are the map-makers’ colors.



12. A MIRACLE FOR BREAKFAST

	_“Miracles enable us to judge of doctrine, and doctrine enables us to
	judge of miracles.”_

	At six o’clock we were waiting for coffee,
	Waiting for coffee and the charitable crumb
	That was going to be served from a certain balcony,
	--Like kings of old, or like a miracle.
	It was still dark. One foot of the sun
	Steadied itself on a long ripple in the river.

	The first ferry of the day had just crossed the river.
	It was so cold we hoped the coffee
	Would be very hot, seeing that the sun
	Was not going to warm us; and that the crumb
	Would be a loaf each buttered, by a miracle.
	At seven a man stepped out on the balcony.

	He stood for a minute alone on the balcony
	Looking over our heads towards the river.
	A servant handed him the makings of the miracle,
	Consisting of one lone cup of coffee
	And one roll, which he proceeded to crumb,
	His head, so to speak, in the clouds--along with the sun.

	Was the man crazy? What under the sun
	Was he trying to do, up there on his balcony!
	Each man received one rather hard crumb,
	Which some flicked scornfully into the river,
	And, in a cup, one drop of the coffee.
	Some of us stood around, waiting for the miracle.

	I can tell what I saw next; it was not a miracle.
	A beautiful villa stood in the sun
	And from its doors came the smell of hot coffee.
	In front, a baroque white plaster balcony
	Added by birds, who nest along the river,
	--I saw it with one eye close to the crumb--

	And galleries and marble chambers. My crumb
	My mansion, made for me by a miracle,
	Through ages, by insects, birds, and the river
	Working the stone. Every day, in the sun,
	At breakfast time I sit on my balcony
	With my feet up, and drink gallons of coffee.

	We licked up the crumb and swallowed the coffee.
	A window across the river caught the sun
	As if the miracle were working, on the wrong balcony.



13. THE MOOSE

	From narrow provinces
	of fish and bread and tea,
	home of the long tides
	where the bay leaves the sea
	twice a day and takes
	the herrings long rides,

	where if the river
	enters or retreats
	in a wall of brown foam
	depends on if it meets
	the bay coming in,
	the bay not at home;

	where, silted red,
	sometimes the sun sets
	facing a red sea,
	and others, veins the flats’
	lavender, rich mud
	in burning rivulets;

	on red, gravelly roads,
	down rows of sugar maples,
	past clapboard farmhouses
	and neat, clapboard churches,
	bleached, ridged as clamshells,
	past twin silver birches,

	through late afternoon
	a bus journeys west,
	the windshield flashing pink,
	pink glancing off of metal,
	brushing the dented flank
	of blue, beat-up enamel;

	down hollows, up rises,
	and waits, patient, while
	a lone traveller gives
	kisses and embraces
	to seven relatives
	and a collie supervises.

	Goodbye to the elms,
	to the farm, to the dog.
	The bus starts. The light
	grows richer; the fog,
	shifting, salty, thin,
	comes closing in.

	Its cold, round crystals
	form and slide and settle
	in the white hens’ feathers,
	in gray glazed cabbages,
	on the cabbage roses
	and lupins like apostles;

	the sweet peas cling
	to their wet white string
	on the whitewashed fences;
	bumblebees creep
	inside the foxgloves,
	and evening commences.

	One stop at Bass River.
	Then the Economies--
	Lower, Middle, Upper;
	Five Islands, Five Houses,
	where a woman shakes a tablecloth
	out after supper.

	A pale flickering. Gone.
	The Tantramar marshes
	and the smell of salt hay.
	An iron bridge trembles
	and a loose plank rattles
	but doesn’t give way.

	On the left, a red light
	swims through the dark:
	a ship’s port lantern.
	Two rubber boots show,
	illuminated, solemn.
	A dog gives one bark.

	A woman climbs in
	with two market bags,
	brisk, freckled, elderly.
	“A grand night. Yes, sir,
	all the way to Boston.”
	She regards us amicably.

	Moonlight as we enter
	the New Brunswick woods,
	hairy, scratchy, splintery;
	moonlight and mist
	caught in them like lamb’s wool
	on bushes in a pasture.

	The passengers lie back.
	Snores. Some long sighs.
	A dreamy divagation
	begins in the night,
	a gentle, auditory,
	slow hallucination . . .

	In the creakings and noises,
	an old conversation
	--not concerning us,
	but recognizable, somewhere,
	back in the bus:
	Grandparents’ voices

	uninterruptedly
	talking, in Eternity:
	names being mentioned,
	things cleared up finally;
	what he said, what she said,
	who got pensioned;

	deaths, deaths and sicknesses;
	the year he remarried;
	the year (something) happened.
	She died in childbirth.
	That was the son lost
	when the schooner foundered.

	He took to drink. Yes.
	She went to the bad.
	When Amos began to pray
	even in the store and
	finally the family had
	to put him away.

	“Yes . . .” that peculiar
	affirmative. “Yes . . .”
	A sharp, indrawn breath,
	half groan, half acceptance,
	that means “Life’s like that.
	We know it (also death).”

	Talking the way they talked
	in the old featherbed,
	peacefully, on and on,
	dim lamplight in the hall,
	down in the kitchen, the dog
	tucked in her shawl.

	Now, it’s all right now
	even to fall asleep
	just as on all those nights.
	--Suddenly the bus driver
	stops with a jolt,
	turns off his lights.

	A moose has come out of
	the impenetrable wood
	and stands there, looms, rather,
	in the middle of the road.
	It approaches; it sniffs at
	the bus’s hot hood.

	Towering, antlerless,
	high as a church,
	homely as a house
	(or, safe as houses).
	A man’s voice assures us
	“Perfectly harmless . . .”

	Some of the passengers
	exclaim in whispers,
	childishly, softly,
	“Sure are big creatures.”
	“It’s awful plain.”
	“Look! It’s a she!”

	Taking her time,
	she looks the bus over,
	grand, otherworldly.
	Why, why do we feel
	(we all feel) this sweet
	sensation of joy?

	“Curious creatures,”
	says our quiet driver,
	rolling his r’s.
	“Look at that, would you.”
	Then he shifts gears.
	For a moment longer,

	by craning backward,
	the moose can be seen
	on the moonlit macadam;
	then there’s a dim
	smell of moose, an acrid
	smell of gasoline.



14. THE MOUNTAIN

	At evening, something behind me.
	I start for a second, I blench,
	or staggeringly halt and burn.
	I do not know my age.

	In the morning it is different.
	An open book confronts me,
	too close to read in comfort.
	Tell me how old I am.

	And then the valleys stuff
	impenetrable mists
	like cotton in my ears.
	I do not know my age.

	I do not mean to complain.
	They say it is my fault.
	Nobody tells me anything.
	Tell me how old I am.

	The deepest demarcation
	can slowly spread and sink
	like any blurred tattoo.
	I do not know my age.

	Shadows fall down; lights climb.
	Clambering lights, oh children!
	you never stay long enough.
	Tell me how old I am.

	Stone wings have sifted here
	with feathers hardening feathers.
	The claws are lost somewhere.
	I do not know my age.

	I am growing deaf. Bird-calls
	dribble and the waterfalls
	go unwiped. What is my age?
	Tell me how old I am.

	Let the moon go hang,
	the stars go fly their kites.
	I want to know my age.
	Tell me how old I am.



15. ONE ART

	The art of losing isn’t hard to master;
	so many things seem filled with the intent
	to be lost that their loss is no disaster.

	Lose something every day. Accept the fluster
	of lost door keys, the hour badly spent.
	The art of losing isn’t hard to master.

	Then practice losing farther, losing faster:
	places, and names, and where it was you meant
	to travel. None of these will bring disaster.

	I lost my mother’s watch. And look! my last, or
	next-to-last, of three loved houses went.
	The art of losing isn’t hard to master.

	I lost two cities, lovely ones. And, vaster,
	some realms I owned, two rivers, a continent.
	I miss them, but it wasn’t a disaster.

	--Even losing you (the joking voice, a gesture
	I love) I shan’t have lied. It’s evident
	the art of losing’s not too hard to master
	though it may look like (Write it!) like disaster.



16. PARIS, 7 A.M.

	I make a trip to each clock in the apartment:
	Some hands point histrionically one way
	And some point others, from the ignorant faces.
	Time is an Etoile; the hours diverge
	So much that days are journeys round the suburbs,
	Circles surrounding stars, overlapping circles.
	The short, half-tone scale of winter weathers
	Is a spread pigeon’s wing.
	Winter lives under a pigeon’s wing, a dead wing with damp feathers.

	Look down into the courtyard. All the houses
	Are built that way, with ornamental urns
	Set on the mansard roof-tops where the pigeons
	Take their walks. It is like introspection
	To stare inside, or retrospection,
	A star inside a rectangle, a recollection:
	This hollow square could easily have been there.
	--The childish snow-forts, built in flashier winters,
	Could have reached these proportions and been houses;
	The mighty snow-forts, four, five, stories high,
	Withstanding spring as sand-forts do the tide,
	Their walls, their shape, could not dissolve and die,
	Only be overlapping in a strong chain, turned to stone,
	And grayed and yellowed now like these.

	Where is the ammunition, the piled-up balls
	With the star-splintered hearts of ice?
	This sky is no carrier-warrior-pigeon
	Escaping endless intersecting circles.
	It is a dead one, or the sky from which a dead one fell.
	The urns have caught his ashes or his feathers.
	When did the star dissolve, or was it captured
	By the sequence of squares and squares and circles, circles?
	Can the clocks say; is it there below,
	About to tumble in snow?



17. SESTINA

	September rain falls on the house.
	In the failing light, the old grandmother
	sits in the kitchen with the child
	beside the Little Marvel Stove,
	reading the jokes from the almanac,
	laughing and talking to hide her tears.

	She thinks that her equinoctial tears
	and the rain that beats on the roof of the house
	were both foretold by the almanac,
	but only known to a grandmother.
	The iron kettle sings on the stove.
	She cuts some bread and says to the child,

	It’s time for tea now; but the child
	is watching the teakettle’s small hard tears
	dance like mad on the hot black stove,
	the way the rain must dance on the house.
	Tidying up, the old grandmother
	hangs up the clever almanac

	on its string. Birdlike, the almanac
	hovers half open above the child,
	hovers above the old grandmother
	and her teacup full of dark brown tears.
	She shivers and says she thinks the house
	feels chilly, and puts more wood in the stove.

	It was to be, says the Marvel Stove.
	I know what I know, says the almanac.
	With crayons the child draws a rigid house
	and a winding pathway. Then the child
	puts in a man with buttons like tears
	and shows it proudly to the grandmother.

	But secretly, while the grandmother
	busies herself about the stove,
	the little moons fall down like tears
	from between the pages of the almanac
	into the flower bed the child
	has carefully placed in the front of the house.

	Time to plant tears, says the almanac.
	The grandmother sings to the marvelous stove
	and the child draws another inscrutable house.



18. SONG

	Summer is over upon the sea.
	The pleasure yacht, the social being,
	That danced on the endless polished floor,
	Stepped and side-stepped like Fred Astaire,
	Is gone, is gone, docked somewhere ashore.

	The friends have left, the sea is bare
	That was strewn with floating, fresh green weeds.
	Only the rusty-sided freighter
	Goes past the moon’s marketless craters
	And the stars are the only ships of pleasure.



19. VISITS TO ST. ELIZABETHS

	This is the house of Bedlam.

	This is the man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is the time
	of the tragic man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is a wristwatch
	telling the time
	of the talkative man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is a sailor
	wearing the watch
	that tells the time
	of the honored man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is the roadstead all of board
	reached by the sailor
	wearing the watch
	that tells the time
	of the old, brave man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	These are the years and the walls of the ward,
	the winds and clouds of the sea of board
	sailed by the sailor
	wearing the watch
	that tells the time
	of the cranky man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
	that dances weeping down the ward
	over the creaking sea of board
	beyond the sailor
	winding his watch
	that tells the time
	of the cruel man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is a world of books gone flat.
	This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
	that dances weeping down the ward
	over the creaking sea of board
	of the batty sailor
	that winds his watch
	that tells the time
	of the busy man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is a boy that pats the floor
	to see if the world is there, is flat,
	for the widowed Jew in the newspaper hat
	that dances weeping down the ward
	waltzing the length of a weaving board
	by the silent sailor
	that hears his watch
	that ticks the time
	of the tedious man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	These are the years and the walls and the door
	that shut on a boy that pats the floor
	to feel if the world is there and flat.
	This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
	that dances joyfully down the ward
	into the parting seas of board
	past the staring sailor
	that shakes his watch
	that tells the time
	of the poet, the man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.

	This is the soldier home from the war.
	These are the years and the walls and the door
	that shut on a boy that pats the floor
	to see if the world is round or flat.
	This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
	that dances carefully down the ward,
	walking the plank of a coffin board
	with the crazy sailor
	that shows his watch
	that tells the time
	of the wretched man
	that lies in the house of Bedlam.
