*** Robert Bly (1926 - 2021)


1. AFTER LONG BUSYNESS

	I start out for a walk at last after weeks at the desk.
	Moon gone, plowing underfoot, no stars, not a trace of light!
	Suppose a horse were galloping toward me in this open field?
	Every day I did not spend in solitude was wasted.


2. AFTER WORKING

	I
	
	After many strange thoughts,
	Thoughts of distant harbors, and new life,
	I came in and found the moonlight lying in the room.
	
	
	II
	
	Outside it covers the trees like pure sound,
	The sound of tower bells, or of water moving under the ice,
	The sound the deaf hear through the bones of their heads.
	
	
	III
	
	We know the road; as the moonlight
	Lifts everything, so in a night like this,
	The road goes on ahead, it is all clear.


3. AN AMERICAN DREAM

	Accountants hover over the earth like helicopters,
	Dropping small bones engraved with Hegel’s name.
	A badger carries the bones in his fur
	To his den, where the entire family dies that night.
	
	A chorus girl stands for hours behind curtains
	Looking out at the street.
	There are dead branches painted white
	In the windows of trucking services;
	A tiny alligator grips those branches tightly
	To keep away from the dry leaves on the floor.
	
	The honeycomb at night has strange dreams:
	Small black trains going round and round--
	Old warships drowning in the raindrop.


4. AWAKENING

	We are approaching sleep: the chestnut blossoms in the mind
	Mingle with thoughts of pain
	And the long roots of barley, bitterness
	As of the oak roots staining the waters dark
	In Louisiana, the wet streets soaked with rain
	And sodden blossoms; out of this
	We have come, a tunnel softly hurtling into darkness.
	
	The storm is coming. The small farmhouse in Minnesota
	Is hardly strong enough for the wind.
	Darkness, darkness in grass, darkness in trees.
	Even the water in wells trembles.
	Bodies give off darkness, and chrysanthemums
	Are dark, and horses, who are bearing great loads of hay
	To the deep barns where the dark air is moving from corners.
	
	Lincoln’s statue, and the traffic. From the long past
	Into the long present
	A bird, forgotten in these troubles, warbling,
	As the great wheel turns around, grinding
	The living in water.
	Washing, continual washing, in water now stained
	With blossoms and rotting logs,
	Cries, half-muffled, from beneath the earth, the living awakened
	at last like the dead.


5. BACH’S B MINOR MASS

	The Walgravian ancestors step inside Trinity Church.
	The tenors, the horns, the sopranos, the altos
	Say: “Do not be troubled. Death will come.”
	
	The basses as they sing reach into their long coats
	And give bits of dark bread to the poor, saying,
	“Eat, eat, in the shadow of Jethro’s garden.”
	
	The clarinets remind us of the old promise
	That the orphans will be fed. The oboes reply,
	“Oh, that promise is too wonderful for us!”
	
	Don’t worry, my dears. The tidal wave that
	Wipes out whole cities is merely the wood thrush
	Lifting her wings to catch the morning sun.
	
	We know that God gobbles up the Faithful.
	The Harvesters on the sea floor are feeding
	All of those ruined by the depth of the sea.
	
	We know that people live and die. Even after
	Their tree has splintered and fallen in the night, once
	Dawn has come, the birds can do nothing but sing.


6. THE BEAR AND THE MAN

	Suppose there were a bear and a man. The bear
	Knows his kin--old pebbles, fifty-five--
	Gallon barrels, big pine trees in the moonlight,
	Abandoned down jackets; and the man approaches warily--
	
	He’s read Tolstoy, knows a few symphonies.
	That’s about it. Each has lost a son. The bear’s
	Killed by a trap, the man’s killed by a bear.
	That boy was partly drunk, alone in the woods.
	
	The bear puts out black claws firmly on earth.
	He’s not dumb. Skinned, he’s like a man. People
	Say that both bears and men receive a signal
	Coming from far up there, near the North Pole.
	
	The old grandmother of both bear and man
	Sits netted among the stars, looking down.


7. THE BEAUTY OF WOMEN

	Delicate women, with eyes open,
	Arms hung lightly as they ride,
	Naked feet covered with jewels,
	Some small scarf trailing from their wrists,
	Shoulders of the spirit:
	This is the secret of Nonnus and Pelagia,
	A chorus of old men shouting Amen.


8. BOARDS ON THE GROUND

	I love to see boards lying on the ground in early spring;
	The ground beneath them is wet, and muddy.
	Perhaps covered with chicken tracks
	And they are dry and eternal.
	
	This is the wood one sees on the decks of ocean ships,
	Wand dis ravis, wininfinenla-for simple taste,
	Like a horse’s tail.
	
	This wood is like a man who has a simple life,
	Living through the spring and winter on the ship of his own desire.
	He sits on dry wood surrounded by half-melted snow
	As the rooster walks away springily over the dampened hay.


9. A BOY ON THE FARM

	I was one of the saved.
	The chickens were, too
	Morning came; only
	The hired girl was ready.
	
	The rest of us dozed,
	And got up, and fed chickens.
	The guinea hens rose
	From unimaginable places.
	
	We couldn’t understand
	How strange they were.
	They slept in trees
	And had better nights.


10. BRAHMS

	It must be that my early friendship with defeat
	Has given me affection for the month of August.
	The potato fields belong to early night.
	
	So many times as a boy I sat in the dirt
	Among dry cornstalks that gave assurances
	Every hour that Francis had his ear to the night.
	
	Columbus’s letters tell us that we will receive
	The gifts that mariners all receive at the end
	Memories of gold and a grave in the sand.
	
	The shadow of a friend’s hand gives us
	Promises similar to those we received from
	The light under the door as our mother came near.
	
	I am the father who wept for Joseph.
	I am the sparrow that flies through the warrior’s
	Hall and back out into the falling snow.
	
	I don’t know why these images should please me
	So much; an angel said: “In the last moment before night
	Brahms will show you how loyal the notes are.”


11. THE BRIDEGROOM

	The bridegroom wanted to reach the Norwegian Church.
	But the roads were made impassable by huge snows.
	We are each the bridegroom longing for existence.
	
	Marriage brings the moth close to the candle flame.
	With their frail wings, men and women
	Are constantly flying into the fire of existence.
	
	Some say that each drop of ground water in Kansas
	Knows about the ocean. How can this be?
	Every drop of water longs like us for existence.
	
	Abu Said fasted in the desert for twenty years.
	Later when he came back, his dragon friend
	Wept. “Your suffering gave me a hint of existence.”
	
	When the pianist’s fingers strike all the notes
	In the Tenth Prelude, it’s clear Bach’s soul has been
	Leaping about like a hare in the field of existence.
	
	Robert, you’re close to joy but not quite there.
	You are a hunchback standing in an Italian
	Square, looking in at the festival of existence.


12. A CATERPILLAR ON THE DESK

	Lifting my coffee cup, I notice a caterpillar crawling over my sheet of ten-cent airmail stamps. The head is black as a Chinese box. Nine soft accordions follow it around, with a waving motion, like a flabby mountain. Skinny brushes used to clean pop bottles rise from some of its shoulders. As I pick up the sheet of stamps, the caterpillar advances around and around the edge, and I see his feet: three pairs under the head, four spongelike pairs under the middle body, and two final pairs at the tip, pink as a puppy’s hind legs. As he walks, he rears, six pairs of legs off the stamp, waving around in the air! One of the sponge pairs, and the last two tail pairs, the reserve feet, hold on anxiously. It is the first of September. The leaf shadows are less ferocious on the notebook cover. A man accepts his failures more easily--or perhaps summer’s insanity is gone? A man notices ordinary earth, scorned in July, with affection, as he settles down to his daily work, to use stamps. 


13. CLEAR AIR OF OCTOBER

	I can see outdoors the gold wings without birds
	Flying around, and the wells of cold water
	Without walls standing eighty feet up in the air,
	I can feel the crickets’ singing carrying them into the sky.
	
	I know these shadows are falling for hundreds of miles,
	Crossing lawns in tiny towns, and the doors of Catholic churches;
	I know the horse of darkness is riding fast to the east,
	Carrying a thin man with no coat.
	
	And I know the sun is sinking down great stairs,
	Like an executioner with a great blade walking into a cellar,
	And the gold animals, the lions, and the zebras, and the pheasants,
	Are waiting at the head of the stairs with robbers’ eyes.


14. COME WITH ME

	Come with me into those things that have felt this despair for so long--
	Those removed Chevrolet wheels that howl with a terrible loneliness,
	Lying on their backs in the cindery dirt, like men drunk and naked,
	Staggering off down a hill to drown at last in a pond;
	Shredded inner tubes abandoned on the shoulders of thruways,
	Black and collapsed souls, who tried and burst
	And were left behind,
	And those curled steel shavings scattered about on oily benches,
	Sometimes still warm, gritty when we hold them,
	Who have given up, and blame everything on the government,
	And those roads in South Dakota that feel around in the darkness . . . 


15. THE CONFUSION OF AMERICA

	I
	
	The lace that lay around the bones of Danish kings
	Rises at dawn in the grass of North Dakota;
	The torture rack is the steering wheel of a Dodge,
	And the Assyrian lions blaze above the soybean fields;
	The last haven of Jehovah, down from the old heavens,
	Hugs a sooty corner of the murdered pine;
	Phoenician priests carrying Arabic numerals
	Walk the earth dressed as bankers and hunters of bear,
	And at night our sleep is invaded by stealthy diamonds.
	
	
	II
	
	The old jewels of Charlemagne fall in the flakes of snow
	And lie drifted in the door of a pig-house,
	Left abandoned all winter in a barnyard in Montana;
	Our bodies are mingled among bills and relics
	Like Bibles and carbines in the Sears Roebuck catalog;
	Saxophones and gears fly together in the nightmares
	Rising, like feathers, from the grave of Hannibal,
	And tiny beetles, bright as Cadillacs, toil down
	The long dusty roads into the mountains of South Dakota.
	
	
	III
	
	We meet men who travelled in Canada for Astor,
	And also strange animals, men with wings of fur,
	Cars that fly through the air with the faces of women,
	Sheep come in hotels wearing crow feathers painted red,
	Rocks climb up stairs balancing on the feet of birds,
	Glasses of water swallow tiny cities with gypsy fairs,
	Poor accountants awake one day with the paws of bears;
	High in the beanplant that has grown from Carnegie’s dime,
	Tiny loaves of bread with ears lie on the President’s table.


16. A DREAM ON THE NIGHT OF FIRST SNOW	

	I woke from a furst-day-of-snow dream
	I dreamt I met a girl in an attic,
		who talked of operas, intensely.
	Snow has bent the poplar over nearly to the ground,
		new snowfall widens the plowing.
	Outside maple leaves floated on rainwater,
	yellow, matted, luminous.
	I found a salamander! and held him.
	When I put him down again,
		he strode over a log
	with such confidence, like a chessmaster,
		the front leg first, then the hind
		leg, he rose up like a tractor climbing
		over a hump in the field
	and disappeared toward winter, a caravan going deeper into mountains,
	dogs pulling travois,
	feathers fluttering on the lances of the arrogant men.


17. DRIVING NORTH FROM SAN FRANCISCO

	We cross the sleeping water on the San Rafael Bridge.
	Red rocks lie in it, like sleepers who will not awake.
	The water is deep blue,
	Washing quietly about the rocks, as if watching.
	
	We drive north through brown hills in the California winter,
	Hills with green trees, sloping quickly down to the road
	Or to a barn fence, with twenty skinny cows,
	And two men spreading some straw in a field.
	
	Ahead of us on the shoulder I see Santa Clauses for sale,
	Standing with outstretched arms in the warm sun,
	Reaching toward us, wrapped in clear cellophane.
	A sign: Meadowbrook Ranch. Horses for Sale.
	
	How strange to think of horses being sold!
	Hiding behind their great eyes
	Other hills, and sides of barns,
	Owners they have loved, now gone,
	Passed into the dark trees on the hill.


18. DRIVING THROUGH OHIO

	We slept that night in Delaware, Ohio:
	A magnificent and sleepy country,
	Oak country, sheep country, sod country
	We slept in a huge white tourist home
	With National Geographics on the table.
	
	North of Columbus there is a kind of torpid joy,
	The slow and muddy river,
	The white barns leaning into the ground,
	Cottonwoods with their trunks painted white,
	And houses with small observatories on top,
	As if Ohio were the widow’s coast, looking over
	The dangerous Atlantic.
	
	Now we drive North past the white cemeteries
	So rich in the morning air!
	All morning I have felt the sense of death!
	I am full of love, and love this torpid land.
	Some day I will go back, and inhabit again
	The sleepy ground where Harding was born.


19. DRIVING TOWARD THE LAC QUI PARLE RIVER

	I am driving; it is dusk; Minnesota.
	The stubble field catches the last growth of sun.   
	The soybeans are breathing on all sides.
	Old men are sitting before their houses on car seats   
	In the small towns. I am happy,
	The moon rising above the turkey sheds.
	
	The small world of the car
	Plunges through the deep fields of the night,   
	On the road from Willmar to Milan.   
	This solitude covered with iron
	Moves through the fields of night
	Penetrated by the noise of crickets.
	
	Nearly to Milan, suddenly a small bridge,
	And water kneeling in the moonlight.
	In small towns the houses are built right on the ground;   
	The lamplight falls on all fours on the grass.
	When I reach the river, the full moon covers it.   
	A few people are talking, low, in a boat.


20. DRIVING WEST IN 1970

	My dear children, do you remember the morning
	When we climbed into the old Plymouth
	And drove west straight toward the Pacific?
	
	We were all the people there were.
	We followed Dylan’s songs all the way west.
	It was Seventy; the war was over, almost;
	
	And we were driving to the sea.
	We had closed the farm, tucked in
	The flap, and were eating the honey
	
	Of distance and the word “there.”
	_Oh whee, we’re gonna fly
	Down into the easy chair._ We sang that
	
	Over and over. That’s what the early
	Seventies were like. We weren’t afraid.
	And a hole had opened in the world.
	
	We laughed at Las Vegas.
	There was enough gaiety
	For all of us, and ahead of us was
	
	The ocean. _Tomorrow’s
	The day my bride’s gonna come._
	And the war was over, almost.


21. FALL

	From far out in the center of the naked lake
	A loon’s cry came--
	It was the cry of someone who owned very little.


22. FALL RAIN

	In the rain the sodden leaffoor shudders faintly as if ruffling its feathers; it is the time when bark hangs from old birch and poplar trees, like rags, and the moss gains new foothold on the sodden cedar trunk leaning out over the water. The husband, in the damp bed covered with blankets, dreams of aunts he has never heard of, dead grandfathers still alive, and strange earthquakes as they walk the street. Now on the roof the delicate rain whispers of wet sails falling over abandoned junks in ancient harbors of China, and of young women wandering in the rain to die, and it whispers of drowned bodies floating on the stairs of the lake floor, ascending to the eternal balconies of death, and of the souls of those of the furst World War beneath the tangled metal, the buckles and the ghosts of leather, ghosts of wooden wagon wheels, of shell casings and bandages. Now the sound of geese is heard.


23. THE FAT OLD COUPLE WHIRLING AROUND

	The drum says that the night we die will be a long night.
	It says the children have time to play. Tell the grownups
	They can pull the curtains around the bed tonight.
	
	The old man wants to know how the war ended.
	The young girl wants her breasts to cause the sun to rise.
	The thinker wants to keep misunderstanding alive.
	
	It’s all right if the earthly monk is buried near the altar.
	It’s all right if the singer fails to turn up for her concert.
	It’s good if the fat old couple keeps whirling around.
	
	Let the parents sing over the cradle every night.
	Let the pelicans go on living in their stickly nests.
	Let the duck go on loving the mud around her feet.
	
	It’s all right if the ant always remembers his way home.
	It’s all right if Bach keeps reaching for the same note.
	It’s all right if we knock the ladder away from the house.
	
	Even if you are a puritan it would be all right
	If you join the lovers in their ruined house tonight.
	It’s good if you become a soul and then disappear.


24. FOR THE OLD GNOSTICS

	The Fathers put their trust in the end of the world
	And they were wrong. The Gnostics were right and not
	Right. Dragons copulate with their knobby tails.
	Some somnolent wealth rises unconcerned,
	Over there! In the world! Ponderous stubborn
	Sorrow weighs down the flying Gospels.
	Some enormous obstacle blocks our way.
	The untempered soul grumbles in empty light.


25. THE GREEK SHIPS

	When the water holes go, and the fish flop about
	In the mud, they can moisten each other faintly,
	But it’s best if they lose themselves in the river.
	
	You know how many Greek ships went down
	With their cargoes of wine. If we can’t get
	To port, perhaps it’s best to head for the bottom.
	
	I’ve heard that the mourning dove never says
	What she means. Those of us who make up poems
	Have agreed not to say what the pain is.
	
	For years Eliot wrote poems standing under
	A bare light-bulb. He knew he was a murderer,
	And he accepted his punishment at birth.
	
	The sitar player is searching: now in the backyard,
	Now in the old dishes left behind on the table,
	Now for the suffering on the underside of a leaf.
	
	Go ahead, throw your good name into the water.
	All those who have ruined their lives for love
	Are calling to us from a hundred sunken ships.


26. HE WANTED TO LIVE HIS LIFE OVER

	_What? You want to live your life over again?_
	“Well, I suppose, yes . . . That time in Grand Rapids . . .
	My life--as I lived it--was a series of shynesses.”
	
	_Being bolder--what good would that do?_
	“I’d open my door again. I’ve felt abashed
	You see. Now I’d go out and say, ‘All right,
	
	I’ll go with you to Alaska.’ Just opening the door
	From inside would have altered me--a little.
	I’m too shy.” _And so, a bolder life
	
	Is what you want?_ “We could begin now.
	Just walk with me--down to the river.
	I’ll pretend this boat is my life . . . I’ll climb in.”


27. THE HERMIT

	Darkness is falling through darkness,
	Falling from ledge
	To ledge.
	There is a man whose body is perfectly whole.
	He stands, the storm behind him,
	And the grass blades are leaping in the wind.
	Darkness is gathered in folds
	About his feet.
	He is no one.
	When we see
	Him, we grow calm,
	And sail on into the tunnels of joyful death.


28. HERONS

	After trailing their bony legs the herons dance
	in their crystal house far up near the clouds.
	I need you in sand, touching your hand I weep.
	In another world I am clear and transparent.


29. HUNTING PHEASANTS IN A CORNFIELD

	What is so strange about a tree alone in an open field?
	It is a willow tree. I walk around and around it.
	My body is strangely torn, and cannot leave it.
	At last I sit down beneath it.
	
	It is a willow tree alone in acres of dry corn.
	Its leaves are scattered around its trunk, and around me,
	Brown now, and speckled with delicate black.
	Only the cornstalks now can make a noise.
	
	The sun is cold, burning through the frosty distances of space.
	The weeds are frozen to death long ago.
	When then do I love to watch
	The sun moving on the chill skin of the branches?
	
	The mind has shed leaves alone for years.
	It stands apart with small creatures near its roots.
	I am happy in this ancient place,
	A spot easily caught sight of above the corn,
	If I were a young animal ready to turn home at dusk.


30. HURRYING AWAY FROM THE EARTH

	The poor, and the dazed, and the idiots
	Are with us, they live in the casket of the sun
	And the moon’s coffin, as I walk out tonight
	Seeing the night wheeling their dark wheelbarrow
	All about the plains of heaven,
	And the stars inexorable rising.
	Dark moon! Sinister tears!
	Shadow of slums and of the conquering dead!
	
	Some men have pierced the chest with a long needle
	To stop their heart from beating any more;
	Another put blocks of ice in his bed
	So he would die, women
	Have washed their hair, and hung themselves
	In the long braids, one climbed
	A high tree above her house
	And lawn and swallowed poisonous spiders--
	
	The time for exhortation is past. I have heard
	The iron chairs scraping in asylums,
	As the cold bird hunches into the winter
	In the windy nights of November.
	The coal miners rise from their pits
	Like a flash flood,
	Like a rice field disintegrating.
	Now men cry when they hear stories of someone rising from the dead.


31. IMAGES SUGGESTED BY MEDIEVAL MUSIC

	_A thousand singing herons I saw passing
	Flying overhead, sounding a thousand voices
	Exulting: Glory be in the heaven, etc._
	
	Once more
	A child is born, and it has no father,
	And it is right to rejoice: our past life appears
	As a wake behind us, and we plunge on into the sea of pain.
	
	I have felt this joy before, it is like the harsh grasses
	On lonely beaches, this strange sweetness
	Of medieval music, a hoarse joy,
	Like birds’, or the joy of trackless seas,
	Columbus’ ships covered with ice,
	Palace children dancing among finely-worked gold:
	
	As I listen, I am a ship, skirting
	A thousand harbors, as once, sailing off the coast of Crete,
	And turning in, we will find the steep climb from the harbor;
	The voyage goes on. The joy of sailing and the open sea!


32. IN BOWLING GREEN, KENTUCKY

	The mourning dove’s call woke me
	In the still night, when it was still night
	To me. Those sounds came from a time
	Before the box radio, even, and they said,
	A man is walking alone down the canyon.
	There’s a baby lost. I saw my dead father
	Last night near the cottonwood grove.
	
	The mourning dove’s story, so lonely
	In the morning, is a tale of water. It says:
	Remember that the cool egg is waiting
	Still on the floor of the swift river,
	And my calls will bring it forth.
	Then this world of taxes will disappear
	And you’ll be with your mother again.


33. ISEULT AND THE BADGER

	The ink we use to write seeps in through our fingers.
	What we call reason is the way the parasite
	Learns to live in the saint’s intestinal tract.
	
	Even the finest reason still contains the darkness
	From feathers packed together; General Patton
	Was a salmon who grew large in the Etruscan pool.
	
	Poetry, being language, is woven from animal hair.
	The badgers and the thrushes soak up the stain of separation,
	Just as lanolin makes the shearer’s hands soft.
	
	The old thinkers of quiddity remind us
	Of the fear the hogs feel hanging by their hind legs;
	For we know our throats are open to the unfaithful.
	
	Iseult said, “I was climbing on the sounds of my lover’s
	Name toward God! Then a badger ran past.
	When I said, ‘Oh badger,’ I fell to earth.”
	
	Perhaps if we used no words at all in poems
	We could continue to climb, but things seep in.
	We are porous to the piled leaves on the ground.


34. A JOURNEY WITH WOMEN

	Floating in turtle blood, going backward and forward,
	We wake up like a mad sea-urchin
	On the bloody fields near the secret pass--
	There the dead sleep in jars . . .
	
	Or we go at night slowly into the tunnels of the tortoise’s claws,
	Carrying chunks of the moon
	To light the tunnels,
	Listening for the sound of falling rocks.
	
	Waking, we find ourselves in the tortoise’s beak,
	As he carries us high over New Jersey!
	Going swiftly through the darkness between the constellations . . .
	
	The body becomes transparent as it flies!
	We sail through space, falling, like a tear
	Made of crystal that gathers in the moonlight . . .


35. LATE AT NIGHT DURING A VISIT OF FRIENDS

	We spent all day fishing and talking.
	At last, late at night, I sit at my desk alone.
	And rise and walk out in the summery night.
	A dark thing hopped near me in the grass.
	
	The trees were breathing, the windmill slowly pumped.
	Over head the rain clouds that rained on Ortonville
	Covered half the stars.
	The air was still cool from their rain.
	
	It is very late.
	I am the only one awake.
	Men and women I love are sleeping nearby.
	
	The human face shines as it speaks of things
	Near itself, thoughts full of dreams.
	The human face shines like a dark sky
	As it speaks of those things that oppress the living.


36. A LATE SPRING DAY IN MY LIFE

	A silence hovers over the earth:
	The grass lifts lightly in the heat
	Like the ancient wing of a bird.
	A horse gazes steadily at me.


37. THE LIFE OF WEEDS

	The cry of those being eaten by America,
	Others pale and soft being stored for later eating
	
	And Jefferson
	Who saw hope in new oats
	
	The wild houses go on
	With long hair growing from between their toes
	The feet at night get up
	And run down the long white roads by themselves
	
	Dams reverse themselves and want to go stand alone in the desert
	
	Ministers who dive headfirst into the earth
	The pale flesh
	Spreading guiltily into new literatures
	
	This is why these poems are so sad
	The long dead running over the fields
	
	The mass sinking down
	The light in children’s faces fading at six or seven
	The world will soon break up into small colonies of the saved


38. LIVING AT THE END OF TIME

	There is so much sweetness in children’s voices,
	And so much discontent at the end of day,
	And so much satisfaction when a train goes by.
	
	I don’t know why the rooster keeps crying,
	Nor why elephants keep raising their trunks,
	Nor why Hawthorne kept hearing trains at night.
	
	A handsome child is a gift from God,
	And a friend is a vein in the back of the hand,
	And a wound is an inheritance from the wind.
	
	Some say we are living at the end of time,
	But I believe a thousand pagan ministers
	Will arrive tomorrow to baptize the wind.
	
	There’s nothing we need to do about John. The Baptist
	Has been laying his hands on earth for so long
	That the well water is sweet for a hundred miles.
	
	It’s all right if we don’t know what the rooster
	Is saying in the middle of the night, nor why we feel
	So much satisfaction when a train goes by.


39. LOOKING AT SOME FLOWERS

	Light is around the petals, and behind them:
	Some petals are living on the other side of the light.
	Like sunlight drifting onto the carpet
	Where the casket stands, not knowing which world it is in.
	And fuzzy leaves, hair growing from some animal
	Buried in the green trenches of the plant.
	Or the ground this house is on,
	Only free of the sea for five or six thousand years. 


40. THE MOOSE

	The Arctic moose drinks at the tundra’s edge,
	swirling the watercress with his mouth.
	How fresh the water is, the coolness of the far North.
	A light wind moves through the deep firs.


41. MORNING IN MARRAKESH

	Do you remember the night Abraham first saw
	The stars? He cried to Saturn: “You are my Lord!”
	How happy he was! When he saw the Dawn Star,
	
	He cried, “You are my Lord!” How destroyed he was
	When he watched them set. Friends, he is like us:
	We take as our Lord the stars that go down.
	
	We are faithful companions to the unfaithful stars.
	We are diggers, like badgers; we love to feel
	The dirt flying out from behind our back claws.
	
	And no one can convince us that mud is not
	Beautiful. It is our badger soul that thinks so.
	We are ready to spend the rest of our life
	
	Walking with muddy shoes in the wet fields.
	We resemble exiles in the kingdom of the serpent.
	We stand in the onion fields looking up at the night.
	
	My heart is a calm potato by day, and a weeping
	Abandoned woman by night. Friend, tell me what to do,
	Since I am a man in love with the setting stars.


42. POEM

	There is dust that is near us,
	Waves breaking on shores just over the hill,
	Trees full of birds that we have never seen,
	Nets drawn down with dark fish.
	
	The evening arrives; we look up and it is there;
	It has come through the nets of the stars,
	Through the tissues of the grass,
	Walking quietly over the asylums of the water.
	
	The day shall never end, we think;
	We have hair that seems born for the daylight;
	But at last the quiet water of the night shall rise,
	And our skin shall see far away, as it does under water.


43. POEM IN PRAISE OF SOLITUDE

	In the deep fall, the body awakes,
	And we find lions on the sea-shore--
	Nothing to fear.
	The wind rises, the water is born,
	Spreading white tomb clothes on a rocky shore,
	Drawing us up
	From the bed of the land.
	
	We did not come to remain whole.
	We came to lose our leaves like the trees,
	The trees that are broken
	And start again, drawing up from the great roots;
	Like mad poets captured by the Moors,
	Men who live out
	A second life.
	
	That we should know of poverty and rags,
	That we should taste the weed of Dillinger,
	And swim in the sea,
	Not always walking on dry land,
	And, dancing, fund in the trees a savior,
	A home in dark grass,
	And nourishment in death.


44. PRAYER FOR MY FATHER

	Your head is still
	restless, rolling
	east and west.
	That body in you
	insisting on living
	is the old hawk
	for whom the world
	darkens.
	If I am not
	with you when you die,
	that is just.
	
	It is all right.
	That part of you cleaned
	my bones more
	than once. But I
	will meet you
	in the young hawk
	whom I see
	inside both
	you and me; he
	will guide
	you to the Lord of Night,
	who will give you
	the tenderness
	you wanted here.


45. A RAMAGE FOR AWAKENING SORROW

	The grackles stroll about on the black floor of sorrow.
	Rabbis robed in saffron feed them
	minnow bread . . . They come to meet you.
	Ficino and Moses and his black wife
	walk like birds and dance. Among the stalks of wild grass
	the saddled horses drink from sorrow tanks.
	But the grackles’ toes are springy--they walk
	over the human footprints the dreamer made last night.


46. A RAMAGE FOR THE STAR MAN, MOURNING

	The star man, mourning, floats among the stars
	firmly, the farms beneath his feet.
	How long it takes for me to climb into grief!
	Fifty years old, and still held in the dark,
	in the unfinished, the hopeful, what longs for solution.
	As that girl there, who explains things, combing
	her hair . . . the face seems alert, the body
	still drifting through the ponderous farms of ocean.


47. RIDERLESS HORSES

	An owl on the dark waters
	And so many torches smoking
	By mossy stone
	And horses that are seen riderless on moonlit nights
	A candle that flutters as a black hand
	Reaches out
	All of these mean
	A man with coins on his eyes
	
	The vast waters
	The cry of seagulls


48. SEEING THE ECLIPSE IN MAINE

	It started about noon. On top of Mount Batte,   
	We were all exclaiming. Someone had a cardboard   
	And a pin, and we all cried out when the sun   
	Appeared in tiny form on the notebook cover.   
	
	It was hard to believe. The high school teacher   
	We’d met called it a pinhole camera,   
	People in the Renaissance loved to do that.   
	And when the moon had passed partly through   
	
	We saw on a rock underneath a fir tree,   
	Dozens of crescents--made the same way--   
	Thousands! Even our straw hats produced   
	A few as we moved them over the bare granite.   
	
	We shared chocolate, and one man from Maine   
	Told a joke. Suns were everywhere--at our feet.


49. SHABISTARI AND THE SECRET GARDEN

	I can’t stop praising Shabistari for bringing
	The gnat’s and the elephant’s legs close to each other.
	Next I want Sunday to be brought closer to Monday.
	
	Suppose a bit of straw were able to marry the wind.
	Haven’t you noticed those good marriages when
	The wind and the chaff go down the road together?
	
	When a poem takes me to that place where
	No story ever happens twice, all I want
	Is a warm room, and a thousand years of thought.
	
	Conrad said the dark swimmer did reach his ship.
	If we sink into the suffering that’s right for us,
	Our dreams will have all that Adam and Eve wept for.
	
	Amazing things do happen. One morning Kierkegaard
	Explains exactly what ressentiment is
	And the mouse agrees to marry everyone in the room.
	
	Robert, those high spirits don’t prove you are
	A close friend of truth; but you have learned to drive
	Your buggy over the prairies of human sorrow.


50. SNOWFALL IN THE NOVEMBER AFTERNOON

	The grass is half-covered with snow.
	It was the kind of snowfall that starts in late afternoon,
	And now the little houses of the grass are growing dark.
	
	If I reached my hands down, near the earth,
	I could take handfulls of darkness!
	That darkness was always there, which we never noticed.
	
	As the snow grows heavier, the cornstalks fade farther away,
	And the barn moves nearer to the house.
	The barn moves all alone in the growing storm.
	
	The barn is full of corn, and moving toward us now
	Like a hulk blown toward us in a storm at sea;
	All the sailors on deck have been blind for many years.


51. SUDDENLY TURNING AWAY

	Some words come near,
	Bullheads that bite
	The snow, moments of intimacy that are waved away,
	Lost antennas of the seasnail.
	Brought to the ground.
	It is the sun
	That glints on us! But the shadows
	Of not-love come,
	It cannot be stood against.
	And we suffer. The gold discs
	Fall from our ears.
	The sea grows cloudy.


52. THE TESTAMENT

	Chrysanthemums crying out on the borders of death,
	Lone teeth walking in the icy water.
	The heavy body mourns!
	It howls outside the hedges of death,
	Pushed out of the enclosure.
	Now it must meet the death outside the death.
	
	Haven’t you seen the cold faces outside the gate,
	The bag of bones warming itself in a tree,
	The rags constantly trailing those lumpish feet?
	There is a desolation that only the Egyptian knows,
	Freezing at dawn in the desert,
	And the water jar turned over by a falling Testament--


53. THINKING OF HIGH SCHOOL GIRLS

	Smoke rising over the full moon,
	Like a cloud forming inside a transparent stone,
	Smouldering fires,
	Leaves raked together still not having met the fire,
	But all the other girls nearby going up in heavy smoke.


54. UNANSWERED LETTERS

	Strips of August sun come in through shutters.
	Baskets of unanswered letters lie on chairs.
	Some foolish man must live here.


55. WAKING FROM SLEEP

	Inside the veins there are navies setting forth,
	Tiny explosions at the waterlines,
	And seagulls weaving in the wind of the salty blood.
	
	It is the morning. The country has slept the whole winter.
	Window seats were covered with fur skins, the yard was full
	Of stiff dogs, and hands that clumsily held heavy books.
	
	Now we wake, and rise from bed, and eat breakfast!
	Shouts rise from the harbor of the blood,
	Mist, and masts rising, the knock of wooden tackle in the sunlight.
	
	Now we sing, and do tiny dances on the kitchen floor.
	Our whole body is like a harbor at dawn;
	We know that our master has left us for the day.


56. WAKING IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT

	I want to be true to what I have heard. It was
	Sweet to hear music last night. There is so
	Much joy in being afraid of the world together.
	
	The snow in the branches, the sadness in your hands,
	The foot tracks in the mud, the old Inca faces,
	The trout who wait all year for the acorns to descend.
	
	The sitar player is so much like the crow, who rises
	Each morning in the sky above the black branches
	And cries six cries with no memory of the light.
	
	Every musician wants his fingers to play faster
	So that he can go deeper into the kingdom of pain.
	Each note on the string calls for one note more.
	
	The hand that has written all these sounds down
	Is like a bird who wakes in the middle of the night
	And starts out toward its old nest on the mountain.
	
	Robert, I don’t know why you would have such
	Good luck these days. Those few lines about the crows
	Crying are better than a whole night of sleep.


57. WAKING ON THE FARM

	I can remember the early mornings--how the stubble,
	a little proud with frost, snapped as we walked.
	
	How the John Deere tractor hood pulled heat
	Away from our hands when we put in gas.
	
	And the way the sun brought light right out of the ground
	It turned on a whole hill of stubble as easily as a single stone.
	
	Breathing seemed frail and daring in the morning.
	To pull in air was like reading a whole novel
	
	The angleworms, turned up by the plow, were uneasy
	Like shy people trying to get away from praise.
	
	For a while we had goats. They were like turkeys,
	Only more reckless. One butted a Chevrolet car door.
	
	When we washed up at noon, we were more ordinary.
	But the water kept something of the early morning in it.


58. WANTING SUMPTUOUS HEAVENS

	No one grumbles among the oyster clans, 
	And lobsters play their bone guitars all summer. 
	Only we, with our opposable thumbs, want 
	Heaven to be, and God to come, again. 
	There is no end to our grumbling; we want 
	Comfortable earth and sumptuous Heaven. 
	But the heron standing on one leg in the bog 
	Drinks his dark rum all day, and is content.


59. WATERING THE HORSE

	How strange to think of giving up all ambition!
	Suddenly I see with such clear eyes
	The white flake of snow
	That has just fallen in the horse’s mane!


60. WHAT KEPT HORACE ALIVE

	Men and women spend only a moment in Paradise.
	The two lovers watch Charlie Chaplin eat his shoe,
	And a moment later find themselves barefooted in the grave.
	
	I know that I wanted more than two years with you.
	If my wife had been able to absorb more cruelty,
	Perhaps I could have paid the fiery angels to go away.
	
	The dead man lies in bed with his great toe
	Sticking up; it is because of his toe
	That he could carry the burden of marriage so long.
	
	Sometimes I frighten that boy who sleeps on the ground.
	He keeps his head in his arms; all he smells is the hair
	That is left behind when the groundhog is eaten.
	
	There are as many groundhogs as there are stars,
	Wherever there is a lot of anything, we are in trouble.
	It is the generosity of snowflakes that leads us to suicide.
	
	The bats’ wings are the Saviours of the mosquitoes;
	And the cod long for the net. It was only the certainty
	Of death that kept Horace alive so long.


61. WHEN I AM WITH YOU

	When I am with you, two notes of the sarod
	Carry me into a place where I am not.
	All the farms have disappeared into air.
	
	Those wooden fence posts I loved as a boy
	I can see my father’s face through their wood,
	And through his face the sky as threshing ends.
	
	It is such a blessing to hear that we will die.
	Ten thousand barks become a hundred thousand;
	I knew this friendship with myself couldn’t last forever.
	
	Touch the sarod’s string again, so that the finger
	That touched my skin a moment ago
	Can become a lightning bolt that closes the door.
	
	Now I know why I keep hinting at the word you--
	The sound of you carries me over the border.
	We disappear the same way a baby is born.
	
	Some fool with my name has been trying
	To peer all afternoon between the thick boards
	Of the fence. Tell that boy it isn’t time.


62. WHEN I WAS TWENTY-SIX

	Why God allowed Montserrat to fall
	Is not explained, nor why the Queen of Cattle
	Drove my one calf into the slaughterhouse.
	
	Of course my poems are sad. How else could they be?
	The judge and the criminal live in my own house.
	I am constantly coming upon secret court proceedings.
	
	Why can we achieve organization only in wartime?
	I want to know why so many plays of Sophocles were lost,
	And why God becomes an ox and eats the grass each night.
	
	When I was twenty-six, the words that fed me were killed
	Along with the vowels that joined me to others;
	And the calf of language was cut up and thrown into the ditch.
	
	My small talent was trapped under the water,
	And the lungs I breathed with were filled with lies.
	If I had been human, it would have been worse.
	
	That is what Separation is like: I know it now.
	I had only will to keep my lungs from filling with water.
	I was unfaithful even to Infidelity.


63. WHEN THE DUMB SPEAK

	There is a joyful night in which we lose
	Everything, and drift
	Like a radish
	Rising and falling, and the ocean
	At last throws us into the ocean,
	And on the water we are sinking
	As if floating on darkness.
	The body raging
	And driving itself, disappearing in smoke,
	Walks in large cities late at night,
	Or reading the Bible in Christian Science windows,
	Or reading a history of Bougainville.
	Then the images appear:
	Images of death,
	Images of the body shaken in the grave,
	And the graves filled with sea-water;
	Fires in the sea,
	The ships smouldering like bodies,
	Images of wasted life,
	Life lost, imagination ruined,
	The house fallen,
	The gold sticks broken,
	Then shall the talkative be silent,
	And the dumb shall speak.


64. WHEN THE MASTER IS UNITED

	“As soon as the master is untied, the bird soars.”
	That is what a great teacher once said.
	“In the sad heat of noon the pheasant chicks
	Spread their new wings in the moon dust.
	Oh my darling, we have experienced this.
	Does it matter whether we are sad or happy?
	Our laughter goes back to the roots of trees
	An old sadness returns in the sorrowing dust.”


65. WHY WE DON’T DIE

	In late September many voices
	Tell you you will die.
	That leaf says it, that coolness.
	All of them are right.
	
	Our many souls--what
	Can they do about it?
	Nothing. They’re already
	Part of the invisible.
	
	Our souls have been
	Longing to go home
	Anyway. “It’s late,” they say,
	“Lock the door, let’s go.”
	
	The body doesn’t agree. It says
	“We buried a little iron
	Ball under that tree.
	Let’s go get it.”


66. THE WORLD IS A CONFUSION OF THREE WORLDS

	The dark figures of politics hover in the air
	Like dark birds,
	The new trees flutter in the backyards of New York
	And the boy stretches to his mother.
	
	I hear a chirping of birds on Twelfth Street,
	In the backyard, and soon I shall dive
	Into the waterfalls of concrete,
	Where the tiny bells of China are heard in the sunlight.
	
	The tiny bells of China ring to call to solitude
	And contemplation, in a tiny mountain house
	By green leaves, and through the bells I hear the traffic
	Which at furst seems the noise of the Hundred Years’ War.


67. WRITTEN NEAR ROME

	What if these long races go on repeating themselves
	century after century, living in houses painted light colors
	on the beach,
	black spiders
	having turned pale and fat,
	men walking thoughtfully with their families,
	vibrations
	of exhausted violin-bodies,
	horrible eternities of sea-pines!
	Some men will leave their houses
	To live on rafts tied together on the ocean,
	those left on shore will go inside tree trunks,
	surrounded by bankers
	whose fingers have grown long and slender,
	piercing through rotting bark for their food.

