*** Jorge Luis Borges (1899 - 1986)


1. HISTORY OF THE NIGHT

	Throughout the course of the generations
	men constructed the night.
	At first she was blindness; 
	thorns raking bare feet,
	fear of wolves.
	We shall never know who forged the word
	for the interval of shadow 
	dividing the two twilights;
	we shall never know in what age it came to mean
	the starry hours.
	Others created the myth.
	They made her the mother of the unruffled Fates
	that spin our destiny,
	they sacrificed black ewes to her, and the cock
	who crows his own death. 
	The Chaldeans assigned to her twelve houses;
	to Zeno, infinite words.
	She took shape from Latin hexameters
	and the terror of Pascal.
	Luis de Leon saw in her the homeland
	of his stricken soul.
	Now we feel her to be inexhaustible
	like an ancient wine
	and no one can gaze on her without vertigo
	and time has charged her with eternity.
	
	And to think that she wouldn’t exist 
	except for those fragile instruments, the eyes.



2. LIMITS

	Of all the streets that blur in to the sunset,
	There must be one (which, I am not sure)
	That I by now have walked for the last time
	Without guessing it, the pawn of that Someone
	
	Who fixes in advance omnipotent laws,
	Sets up a secret and unwavering scale
	for all the shadows, dreams, and forms
	Woven into the texture of this life.
	
	If there is a limit to all things and a measure
	And a last time and nothing more and forgetfulness,
	Who will tell us to whom in this house
	We without knowing it have said farewell?
	
	Through the dawning window night withdraws
	And among the stacked books which throw
	Irregular shadows on the dim table,
	There must be one which I will never read.
	
	There is in the South more than one worn gate,
	With its cement urns and planted cactus,
	Which is already forbidden to my entry,
	Inaccessible, as in a lithograph.
	
	There is a door you have closed forever
	And some mirror is expecting you in vain;
	To you the crossroads seem wide open,
	Yet watching you, four-faced, is a Janus.
	
	There is among all your memories one
	Which has now been lost beyond recall.
	You will not be seen going down to that fountain
	Neither by white sun nor by yellow moon.
	
	You will never recapture what the Persian
	Said in his language woven with birds and roses,
	When, in the sunset, before the light disperses,
	You wish to give words to unforgettable things.
	
	And the steadily flowing Rhone and the lake,
	All that vast yesterday over which today I bend?
	They will be as lost as Carthage,
	Scourged by the Romans with fire and salt.
	
	At dawn I seem to hear the turbulent
	Murmur of crowds milling and fading away;
	They are all I have been loved by, forgotten by;
	Space, time, and Borges now are leaving me.
