*** Bertolt Brecht (1898 - 1956)


1. ALABAMA SONG

	Show me the way to the next whisky bar
	Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
	Show me the way to the next whisky bar
	Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
	For if we don’t find the next whisky bar
	I tell you we must die
	I tell you we must die
	I tell you
	I tell you
	I tell you we must die
	
	Oh, moon of Alabama
	We now must say say good-bye
	We’ve lost our good old mamma
	And must have whisky
	Oh, you know why.
	
	Show me the way to the next pretty girl
	Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
	Show me the way to the next pretty girl
	Oh don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
	For if we don’t find the next pretty girl
	I tell you we must die
	I tell you we must die
	I tell you
	I tell you
	I tell you we must die
	
	Oh, moon of Alabama
	We now must say good-bye
	We’ve lost our good old mamma
	And must have a girl
	Oh, you know why.
	
	Show me the way to the next little dollar
	Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
	Show me the way to the next little dollar
	Oh, don’t ask why, oh, don’t ask why
	For if we don’t find the next little dollar
	I tell you we must die
	I tell you we must die
	I tell you
	I tell you
	I tell you we must die
	
	Oh, moon of Alabama
	We now must say good-bye
	We’ve lost our good old mamma
	And must have dollars
	Oh, you know why.


2. CONTEMPLATING HELL

	Contemplating Hell, as I once heard it,
	My brother Shelley found it to be a place
	Much like the city of London. I,
	Who do not live in London, but in Los Angeles,
	Find, contemplating Hell, that it
	Must be even more like Los Angeles.
	
	Also in Hell,
	I do not doubt it, there exist these opulent gardens
	With flowers as large as trees, wilting, of course,
	Very quickly, if they are not watered with very expensive water. And fruit markets
	With great leaps of fruit, which nonetheless
	
	Possess neither scent nor taste. And endless trains of autos,
	Lighter than their own shadows, swifter than
	Foolish thoughts, shimmering vehicles, in which
	Rosy people, coming from nowhere, go nowhere.
	And houses, designed for happiness, standing empty,
	Even when inhabited.
	
	Even the houses in Hell are not all ugly.
	But concern about being thrown into the street
	Consumes the inhabitants of the villas no less
	Than the inhabitants of the barracks.


3. HOW FORTUNATE THE MAN WITH NONE

	You saw sagacious Solomon
	You know what came of him,
	To him complexities seemed plain.
	He cursed the hour that gave birth to him
	And saw that everything was vain.
	How great and wise was Solomon.
	The world however did not wait
	But soon observed what followed on.
	It’s wisdom that had brought him to this state.
	How fortunate the man with none.
	
	You saw courageous Caesar next
	You know what he became.
	They deified him in his life
	Then had him murdered just the same.
	And as they raised the fatal knife
	How loud he cried: you too my son!
	The world however did not wait
	But soon observed what followed on.
	It’s courage that had brought him to that state.
	How fortunate the man with none.
	
	You heard of honest Socrates
	The man who never lied:
	They weren’t so grateful as you’d think
	Instead the rulers fixed to have him tried
	And handed him the poisoned drink.
	How honest was the people’s noble son.
	The world however did not wait
	But soon observed what followed on.
	It’s honesty that brought him to that state.
	How fortunate the man with none.
	
	Here you can see respectable folk
	Keeping to God’s own laws.
	So far he hasn’t taken heed.
	You who sit safe and warm indoors
	Help to relieve our bitter need.
	How virtuously we had begun.
	The world however did not wait
	But soon observed what followed on.
	It’s fear of god that brought us to that state.
	How fortunate the man with none.


4. I NEVER LOVED YOU MORE

	I never loved you more, ma soeur
	Than as I walked away from you that evening.
	The forest swallowed me, the blue forest, ma soeur
	The blue forest and above it pale stars in the west.
	
	I did not laugh, not one little bit, ma soeur
	As I playfully walked towards a dark fate--
	While the faces behind me
	Slowly paled in the evening of the blue forest.
	
	Everything was grand that one night, ma soeur
	Never thereafter and never before--
	I admit it: I was left with nothing but the big birds
	And their hungry cries in the dark evening sky.


5. I’M NOT SAYING ANYTHING AGAINST ALEXANDER

	Timur, I hear, took the trouble to conquer the earth.
	I don’t understand him.
	With a bit of hard liquor you can forget the earth.
	
	I’m not saying anything against Alexander,
	Only I have seen people who were remarkable,
	Highly deserving of your admiration
	For the fact that they were alive at all.
	
	Great men generate too much sweat.
	In all of this I see just a proof that
	They couldn’t stand being on their own
	And smoking and drinking and the like.
	And they must be too mean-spirited to get
	Contentment from sitting by a woman.


6. NOT WHAT WAS MEANT

	When the Academy of Arts demanded freedom
	Of artistic expression from narrow-minded bureaucrats
	There was a howl and a clamour in its immediate vicinity
	But roaring above everything
	Came a deafening thunder of applause
	From beyond the Sector boundary.
	Freedom! it roared. Freedom for the artists!
	Freedom all round! Freedom for all!
	Freedom for the exploiters! Freedom for the warmongers!
	Freedom for the Ruhr cartels! Freedom for Hitler’s generals!
	Softly, my dear fellows...
	The Judas kiss for the artists follows
	Hard on the Judas kiss for the workers.
	The arsonist with his bottle of petrol
	Sneaks up grinning to
	The Academy of Arts.
	But it was not to embrace him, just
	To knock the bottle out of his dirty hand that
	We asked for elbow room.
	Even the narrowest minds
	In which peace is harboured
	Are more welcome to the arts than the art lover
	
	Who is also a lover of the art of war.


7. SEND ME A LEAF

	Send me a leaf, but from a bush
	That grows at least one half hour
	Away from your house, then
	You must go and will be strong, and I
	Thank you for the pretty leaf.


8. TO POSTERITY

	I
	
	Indeed I live in the dark ages!
	A guileless word is an absurdity. A smooth forehead betokens
	A hard heart. He who laughs
	Has not yet heard
	The terrible tidings.
	
	Ah, what an age it is
	When to speak of trees is almost a crime
	For it is a kind of silence about injustice!
	And he who walks calmly across the street,
	Is he not out of reach of his friends
	In trouble?
	
	It is true: I earn my living
	But, believe me, it is only an accident.
	Nothing that I do entitles me to eat my fill.
	By chance I was spared. (If my luck leaves me
	I am lost.)
	
	They tell me: eat and drink. Be glad you have it!
	But how can I eat and drink
	When my food is snatched from the hungry
	And my glass of water belongs to the thirsty?
	And yet I eat and drink.
	
	I would gladly be wise.
	The old books tell us what wisdom is:
	Avoid the strife of the world
	Live out your little time
	Fearing no one
	Using no violence
	Returning good for evil--
	Not fulfillment of desire but forgetfulness
	Passes for wisdom.
	I can do none of this:
	Indeed I live in the dark ages!
	
	
	II
	
	I came to the cities in a time of disorder
	When hunger ruled.
	I came among men in a time of uprising
	And I revolted with them.
	So the time passed away
	Which on earth was given me.
	
	I ate my food between massacres.
	The shadow of murder lay upon my sleep.
	And when I loved, I loved with indifference.
	I looked upon nature with impatience.
	So the time passed away
	Which on earth was given me.
	
	In my time streets led to the quicksand.
	Speech betrayed me to the slaughterer.
	There was little I could do. But without me
	The rulers would have been more secure. This was my hope.
	So the time passed away
	Which on earth was given me.
	
	
	III
	
	You, who shall emerge from the flood
	In which we are sinking,
	Think--
	When you speak of our weaknesses,
	Also of the dark time
	That brought them forth.
	
	For we went, changing our country more often than our shoes.
	In the class war, despairing
	When there was only injustice and no resistance.
	
	For we knew only too well:
	Even the hatred of squalor
	Makes the brow grow stern.
	Even anger against injustice
	Makes the voice grow harsh. Alas, we
	Who wished to lay the foundations of kindness
	Could not ourselves be kind.
	
	But you, when at last it comes to pass
	That man can help his fellow man,
	Do no judge us
	Too harshly.


9. TO THOSE BORN AFTER

	I
	
	To the cities I came in a time of disorder
	That was ruled by hunger.
	I sheltered with the people in a time of uproar
	And then I joined in their rebellion.
	That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
	
	I ate my dinners between the battles,
	I lay down to sleep among the murderers,
	I didn’t care for much for love
	And for nature’s beauties I had little patience.
	That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
	
	The city streets all led to foul swamps in my time,
	My speech betrayed me to the butchers.
	I could do only little
	But without me those that ruled could not sleep so easily:
	That’s what I hoped.
	That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
	
	Our forces were slight and small,
	Our goal lay in the far distance
	Clearly in our sights,
	If for me myself beyond my reaching.
	That’s how I passed my time that was given to me on this Earth.
	
	
	II
	
	You who will come to the surface
	From the flood that’s overwhelmed us and drowned us all
	Must think, when you speak of our weakness in times of darkness
	That you’ve not had to face:
	
	Days when we were used to changing countries
	More often than shoes,
	Through the war of the classes despairing
	That there was only injustice and no outrage.
	
	Even so we realised
	Hatred of oppression still distorts the features,
	Anger at injustice still makes voices raised and ugly.
	Oh we, who wished to lay for the foundations for peace and friendliness,
	Could never be friendly ourselves.
	
	And in the future when no longer
	Do human beings still treat themselves as animals,
	Look back on us with indulgence.


10. WHAT HAS HAPPENED?

	The industrialist is having his aeroplane serviced.
	The priest is wondering what he said in his sermon eight weeks ago
	about tithes.
	The generals are putting on civvies and looking like bank clerks.
	Public officials are getting friendly.
	The policeman points out the way to the man in the cloth cap.
	The landlord comes to see whether the water supply is working.
	The journalists write the word People with capital letters.
	The singers sing at the opera for nothing.
	Ships’ captains check the food in the crew’s galley,
	Car owners get in beside their chauffeurs.
	Doctors sue the insurance companies.
	Scholars show their discoveries and hide their decorations.
	Farmers deliver potatoes to the barracks.
	The revolution has won its first battle:
	That’s what has happened.