*** Robert Bridges (1844 - 1930)


1. THE AFFLICTION OF RICHARD

	Love not too much. But how, 
	When thou hast made me such, 
	And dost thy gifts bestow, 
	How can I love too much? 
	Though I must fear to lose, 
	And drown my joy in care, 
	With all its thorns I choose 
	The path of love and prayer. 
	
	Though thou, I know not why, 
	Didst kill my childish trust, 
	That breach with toil did I 
	Repair, because I must: 
	And spite of frighting schemes, 
	With which the fiends of Hell 
	Blaspheme thee in my dreams, 
	So far I have hoped well. 
	
	But what the heavenly key, 
	What marvel in me wrought 
	Shall quite exculpate thee, 
	I have no shadow of thought. 
	What am I that complain? 
	The love, from which began 
	My question sad and vain, 
	Justifies thee to man.


2. AMIEL

	Why, O Maker of all, madest thou man with affections
	   Tender above thyself, scrupulous and passionate?
	Nay, if compassionate thou art, why, thou lover of men,
	   Hidest thou thy face so pitilessly from us?
	If thou in priesthoods and altar-glory delitest,
	   In torment and tears of trouble and suffering,
	Then wert thou displeas’d looking on soft human emotion,
	   Thou must scorn the devout love of a sire to a son.
	’Twas but vainly of old, Man, making Faith to approach thee,
	   Held an imagin’d scheme of providence in honour;
	And, to redeem thy praise, judg’d himself cause, took upon him
	   Humbly the impossible burden of all misery.
	Now casteth he away his books and logical idols
	   Leaveth again his cell of terrified penitence;
	And that stony goddess, his first-born fancy, dethroning,
	   Hath made after his own homelier art another;
	Made sweet Hope, the modest unportion’d daughter of anguish,
	   Whose brimming eye sees but dimly what it looketh on;
	Dreaming a day when fully, without curse or horrible cross,
	   Thou wilt deign to reveal her vision of happiness.


3. AMONG THE TOMBS

	Sad, sombre place, beneath whose antique yews
	I come, unquiet sorrows to control;
	Amid thy silent mossgrown graves to muse
	With my neglected solitary soul;
	And to poetic sadness care confide,
	Trusting sweet Melancholy for my guide:
	
	They will not ask why in thy shades I stray,
	Among the tombs finding my rare delight,
	Beneath the sun at indolent noonday,
	Or in the windy moon-enchanted night,
	Who have once reined in their steeds at any shrine,
	And given them water from the well divine.--
	
	The orchards are all ripened, and the sun
	Spots the deserted gleanings with decay;
	The seeds are perfected: his work is done,
	And Autumn lingers but to outsmile the May;
	Bidding his tinted leaves glide, bidding clear
	Unto clear skies the birds applaud the year.
	
	Lo, here I sit, and to the world I call,
	The world my solemn fancy leaves behind,
	Come! pass within the inviolable wall,
	Come pride, come pleasure, come distracted mind;
	Within the fated refuge, hither, turn,
	And learn your wisdom ere ’tis late to learn.
	
	Come with me now, and taste the fount of tears;
	For many eyes have sanctified this spot,
	Where grief’s unbroken lineage endears
	The charm untimely Folly injures not,
	And slays the intruding thoughts, that overleap
	The simple fence its holiness doth keep.
	
	Read the worn names of the forgotten dead,
	Their pompous legends will no smile awake;
	Even the vainglorious title o’er the head
	Wins its pride pardon for its sorrow’s sake;
	And carven Loves scorn not their dusty prize,
	Though fallen so far from tender sympathies.
	
	Here where a mother laid her only son,
	Here where a lover left his bride, below
	The treasured names their own are added on
	To those whom they have followed long ago:
	Sealing the record of the tears they shed,
	That ‘where their treasure there their hearts are fled.’
	
	Grandfather, father, son, and then again
	Child, grandchild, and great-grandchild laid beneath
	Numbered in turn among the sons of men,
	And gathered each one in his turn to death:
	While he that occupies their house and name
	To-day,--to-morrow too their grave shall claim.
	
	And where are all the spirits? Ah! could we tell
	The manner of our being when we die,
	And see beyond the scene we know so well,
	The country that so much obscured doth lie!
	With brightest visions our fond hopes repair,
	Or crown our melancholy with despair;
	
	From death, still death, still would a comfort come:
	Since of this world the essential joy must fall
	In all distributed, in each thing some,
	In nothing all, and all complete in all;
	Till pleasure, ageing to her full increase,
	Puts on perfection, and is throned in peace.
	
	Yea, sweetest peace, unsought-for, undesired,
	Loathed and misnamed, ’tis thee I worship here:
	Though in most black habiliments attired,
	Thou art sweet peace, and thee I cannot fear.
	Nay, were my last hope quenched, I here would sit
	And praise the annihilation of the pit.
	
	Nor quickly disenchanted will my feet
	Back to the busy town return, but yet
	Linger, ere I my loving friends would greet,
	Or touch their hands, or share without regret
	The warmth of that kind hearth, whose sacred ties
	Only shall dim with tears my dying eyes.
	
	    
	*** INVITATION TO THE COUNTRY
	{'month': 'april'}
	
	   Again with pleasant green
	Has Spring renewed the wood,
	And where the bare trunks stood
	Are leafy arbours seen;
	And back on budding boughs
	Come birds, to court and pair,
	Whose rival amorous vows
	Amaze the scented air.
	
	   The streams unbound anew
	Refill their mossy banks,
	The forward season pranks
	With flowers of varied hue:
	And scattered down the meads
	From hour to hour unfold
	A thousand buds and beads
	In stars and cups of gold.
	
	   Now hear, and see, and note,
	The farms are all astir,
	And every labourer
	Has doffed his winter coat;
	And how with specks of white
	They dot the brown hillside,
	Or jaunt and sing outright
	As by their teams they stride.
	
	   They sing to feel the Sun
	Regain his wanton strength;
	To know the year at length
	Rewards their labour done;
	To see the rootless stake
	They set bare in the ground,
	Burst into leaf, and shake
	Its grateful scent around.
	
	   Ah now an evil lot
	Is his who toils for gain,
	Where crowded chimneys stain
	The heavens his choice forgot;
	’Tis on the blighted trees
	That deck his garden dim,
	And in the tainted breeze
	That sweet spring comes to him.
	
	   Far rather would I choose
	The grace of brutes that bask,
	Than in an eager task,
	My inborn honour lose:
	Would rather far enjoy
	The body, than invent
	A duty, to destroy
	The ease which nature sent;
	
	   And country life I praise
	And lead, because I find
	The philosophic mind
	Can take no middle ways;
	She will not leave her love
	To mix with men, her art
	Is all to strive above
	The crowd, or stand apart.
	
	   Thrice happy he, the rare
	Prometheus, who can play
	With hidden things, and lay
	New realms of nature bare:
	Whose venturous step has trod
	Hell underfoot, and won
	A crown from man and God
	For all that he has done.--
	
	   That highest gift of all,
	Since crabbèd fate did flood
	My heart with sluggish blood,
	I look not mine to call;
	But, like a truant freed,
	Fly to the woods, and claim
	A pleasure for the deed
	Of my inglorious name.
	
	   And am content, denied
	The best, in choosing right;
	For Nature can delight
	Fancies unoccupied
	With ecstasies so sweet
	As none can even guess,
	Who walk not with the feet
	Of joy in idleness.
	
	   Then leave your joyless ways,
	My friend, my joys to see.
	The day you come shall be
	The choice of chosen days:
	You shall be lost, and learn
	New being, and forget
	The world, till your return
	Shall bring your first regret.


4. APRIL

	Wanton with long delay the gay spring leaping cometh;
	The blackthorn starreth now his bough on the eve of May:
	All day in the sweet box-tree the bee for pleasure hummeth:
	The cuckoo sends afloat his note on the air all day.
	
	Now dewy nights again and rain in gentle shower
	At root of tree and flower have quenched the winter’s drouth:
	On high the hot sun smiles, and banks of cloud uptower
	In bulging heads that crowd for miles the dazzling south.


5. ASIAN BIRDS

	In this May-month, by grace
	of heaven, things shoot apace.
	The waiting multitude
	of fair boughs in the wood,
	How few days have arrayed
	their beauty in green shade.
	
	What have I seen or heard?
	it was the yellow bird
	Sang in the tree: he flew
	a flame against the blue;
	Upward he flashed. Again,
	hark! ’tis his heavenly strain.
	
	Another! Hush! Behold,
	many, like boats of gold,
	From waving branch to branch
	their airy bodies launch.
	What music is like this,
	where each note is a kiss?
	
	The golden willows lift
	their boughs the sun to sift:
	Their sprays they droop to screen
	the sky with veils of green,
	A floating cage of song,
	where feathered lovers throng.
	
	How the delicious notes
	come bubbling from their throats!
	Full and sweet how they are shed
	like round pearls from a thread!
	The motions of their flight
	are wishes of delight.
	
	Hearing their song I trace
	the secret of their grace.
	Ah, could I this fair time
	so fashion into rhyme,
	The poem that I sing
	would be the voice of spring.


6. AWAKE, MY HEART

	Awake, my heart, to be loved, awake, awake!
	
	The darkness silvers away, the morn doth break,
	It leaps in the sky: unrisen lustres slake
	The o’ertaken moon. Awake, O heart, awake!
	
	She too that loveth awaketh and hopes for thee:
	Her eyes already have sped the shades that flee,
	Already they watch the path thy feet shall take:
	Awake, O heart, to be loved, awake, awake!
	
	And if thou tarry from her,--if this could be,--
	She cometh herself, O heart, to be loved, to thee;
	For thee would unashamed herself forsake:
	Awake, to be loved, my heart, awake, awake!
	
	Awake! The land is scattered with light, and see,
	Uncanopied sleep is flying from field and tree;
	And blossoming boughs of April in laughter shake:
	Awake, O heart, to be loved, awake, awake!
	
	Lo, all things wake and tarry and look for thee:
	She looketh and saith, “O sun, now bring him to me.
	Come, more adored, O adored, for his coming’s sake,
	And awake, my heart, to be loved, awake, awake!”


7. THE BIRDS THAT SING ON AUTUMN EVES

	The birds that sing on autumn eves
	Among the golden-tinted leaves,
	Are but the few that true remain
	Of budding May’s rejoicing train.
	
	Like autumn flowers that brave the frost,
	And make their show when hope is lost,
	These ’mong the fruits and mellow scent
	Mourn not the high-sunned summer spent.
	
	Their notes thro’ all the jocund spring
	Were mixed in merry musicking:
	They sang for love the whole day long,
	But now their love is all for song.
	
	Now each hath perfected his lay
	To praise the year that hastes away:
	They sit on boughs apart, and vie
	In single songs and rich reply:
	
	And oft as in the copse I hear
	These anthems of the dying year,
	The passions, once her peace that stole,
	With flattering love my heart console.


8. CHRISTMAS EVE

	_Pax hominibus bonae voluntatis_
	
	A frosty Christmas Eve 
	   when the stars were shining
	Fared I forth alone 
	   where westward falls the hill,
	And from many a village 
	   in the water’d valley
	Distant music reach’d me 
	   peals of bells aringing:
	The constellated sounds 
	   ran sprinkling on earth’s floor
	As the dark vault above 
	   with stars was spangled o’er.
	Then sped my thoughts to keep 
	   that first Christmas of all
	When the shepherds watching 
	   by their folds ere the dawn
	Heard music in the fields 
	   and marveling could not tell
	Whether it were angels 
	   or the bright stars singing.
	
	Now blessed be the tow’rs 
	   that crown England so fair
	That stand up strong in prayer 
	   unto God for our souls
	Blessed be their founders 
	   (said I) an’ our country folk
	Who are ringing for Christ 
	   in the belfries to-night
	With arms lifted to clutch 
	   the rattling ropes that race
	Into the dark above 
	   and the mad romping din.
	
	But to me heard afar 
	   it was starry music
	Angels’ song, comforting 
	   as the comfort of Christ
	When he spake tenderly 
	   to his sorrowful flock:
	The old words came to me 
	   by the riches of time
	Mellow’d and transfigured 
	   as I stood on the hill
	Heark’ning in the aspect 
	   of th’ eternal silence.


9. CROWN WINTER WITH GREEN

	Crown Winter with green,
	And give him good drink
	To physic his spleen
	Or ever he think.
	
	His mouth to the bowl,
	His feet to the fire;
	And let him, good soul,
	No comfort desire.
	
	So merry he be,
	I bid him abide:
	And merry be we
	This good Yuletide.


10. DUNSTONE HILL

	A cottage built of native stone
	Stands on the mountain-moor alone,
	High from man’s dwelling on the wide
	And solitary mountain-side,
	
	The purple mountain-side, where all
	The dewy night the meteors fall,
	And the pale stars musically set
	To the watery bells of the rivulet,
	
	And all day long, purple and dun,
	The vast moors stretch beneath the sun,
	The wide wind passeth fresh and hale,
	And whirring grouse and blackcock sail.
	
	Ah, heavenly Peace, where dost thou dwell?
	Surely ’twas here thou hadst a cell,
	Till flaming Love, wandering astray
	With fury and blood, drove thee away.--
	
	Far down across the valley deep
	The town is hid in smoky sleep,
	At moonless nightfall wakening slow
	Upon the dark with lurid glow:
	
	Beyond, afar the widening view
	Merges into the soften’d blue,
	Cornfield and forest, hill and stream,
	Fair England in her pastoral dream.
	
	To one who looketh from this hill
	Life seems asleep, all is so still:
	Nought passeth save the travelling shade
	Of clouds on high that float and fade:
	
	Nor since this landscape saw the sun
	Might other motion o’er it run,
	Till to man’s scheming heart it came
	To make a steed of steel and flame.
	
	Him may you mark in every vale
	Moving beneath his fleecy trail,
	And tell whene’er the motions die
	Where every town and hamlet lie.
	
	He gives the distance life to-day,
	Rushing upon his level’d way
	From man’s abode to man’s abode,
	And mocks the Roman’s vaunted road,
	
	Which o’er the moor purple and dun
	Still wanders white beneath the sun,
	Deserted now of men and lone
	Save for this cot of native stone.
	
	There ever by the whiten’d wall
	Standeth a maiden fair and tall,
	And all day long in vacant dream
	Watcheth afar the flying steam.


11. THE DUTEOUS HEART

	Spirit of grace and beauty,
	Whom men so much miscall:
	Maidenly, modest duty,
	I cry thee fair befall!
	
	Pity for them that shun thee,
	Sorrow for them that hate,
	Glory, hath any won thee
	To dwell in high estate!
	
	But rather thou delightest
	To walk in humble ways,
	Keeping thy favour brightest
	Uncrown’d by foolish praise;
	In such retirement dwelling,
	Where, hath the worldling been,
	He straight returneth telling
	Of sights that he hath seen,
	
	Of simple men and truest
	Faces of girl and boy;
	The souls whom thou enduest
	With gentle peace and joy.
	
	Fair from my song befall thee,
	Spirit of beauty and grace!
	Men that so much miscall thee
	Have never seen thy face.


12. ELEGY

	Clear and gentle stream,
	Known and loved so long,
	That hast heard the song
	And the idle dream
	Of my boyish day;
	While I once again
	Down thy margin stray,
	In the selfsame strain
	Still my voice is spent,
	With my old lament,
	And my idle dream,
	Clear and gentle stream!
	
	Where my old seat was
	Here again I sit,
	Where the long boughs knit
	Over stream and graís
	Thick translucent eaves:
	Where back eddies play
	Shipwreck with the leaves,
	And the proud swans stray,
	Sailing one by one
	Out of stream and sun,
	And the fish lie cool
	In their chosen pool.
	
	Many an afternoon
	Of the summer day
	Dreaming here I lay;
	And I know how soon
	Idly at its hour
	First the deep bell hums
	From the minster tower,
	And then evening comes,
	Creeping up the glade,
	With her lengthening shade,
	And the tardy boon
	Of her brightening moon.
	
	Clear and gentle stream,
	Ere again I go
	Where thou dost not flow,
	Well does it beseem
	Thee to hear again
	Once my youthful song,
	That familiar strain
	Silent now so long:
	Be as I content
	With my old lament,
	And my idle dream,
	Clear and gentle stream!


13. EROS

	Why hast thou nothing in thy face? 
	Thou idol of the human race, 
	Thou tyrant of the human heart, 
	The flower of lovely youth that art; 
	Yea, and that standest in thy youth 
	An image of eternal Truth, 
	With thy exuberant flesh so fair, 
	That only Pheidias might compare, 
	Ere from his chaste marmoreal form 
	Time had decayed the colours warm; 
	Like to his gods in thy proud dress, 
	Thy starry sheen of nakedness. 
	
	Surely thy body is thy mind, 
	For in thy face is nought to find, 
	Only thy soft unchristen’d smile, 
	That shadows neither love nor guile, 
	But shameless will and power immense, 
	In secret sensuous innocence. 
	
	O king of joy, what is thy thought? 
	I dream thou knowest it is nought, 
	And wouldst in darkness come, but thou 
	Makest the light where’er thou go. 
	Ah yet no victim of thy grace, 
	None who e’er long’d for thy embrace, 
	Hath cared to look upon thy face.


14. THE EVENING DARKENS OVER

	The evening darkens over 
	After a day so bright 
	The windcapt waves discover 
	That wild will be the night. 
	There’s sound of distant thunder. 
	
	The latest sea-birds hover 
	Along the cliff’s sheer height; 
	As in the memory wander 
	Last flutterings of delight, 
	White wings lost on the white. 
	
	There’s not a ship in sight; 
	And as the sun goes under 
	Thick clouds conspire to cover 
	The moon that should rise yonder. 
	Thou art alone, fond lover. 


15. FIRST SPRING MORNING

	   Look! Look! the spring is come:
	   O feel the gentle air,
	That wanders thro’ the boughs to burst
	   The thick buds everywhere!
	   The birds are glad to see
	   The high unclouded sun:
	Winter is fled away, they sing,
	   The gay time is begun.
	
	   Adown the meadows green
	   Let us go dance and play,
	And look for violets in the lane,
	   And ramble far away
	   To gather primroses,
	   That in the woodland grow,
	And hunt for oxlips, or if yet
	   The blades of bluebells show:
	
	   There the old woodman gruff
	   Hath half the coppice cut,
	And weaves the hurdles all day long
	   Beside his willow hut.
	   We’ll steal on him, and then
	   Startle him, all with glee
	Singing our song of winter fled
	   And summer soon to be.


16. THE GARDEN IN SEPTEMBER

	Now thin mists temper the slow-ripening beams
	Of the September sun: his golden gleams
	On gaudy flowers shine, that prank the rows
	Of high-grown hollyhocks, and all tall shows
	That Autumn flaunteth in his bushy bowers;
	Where tomtits, hanging from the drooping heads
	Of giant sunflowers, peck the nutty seeds;
	And in the feathery aster bees on wing
	Seize and set free the honied flowers,
	Till thousand stars leap with their visiting:
	While ever across the path mazily flit,
	Unpiloted in the sun,
	The dreamy butterflies
	With dazzling colours powdered and soft glooms,
	White, black and crimson stripes, and peacock eyes,
	Or on chance flowers sit,
	With idle effort plundering one by one
	The nectaries of deepest-throated blooms.
	
	With gentle flaws the western breeze
	Into the garden saileth,
	Scarce here and there stirring the single trees,
	For his sharpness he vaileth:
	So long a comrade of the bearded corn,
	Now from the stubbles whence the shocks are borne,
	O’er dewy lawns he turns to stray,
	As mindful of the kisses and soft play
	Wherewith he enamoured the light-hearted May,
	Ere he deserted her;
	Lover of fragrance, and too late repents;
	Nor more of heavy hyacinth now may drink,
	Nor spicy pink,
	Nor summer’s rose, nor garnered lavender,
	But the few lingering scents
	Of streakèd pea, and gillyflower, and stocks
	Of courtly purple, and aromatic phlox.
	
	And at all times to hear are drowsy tones
	Of dizzy flies, and humming drones,
	With sudden flap of pigeon wings in the sky,
	Or the wild cry
	Of thirsty rooks, that scour ascare
	The distant blue, to watering as they fare
	With creaking pinions, or--on business bent,
	If aught their ancient polity displease,--
	Come gathering to their colony, and there
	Settling in ragged parliament,
	Some stormy council hold in the high trees.


17. A HYMN OF NATURE

	I
	
	   Power eternal, power unknown, uncreate:
	   Force of force, fate of fate.
	
	   Beauty and light are thy seeing,
	   Wisdom and right thy decreeing,
	   Life of life is thy being.
	In the smile of thine infinite starry gleam,
	   Without beginning or end,
	   Measure or number,
	   Beyond time and space,
	   Without foe or friend,
	In the void of thy formless embrace,
	   All things pass as a dream
	   Of thine unbroken slumber.
	
	
	II
	
	   Gloom and the night are thine:
	On the face of thy mirror darkness and terror,
	The smoke of thy blood, the frost of thy breath.
	
	   In silence and woful awe
	   Thy harrying angels of death
	   Destroy whate’er thou makest--
	Makest, destroyest, destroyest and makest.
	Thy gems of life thou dost squander,
	Their virginal beauty givest to plunder,
	Doomest to uttermost regions of age-long ice
	   To starve and expire:
	   Consumest with glance of fire,
	   Or back to confusion shakest
	With earthquake, elemental storm and thunder.
	
	
	III
	
	   In ways of beauty and peace
	   Fair desire, companion of man,
	   Leadeth the children of earth.
	
	   As when the storm doth cease,
	The loving sun the clouds dispelleth,
	And woodland walks are sweet in spring;
	   The birds they merrily sing
	   And every flower-bud swelleth.
	   Or where the heav’ns o’erspan
	      The lonely downs
	      When summer is high:
	   Below their breezy crowns
	      And grassy steep
	Spreadeth the infinite smile of the sunlit sea;
	   Whereon the white ships swim,
	   And steal to havens far
	   Across the horizon dim,
	Or lie becalm’d upon the windless deep,
	   Like thoughts of beauty and peace,
	   When the storm doth cease,
	And fair desire, companion of man,
	   Leadeth the children of earth.
	
	
	IV
	
	Man, born to toil, in his labour rejoiceth;
	His voice is heard in the morn:
	He armeth his hand and sallieth forth
	To engage with the generous teeming earth,
	   And drinks from the rocky rills
	      The laughter of life.
	
	Or else, in crowded cities gathering close,
	   He traffics morn and eve
	   In thronging market-halls;
	   Or within echoing walls
	   Of busy arsenals
	Weldeth the stubborn iron to engines vast;
	   Or tends the thousand looms
	   Where, with black smoke o’ercast,
	   The land mourns in deep glooms.
	
	   Life is toil, and life is good:
	   There in loving brotherhood
	   Beateth the nation’s heart of fire.
	   Strife! Strife! The strife is strong!
	There battle thought and voice, and spirits conspire
	In joyous dance around the tree of life,
	   And from the ringing choir
	Riseth the praise of God from hearts in tuneful song.
	
	
	V
	
	Hark! What spirit doth entreat
	The love-obedient air?
	All the pomp of his delight
	Revels on the ravisht night,
	Wandering wilful, soaring fair:
	There! ’Tis there, ’tis there.
	Like a flower of primal fire
	Late redeem’d by man’s desire.
	
	Away, on wings away
	My spirit far hath flown,
	To a land of love and peace,
	   Of beauty unknown.
	The world that earth-born man,
	By evil undismay’d,
	Out of the breath of God
	Hath for his heaven made.
	
	Where all his dreams soe’er
	Of holy things and fair
	In splendour are upgrown,
	Which thro’ the toilsome years
	Martyrs and faithful seers
	And poets with holy tears
	   Of hope have sown.
	
	There, beyond power of ill,
	In joy and blessing crown’d,
	Christ with His lamp of truth
	Sitteth upon the hill
	Of everlasting youth,
	And calls His saints around.
	
	
	VI
	
	Sweet compassionate tears
	Have dimm’d my earthly sight,
	Tears of love, the showers wherewith
	The eternal morn is bright:
	Dews of the heav’nly spheres.
	With tears my eyes are wet,
	Tears not of vain regret,
	Tears of no lost delight,
	Dews of the heav’nly spheres
	Have dimm’d my earthly sight,
	Sweet compassionate tears.
	
	
	VII
	
	Gird on thy sword, O man, thy strength endue,
	In fair desire thine earth-born joy renew.
	Live thou thy life beneath the making sun
	Till Beauty, Truth, and Love in thee are one.
	
	Thro’ thousand ages hath thy childhood run:
	On timeless ruin hath thy glory been:
	From the forgotten night of loves fordone
	Thou risest in the dawn of hopes unseen.
	
	Higher and higher shall thy thoughts aspire,
	Unto the stars of heaven, and pass away,
	And earth renew the buds of thy desire
	In fleeting blooms of everlasting day.
	
	Thy work with beauty crown, thy life with love;
	Thy mind with truth uplift to God above:
	For whom all is, from whom was all begun,
	In whom all Beauty, Truth, and Love are one.
	
	    
	*** THE PORTRAIT OF A GRANDFATHER
	{}
	
	With mild eyes agaze, and lips ready to speak,
	Whereon the yearning of love, the warning of wisdom plays,
	One portrait ever charms me and teaches me when I seek:
	   It is of him whom I, remembering my young days,
	Imagine fathering my father; when he, in sonship afore,
	Liv’d honouring and obeying the eyes now pictur’d agaze,
	   The lips ready to speak, that promise but speak no more.
	
	O high parental claim, that were not but for the knowing,
	O fateful bond of duty, O more than body that bore,
	   The smile that guides me to right, the gaze that follows my going,
	How had I stray’d without thee! and yet how few will seek
	The spirit-hands, that heaven, in tender-free bestowing,
	   Holds to her children, to guide the wandering and aid the weak.
	
	And Thee! ah what of thee, thou lover of men? if truly
	A painter had stell’d thee there, with thy lips ready to speak,
	   In all-fathering passion to souls enchanted newly,
	--Tenderer call than of sire to son, or of lover to maiden,--
	Ever ready to speak to us, if we will hearken duly,
	   ‘Come, O come unto me, ye weary and heavy-laden!’


18. I LOVE ALL BEAUTEOUS THINGS

	I love all beauteous things, 
	I seek and adore them; 
	God hath no better praise, 
	And man in his hasty days 
	Is honoured for them. 
	
	I too will something make 
	And joy in the making; 
	Altho’ to-morrow it seem 
	Like the empty words of a dream 
	Remembered on waking. 


19. I NEVER SHALL LOVE THE SNOW AGAIN

	I never shall love the snow again
	      Since Maurice died:
	With corniced drift it blocked the lane
	And sheeted in a desolate plain
	      The country side.
	
	The trees with silvery rime bedight
	      Their branches bare.
	By day no sun appeared; by night
	The hidden moon shed thievish light
	      In the misty air.
	
	We fed the birds that flew around
	      In flocks to be fed:
	No shelter in holly or brake they found.
	The speckled thrush on the frozen ground
	      Lay frozen and dead.
	
	We skated on stream and pond; we cut
	      The crinching snow
	To Doric temple or Arctic hut;
	We laughed and sang at nightfall, shut
	      By the fireside glow.
	
	Yet grudged we our keen delights before
	      Maurice should come.
	We said, In-door or out-of-door
	We shall love life for a month or more,
	      When he is home.
	
	They brought him home; ’twas two days late
	      For Christmas day:
	Wrapped in white, in solemn state,
	A flower in his hand, all still and straight
	      Our Maurice lay.
	
	And two days ere the year outgave
	      We laid him low.
	The best of us truly were not brave,
	When we laid Maurice down in his grave
	      Under the snow.


20. I PRAISE THE TENDER FLOWER

	I praise the tender flower,
	That on a mournful day
	Bloomed in my garden bower
	And made the winter gay.
	Its loveliness contented
	   My heart tormented.
	
	I praise the gentle maid
	Whose happy voice and smile
	To confidence betrayed
	My doleful heart awhile:
	And gave my spirit deploring
	   Fresh wings for soaring.
	
	The maid for very fear
	Of love I durst not tell:
	The rose could never hear,
	Though I bespake her well:
	So in my song I bind them
	   For all to find them.


21. I WILL NOT LET THEE GO

	I will not let thee go.
	Ends all our month-long love in this?
	Can it be summed up so,
	Quit in a single kiss?
	I will not let thee go.
	
	I will not let thee go.
	If thy words’ breath could scare thy deeds,
	As the soft south can blow
	And toss the feathered seeds,
	Then might I let thee go.
	
	I will not let thee go.
	Had not the great sun seen, I might;
	Or were he reckoned slow
	To bring the false to light,
	Then might I let thee go.
	
	I will not let thee go.
	The stars that crowd the summer skies
	Have watched us so below
	With all their million eyes,
	I dare not let thee go.
	
	I will not let thee go.
	Have we chid the changeful moon,
	Now rising late, and now
	Because she set too soon,
	And shall I let thee go?
	
	I will not let thee go.
	Have not the young flowers been content,
	Plucked ere their buds could blow,
	To seal our sacrament?
	I cannot let thee go.
	
	I will not let thee go.
	I hold thee by too many bands:
	Thou sayest farewell, and lo!
	I have thee by the hands,
	And will not let thee go.


22. IN STILL MIDSUMMER NIGHT

	In still midsummer night
	When the moon is late
	And the stars all watery and white
	For her coming wait,
	
	A spirit, whose eyes are possest
	By wonder new,
	Passeth--her arms upon her breast
	Enwrapt from the dew
	In a raiment of azure fold
	With diaper
	Of flower’d embroidery of gold
	Bestarr’d with silver.
	
	
	The daisy folk are awake
	Their carpet to spread,
	And the thron’d stars gazing on her make
	Fresh crowns for her head,
	
	Netted in her floating hair
	As she drifteth free
	Between the starriness of the air
	And the starry lea,
	
	From the silent-shadow’d vale
	By the west wind drawn
	Aloft to melt into the pale
	Moonrise of dawn.


23. INDOLENCE

	We left the city when the summer day
	Had verged already on its hot decline,
	And charmèd Indolence in languor lay
	In her gay gardens, ’neath her towers divine:
	‘Farewell,’ we said, ‘dear city of youth and dream!’
	And in our boat we stepped and took the stream.
	
	All through that idle afternoon we strayed
	Upon our proposed travel well begun,
	As loitering by the woodland’s dreamy shade,
	Past shallow islets floating in the sun,
	Or searching down the banks for rarer flowers
	We lingered out the pleasurable hours.
	
	Till when that loveliest came, which mowers home
	Turns from their longest labour, as we steered
	Along a straitened channel flecked with foam,
	We lost our landscape wide, and slowly neared
	An ancient bridge, that like a blind wall lay
	Low on its buried vaults to block the way.
	
	Then soon the narrow tunnels broader showed,
	Where with its arches three it sucked the mass
	Of water, that in swirl thereunder flowed,
	Or stood piled at the piers waiting to pass;
	And pulling for the middle span, we drew
	The tender blades aboard and floated through.
	
	But past the bridge what change we found below!
	The stream, that all day long had laughed and played
	Betwixt the happy shires, ran dark and slow,
	And with its easy flood no murmur made:
	And weeds spread on its surface, and about
	The stagnant margin reared their stout heads out.
	
	Upon the left high elms, with giant wood
	Skirting the water-meadows, interwove
	Their slumbrous crowns, o’ershadowing where they stood
	The floor and heavy pillars of the grove:
	And in the shade, through reeds and sedges dank,
	A footpath led along the moated bank.
	
	Across, all down the right, an old brick wall,
	Above and o’er the channel, red did lean;
	Here buttressed up, and bulging there to fall,
	Tufted with grass and plants and lichen green;
	And crumbling to the flood, which at its base
	Slid gently nor disturbed its mirrored face.
	
	Sheer on the wall the houses rose, their backs
	All windowless, neglected and awry,
	With tottering coigns, and crooked chimney stacks;
	And here and there an unused door, set high
	Above the fragments of its mouldering stair,
	With rail and broken step led out on air.
	
	Beyond, deserted wharfs and vacant sheds,
	With empty boats and barges moored along,
	And rafts half-sunken, fringed with weedy shreds,
	And sodden beams, once soaked to season strong.
	No sight of man, nor sight of life, no stroke,
	No voice the somnolence and silence broke.
	
	Then I who rowed leant on my oar, whose drip
	Fell without sparkle, and I rowed no more;
	And he that steered moved neither hand nor lip,
	But turned his wondering eye from shore to shore;
	And our trim boat let her swift motion die,
	Between the dim reflections floating by.


24. JANUARY

	Cold is the winter day, misty and dark:
	The sunless sky with faded gleams is rent:
	And patches of thin snow outlying, mark
	The landscape with a drear disfigurement.
	
	The trees their mournful branches lift aloft:
	The oak with knotty twigs is full of trust,
	With bud-thronged bough the cherry in the croft;
	The chestnut holds her gluey knops upthrust.
	
	No birds sing, but the starling chaps his bill
	And chatters mockingly; the newborn lambs
	Within their strawbuilt fold beneath the hill
	Answer with plaintive cry their bleating dams.
	
	Their voices melt in welcome dreams of spring,
	Green grass and leafy trees and sunny skies:
	My fancy decks the woods, the thrushes sing,
	Meadows are gay, bees hum and scents arise.
	
	And God the Maker doth my heart grow bold
	To praise for wintry works not understood,
	Who all the worlds and ages doth behold,
	Evil and good as one, and all as good.


25. JOY

	Joy, sweetest lifeborn joy, where dost thou dwell?
	Upon the formless moments of our being
	Flitting, to mock the ear that heareth well,
	To escape the trainèd eye that strains in seeing,
	Dost thou fly with us whither we are fleeing;
	Or home in our creations, to withstand
	Black-wingèd death, that slays the making hand?
	
	The making mind, that must untimely perish
	Amidst its work which time may not destroy,
	The beauteous forms which man shall love to cherish,
	The glorious songs that combat earth’s annoy?
	Thou dost dwell here, I know, divinest Joy:
	But they who build thy towers fair and strong,
	Of all that toil, feel most of care and wrong.
	
	Sense is so tender, O and hope so high,
	That common pleasures mock their hope and sense;
	And swifter than doth lightning from the sky
	The ecstasy they pine for flashes hence,
	Leaving the darkness and the woe immense,
	Wherewith it seems no thread of life was woven,
	Nor doth the track remain where once ’twas cloven.
	
	And heaven and all the stable elements
	That guard God’s purpose mock us, though the mind
	Be spent in searching: for his old intents
	We see were never for our joy designed:
	They shine as doth the bright sun on the blind,
	Or like his pensioned stars, that hymn above
	His praise, but not toward us, that God is Love.
	
	For who so well hath wooed the maiden hours
	As quite to have won the worth of their rich show,
	To rob the night of mystery, or the flowers
	Of their sweet delicacy ere they go?
	Nay, even the dear occasion when we know,
	We miss the joy, and on the gliding day
	The special glories float and pass away.
	
	Only life’s common plod: still to repair
	The body and the thing which perisheth:
	The soil, the smutch, the toil and ache and wear,
	The grinding enginry of blood and breath,
	Pain’s random darts, the heartless spade of death;
	All is but grief, and heavily we call
	On the last terror for the end of all.
	
	Then comes the happy moment: not a stir
	In any tree, no portent in the sky:
	The morn doth neither hasten nor defer,
	The morrow hath no name to call it by,
	But life and joy are one,--we know not why,--
	As though our very blood long breathless lain
	Had tasted of the breath of God again.
	
	And having tasted it I speak of it,
	And praise him thinking how I trembled then
	When his touch strengthened me, as now I sit
	In wonder, reaching out beyond my ken,
	Reaching to turn the day back, and my pen
	Urging to tell a tale which told would seem
	The witless phantasy of them that dream.
	
	But O most blessèd truth, for truth thou art,
	Abide thou with me till my life shall end.
	Divinity hath surely touched my heart;
	I have possessed more joy than earth can lend:
	I may attain what time shall never spend.
	Only let not my duller days destroy
	The memory of thy witness and my joy.


26. JUNE IS COME

	When June is come, then all the day
	I’ll sit with my love in the scented hay:
	And watch the sunshot palaces high,
	That the white clouds build in the breezy sky.
	
	She singeth, and I do make her a song,
	And read sweet poems the whole day long:
	Unseen as we lie in our haybuilt home.
	O life is delight when June is come.


27. THE LAST WEEK OF FEBRUARY

	Hark to the merry birds, hark how they sing!
	Although ’tis not yet spring
	   And keen the air;
	Hale Winter, half resigning ere he go,
	Doth to his heiress shew
	   His kingdom fair.
	
	In patient russet is his forest spread,
	All bright with bramble red,
	   With beechen moss
	And holly sheen: the oak silver and stark
	Sunneth his aged bark
	   And wrinkled boss.
	
	But neath the ruin of the withered brake
	Primroses now awake
	   From nursing shades:
	The crumpled carpet of the dry leaves brown
	Avails not to keep down
	   The hyacinth blades.
	
	The hazel hath put forth his tassels ruffed;
	The willow’s flossy tuft
	   Hath slipped him free:
	The rose amid her ransacked orange hips
	Braggeth the tender tips
	   Of bowers to be.
	
	A black rook stirs the branches here and there,
	Foraging to repair
	   His broken home:
	And hark, on the ash-boughs! Never thrush did sing
	Louder in praise of spring,
	   When spring is come.


28. LATE SPRING EVENING

	I saw the Virgin-mother clad in green,
	Walking the sprinkled meadows at sundown;
	While yet the moon’s cold flame was hung between
	The day and night, above the dusky town:
	I saw her brighter than the Western gold,
	Whereto she faced in splendour to behold.
	
	Her dress was greener than the tenderest leaf
	That trembled in the sunset glare aglow:
	Herself more delicate than is the brief,
	Pink apple-blossom, that May showers lay low,
	And more delicious than’s the earliest streak
	The blushing rose shows of her crimson cheek.
	
	With jealous grace her idle ears to please,
	A music entered, making passion fain:
	Three nightingales sat singing in the trees,
	And praised the Goddess for the fallen rain;
	Which yet their unseen motions did arouse,
	Or parting Zephyrs shook out from the boughs.
	
	And o’er the treetops, scattered in mid air,
	The exhausted clouds, laden with crimson light,
	Floated, or seemed to sleep; and, highest there,
	One planet broke the lingering ranks of night;
	Daring day’s company, so he might spy
	The Virgin-queen once with his watchful eye.
	
	And when I saw her, then I worshipped her,
	And said,--O bounteous Spring, O beauteous Spring,
	Mother of all my years, thou who dost stir
	My heart to adore thee and my tongue to sing,
	Flower of my fruit, of my heart’s blood the fire,
	Of all my satisfaction the desire!
	
	How art thou every year more beautiful,
	Younger for all the winters thou hast cast:
	And I, for all my love grows, grow more dull,
	Decaying with each season overpast!
	In vain to teach him love must man employ thee,
	The more he learns the less he can enjoy thee.


29. LAUS DEO

	Let praise devote thy work, and skill employ
	Thy whole mind, and thy heart be lost in joy.
	Well-doing bringeth pride, this constant thought
	Humility, that thy best done is nought.
	
	Man doeth nothing well, be it great or small,
	Save to praise God; but that hath savèd all:
	For God requires no more than thou hast done,
	And takes thy work to bless it for his own.


30. LONDON SNOW

	When men were all asleep the snow came flying, 
	In large white flakes falling on the city brown, 
	Stealthily and perpetually settling and loosely lying, 
	     Hushing the latest traffic of the drowsy town; 
	Deadening, muffling, stifling its murmurs failing; 
	Lazily and incessantly floating down and down: 
	     Silently sifting and veiling road, roof and railing; 
	Hiding difference, making unevenness even, 
	Into angles and crevices softly drifting and sailing. 
	     All night it fell, and when full inches seven 
	It lay in the depth of its uncompacted lightness, 
	The clouds blew off from a high and frosty heaven; 
	     And all woke earlier for the unaccustomed brightness 
	Of the winter dawning, the strange unheavenly glare: 
	The eye marvelled--marvelled at the dazzling whiteness; 
	     The ear hearkened to the stillness of the solemn air; 
	No sound of wheel rumbling nor of foot falling, 
	And the busy morning cries came thin and spare. 
	     Then boys I heard, as they went to school, calling, 
	They gathered up the crystal manna to freeze 
	Their tongues with tasting, their hands with snowballing; 
	     Or rioted in a drift, plunging up to the knees; 
	Or peering up from under the white-mossed wonder, 
	‘O look at the trees!’ they cried, ‘O look at the trees!’ 
	     With lessened load a few carts creak and blunder, 
	Following along the white deserted way, 
	A country company long dispersed asunder: 
	     When now already the sun, in pale display 
	Standing by Paul’s high dome, spread forth below 
	His sparkling beams, and awoke the stir of the day. 
	     For now doors open, and war is waged with the snow; 
	And trains of sombre men, past tale of number, 
	Tread long brown paths, as toward their toil they go: 
	     But even for them awhile no cares encumber 
	Their minds diverted; the daily word is unspoken, 
	The daily thoughts of labour and sorrow slumber 
	At the sight of the beauty that greets them, for the charm they have broken.


31. LOW BAROMETER

	The south-wind strengthens to a gale, 
	Across the moon the clouds fly fast, 
	The house is smitten as with a flail, 
	The chimney shudders to the blast. 
	
	On such a night, when Air has loosed 
	Its guardian grasp on blood and brain, 
	Old terrors then of god or ghost 
	Creep from their caves to life again; 
	
	And Reason kens he herits in 
	A haunted house. Tenants unknown 
	Assert their squalid lease of sin 
	With earlier title than his own. 
	
	Unbodied presences, the pack’d 
	Pollution and remorse of Time, 
	Slipp’d from oblivion reënact 
	The horrors of unhouseld crime. 
	
	Some men would quell the thing with prayer 
	Whose sightless footsteps pad the floor, 
	Whose fearful trespass mounts the stair 
	Or burts the lock’d forbidden door. 
	
	Some have seen corpses long interr’d 
	Escape from hallowing control, 
	Pale charnel forms--nay ev’n have heard 
	The shrilling of a troubled soul, 
	
	That wanders till the dawn hath cross’d 
	The dolorous dark, or Earth hath wound 
	Closer her storm-spredd cloke, and thrust 
	The baleful phantoms underground. 


32. MAY

	The hill pines were sighing,
	O’ercast and chill was the day:
	A mist in the valley lying
	Blotted the pleasant May.
	
	But deep in the glen’s bosom
	Summer slept in the fire
	Of the odorous gorse-blossom
	And the hot scent of the brier.
	
	A ribald cuckoo clamoured,
	And out of the copse the stroke
	Of the iron axe that hammered
	The iron heart of the oak.
	
	Anon a sound appalling,
	As a hundred years of pride
	Crashed, in the silence falling:
	And the shadowy pine-trees sighed.


33. MORNING HYMN

	O golden Sun, whose ray
	My path illumineth:
	Light of the circling day,
	Whose night is birth and death:
	
	That dost not stint the prime
	Of wise and strong, nor stay
	The changeful ordering time,
	That brings their sure decay:
	
	Though thou, the central sphere,
	Dost seem to turn around
	Thy creature world, and near
	As father fond art found;
	
	Thereon, as from above
	To shine, and make rejoice
	With beauty, life, and love,
	The garden of thy choice,
	To dress the jocund Spring
	With bounteous promise gay
	Of hotter months, that bring
	The full perfected day;
	
	To touch with richest gold
	The ripe fruit, ere it fall;
	And smile through cloud and cold
	On Winter’s funeral.
	
	Now with resplendent flood
	Gladden my waking eyes,
	And stir my slothful blood
	To joyous enterprise.
	
	Arise, arise, as when
	At first God said LIGHT BE!
	That He might make us men
	With eyes His light to see.
	
	Scatter the clouds that hide
	The face of heaven, and show
	Where sweet Peace doth abide,
	Where Truth and Beauty grow.
	
	Awaken, cheer, adorn,
	Invite, inspire, assure
	The joys that praise thy morn,
	The toil thy noons mature:
	
	And soothe the eve of day,
	That darkens back to death;
	O golden Sun, whose ray
	Our path illumineth!


34. THE NORTH WIND

	The north wind came up yesternight
	With the new year’s full moon,
	And rising as she gained her height,
	Grew to a tempest soon.
	Yet found he not on heaven’s face
	A task of cloud to clear;
	There was no speck that he might chase
	Off the blue hemisphere,
	Nor vapour from the land to drive:
	The frost-bound country held
	Nought motionable or alive,
	That ’gainst his wrath rebelled.
	There scarce was hanging in the wood
	A shrivelled leaf to reave;
	No bud had burst its swathing hood
	That he could rend or grieve:
	Only the tall tree-skeletons,
	Where they were shadowed all,
	Wavered a little on the stones,
	And on the white church-wall.
	
	--Like as an artist in his mood,
	Who reckons all as nought,
	So he may quickly paint his nude,
	Unutterable thought:
	So Nature in a frenzied hour
	By day or night will show
	Dim indications of the power
	That doometh man to woe.
	Ah, many have my visions been,
	And some I know full well:
	I would that all that I have seen
	Were fit for speech to tell.--
	
	And by the churchyard as I came,
	It seemed my spirit passed
	Into a land that hath no name,
	Grey, melancholy and vast;
	Where nothing comes: but Memory,
	The widowed queen of Death,
	Reigns, and with fixed, sepulchral eye
	All slumber banisheth.
	Each grain of writhen dust, that drapes
	That sickly, staring shore,
	Its old chaotic change of shapes
	Remembers evermore.
	And ghosts of cities long decayed
	And ruined shrines of Fate
	Gather the paths, that Time hath made
	Foolish and desolate.
	
	Nor winter there hath hope of spring,
	Nor the pale night of day,
	Since the old king with scorpion sting
	Hath done himself away.
	
	
	The morn was calm; the wind’s last breath
	Had fal’n: in solemn hush
	The golden moon went down beneath
	The dawning’s crimson flush.


35. NORTH WIND IN OCTOBER

	In the golden glade the chestnuts are fallen all;
	From the sered boughs of the oak the acorns fall:
	The beech scatters her ruddy fire;
	The lime hath stripped to the cold,
	And standeth naked above her yellow attire:
	The larch thinneth her spire
	To lay the ways of the wood with cloth of gold.
	
	Out of the golden-green and white Of the brake the fir-trees stand upright
	In the forest of flame, and wave aloft
	To the blue of heaven their blue-green tuftings soft.
	
	But swiftly in shuddering gloom the splendours fail,
	As the harrying North-wind beareth
	A cloud of skirmishing hail
	The grieved woodland to smite:
	In a hurricane through the trees he teareth,
	Raking the boughs and the leaves rending,
	And whistleth to the descending
	Blows of his icy flail.
	Gold and snow he mixeth in spite,
	And whirleth afar; as away on his winnowing flight
	He passeth, and all again for ahile is bright.


36. NOVEMBER

	The lonely season in lonely lands, when fled
	Are half the birds, and mists lie low, and the sun
	Is rarely seen, nor strayeth far from his bed;
	The short days pass unwelcomed one by one.
	
	Out by the ricks the mantled engine stands
	Crestfallen, deserted,--for now all hands
	Are told to the plough,--and ere it is dawn appear
	The teams following and crossing far and near,
	As hour by hour they broaden the brown bands
	Of the striped fields; and behind them firk and prance
	The heavy rooks, and daws grey-pated dance:
	As awhile, surmounting a crest, in sharp outline
	(A miniature of toil, a gem’s design,)
	They are pictured, horses and men, or now near by
	Above the lane they shout lifting the share,
	By the trim hedgerow bloom’d with purple air;
	Where, under the thorns, dead leaves in huddle lie
	Packed by the gales of Autumn, and in and out
	The small wrens glide
	With a happy note of cheer,
	And yellow amorets flutter above and about,
	Gay, familiar in fear.
	
	And now, if the night shall be cold, across the sky
	Linnets and twites, in small flocks helter-skelter,
	All the afternoon to the gardens fly,
	From thistle-pastures hurrying to gain the shelter
	Of American rhododendron or cherry-laurel:
	And here and there, near chilly setting of sun,
	In an isolated tree a congregation
	Of starlings chatter and chide,
	Thickset as summer leaves, in garrulous quarrel:
	Suddenly they hush as one,--
	The tree top springs,--
	And off, with a whirr of wings,
	They fly by the score
	To the holly-thicket, and there with myriads more
	Dispute for the roosts; and from the unseen nation
	A babel of tongues, like running water unceasing,
	Makes live the wood, the flocking cries increasing,
	Wrangling discordantly, incessantly,
	While falls the night on them self-occupied;
	The long dark night, that lengthens slow,
	Deepening with Winter to starve grass and tree,
	And soon to bury in snow
	The Earth, that, sleeping ’neath her frozen stole,
	Shall dream a dream crept from the sunless pole
	Of how her end shall be.


37. ON A DEAD CHILD

	Perfect little body, without fault or stain on thee, 
	With promise of strength and manhood full and fair! 
	Though cold and stark and bare, 
	The bloom and the charm of life doth awhile remain on thee. 
	
	Thy mother’s treasure wert thou;--alas! no longer 
	To visit her heart with wondrous joy; to be 
	Thy father’s pride;--ah, he 
	Must gather his faith together, and his strength make stronger. 
	
	To me, as I move thee now in the last duty, 
	Dost thou with a turn or gesture anon respond; 
	Startling my fancy fond 
	With a chance attitude of the head, a freak of beauty. 
	
	Thy hand clasps, as ’twas wont, my finger, and holds it: 
	But the grasp is the clasp of Death, heartbreaking and stiff; 
	Yet feels to my hand as if 
	’Twas still thy will, thy pleasure and trust that enfolds it. 
	
	So I lay thee there, thy sunken eyelids closing,-- 
	Go lie thou there in thy coffin, thy last little bed!-- 
	Propping thy wise, sad head, 
	Thy firm, pale hands across thy chest disposing. 
	
	So quiet! doth the change content thee?--Death, whither hath he taken thee? 
	To a world, do I think, that rights the disaster of this? 
	The vision of which I miss, 
	Who weep for the body, and wish but to warm thee and awaken thee? 
	
	Ah! little at best can all our hopes avail us 
	To lift this sorrow, or cheer us, when in the dark, 
	Unwilling, alone we embark, 
	And the things we have seen and have known and have heard of, fail us. 


38. THE PALM WILLOW

	See, whirling snow sprinkles the starvèd fields,
	   The birds have stayed to sing;
	No covert yet their fairy harbour yields.
	      When cometh Spring?
	Ah! in their tiny throats what songs unborn
	      Are quenched each morn.
	
	The lenten lilies, through the frost that push,
	   Their yellow heads withhold:
	The woodland willow stands a lonely bush
	      Of nebulous gold;
	There the Spring-goddess cowers in faint attire
	      Of frightened fire.


39. PATER FILIO

	Sense with keenest edge unusèd, 
	Yet unsteel’d by scathing fire; 
	Lovely feet as yet unbruisèd 
	On the ways of dark desire; 
	Sweetest hope that lookest smiling
	O’er the wilderness defiling! 
	
	Why such beauty, to be blighted 
	By the swarm of foul destruction? 
	Why such innocence delighted, 
	When sin stalks to thy seduction? 
	All the litanies e’er chaunted 
	Shall not keep thy faith undaunted. 
	
	I have pray’d the sainted Morning 
	To unclasp her hands to hold thee; 
	From resignful Eve’s adorning 
	Stol’n a robe of peace to enfold thee; 
	With all charms of man’s contriving 
	Arm’d thee for thy lonely striving. 
	
	Me too once unthinking Nature, 
	--Whence Love’s timeless mockery took me,-- 
	Fashion’d so divine a creature, 
	Yea, and like a beast forsook me. 
	I forgave, but tell the measure 
	Of her crime in thee, my treasure.


40. A ROBIN

	Flame-throated robin on the topmost bough
	Of the leafless oak, what singest thou?
	   Hark! he telleth how--
	’Spring is coming now; Spring is coming now.
	
	Now ruddy are the elm-tops against the blue sky,
	The pale larch donneth her jewelry;
	   Red fir and black fir sigh,
	And I am lamenting the year gone by.
	
	The bushes where I nested are all cut down,
	They are felling the tall trees one by one,
	   And my mate is dead and gone,
	In the winter she died and left me lone.
	
	She lay in the thicket where I fear to go;
	For when the March-winds after the snow
	   The leaves away did blow,
	She was not there, and my heart is woe:
	
	And sad is my song, when I begin to sing,
	As I sit in the sunshine this merry spring:
	   Like a withered leaf I cling
	To the white oak-bough, while the wood doth ring.
	
	Spring is coming now, the sun again is gay;
	Each day like a last spring’s happy day.’--
	   Thus sang he; then from his spray
	He saw me listening and flew away.


41. THE SCREAMING TARN

	The saddest place that e’er I saw
	Is the deep tarn above the inn
	That crowns the mountain-road, whereby
	One southward bound his way must win.
	
	Sunk on the table of the ridge
	From its deep shores is nought to see:
	The unresting wind lashes and chills
	Its shivering ripples ceaselessly.
	
	Three sides ’tis banked with stones aslant,
	And down the fourth the rushes grow,
	And yellow sedge fringing the edge
	With lengthen’d image all arow.
	
	’Tis square and black, and on its face
	When noon is still, the mirror’d sky
	Looks dark and further from the earth
	Than when you gaze at it on high.
	
	At mid of night, if one be there,
	--So say the people of the hill--
	A fearful shriek of death is heard,
	One sudden scream both loud and shrill.
	
	And some have seen on stilly nights,
	And when the moon was clear and round,
	Bubbles which to the surface swam
	And burst as if they held the sound.--
	
	’Twas in the days ere hapless Charles
	Losing his crown had lost his head,
	This tale is told of him who kept
	The inn upon the watershed:
	
	He was a lowbred ruin’d man
	Whom lawless times set free from fear:
	One evening to his house there rode
	A young and gentle cavalier.
	
	With curling hair and linen fair
	And jewel-hilted sword he went;
	The horse he rode he had ridden far,
	And he was with his journey spent.
	
	He asked a lodging for the night,
	His valise from his steed unbound,
	He let none bear it but himself
	And set it by him on the ground.
	
	‘Here’s gold or jewels,’ thought the host,
	‘That’s carrying south to find the king.’
	He chattered many a loyal word,
	And scraps of royal airs gan sing.
	
	His guest thereat grew more at ease
	And o’er his wine he gave a toast,
	But little ate, and to his room
	Carried his sack behind the host.
	
	‘Now rest you well,’ the host he said,
	But of his wish the word fell wide;
	Nor did he now forget his son
	Who fell in fight by Cromwell’s side.
	
	Revenge and poverty have brought
	Full gentler heart than his to crime;
	And he was one by nature rude,
	Born to foul deeds at any time.
	
	With unshod feet at dead of night
	In stealth he to the guest-room crept,
	Lantern and dagger in his hand,
	And stabbed his victim while he slept.
	
	But as he struck a scream there came,
	A fearful scream so loud and shrill:
	He whelm’d the face with pillows o’er,
	And lean’d till all had long been still.
	
	Then to the face the flame he held
	To see there should no life remain:--
	When lo! his brutal heart was quell’d:
	’Twas a fair woman he had slain.
	
	The tan upon her face was paint,
	The manly hair was torn away,
	Soft was the breast that he had pierced;
	Beautiful in her death she lay.
	
	His was no heart to faint at crime,
	Tho’ half he wished the deed undone.
	He pulled the valise from the bed
	To find what booty he had won.
	
	He cut the straps, and pushed within
	His murderous fingers to their theft.
	A deathly sweat came o’er his brow,
	He had no sense nor meaning left.
	
	He touched not gold, it was not cold,
	It was not hard, it felt like flesh.
	He drew out by the curling hair
	A young man’s head, and murder’d fresh;
	
	A young man’s head, cut by the neck.
	But what was dreader still to see,
	Her whom he had slain he saw again,
	The twain were like as like can be.
	
	Brother and sister if they were,
	Both in one shroud they now were wound,--
	Across his back and down the stair,
	Out of the house without a sound.
	
	He made his way unto the tarn,
	The night was dark and still and dank;
	The ripple chuckling neath the boat
	Laughed as he drew it to the bank.
	
	Upon the bottom of the boat
	He laid his burden flat and low,
	And on them laid the square sandstones
	That round about the margin go.
	
	Stone upon stone he weighed them down,
	Until the boat would hold no more;
	The freeboard now was scarce an inch:
	He stripp’d his clothes and push’d from shore.
	
	All naked to the middle pool
	He swam behind in the dark night;
	And there he let the water in
	And sank his terror out of sight.
	
	He swam ashore, and donn’d his dress,
	And scraped his bloody fingers clean;
	Ran home and on his victim’s steed
	Mounted, and never more was seen.
	
	But to a comrade ere he died
	He told his story guess’d of none:
	So from his lips the crime returned
	To haunt the spot where it was done.


42. SINCE WE LOVED

	Since we loved,--(the earth that shook
	As we kissed, fresh beauty took)--
	Love hath been as poets paint,
	Life as heaven is to a saint;
	
	All my joys my hope excel,
	All my work hath prosper’d well,
	All my songs have happy been,
	O my love, my life, my queen.


43. SO SWEET LOVE SEEMED THAT APRIL MORN

	So sweet love seemed that April morn,
	When first we kissed beside the thorn,
	So strangely sweet, it was not strange
	We thought that love could never change.
	
	But I can tell--let truth be told--
	That love will change in growing old;
	Though day by day is naught to see,
	So delicate his motions be.
	
	And in the end ‘twill come to pass
	Quite to forget what once he was,
	Nor even in fancy to recall
	The pleasure that was all in all.
	
	His little spring, that sweet we found,
	So deep in summer floods is drowned,
	I wonder, bathed in joy complete,
	How love so young could be so sweet.


44. THE SOUTH WIND

	The south wind rose at dusk of the winter day,
	The warm breath of the western sea
	Circling wrapp’d the isle with his cloke of cloud,
	And it now reach’d even to me, at dusk of the day,
	And moan’d in the branches aloud:
	While here and there, in patches of dark space,
	A star shone forth from its heavenly place,
	As a spark that is borne in the smoky chase;
	And, looking up, there fell on my face--
	Could it be drops of rain
	Soft as the wind, that fell on my face?
	Gossamers light as threads of the summer dawn,
	Suck’d by the sun from midmost calms of the main,
	From groves of coral islands secretly drawn,
	O’er half the round of earth to be driven,
	Now to fall on my face
	In silky skeins spun from the mists of heaven.
	
	Who art thou, in wind and darkness and soft rain
	Thyself that robest, that bendest in sighing pines
	To whisper thy truth? that usest for signs
	A hurried glimpse of the moon, the glance of a star
	In the rifted sky?
	Who art thou, that with thee I
	Woo and am wooed?
	That robing thyself in darkness and soft rain
	Choosest my chosen solitude,
	Coming so far
	To tell thy secret again,
	As a mother her child, in her folding arm
	Of a winter night by a flickering fire,
	Telleth the same tale o’er and o’er
	With gentle voice, and I never tire,
	So imperceptibly changeth the charm,
	As Love on buried ecstasy buildeth his tower,
	--Like as the stem that beareth the flower
	By trembling is knit to power;--
	Ah! long ago
	In thy first rapture I renounced my lot,
	The vanity, the despondency and the woe,
	And seeking thee to know
	Well was ’t for me, and evermore
	I am thine, I know not what.
	
	For me thou seekest ever, me wondering a day
	In the eternal alternations, me
	Free for a stolen moment of chance
	To dream a beautiful dream
	In the everlasting dance
	Of speechless worlds, the unsearchable scheme,
	To me thou findest the way,
	Me and whomsoe’er
	I have found my dream to share
	Still with thy charm encircling; even to-night
	To me and my love in darkness and soft rain
	Under the sighing pines thou comest again,
	And staying our speech with mystery of delight,
	Of the kiss that I give a wonder thou makest,
	And the kiss that I take thou takest.


45. THE STORM IS OVER

	The storm is over, the land hushes to rest:
	The tyrannous wind, its strength fordone,
	Is fallen back in the west
	To couch with the sinking sun.
	The last clouds fare
	With fainting speed, and their thin streamers fly
	In melting drifts of the sky.
	Already the birds in the air
	Appear again; the rooks return to their haunt,
	And one by one,
	Proclaiming aloud their care,
	Renew their peaceful chant.
	
	Torn and shattered the trees their branches again reset,
	They trim afresh the fair
	Few green and golden leaves withheld from the storm,
	And awhile will be handsome yet.
	To-morrow’s sun shall caress
	Their remnant of loveliness:
	In quiet days for a time
	Sad Autumn lingering warm
	Shall humour their faded prime.
	
	But ah! the leaves of summer that lie on the ground!
	What havoc! The laughing timbrels of June,
	That curtained the birds’ cradles, and screened their song,
	That sheltered the cooing doves at noon,
	Of airy fans the delicate throng,--
	Torn and scattered around:
	Far out afield they lie,
	In the watery furrows die,
	In grassy pools of the flood they sink and drown,
	Green-golden, orange, vermilion, golden and brown,
	The high year’s flaunting crown
	Shattered and trampled down.
	
	The day is done: the tired land looks for night:
	She prays to the night to keep
	In peace her nerves of delight:
	While silver mist upstealeth silently,
	And the broad cloud driving moon in the clear sky
	Lifts o’er the firs her shining shield,
	And in her tranquil light
	Sleep falls on forest and field.
	Sée! sléep hath fallen: the trees are asleep:
	The night is come. The land is wrapt in sleep.


46. THE SUMMER TREES

	The summer trees are tempest-torn,
	The hills are wrapped in a mantle wide
	Of folding rain by the mad wind borne
	   Across the country side.
	
	His scourge of fury is lashing down
	The delicate-rankèd golden corn,
	That never more shall rear its crown
	   And curtsey to the morn.
	
	There shews no care in heaven to save
	Man’s pitiful patience, or provide
	A season for the season’s slave,
	   Whose trust hath toiled and died.
	
	So my proud spirit in me is sad,
	A wreck of fairer fields to mourn,
	The ruin of golden hopes she had,
	   My delicate-rankèd corn.


47. THE SUMMER-HOUSE ON THE MOUND

	How well my eyes remember the dim path!
	My homing heart no happier playground hath.
	I need not close my lids but it appears
	Through the bewilderment of forty years
	To tempt my feet, my childish feet, between
	Its leafy walls, beneath its arching green;
	Fairer than dream of sleep, than Hope more fair
	Leading to dreamless sleep her sister Care.
	
	There grew two fellow limes, two rising trees,
	Shadowing the lawn, the summer haunt of bees,
	Whose stems, engraved with many a russet scar
	From the spear-hurlings of our mimic war,
	Pillar’d the portico to that wide walk,
	A mossy terrace of the native chalk
	Fashion’d, that led thro’ the dark shades around
	Straight to the wooden temple on the mound.
	There live the memories of my early days,
	There still with childish heart my spirit plays;
	Yea, terror-stricken by the fiend despair
	When she hath fled me, I have found her there;
	And there ’tis ever noon, and glad suns bring
	Alternate days of summer and of spring,
	With childish thought, and childish faces bright,
	And all unknown save but the hour’s delight.
	
	High on the mound the ivied arbour stood,
	A dome of straw upheld on rustic wood:
	Hidden in fern the steps of the ascent,
	Whereby unto the southern front we went,
	And from the dark plantation climbing free,
	Over a valley look’d out on the sea.
	That sea is ever bright and blue, the sky
	Serene and blue, and ever white ships lie
	High on the horizon steadfast in full sail,
	Or nearer in the roads pass within hail,
	Of naked brigs and barques that windbound ride
	At their taut cables heading to the tide.
	
	There many an hour I have sat to watch; nay, now
	The brazen disk is cold against my brow,
	And in my sight a circle of the sea
	Enlarged to swiftness, where the salt waves flee,
	And ships in stately motion pass so near
	That what I see is speaking to my ear:
	I hear the waves dash and the tackle strain,
	The canvas flap, the rattle of the chain
	That runs out thro’ the hawse, the clank of the winch
	Winding the rusty cable inch by inch,
	Till half I wonder if they have no care,
	Those sailors, that my glass is brought to bear
	On all their doings, if I vex them not
	On every petty task of their rough lot
	Prying and spying, searching every craft
	From painted truck to gunnel, fore and aft,--
	Thro’ idle Sundays as I have watch’d them lean
	Long hours upon the rail, or neath its screen
	Prone on the deck to lie outstretch’d at length,
	Sunk in renewal of their wearied strength.
	
	But what a feast of joy to me, if some
	Fast-sailing frigate to the Channel come
	Back’d here her topsail, or brought gently up
	Let from her bow the splashing anchor drop,
	By faint contrary wind stay’d in her cruise,
	The _Phaethon_ or dancing _Arethuse_,
	Or some immense three-decker of the line,
	Romantic as the tale of Troy divine;
	Ere yet our iron age had doom’d to fall
	The towering freeboard of the wooden wall,
	And for the engines of a mightier Mars
	Clipp’d their wide wings, and dock’d their soaring spars.
	The gale that in their tackle sang, the wave
	That neath their gilded galleries dasht so brave
	Lost then their merriment, nor look to play
	With the heavy-hearted monsters of to-day.
	
	One noon in March upon that anchoring ground
	Came Napier’s fleet unto the Baltic bound:
	Cloudless the sky and calm and blue the sea,
	As round Saint Margaret’s cliff mysteriously,
	Those murderous queens walking in Sabbath sleep
	Glided in line upon the windless deep:
	For in those days was first seen low and black
	Beside the full-rigg’d mast the strange smoke-stack,
	And neath their stern revolv’d the twisted fan.
	Many I knew as soon as I might scan,
	The heavy _Royal George_, the _Acre_ bright,
	The _Hogue_ and _Ajax_, and could name aright
	Others that I remember now no more;
	But chief, her blue flag flying at the fore,
	With fighting guns a hundred thirty and one,
	The Admiral ship _The Duke of Wellington_,
	Whereon sail’d George, who in her gig had flown
	The silken ensign by our sisters sewn.
	The iron Duke himself,--whose soldier fame
	To England’s proudest ship had given her name,
	And whose white hairs in this my earliest scene
	Had scarce more honour’d than accustom’d been,--
	Was two years since to his last haven past:
	I had seen his castle-flag to fall half-mast
	One morn as I sat looking on the sea,
	When thus all England’s grief came first to me,
	Who hold my childhood favour’d that I knew
	So well the face that won at Waterloo.
	
	But now ’tis other wars, and other men;--
	The year that Napier sail’d, my years were ten--
	Yea, and new homes and loves my heart hath found:
	A priest has there usurped the ivied mound,
	The bell that call’d to horse calls now to prayers,
	And silent nuns tread the familiar stairs.
	Within the peach-clad walls that old outlaw,
	The Roman wolf, scratches with privy paw.


48. THE TESTAMENT OF BEAUTY

	I
	
	Man’s Reason is in such deep insolvency to sense,
	that tho’ she guide his highest flight heav’nward, and teach him
	dignity morals manners and human comfort,
	she can delicatly and dangerously bedizen
	the rioting joys that fringe the sad pathways of Hell.
	Not without alliance of the animal senses
	hath she any miracle: Lov’st thou in the blithe hour
	of April dawns--nay marvelest thou not--to hear
	the ravishing music that the small birdës make
	in garden or woodland, rapturously heralding
	the break of day; when the first lark on high hath warn’d
	the vigilant robin already of the sun’s approach,
	and he on slender pipe calleth the nesting tribes
	to awake and fill and thrill their myriad-warbling throats
	praising life’s God, untill the blisful revel grow
	in wild profusion unfeign’d to such a hymn as man
	hath never in temple or grove pour’d to the Lord of heav’n?
	      Hast thou then thought that all this ravishing music,
	that stirreth so thy heart, making thee dream of things
	illimitable unsearchable and of heavenly import,
	is but a light disturbance of the atoms of air,
	whose jostling ripples, gather’d within the ear, are tuned
	to resonant scale, and thence by the enthron’d mind received
	on the spiral stairway of her audience chamber
	as heralds of high spiritual significance?
	and that without thine ear, sound would hav no report.
	Nature hav no music; nor would ther be for thee
	any better melody in the April woods at dawn
	than what an old stone-deaf labourer, lying awake
	o’night in his comfortless attic, might perchance
	be aware of, when the rats run amok in his thatch?
	      Now since the thoughtless birds not only act and enjoy
	this music, but to their offspring teach it with care,
	handing on those small folk-songs from father to son
	in such faithful tradition that they are familiar
	unchanging to the changeful generations of men--
	and year by year, listening to himself the nightingale
	as amorous of his art as of his brooding mate
	practiseth every phrase of his espousal lay,
	and still provoketh envy of the lesser songsters
	with the same notes that woke poetic eloquence
	alike in Sophocles and the sick heart of Keats--
	see then how deeply seated is the urgence whereto
	Bach and Mozart obey’d, or those other minstrels
	who pioneer’d for us on the marches of heav’n
	and paid no heed to wars that swept the world around,
	nor in their homes wer more troubled by cannon-roar
	than late the small birds wer, that nested and carol’d
	upon the devastated battlefields of France.
	      Birds are of all animals the nearest to men
	for that they take delight in both music and dance,
	and gracefully schooling leisure to enliven life
	wer the earlier artists: moreover in their airy flight
	(which in its swiftness symboleth man’s soaring thought)
	they hav no rival but man, and easily surpass
	in their free voyaging his most desperate daring,
	altho’ he hath fed and sped his ocean-ships with fire;
	and now, disturbing me as I write, I hear on high
	his roaring airplanes, and idly raising my head
	see them there; like a migratory flock of birds
	that rustle southward from the cold fall of the year
	in order’d phalanx--so the thin-rankt squadrons ply,
	til sound and sight failing me they are lost in the clouds.
	
	Time eateth away at many an old delusion,
	yet with civilization delusions make head;
	the thicket of the people wil take furtiv fire
	from irresponsible catchwords of live ideas,
	      sudden as a gorse-bush from the smouldering end
	of any loiterer’s match-splint, which, unless trodden out
	afore it spredd, or quell’d with wieldy threshing-rods
	wil burn ten years of planting with all last year’s ricks
	and blacken a countryside. ’Tis like enough that men
	ignorant of fire and poison should be precondemn’d
	to sudden deaths and burnings, but ’tis mightily
	to the reproach of Reason that she cannot save
	nor guide the herd; that minds who else wer fit to rule
	must win to power by flattery and pretence, and so
	by spiritual dishonesty in their flurried reign
	confirm the disrepute of all authority--
	but only in sackcloth can the Muse speak of such things.
	
	
	II
	
	The Spartan General Brasidas, the strenuous man,
	who earn’d historic favour from his conquer’d foe,
	once caught a mouse foraging in his messbasket
	among the figs, but when it bit him let it go,
	praising its show of fight in words that Plutarch judged
	worth treasuring; and since I redd the story at school
	unto this hour I hav never thought of Brasidas
	and cannot hear his name, but that I straightway see
	a table and an arm’d man smiling with hand outstretch’d
	above a little mouse that is scampering away.
	      Why should this thing so hold me? and why do I welcome now
	the tiny beast, that hath come running up to me
	as if here in my cantos he had spied a crevice,
	and counting on my friendship would make it his home?
	      ’Tis such a pictur as must by mere beauty of fitness
	convince natural feeling with added comfort.
	The soldier seeth the instinct of Selfhood in the mouse
	to be the same impulse that maketh virtue in him.
	For Brasidas held that courage ennobleth man,
	and from unworth redeemeth, and that folk who shrink
	from ventur of battle in self-defence are thereby doom’d
	to slavery and extinction: and so this mouse, albeit
	its little teeth had done him a petty hurt, deserved
	liberty for its courage, and found grace in man.
	
	
	What is Beauty? saith my sufferings then.--I answer
	the lover and poet in my loose alexandrines:
	Beauty is the highest of all these occult influences,
	the quality of appearances that thru’ the sense
	wakeneth spiritual emotion in the mind of man:
	And Art, as it createth new forms of beauty,
	awakeneth new ideas that advance the spirit
	in the life of Reason to the wisdom of God.
	But highest Art must be as rare as nativ faculty is
	and her surprise of magic winneth favor of men
	more than her inspiration: most are led away
	by fairseeming pretences, which being wrought for gain
	pursue the ephemeral fashion that assureth it;
	and their thin influences are of the same low grade
	as the unaccomplish’d forms; their poverty is exposed
	when they would stake their charm on ethic excellence;
	for then weak simulations of virtues appear,
	such as convention approveth, but not Virtue itself,
	tho’ not void of all good: and (as I read) ’twas this
	that Benvenuto intended, saying that not only
	Virtue was memorable but things so truly done
	that they wer like to Virtue; and thus prefaced his book,
	thinking to justify both himself and his works.
	      The authority of Reason therefor relieth at last
	hereon--that her discernment of spiritual things,
	the ideas of Beauty, is her conscience of instinct
	upgrown in her (as she unto conscience of all
	upgrew from lower to higher) to conscience of Beauty
	judging itself by its own beauteous judgment.
	
	
	III
	
	How was November’s melancholy endear’d to me
	in the effigy of plowteams following and recrossing
	patiently the desolat landscape from dawn to dusk,
	as the slow-creeping ripple of their single furrow
	submerged the sodden litter of summer’s festival!
	They are fled, those gracious teams; high on the headland now
	squatted, a roaring engin toweth to itself
	a beam of bolted shares, that glideth to and fro
	combing the stubbled glebe: and agriculture here,
	blotting out with such daub so rich a pictur of grace,
	hath lost as much of beauty as it hath saved in toil.
	      Again where reapers, bending to the ripen’d corn,
	were wont to scythe in rank and step with measured stroke,
	a shark-tooth’d chariot rampeth biting a broad way,
	and, jerking its high swindging arms around in the air,
	swoopeth the swath. Yet this queer Pterodactyl is well,
	that in the sinister torpor of the blazing day
	clicketeth in heartless mockery of swoon and sweat,
	as ’twer the salamandrine voice of all parch’d things:
	and the dry grasshopper wondering knoweth his God.
	
	
	IV 
	
	Beauty, the eternal Spouse of the Wisdom of God
	and Angel of his Presence thru’ all creation,
	fashioning her new love-realm in the mind of man,
	attempteth every mortal child with influences
	of her divine supremacy . . . ev’n as in a plant
	when the sap mounteth secretly and its wintry stalk
	breaketh out in the prolific miracle of Spring,
	or as the red blood floodeth into a beating heart
	to build the animal body comely and strong; so she
	in her transcendant rivalry would flush his spirit
	with pleasurable ichor of heaven: and where she hath found
	responsiv faculty in some richly favour’d soul--
	L’anima vaga delle cose belle, as saith
	the Florentine,--she wil inaugurate her feast
	of dedication, and even in thatt earliest onset,
	when yet infant Desire hath neither goal nor clue
	to fix the dream, ev’n then, altho’ it graspeth nought
	and passeth in its airy vision away, and dieth
	out of remembrance, ’tis in its earnest of life
	and dawn of bliss purer and hath less of earthly tinge
	than any other after-attainment of the understanding:
	for all man’s knowledge kenneth also of toil and flaw
	and even his noblest works, tho’ they illume the dark
	with individual consummation, are cast upon
	by the irrelevant black shadows of time and fate.
	
	Repudiation of pleasur is a reason’d folly
	of imperfection. Ther is no motiv can rebate
	or decompose the intrinsic joy of activ life,
	whereon all function whatsoever in man is based.
	Consider how this mortal sensibility
	hath a wide jurisdiction of range in all degrees,
	from mountainous gravity to imperceptible
	faintest tenuities:--The imponderable fragrance
	of my window-jasmin, that from her starry cup
	of red-stemm’d ivory invadeth my being,
	as she floateth it forth, and wantoning unabash’d
	asserteth her idea in the omnipotent blaze
	of the tormented sun-ball, checquering the grey wall
	with shadow-tracery of her shapely fronds; this frail
	unique spice of perfumery, in which she holdeth
	monopoly by royal licence of Nature,
	is but one of a thousand angelic species,
	original beauties that win conscience in man:
	a like marvel hangeth o’er the rosebed, and where
	the honeysuckle escapeth in serpentine sprays
	from its dark-cloister’d clamber thru’ the old holly-bush,
	spreading its joybunches to finger at the sky
	in revel above rivalry. Legion is their name;
	Lily-of-the-vale, Violet, Verbena, Mignonette,
	Hyacinth, Heliotrope, Sweet-briar, Pinks and Peas,
	Lilac and Wallflower, or such white and purple blooms
	that sleep i’ the sun, and their heavy perfumes withhold
	to mingle their heart’s incense with the wonder-dreams,
	love-laden prayers and reveries that steal forth from earth,
	under the dome of night: and tho’ these blossomy breaths,
	that hav presumed the title of their gay genitors,
	enter but singly into our neighboring sense, that hath
	no panorama, yet the mind’s eye is not blind
	unto their multitudinous presences:--I know
	that if odour wer visible as color is, I’d see
	the summer garden aureoled in rainbow clouds,
	with such warfare of hues as a painter might choose
	to show his sunset sky or a forest aflame;
	while o’er the country-side the wide clover-pastures
	and the beanfields of June would wear a mantle, thick
	as when in late October, at the drooping of day
	the dark grey mist arising blotteth out the land
	with ghostly shroud. Now these and such-like influences
	of tender specialty must not--so fine they be--
	fall in neglect and all their loveliness be lost,
	being to the soul deep springs of happiness, and full
	of lovingkindness to the natural man, who is apt
	kindly to judge of good by comfortable effect.
	Thus all men ever hav judged the wholesomness of food
	from the comfort of body ensuing thereupon,
	whereby all animals retrieve their proper diet;
	but if when in discomfort ’tis for pleasant hope
	of health restored we swallow nauseous medicines,
	so mystics use asceticism, yea, and no man
	readier than they to assert eventual happiness
	to justify their conduct. Whence it is not strange
	(for so scientific minds in search of truth digest
	assimilable hypotheses) they should extend
	their pragmatism, and from their happiness deduce
	the very existence and the natur of God, and take
	religious consolation for the ground of faith:
	as if the pleasur of life wer the sign-manual
	of Nature when she set her hand to her covenant.
	      But man, vain of his Reason and thinking more to assure
	its independence, wil disclaim complicity
	with human emotion; and regarding his Mother
	deemeth it dutiful and nobler in honesty
	coldly to criticize than purblindly to love;
	and in pride of this quarrel he hath been led in the end
	to make distinction of kind ’twixt Pleasur and Happiness;
	observing truly enough how one may hav pleasure
	and yet miss happiness; but this warpeth the sense
	and common use of speech, since all tongues in the world
	call children and silly folk happy and sometimes ev’n brutes.
	      The name of happiness is but a wider term
	for the unalloy’d conditions of the Pleasur of Life,
	attendant on all function, and not to be deny’d
	to th’ soul, unless forsooth in our thought of nature
	spiritual is by definition unnatural.


49. THOU DIDST DELIGHT MY EYES

	Thou didst delight my eyes:
	Yet who am I? nor first
	Nor last nor best, that durst
	Once dream of thee for prize;
	Nor this the only time
	Thou shalt set love to rhyme.
	
	Thou didst delight my ear:
	Ah! little praise; thy voice
	Makes other hearts rejoice,
	Makes all ears glad that hear;
	And short my joy: but yet,
	O song, do not forget.
	
	For what wert thou to me?
	How shall I say? The moon,
	That poured her midnight noon
	Upon his wrecking sea;--
	A sail, that for a day
	Has cheered the castaway.


50. THE UPPER SKIES

	The upper skies are palest blue
	Mottled with pearl and fretted snow:
	With tattered fleece of inky hue
	Close overhead the storm-clouds go.
	
	Their shadows fly along the hill
	And o’er the crest mount one by one:
	The whitened planking of the mill
	Is now in shade and now in sun.


51. A VIGNETTE

	Among the meadows
	lightly going,
	With worship and joy
	my heart o’erflowing,
	
	Far from town
	and toil of living,
	To a holy day
	my spirit giving, . . .
	
	Thou tender flower,
	I kneel beside thee
	Wondering why God
	so beautified thee.--
	
	An answering thought
	within me springeth,
	A bloom of the mind
	her vision bringeth.
	
	Between the dim hill’s
	distant azure
	And flowery foreground
	of sparkling pleasure
	
	I see the company
	of figures sainted,
	For whom the picture
	of earth was painted.
	
	Those robèd seers
	who made man’s story
	The crown of Nature,
	Her cause his glory.
	
	They walk in the city
	which they have builded,
	The city of God
	from evil shielded:
	
	To them for canopy
	the vault of heaven,
	The flowery earth
	for carpet is given;
	
	Whereon I wander
	not unknowing,
	With worship and joy
	my heart o’erflowing.


52. A VILLAGER

	There was no lad handsomer than Willie was
	The day that he came to father’s house:
	There was none had an eye as soft an’ blue
	As Willie’s was, when he came to woo.
	
	To a labouring life though bound thee be,
	An’ I on my father’s ground live free,
	I’ll take thee, I said, for thy manly grace,
	Thy gentle voice an’ thy loving face.
	
	’Tis forty years now since we were wed:
	We are ailing an’ grey needs not to be said:
	But Willie’s eye is as blue an’ soft
	As the day when he wooed me in father’s croft.
	
	Yet changed am I in body an’ mind,
	For Willie to me has ne’er been kind:
	Merrily drinking an’ singing with the men
	He ’ud come home late six nights o’ the se’n.
	
	An’ since the children be grown an’ gone
	He ’as shunned the house an’ left me lone:
	An’ less an’ less he brings me in
	Of the little he now has strength to win.
	
	The roof lets through the wind an’ the wet,
	An’ master won’t mend it with us in ’s debt:
	An’ all looks every day more worn,
	An’ the best of my gowns be shabby an’ torn.
	
	No wonder if words hav’ a-grown to blows;
	That matters not while nobody knows:
	For love him I shall to the end of life,
	An’ be, as I swore, his own true wife.
	
	An’ when I am gone, he’ll turn, an’ see
	His folly an’ wrong, an’ be sorry for me:
	An’ come to me there in the land o’ bliss
	To give me the love I looked for in this.


53. THE VOICE OF NATURE

	I stand on the cliff and watch the veiled sun paling
	A silver field afar in the mournful sea,
	The scourge of the surf, and plaintive gulls sailing
	At ease on the gale that smites the shuddering lea:
	            Whose smile severe and chaste
	June never hath stirred to vanity, nor age defaced.
	In lofty thought strive, O spirit, for ever:
	In courage and strength pursue thine own endeavour.
	
	Ah! if it were only for thee, thou restless ocean
	Of waves that follow and roar, the sweep of the tides;
	Wer’t only for thee, impetuous wind, whose motion
	Precipitate all o’errides, and turns, nor abides:
	            For you sad birds and fair,
	Or only for thee, bleak cliff, erect in the air;
	Then well could I read wisdom in every feature,
	O well should I understand the voice of Nature.
	
	But far away, I think, in the Thames valley,
	The silent river glides by flowery banks:
	And birds sing sweetly in branches that arch an alley
	Of cloistered trees, moss-grown in their ancient ranks:
	            Where if a light air stray,
	’Tis laden with hum of bees and scent of may.
	Love and peace be thine, O spirit, for ever:
	Serve thy sweet desire: despise endeavour.
	
	And if it were only for thee, entrancèd river,
	That scarce dost rock the lily on her airy stem,
	Or stir a wave to murmur, or a rush to quiver;
	Wer’t but for the woods, and summer asleep in them:
	            For you my bowers green,
	My hedges of rose and woodbine, with walks between,
	Then well could I read wisdom in every feature,
	O well should I understand the voice of Nature.


54. THE WINDMILL

	The green corn waving in the dale,
	The ripe grass waving on the hill:
	I lean across the paddock pale
	And gaze upon the giddy mill.
	
	Its hurtling sails a mighty sweep
	Cut thro’ the air: with rushing sound
	Each strikes in fury down the steep,
	Rattles, and whirls in chase around.
	
	Beside his sacks the miller stands
	On high within the open door:
	A book and pencil in his hands,
	His grist and meal he reckoneth o’er.
	
	His tireless merry slave the wind
	Is busy with his work to-day:
	From whencesoe’er, he comes to grind;
	He hath a will and knows the way.
	
	He gives the creaking sails a spin,
	The circling millstones faster flee,
	The shuddering timbers groan within,
	And down the shoot the meal runs free.
	
	The miller giveth him no thanks,
	And doth not much his work o’erlook:
	He stands beside the sacks, and ranks
	The figures in his dusty book.


55. THE WINNOWERS

	Betwixt two billows of the downs
	The little hamlet lies,
	And nothing sees but the bald crowns
	Of the hills, and the blue skies.
	
	Clustering beneath the long descent
	And grey slopes of the wold,
	The red roofs nestle, oversprent
	With lichen yellow as gold.
	
	We found it in the mid-day sun
	Basking, what time of year
	The thrush his singing has begun,
	Ere the first leaves appear.
	
	High from his load a woodman pitched
	His faggots on the stack:
	Knee-deep in straw the cattle twitched
	Sweet hay from crib and rack:
	
	And from the barn hard by was borne
	A steady muffled din,
	By which we knew that threshèd corn
	Was winnowing, and went in.
	
	The sunbeams on the motey air
	Streamed through the open door,
	And on the brown arms moving bare,
	And the grain upon the floor.
	
	One turns the crank, one stoops to feed
	The hopper, lest it lack,
	One in the bushel scoops the seed,
	One stands to hold the sack.
	
	We watched the good grain rattle down,
	And the awns fly in the draught;
	To see us both so pensive grown
	The honest labourers laughed:
	
	Merry they were, because the wheat
	Was clean and plump and good,
	Pleasant to hand and eye, and meet
	For market and for food.
	
	It chanced we from the city were,
	And had not gat us free
	In spirit from the store and stir
	Of its immensity:
	
	But here we found ourselves again.
	Where humble harvests bring
	After much toil but little grain,
	’Tis merry winnowing.


56. WINTER NIGHTFALL

	The day begins to droop,--
	Its course is done:
	But nothing tells the place
	Of the setting sun.
	
	The hazy darkness deepens,
	And up the lane
	You may hear, but cannot see,
	The homing wain.
	
	An engine pants and hums
	In the farm hard by:
	Its lowering smoke is lost
	In the lowering sky.
	
	The soaking branches drip,
	And all night through
	The dropping will not cease
	In the avenue.
	
	A tall man there in the house
	Must keep his chair:
	He knows he will never again
	Breathe the spring air:
	
	His heart is worn with work;
	He is giddy and sick
	If he rise to go as far
	As the nearest rick:
	
	He thinks of his morn of life,
	His hale, strong years;
	And braves as he may the night
	Of darkness and tears.


57. A WINTER’S NIGHT

	A winter’s night with the snow about:
	’Twas silent within and cold without:
	Both father and mother to bed were gone:
	The son sat yet by the fire alone.
	
	He gazed on the fire, and dreamed again
	Of one that was now no more among men:
	As still he sat and never aware
	How close was the spirit beside his chair.
	
	Nay, sad were his thoughts, for he wept and said
	Ah, woe for the dead! ah, woe for the dead!
	How heavy the earth lies now on her breast,
	The lips that I kissed, and the hand I pressed.
	
	The spirit he saw not, he could not hear
	The comforting word she spake in his ear:
	His heart in the grave with her mouldering clay
	No welcome gave--and she fled away.