*** Joseph Brodsky (1940 - 1996)


1. AT A LECTURE

	Since mistakes are inevitable, I can easily be taken
	for a man standing before you in this room filled
	with yourselves. Yet in about an hour
	this will be corrected, at your and at my expense,
	and the place will be reclaimed by elemental particles
	free from the rigidity of a particular human shape
	or type of assembly. Some particles are still free. It’s not all dust.
	
	So my unwillingness to admit it’s I
	facing you now, or the other way around,
	has less to do with my modesty or solipsism
	than with my respect for the premises’ instant future,
	for those afore-mentioned free-floating particles
	settling upon the shining surface
	of my brain. Inaccessible to a wet cloth eager to wipe them off.
	
	The most interesting thing about emptiness
	is that it is preceded by fullness.
	The first to understand this were, I believe, the Greek
	gods, whose forte indeed was absence.
	Regard, then, yourselves as rehearsing perhaps for the divine encore,
	with me playing obviously to the gallery.
	We all act out of vanity. But I am in a hurry.
	
	Once you know the future, you can make it come
	earlier. The way it’s done by statues or by one’s furniture.
	Self-effacement is not a virtue
	but a necessity, recognised most often
	toward evening. Though numerically it is easier
	not to be me than not to be you. As the swan confessed
	to the lake: I don’t like myself. But you are welcome to my reflection.


2. BELFAST TUNE

	Here’s a girl from a dangerous town
	        She crops her dark hair short
	so that less of her has to frown
	        when someone gets hurt.
	
	She folds her memories like a parachute.
	        Dropped, she collects the peat
	and cooks her veggies at home: they shoot
	        here where they eat.
	
	Ah, there’s more sky in these parts than, say,
	        ground. Hence her voice’s pitch,
	and her stare stains your retina like a gray
	        bulb when you switch
	
	hemispheres, and her knee-length quilt
	        skirt’s cut to catch the squall,
	I dream of her either loved or killed
	        because the town’s too small.


3. CONSTANCY

	Constancy is an evolution of one’s living quarters into
	a thought: a continuation of a parallelogram or a rectangle
	by means--as Clausewitz would have put it--
	of the voice and, ultimately, the gray matter.
	Ah, shrunken to the size of a brain-cell parlor
	with a lampshade, an armoire in the “Slavic
	Glory” fashion, four studded chairs, a sofa,
	a bed, a bedside table with
	little medicine bottles left there standing like
	a kremlin or, better yet, manhattan.
	To die, to abandon a family, to go away for good,
	to change hemispheres, to let new ovals
	be painted into the square--the more
	volubly will the gray cell insist
	on its actual measurements, demanding
	daily sacrifice from the new locale,
	from the furniture, from the silhouette in a yellow
	dress; in the end--from your very self.
	A spider revels in shading especially the fifth corner.
	Evolution is not a species’
	adjustment to a new environment but one’s memories’
	triumph over reality, the ichthyosaurus pining
	for the amoeba, the slack vertebrae of a train
	thundering in the darkness, past
	the mussel shells, tightly shut for the night, with their
	spineless, soggy, pearl-shrouding contents.


4. DECEMBER 24, 1971

	When it’s Christmas we’re all of us magi.
	At the grocers’ all slipping and pushing.
	Where a tin of halvah, coffee-flavored,
	is the cause of a human assault-wave
	by a crowd heavy-laden with parcels:
	each one his own king, his own camel.
	
	Nylon bags, carrier bags, paper cones,
	caps and neckties all twisted up sideways.
	Reek of vodka and resin and cod,
	orange mandarins, cinnamon, apples.
	Floods of faces, no sign of a pathway
	toward Bethlehem, shut off by blizzard.
	
	And the bearers of moderate gifts
	leap on buses and jam all the doorways,
	disappear into courtyards that gape,
	though they know that there’s nothing inside there:
	not a beast, not a crib, nor yet her,
	round whose head gleams a nimbus of gold.
	
	Emptiness. But the mere thought of that
	brings forth lights as if out of nowhere.
	Herod reigns but the stronger he is,
	the more sure, the more certain the wonder.
	In the constancy of this relation
	is the basic mechanics of Christmas.
	
	That’s what they celebrate everywhere,
	for its coming push tables together.
	No demand for a star for a while,
	but a sort of good will touched with grace
	can be seen in all men from afar,
	and the shepherds have kindled their fires.
	
	Snow is falling: not smoking but sounding
	chimney pots on the roof, every face like a stain.
	Herod drinks. Every wife hides her child.
	He who comes is a mystery: features
	are not known beforehand, men’s hearts may
	not be quick to distinguish the stranger.
	
	But when drafts through the doorway disperse
	the thick mist of the hours of darkness
	and a shape in a shawl stands revealed,
	both a newborn and Spirit that’s Holy
	in your self you discover; you stare
	skyward, and it’s right there: a star.


5. THE END OF A BEAUTIFUL ERA

	Since the stern art of poetry calls for words, I, morose,
	deaf, and balding ambassador of a more or less
	    insignificant nation that’s stuck in this super
	power, wishing to spare my old brain,
	hand myself my own topcoat and head for the main
	    street: to purchase the evening paper.
	
	Wind disperses the foliage. The dimness of old bulbs in these
	sorry quarters, whose motto’s “The mirror will please,”
	    gives a sense of abundance supported by puddles.
	Even thieves here steal apples by scratching the amalgam first.
	Yet the feeling one gets, from one’s own sweet reflection--this feeling I’ve lost.
	      That’s what really puzzles.
	
	Everything in these parts is geared for winter: long dreams,
	prison walls, overcoats, bridal dresses of whiteness that seems
	    snowlike. Drinks. Kinds of soap matching dirt in dark corners.
	Sparrow vests, second hand of the watch round your wrist,
	puritanical mores, underwear. And, tucked in the violinists’
	    palms, old redwood hand warmers.
	
	This whole realm is just static. Imagining the output of lead
	and cast iron, and shaking your stupefied head,
	   you recall bayonets, Cossack whips of old power.
	Yet the eagles land like good lodestones on the scraps.
	Even wicker chairs here are built mostly with bolts and with nuts,
	   one is bound to discover.
	
	Only fish in the sea seem to know freedom’s price.
	Still, their muteness compels us to sit and devise
	    cashier booths of our own. And space rises like some bill of fare.
	Time’s invented by death. In its search for the objects, it deals
	with raw vegetables first That’s why cocks are so keen on the bells
	    chiming deafly somewhere.
	
	To exist in the Era of Deeds and to stay elevated, alert
	ain’t so easy, alas. Having raised a long skirt,
	    you will find not new wonders but what you expected.
	And it’s not that they play Lobachevsky’s ideas by ear,
	but the widened horizons should narrow somewhere, and here--
	    here’s the end of perspective.
	
	Either old Europe’s map has been swiped by the gents in plain clothes,
	or the famous five-sixths of remaining landmass has just lost
	    its poor infamous colleague, or a fairy casts spells over shabby
	me, who knows--but I cannot escape from this place;
	I pour wine for myself (service here’s a disgrace),
	    sip, and rub my old tabby.
	
	Thus the brain earned a slug, as a spot where an error occurred
	earns a good pointing finger. Or should I hit waterways, sort
	     of like Christ? Anyway, in these laudable quarters,
	eyes dumbfounded by ice and by booze
	will reproach you alike for whatever you choose:
	     traceless rails, traceless waters.
	
	Now let’s see what they say in the papers about lawsuits.
	“The condemned has been dealt with.” Having read this, a denizen puts
	    on his metal-rimmed glasses that help to relate it
	to a man lying flat, his face down, by the wall;
	though he isn’t asleep. Since dreams spurn a skull
	     that has been perforated.
	
	The keen-sightedness of our era takes root in the times
	which were short, in their blindness, of drawing clear lines
	    twixt those fallen from cradles and fallen from saddles.
	Though there are plenty of saucers, there is no one to turn tables with
	to subject you, poor Rurik, to a sensible quiz;
	    that’s what really saddens.
	
	The keen-sightedness of our days is the sort that befits the dead end
	whose concrete begs for spittle and not for a witty comment.
	   Wake up a dinosaur, not a prince, to recite you the moral!
	Birds have feathers for penning last words, though it’s better to ask.
	All the innocent head has in store for itself is an ax
	   plus the evergreen laurel.


6. THE FUNERAL OF BOBÓ

	1
	
	Bobó is dead, but don’t take off your hat. 
	You can’t explain why there’s no consolation. 
	We cannot pin a butterfly upon 
	the Admiralty spire--we’d only crush it. 
	The squares of windows no matter where 
	one looks on every side. And as reply 
	to “what happened?” you open up 
	an empty can: “Apparently, this did.” 
	Bobó is dead. Wednesday ends. 
	On streets devoid of spots to spend the night 
	it’s white, so white. Only the black water 
	in the night river does not retain the snow. 
	
	
	2
	
	Bobó is dead--a line containing grief. 
	The squares of windows, archways’ semicircle. 
	Such freezing frost that if one’s to be killed, 
	then let it be from firearms. 
	Farewell, Bobó, my beautiful Bobó. 
	My tear would suit sliced cheese. 
	We are too frail to follow after you, 
	nor are we strong enough to stay in place. 
	In heat-waves and in devastating cold 
	I know beforehand, your image will 
	not diminish--but quite to the contrary--
	in Rossi’s inimitable prospect. 
	
	3
	
	
	Bobó is dead. This is a feeling which can 
	be shared, but slippery like soap. 
	Today I dreamed that I was lying 
	upon my bed. And so it was in fact. 
	Tear off a page, correct the date: 
	the list of losses opens with a zero. 
	Dreams without Bobó suggest reality. 
	A square of air comes in the window vent. 
	Bobó is dead. And, one’s lips somewhat 
	apart, one wants to say “it shouldn’t be”. 
	No doubt it’s emptiness that follows death. 
	Both far more probable, and worse than Hell. 
	
	
	4
	
	You were everything. But because you are 
	dead now, my Bobó, you have become 
	nothing--more precisely, a glob of emptiness. 
	Which, if one considers it, is quite a lot. 
	Bobó is dead. On rounded eyes 
	the sight of the horizon is like a knife, 
	but neither Kiki nor Zaza, Bobó, 
	will take your place. That is impossible. 
	Thursday is coming. I believe in emptiness. 
	It’s quite like Hell there, only ----tier. 
	And the new Dante bends toward the page, 
	and on an empty spot he sets a word.


7. GALATEA ENCORE

	As though the mercury’s under its tongue, it won’t 
	talk. As though with the mercury in its sphincter, 
	immobile, by a leaf-coated pond 
	a statue stands white like a blight of winter. 
	After such snow, there is nothing indeed: the ins 
	and outs of centuries, pestered heather. 
	That’s what coming full circle means-- 
	when your countenance starts to resemble weather, 
	when Pygmalion’s vanished. And you are free 
	to cloud your folds, to bare the navel. 
	Future at last! That is, bleached debris 
	of a glacier amid the five-lettered “never.”
	Hence the routine of a goddess, nee 
	alabaster, that lets roving pupils gorge on 
	the heart of color and the temperature of the knee. 
	That’s what it looks like inside a virgin.


8. THE HAWK’S CRY IN AUTUMN

	Wind from the northwestern quarter is lifting him high above
	the dove-gray, crimson, umber, brown
	Connecticut Valley. Far beneath,
	chickens daintily pause and move
	unseen in the yard of the tumbledown
	farmstead, chipmunks blend with the heath.
	
	Now adrift on the airflow, unfurled, alone,
	all that he glimpses--the hills’ lofty, ragged
	ridges, the silver stream that threads
	quivering like a living bone
	of steel, badly notched with rapids,
	the townships like strings of beads
	
	strewn across New England. Having slid down to nil
	thermometers--those household gods in niches--
	freeze, inhibiting thus the fire
	of leaves and churches’ spires. Still,
	no churches for him. In the windy reaches,
	undreamt of by the most righteous choir,
	
	he soars in a cobalt-blue ocean, his beak clamped shut,
	his talons clutched tight into his belly
	--claws balled up like a sunken fist--
	sensing in each wisp of down the thrust
	from below, glinting back the berry
	of his eyeball, heading south-southeast
	
	to the Rio Grande, the Delta, the beech groves and farther still:
	to a nest hidden in the mighty groundswell
	of grass whose edges no fingers trust,
	sunk amid forest’s odors, filled
	with splinters of red-speckled eggshell,
	with a brother or a sister’s ghost.
	
	The heart overgrown with flesh, down, feather, wing,
	pulsing at feverish rate, nonstopping,
	propelled by internal heat and sense,
	the bird goes slashing and scissoring
	the autumnal blue, yet by the same swift token,
	enlarging it at the expense
	
	of its brownish speck, barely registering on the eye,
	a dot, sliding far above the lofty
	pine tree; at the expense of the empty look
	of that child, arching up at the sky,
	that couple that left the car and lifted
	their heads, that woman on the stoop.
	
	But the uprush of air is still lifting him
	higher and higher. His belly feathers
	feel the nibbling cold. Casting a downward gaze,
	he sees the horizon growing dim,
	he sees, as it were, the features
	of the first thirteen colonies whose
	
	chimneys all puff out smoke. Yet it’s their total within his sight
	that tells the bird of his elevation,
	of what altitude he’s reached this trip.
	What am I doing at such a height?
	He senses a mixture of trepidation
	and pride. Heeling over a tip
	
	of wing, he plummets down. But the resilient air
	bounces him back, winging up to glory,
	to the colorless icy plane.
	His yellow pupil darts a sudden glare
	of rage, that is, a mix of fury
	and terror. So once again
	
	he turns and plunges down. But as walls return
	rubber balls, as sins send a sinner to faith, or near,
	he’s driven upward this time as well!
	He! whose innards are still so warm!
	Still higher! Into some blasted ionosphere!
	That astronomically objective hell
	
	of birds that lacks oxygen, and where the milling stars
	play millet served from a plate or a crescent.
	What, for the bipeds, has always meant
	height, for the feathered is the reverse.
	Not with his puny brain but with shriveled air sacs
	he guesses the truth of it: it’s the end.
	
	And at this point he screams. From the hooklike beak
	there tears free of him and flies ad luminem
	the sound Erinyes make to rend
	souls: a mechanical, intolerable shriek,
	the shriek of steel that devours aluminum;
	“mechanical,” for it’s meant
	
	for nobody, for no living ears:
	not man’s, not yelping foxes’,
	not squirrels’ hurrying to the ground
	from branches; not for tiny field mice whose tears
	can’t be avenged this way, which forces
	them into their burrows. And only hounds
	
	lift up their muzzles. A piercing, high-pitched squeal,
	more nightmarish than the D-sharp grinding
	of the diamond cutting glass,
	slashes the whole sky across. And the world seems to reel
	for an instant, shuddering from this rending.
	For the warmth burns space in the highest as
	
	badly as some iron fence down here
	brands incautious gloveless fingers.
	We, standing where we are, exclaim
	“There!” and see far above the tear
	that is a hawk, and hear the sound that lingers
	in wavelets, a spider skein
	
	swelling notes in ripples across the blue vault of space
	whose lack of echo spells, especially in October,
	an apotheosis of pure sound.
	And caught in this heavenly patterned lace,
	starlike, spangled with hoarfrost powder,
	silver-clad, crystal-bound,
	
	the bird sails to the zenith, to the dark-blue high
	of azure. Through binoculars we foretoken
	him, a glittering dot, a pearl.
	We hear something ring out in the sky,
	like some family crockery being broken,
	slowly falling aswirl,
	
	yet its shards, as they reach our palms, don’t hurt
	but melt when handled. And in a twinkling
	once more one makes out curls, eyelets, strings,
	rainbowlike, multicolored, blurred
	commas, ellipses, spirals, linking
	heads of barley, concentric rings--
	
	the bright doodling pattern the feather once possessed,
	a map, now a mere heap of flying
	pale flakes that make a green slope appear
	white. And the children, laughing and brightly dressed,
	swarm out of doors to catch them, crying
	with a loud shout in English, “Winter's here!”


9. HISTORY OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

	 _The Sun’s in its orbit,
	 yet I feel morbid._
	
	Act 1
	
	_Prologue_
	
	Ladies and gentlemen and the day! 
	All ye made of sweet human clay! 
	Let me tell you: you are o’kay. 
	
	Our show is to start without much delay. 
	So let me inform you right away: 
	this is not a play but the end of the play 
	
	that has been on for some eighty years. 
	It received its boos and received its cheers. 
	It won’t last for long, one fears. 
	
	Men and machines lie to rest or rust. 
	Nothing arrives as quick as the Past. 
	What we’ll show you presently is the cast 
	
	of characters who have ceased to act. 
	Each of these lives has become a fact 
	from which you presumably can subtract 
	
	but to which you blissfully cannot add. 
	The consequences of that could be bad 
	for your looks or your blood. 
	
	For they are the cause, you are the effect. 
	because they lie flat, you are still erect. 
	Citizens! Don’t neglect 
	
	history! History holds the clue 
	to your taxes and to your flu, 
	to what comes out of the blue. 
	
	We’ll show you battlefields, bedrooms, labs, 
	sinking ships and escaping subs, 
	cradles, weddings, divorces, slabs. 
	
	Folks! The curtain’s about to rise! 
	What you’ll see won’t look like a Paradise. 
	Still, the Past may moisten a pair of eyes, 
	
	for its prices were lower than our sales, 
	for it was ruining cities: not blood cells; 
	for on the horizon it’s not taut sails 
	
	but the wind that fails. 
	
	
	1900. A quiet year, you bet. 
	True: none of you is alive as yet. 
	The ‘00’ stands for the lack of you. 
	Still, things are happening, quite a few. 
	In China, the Boxers are smashing whites. 
	In Russia, A. P. Chekhov writes. 
	In Italy, Floria Tosca screams. 
	Freud, in Vienna, interprets dreams. 
	The Impressionists paint, Rodin still sculpts. 
	In Africa, Boers grab the British scalps 
	or vice versa (who cares, my dear?). 
	And McKinley is re-elected here. 
	There are four great empires, three good democracies. 
	The rest of the world sports loin-cloths and moccasins, 
	speaking both figuratively and literally. 
	Upstaging “Umberto’s” in Little Italy, 
	in the big one Umberto the Ist’s shot dead. 
	(Not all that’s written on walls is read). 
	And marking the century’s real turn, 
	Friedrich Nietzsche dies, Louis Armstrong’s born 
	to refute the great Kraut’s unholy 
	“God is dead” with “Hello, Dolly.” 
	
	The man of the year, though, is an engineer. 
	John Browning is his name. 
	He’s patented something. So let us hear 
	about John’s claim to fame. 
	
	_( John Moses Browning )_
	
	“I looked at the calendar, and I saw 
	that there are a hundred years to go. 
	That made me a little nervous 
	for I thought of my neighbors. 
	I’ve multiplied them one hundred times: 
	it came to them being all over! 
	So I went to my study that looks out on limes 
	and invented this cute revolver!” 
	
	
	1901. A swell, modest time. 
	A T-bone steak is about a dime. 
	Queen Victoria dies; but then Australia 
	repeats her silhouette and, inter alia, 
	joins the Commonwealth. In the humid woods 
	of Tahiti, Gauguin paints his swarthy nudes. 
	In China, the Boxers take the rap. 
	Max Planck in his lab (not on his lap 
	yet) in studying radiation. 
	Verdi dies too. But our proud nation, 
	represented by Mrs.Disney, awards the world 
	with a kid by the name of Walt 
	who’ll animate the screen. Off screen, 
	the British launch their first submarine. 
	But it’s a cake-walk or a Strindberg play 
	or Freud’s “Psychopathology of Everyday 
	Life” that really are not to be missed! 
	And McKinley’s shot dead by an anarchist. 
	
	The man of the year is Signore Marconi. 
	He is an Italian, a Roman. 
	His name prophetically rhymes with “Sony”: 
	they have a few things in common. 
	
	_( Guglieimo Marconi )_
	
	“In a Catholic country where the sky is blue 
	and clouds look like cherubs’ vestiges, 
	one daily receives through the air a few 
	wordless but clear messages. 
	Regular speech has its boring spoils: 
	it leads to more speech, to violence, 
	it looks like spaghetti, it also coils. 
	That’s why I’ve built the wireless!” 
	
	
	1902. Just another bland 
	peaceful year. They dissect a gland 
	and discover hormones. And a hormone 
	once discovered is never gone. 
	The Boer War (ten thousand dead) is over. 
	Elsewhere, kind Europeans offer 
	railroad chains to a noble savage. 
	A stork leaves a bundle in a Persian cabbage 
	patch, and the tag reads “Khomeini”. Greeks, Serbs, Croats, 
	and Bulgars are at each others’ throats. 
	Claude Monet paints bridges nevertheless. 
	The population of the U.S. 
	is approximately 76 
	million: all of them having sex 
	to affect our present rent. 
	Plus Teddy Roosevelt’s the President. 
	
	The man of the year is Arthur Conan Doyle, 
	a writer. The subjects of his great toil 
	are a private dick and a paunchy doc; 
	occasionally, a dog. 
	
	( Sir Arthur Conan Doyle )
	
	“Imagine the worst: your subconscious is 
	as dull as your conscience. And you, a noble 
	soul, grab a Luger and make Swiss cheese 
	out of your skull. Better take my novel 
	about the Hound of the Baskervilles! 
	It’ll save a handful of your brain cells 
	and beef up your dreams. For it simply kills 
	time and somebody else!” 
	
	1903. You may start to spy 
	on the future. Old Europe’s sky 
	is a little dim. To increase its dimness, 
	The Krupp Works in Essen erect their chimneys. 
	(Thus the sense of Geld breeds the sense of guilt.) 
	Still, more smoke comes from London, from a smoke-filled 
	room where with guile and passion 
	Bolsheviks curse Mensheviks in Russian. 
	Speaking of Slavs: The Serbian King and Queen 
	are done by local well-wishers in. 
	Painters Whistler, Gauguin, Pissarro are gone. 
	Panama rents us its Canal Zone. 
	While bidding their maidens bye-bye and cheerio, 
	the tommies sail off to grab Nigeria 
	and turn it into a British colony: 
	to date, a nation’s greatest felony 
	is if it’s neither friend nor foe. 
	My father is born. So is Evelyn Waugh. 
	
	Man of the year, I am proud to say 
	is two men. They are brothers. Together, they 
	sport two heads, four legs and four hands-which brings 
	us to their bird’s four wings. 
	
	_( The Wright Brothers )_
	
	“We are Orville and Wilbur Wright. 
	Our name simply rhymes with ‘flight’! 
	This may partially explain 
	why we decided to build a plane. 
	Oh there are no men in the skies, just wind! 
	Cities look like newspaper print. 
	Mountains glitter and rivers bend. 
	But the ultimate plane’d rather bomb than land!” 
	
	
	1904. Things which were in store 
	hit the counter. There is a war. 
	Japan, ever so smiling, gnashes 
	teeth and bites off what, in fact, in Russia’s. 
	Other than that, in Milan police 
	crack local skulls. But more common is 
	the touch of the new safety razor blade. 
	The nuances of the White Slave Trade, 
	Mount St.Victoire by Monsieur Cezanne 
	and other trifles under the sun 
	including popular French disgust 
	with the Vatican, are discussed 
	in every Partisan cafeteria. 
	Radioactivity - still a theory - 
	is stated by Rutherford (when a particle 
	brings you a lordship we call it practical). 
	And as the first Rolls Royce engines churn, 
	Chekhov dies but Graham Greene is born, 
	so is George Balanchine, to upgrade the stage, 
	so too - though it’s sin to disclose her age - 
	is Miss Dietrich, to daunt the screen. 
	And New York hears its subway’s first horrid scream! 
	
	The man of the year is a Hottentot. 
	South-West Africa’s where he dwells. 
	In a German colony. And is being taught 
	German. So he rebels. 
	
	_( A Hottentot )_
	
	“Germans to me are extremely white. 
	They are white in broad daylight and what’s more, at night. 
	Plus if you try to win minds and hearts 
	of locals, you don’t call a black guy “schwarz” - 
	“Schwarz” sounds shoddy and worse than “black”. 
	Change your language and then come back! 
	Fly, my arrow, and hit a Hans 
	to cure a Hans of his arrogance!” 
	
	
	1905. In the news: Japan. 
	Which means that the century is upon 
	us. Diminishing the lifespan 
	of Russian dreadnoughts to naught, Japan 
	tells urbi et orbi it’s loathe to lurk 
	in the wings of geography. In Petersburg 
	those whose empty stomachs churn 
	take to the streets. Yet they won’t return 
	home, for the Cossacks adore long streets. 
	A salesman of the Singer sewing devices greets 
	in Latvia the arrival of yet another 
	daughter, who is to become my mother. 
	In Spain, unaware of this clever ploy, 
	Pablo Picasso depicts his “Boy 
	With Pipe” in blue. While the shades of blonde, 
	Swedes and Norwegians, dissolve their bond. 
	And Norway goes independent; yet 
	that’s not enough to turn brunette. 
	Speaking of things that sound rather queer, 
	E is equated to MC square 
	by Albert Einstein, and the Fauvists 
	(Les Fauves is the French for unruly beasts) 
	unleash Henri Matisse in Paris. 
	“The Merry Widow” by Franz Lehar is 
	the toast of the town. Plus Transvaal gets its 
	constitution called by the natives “the pits”. 
	And Greta Garbo, La belle dame sans 
	merci, is born. So are neon signs. 
	
	The man of the year, our record tells, 
	is neither Strindberg nor H.G.Wells, 
	he is not Albert Schweitzer, not Oscar Wilde: 
	his name is obscured by his own brain-child. 
	
	_( Camouflage )_
	
	“I am what gentleman wear in the field 
	when they are afraid that they may be killed. 
	I am called camouflage. Sporting me, each creature 
	feels both safer and close to Nature. 
	The green makes your simper’s pupil sore. 
	That’s what forests and swamps are for. 
	The planet itself wears me: the design 
	is as French as it is divine.” 
	
	
	1906. Time stands at ease. 
	Having one letter in common with 
	his subject, Freud adds to our bookshelf 
	preparing the century for itself. 
	On the whole, Europeans become much nicer 
	to each other: in Africa. Still, the Kaiser 
	when asked of the growth of his navy, lies. 
	The Japs, for some reason, nationalize 
	their railroads of whose existence none, 
	save several spices, had known. 
	Along the same, so to speak cast-iron 
	lines, aping the rod of Aaron, 
	the Simplon Tunnel opens to hit your sight 
	with a smoking non-stop Vis-a-vis. Aside 
	from that the civilized world condemns 
	night shifts (in factories though) for dames. 
	Prime ministers are leapfrogging in 
	Russia, as though they’ve seen 
	in a crystal ball that the future keeps 
	no room for these kinds of leaps. 
	The French Government warily says “pardon” 
	to Captain Dreyfus, a Jew who’s done 
	ten years in the slimmer on the charge of treason. 
	Still, this distinction between a prison 
	and a Jew has no prophetic air. 
	The U.S. troops have a brief affair 
	with the Island of Cuba: their first tete-a-tete. 
	Samuel Beckett is born. Paul Cezanne is dead. 
	
	The man of the year is Herr von Pirquet. 
	He stings like honey-bee. 
	The sting screams like Prince Hamlet’s sick parakeet: 
	TB or not TB. 
	
	_( Dr. Clement von Pirquet )_
	
	“What I call allergy, you call rash. 
	I’ll give you an analogy: each time you blush, 
	it shows you’re too susceptible to something lurid, 
	obscene and antiseptical to hope to cure it. 
	This, roughly, is the principle that guides my needle. 
	To prove you are invincible it hurts a little; 
	it plucks from your pale cheeks the blooming roses 
	and checks their petals for tuberculosis!” 
	
	
	As for 1907, it’s neither here 
	not there. But Auden is born this year! 
	This birth is the greatest of all prologues! 
	Still, Pavlov gets interested in dogs. 
	Next door Mendeleev, his bearded neighbor 
	who gave the universe the table 
	of its elements, slips into a coma. 
	The Cubists’ first show, while Oklahoma 
	becomes the Union’s 46th 
	state. Elsewhere New Zeland seeks 
	to fly the Union Jack. Lumiere 
	develops the colored pictures ere 
	anyone else (we all owe it to him!) 
	The Roman Pope takes a rather dim 
	view of modernism: jealous Iago! 
	Having squashed (4-0) Detroit, Chicago 
	forever thirsting for Gloria Mundi 
	wins the World Series. In Swinemunde 
	Nicholas the IInd meets the German Kaiser 
	for a cup of tea. That, again, is neither 
	here not there, like Kalamazoo. 
	And Carl Hagenbeck opens his careless zoo 
	where walruses swim, lions pace, birds fly 
	proving: animals also can live a lie. 
	
	The man of the year, you won’t believe, 
	is Joseph Stalin, then just a tried. 
	He is young; he is twenty-eight; 
	but History’s there, and he cannot wait. 
	
	_( Joseph Dzhugashvili, alias Stalin )_
	
	“My childhood was rotten, I lived in mud. 
	I hold up banks ‘cause I miss my dad. 
	So to help the party, for all my troubles 
	one day I took four hundred grand in roubles. 
	Thus far, it was the greatest heist 
	in the Russian history after Christ. 
	Some call me eager, some call me zealous; 
	I just like big figures with their crowd of zeroes.” 
	
	
	1908 is a real bore 
	though it provides a new high in gore 
	by means of an earthquake in the Southern part 
	of Calabria, Italy. Still, the world of art 
	tries to replace those one hundred fifty 
	thousand victims with things as nifty 
	as Monet’s depiction of the Ducal Palace 
	in Venice, or with Isadora’s galas, 
	or with the birth of Ian Fleming: to fill the crater. 
	In the World Series Chicago’s again a winner. 
	In the Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
	are taken by Austria (for what it took 
	it will pay somewhat later with its Archduke). 
	And the fountain pen is in vogue worldwide. 
	The gas of helium’s liquefied 
	in Holland which means the rising of 
	that flat country a bit above 
	sea level, which means thoughts vertical. 
	The king and the crown prince are killed in Portugal, 
	for horizontality’s sake no doubt. 
	Also, the first Model T is out 
	in Dearborn to roam our blissful quarters 
	trailed by the news that General Motors 
	is incorporated. The English Edward 
	and Russia’s Nicholas make an effort 
	to know each other aboard a yacht. 
	The Germans watch it but don’t react - 
	or do, but that cannot be photographed. 
	And the Republic calls on William Taft. 
	
	The man of the year is German scientist 
	Paul Ehrlich. He digs bacterias 
	and sires immunology. All the sapiens 
	owe a lot to his theories. 
	
	_( Paul Ehrlich )_
	
	“The world is essentially a community 
	and to syphilis, nobody has immunity. 
	So what I’ve invented beefs up your arsenal 
	for living a life that’s a bit more personal. 
	I’ve made Salvarsan. Oh my Salvarsan! 
	It may cure your wife, it may cure your son, 
	it may cure yourself and your mistress fast. 
	Think of Paul Ehrlich as you pull or thrust!” 
	
	
	1909 trots a fine straight line. 
	Three Lives are published by Gertrude Stein. 
	(On the strength of this book, if its author vies 
	for the man of the year, she sure qualifies.) 
	Other than that, there is something murky 
	about the political life in Turkey: 
	in those parts, every man has a younger brother, 
	and as Sultans they love to depose each other. 
	The same goes apparently in Iran: 
	Ahmed Shah tells Mohammed Ali: “I run 
	the show”, though he’s 12 years old. 
	In Paris, Sergei Diaghilev strikes gold 
	with his “Ballets Russes”. While in Honduras, 
	screaming the usual “God, endure us!” 
	peasants slaughter each other: it’s a civil war. 
	Sigmund Freud crosses the waters for 
	to tell our Wonderland’s cats and Alices 
	a few things about psychoanalysis. 
	But David Griffith of Motion Pictures, 
	boggling one’s dreams, casts Mary Pickford. 
	The Brits, aping the Royal Dutch 
	Shell Company, too, legalize their touch 
	on the Persian oil. The Rockefeller 
	Foundation is launched to stall a failure 
	and to boost a genus. Leaving all the blight, 
	glitter and stuff made of Bake light 
	(that heralds the Plastic Age) far below, the weary 
	bearded and valiant Captain Robert Peary 
	reaches the North Pole, and thus subscribes 
	virginal white to the Stars and Stripes. 
	Ah those days when one’s thoughts were glued 
	to this version of the Absolute! 
	
	The man of the year is the unknown 
	nameless hairdresser in London Town. 
	Stirred either by its cumulous firmament 
	or by the British anthem, he invents the permanent. 
	
	_( A London hairdresser )_
	
	“The Sun never sets over this Empire. 
	Still, all empires one day expire. 
	They go to pieces, they get undone. 
	The wind of history is no fun. 
	Let England be England and rule the waves! 
	And let those waves be real raves. 
	Let them be dark, red, chestnut, blonde 
	unruffled by great events beyond!” 
	
	
	1910 marks the end of the first decade. 
	As such, it can definitely be okayed. 
	For there is clearly a democratic 
	trend. Though at times things take an erratic 
	turn. Like when Egypt’s Prime Minister, through no fault 
	of his, gets murdered. But the revolt 
	in Albania is the work of masses 
	(although how they tell their oppressed from their ruling class is 
	anyone’s guess). Plus Portugal bravely rids 
	itself of its king, and as he’s hugged by the Brits, 
	becomes a republic. As for the Brits themselves, 
	one more generation of them learns God saves 
	no king, and mourning the sad demise 
	of Edward the Seventh, they fix their eyes 
	on George the Fifth. Mark Twain and Tolstoy die too. 
	But Karl May has just published his Winnetou 
	in German. In Paris, they’ve seen and heard 
	Stravinsky-****-Diaghilev’s “Firebird”. 
	That causes some riot, albeit a tiny one. 
	Whereas the twangs of the Argentinean 
	Tango do to the world what the feared and hailed 
	Halley’s comet, thank heavens, failed 
	to do. And our watchful Congress 
	finds it illegal if not incongruous 
	to take ladies across state lines 
	for purposes it declines 
	to spell out, while Japan moves nearer 
	to Korea: a face that invades a mirror. 
	
	The man of the year is an architect. 
	His name is Frank Lloyd Wright. 
	Things that he’s built still stand erect, 
	nay! hug what they stand on tight. 
	
	_(Frank Lloyd Wright)_
	
	“Nature and space have no walls or doors, 
	and roaming at will is what man adores. 
	So, a builder of houses, I decide 
	to bring the outside inside. 
	You don’t build them tall: you build them flat. 
	That’s what Nature is so good at. 
	You go easy on bricks and big on glass 
	so that space may sashay your parquets like grass.” 
	
	
	1911 is wholly given 
	to looking balanced albeit uneven. 
	In Hamburg, stirring his nation’s helm 
	the German Kaiser (for you, Wilhelm 
	the Second) demands what sounds weird for some: 
	“A Place for Germany in the Sun”. 
	It you were French, you would say C’est tout. 
	Yet Hitler is barely twenty-two 
	and things in the sun aren’t so hot besides. 
	The activity of the sun excites 
	the Chinese to abolish pigtails and then 
	proclaim a republic with Sun Yat-Sen 
	their first President. (Although how three hundred 
	twenty-five millions can be handled 
	by a Parliament, frankly, beats 
	me. That is, how many seats 
	would they have had in that grand pavilion? 
	And even if it’s just one guy per million 
	what would a minority of, say, ten percent 
	add up to? This is like counting sand! 
	For this democracy has no lexicon!) 
	Along the same latitude, the Mexican 
	Civil War is over, and saintly, hesitant 
	Francisco Madero becomes the President. 
	Italy finding the Turks too coarse 
	to deal with, resorts to the air force 
	for the first time in history, while da Vinci’s 
	Mona Lisa gets stolen from the Louver - which is 
	why the cops in Paris grab Monsieur Guillaume 
	Apollinaire who though born in Rome, 
	writes in French, and has other energies. 
	Rilke prints his Duinese Elegies 
	and in London, suffragettes poke their black 
	umbrellas at Whitehall and cry Alack! 
	
	Man of the year is a great Norwegian. 
	The crucial word in their tongue is “Skol”. 
	They are born wearing turtlenecks in that region. 
	When they go South, they hit the Pole. 
	
	_( Roald Amundsen )_
	
	“I am Roald Amundsen. I like ice. 
	The world is my oyster for it’s capped twice 
	with ice: first, Arctical, then Antarctical. 
	Human life in those parts is a missing article. 
	O! when the temperature falls subzero 
	the eyes grow blue, the heart sincere. 
	There are neither doubts nor a question mark: 
	it’s the tails of your huskies which pull and bark”. 
	
	
	1912. Captain Robert Scott 
	reaches the South Pole also. Except he got 
	there later than Amundsen. He stares at ice, 
	thinks of his family, prays, and dies. 
	Ice, however, is not through yet. 
	S.S. Titanic hits an iceberg at 
	full speed and goes down. The bell grimly tolls 
	at Lloyd’s in London. Fifteen hundred souls 
	are lost, if not more. Therefore, let’s turn 
	to Romania where Eugene Ionesco’s born 
	or to Turkey and her Balkan neighbors: each 
	one of them feels an itch to reach 
	for the gun; on reflection, though, they abandon 
	the idea. It’s peace everywhere. In London 
	by now there are five hundred movie theaters 
	which makes an issue of baby-sitters. 
	At home, after having less done than said; 
	Woodrow Wilson becomes the Prez. Dead-set 
	to pocket the dizzy with flipping coin 
	New Mexico and Arizona join 
	the Union. For all its steel mills and farms 
	the Union keeps currently under arms 
	only one hundred thousand men. That’s barmy 
	considering five million in the Russian Army, 
	or four million in Germany, or the French 
	who, too, have as many to fill a trench. 
	This sounds to some like a lack of caution. 
	But then there is the Atlantic Ocean 
	between the Continent and the U.S., 
	and it’s only 1912, God bless, 
	and the hemispheres luckily seem unable 
	to play the now popular Cain and Abel. 
	
	The man of the year is both short and tall. 
	He’s nameless, and well he should 
	stay nameless: for spoiling for us free fall 
	by using a parachute. 
	
	_(Captain Albert Berry)_
	
	“Leaving home with umbrella? Take a parachute! 
	When it rains from below, that is when they shoot 
	down a plane and its pilot objects to die, 
	when you wand to grab Holland or drop a spy 
	behind enemy lines, you need parachutes. 
	O, they’ll be more popular than a pair of shoes. 
	In their soft descent they suggest a dove. 
	Aye! it’s not only love that comes from above!” 
	
	
	1913. Peace is wearing thin 
	in the Balkans. Great powers try their pristine 
	routine of talks, but only soil white gloves: 
	Turkey and the whole bunch of Slavs 
	slash one another as if there is no tomorrow. 
	The States think there is; and being thorough 
	introduce the federal income tax. 
	Still, what really spells the Pax 
	Americana is the assembly line 
	Ford installs in Michigan. Some decline 
	of capitalism! No libertine or Marxist 
	could foresee this development in the darkest 
	possible dream. Speaking of such a dream, 
	California hears the first natal scream 
	of Richard Nixon. However, the most 
	loaded sounds are those uttered by Robert Frost 
	whose A Boy’s Will and North of Boston 
	are printed in England and nearly lost on 
	his compatriots eyeing in sentimental 
	rapture the newly-built Grand Central 
	Station where they later would 
	act as though hired by Hollywood. 
	In the meantime, M.Proust lets his stylus saunter 
	the Swann’s Way, H.Geyger designs his counter; 
	probing nothing perilous or perdu, 
	Stravinsky produces Le Sacre du 
	Printemps, a ballet, in Paris, France. 
	But the fox-trot is what people really dance. 
	And as Schweitzer cures lepers and subs dive deeper, 
	the hottest news is the modest zipper. 
	Think of the preliminaries it skips 
	timing your lips with you fingertips! 
	
	The man of the year is, I fear, Niels Bohr. 
	He comes from the same place as danishes. 
	He builds what one feels like when one can’t score 
	or what one looks like when one vanishes. 
	
	_(Niels Bohr)_
	
	Atoms are small. Atoms are nice. Until you split one, of course. 
	Then they get large enough to play dice with your whole universe. 
	A model of an atom is what I’ve built! Something both small and big! 
	Inside, it resembles the sense of guilt. Outside, the lunar dig. 
	
	
	1914.
	
	Nineteen-fourteen! Oh, nineteen-fourteen! 
	Ah, some years shouldn’t be let out of quarantine! 
	Well, this is one of them. Things get raw: 
	In Paris, the editor of Figaro 
	is shot dead by the wife of the French finance 
	minister, for printing this lady’s--sans 
	merci, should we add?--steamy letters to 
	--ah, who cares! . . . And apparently it’s c’est tout 
	also for a socialist and pacifist 
	of all times, Jean Jaures. He who shook his fist 
	at the Parliament urging hot heads to cool it, 
	dies, as he dines, by some bigot’s bullet 
	in a cafe. Ah, those early, single 
	shots of Nineteen-fourteen! ah, the index finger 
	of an assassin! ah, white puffs in the blue acrylic! . . .
	There is something pastoral, nay! idyllic 
	about these murders. About that Irish enema 
	the Brits suffer in Dublin again. And about Panama 
	Canal’s grand opening. Or about that doc 
	and his open heart surgery on his dog . . .
	Well, to make these things disappear forever, 
	the Archduke is arriving at Sarajevo; 
	and there is in the crowd that unshaven, timid 
	youth, with his handgun . . . (To be continued).


10. I SIT BY THE WINDOW

	I said fate plays a game without a score,
	and who needs fish if you’ve got caviar?
	The triumph of the Gothic style would come to pass
	and turn you on--no need for coke, or grass.
	I sit by the window. Outside, an aspen.
	When I loved, I loved deeply. It wasn’t often.
	
	I said the forest’s only part of a tree.
	Who needs the whole girl if you’ve got her knee?
	Sick of the dust raised by the modern era,
	the Russian eye would rest on an Estonian spire.
	I sit by the window. The dishes are done.
	I was happy here. But I won’t be again.
	
	I wrote: The bulb looks at the flower in fear,
	and love, as an act, lacks a verb; the zer-
	o Euclid thought the vanishing point became
	wasn’t math--it was the nothingness of Time.
	I sit by the window. And while I sit
	my youth comes back. Sometimes I’d smile. Or spit.
	
	I said that the leaf may destory the bud;
	what’s fertile falls in fallow soil--a dud;
	that on the flat field, the unshadowed plain
	nature spills the seeds of trees in vain.
	I sit by the window. Hands lock my knees.
	My heavy shadow’s my squat company.
	
	My song was out of tune, my voice was cracked,
	but at least no chorus can ever sing it back.
	That talk like this reaps no reward bewilders
	no one--no one’s legs rest on my sholders.
	I sit by the window in the dark. Like an express,
	the waves behind the wavelike curtain crash.
	
	A loyal subject of these second-rate years,
	I proudly admit that my finest ideas
	are second-rate, and may the future take them
	as trophies of my struggle against suffocation.
	I sit in the dark. And it would be hard to figure out
	which is worse; the dark inside, or the darkness out.


11. JANUARY 1, 1965

	The Wise Men will unlearn your name.
	Above your head no star will flame.
	One weary sound will be the same--
	the hoarse roar of the gale.
	The shadows fall from your tired eyes
	as your lone bedside candle dies,
	for here the calendar breeds nights
	till stores of candles fail.
	
	What prompts this melancholy key?
	A long familiar melody.
	It sounds again. So let it be.
	Let it sound from this night.
	Let it sound in my hour of death—
	as gratefulness of eyes and lips
	for that which sometimes makes us lift
	our gaze to the far sky.
	
	You glare in silence at the wall.
	Your stocking gapes: no gifts at all.
	It’s clear that you are now too old
	to trust in good Saint Nick;
	that it’s too late for miracles.
	--But suddenly, lifting your eyes
	to heaven’s light, you realize:
	your life is a sheer gift.


12. LETTER TO AN ARCHAEOLOGIST

	Citizen, enemy, mama’s boy, sucker, utter
	garbage, panhandler, swine, refujew, verrucht;
	a scalp so often scalded with boiling water
	that the puny brain feels completely cooked.
	Yes, we have dwelt here: in this concrete, brick, wooden
	rubble which you now arrive to sift.
	All our wires were crossed, barbed, tangled, or interwoven.
	Also: we didn’t love our women, but they conceived.
	Sharp is the sound of pickax that hurts dead iron;
	still, it’s gentler than what we’ve been told or have said ourselves.
	Stranger! move carefully through our carrion:
	what seems carrion to you is freedom to our cells.
	Leave our names alone. Don’t reconstruct those vowels,
	consonants, and so forth: they won’t resemble larks
	but a demented bloodhound whose maw devours 
	its own traces, feces, and barks, and barks.


13. LETTERS TO THE ROMAN FRIEND

	_From Martial_
	
	Now is windy and the waves are cresting over 
	Fall is soon to come to change the place entirely. 
	Change of colors moves me, Postum, even stronger 
	Than a girlfriend while she’s changing her attire. 
	  
	Maidens comfort you but to a certain limit--
	Can’t go further than an elbow or a kneeline. 
	While apart from body, beauty is more splendid-- 
	An embrace is as impossible as treason. 
	
	  
	I’m sending to you, Postum-friend, some reading. 
	How’s the capital? Soft bed and rude awakening? 
	How’s Caesar? What’s he doing? Still intriguing? 
	Still intriguing, I imagine, and engorging. 
	  
	In my garden, I am sitting with a night-light 
	No maid nor mate, not even a companion 
	But instead of weak and mighty of this planet, 
	Buzzing pests in their unanimous dominion. 
	  
	  
	Here, was laid away an Asian merchant. Clever 
	Merchant was he--very diligent yet decent. 
	He died suddenly--malaria. To barter 
	Business did he come, and surely not for this one. 
	  
	Next to him--a legionnaire under a quartz grave. 
	In the battles, he brought fame to the Empire. 
	Many times could have been killed! Yet died an old brave. 
	Even here, there is no ordinance, my dear. 
	  
	
	Maybe, chicken really aren’t birds, my Postum, 
	Yet a chicken brain should rather take precautions. 
	An empire, if you happened to be born to, 
	better live in distant province, by the ocean. 
	  
	Far away from Caesar, and away from tempests 
	No need to cringe, to rush or to be fearful, 
	You are saying procurators are all looters, 
	But I’d rather choose a looter than a slayer. 
	  
	
	Under thunderstorm, to stay with you, hetaera,--
	I agree but let us deal without haggling: 
	To demand sesterces from a flesh that covers 
	is the same as stripping roofs of their own shingle. 
	  
	Are you saying that I leak? Well, where’s a puddle? 
	Leaving puddles hasn’t been among my habits. 
	Once you find yourself some-body for a husband, 
	Then you’ll see him take a leak under your blankets. 
	  
	
	Here, we’ve covered more than half of our life span 
	As an old slave, by the tavern, has just said it, 
	«Turning back, we look but only see old ruins». 
	Surely, his view is barbaric, but yet candid. 
	    
	’ve been to hills and now busy with some flowers. 
	Have to find a pitcher, so to pour them water. 
	How’s in Libya, my Postum, or wherever? 
	Is it possible that we are still at war there? 
	    
	
	You remember, friend, the procurator’s sister? 
	On the skinny side, however with those plump legs. 
	You have slept with her then... she became a priestess. 
	Priestess, Postum, and confers with the creators. 
	    
	Do come here, we’ll have a drink with bread and olives--
	Or with plums. You’ll tell me news about the nation. 
	In the garden you will sleep under clear heavens, 
	And I’ll tell you how they name the constellations. 
	  
	
	Postum, friend of yours once tendered to addition, 
	Soon shall reimburse deduction, his old duty… 
	Take the savings, which you’ll find under my cushion. 
	Haven’t got much but for funeral--it’s plenty. 
	  
	On your skewbald, take a ride to the hetaeras, 
	Their house is right by the town limit, 
	Bid the price we used to pay--for them to love us--
	They should now get the same--for their lament. 
	    
	
	Laurel’s leaves so green--it makes your body shudder. 
	Wide ajar the door--a tiny window’s dusty--
	Long deserted bed--an armchair is abandoned--
	Noontime sun has been absorbed by the upholstery. 
	  
	With the wind, by sea point cape, a boat, is wrestling. 
	Roars the gulf behind the black fence of the pine trees. 
	On the old and wind-cracked bench--Pliny the Elder. 
	And a thrush is chirping in the mane of cypress.


14. LINES ON THE WINTER CAMPAIGN, 1980

	_The scorching noon, the vale in Dagestan . . ._
	                                          --Mikhail Lermontov
	
	I
	
	A bullet’s velocity in low temperatures
	greatly depends on its target’s virtues,
	on its urge to warm up in the plaited muscles
	of the torso, in the neck’s webbed sinews.
	Stones lie flat like a second army.
	The shade hugs the loam to itself willy-nilly.
	The sky resembles peeling stucco.
	An aircraft dissolves in it like a clothes moth,
	and like a spring from a ripped-up mattress
	an explosion sprouts up. Outside the crater,
	the blood, like boiled milk, powerless to seep into
	the ground, is seized by a film’s hard ripples.
	 
	
	II
	
	Shepherd and sower, the North is driving 
	herds to the sea, spreading cold to the South. 
	A bright, frosty noon in a Wogistan valley. 
	A mechanical elephant, trunk wildly waving 
	at the horrid sight of the small black rodent 
	of a snow-covered mine, spews out throat-clogging 
	lumps, possessed of that old desire 
	of Mahomet’s, to move a mountain. 
	Summits loom white; the celestial warehouse 
	lends them at noontime its flaking surplus. 
	The mountains lack any motion, passing 
	their immobility to the scattered bodies.
	
	
	III
	
	The doleful, echoing Slavic singing 
	at evening in Asia. Dank and freezing, 
	sprawling piles of human pig meat
	cover the caravansary’s mud bottom.
	The fuel dung smolders, legs stiffen in numbness.
	It smells of old socks, of forgotten bath days.
	The dreams are identical, as are the greatcoats.
	Plenty of cartridges, few recollections,
	and the tang in the mouth of too many “hurrahs.”
	Glory to those who, their glances lowered,
	marched in the sixties to abortion tables,
	sparing the homeland its present stigma.
	
	
	IV
	
	What is contained in the drone’s dull buzzing? 
	And what in the sound of the aero-engine?
	Living is getting as complicated
	as building a house with grapes’ green marbles 
	or little lean-tos with spades and diamonds. 
	Nothing is stable (one puff and it’s over): 
	families, private thoughts, clay shanties. 
	Night over ruins of a mountain village. 
	Armor, wetting its metal sheets with oil slick,
	freezes in thorn scrub. Afraid of drowning 
	in a discarded jackboot, the moon
	hides in a cloud as in Allah’s turban.
	
	
	V
	
	Idle, inhaled now by no one, air.
	Imported, carelessly piled-up silence.
	Rising like dough that’s leavened,
	emptiness. If the stars had life-forms,
	space would erupt with a brisk ovation;
	a gunner, blinking, runs to the footlights.
	Murder’s a blatant way of dying,
	a tautology, the art form of parrots,
	a manual matter, the knack for catching
	life’s fly in the hairs of the gunsight
	by youngsters acquainted with blood through either
	hearsay or violating virgins.
	
	
	VI
	
	Pull up the blanket, dig a hole in the palliasse.
	Flop down and give ear to the _oo_ of the siren.
	The Ice Age is coming--slavery’s ice age is coming,
	oozing over the atlas. Its moraines force under
	nations, fond memories, muslin blouses.
	Muttering, rolling our eyeballs upward,
	we are becoming a new kind of bivalve,
	our voice goes unheard, as though we were trilobites.
	There’s a draft from the corridor, draft from the square windows.
	Turn off the light, wrap up in a bundle.
	The vertebra craves eternity. Unlike a ringlet.
	In the morning the limbs are past all uncoiling.
	
	
	VII
	
	Up in the stratosphere, thought of by no one, 
	the little bitch barks as she peers through the porthole: 
	“Beach Ball! Beach Ball! Over. It's Rover.”
	The beach ball’s below. With the equator on it
	like a dog collar. Slopes, fields, and gullies 
	repeat in their whiteness cheekbones 
	(the color of shame has all gone to the banners). 
	And the hens in their snowed-in hen coops, 
	also a-shake from the shock of reveille, 
	lay their eggs of immaculate color.
	If anything blackens, it’s just the letters, 
	like the tracks of some rabbit, preserved by a wonder.


15. MAY 24, 1980

	I have braved, for want of wild beasts, steel cages,
	carved my term and nickname on bunks and rafters,
	lived by the sea, flashed aces in an oasis,
	dined with the-devil-knows-whom, in tails, on truffles.
	From the height of a glacier I beheld half a world, the earthly
	width. Twice have drowned, thrice let knives rake my nitty-gritty.
	Quit the country the bore and nursed me.
	Those who forgot me would make a city.
	I have waded the steppes that saw yelling Huns in saddles,
	worn the clothes nowadays back in fashion in every quarter,
	planted rye, tarred the roofs of pigsties and stables,
	guzzled everything save dry water.
	I’ve admitted the sentries’ third eye into my wet and foul
	dreams. Munched the bread of exile; it’s stale and warty.
	Granted my lungs all sounds except the howl;
	switched to a whisper. Now I am forty.
	What should I say about my life? That it’s long and abhors transparence.
	Broken eggs make me grieve; the omelet, though, makes me vomit.
	Yet until brown clay has been rammed down my larynx,
	only gratitude will be gushing from it.


16. ODYSSEUS TO TELEMACHUS

	My dear Telemachus,
	The Trojan War 
	is over now; I don’t recall who won it. 
	The Greeks, no doubt, for only they would leave
	so many dead so far from their own homeland. 
	But still, my homeward way has proved too long. 
	While we were wasting time there, old Poseidon, 
	it almost seems, stretched and extended space.
	
	I don’t know where I am or what this place 
	can be. It would appear some filthy island, 
	with bushes, buildings, and great grunting pigs. 
	A garden choked with weeds; some queen or other. 
	Grass and huge stones . . . Telemachus, my son! 
	To a wanderer the faces of all islands 
	resemble one another. And the mind 
	trips, numbering waves; eyes, sore from sea horizons, 
	run; and the flesh of water stuffs the ears. 
	I can’t remember how the war came out; 
	even how old you are--I can’t remember.
	
	Grow up, then, my Telemachus, grow strong. 
	Only the gods know if we’ll see each other 
	again. You’ve long since ceased to be that babe 
	before whom I reined in the plowing bullocks. 
	Had it not been for Palamedes’ trick 
	we two would still be living in one household. 
	But maybe he was right; away from me 
	you are quite safe from all Oedipal passions, 
	and your dreams, my Telemachus, are blameless.


17. A PART OF SPEECH

	I was born and grew up in the Baltic marshland
	by zinc-gray breakers that always marched on
	in twos. Hence all rhymes, hence that wan flat voice
	that ripples between them like hair still moist,
	if it ripples at all. Propped on a pallid elbow,
	the helix picks out of them no sea rumble
	but a clap of canvas, of shutters, of hands, a kettle
	on the burner, boiling--lastly, the seagull’s metal
	cry. What keeps hearts from falseness in this flat region
	is that there is nowhere to hide and plenty of room for vision.
	Only sound needs echo and dreads its lack.
	A glance is accustomed to no glance back
	
	A list of some observations. In a corner, it’s warm.
	A glance leaves an imprint on anything it’s dwelt on.
	Water is glass’s most public form.
	Man is more frightening than his skeleton.
	A nowhere winter evening with wine. A black
	porch resists an osier’s stiff assaults.
	Fixed on an elbow, the body bulks
	like a glacier’s debris, a moraine of sorts.
	A millenium hence, they’ll no doubt expose
	a fossil bivalve propped behind this gauze
	cloth, with the print of lips under the print of fringe,
	mumbling “Good night” to a window hinge.
	
	I recognize this wind battering the limp grass
	that submits to it as they did to the Tartar mass.
	I recognize this leaf splayed in the roadside mud
	like a prince empurpled in his own blood.
	Fanning wet arrows that blow aslant
	the cheek of a wooden hut in another land,
	autumn tells, like geese by their flying call,
	a tear by its face. And as I roll
	my eyes to the ceiling, I chant herein
	not the lay of that eager man’s campaign
	but utter your Kazakh name which till now was stored
	in my throat as a password into the Horde.
	
	A navy-blue dawn in a frosted pane
	recalls yellow streetlamps in the snow-piled lane,
	icy pathways, crossroads, drifts on either hand,
	a jostling cloakroom in Europe’s eastern end.
	“Hannibal . . .” drones on there, a worn-out motor,
	parallel bars in the gym reek with armpit odor;
	as for that scary blackboard you failed to see through,
	it has stayed just as black. And its reverse side, too.
	Silvery hoarfrost has transformed the rattling bell
	into crystal. As regards all that parallel-
	line stuff, it’s turned out true and bone-clad, indeed.
	Don’t want to get up now. And never did.
	
	You’ve forgotten that village lost in the rows and rows
	of swamp in a pine-wooded territory where no scarecrows
	ever stand in orchards: the crops aren’t worth it,
	and the roads are also just ditches and brushwood surface.
	Old Nastasia is dead, I take it, and Pesterev, too, for sure,
	and if not, he’s sitting drunk in the cellar or
	is making something out of the headboard of our bed:
	a wicket gate, say, or some kind of shed.
	And in winter they’re chopping wood, and turnips is all they live on,
	and a star blinks from all the smoke in the frosty heaven,
	and no bride in chintz at the window, but dust’s gray craft,
	plus the emptiness where once we loved.
	
	In the little town out of which death sprawled over the classroom map
	the cobblestones shine like scales that coat a carp,
	on the secular chestnut tree melting candles hang,
	and a cast-iron lion pines for a good harangue.
	Through the much laundered, pale window gauze
	woundlike carnations and kirchen needles ooze;
	a tram rattles far off, as in days of yore,
	but no one gets off at the stadium anymore.
	The real end of the war is a sweet blonde’s frock
	across a Viennese armchair’s fragile back
	while the humming winged silver bullets fly,
	taking lives southward, in mid-July.
	                                                                                                                 
	As for the stars, they are always on.
	That is, one appears, then others adorn the inklike
	sphere. That’s the best way from there to look upon
	here: well after hours, blinking.
	The sky looks better when they are off.
	Though, with them, the conquest of space is quicker.
	Provided you haven’t got to move
	from the bare veranda and squeaking rocker.
	As one spacecraft pilot has said, his face
	half sunk in the shadow, it seems there is
	no life anywhere, and a thoughtful gaze
	can be rested on none of these.
	
	Near the ocean, by candlelight. Scattered farms,
	fields overrun with sorrel, lucerne, and clover.
	Toward nightfall, the body, like Shiva, grows extra arms
	reaching out yearningly to a lover.
	A mouse rustles through grass. An owl drops down.
	Suddenly creaking rafters expand a second.
	One sleeps more soundly in a wooden town,
	since you dream these days only of things that happened.
	There’s a smell of fresh fish. An armchair’s profile
	is glued to the wall. The gauze is too limp to bulk at
	the slightest breeze.. And a ray of the moon, meanwhile,
	draws up the tide like a slipping blanket.
	
	The Laocoön of a tree, casting the mountain weight
	off his shoulders, wraps them in an immense
	cloud. From a promontory, wind gushes in. A voice
	pitches high, keeping words on a string of sense.
	Rain surges down; its ropes twisted into lumps,
	lash, like the bather’s shoulders, the naked backs of these
	hills. The Medhibernian Sea stirs round colonnaded stumps
	like a salt tongue behind broken teeth.
	The heart, however grown savage, still beats for two.
	Every good boy deserves fingers to indicate
	that beyond today there is always a static to-
	morrow, like a subject’s shadowy predicate.
	
	If anything’s to be praised, it’s most likely how
	the west wind becomes the east wind, when a frozen bough
	sways leftward, voicing its creaking protests,
	and your cough flies across the Great Plains to Dakota’s forests.
	At noon, shouldering a shotgun, fire at what may well
	be a rabbit in snowfields, so that a shell
	widens the breach between the pen that puts up these limping
	awkward lines and the creature leaving
	real tracks in the white. On occasion the head combines
	its existence with that of a hand, not to fetch more lines
	but to cup an ear under the pouring slur
	of their common voice. Like a new centaur.
	
	There is always a possibility left--to let
	yourself out to the street whose brown length
	will soothe the eye with doorways, the slender forking
	of willows, the patchwork puddles, with simply walking.
	The hair on my gourd is stirred by a breeze
	and the street, in distance, tapering to a V, is
	like a face to a chin; and a barking puppy
	flies out of a gateway like crumpled paper.
	A street. Some houses, let’s say,
	are better than others. To take one item,
	some have richer windows. What’s more, if you go insane,
	it won’t happen, at least, inside them.
	
	. . . and when “the future” is uttered, swarms of mice
	rush out of the Russian language and gnaw a piece
	of ripened memory which is twice
	as hole-ridden as real cheese.
	After all these years it hardly matters who
	or what stands in the corner, hidden by heavy drapes,
	and your mind resounds not with a seraphic “do,”
	only their rustle. Life, that no one dares
	to appraise, like that gift horse’s mouth,
	bares its teeth in a grin at each
	encounter. What gets left of a man amounts
	to a part. To his spoken part. To a part of speech.
	
	Not that I am losing my grip; I am just tired of summer.
	You reach for a shirt in a drawer and the day is wasted.
	If only winter were here for snow to smother
	all these streets, these humans; but first, the blasted
	green. I would sleep in my clothes or just pluck a borrowed
	book, while what’s left of the year’s slack rhythm,
	like a dog abandoning its blind owner,
	crosses the road at the usual zebra. Freedom
	is when you forget the spelling of the tyrant’s name
	and your mouth’s saliva is sweeter than Persian pie,
	and though your brain is wrung tight as the horn of a ram
	nothing drops from your pale-blue eye.


18. SEAWARD

	Darling, you think it’s love, it’s just a midnight journey. 
	Best are the dales and rivers removed by force, 
	as from the next compartment throttles “Oh, stop it, Bernie,” 
	yet the rhythm of those paroxysms is exactly yours. 
	Hook to the meat! Brush to the red-brick dentures, 
	alias cigars, smokeless like a driven nail! 
	Here the works are fewer than monkey wrenches, 
	and the phones are whining, dwarfed by to-no-avail. 
	Bark, then, with joy at Clancy, Fitzgibbon, Miller. 
	Dogs and block letters care how misfortune spells. 
	Still, you can tell yourself in the john by the spat-at mirror, 
	slamming the flush and emerging with clean lapels. 
	Only the liquid furniture cradles the dwindling figure. 
	Man shouldn’t grow in size once he’s been portrayed. 
	Look: what’s been left behind is about as meager 
	as what remains ahead. Hence the horizon’s blade. 


19. A SONG

	I wish you were here, dear,
	I wish you were here. 
	I wish you sat on the sofa 
	and I sat near. 
	The handkerchief could be yours, 
	the tear could be mine, chin-bound. 
	Though it could be, of course, 
	the other way around.
	
	I wish you were here, dear, 
	I wish you were here. 
	I wish we were in my car 
	and you’d shift the gear. 
	We’d find ourselves elsewhere, 
	on an unknown shore. 
	Or else we’d repair 
	to where we’ve been before.
	
	I wish you were here, dear, 
	I wish you were here. 
	I wish I knew no astronomy 
	when stars appear, 
	when the moon skims the water 
	that sighs and shifts in its slumber.
	I wish it were still a quarter 
	to dial your number.
	
	I wish you were here, dear, 
	in this hemisphere, 
	as I sit on the porch 
	sipping a beer. 
	It’s evening, the sun is setting; 
	boys shout and gulls are crying. 
	What’s the point of forgetting 
	if it’s followed by dying?


20. STAR OF THE NATIVITY

	In the cold season, in a locality accustomed to heat more than
	to cold, to horizontality more than to a mountain,
	a child was born in a cave in order to save the world;
	it blew as only in deserts in winter it blows, athwart.
	
	To Him, all things seemed enormous: His mother’s breast, the steam
	out of the ox’s nostrils, Caspar, Balthazar, Melchior--the team
	of Magi, their presents heaped by the door, ajar.
	He was but a dot, and a dot was the star.
	
	Keenly, without blinking, through pallid, stray
	clouds, upon the child in the manger, from far away--
	from the depth of the universe, from its opposite end--the star
	was looking into the cave. And that was the Father’s stare.


21. TORNFALLET

	There is a meadow in Sweden 
	where I lie smitten, 
	eyes stained with clouds’
	white ins and outs. 
	
	And about that meadow 
	roams my widow 
	plaiting a clover 
	wreath for her lover. 
	
	I took her in marriage 
	in a granite parish. 
	The snow lent her whiteness, 
	a pine was a witness. 
	
	She’d swim in the oval 
	lake whose opal 
	mirror, framed by bracken, 
	felt happy, broken. 
	
	And at night the stubborn 
	sun of her auburn 
	hair shone from my pillow 
	at post and pillar. 
	
	Now in the distance 
	I hear her descant. 
	She sings “Blue Swallow,”
	but I can’t follow. 
	
	The evening shadow 
	robs the meadow 
	of width and color. 
	It’s getting colder. 
	
	As I lie dying 
	here, I’m eyeing 
	stars. Here’s Venus; 
	no one between us.


22. TRANSATLANTIC

	The last twenty years were good for practically everybody
	save the dead. But maybe for them as well.
	Maybe the Almighty Himself has turned a bit bourgeois
	and uses a credit card. For otherwise time’s passage
	makes no sense. Hence memories, recollections,
	values, deportment. One hopes one hasn’t
	spent one’s mother or father or both, or a handful of friends entirely
	as they cease to hound one’s dreams. One’s dreams,
	unlike the city, become less populous
	the older one gets. That’s why the eternal rest
	cancels analysis. The last twenty years were good
	for practically everybody and constituted
	the afterlife for the dead. Its quality could be questioned
	but not its duration. The dead, one assumes, would not
	mind attaining a homeless status, and sleep in archways
	or watch pregnant submarines returning
	to their native pen after a worldwide journey
	without destroying life on earth, without
	even a proper flag to hoist.


23. TSUSHIMA SCREEN

	The perilous yellow sun follows with its slant eyes
	masts of the shuddered grove steaming up to capsize
	in the frozen straits of Epiphany. February has fewer
	days than the other months; therefore, it’s more cruel
	than the rest. Dearest, it’s more sound
	to wrap up our sailing round 
	the globe with habitual naval grace,
	moving your cot to the fireplace
	where our dreadnought is going under
	in great smoke. Only fire can grasp a winter!
	Golder unharnessed stallions in the chimney
	dye their manes to more corvine shades as they near the finish,
	and the dark room fills with the plaintive, incessant chirring
	of a naked, lounging grasshopper one cannot cup in fingers.


24. TWO HOURS IN RESERVOIR

	1
	
	I am an anti-fascist . . . anti-Faust 
	Ich liebe life and I admire chaos 
	Ich bin to wish, Genosse Offizieren, 
	Dem Zeit zum Faust for a while spazieren. 
	  
	
	2
	
	Without embracing Polish propaganda, 
	In Krakow he had missed his Vaterland, and 
	He dreamt of the philosopher’s true diamond 
	And sometimes doubted his own talent. 
	He gently picked, off ground, ladies' tissues, 
	He got excited with the gender issues, 
	Along, in school he played the polo's virtues. 
	
	He studied deeply gambling catechismus, 
	And learned to taste the sweetness of Cartesian. 
	Then crawled deep down into the Artesian 
	well of ego-centrism. The military slyness 
	For which was famous Mr. Clausewitz, 
	For him remained apparently unknown, 
	Whereas to Vater was a wood artisan. 
	
	Zum beispiel, in outbreak of glaucoma, 
	The plague, cholera und Tuberculosen, 
	He saved himself by schwarze Papierossen. 
	Attracted by the Gypsies and the Moors. 
	He then became a bachelor alumnus. 
	Was granted then a licentiate laurus 
	And sang to students, «Cambrian . . . dinosaurs . . .» 
	
	A German man--a German cerebrum. 
	Without mentioning, Cogito ergo sum. 
	Undoubtedly--Deutschland uber alles. 
	(One's ears can catch a famous Vienna's waltz). 
	He parted with Krakow with some heart cheer, 
	And took a carriage in a rush to sheer 
	To chair the school with honest glass of beer. 
	  
	
	3
	
	A splendid C-moon shines out of the clouds. 
	Tremendous foliant. A man above it. 
	A wrinkle darkens right ‘twixt the eyebrows, 
	His eyes--the lacework devilry of Arabs. 
	With a Cordovan black chalk in his right hand 
	And from the corner, he’s watched at profile length 
	By Meph-ibn-Stopheles: an Arab agent. 
	
	The candles burning. Screeches under clothes-bin. 
	«Herr Doktor, midnight». «Jawohl, schlafen, schlafen...» 
	Two dark black muzzles open utter «meow», 
	From kitchen quietly comes a Yiddish Frau. 
	She holds a sizzling omelet with fried bacon. 
	Herr doctor jots the address on the letter: 
	«Gott Strafe. England. London. Francis Bacon». 
	
	Concerns and demons come and go further, 
	The years and guests do come and go further... 
	One can't recall then dresses, words, or weather. 
	That's how all the years have passed and gone swift. 
	He knew the Arabic, but didn’t know Sanskrit. 
	And yet quite late, hey, Faust had discovered 
	Before him, eine kleine Fraulein Margaret. 
	
	And then to Cairo he had sent epistle 
	By which he voted back his soul from devil. 
	Meph had arrived while he had changed his clothes. 
	He gazed into the mirrow and saw close 
	That he forever is metamorphosed. 
	To maiden’s boudoir, with flowers, kitschy 
	He then set off. Und veni, vidi, vici. 
	  
	
	4
	
	Ich liebe clearness. Ja. Ich liebe promptness. 
	Ich bin to ask to see here no vileness. 
	You’re hinting that he loved the flower lasses. 
	Ich understanden, das ist ganze swiftness. 
	But this transaction macht der grosse Minus. 
	Die righte Sprache, macht der grosse Sinus: 
	The heart and spirit nein gehabt in surplus. 
	
	In vain you alles would expect from creatures: 
	«Behold--said to the moment--you're so gorgeous» 
	The devil all the time among us wanders 
	And by the minute he awaits this phrase. 
	Nevertheless, a man, mein liebe Herren, 
	Is so uncertain in his greatest darings, 
	That each time lies as if he sells the air 
	And yet like Goethe could not goof by chance. 
	
	Und grosser Dichter Goethe made a blooper 
	With which subjected to a ganze risk that matter. 
	And Thomas Mann had ruined his best seller 
	And cher Gounod confused his lady actor. 
	The fine art is the fine art is the fine art... 
	I'd rather sing in skies than fib in concert. 
	Die Kunst gehabt the need in truthful kind heart. 
	
	By all fair means, of death, he could be scared. 
	From where the demons come, he was aware. 
	He fed der dog on all Galens, Ibn-Sinas. 
	He could das Wasser drain in knees and fingers. 
	He could define the tree age by the log rings, 
	He knew where to the stars' ways lead us rightly.
	
	But Doctor Faust nichts knew of Almighty. 
	  
	
	5
	
	There's mystique. There's faith. And there is God. 
	There's difference between them. And there's oneness. 
	Some men are itched by flesh, while some are saved. 
	Unfaith is sightlessness, or rather swine-ness. 
	
	The Lord looks down. Up above look men. 
	Yet everybody seeks his own profit.. 
	God's infinite. Indeed. And what is man? 
	And man, most probably, is very finite. 
	
	A man has got his ceiling, which in fact 
	Could always be up there, a little mobile. 
	A flatterer will find his way to heart. 
	And life no more is seen beyond the devil. 
	
	That's how Doctor Faust was. Likewise 
	Marlowe, and Goethe, Thomas Mann and masses 
	of singers, intellectuals und, alas, 
	The readers in milieu of other classes. 
	
	Same flow sweeps away their foot steps too, 
	Their retorts,--Donnerwetter!,--vibes and musings... 
	So grant them, God, the time to scream «Where to?» 
	And listen to the answers of their Muses. 
	
	An honest German for der Weg zuruck 
	Won't wait until he's summoned by the others. 
	He takes his Walter out of his warm slacks 
	And then forever leaves to a Walter-Closet. 
	  
	
	6
	
	Fraulein, please tell me was ist das «incubus»? 
	Incubus das ist eine kleine globus. 
	Noch grosser Dichter Goethe gave us rebus 
	And Ibycus's evil bearing cranes, 
	When having fled off Weimar's foggy cloud, 
	They, of the pocket, snatched a key right out, 
	By Eckermann’s insight, not being rescued. 
	And now we got, Matrosen, in a fix. 
	
	There are spiritually thuthful queries. 
	Mystique is indication of a failure 
	In an attempt to handle them. However, 
	Ich bin--unworthy topic to debate--. 
	Zum beispiel: Ceiling starts the roofing layers; 
	One poem lavisher . . . one human--nietzsche-r. 
	I can recall Godmother in a niche there. 
	Abundant Fruhstuck served right into bed. 
	
	Again September, Boredom. Full moon's blown. 
	Gray witch does «meow» at my feet below. 
	I put a hatchet right beneath my pillow... 
	Some schnapps will do! Well this is apgemacht! 
	Jawohl, September. Character gets rotten 
	And spinning, in a field a roaring tractor. 
	
	Ich liebe life and «Volkisch Beobachter». 
	Gut Nacht, mein liebe Herren. Ja, gut Nacht.