*** Gwendolyn Brooks (1917 - 2000)


1. THE BEAN EATERS

	They eat beans mostly, this old yellow pair.
	Dinner is a casual affair.
	Plain chipware on a plain and creaking wood,
	Tin flatware.
	
	Two who are Mostly Good.
	Two who have lived their day,
	But keep on putting on their clothes
	And putting things away.
	
	And remembering . . .
	Remembering, with twinklings and twinges,
	As they lean over the beans in their rented back room that
	is full of beads and receipts and dolls and cloths,
	tobacco crumbs, vases and fringes.


2. THE LOVERS OF THE POOR

	arrive. The Ladies from the Ladies’ Betterment League
	Arrive in the afternoon, the late light slanting   
	In diluted gold bars across the boulevard brag
	Of proud, seamed faces with mercy and murder hinting   
	Here, there, interrupting, all deep and debonair,
	The pink paint on the innocence of fear;   
	Walk in a gingerly manner up the hall.
	Cutting with knives served by their softest care,   
	Served by their love, so barbarously fair.
	Whose mothers taught: You’d better not be cruel!   
	You had better not throw stones upon the wrens!   
	Herein they kiss and coddle and assault   
	Anew and dearly in the innocence   
	With which they baffle nature. Who are full,   
	Sleek, tender-clad, fit, fiftyish, a-glow, all   
	Sweetly abortive, hinting at fat fruit,   
	Judge it high time that fiftyish fingers felt   
	Beneath the lovelier planes of enterprise.   
	To resurrect. To moisten with milky chill.   
	To be a random hitching-post or plush.
	To be, for wet eyes, random and handy hem.
	                       Their guild is giving money to the poor.
	The worthy poor. The very very worthy
	And beautiful poor. Perhaps just not too swarthy?
	perhaps just not too dirty nor too dim   
	Nor--passionate. In truth, what they could wish
	Is--something less than derelict or dull.
	Not staunch enough to stab, though, gaze for gaze!
	God shield them sharply from the beggar-bold!   
	The noxious needy ones whose battle’s bald   
	Nonetheless for being voiceless, hits one down.
	                       But it’s all so bad! and entirely too much for them.
	The stench; the urine, cabbage, and dead beans,
	Dead porridges of assorted dusty grains,
	The old smoke, heavy diapers, and, they’re told,
	Something called chitterlings. The darkness. Drawn
	Darkness, or dirty light. The soil that stirs.   
	The soil that looks the soil of centuries.
	And for that matter the general oldness. Old   
	Wood. Old marble. Old tile. Old old old.
	Not homekind Oldness! Not Lake Forest, Glencoe.
	Nothing is sturdy, nothing is majestic,
	There is no quiet drama, no rubbed glaze, no   
	Unkillable infirmity of such
	A tasteful turn as lately they have left,   
	Glencoe, Lake Forest, and to which their cars   
	Must presently restore them. When they’re done
	With dullards and distortions of this fistic
	Patience of the poor and put-upon.
	                       They’ve never seen such a make-do-ness as   
	Newspaper rugs before! In this, this “flat,”   
	Their hostess is gathering up the oozed, the rich   
	Rugs of the morning (tattered! the bespattered. . . .)   
	Readies to spread clean rugs for afternoon.   
	Here is a scene for you. The Ladies look,   
	In horror, behind a substantial citizeness   
	Whose trains clank out across her swollen heart.   
	Who, arms akimbo, almost fills a door.
	All tumbling children, quilts dragged to the floor   
	And tortured thereover, potato peelings, soft-
	Eyed kitten, hunched-up, haggard, to-be-hurt.
	                       Their League is allotting largesse to the Lost.   
	But to put their clean, their pretty money, to put   
	Their money collected from delicate rose-fingers   
	Tipped with their hundred flawless rose-nails seems . . .
	                       They own Spode, Lowestoft, candelabra,   
	Mantels, and hostess gowns, and sunburst clocks,   
	Turtle soup, Chippendale, red satin “hangings,”   
	Aubussons and Hattie Carnegie. They Winter   
	In Palm Beach; cross the Water in June; attend,   
	When suitable, the nice Art Institute;
	Buy the right books in the best bindings; saunter   
	On Michigan, Easter mornings, in sun or wind.   
	Oh Squalor! This sick four-story hulk, this fibre   
	With fissures everywhere! Why, what are bringings   
	Of loathe-love largesse? What shall peril hungers   
	So old old, what shall flatter the desolate?   
	Tin can, blocked fire escape and chitterling
	And swaggering seeking youth and the puzzled wreckage   
	Of the middle passage, and urine and stale shames   
	And, again, the porridges of the underslung
	And children children children. Heavens! That
	Was a rat, surely, off there, in the shadows? Long
	And long-tailed? Gray? The Ladies from the Ladies’   
	Betterment League agree it will be better
	To achieve the outer air that rights and steadies,
	To hie to a house that does not holler, to ring
	Bells elsetime, better presently to cater
	To no more Possibilities, to get
	Away. Perhaps the money can be posted.
	Perhaps they two may choose another Slum!
	Some serious sooty half-unhappy home!--
	Where loathe-love likelier may be invested.
	                       Keeping their scented bodies in the center   
	Of the hall as they walk down the hysterical hall,   
	They allow their lovely skirts to graze no wall,
	Are off at what they manage of a canter,
	And, resuming all the clues of what they were,
	Try to avoid inhaling the laden air.


3. A SUNSET OF THE CITY

	Already I am no longer looked at with lechery or love.
	My daughters and sons have put me away with marbles and dolls,
	Are gone from the house.
	My husband and lovers are pleasant or somewhat polite
	And night is night.
	It is a real chill out,
	The genuine thing.
	I am not deceived, I do not think it is still summer
	Because sun stays and birds continue to sing.
	It is summer-gone that I see, it is summer-gone.
	The sweet flowers indrying and dying down,
	The grasses forgetting their blaze and consenting to brown.
	It is a real chill out. The fall crisp comes.
	I am aware there is winter to heed.
	There is no warm house
	That is fitted with my need.
	I am cold in this cold house this house
	Whose washed echoes are tremulous down lost halls.
	I am a woman, and dusty, standing among new affairs.
	I am a woman who hurries through her prayers.
	Tin intimations of a quiet core to be my
	Desert and my dear relief
	Come: there shall be such islanding from grief,
	And small communion with the master shore.
	Twang they. And I incline this ear to tin,
	Consult a dual dilemma. Whether to dry
	In humming pallor or to leap and die.
	Somebody muffed it? Somebody wanted to joke.


4. TRUTH

	And if sun comes
	How shall we greet him?
	Shall we not dread him,
	Shall we not fear him
	After so lengthy a
	Session with shade?
	
	Though we have wept for him,
	Though we have prayed
	All through the night-years--
	What if we wake one shimmering morning to
	Hear the fierce hammering
	Of his firm knuckles
	Hard on the door?
	
	Shall we not shudder?--
	Shall we not flee
	Into the shelter, the dear thick shelter
	Of the familiar
	Propitious haze?
	
	Sweet is it, sweet is it
	To sleep in the coolness
	Of snug unawareness.
	
	The dark hangs heavily
	Over the eyes.