*** Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806 - 1861)


1. THE CRY OF THE CHILDREN

	“Pheu pheu, ti prosderkesthe m ommasin, tekna;” 
	_Alas, alas, why do you gaze at me with your eyes, my children._ --Medea.
	
	Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers, 
	     Ere the sorrow comes with years ? 
	They are leaning their young heads against their mothers,-- 
	     And that cannot stop their tears. 
	The young lambs are bleating in the meadows ; 
	  The young birds are chirping in the nest ; 
	The young fawns are playing with the shadows ; 
	  The young flowers are blowing toward the west-- 
	But the young, young children, O my brothers, 
	     They are weeping bitterly ! 
	They are weeping in the playtime of the others, 
	     In the country of the free. 
	
	Do you question the young children in the sorrow, 
	     Why their tears are falling so ? 
	The old man may weep for his to-morrow 
	     Which is lost in Long Ago-- 
	The old tree is leafless in the forest-- 
	  The old year is ending in the frost-- 
	The old wound, if stricken, is the sorest-- 
	  The old hope is hardest to be lost : 
	But the young, young children, O my brothers, 
	     Do you ask them why they stand 
	Weeping sore before the bosoms of their mothers, 
	     In our happy Fatherland ? 
	
	They look up with their pale and sunken faces, 
	     And their looks are sad to see, 
	For the man’s grief abhorrent, draws and presses 
	     Down the cheeks of infancy-- 
	“Your old earth,” they say, “is very dreary;” 
	  “Our young feet,” they say, “are very weak !” 
	Few paces have we taken, yet are weary-- 
	  Our grave-rest is very far to seek ! 
	Ask the old why they weep, and not the children, 
	     For the outside earth is cold-- 
	And we young ones stand without, in our bewildering, 
	     And the graves are for the old !” 
	
	“True,” say the children, “it may happen 
	     That we die before our time ! 
	Little Alice died last year her grave is shapen 
	     Like a snowball, in the rime. 
	We looked into the pit prepared to take her-- 
	  Was no room for any work in the close clay : 
	From the sleep wherein she lieth none will wake her, 
	  Crying, ‘Get up, little Alice ! it is day.’ 
	If you listen by that grave, in sun and shower, 
	  With your ear down, little Alice never cries ; 
	Could we see her face, be sure we should not know her, 
	  For the smile has time for growing in her eyes ,-- 
	And merry go her moments, lulled and stilled in 
	     The shroud, by the kirk-chime ! 
	It is good when it happens,” say the children, 
	     “That we die before our time !” 
	
	Alas, the wretched children ! they are seeking 
	     Death in life, as best to have ! 
	They are binding up their hearts away from breaking, 
	     With a cerement from the grave. 
	Go out, children, from the mine and from the city-- 
	  Sing out, children, as the little thrushes do-- 
	Pluck you handfuls of the meadow-cowslips pretty 
	  Laugh aloud, to feel your fingers let them through ! 
	But they answer, ” Are your cowslips of the meadows 
	     Like our weeds anear the mine ? 
	Leave us quiet in the dark of the coal-shadows, 
	     From your pleasures fair and fine! 
	
	“For oh,” say the children, “we are weary, 
	     And we cannot run or leap-- 
	If we cared for any meadows, it were merely 
	     To drop down in them and sleep. 
	Our knees tremble sorely in the stooping-- 
	  We fall upon our faces, trying to go ; 
	And, underneath our heavy eyelids drooping, 
	  The reddest flower would look as pale as snow. 
	For, all day, we drag our burden tiring, 
	     Through the coal-dark, underground-- 
	Or, all day, we drive the wheels of iron 
	     In the factories, round and round. 
	
	“For all day, the wheels are droning, turning,-- 
	     Their wind comes in our faces,-- 
	Till our hearts turn,-- our heads, with pulses burning, 
	     And the walls turn in their places 
	Turns the sky in the high window blank and reeling-- 
	  Turns the long light that droppeth down the wall,-- 
	Turn the black flies that crawl along the ceiling-- 
	  All are turning, all the day, and we with all !-- 
	And all day, the iron wheels are droning ; 
	     And sometimes we could pray, 
	‘O ye wheels,’ (breaking out in a mad moaning) 
	     ‘Stop ! be silent for to-day ! ’ ” 
	
	Ay ! be silent ! Let them hear each other breathing 
	     For a moment, mouth to mouth-- 
	Let them touch each other’s hands, in a fresh wreathing 
	     Of their tender human youth ! 
	Let them feel that this cold metallic motion 
	  Is not all the life God fashions or reveals-- 
	Let them prove their inward souls against the notion 
	  That they live in you, or under you, O wheels !-- 
	Still, all day, the iron wheels go onward, 
	     As if Fate in each were stark ; 
	And the children’s souls, which God is calling sunward, 
	     Spin on blindly in the dark. 
	
	Now tell the poor young children, O my brothers, 
	     To look up to Him and pray-- 
	So the blessed One, who blesseth all the others, 
	     Will bless them another day. 
	They answer, ” Who is God that He should hear us, 
	  While the rushing of the iron wheels is stirred ? 
	When we sob aloud, the human creatures near us 
	  Pass by, hearing not, or answer not a word ! 
	And we hear not (for the wheels in their resounding) 
	     Strangers speaking at the door : 
	Is it likely God, with angels singing round Him, 
	     Hears our weeping any more ? 
	
	“ Two words, indeed, of praying we remember ; 
	     And at midnight’s hour of harm,-- 
	‘Our Father,’ looking upward in the chamber, 
	     We say softly for a charm. 
	We know no other words, except ‘Our Father,’ 
	  And we think that, in some pause of angels’ song, 
	God may pluck them with the silence sweet to gather, 
	  And hold both within His right hand which is strong. 
	‘Our Father !’ If He heard us, He would surely 
	     (For they call Him good and mild) 
	Answer, smiling down the steep world very purely, 
	     ‘Come and rest with me, my child.’ 
	
	“But, no !” say the children, weeping faster, 
	     ” He is speechless as a stone ; 
	And they tell us, of His image is the master 
	     Who commands us to work on. 
	Go to ! ” say the children,--“up in Heaven, 
	  Dark, wheel-like, turning clouds are all we find ! 
	Do not mock us ; grief has made us unbelieving-- 
	  We look up for God, but tears have made us blind.” 
	Do ye hear the children weeping and disproving, 
	     O my brothers, what ye preach ? 
	For God’s possible is taught by His world’s loving-- 
	     And the children doubt of each. 
	
	And well may the children weep before you ; 
	     They are weary ere they run ; 
	They have never seen the sunshine, nor the glory 
	     Which is brighter than the sun : 
	They know the grief of man, without its wisdom ; 
	  They sink in the despair, without its calm-- 
	Are slaves, without the liberty in Christdom,-- 
	  Are martyrs, by the pang without the palm,-- 
	Are worn, as if with age, yet unretrievingly 
	     No dear remembrance keep,-- 
	Are orphans of the earthly love and heavenly : 
	     Let them weep ! let them weep ! 
	
	They look up, with their pale and sunken faces, 
	     And their look is dread to see, 
	For they think you see their angels in their places, 
	     With eyes meant for Deity ;-- 
	“How long,” they say, “how long, O cruel nation, 
	  Will you stand, to move the world, on a child’s heart,-- 
	Stifle down with a mailed heel its palpitation, 
	  And tread onward to your throne amid the mart ? 
	Our blood splashes upward, O our tyrants, 
	     And your purple shews your path ; 
	But the child’s sob curseth deeper in the silence 
	     Than the strong man in his wrath !”



2. GRIEF

	I tell you, hopeless grief is passionless; 
	That only men incredulous of despair, 
	Half-taught in anguish, through the midnight air 
	Beat upward to God’s throne in loud access 
	Of shrieking and reproach. Full desertness, 
	In souls as countries, lieth silent-bare 
	Under the blanching, vertical eye-glare 
	Of the absolute heavens. Deep-hearted man, express 
	Grief for thy dead in silence like to death--
	Most like a monumental statue set 
	In everlasting watch and moveless woe 
	Till itself crumble to the dust beneath. 
	Touch it; the marble eyelids are not wet: 
	If it could weep, it could arise and go. 



3. LOVE

	We cannot live, except thus mutually 
	We alternate, aware or unaware, 
	The reflex act of life: and when we bear 
	Our virtue onward most impulsively, 
	Most full of invocation, and to be 
	Most instantly compellant, certes, there 
	We live most life, whoever breathes most air 
	And counts his dying years by sun and sea. 
	But when a soul, by choice and conscience, doth 
	Throw out her full force on another soul, 
	The conscience and the concentration both 
	Make mere life, Love. For Life in perfect whole 
	And aim consummated, is Love in sooth, 
	As nature’s magnet-heat rounds pole with pole. 



4. A MUSICAL INSTRUMENT

	I. 
	
	WHAT was he doing, the great god Pan, 
	   Down in the reeds by the river ? 
	Spreading ruin and scattering ban, 
	Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat, 
	And breaking the golden lilies afloat 
	   With the dragon-fly on the river. 
	
	
	II. 
	
	He tore out a reed, the great god Pan, 
	   From the deep cool bed of the river : 
	The limpid water turbidly ran, 
	And the broken lilies a-dying lay, 
	And the dragon-fly had fled away, 
	   Ere he brought it out of the river. 
	
	
	III. 
	
	High on the shore sate the great god Pan, 
	   While turbidly flowed the river ; 
	And hacked and hewed as a great god can, 
	With his hard bleak steel at the patient reed, 
	Till there was not a sign of a leaf indeed 
	   To prove it fresh from the river. 
	
	
	IV. 
	
	He cut it short, did the great god Pan, 
	   (How tall it stood in the river !) 
	Then drew the pith, like the heart of a man, 
	Steadily from the outside ring, 
	And notched the poor dry empty thing 
	   In holes, as he sate by the river. 
	
	
	V. 
	
	This is the way,’ laughed the great god Pan, 
	   Laughed while he sate by the river,) 
	The only way, since gods began 
	To make sweet music, they could succeed.’ 
	Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed, 
	   He blew in power by the river. 
	
	
	VI. 
	
	Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan ! 
	   Piercing sweet by the river ! 
	Blinding sweet, O great god Pan ! 
	The sun on the hill forgot to die, 
	And the lilies revived, and the dragon-fly 
	   Came back to dream on the river. 
	
	
	VII. 
	
	Yet half a beast is the great god Pan, 
	   To laugh as he sits by the river, 
	Making a poet out of a man : 
	The true gods sigh for the cost and pain,-- 
	For the reed which grows nevermore again 
	   As a reed with the reeds in the river. 



5. MY HEART AND I

	I. 
	
	ENOUGH ! we’re tired, my heart and I. 
	We sit beside the headstone thus, 
	And wish that name were carved for us. 
	The moss reprints more tenderly 
	The hard types of the mason’s knife, 
	As heaven’s sweet life renews earth’s life 
	With which we’re tired, my heart and I. 
	
	
	II. 
	
	You see we’re tired, my heart and I. 
	We dealt with books, we trusted men, 
	And in our own blood drenched the pen, 
	As if such colours could not fly. 
	We walked too straight for fortune’s end, 
	We loved too true to keep a friend ; 
	At last we’re tired, my heart and I. 
	
	
	III. 
	
	How tired we feel, my heart and I ! 
	We seem of no use in the world ; 
	Our fancies hang grey and uncurled 
	About men’s eyes indifferently ; 
	Our voice which thrilled you so, will let 
	You sleep; our tears are only wet : 
	What do we here, my heart and I ? 
	
	
	IV. 
	
	So tired, so tired, my heart and I ! 
	It was not thus in that old time 
	When Ralph sat with me ‘neath the lime 
	To watch the sunset from the sky. 
	Dear love, you’re looking tired,’ he said; 
	I, smiling at him, shook my head : 
	‘Tis now we’re tired, my heart and I. 
	
	
	V. 
	
	So tired, so tired, my heart and I ! 
	Though now none takes me on his arm 
	To fold me close and kiss me warm 
	Till each quick breath end in a sigh 
	Of happy languor. Now, alone, 
	We lean upon this graveyard stone, 
	Uncheered, unkissed, my heart and I. 
	
	
	VI. 
	
	Tired out we are, my heart and I. 
	Suppose the world brought diadems 
	To tempt us, crusted with loose gems 
	Of powers and pleasures ? Let it try. 
	We scarcely care to look at even 
	A pretty child, or God’s blue heaven, 
	We feel so tired, my heart and I. 
	
	
	VII. 
	
	Yet who complains ? My heart and I ? 
	In this abundant earth no doubt 
	Is little room for things worn out : 
	Disdain them, break them, throw them by 
	And if before the days grew rough 
	We once were loved, used,-- well enough, 
	I think, we’ve fared, my heart and I. 
