*** Robert Browning (1812 - 1889)


1. AMONG THE ROCKS

	Oh, good gigantic smile o’ the brown old earth, 
	This autumn morning! How he sets his bones 
	To bask i’ the sun, and thrusts out knees and feet 
	For the ripple to run over in its mirth; 
	Listening the while, where on the heap of stones 
	The white breast of the sea-lark twitters sweet. 
	
	That is the doctrine, simple, ancient, true; 
	Such is life’s trial, as old earth smiles and knows. 
	If you loved only what were worth your love, 
	Love were clear gain, and wholly well for you: 
	Make the low nature better by your throes! 
	Give earth yourself, go up for gain above!


2. CONFESSIONS

	What is he buzzing in my ears? 
	“Now that I come to die, 
	Do I view the world as a vale of tears?” 
	Ah, reverend sir, not I! 
	
	What I viewed there once, what I view again 
	Where the physic bottles stand 
	On the table’s edge,--is a suburb lane, 
	With a wall to my bedside hand. 
	
	That lane sloped, much as the bottles do, 
	From a house you could descry 
	O’er the garden-wall; is the curtain blue 
	Or green to a healthy eye? 
	
	To mine, it serves for the old June weather 
	Blue above lane and wall; 
	And that farthest bottle labelled “Ether” 
	Is the house o’ertopping all. 
	
	At a terrace, somewhere near the stopper, 
	There watched for me, one June, 
	A girl: I know, sir, it’s improper, 
	My poor mind’s out of tune. 
	
	Only, there was a way... you crept 
	Close by the side, to dodge 
	Eyes in the house, two eyes except: 
	They styled their house “The Lodge.” 
	
	What right had a lounger up their lane? 
	But, by creeping very close, 
	With the good wall’s help,--their eyes might strain 
	And stretch themselves to Oes, 
	
	Yet never catch her and me together, 
	As she left the attic, there, 
	By the rim of the bottle labelled “Ether,” 
	And stole from stair to stair, 
	
	And stood by the rose-wreathed gate. Alas, 
	We loved, sir--used to meet: 
	How sad and bad and mad it was-- 
	But then, how it was sweet! 


3. EPILOGUE

	At the midnight in the silence of the sleep-time,
	 When you set your fancies free,
	Will they pass to where--by death, fools think, imprisoned--
	Low he lies who once so loved you, whom you loved so,
	         --Pity me?
	
	Oh to love so, be so loved, yet so mistaken!
	 What had I on earth to do
	With the slothful, with the mawkish, the unmanly?
	Like the aimless, helpless, hopeless, did I drivel
	         --Being--who?
	
	One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
	 Never doubted clouds would break,
	Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
	Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
	         Sleep to wake.
	
	No, at noonday in the bustle of man’s work-time
	 Greet the unseen with a cheer!
	Bid him forward, breast and back as either should be,
	“Strive and thrive!” cry “Speed,--fight on, fare ever
	         There as here!”


4. THE LOST MISTRESS

	I
	
	All’s over, then: does truth sound bitter
	 As one at first believes?
	Hark, ‘tis the sparrows’ good-night twitter
	 About your cottage eaves!
	
	
	II
	
	And the leaf-buds on the vine are woolly,
	 I noticed that, to-day;
	One day more bursts them open fully
	 --You know the red turns grey.
	
	
	III
	
	To-morrow we meet the same then, dearest?
	 May I take your hand in mine?
	Mere friends are we,--well, friends the merest
	 Keep much that I resign:
	
	
	IV
	
	For each glance of the eye so bright and black,
	 Though I keep with heart’s endeavour,--
	Your voice, when you wish the snowdrops back,
	 Though it stay in my soul for ever!--
	
	
	V
	
	Yet I will but say what mere friends say,
	 Or only a thought stronger;
	I will hold your hand but as long as all may,
	 Or so very little longer!


5. NOW

	Out of your whole life give but one moment! 
	All of your life that has gone before, 
	All to come after it,--so you ignore, 
	So you make perfect the present,--condense, 
	In a rapture of rage, for perfection’s endowment, 
	Thought and feeling and soul and sense--
	Merged in a moment which gives me at last 
	You around me for once, you beneath me, above me--
	Me--sure that despite of time future, time past,--
	This tick of our life-time’s one moment you love me! 
	How long such suspension may linger? Ah, Sweet--
	The moment eternal--just that and no more--
	When ecstasy’s utmost we clutch at the core 
	While cheeks burn, arms open, eyes shut and lips meet! 


6. THE REAL AND TRUE AND SURE

	Marriage on earth seems such a counterfeit, 
	Mere imitation of the inimitable: 
	In heaven we have the real and true and sure. 
	’Tis there they neither marry nor are given 
	In marriage but are as the angels: right, 
	Oh how right that is, how like Jesus Christ 
	To say that! Marriage-making for the earth, 
	With gold so much,--birth, power, repute so much, 
	Or beauty, youth so much, in lack of these! 
	Be as the angels rather, who, apart, 
	Know themselves into one, are found at length 
	Married, but marry never, no, nor give 
	In marriage; they are man and wife at once 
	When the true time is: here we have to wait 
	Not so long neither! Could we by a wish 
	Have what we will and get the future now, 
	Would we wish aught done undone in the past? 
	So, let him wait God’s instant men call years; 
	Meantime hold hard by truth and his great soul, 
	Do out the duty! Through such souls alone 
	God stooping shows sufficient of His light 
	For us i’ the dark to rise by. And I rise. 