*** William Cullen Bryant (1794 - 1878)


1. AFTER A TEMPEST

	 The day had been a day of wind and storm;--
	 The wind was laid, the storm was overpast,--
	 And stooping from the zenith bright and warm
	 Shone the great sun on the wide earth at last.
	 I stood upon the upland slope, and cast
	 My eye upon a broad and beauteous scene,
	 Where the vast plain lay girt by mountains vast,
	 And hills o’er hills lifted their heads of green,
	With pleasant vales scooped out and villages between.
	
	 The rain-drops glistened on the trees around,
	 Whose shadows on the tall grass were not stirred,
	 Save when a shower of diamonds, to the ground,
	 Was shaken by the flight of startled bird;
	 For birds were warbling round, and bees were heard
	 About the flowers; the cheerful rivulet sung
	 And gossiped, as he hastened ocean-ward;
	 To the gray oak the squirrel, chiding, clung,
	And chirping from the ground the grasshopper upsprung.
	
	 And from beneath the leaves that kept them dry
	 Flew many a glittering insect here and there,
	 And darted up and down the butterfly,
	 That seemed a living blossom of the air.
	 The flocks came scattering from the thicket, where
	 The violent rain had pent them; in the way
	 Strolled groups of damsels frolicksome and fair;
	 The farmer swung the scythe or turned the hay,
	And ’twixt the heavy swaths his children were at play.
	
	 It was a scene of peace--and, like a spell,
	 Did that serene and golden sunlight fall
	 Upon the motionless wood that clothed the fell,
	 And precipice upspringing like a wall,
	 And glassy river and white waterfall,
	 And happy living things that trod the bright
	 And beauteous scene; while far beyond them all,
	 On many a lovely valley, out of sight,
	Was poured from the blue heavens the same soft golden light.
	
	 I looked, and thought the quiet of the scene
	 An emblem of the peace that yet shall be,
	 When o’er earth’s continents, and isles between,
	 The noise of war shall cease from sea to sea,
	 And married nations dwell in harmony;
	 When millions, crouching in the dust to one,
	 No more shall beg their lives on bended knee,
	 Nor the black stake be dressed, nor in the sun
	The o’erlaboured captive toil, and wish his life were done.
	
	 Too long, at clash of arms amid her bowers
	 And pools of blood, the earth has stood aghast,
	 The fair earth, that should only blush with flowers
	 And ruddy fruits; but not for aye can last
	 The storm, and sweet the sunshine when ‘tis past.
	 Lo, the clouds roll away--they break--they fly,
	 And, like the glorious light of summer, cast
	 O’er the wide landscape from the embracing sky,
	On all the peaceful world the smile of heaven shall lie.


2. AUTUMN WOODS

	    Ere, in the northern gale,
	The summer tresses of the trees are gone,
	The woods of Autumn, all around our vale,
	    Have put their glory on.
	
	    The mountains that infold,
	In their wide sweep, the coloured landscape round,
	Seem groups of giant kings, in purple and gold,
	    That guard the enchanted ground.
	
	    I roam the woods that crown
	The upland, where the mingled splendours glow,
	Where the gay company of trees look down
	    On the green fields below.
	
	    My steps are not alone
	In these bright walks; the sweet south-west, at play,
	Flies, rustling, where the painted leaves are strown
	    Along the winding way.
	
	    And far in heaven, the while,
	The sun, that sends that gale to wander here,
	Pours out on the fair earth his quiet smile,--
	    The sweetest of the year.
	
	    Where now the solemn shade,
	Verdure and gloom where many branches meet;
	So grateful, when the noon of summer made
	    The valleys sick with heat?
	
	    Let in through all the trees
	Come the strange rays; the forest depths are bright?
	Their sunny-coloured foliage, in the breeze,
	    Twinkles, like beams of light.
	
	    The rivulet, late unseen,
	Where bickering through the shrubs its waters run,
	Shines with the image of its golden screen,
	    And glimmerings of the sun.
	
	    But ’neath yon crimson tree,
	Lover to listening maid might breathe his flame,
	Nor mark, within its roseate canopy,
	    Her blush of maiden shame.
	
	    Oh, Autumn! why so soon
	Depart the hues that make thy forests glad;
	Thy gentle wind and thy fair sunny noon,
	    And leave thee wild and sad!
	
	    Ah! ’twere a lot too blessed
	For ever in thy coloured shades to stray;
	Amid the kisses of the soft south-west
	    To rove and dream for aye;
	
	    And leave the vain low strife
	That makes men mad--the tug for wealth and power,
	The passions and the cares that wither life,
	    And waste its little hour.


3. THE DAMSEL OF PERU

	Where olive leaves were twinkling in every wind that blew,
	There sat beneath the pleasant shade a damsel of Peru.
	Betwixt the slender boughs, as they opened to the air,
	Came glimpses of her ivory neck and of her glossy hair;
	And sweetly rang her silver voice, within that shady nook,
	As from the shrubby glen is heard the sound of hidden brook.
	
	’Tis a song of love and valour, in the noble Spanish tongue,
	That once upon the sunny plains of old Castile was sung;
	When, from their mountain holds, on the Moorish rout below,
	Had rushed the Christians like a flood, and swept away the foe.
	A while that melody is still, and then breaks forth anew
	A wilder rhyme, a livelier note, of freedom and Peru.
	
	For she has bound the sword to a youthful lover’s side,
	And sent him to the war the day she should have been his bride,
	And bade him bear a faithful heart to battle for the right,
	And held the fountains of her eyes till he was out of sight.
	Since the parting kiss was given, six weary months are fled,
	And yet the foe is in the land, and blood must yet be shed.
	
	A white hand parts the branches, a lovely face looks forth,
	And bright dark eyes gaze steadfastly and sadly toward the north
	Thou look’st in vain, sweet maiden, the sharpest sight would fail.
	To spy a sign of human life abroad in all the vale;
	For the noon is coming on, and the sunbeams fiercely beat,
	And the silent hills and forest-tops seem reeling in the heat.
	
	That white hand is withdrawn, that fair sad face is gone,
	But the music of that silver voice is flowing sweetly on,
	Not as of late, in cheerful tones, but mournfully and low,--
	A ballad of a tender maid heart-broken long ago,
	Of him who died in battle, the youthful and the brave,
	And her who died of sorrow, upon his early grave.
	
	But see, along that mountain’s slope, a fiery horseman ride;
	Mark his torn plume, his tarnished belt, the sabre at his side.
	His spurs are buried rowel-deep, he rides with loosened rein,
	There’s blood upon his charger’s flank and foam upon the mane;
	He speeds him toward the olive-grove, along that shaded hill:
	God shield the helpless maiden there, if he should mean her ill!
	
	And suddenly that song has ceased, and suddenly I hear
	A shriek sent up amid the shade, a shriek--but not of fear.
	For tender accents follow, and tenderer pauses speak
	The overflow of gladness, when words are all too weak:
	“I lay my good sword at thy feet, for now Peru is free,
	And I am come to dwell beside the olive-grove with thee.”


4. THE DEATH OF THE FLOWERS

	The melancholy days are come, the saddest of the year,
	Of wailing winds, and naked woods, and meadows brown and sear.
	Heaped in the hollows of the grove, the autumn leaves lie dead;
	They rustle to the eddying gust, and to the rabbit’s tread.
	The robin and the wren are flown, and from the shrubs the jay,
	And from the wood-top calls the crow through all the gloomy day.
	
	Where are the flowers, the fair young flowers, that lately sprang and stood
	In brighter light, and softer airs, a beauteous sisterhood?
	Alas! they all are in their graves, the gentle race, of flowers
	Are lying in their lowly beds, with the fair and good of ours.
	The rain is falling where they lie, but the cold November rain
	Calls not from out the gloomy earth the lovely ones again.
	
	The wind-flower and the violet, they perished long ago,
	And the brier-rose and the orchis died amid the summer glow;
	But on the hill the golden-rod, and the aster in the wood,
	And the yellow sun-flower by the brook in autumn beauty stood,
	Till fell the frost from the clear cold heaven, as falls the plague on men,
	And the brightness of their smile was gone, from upland, glade, and glen.
	
	And now, when comes the calm mild day, as still such days will come,
	To call the squirrel and the bee from out their winter home;
	When the sound of dropping nuts is heard, though all the trees are still,
	And twinkle in the smoky light the waters of the rill,
	The south wind searches for the flowers whose fragrance late he bore,
	And sighs to find them in the wood and by the stream no more.
	
	And then I think of one who in her youthful beauty died,
	The fair meek blossom that grew up and faded by my side:
	In the cold moist earth we laid her, when the forest cast the leaf,
	And we wept that one so lovely should have a life so brief:
	Yet not unmeet it was that one, like that young friend of ours,
	So gentle and so beautiful, should perish with the flowers.


5. AN EVENING REVERY

	The summer day is closed--the sun is set:
	Well they have done their office, those bright hours,
	The latest of whose train goes softly out
	In the red West. The green blade of the ground
	Has risen, and herds have cropped it; the young twig
	Has spread its plaited tissues to the sun;
	Flowers of the garden and the waste have blown
	And withered; seeds have fallen upon the soil,
	From bursting cells, and in their graves await
	Their resurrection. Insects from the pools
	Have filled the air awhile with humming wings,
	That now are still for ever; painted moths
	Have wandered the blue sky, and died again;
	The mother-bird hath broken for her brood
	Their prison shell, or shoved them from the nest,
	Plumed for their earliest flight. In bright alcoves,
	In woodland cottages with barky walls,
	In noisome cells of the tumultuous town,
	Mothers have clasped with joy the new-born babe.
	Graves by the lonely forest, by the shore
	Of rivers and of ocean, by the ways
	Of the thronged city, have been hollowed out
	And filled, and closed. This day hath parted friends
	That ne’er before were parted; it hath knit
	New friendships; it hath seen the maiden plight
	Her faith, and trust her peace to him who long
	Had wooed; and it hath heard, from lips which late
	Were eloquent of love, the first harsh word,
	That told the wedded one her peace was flown.
	Farewell to the sweet sunshine! One glad day
	Is added now to Childhood’s merry days,
	And one calm day to those of quiet Age.
	Still the fleet hours run on; and as I lean,
	Amid the thickening darkness, lamps are lit,
	By those who watch the dead, and those who twine
	Flowers for the bride. The mother from the eyes
	Of her sick infant shades the painful light,
	And sadly listens to his quick-drawn breath.
	
	Oh thou great Movement of the Universe,
	Or Change, or Flight of Time--for ye are one!
	That bearest, silently, this visible scene
	Into night’s shadow and the streaming rays
	Of starlight, whither art thou bearing me?
	I feel the mighty current sweep me on,
	Yet know not whither. Man foretells afar
	The courses of the stars; the very hour
	He knows when they shall darken or grow bright;
	Yet doth the eclipse of Sorrow and of Death
	Come unforewarned. Who next, of those I love,
	Shall pass from life, or, sadder yet, shall fall
	From virtue? Strife with foes, or bitterer strife
	With friends, or shame and general scorn of men--
	Which who can bear?--or the fierce rack of pain,
	Lie they within my path? Or shall the years
	Push me, with soft and inoffensive pace,
	Into the stilly twilight of my age?
	Or do the portals of another life
	Even now, while I am glorying in my strength,
	Impend around me? Oh! beyond that bourne,
	In the vast cycle of being which begins
	At that broad threshold, with what fairer forms
	Shall the great law of change and progress clothe
	Its workings? Gently--so have good men taught--
	Gently, and without grief, the old shall glide
	Into the new; the eternal flow of things,
	Like a bright river of the fields of heaven,
	Shall journey onward in perpetual peace.


6. THE FOUNTAIN

	Fountain, that springest on this grassy slope,
	Thy quick cool murmur mingles pleasantly,
	With the cool sound of breezes in the beach,
	Above me in the noontide. Thou dost wear
	No stain of thy dark birthplace; gushing up
	From the red mould and slimy roots of earth,
	Thou flashest in the sun. The mountain air,
	In winter, is not clearer, nor the dew
	That shines on mountain blossom. Thus doth God
	Bring, from the dark and foul, the pure and bright.
	
	This tangled thicket on the bank above
	Thy basin, how thy waters keep it green!
	For thou dost feed the roots of the wild vine
	That trails all over it, and to the twigs
	Ties fast her clusters. There the spice-bush lifts
	Her leafy lances; the viburnum there,
	Paler of foliage, to the sun holds up
	Her circlet of green berries. In and out
	The chipping sparrow, in her coat of brown,
	Steals silently, lest I should mark her nest.
	
	Not such thou wert of yore, ere yet the axe
	Had smitten the old woods. Then hoary trunks
	Of oak, and plane, and hickory, o’er thee held
	A mighty canopy. When April winds
	Grew soft, the maple burst into a flush
	Of scarlet flowers. The tulip-tree, high up,
	Opened, in airs of June, her multitude
	Of golden chalices to humming-birds
	And silken-winged insects of the sky.
	
	Frail wood-plants clustered round thy edge in Spring.
	The liverleaf put forth her sister blooms
	Of faintest blue. Here the quick-footed wolf,
	Passing to lap thy waters, crushed the flower
	Of sanguinaria, from whose brittle stem
	The red drops fell like blood. The deer, too, left
	Her delicate foot-print in the soft moist mould,
	And on the fallen leaves. The slow-paced bear,
	In such a sultry summer noon as this,
	Stopped at thy stream, and drank, and leaped across.
	
	But thou hast histories that stir the heart
	With deeper feeling; while I look on thee
	They rise before me. I behold the scene
	Hoary again with forests; I behold
	The Indian warrior, whom a hand unseen
	Has smitten with his death-wound in the woods,
	Creep slowly to thy well-known rivulet,
	And slake his death-thirst. Hark, that quick fierce cry
	That rends the utter silence; ’tis the whoop
	Of battle, and a throng of savage men
	With naked arms and faces stained like blood,
	Fill the green wilderness; the long bare arms
	Are heaved aloft, bows twang and arrows stream;
	Each makes a tree his shield, and every tree
	Sends forth its arrow. Fierce the fight and short,
	As is the whirlwind. Soon the conquerors
	And conquered vanish, and the dead remain
	Mangled by tomahawks. The mighty woods
	Are still again, the frighted bird comes back
	And plumes her wings; but thy sweet waters run
	Crimson with blood. Then, as the sun goes down,
	Amid the deepening twilight I descry
	Figures of men that crouch and creep unheard,
	And bear away the dead. The next day’s shower
	Shall wash the tokens of the fight away.
	
	I look again--a hunter’s lodge is built,
	With poles and boughs, beside thy crystal well,
	While the meek autumn stains the woods with gold,
	And sheds his golden sunshine. To the door
	The red man slowly drags the enormous bear
	Slain in the chestnut thicket, or flings down
	The deer from his strong shoulders. Shaggy fells
	Of wolf and cougar hang upon the walls,
	And loud the black-eyed Indian maidens laugh,
	That gather, from the rustling heaps of leaves,
	The hickory’s white nuts, and the dark fruit
	That falls from the gray butternut’s long boughs.
	
	So centuries passed by, and still the woods
	Blossomed in spring, and reddened when the year
	Grew chill, and glistened in the frozen rains
	Of winter, till the white man swung the axe
	Beside thee--signal of a mighty change.
	Then all around was heard the crash of trees,
	Trembling awhile and rushing to the ground,
	The low of ox, and shouts of men who fired
	The brushwood, or who tore the earth with ploughs.
	The grain sprang thick and tall, and hid in green
	The blackened hill-side; ranks of spiky maize
	Rose like a host embattled; the buckwheat
	Whitened broad acres, sweetening with its flowers
	The August wind. White cottages were seen
	With rose-trees at the windows; barns from which
	Came loud and shrill the crowing of the cock;
	Pastures where rolled and neighed the lordly horse,
	And white flocks browsed and bleated. A rich turf
	Of grasses brought from far o’ercrept thy bank,
	Spotted with the white clover. Blue-eyed girls
	Brought pails, and dipped them in thy crystal pool;
	And children, ruddy-cheeked and flaxen-haired,
	Gathered the glistening cowslip from thy edge.
	
	Since then, what steps have trod thy border! Here
	On thy green bank, the woodmann of the swamp
	Has laid his axe, the reaper of the hill
	His sickle, as they stooped to taste thy stream.
	The sportsman, tired with wandering in the still
	September noon, has bathed his heated brow
	In thy cool current. Shouting boys, let loose
	For a wild holiday, have quaintly shaped
	Into a cup the folded linden leaf,
	And dipped thy sliding crystal. From the wars
	Returning, the plumed soldier by thy side
	Has sat, and mused how pleasant ‘twere to dwell
	In such a spot, and be as free as thou,
	And move for no man’s bidding more. At eve,
	When thou wert crimson with the crimson sky,
	Lovers have gazed upon thee, and have thought
	Their mingled lives should flow as peacefully
	And brightly as thy waters. Here the sage,
	Gazing into thy self-replenished depth,
	Has seen eternal order circumscribe
	And bind the motions of eternal change,
	And from the gushing of thy simple fount
	Has reasoned to the mighty universe.
	
	Is there no other change for thee, that lurks
	Among the future ages? Will not man
	Seek out strange arts to wither and deform
	The pleasant landscape which thou makest green?
	Or shall the veins that feed thy constant stream
	Be choked in middle earth, and flow no more
	For ever, that the water-plants along
	Thy channel perish, and the bird in vain
	Alight to drink? Haply shall these green hills
	Sink, with the lapse of years, into the gulf
	Of ocean waters, and thy source be lost
	Amidst the bitter brine? Or shall they rise,
	Upheaved in broken cliffs and airy peaks,
	Haunts of the eagle and the snake, and thou
	Gush midway from the bare and barren steep?


7. GREEN RIVER

	When breezes are soft and skies are fair,
	I steal an hour from study and care,
	And hie me away to the woodland scene,
	Where wanders the stream with waters of green,
	As if the bright fringe of herbs on its brink
	Had given their stain to the wave they drink;
	And they, whose meadows it murmurs through,
	Have named the stream from its own fair hue.
	
	Yet pure its waters--its shallows are bright
	With coloured pebbles and sparkles of light,
	And clear the depths where its eddies play,
	And dimples deepen and whirl away,
	And the plane-tree’s speckled arms o’ershoot
	The swifter current that mines its root,
	Through whose shifting leaves, as you walk the hill,
	The quivering glimmer of sun and rill
	With a sudden flash on the eye is thrown,
	Like the ray that streams from the diamond stone.
	Oh, loveliest there the spring days come,
	With blossoms, and birds, and wild bees’ hum;
	The flowers of summer are fairest there,
	And freshest the breath of the summer air;
	And sweetest the golden autumn day
	In silence and sunshine glides away.
	
	Yet fair as thou art, thou shunnest to glide,
	Beautiful stream! by the village side;
	But windest away from haunts of men,
	To quiet valley and shaded glen;
	And forest, and meadow, and slope of hill,
	Around thee, are lonely, lovely, and still.
	Lonely--save when, by thy rippling tides,
	From thicket to thicket the angler glides;
	Or the simpler comes with basket and book,
	For herbs of power on thy banks to look;
	Or haply, some idle dreamer, like me,
	To wander, and muse, and gaze on thee.
	Still--save the chirp of birds that feed
	On the river cherry and seedy reed,
	And thy own wild music gushing out
	With mellow murmur and fairy shout,
	From dawn to the blush of another day,
	Like traveller singing along his way.
	
	That fairy music I never hear,
	Nor gaze on those waters so green and clear,
	And mark them winding away from sight,
	Darkened with shade or flashing with light,
	While o’er them the vine to its thicket clings,
	And the zephyr stoops to freshen his wings,
	But I wish that fate had left me free
	To wander these quiet haunts with thee,
	Till the eating cares of earth should depart,
	And the peace of the scene pass into my heart;
	And I envy thy stream, as it glides along,
	Through its beautiful banks in a trance of song.
	
	Though forced to drudge for the dregs of men,
	And scrawl strange words with the barbarous pen,
	And mingle among the jostling crowd,
	Where the sons of strife are subtle and loud--
	I often come to this quiet place,
	To breathe the airs that ruffle thy face,
	And gaze upon thee in silent dream,
	For in thy lonely and lovely stream
	An image of that calm life appears
	That won my heart in my greener years.


8. JUNE

	I gazed upon the glorious sky
	 And the green mountains round,
	And thought that when I came to lie
	 Within the silent ground,
	‘Twere pleasant, that in flowery June,
	When brooks send up a cheerful tune,
	 And groves a joyous sound,
	The sexton’s hand, my grave to make,
	The rich, green mountain turf should break.
	
	A cell within the frozen mould,
	 A coffin borne through sleet,
	And icy clods above it rolled,
	 While fierce the tempests beat--
	Away!--I will not think of these--
	Blue be the sky and soft the breeze,
	 Earth green beneath the feet,
	And be the damp mould gently pressed
	Into my narrow place of rest.
	
	There through the long, long summer hours,
	 The golden light should lie,
	And thick young herbs and groups of flowers
	 Stand in their beauty by.
	The oriole should build and tell
	His love-tale close beside my cell;
	 The idle butterfly
	Should rest him there, and there be heard
	The housewife bee and humming-bird.
	
	And what if cheerful shouts at noon
	 Come, from the village sent,
	Or songs of maids, beneath the moon
	 With fairy laughter blent?
	And what if, in the evening light,
	Betrothed lovers walk in sight
	 Of my low monument?
	I would the lovely scene around
	Might know no sadder sight nor sound.
	
	I know, I know I should not see
	 The season’s glorious show,
	Nor would its brightness shine for me,
	 Nor its wild music flow;
	But if, around my place of sleep,
	The friends I love should come to weep,
	 They might not haste to go.
	Soft airs, and song, and light, and bloom,
	Should keep them lingering by my tomb.
	
	These to their softened hearts should bear
	 The thought of what has been,
	And speak of one who cannot share
	 The gladness of the scene;
	Whose part, in all the pomp that fills
	The circuit of the summer hills,
	 Is--that his grave is green;
	And deeply would their hearts rejoice
	To hear again his living voice.


9. THE MAIDEN’S SORROW

	Seven long years has the desert rain
	 Dropped on the clods that hide thy face;
	Seven long years of sorrow and pain
	 I have thought of thy burial-place.
	
	Thought of thy fate in the distant west,
	 Dying with none that loved thee near;
	They who flung the earth on thy breast
	 Turned from the spot williout a tear.
	
	There, I think, on that lonely grave,
	 Violets spring in the soft May shower;
	There, in the summer breezes, wave
	 Crimson phlox and moccasin flower.
	
	There the turtles alight, and there
	 Feeds with her fawn the timid doe;
	There, when the winter woods are bare,
	 Walks the wolf on the crackling snow.
	
	Soon wilt thou wipe my tears away;
	 All my task upon earth is done;
	My poor father, old and gray,
	 Slumbers beneath the churchyard stone.
	
	In the dreams of my lonely bed,
	 Ever thy form before me seems;
	All night long I talk with the dead,
	 All day long I think of my dreams.
	
	This deep wound that bleeds and aches,
	 This long pain, a sleepless pain--
	When the Father my spirit takes,
	 I shall feel it no more again.


10. MIDSUMMER

	A power is on the earth and in the air,
	 From which the vital spirit shrinks afraid,
	 And shelters him, in nooks of deepest shade,
	From the hot steam and from the fiery glare.
	Look forth upon the earth--her thousand plants
	 Are smitten; even the dark sun-loving maize
	 Faints in the field beneath the torrid blaze;
	The herd beside the shaded fountain pants;
	For life is driven from all the landscape brown;
	 The bird has sought his tree, the snake his den,
	 The trout floats dead in the hot stream, and men
	Drop by the sun-stroke in the populous town:
	 As if the Day of Fire had dawned, and sent
	 Its deadly breath into the firmament.


11. MONUMENT MOUNTAIN

	Thou who wouldst see the lovely and the wild
	Mingled in harmony on Nature’s face,
	Ascend our rocky mountains. Let thy foot
	Fail not with weariness, for on their tops
	The beauty and the majesty of earth,
	Spread wide beneath, shall make thee to forget
	The steep and toilsome way. There, as thou stand’st,
	The haunts of men below thee, and around
	The mountain summits, thy expanding heart
	Shall feel a kindred with that loftier world
	To which thou art translated, and partake
	The enlargement of thy vision. Thou shalt look
	Upon the green and rolling forest tops,
	And down into the secrets of the glens,
	And streams, that with their bordering thickets strive
	To hide their windings. Thou shalt gaze, at once,
	Here on white villages, and tilth, and herds,
	And swarming roads, and there on solitudes
	That only hear the torrent, and the wind,
	And eagle’s shriek. There is a precipice
	That seems a fragment of some mighty wall,
	Built by the hand that fashioned the old world,
	To separate its nations, and thrown down
	When the flood drowned them. To the north, a path
	Conducts you up the narrow battlement.
	Steep is the western side, shaggy and wild
	With mossy trees, and pinnacles of flint,
	And many a hanging crag. But, to the east,
	Sheer to the vale go down the bare old cliffs,--
	Huge pillars, that in middle heaven upbear
	Their weather-beaten capitals, here dark
	With the thick moss of centuries, and there
	Of chalky whiteness where the thunderbolt
	Has splintered them. It is a fearful thing
	To stand upon the beetling verge, and see
	Where storm and lightning, from that huge gray wall,
	Have tumbled down vast blocks, and at the base
	Dashed them in fragments, and to lay thine ear
	Over the dizzy depth, and hear the sound
	Of winds, that struggle with the woods below,
	Come up like ocean murmurs. But the scene
	Is lovely round; a beautiful river there
	Wanders amid the fresh and fertile meads,
	The paradise he made unto himself,
	Mining the soil for ages. On each side
	The fields swell upward to the hills; beyond,
	Above the hills, in the blue distance, rise
	The mighty columns with which earth props heaven.
	
	There is a tale about these reverend rocks,
	A sad tradition of unhappy love,
	And sorrows borne and ended, long ago,
	When over these fair vales the savage sought
	His game in the thick woods. There was a maid,
	The fairest of the Indian maids, bright-eyed,
	With wealth of raven tresses, a light form,
	And a gay heart. About her cabin-door
	The wide old woods resounded with her song
	And fairy laughter all the summer day.
	She loved her cousin; such a love was deemed,
	By the morality of those stern tribes,
	Incestuous, and she struggled hard and long
	Against her love, and reasoned with her heart,
	As simple Indian maiden might. In vain.
	Then her eye lost its lustre, and her step
	Its lightness, and the gray-haired men that passed
	Her dwelling, wondered that they heard no more
	The accustomed song and laugh of her, whose looks
	Were like the cheerful smile of Spring, they said,
	Upon the Winter of their age. She went
	To weep where no eye saw, and was not found
	When all the merry girls were met to dance,
	And all the hunters of the tribe were out;
	Nor when they gathered from the rustling husk
	The shining ear; nor when, by the river’s side,
	Thay pulled the grape and startled the wild shades
	With sounds of mirth. The keen-eyed Indian dames
	Would whisper to each other, as they saw
	Her wasting form, and say _the girl will die_.
	
	One day into the bosom of a friend,
	A playmate of her young and innocent years,
	She poured her griefs. “Thou know’st, and thou alone,”
	She said, “for I have told thee, all my love,
	And guilt, and sorrow. I am sick of life.
	All night I weep in darkness, and the morn
	Glares on me, as upon a thing accursed,
	That has no business on the earth. I hate
	The pastimes and the pleasant toils that once
	I loved; the cheerful voices of my friends
	Have an unnatural horror in mine ear.
	In dreams my mother, from the land of souls,
	Calls me and chides me. All that look on me
	Do seem to know my shame; I cannot bear
	Their eyes; I cannot from my heart root out
	The love that wrings it so, and I must die.”
	
	It was a summer morning, and they went
	To this old precipice. About the cliffs
	Lay garlands, ears of maize, and shaggy skins
	Of wolf and bear, the offerings of the tribe
	Here made to the Great Spirit, for they deemed,
	Like worshippers of the elder time, that God
	Doth walk on the high places and affect
	The earth-o’erlooking mountains. She had on
	The ornaments with which her father loved
	To deck the beauty of his bright-eyed girl,
	And bade her wear when stranger warriors came
	To be his guests. Here the friends sat them down,
	And sang, all day, old songs of love and death,
	And decked the poor wan victim’s hair with flowers,
	And prayed that safe and swift might be her way
	To the calm world of sunshine, where no grief
	Makes the heart heavy and the eyelids red.
	Beautiful lay the region of her tribe
	Below her--waters resting in the embrace
	Of the wide forest, and maize-planted glades
	Opening amid the leafy wilderness.
	She gazed upon it long, and at the sight
	Of her own village peeping through the trees,
	And her own dwelling, and the cabin roof
	Of him she loved with an unlawful love,
	And came to die for, a warm gush of tears
	Ran from her eyes. But when the sun grew low
	And the hill shadows long, she threw herself
	From the steep rock and perished. There was scooped
	Upon the mountain’s southern slope, a grave;
	And there they laid her, in the very garb
	With which the maiden decked herself for death,
	With the same withering wild flowers in her hair.
	And o’er the mould that covered her, the tribe
	Built up a simple monument, a cone
	Of small loose stones. Thenceforward all who passed,
	Hunter, and dame, and virgin, laid a stone
	In silence on the pile. It stands there yet.
	And Indians from the distant West, who come
	To visit where their fathers’ bones are laid,
	Yet tell the sorrowful tale, and to this day
	The mountain where the hapless maiden died
	Is called the Mountain of the Monument.


12. NOON

	’Tis noon. At noon the Hebrew bowed the knee
	And worshipped, while the husbandmen withdrew
	From the scorched field, and the wayfaring man
	Grew faint, and turned aside by bubbling fount,
	Or rested in the shadow of the palm.
	
	I, too, amid the overflow of day,
	Behold the power which wields and cherishes
	The frame of Nature. From this brow of rock
	That overlooks the Hudson’s western marge,
	I gaze upon the long array of groves,
	The piles and gulfs of verdure drinking in
	The grateful heats. They love the fiery sun;
	Their broadening leaves grow glossier, and their sprays
	Climb as he looks upon them. In the midst,
	The swelling river, into his green gulfs,
	Unshadowed save by passing sails above,
	Takes the redundant glory, and enjoys
	The summer in his chilly bed. Coy flowers,
	That would not open in the early light,
	Push back their plaited sheaths. The rivulet’s pool,
	That darkly quivered all the morning long
	In the cool shade, now glimmers in the sun;
	And o’er its surface shoots, and shoots again,
	The glittering dragon-fly, and deep within
	Run the brown water-beetles to and fro.
	
	A silence, the brief sabbath of an hour,
	Reigns o’er the fields; the laborer sits within
	His dwelling; he has left his steers awhile,
	Unyoked, to bite the herbage, and his dog
	Sleeps stretched beside the door-stone in the shade.
	Now the grey marmot, with uplifted paws,
	No more sits listening by his den, but steals
	Abroad, in safety, to the clover field,
	And crops its juicy blossoms. All the while
	A ceaseless murmur from the populous town
	Swells o’er these solitudes: a mingled sound
	Of jarring wheels, and iron hoofs that clash
	Upon the stony ways, and hammer-clang,
	And creak of engines lifting ponderous bulks,
	And calls and cries, and tread of eager feet,
	Innumerable, hurrying to and fro.
	Noon, in that mighty mart of nations, brings
	No pause to toil and care. With early day
	Began the tumult, and shall only cease
	When midnight, hushing one by one the sounds
	Of bustle, gathers the tired brood to rest.
	
	Thus, in this feverish time, when love of gain
	And luxury possess the hearts of men,
	Thus is it with the noon of human life.
	We, in our fervid manhood, in our strength
	Of reason, we, with hurry, noise, and care,
	Plan, toil, and strife, and pause not to refresh
	Our spirits with the calm and beautiful
	Of God’s harmonious universe, that won
	Our youthful wonder; pause not to inquire
	Why we are here; and what the reverence
	Man owes to man, and what the mystery
	That links us to the greater world, beside
	Whose borders we but hover for a space.


13. NOVEMBER

	Yet one smile more, departing, distant sun!
	   One mellow smile through the soft vapoury air,
	Ere, o’er the frozen earth, the loud winds run,
	   Or snows are sifted o’er the meadows bare.
	One smile on the brown hills and naked trees,
	   And the dark rocks whose summer wreaths are cast,
	And the blue gentian flower, that, in the breeze,
	   Nods lonely, of her beauteous race the last.
	Yet a few sunny days, in which the bee
	   Shall murmur by the hedge that skirts the way,
	The cricket chirp upon the russet lea,
	   And man delight to linger in thy ray.
	Yet one rich smile, and we will try to bear
	The piercing winter frost, and winds, and darkened air.


14. OCTOBER

	Ay, thou art welcome, heaven’s delicious breath,
	 When woods begin to wear the crimson leaf,
	 And suns grow meek, and the meek suns grow brief,
	And the year smiles as it draws near its death.
	Wind of the sunny south! oh still delay
	 In the gay woods and in the golden air,
	 Like to a good old age released from care,
	Journeying, in long serenity, away.
	In such a bright, late quiet, would that I
	 Might wear out life like thee, mid bowers and brooks,
	 And, dearer yet, the sunshine of kind looks,
	And music of kind voices ever nigh;
	And when my last sand twinkled in the glass,
	Pass silently from men, as thou dost pass.


15. THE OLD MAN’S COUNSEL

	Among our hills and valleys, I have known
	Wise and grave men, who, while their diligent hands
	Tended or gathered in the fruits of earth,
	Were reverent learners in the solemn school
	Of nature. Not in vain to them were sent
	Seed-time and harvest, or the vernal shower
	That darkened the brown tilth, or snow that beat
	On the white winter hills. Each brought, in turn,
	Some truth, some lesson on the life of man,
	Or recognition of the Eternal mind
	Who veils his glory with the elements.
	
	One such I knew long since, a white-haired man,
	Pithy of speech, and merry when he would;
	A genial optimist, who daily drew
	From what he saw his quaint moralities.
	Kindly he held communion, though so old,
	With me a dreaming boy, and taught me much
	That books tell not, and I shall ne’er forget.
	
	The sun of May was bright in middle heaven,
	And steeped the sprouting forests, the green hills
	And emerald wheat-fields, in his yellow light.
	Upon the apple-tree, where rosy buds
	Stood clustered, ready to burst forth in bloom,
	The robin warbled forth his full clear note
	For hours, and wearied not. Within the woods,
	Whose young and half transparent leaves scarce cast
	A shade, gay circles of anemones
	Danced on their stalks; the shadbush, white with flowers,
	Brightened the glens; the new-leaved butternut
	And quivering poplar to the roving breeze
	Gave a balsamic fragrance. In the fields
	I saw the pulses of the gentle wind
	On the young grass. My heart was touched with joy
	At so much beauty, flushing every hour
	Into a fuller beauty; but my friend,
	The thoughtful ancient, standing at my side,
	Gazed on it mildly sad. I asked him why.
	
	“Well mayst thou join in gladness,“ he replied,
	“With the glad earth, her springing plants and flowers,
	And this soft wind, the herald of the green
	Luxuriant summer. Thou art young like them,
	And well mayst thou rejoice. But while the flight
	Of seasons fills and knits thy spreading frame,
	It withers mine, and thins my hair, and dims
	These eyes, whose fading light shall soon be quenched
	In utter darkness. Hearest thou that bird?”
	
	I listened, and from midst the depth of woods
	Heard the love-signal of the grouse, that wears
	A sable ruff around his mottled neck;
	Partridge they call him by our northern streams,
	And pheasant by the Delaware. He beat
	‘Gainst his barred sides his speckled wings, and made
	A sound like distant thunder; slow the strokes
	At first, then fast and faster, till at length
	They passed into a murmur and were still.
	
	“There hast thou,“ said my friend, “a fitting type
	Of human life. ‘Tis an old truth, I know,
	But images like these revive the power
	Of long familiar truths. Slow pass our days
	In childhood, and the hours of light are long
	Betwixt the morn and eve; with swifter lapse
	They glide in manhood, and in age they fly;
	Till days and seasons flit before the mind
	As flit the snow-flakes in a winter storm,
	Seen rather than distinguished. Ah! I seem
	As if I sat within a helpless bark
	By swiftly running waters hurried on
	To shoot some mighty cliff. Along the banks
	Grove after grove, rock after frowning rock,
	Bare sands and pleasant homes, and flowery nooks,
	And isles and whirlpools in the stream, appear
	Each after each, but the devoted skiff
	Darts by so swiftly that their images
	Dwell not upon the mind, or only dwell
	In dim confusion; faster yet I sweep
	By other banks, and the great gulf is near.
	
	“Wisely, my son, while yet thy days are long,
	And this fair change of seasons passes slow,
	Gather and treasure up the good they yield--
	All that they teach of virtue, of pure thoughts
	And kind affections, reverence for thy God
	And for thy brethren; so when thou shalt come
	Into these barren years, thou mayst not bring
	A mind unfurnished and a withered heart.”
	
	Long since that white-haired ancient slept--but still,
	When the red flower-buds crowd the orchard bough,
	And the ruffed grouse is drumming far within
	The woods, his venerable form again
	Is at my side, his voice is in my ear.


16. A SCENE ON THE BANKS OF THE HUDSON

	Cool shades and dews are round my way,
	And silence of the early day;
	Mid the dark rocks that watch his bed,
	Glitters the mighty Hudson spread,
	Unrippled, save by drops that fall
	From shrubs that fringe his mountain wall;
	And o’er the clear still water swells
	The music of the Sabbath bells.
	
	All, save this little nook of land
	Circled with trees, on which I stand;
	All, save that line of hills which lie
	Suspended in the mimic sky--
	Seems a blue void, above, below,
	Through which the white clouds come and go,
	And from the green world’s farthest steep
	I gaze into the airy deep.
	
	Loveliest of lovely things are they,
	On earth, that soonest pass away.
	The rose that lives its little hour
	Is prized beyond the sculptured flower.
	Even love, long tried and cherished long,
	Becomes more tender and more strong,
	At thought of that insatiate grave
	From which its yearnings cannot save.
	
	River! in this still hour thou hast
	Too much of heaven on earth to last;
	Nor long may thy still waters lie,
	An image of the glorious sky.
	Thy fate and mine are not repose,
	And ere another evening close,
	Thou to thy tides shalt turn again,
	And I to seek the crowd of men.


17. SONG OF THE STARS

	When the radiant morn of creation broke,
	And the world in the smile of God awoke,
	And the empty realms of darkness and death
	Were moved through their depths by his mighty breath,
	And orbs of beauty and spheres of flame
	From the void abyss by myriads came,--
	In the joy of youth as they darted away,
	Through the widening wastes of space to play,
	Their silver voices in chorus rang,
	And this was the song the bright ones sang:
	
	“Away, away, through the wide, wide sky,
	The fair blue fields that before us lie,--
	Each sun with the worlds that round him roll,
	Each planet, poised on her turning pole;
	With her isles of green, and her clouds of white,
	And her waters that lie like fluid light.
	
	“For the source of glory uncovers his face,
	And the brightness o’erflows unbounded space;
	And we drink as we go the luminous tides
	In our ruddy air and our blooming sides:
	Lo, yonder the living splendours play;
	Away, on our joyous path, away!
	
	“Look, look, through our glittering ranks afar,
	In the infinite azure, star after star,
	How they brighten and bloom as they swiftly pass!
	How the verdure runs o’er each rolling mass!
	And the path of the gentle winds is seen,
	Where the small waves dance, and the young woods lean.
	
	“And see where the brighter day-beams pour,
	How the rainbows hang in the sunny shower;
	And the morn and eve, with their pomp of hues,
	Shift o’er the bright planets and shed their dews;
	And ‘twixt them both, o’er the teeming ground,
	With her shadowy cone the night goes round!
	
	“Away, away! in our blossoming bowers,
	In the soft air wrapping these spheres of ours,
	In the seas and fountains that shine with morn,
	See, Love is brooding, and Life is born,
	And breathing myriads are breaking from night,
	To rejoice, like us, in motion and light.
	
	“Glide on in your beauty, ye youthful spheres,
	To weave the dance that measures the years;
	Glide on, in the glory and gladness sent,
	To the farthest wall of the firmament,--
	The boundless visible smile of Him,
	To the veil of whose brow your lamps are dim.”


18. THE STRANGE LADY

	The summer morn is bright and fresh, the birds are darting by,
	As if they loved to breast the breeze that sweeps the cool clear sky;
	Young Albert, in the forest’s edge, has heard a rustling sound,
	An arrow slightly strikes his hand and falls upon the ground.
	
	A dark-haired woman from the wood comes suddenly in sight;
	Her merry eye is full and black, her cheek is brown and bright;
	Her gown is of the mid-sea blue, her belt with beads is strung,
	And yet she speaks in gentle tones, and in the English tongue.
	
	“It was an idle bolt I sent, against the villain crow;
	Fair sir, I fear it harmed thy hand; beshrew my erring bow!”
	“Ah! would that bolt had not been spent! then, lady, might I wear
	A lasting token on my hand of one so passing fair!”
	
	“Thou art a flatterer like the rest, but wouldst thou take with me
	A day of hunting in the wilds, beneath the greenwood tree,
	I know where most the pheasants feed, and where the red-deer herd,
	And thou shouldst chase the nobler game, and I bring down the bird.”
	
	Now Albert in her quiver lays the arrow in its place,
	And wonders as he gazes on the beauty of her face:
	“Those hunting-grounds are far away, and, lady, ‘twere not meet
	That night, amid the wilderness, should overtake thy feet.”
	
	“Heed not the night; a summer lodge amid the wild is mine,--
	‘Tis shadowed by the tulip-tree, ‘tis mantled by the vine;
	The wild plum sheds its yellow fruit from fragrant thickets nigh,
	And flowery prairies from the door stretch till they meet the sky.
	
	“There in the boughs that hide the roof the mock-bird sits and sings,
	And there the hang-bird’s brood within its little hammock swings;
	A pebbly brook, where rustling winds among the hopples sweep,
	Shall lull thee till the morning sun looks in upon thy sleep.”
	
	Away, into the forest depths by pleasant paths they go,
	He with his rifle on his arm, the lady with her bow,
	Where cornels arch their cool dark boughs o’er beds of winter-green,
	And never at his father’s door again was Albert seen.
	
	That night upon the woods came down a furious hurricane,
	With howl of winds and roar of streams, and beating of the rain;
	The mighty thunder broke and drowned the noises in its crash;
	The old trees seemed to fight like fiends beneath the lightning-flash.
	
	Next day, within a mossy glen, ‘mid mouldering trunks were found
	The fragments of a human form upon the bloody ground;
	White bones from which the flesh was torn, and locks of glossy hair;
	They laid them in the place of graves, yet wist not whose they were.
	
	And whether famished evening wolves had mangled Albert so,
	Or that strange dame so gay and fair were some mysterious foe,
	Or whether to that forest lodge, beyond the mountains blue,
	He went to dwell with her, the friends who mourned him never knew.


19. A SUMMER RAMBLE

	The quiet August noon has come,
	 A slumberous silence fills the sky,
	The fields are still, the woods are dumb,
	 In glassy sleep the waters lie.
	
	And mark yon soft white clouds that rest
	 Above our vale, a moveless throng;
	The cattle on the mountain’s breast
	 Enjoy the grateful shadow long.
	
	Oh, how unlike those merry hours
	 In early June when Earth laughs out,
	When the fresh winds make love to flowers,
	 And woodlands sing and waters shout.
	
	When in the grass sweet voices talk,
	 And strains of tiny music swell
	From every moss-cup of the rock,
	 From every nameless blossom’s bell.
	
	But now a joy too deep for sound,
	 A peace no other season knows,
	Hushes the heavens and wraps the ground,
	 The blessing of supreme repose.
	
	Away! I will not be, to-day,
	 The only slave of toil and care.
	Away from desk and dust! away!
	 I’ll be as idle as the air.
	
	Beneath the open sky abroad,
	 Among the plants and breathing things,
	The sinless, peaceful works of God,
	 I’ll share the calm the season brings.
	
	Come, thou, in whose soft eyes I see
	 The gentle meanings of thy heart,
	One day amid the woods with me,
	 From men and all their cares apart.
	
	And where, upon the meadow’s breast,
	 The shadow of the thicket lies,
	The blue wild flowers thou gatherest
	 Shall glow yet deeper near thine eyes.
	
	Come, and when mid the calm profound,
	 I turn, those gentle eyes to seek,
	They, like the lovely landscape round,
	 Of innocence and peace shall speak.
	
	Rest here, beneath the unmoving shade,
	 And on the silent valleys gaze,
	Winding and widening, till they fade
	 In yon soft ring of summer haze.
	
	The village trees their summits rear
	 Still as its spire, and yonder flock
	At rest in those calm fields appear
	 As chiselled from the lifeless rock.
	
	One tranquil mount the scene o’erlooks--
	 There the hushed winds their sabbath keep
	While a near hum from bees and brooks
	 Comes faintly like the breath of sleep.
	
	Well may the gazer deem that when,
	 Worn with the struggle and the strife,
	And heart-sick at the wrongs of men,
	 The good forsakes the scene of life;
	
	Like this deep quiet that, awhile,
	 Lingers the lovely landscape o’er,
	Shall be the peace whose holy smile
	 Welcomes him to a happier shore.


20. TO A CLOUD

	Beautiful cloud! with folds so soft and fair,
	 Swimming in the pure quiet air!
	Thy fleeces bathed in sunlight, while below
	 Thy shadow o’er the vale moves slow;
	Where, midst their labour, pause the reaper train
	 As cool it comes along the grain.
	Beautiful cloud! I would I were with thee
	 In thy calm way o’er land and sea:
	To rest on thy unrolling skirts, and look
	 On Earth as on an open book;
	On streams that tie her realms with silver bands,
	 And the long ways that seem her lands;
	And hear her humming cities, and the sound
	 Of the great ocean breaking round.
	Ay--I would sail upon thy air-borne car
	 To blooming regions distant far,
	To where the sun of Andalusia shines
	 On his own olive-groves and vines,
	Or the soft lights of Italy’s bright sky
	 In smiles upon her ruins lie.
	But I would woo the winds to let us rest
	 O’er Greece long fettered and oppressed,
	Whose sons at length have heard the call that comes
	 From the old battle-fields and tombs,
	And risen, and drawn the sword, and on the foe
	 Have dealt the swift and desperate blow,
	And the Othman power is cloven, and the stroke
	 Has touched its chains, and they are broke.
	Ay, we would linger till the sunset there
	 Should come, to purple all the air,
	And thou reflect upon the sacred ground
	 The ruddy radiance streaming round.
	
	Bright meteor! for the summer noontide made!
	 Thy peerless beauty yet shall fade.
	The sun, that fills with light each glistening fold,
	 Shall set, and leave thee dark and cold:
	The blast shall rend thy skirts, or thou mayst frown
	 In the dark heaven when storms come down;
	And weep in rain, till man’s inquiring eye
	 Miss thee, for ever, from the sky.


21. TO A MOSQUITO

	Fair insect! that, with threadlike legs spread out,
	 And blood-extracting bill and filmy wing,
	Does murmur, as thou slowly sail’st about,
	 In pitiless ears full many a plaintive thing,
	And tell how little our large veins should bleed,
	Would we but yield them to thy bitter need.
	
	Unwillingly, I own, and, what is worse,
	 Full angrily men hearken to thy plaint;
	Thou gettest many a brush, and many a curse,
	 For saying thou art gaunt, and starved, and faint:
	Even the old beggar, while he asks for food,
	Would kill thee, hapless stranger, if he could.
	
	I call thee stranger, for the town, I ween,
	 Has not the honour of so proud a birth,--
	Thou com’st from Jersey meadows, fresh and green,
	 The offspring of the gods, though born on earth;
	For Titan was thy sire, and fair was she,
	The ocean nymph that nursed thy infancy.
	
	Beneath the rushes was thy cradle swung,
	 And when, at length, thy gauzy wings grew strong,
	Abroad to gentle airs their folds were flung,
	 Rose in the sky and bore thee soft along;
	The south wind breathed to waft thee on thy way,
	And danced and shone beneath the billowy bay.
	
	Calm rose afar the city spires, and thence
	 Came the deep murmur of its throng of men,
	And as its grateful odours met thy sense,
	 They seemed the perfumes of thy native fen.
	Fair lay its crowded streets, and at the sight
	Thy tiny song grew shriller with delight.
	
	At length thy pinions fluttered in Broadway--
	 Ah, there were fairy steps, and white necks kissed
	By wanton airs, and eyes whose killing ray
	 Shone through the snowy veils like stars through mist;
	And fresh as morn, on many a cheek and chin,
	Bloomed the bright blood through the transparent skin.
	
	Sure these were sights to touch an anchorite!
	 What! do I hear thy slender voice complain?
	Thou wailest, when I talk of beauty’s light,
	 As if it brought the memory of pain:
	Thou art a wayward being--well--come near,
	And pour thy tale of sorrow in my ear.
	
	What sayst thou--slanderer!--rouge makes thee sick?
	 And China bloom at best is sorry food?
	And Rowland’s Kalydor, if laid on thick,
	 Poisons the thirsty wretch that bores for blood?
	Go! ’twas a just reward that met thy crime--
	But shun the sacrilege another time.
	
	That bloom was made to look at, not to touch;
	 To worship, not approach, that radiant white;
	And well might sudden vengeance light on such
	 As dared, like thee, most impiously to bite.
	Thou shouldst have gazed at distance and admired,
	Murmured thy adoration and retired.
	
	Thou’rt welcome to the town--but why come here
	 To bleed a brother poet, gaunt like thee?
	Alas! the little blood I have is dear,
	 And thin will be the banquet drawn from me.
	Look round--the pale-eyed sisters in my cell,
	Thy old acquaintance, Song and Famine, dwell.
	
	Try some plump alderman, and suck the blood
	 Enriched by generous wine and costly meat;
	On well-filled skins, sleek as thy native mud,
	 Fix thy light pump and press thy freckled feet:
	Go to the men for whom, in ocean’s hall,
	The oyster breeds, and the green turtle sprawls.
	
	There corks are drawn, and the red vintage flows
	 To fill the swelling veins for thee, and now
	The ruddy cheek and now the ruddier nose
	 Shall tempt thee, as thou flittest round the brow;
	And when the hour of sleep its quiet brings,
	No angry hand shall rise to brush thy wings.


22. THE TWENTY-SECOND OF DECEMBER

	Wild was the day; the wintry sea
	 Moaned sadly on New-England’s strand,
	When first the thoughtful and the free,
	 Our fathers, trod the desert land.
	
	They little thought how pure a light,
	 With years, should gather round that day;
	How love should keep their memories bright,
	 How wide a realm their sons should sway.
	
	Green are their bays; but greener still
	 Shall round their spreading fame be wreathed,
	And regions, now untrod, shall thrill
	 With reverence when their names are breathed.
	
	Till where the sun, with softer fires,
	 Looks on the vast Pacific’s sleep,
	The children of the pilgrim sires
	 This hallowed day like us shall keep.


23. THE WHITE-FOOTED DEER

	It was a hundred years ago,
	 When, by the woodland ways,
	The traveller saw the wild deer drink,
	 Or crop the birchen sprays.
	
	Beneath a hill, whose rocky side
	 O’erbrowed a grassy mead,
	And fenced a cottage from the wind,
	 A deer was wont to feed.
	
	She only came when on the cliffs
	 The evening moonlight lay,
	And no man knew the secret haunts
	 In which she walked by day.
	
	White were her feet, her forehead showed
	 A spot of silvery white,
	That seemed to glimmer like a star
	 In autumn’s hazy night.
	
	And here, when sang the whippoorwill,
	 She cropped the sprouting leaves,
	And here her rustling steps were heard
	 On still October eves.
	
	But when the broad midsummer moon
	 Rose o’er that grassy lawn,
	Beside the silver-footed deer
	 There grazed a spotted fawn.
	
	The cottage dame forbade her son
	 To aim the rifle here;
	“It were a sin,“ she said, “to harm
	 Or fright that friendly deer.
	
	“This spot has been my pleasant home
	 Ten peaceful years and more;
	And ever, when the moonlight shines,
	 She feeds before our door.
	
	“The red men say that here she walked
	 A thousand moons ago;
	They never raise the war-whoop here,
	 And never twang the bow.
	
	“I love to watch her as she feeds,
	 And think that all is well
	While such a gentle creature haunts
	 The place in which we dwell.”
	
	The youth obeyed, and sought for game
	 In forests far away,
	Where, deep in silence and in moss,
	 The ancient woodland lay.
	
	But once, in autumn’s golden time,
	 He ranged the wild in vain,
	Nor roused the pheasant nor the deer,
	 And wandered home again.
	
	The crescent moon and crimson eve
	 Shone with a mingling light;
	The deer, upon the grassy mead,
	 Was feeding full in sight.
	
	He raised the rifle to his eye,
	 And from the cliffs around
	A sudden echo, shrill and sharp,
	 Gave back its deadly sound.
	
	Away into the neighbouring wood
	 The startled creature flew,
	And crimson drops at morning lay
	 Amid the glimmering dew.
	
	Next evening shone the waxing moon
	 As sweetly as before;
	The deer upon the grassy mead
	 Was seen again no more.
	
	But ere that crescent moon was old,
	 By night the red men came,
	And burnt the cottage to the ground,
	 And slew the youth and dame.
	
	Now woods have overgrown the mead,
	 And hid the cliffs from sight;
	There shrieks the hovering hawk at noon,
	 And prowls the fox at night.


24. A WINTER PIECE

	The time has been that these wild solitudes,
	Yet beautiful as wild, were trod by me
	Oftener than now; and when the ills of life
	Had chafed my spirit--when the unsteady pulse
	Beat with strange flutterings--I would wander forth
	And seek the woods. The sunshine on my path
	Was to me as a friend. The swelling hills,
	The quiet dells retiring far between,
	With gentle invitation to explore
	Their windings, were a calm society
	That talked with me and soothed me. Then the chant
	Of birds, and chime of brooks, and soft caress
	Of the fresh sylvan air, made me forget
	The thoughts that broke my peace, and I began
	To gather simples by the fountain’s brink,
	And lose myself in day-dreams. While I stood
	In nature’s loneliness, I was with one
	With whom I early grew familiar, one
	Who never had a frown for me, whose voice
	Never rebuked me for the hours I stole
	From cares I loved not, but of which the world
	Deems highest, to converse with her. When shrieked
	The bleak November winds, and smote the woods,
	And the brown fields were herbless, and the shades,
	That met above the merry rivulet,
	Were spoiled, I sought, I loved them still,--they seemed
	Like old companions in adversity.
	Still there was beauty in my walks; the brook,
	Bordered with sparkling frost-work, was as gay
	As with its fringe of summer flowers. Afar,
	The village with its spires, the path of streams,
	And dim receding valleys, hid before
	By interposing trees, lay visible
	Through the bare grove, and my familiar haunts
	Seemed new to me. Nor was I slow to come
	Among them, when the clouds, from their still skirts,
	Had shaken down on earth the feathery snow,
	And all was white. The pure keen air abroad,
	Albeit it breathed no scent of herb, nor heard
	Love-call of bird, nor merry hum of bee,
	Was not the air of death. Bright mosses crept
	Over the spotted trunks, and the close buds,
	That lay along the boughs, instinct with life,
	Patient, and waiting the soft breath of Spring,
	Feared not the piercing spirit of the North.
	The snow-bird twittered on the beechen bough,
	And ‘neath the hemlock, whose thick branches bent
	Beneath its bright cold burden, and kept dry
	A circle, on the earth, of withered leaves,
	The partridge found a shelter. Through the snow
	The rabbit sprang away. The lighter track
	Of fox, and the racoon’s broad path, were there,
	Crossing each other. From his hollow tree,
	The squirrel was abroad, gathering the nuts
	Just fallen, that asked the winter cold and sway
	Of winter blast, to shake them from their hold.
	
	But Winter has yet brighter scenes,--he boasts
	Splendours beyond what gorgeous Summer knows;
	Or Autumn with his many fruits, and woods
	All flushed with many hues. Come when the rains
	Have glazed the snow, and clothed the trees with ice;
	While the slant sun of February pours
	Into the bowers a flood of light. Approach!
	The incrusted surface shall upbear thy steps,
	And the broad arching portals of the grove
	Welcome thy entering. Look! the massy trunks
	Are cased in the pure crystal; each light spray,
	Nodding and tinkling in the breath of heaven,
	Is studded with its trembling water-drops,
	That stream with rainbow radiance as they move.
	But round the parent stem the long low boughs
	Bend, in a glittering ring, and arbours hide
	The glassy floor. Oh! you might deem the spot
	The spacious cavern of some virgin mine,
	Deep in the womb of earth--where the gems grow,
	And diamonds put forth radiant rods and bud
	With amethyst and topaz--and the place
	Lit up, most royally, with the pure beam
	That dwells in them. Or haply the vast hall
	Of fairy palace, that outlasts the night,
	And fades not in the glory of the sun;--
	Where crystal columns send forth slender shafts
	And crossing arches; and fantastic aisles
	Wind from the sight in brightness, and are lost
	Among the crowded pillars. Raise thine eye,--
	Thou seest no cavern roof, no palace vault;
	There the blue sky and the white drifting cloud
	Look in. Again the wildered fancy dreams
	Of spouting fountains, frozen as they rose,
	And fixed, with all their branching jets, in air,
	And all their sluices sealed. All, all is light;
	Light without shade. But all shall pass away
	With the next sun. From numberless vast trunks,
	Loosened, the crashing ice shall make a sound
	Like the far roar of rivers, and the eve
	Shall close o’er the brown woods as it was wont.
	
	And it is pleasant, when the noisy streams
	Are just set free, and milder suns melt off
	The plashy snow, save only the firm drift
	In the deep glen or the close shade of pines,--
	’Tis pleasant to behold the wreaths of smoke
	Roll up among the maples of the hill,
	Where the shrill sound of youthful voices wakes
	The shriller echo, as the clear pure lymph,
	That from the wounded trees, in twinkling drops,
	Falls, mid the golden brightness of the morn,
	Is gathered in with brimming pails, and oft,
	Wielded by sturdy hands, the stroke of axe
	Makes the woods ring. Along the quiet air,
	Come and float calmly off the soft light clouds,
	Such as you see in summer, and the winds
	Scarce stir the branches. Lodged in sunny cleft,
	Where the cold breezes come not, blooms alone
	The little wind-flower, whose just opened eye
	Is blue as the spring heaven it gazes at--
	Startling the loiterer in the naked groves
	With unexpected beauty, for the time
	Of blossoms and green leaves is yet afar.
	And ere it comes, the encountering winds shall oft
	Muster their wrath again, and rapid clouds
	Shade heaven, and bounding on the frozen earth
	Shall fall their volleyed stores rounded like hail,
	And white like snow, and the loud North again
	Shall buffet the vexed forest in his rage.

