*** Ivan Bunin (1870 - 1953)


1. AS IN A BOUNDLESS SEA

	As in a boundless sea in darkening fields and meadows
	The sunset’s tristful rays fade and then sink from sight,
	And in mute twilights wake, over the steppe the shadows
	          Creep swiftly, bringing night.
	
	Soft sound the gophers’ calls, and, ne’er the stillness waking,
	Jerboas now appear--two or perhaps just one.
	They ghost-like haunt the plain, great leaps across it taking,
	          And  all at once are gone . . .


2. THE CAMEL SNORTS

	The camel snorts. He won’t get up.
	His grumbling flanks are heaving. Give him
	A kick? . . . The criers’ calls atop
	The mosques dawn’s sleepy streets enliven.
	
	Pearl-grey, Stambul shows from afar.
	Mist clothes the strait, its blue waves veiling.
	Into the Sea of Marmora,
	Through haze and smoke the ships are sailing.
	
	The smoke, white orchards, drifts from you,
	And, though it has imbibed the chill of
	Sea water, smells of summer dew,
	Of dung, of honey and vanilla.
	
	A Greek a great red samovar
	Bears from his teahouse; sheep are taken
	Across the square to the bazaar;
	Two beggars, stretched nearby, awaken.
	
	Time to move off, go east, toward
	A land where morning burns and blazes
	And where across the sun-parched sward
	A bird’s small, slanting shadow races.


3. A FAREWELL

	Blasting the malachites beneath the rudder, 
	The seething sea spews pearly blobs of foam. 
	The shore sails nearer as we move from under 
	The ship’s smooth, towering shape and make for home. 
	
	The pier is empty. Pigeons coo and chatter 
	And peck at corn and scraps of food . . . At sea, 
	The ship’s stern sways, the bowsprit draws a pattern 
	Upon the dimming sky’s dark canopy. 
	
	Where now? March. Dusk. In port, the church bells ringing. 
	Of spring and sadness full this soul of mine. 
	Lights at the inn . . . No, home I’ll go, I’m thinking! 
	For I am drunk--drunk though I’ve touched no wine.


4. THE FISHERWOMAN

	“Who  knocks? I won’t get up. I will not open
	The spray-soaked door of this old hut. How chill
	And how uneasy are the nights of autumn!
	And yet its dawns are more uneasy still.”
	
	“Is it the wind’s moan as it louder grows
	That scares you or, perhaps, the rasping sound
	Of pebbles by the waves rolled round and round?”
	“No, I’m unwell, and there’s a draft, it blows.”
	
	“I’ll wait until the storm-drunk waves are sober,
	Till they are quelled, and through the window pane
	And down on to the bench there streams again
	The pallid, tarnished gold of mid-October.”
	
	“Begone! Another spent the night with me.
	He’s bold and does not fear the wind and sea.”


5. ISTANBUL

	Starved, mangy dogs with mournful, pleading eyes,
	Descendants of the ones that in a bygone
	Age from the steppeland came, and, stung by flies,
	Dragged in the wake  of dusty, creaking wagons.
	
	The conqueror was rich and powerful,
	And with his hordes, proud city, he invaded
	Your palaces, and named you Istanbul,
	And then sought rest, a lion gorged and sated.
	
	But faster move the days than birds in flight!
	Black loom the trees in Scutari; unnumbered
	The tombs they shade, their marble shapes as white
	As bones bleached by the rays of many summers.
	
	Upon the dust of shrines and temples falls
	The dust of ages, and the plaintive howling
	Of dogs the gloom of desert sands recalls
	Beneath Byzantium’s walls and arches crumbling.
	
	Bare the Serail, its glory spent and past,
	Its trees, now dry, bent low in desolation . . .
	O Istanbul! Dead nomad camp, the last
	Great relic of a last and great migration!


6. LONELINESS

	The rain and the wind and the murk 
	Reign over cold desert of fall, 
	Here, life’s interrupted till spring; 
	Till the spring, gardens barren and tall. 
	I’m alone in my house, it’s dim 
	At the easel, and drafts through the rims. 
	
	The other day, you came to me, 
	But I feel you are bored with me now. 
	The somber day’s over, it seemed 
	You were there for me as my spouse. 
	Well, so long, I will somehow strive 
	To survive till the spring with no wife. 
	
	The clouds, again, have today 
	Returned, passing, patch after patch. 
	Your footprints got smudged by the rain, 
	And are filling with water by the porch. 
	As I sink into lonesome despair 
	From the vanishing late autumn’s glare. 
	
	I gasped to call after you fast: 
	Please come back, you’re a part of me, dear; 
	To a woman, there is no past 
	Once love ends, you’re a stranger to her; 
	I’ll get drunk, I will watch burning logs, 
	Would be splendid to get me a dog.


7. NO BIRDS IN SIGHT

	No birds in sight. The forest withers slowly,
	Resigned to utter emptiness and chill.
	No mushrooms, but there comes from out a gully
	Of mushroom damp the strong and tangy smell.
	
	The scrub is lighter and less tall, the greying
	Grass near the bushes droops, seems trampled down;
	Beneath the autumn rain the leaves, decaying,
	In mouldy heaps lie of a darkish brown.
	
	But in the fields the wind is fresh and biting.
	I lead my stallion out and ride from home,
	And, in the freedom of the steppe delighting,
	Far from the villages till nightfall roam.
	
	Lulled by my mount’s slow, easy pace, I listen
	With joy-tinged, quiet sadness to the hum
	Of wind as it invades with singsong whistle
	And drawn-out moan the barrels of my gun.


8. THE PLEIADES

	It’s dark. Not caring where I go, which path I follow,
	    Past sleepy ponds I stroll.
	Of autumn freshness, leaves and fruit the fragrance mellow
	    Drifts over all.
	The garden’s almost bare, and through the branches whitely
	    The stars of evening show.
	Dead silence reigns. Murk clothes the paths. It’s nighttime.
	    My steps are slow.
	
	They’re slow, but wake the hush . . . High in the sky’s cool darkness,
	    A princely diadem,
	The icy Pleiades blaze diamond-like and sparkle,
	    Each one a gem.


9. RAKHIL’S TOMB

	“She passed away, and was interred by Jacob
	Beside the road . . .” And on the tomb, no sight
	Of any name, inscription and no mark up.
	
	At nighttime, there’s a gleaming feeble light,
	And whitewashed with chalk, the grave’s cupola
	With enigmatic paleness is attired.
	
	I’m timidly approaching as the night falls
	And kiss the dust and chalk in awe and thrill
	Of this tombstone, artless, white, and cold
	The sweetest of the earthly words! Rakhil!


10. WARMTH AND LIGHT

	Warmth and light, buzzing bumblebees, wheat ears and grasses,
	Azure skies--of high summer the birth . . .
	To his prodigal son will the Lord say: “Confess, pray--
	Have you known true contentment on earth?”
	
	And forgetting all else save the golden and endless
	Fields of wheat, the sereneness and peace,
	I will weep, and, my words choked by sweet tears of gladness,
	Thankful fall at those merciful knees.


11. YOUTH

	A whip cracks in the wood, and cattle low
	And through the underbrush are heard to
	Crash heavily. Leaves rustle. Snowdrops show
	Their blue heads here and there. A sudden, furtive
	
	Wind starts to blow, and ashen clouds are swept
	Across the skies, a cool, fresh rain presaging . . .
	The heart grieves and is glad that life is, strangely,
	Vast like the steppe and empty like the steppe.

