*** Lord Byron (1788 - 1824)


1. AND THOU ART DEAD, AS YOUNG AND FAIR

	And thou art dead, as young and fair
	As aught of mortal birth;
	And form so soft, and charms so rare,
	Too soon return’d to Earth!
	Though Earth receiv’d them in her bed,
	And o’er the spot the crowd may tread
	In carelessness or mirth,
	There is an eye which could not brook
	A moment on that grave to look.

	I will not ask where thou liest low,
	Nor gaze upon the spot;
	There flowers or weeds at will may grow,
	So I behold them not:
	It is enough for me to prove
	That what I lov’d, and long must love,
	Like common earth can rot;
	To me there needs no stone to tell,
	’T is Nothing that I lov’d so well.

	Yet did I love thee to the last
	As fervently as thou,
	Who didst not change through all the past,
	And canst not alter now.
	The love where Death has set his seal,
	Nor age can chill, nor rival steal,
	Nor falsehood disavow:
	And, what were worse, thou canst not see
	Or wrong, or change, or fault in me.

	The better days of life were ours;
	The worst can be but mine:
	The sun that cheers, the storm that lowers,
	Shall never more be thine.
	The silence of that dreamless sleep
	I envy now too much to weep;
	Nor need I to repine
	That all those charms have pass’d away,
	I might have watch’d through long decay.

	The flower in ripen’d bloom unmatch’d
	Must fall the earliest prey;
	Though by no hand untimely snatch’d,
	The leaves must drop away:
	And yet it were a greater grief
	To watch it withering, leaf by leaf,
	Than see it pluck’d to-day;
	Since earthly eye but ill can bear
	To trace the change to foul from fair.

	I know not if I could have borne
	To see thy beauties fade;
	The night that follow’d such a morn
	Had worn a deeper shade:
	Thy day without a cloud hath pass’d,
	And thou wert lovely to the last,
	Extinguish’d, not decay’d;
	As stars that shoot along the sky
	Shine brightest as they fall from high.

	As once I wept, if I could weep,
	My tears might well be shed,
	To think I was not near to keep
	One vigil o’er thy bed;
	To gaze, how fondly! on thy face,
	To fold thee in a faint embrace,
	Uphold thy drooping head;
	And show that love, however vain,
	Nor thou nor I can feel again.

	Yet how much less it were to gain,
	Though thou hast left me free,
	The loveliest things that still remain,
	Than thus remember thee!
	The all of thine that cannot die
	Through dark and dread Eternity
	Returns again to me,
	And more thy buried love endears
	Than aught except its living years.



2. DARKNESS

	I had a dream, which was not all a dream.
	The bright sun was extinguish’d, and the stars
	Did wander darkling in the eternal space,
	Rayless, and pathless, and the icy earth
	Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air;
	Morn came and went--and came, and brought no day,
	And men forgot their passions in the dread
	Of this their desolation; and all hearts
	Were chill’d into a selfish prayer for light:
	And they did live by watchfires--and the thrones,
	The palaces of crowned kings--the huts,
	The habitations of all things which dwell,
	Were burnt for beacons; cities were consum’d,
	And men were gather’d round their blazing homes
	To look once more into each other’s face;
	Happy were those who dwelt within the eye
	Of the volcanos, and their mountain-torch:
	A fearful hope was all the world contain’d;
	Forests were set on fire--but hour by hour
	They fell and faded--and the crackling trunks
	Extinguish’d with a crash--and all was black.
	The brows of men by the despairing light
	Wore an unearthly aspect, as by fits
	The flashes fell upon them; some lay down
	And hid their eyes and wept; and some did rest
	Their chins upon their clenched hands, and smil’d;
	And others hurried to and fro, and fed
	Their funeral piles with fuel, and look’d up
	With mad disquietude on the dull sky,
	The pall of a past world; and then again
	With curses cast them down upon the dust,
	And gnash’d their teeth and howl’d: the wild birds shriek’d
	And, terrified, did flutter on the ground,
	And flap their useless wings; the wildest brutes
	Came tame and tremulous; and vipers crawl’d
	And twin’d themselves among the multitude,
	Hissing, but stingless--they were slain for food.
	And War, which for a moment was no more,
	Did glut himself again: a meal was bought
	With blood, and each sate sullenly apart
	Gorging himself in gloom: no love was left;
	All earth was but one thought--and that was death
	Immediate and inglorious; and the pang
	Of famine fed upon all entrails--men
	Died, and their bones were tombless as their flesh;
	The meagre by the meagre were devour’d,
	Even dogs assail’d their masters, all save one,
	And he was faithful to a corse, and kept
	The birds and beasts and famish’d men at bay,
	Till hunger clung them, or the dropping dead
	Lur’d their lank jaws; himself sought out no food,
	But with a piteous and perpetual moan,
	And a quick desolate cry, licking the hand
	Which answer’d not with a caress--he died.
	The crowd was famish’d by degrees; but two
	Of an enormous city did survive,
	And they were enemies: they met beside
	The dying embers of an altar-place
	Where had been heap’d a mass of holy things
	For an unholy usage; they rak’d up,
	And shivering scrap’d with their cold skeleton hands
	The feeble ashes, and their feeble breath
	Blew for a little life, and made a flame
	Which was a mockery; then they lifted up
	Their eyes as it grew lighter, and beheld
	Each other’s aspects--saw, and shriek’d, and died--
	Even of their mutual hideousness they died,
	Unknowing who he was upon whose brow
	Famine had written Fiend. The world was void,
	The populous and the powerful was a lump,
	Seasonless, herbless, treeless, manless, lifeless--
	A lump of death--a chaos of hard clay.
	The rivers, lakes and ocean all stood still,
	And nothing stirr’d within their silent depths;
	Ships sailorless lay rotting on the sea,
	And their masts fell down piecemeal: as they dropp’d
	They slept on the abyss without a surge--
	The waves were dead; the tides were in their grave,
	The moon, their mistress, had expir’d before;
	The winds were wither’d in the stagnant air,
	And the clouds perish’d; Darkness had no need
	Of aid from them--She was the Universe.



3. SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY

	She walks in beauty, like the night
	Of cloudless climes and starry skies;
	And all that’s best of dark and bright
	Meet in her aspect and her eyes;
	Thus mellowed to that tender light
	Which heaven to gaudy day denies.

	One shade the more, one ray the less,
	Had half impaired the nameless grace
	Which waves in every raven tress,
	Or softly lightens o’er her face;
	Where thoughts serenely sweet express,
	How pure, how dear their dwelling-place.

	And on that cheek, and o’er that brow,
	So soft, so calm, yet eloquent,
	The smiles that win, the tints that glow,
	But tell of days in goodness spent,
	A mind at peace with all below,
	A heart whose love is innocent!



4. SNATCHED AWAY IN BEAUTY’S BLOOM

	I

	Oh! snatched away in beauty’s bloom,
	On thee shall press no ponderous tomb;
	But on thy turf shall roses rear
	Their leaves, the earliest of the year;
	And the wild cypress wave in tender gloom:


	II

	And oft by yon blue gushing stream
	Shall Sorrow lean her drooping head,
	And feed deep thought with many a dream,
	And lingering pause and lightly tread;
	Fond wretch! as if her step disturbed the dead!


	III

	Away! we know that tears are vain,
	That Death nor heeds nor hears distress:
	Will this unteach us to complain?
	Or make one mourner weep the less?
	And thou--who tell’st me to forget,
	Thy looks are wan, thine eyes are wet.
