*** Scott Cairns (1954 - )


1. EARLY FROST

	This morning the world’s white face reminds us
	that life intends to become serious again.
	And the same loud birds that all summer long
	annoyed us with their high attitudes and chatter
	silently line the gibbet of the fence a little stunned,
	chastened enough.
	
	They look as if they’re waiting for things
	to grow worse, but are watching the house,
	as if somewhere in their dim memories
	they recall something about this abandoned garden
	that could save them.
	
	The neighbor’s dog has also learned to wake
	without exaggeration. And the neighbor himself
	has made it to his car with less noise, starting
	the small engine with a kind of reverence. At the window
	his wife witnesses this bleak tableau, blinking
	her eyes, silent.
	
	I fill the feeders to the top and cart them
	to the tree, hurrying back inside
	to leave the morning to these ridiculous
	birds, who, reminded, find the rough shelters,
	bow, and then feed.


2. LATE RESULTS

	And the few willing to listen demanded that we confess on television.
	So we kept our sins to ourselves, and they became less troubling.
	
	The halt and the lame arranged to have their hips replaced.
	Lepers coated their sores with a neutral foundation, avoided strong light.
	
	The hungry ate at grand buffets and grew huge, though they remained hungry.
	Prisoners became indistinguishable from the few who visited them.
	
	Widows remarried and became strangers to their kin.
	The orphans finally grew up and learned to fend for themselves.
	
	Even the prophets suspected they were mad, and kept their mouths shut.
	Only the poor--who are with us always--only they continued in the hope.


3. A PRIOR DESPAIR

	When I saw that I had lost her completely, I sought the dulcet
	taste of her on the lips of each subsequent woman, her fragrant
	flesh in the fold of every lover’s nape thereafter, and her heat
	welling with my own and drawing out an urgency in each
	ambiguous woman met in that tortured interim.
	
	When I saw that I had lost her I was lost, and held
	my eyes shut tight that I might so delude my wits as to trust
	that it was she receiving me, that it was she returning
	with delight the urgent drive against the unbearable
	distance--two bodies, struggling toward agreeable repose.
	
	Then, tasting once a sudden kiss so suddenly presented,
	I saw another prospect rise to view, and knew reprieve
	from the familiar ring of hell, from which I rose and marveled
	at the offer of another life whose heat and heady fragrance
	rose, delirious to burn deliciously, and not consume.