*** Luís de Camões (1525 - 1580)


1. AN ADIEU TO TAGUS

	Waters of gentle Tagus, calmly flowing 
	Through these green fields ye freshen as ye flow, 
	On flocks and herds, plants, flowers, all things that grow, 
	On shepherds and on nymphs delight bestowing; 
	I know not, ah! sweet streams, despair of knowing 
	When I shall come again; for as I go, 
	And ponder why, ye fill me with such woe, 
	That in my heart a deep distrust is growing. 
	The Fates have e’en decreed this sad adieu, 
	Aiming to change my joys into despair, 
	This sad adieu that weighs upon my years: 
	Of them complaining, yearning after you, 
	With sighs I shall invade some distant air, 
	And trouble other waters with my tears.



2. BEHOLDING HER

	When I behold you, Lady! when my eyes
	Dwell on the deep enjoyment of your sight,
	I give my spirit to that one delight,
	And earth appears to me a Paradise.
	And when I hear you speak, and see you smile,
	Full satisfied, absorb’d, my centr’d mind
	Deems all the world’s vain hopes and joys the while
	As empty as the unsubstantial wind.
	Lady! I feel your charms, yet dare not raise
	To that high theme the unequal song of praise,--
	A power for that to language was not given;
	Nor marvel I, when I those beauties view,
	Lady! that He, whose power created you,
	Could form the stars and yonder glorious heaven.



3. HIS INSUFFICIENCY OF PRAISE

	So sweet the lyre, so musical the strain,
	By which my suit, Belovëd! is expressed,
	That, hearing them, no such indifferent breast
	But welcomes Love and his delicious pain,
	And opes to his innumerable train
	Of sweet persuasions, lovely mysteries,
	Brief angers, gentle reconcilements, sighs
	And ardour unabash’d by proud disdain.
	Yet, when I strive to sing what beauty dwells
	Upon thy brow, so oft in scorn array’d,
	My song upon the unworthy lips expires.
	It must be loftier verse than mine that tells
	Of loveliness like thine. My Muse, dismay’d,
	Folds her weak wing and silently retires.



4. LOVE

	Love is a fire that burns unseen, 
	a wound that aches yet isn’t felt, 
	an always discontent contentment, 
	a pain that rages without hurting, 
	
	a longing for nothing but to long, 
	a loneliness in the midst of people, 
	a never feeling pleased when pleased, 
	a passion that gains when lost in thought. 
	
	It’s being enslaved of your own free will; 
	it’s counting your defeat a victory; 
	it’s staying loyal to your killer. 
	
	But if it’s so self-contradictory, 
	how can Love, when Love chooses, 
	bring human hearts into sympathy? 
