*** Giosuè Carducci (1835 - 1907)


1. AT THE STATION

	O the lamps--how they chase
	each other lazily there behind the trees,
	yawning their light through dripping
	branches onto the mud.
	
	Faint, fine, shrill, a nearby
	steam engine hisses. A lead sky
	and the autumn morning
	enwrap us like a great chimera.
	
	Where and to what are they going, these people,
	cloaked and silent, hurrying to dark cars--
	to what unforeseeable sorrows
	or pangs of remote hope?
	
	Even you, rapt Lydia, give
	to the conductor your torn ticket,
	and to pressing time your beautiful years,
	your memories and moments of joy.
	
	Along the black train come
	the trainmen hooded in black
	like shadows, with dim lanterns
	and iron sledges, and the iron
	
	brakes when plied make a long
	enervated clang: from the soul’s depths,
	an echo of languor makes its sad
	reply, like a shudder.
	
	And the doors slammed shut
	seem like outrages: a quick jibe
	sounds the final farewell:
	thundering on heavy panes, the rain.
	
	Already the monster, owning its metallic
	soul, fumes, slouches, pants, opens
	wide its fiery eyes; defies the heavens,
	whistling through the gloom.
	
	The unholy monster goes; with a horrible tug,
	beating its wings, it carries away my love.
	Ah, the alabaster face and fine veil,
	hailing me, disappear in darkness.
	
	O sweet face of pale rose,
	o starlit placid eyes, o snow-white
	forehead ringed with luxuriant curls
	gently bending in a nod of love.
	
	The warm air was throbbing with life;
	the summer throbbed when she looked on me,
	and the youthful June sun
	liked to shower her cheek
	
	with kisses of light, reflected through
	auburn hair: like a halo
	more brilliant than the sun, my dreams
	encircle her soft shape . . .
	
	Beneath the rain, I return through
	the haze; and I would lose myself in it.
	I stagger like a drunk. I touch myself
	to see if I also have become a ghost.
	
	O how the leaves are falling--cold,
	incessant, mute, heavy--on my soul.
	I know that everywhere in the world,
	solitary and eternal, it is November.
	
	Better he who’s lost the sense of life,
	better this shadow, this haze:
	I want O how I want to lie myself down
	in doldrums that will last forever.


2. DEATH

	When the precise diva drops down on our houses,
	the far off roar of her flying is heard,
	
	and the shadow of her icy wing, icily advancing,
	spreads wide a melancholy silence.
	
	When she comes, men bow their heads,
	but the women fall to pining.
	
	Thus the treetops, when July winds gather,
	do not sway on the green hills:
	
	the trees stand almost utterly still,
	and only the hoarse moan of the creek is heard.
	
	She enters, passes, touches, and without even turning levels
	the saplings, delighted by their young branches;
	
	she shears the golden wheat, and strips even hanging grapes,
	scoops up the good wives and innocent girls
	
	and tiny children: pink between black wings they reach their arms
	to the sun, to their games, and smile.
	
	O sad homes, where before their fathers’ faces,
	silent, livid diva, you put out young lives.
	
	Therein, rooms no longer sound with laughter and merrymaking
	or with whispers, like birds’ nests in May:
	
	therein, no more the sound of joyful rearing,
	nor love’s woes, nor wedding dances:
	
	they grow old therein, the shadowed survivors; to the roar
	of your return their ears incline, O goddess.


3. KINGFISHER

	Not under a steel nib that scratches in nasty furrows
	its dull thoughts onto dry white paper;
	
	but under the ripe sun, as breezes gust
	through wide-open clearings beside a swift stream,
	
	the heart’s sighs, dwindling into infinity, are born,
	the sweet, wistful flower of melody is born.
	
	Here redolent May shines in rose-scented air,
	brilliant the hollow eyes, hearts asleep in their chests;
	
	the heart sleeps, but ears are easily roused
	by the chromatic cries of La Gioconda.
	
	O Muses’ altar of green, white-capped
	above the sea. Alcman leads the chaste choir:
	
	“I want to fly with you, maidens, fly into a dance,
	as the kingfisher flies drawn by halcyons:
	
	he flies with halcyons over spindrift waves in a gale,
	kingfisher, purple herald of spring.”

