*** John Clare (1793 - 1864)


1. AUTUMN

	The thistledown’s flying, though the winds are all still, 
	On the green grass now lying, now mounting the hill, 
	The spring from the fountain now boils like a pot; 
	Through stones past the counting it bubbles red-hot. 
	
	The ground parched and cracked is like overbaked bread, 
	The greensward all wracked is, bents dried up and dead. 
	The fallow fields glitter like water indeed, 
	And gossamers twitter, flung from weed unto weed. 
	
	Hill-tops like hot iron glitter bright in the sun, 
	And the rivers we’re eying burn to gold as they run; 
	Burning hot is the ground, liquid gold is the air; 
	Whoever looks round sees Eternity there. 



2. THE DYING CHILD

	He could not die when trees were green, 
	        For he loved the time too well. 
	His little hands, when flowers were seen, 
	        Were held for the bluebell, 
	        As he was carried o’er the green. 
	
	His eye glanced at the white-nosed bee; 
	        He knew those children of the spring: 
	When he was well and on the lea 
	        He held one in his hands to sing, 
	        Which filled his heart with glee. 
	
	Infants, the children of the spring! 
	        How can an infant die 
	When butterflies are on the wing, 
	        Green grass, and such a sky? 
	        How can they die at spring? 
	
	He held his hands for daisies white, 
	        And then for violets blue, 
	And took them all to bed at night 
	        That in the green fields grew, 
	        As childhood’s sweet delight. 
	
	And then he shut his little eyes, 
	        And flowers would notice not; 
	Birds’ nests and eggs caused no surprise, 
	        He now no blossoms got; 
	        They met with plaintive sighs. 
	
	When winter came and blasts did sigh, 
	        And bare were plain and tree, 
	As he for ease in bed did lie 
	        His soul seemed with the free, 
	        He died so quietly.



3. I AM!

	I am--yet what I am none cares or knows; 
	My friends forsake me like a memory lost: 
	I am the self-consumer of my woes-- 
	They rise and vanish in oblivious host, 
	Like shadows in love’s frenzied stifled throes 
	And yet I am, and live--like vapours tossed 
	
	Into the nothingness of scorn and noise, 
	Into the living sea of waking dreams, 
	Where there is neither sense of life or joys, 
	But the vast shipwreck of my life’s esteems; 
	Even the dearest that I loved the best 
	Are strange--nay, rather, stranger than the rest. 
	
	I long for scenes where man hath never trod 
	A place where woman never smiled or wept 
	There to abide with my Creator, God, 
	And sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept, 
	Untroubling and untroubled where I lie 
	The grass below--above the vaulted sky.



4. I HID MY LOVE

	I hid my love when young till I 
	Couldn’t bear the buzzing of a fly; 
	I hid my love to my despite 
	Till I could not bear to look at light: 
	I dare not gaze upon her face 
	But left her memory in each place; 
	Where’er I saw a wild flower lie 
	I kissed and bade my love good-bye. 
	
	I met her in the greenest dells, 
	Where dewdrops pearl the wood bluebells; 
	The lost breeze kissed her bright blue eye, 
	The bee kissed and went singing by, 
	A sunbeam found a passage there, 
	A gold chain round her neck so fair; 
	As secret as the wild bee’s song 
	She lay there all the summer long. 
	
	I hid my love in field and town 
	Till e’en the breeze would knock me down; 
	The bees seemed singing ballads o’er, 
	The fly’s bass turned a lion’s roar; 
	And even silence found a tongue, 
	To haunt me all the summer long; 
	The riddle nature could not prove 
	Was nothing else but secret love. 



5. I LOVE TO SEE THE SUMMER BEAMING FORTH

	I love to see the summer beaming forth
	And white wool sack clouds sailing to the north
	I love to see the wild flowers come again
	And mare blobs stain with gold the meadow drain
	And water lilies whiten on the floods
	Where reed clumps rustle like a wind shook wood
	Where from her hiding place the Moor Hen pushes
	And seeks her flag nest floating in bull rushes
	I like the willow leaning half way o’er
	The clear deep lake to stand upon its shore
	I love the hay grass when the flower head swings
	To summer winds and insects happy wings
	That sport about the meadow the bright day
	And see bright beetles in the clear lake play



6. LOVE LIVES BEYOND THE TOMB

	Love lives beyond 
	The tomb, the earth, which fades like dew-- 
	              I love the fond, 
	The faithful, and the true 
	
	              Love lives in sleep, 
	‘Tis happiness of healthy dreams 
	              Eve’s dews may weep, 
	But love delightful seems. 
	
	              ‘Tis seen in flowers, 
	And in the even’s pearly dew 
	              On earth’s green hours, 
	And in the heaven’s eternal blue. 
	
	              ‘Tis heard in spring 
	When light and sunbeams, warm and kind, 
	              On angels’ wing 
	Bring love and music to the wind. 
	
	              And where is voice, 
	So young, so beautiful and sweet 
	              As nature’s choice, 
	Where Spring and lovers meet? 
	
	              Love lives beyond 
	The tomb, the earth, the flowers, and dew. 
	              I love the fond, 
	The faithful, young and true. 



7. MEET ME IN THE GREEN GLEN

	Love, meet me in the green glen, 
	Beside the tall elm-tree, 
	Where the sweetbriar smells so sweet agen; 
	There come with me. 
	Meet me in the green glen. 
	
	Meet me at the sunset 
	Down in the green glen, 
	Where we’ve often met 
	By hawthorn-tree and foxes’ den, 
	Meet me in the green glen. 
	
	Meet me in the green glen, 
	By sweetbriar bushes there; 
	Meet me by your own sen, 
	Where the wild thyme blossoms fair. 
	Meet me in the green glen. 
	
	Meet me by the sweetbriar, 
	By the mole-hill swelling there; 
	When the west glows like a fire 
	God’s crimson bed is there. 
	Meet me in the green glen. 



8. THE STRANGER

	When trouble haunts me, need I sigh? 
	No, rather smile away despair; 
	For those have been more sad than I, 
	With burthens more than I could bear; 
	Aye, gone rejoicing under care 
	Where I had sunk in black despair. 
	
	When pain disturbs my peace and rest, 
	Am I a hopeless grief to keep, 
	When some have slept on torture’s breast 
	And smiled as in the sweetest sleep, 
	Aye, peace on thorns, in faith forgiven, 
	And pillowed on the hope of heaven? 
	
	Though low and poor and broken down, 
	Am I to think myself distrest? 
	No, rather laugh where others frown 
	And think my being truly blest; 
	For others I can daily see 
	More worthy riches worse than me. 
	
	Aye, once a stranger blest the earth 
	Who never caused a heart to mourn, 
	Whose very voice gave sorrow mirth-- 
	And how did earth his worth return? 
	It spurned him from its lowliest lot, 
	The meanest station owned him not; 
	
	An outcast thrown in sorrow’s way, 
	A fugitive that knew no sin, 
	Yet in lone places forced to stray-- 
	Men would not take the stranger in. 
	Yet peace, though much himself he mourned, 
	Was all to others he returned. 
	
	*    *    *    *    * 
	
	His presence was a peace to all, 
	He bade the sorrowful rejoice. 
	Pain turned to pleasure at his call, 
	Health lived and issued from his voice. 
	He healed the sick and sent abroad 
	The dumb rejoicing in the Lord. 
	
	The blind met daylight in his eye, 
	The joys of everlasting day; 
	The sick found health in his reply; 
	The cripple threw his crutch away. 
	Yet he with troubles did remain 
	And suffered poverty and pain. 
	
	Yet none could say of wrong he did, 
	And scorn was ever standing bye; 
	Accusers by their conscience chid, 
	When proof was sought, made no reply. 
	Yet without sin he suffered more 
	Than ever sinners did before.



9. SUMMER

	Come we to the summer, to the summer we will come, 
	For the woods are full of bluebells and the hedges full of bloom, 
	And the crow is on the oak a-building of her nest, 
	And love is burning diamonds in my true lover’s breast; 
	She sits beneath the whitethorn a-plaiting of her hair, 
	And I will to my true lover with a fond request repair; 
	I will look upon her face, I will in her beauty rest, 
	And lay my aching weariness upon her lovely breast. 
	
	The clock-a-clay is creeping on the open bloom of May, 
	The merry bee is trampling the pinky threads all day, 
	And the chaffinch it is brooding on its grey mossy nest 
	In the whitethorn bush where I will lean upon my lover’s breast; 
	I’ll lean upon her breast and I’ll whisper in her ear 
	That I cannot get a wink o’sleep for thinking of my dear; 
	I hunger at my meat and I daily fade away 
	Like the hedge rose that is broken in the heat of the day. 



10. SUMMER IMAGES

	Now swarthy Summer, by rude health embrowned, 
	Precedence takes of rosy fingered Spring; 
	And laughing Joy, with wild flowers prank’d, and crown’d, 
	A wild and giddy thing, 
	And Health robust, from every care unbound, 
	Come on the zephyr’s wing, 
	And cheer the toiling clown. 
	
	Happy as holiday-enjoying face, 
	Loud tongued, and “merry as a marriage bell,“ 
	Thy lightsome step sheds joy in every place; 
	And where the troubled dwell, 
	Thy witching charms wean them of half their cares; 
	And from thy sunny spell, 
	They greet joy unawares. 
	
	Then with thy sultry locks all loose and rude, 
	And mantle laced with gems of garish light, 
	Come as of wont; for I would fain intrude, 
	And in the world’s despite, 
	Share the rude wealth that thy own heart beguiles; 
	If haply so I might 
	Win pleasure from thy smiles. 
	
	Me not the noise of brawling pleasure cheers, 
	In nightly revels or in city streets; 
	But joys which soothe, and not distract the ears, 
	That one at leisure meets 
	In the green woods, and meadows summer-shorn, 
	Or fields, where bee-fly greets 
	The ear with mellow horn. 
	
	The green-swathed grasshopper, on treble pipe, 
	Sings there, and dances, in mad-hearted pranks; 
	There bees go courting every flower that’s ripe, 
	On baulks and sunny banks; 
	And droning dragon-fly, on rude bassoon, 
	Attempts to give God thanks 
	In no discordant tune. 
	
	The speckled thrush, by self-delight embued, 
	There sings unto himself for joy’s amends, 
	And drinks the honey dew of solitude. 
	There Happiness attends 
	With inbred Joy until the heart o’erflow, 
	Of which the world’s rude friends, 
	Nought heeding, nothing know. 
	
	There the gay river, laughing as it goes, 
	Plashes with easy wave its flaggy sides, 
	And to the calm of heart, in calmness shows 
	What pleasure there abides, 
	To trace its sedgy banks, from trouble free: 
	Spots Solitude provides 
	To muse, and happy be. 
	
	There ruminating ‘neath some pleasant bush, 
	On sweet silk grass I stretch me at mine ease, 
	Where I can pillow on the yielding rush; 
	And, acting as I please, 
	Drop into pleasant dreams; or musing lie, 
	Mark the wind-shaken trees, 
	And cloud-betravelled sky. 
	
	There think me how some barter joy for care, 
	And waste life’s summer-health in riot rude, 
	Of nature, nor of nature’s sweets aware. 
	When passions vain intrude, 
	These, by calm musings, softened are and still; 
	And the heart’s better mood 
	Feels sick of doing ill. 
	
	There I can live, and at my leisure seek 
	Joys far from cold restraints--not fearing pride-- 
	Free as the winds, that breathe upon my cheek 
	Rude health, so long denied. 
	Here poor Integrity can sit at ease, 
	And list self-satisfied 
	The song of honey-bees. 
	
	The green lane now I traverse, where it goes 
	Nought guessing, till some sudden turn espies 
	Rude batter’d finger post, that stooping shows 
	Where the snug mystery lies; 
	And then a mossy spire, with ivy crown, 
	Cheers up the short surprise, 
	And shows a peeping town. 
	
	I see the wild flowers, in their summer morn 
	Of beauty, feeding on joy’s luscious hours; 
	The gay convolvulus, wreathing round the thorn, 
	Agape for honey showers; 
	And slender kingcup, burnished with the dew 
	Of morning’s early hours, 
	Like gold yminted new. 
	
	And mark by rustic bridge, o’er shallow stream, 
	Cow-tending boy, to toil unreconciled, 
	Absorbed as in some vagrant summer dream; 
	Who now, in gestures wild, 
	Starts dancing to his shadow on the wall, 
	Feeling self-gratified, 
	Nor fearing human thrall. 
	
	Or thread the sunny valley laced with streams, 
	Or forests rude, and the o’ershadow’d brims 
	Of simple ponds, where idle shepherd dreams, 
	Stretching his listless limbs; 
	Or trace hay-scented meadows, smooth and long, 
	Where joy’s wild impulse swims 
	In one continued song. 
	
	I love at early morn, from new mown swath, 
	To see the startled frog his route pursue; 
	To mark while, leaping o’er the dripping path, 
	His bright sides scatter dew, 
	The early lark that from its bustle flies, 
	To hail his matin new; 
	And watch him to the skies. 
	
	To note on hedgerow baulks, in moisture sprent, 
	The jetty snail creep from the mossy thorn, 
	With earnest heed, and tremulous intent, 
	Frail brother of the morn, 
	That from the tiny bent’s dew-misted leaves 
	Withdraws his timid horn, 
	And fearful vision weaves. 
	
	Or swallow heed on smoke-tanned chimney top, 
	Wont to be first unsealing Morning’s eye, 
	Ere yet the bee hath gleaned one wayward drop 
	Of honey on his thigh; 
	To see him seek morn’s airy couch to sing, 
	Until the golden sky 
	Bepaint his russet wing. 
	
	Or sauntering boy by tanning corn to spy, 
	With clapping noise to startle birds away, 
	And hear him bawl to every passer by 
	To know the hour of day; 
	While the uncradled breezes, fresh and strong, 
	With waking blossoms play, 
	And breathe Æolian song. 
	
	I love the south-west wind, or low or loud, 
	And not the less when sudden drops of rain 
	Moisten my glowing cheek from ebon cloud, 
	Threatening soft showers again, 
	That over lands new ploughed and meadow grounds, 
	Summer’s sweet breath unchain, 
	And wake harmonious sounds. 
	
	Rich music breathes in Summer’s every sound; 
	And in her harmony of varied greens, 
	Woods, meadows, hedge-rows, corn-fields, all around 
	Much beauty intervenes, 
	Filling with harmony the ear and eye; 
	While o’er the mingling scenes 
	Far spreads the laughing sky. 
	
	See, how the wind-enamoured aspen leaves 
	Turn up their silver lining to the sun! 
	And hark! the rustling noise, that oft deceives, 
	And makes the sheep-boy run: 
	The sound so mimics fast-approaching showers, 
	He thinks the rain’s begun, 
	And hastes to sheltering bowers. 
	
	But now the evening curdles dank and grey, 
	Changing her watchet hue for sombre weed; 
	And moping owls, to close the lids of day, 
	On drowsy wing proceed; 
	While chickering crickets, tremulous and long, 
	Light’s farewell inly heed, 
	And give it parting song. 
	
	The pranking bat its flighty circlet makes; 
	The glow-worm burnishes its lamp anew; 
	O’er meadows dew-besprent, the beetle wakes 
	Inquiries ever new, 
	Teazing each passing ear with murmurs vain, 
	As wanting to pursue 
	His homeward path again. 
	
	Hark! ‘tis the melody of distant bells 
	That on the wind with pleasing hum rebounds 
	By fitful starts, then musically swells 
	O’er the dim stilly grounds; 
	While on the meadow-bridge the pausing boy 
	Listens the mellow sounds, 
	And hums in vacant joy. 
	
	Now homeward-bound, the hedger bundles round 
	His evening faggot, and with every stride 
	His leathern doublet leaves a rustling sound, 
	Till silly sheep beside 
	His path start tremulous, and once again 
	Look back dissatisfied, 
	And scour the dewy plain. 
	
	How sweet the soothing calmness that distills 
	O’er the heart’s every sense its opiate dews, 
	In meek-eyed moods and ever balmy trills! 
	That softens and subdues, 
	With gentle Quiet’s bland and sober train, 
	Which dreamy eve renews 
	In many a mellow strain! 
	
	I love to walk the fields, they are to me 
	A legacy no evil can destroy; 
	They, like a spell, set every rapture free 
	That cheer’d me when a boy. 
	Play--pastime--all Time’s blotting pen conceal’d, 
	Comes like a new-born joy, 
	To greet me in the field. 
	
	For Nature’s objects ever harmonize 
	With emulous Taste, that vulgar deed annoys; 
	Which loves in pensive moods to sympathize, 
	And meet vibrating joys 
	O’er Nature’s pleasing things; nor slighting, deems 
	Pastimes, the Muse employs, 
	Vain and obtrusive themes.



11. WHAT IS LIFE?

	And what is Life?--An hour-glass on the run,
	A Mist retreating from the morning sun,
	   A busy, bustling, still repeated dream;
	Its length?--A minute’s pause, a moment’s thought;
	   And happiness?--A bubble on the stream,
	That in the act of seizing shrinks to nought.
	
	What are vain Hopes?--The puffing gale of morn,
	   That of its charms divests the dewy lawn,
	And robs each flow’ret of its gem,--and dies;
	   A cobweb hiding disappointment’s thorn,
	Which stings more keenly through the thin disguise.
	
	And thou, O Trouble?--nothing can suppose,
	(And sure the power of wisdom only knows,)
	   What need requireth thee:
	So free and liberal as thy bounty flows,
	   Some necessary cause must surely be:
	But disappointments, pains, and every woe
	   Devoted wretches feel,
	The universal plagues of life below,
	   Are mysteries still ‘neath Fate’s unbroken seal.
	
	And what is Death? is still the cause unfound?
	That dark, mysterious name of horrid sound?--
	   A long and lingering sleep, the weary crave.
	And Peace? where can its happiness abound?--
	   No where at all, save heaven, and the grave.
	
	Then what is Life?--When stripp’d of its disguise,
	   A thing to be desir’d it cannot be;
	Since every thing that meets our foolish eyes
	   Gives proof sufficient of its vanity.
	‘Tis but a trial all must undergo;
	   To teach unthankful mortals how to prize
	That happiness vain man’s denied to know,
	   Until he’s call’d to claim it in the skies.
