*** Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772 - 1834)


1. A CHRISTMAS CAROL

	I
	
	   The Shepherds went their hasty way,
	        And found the lowly stable-shed
	   Where the Virgin-Mother lay:
	        And now they checked their eager tread,
	For to the Babe, that at her bosom clung,
	A Mother’s song the Virgin-Mother sung.
	
	
	II
	
	   They told her how a glorious light,
	         Streaming from a heavenly throng,
	   Around them shone, suspending night!
	         While sweeter than a Mother’s song,
	Blest Angels heralded the Saviour’s birth,
	Glory to God on high! and Peace on Earth.
	
	
	III
	
	   She listened to the tale divine,
	         And closer still the Babe she pressed;
	   And while she cried, the Babe is mine!
	         The milk rushed faster to her breast:
	Joy rose within her, like a summer’s morn;
	Peace, Peace on Earth! the Prince of Peace is born.
	
	
	IV
	
	   Thou Mother of the Prince of Peace,
	         Poor, simple, and of low estate!
	   That Strife should vanish, Battle cease,
	         O why should this thy soul elate?
	Sweet Music’s loudest note, the Poet’s story,--
	Did’st thou ne’er love to hear of Fame and Glory?
	
	
	V
	
	   And is not War a youthful King,
	         A stately Hero clad in Mail?
	   Beneath his footsteps laurels spring;
	         Him Earth’s majestic monarchs hail
	Their Friend, their Playmate! and his bold bright eye
	Compels the maiden’s love-confessing sigh.
	
	
	VI
	
	   “Tell this in some more courtly scene,
	         “To maids and youths in robes of state!
	   “I am a woman poor and mean,
	         “And therefore is my Soul elate.
	“War is a ruffian, all with guilt defiled,
	“That from the aged Father tears his Child!
	
	
	VII
	
	   “A murderous fiend, by fiends adored,
	         “He kills the Sire and starves the Son;
	   “The Husband kills, and from her board
	         “Steals all his Widow’s toil had won;
	“Plunders God’s world of beauty; rends away
	“All safety from the Night, all comfort from the Day.
	
	
	VIII.
	
	   “Then wisely is my soul elate,
	         “That Strife should vanish, Battle cease:
	   “I’m poor and of a low estate,
	         “The Mother of the Prince of Peace.
	“Joy rises in me, like a summer’s morn:
	“Peace, Peace on Earth, the Prince of Peace is born.”   


2. FROST AT MIDNIGHT

	The Frost performs its secret ministry, 
	Unhelped by any wind. The owlet’s cry 
	Came loud--and hark, again! loud as before. 
	The inmates of my cottage, all at rest, 
	Have left me to that solitude, which suits 
	Abstruser musings: save that at my side 
	My cradled infant slumbers peacefully. 
	‘Tis calm indeed! so calm, that it disturbs 
	And vexes meditation with its strange 
	And extreme silentness. Sea, hill, and wood, 
	This populous village! Sea, and hill, and wood, 
	With all the numberless goings-on of life, 
	Inaudible as dreams! the thin blue flame 
	Lies on my low-burnt fire, and quivers not; 
	Only that film, which fluttered on the grate, 
	
	Still flutters there, the sole unquiet thing. 
	Methinks, its motion in this hush of nature 
	Gives it dim sympathies with me who live, 
	Making it a companionable form, 
	Whose puny flaps and freaks the idling Spirit 
	By its own moods interprets, every where 
	Echo or mirror seeking of itself, 
	And makes a toy of Thought. 
	
	                     But O! how oft, 
	How oft, at school, with most believing mind, 
	Presageful, have I gazed upon the bars, 
	To watch that fluttering _stranger_ ! and as oft 
	With unclosed lids, already had I dreamt 
	Of my sweet birth-place, and the old church-tower, 
	Whose bells, the poor man’s only music, rang 
	From morn to evening, all the hot Fair-day, 
	So sweetly, that they stirred and haunted me 
	With a wild pleasure, falling on mine ear 
	Most like articulate sounds of things to come! 
	So gazed I, till the soothing things, I dreamt, 
	Lulled me to sleep, and sleep prolonged my dreams! 
	And so I brooded all the following morn, 
	Awed by the stern preceptor’s face, mine eye 
	Fixed with mock study on my swimming book: 
	Save if the door half opened, and I snatched 
	A hasty glance, and still my heart leaped up, 
	For still I hoped to see the _stranger_‘s face, 
	Townsman, or aunt, or sister more beloved, 
	My play-mate when we both were clothed alike! 
	
	        Dear Babe, that sleepest cradled by my side, 
	Whose gentle breathings, heard in this deep calm, 
	Fill up the intersperséd vacancies 
	And momentary pauses of the thought! 
	My babe so beautiful! it thrills my heart 
	With tender gladness, thus to look at thee, 
	And think that thou shalt learn far other lore, 
	And in far other scenes! For I was reared 
	In the great city, pent ‘mid cloisters dim, 
	And saw nought lovely but the sky and stars. 
	But _thou_, my babe! shalt wander like a breeze 
	By lakes and sandy shores, beneath the crags 
	Of ancient mountain, and beneath the clouds, 
	Which image in their bulk both lakes and shores 
	And mountain crags: so shalt thou see and hear 
	The lovely shapes and sounds intelligible 
	Of that eternal language, which thy God 
	Utters, who from eternity doth teach 
	Himself in all, and all things in himself. 
	Great universal Teacher! he shall mould 
	Thy spirit, and by giving make it ask. 
	
	        Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee, 
	Whether the summer clothe the general earth 
	With greenness, or the redbreast sit and sing 
	Betwixt the tufts of snow on the bare branch 
	Of mossy apple-tree, while the night-thatch 
	Smokes in the sun-thaw; whether the eave-drops fall 
	Heard only in the trances of the blast, 
	Or if the secret ministry of frost 
	Shall hang them up in silent icicles, 
	Quietly shining to the quiet Moon.


3. THE GOOD, GREAT MAN

	“How seldom, friend! a good great man inherits 
	Honour or wealth with all his worth and pains! 
	It sounds like stories from the land of spirits 
	If any man obtain that which he merits 
	Or any merit that which he obtains.“ 
	
	
	_Reply to the above:_
	
	For shame, dear friend, renounce this canting strain! 
	What would’st thou have a good great man obtain? 
	Place? titles? salary? a gilded chain? 
	Or throne of corses which his sword had slain? 
	Greatness and goodness are not _means_, but _ends_! 
	Hath he not always treasures, always friends, 
	The good great man? _three_ treasures, LOVE, and LIGHT, 
	And CALM THOUGHTS, regular as infant’s breath: 
	And three firm friends, more sure than day and night, 
	HIMSELF, his MAKER, and the ANGEL DEATH! 


4. THE KNIGHT’S TOMB

	Where is the grave of Sir Arthur O’Kellyn?
	Where may the grave of that good man be?--
	By the side of a spring, on the breast of Helvellyn,
	Under the twigs of a young birch tree!
	The oak that in summer was sweet to hear,
	And rustled its leaves in the fall of the year,
	And whistled and roared in the winter alone,
	Is gone,--and the birch in its stead is grown.--
	The Knight’s bones are dust,
	And his good sword rust;--
	His soul is with the saints, I trust.


5. KUBLA KHAN

	_Or, a vision in a dream. A Fragment._
	
	In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
	A stately pleasure-dome decree:
	Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
	Through caverns measureless to man
	  Down to a sunless sea.
	So twice five miles of fertile ground
	With walls and towers were girdled round;
	And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
	Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
	And here were forests ancient as the hills,
	Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
	
	But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
	Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
	A savage place! as holy and enchanted
	As e’er beneath a waning moon was haunted
	By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
	And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
	As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
	A mighty fountain momently was forced:
	Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst
	Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
	Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher’s flail:
	And mid these dancing rocks at once and ever
	It flung up momently the sacred river.
	Five miles meandering with a mazy motion
	Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
	Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
	And sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean;
	And ’mid this tumult Kubla heard from far
	Ancestral voices prophesying war!
	  The shadow of the dome of pleasure
	  Floated midway on the waves;
	  Where was heard the mingled measure
	  From the fountain and the caves.
	It was a miracle of rare device,
	A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!
	
	  A damsel with a dulcimer
	  In a vision once I saw:
	  It was an Abyssinian maid
	  And on her dulcimer she played,
	  Singing of Mount Abora.
	  Could I revive within me
	  Her symphony and song,
	  To such a deep delight ’twould win me,
	That with music loud and long,
	I would build that dome in air,
	That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
	And all who heard should see them there,
	And all should cry, Beware! Beware!
	His flashing eyes, his floating hair!
	Weave a circle round him thrice,
	And close your eyes with holy dread
	For he on honey-dew hath fed,
	And drunk the milk of Paradise.


6. YOUTH AND AGE

	Verse, a breeze mid blossoms straying, 
	Where Hope clung feeding, like a bee-- 
	Both were mine! Life went a-maying 
	With Nature, Hope, and Poesy, 
	When I was young! 
	
	When I was young?--Ah, woful When! 
	Ah! for the change ‘twixt Now and Then! 
	This breathing house not built with hands, 
	This body that does me grievous wrong, 
	O’er aery cliffs and glittering sands, 
	How lightly then it flashed along:-- 
	Like those trim skiffs, unknown of yore, 
	On winding lakes and rivers wide, 
	That ask no aid of sail or oar, 
	That fear no spite of wind or tide! 
	Nought cared this body for wind or weather 
	When Youth and I lived in’t together. 
	
	Flowers are lovely; Love is flower-like; 
	Friendship is a sheltering tree; 
	O! the joys, that came down shower-like, 
	Of Friendship, Love, and Liberty, 
	Ere I was old! 
	Ere I was old? Ah woful Ere, 
	Which tells me, Youth’s no longer here! 
	O Youth! for years so many and sweet, 
	‘Tis known, that Thou and I were one, 
	I’ll think it but a fond conceit-- 
	It cannot be that Thou art gone! 
	
	Thy vesper-bell hath not yet toll’d:-- 
	And thou wert aye a masker bold! 
	What strange disguise hast now put on, 
	To make believe, that thou are gone? 
	I see these locks in silvery slips, 
	This drooping gait, this altered size: 
	But Spring-tide blossoms on thy lips, 
	And tears take sunshine from thine eyes! 
	Life is but thought: so think I will 
	That Youth and I are house-mates still. 
	
	Dew-drops are the gems of morning, 
	But the tears of mournful eve! 
	Where no hope is, life’s a warning 
	That only serves to make us grieve, 
	When we are old: 
	That only serves to make us grieve 
	With oft and tedious taking-leave, 
	Like some poor nigh-related guest, 
	That may not rudely be dismist; 
	Yet hath outstay’d his welcome while, 
	And tells the jest without the smile. 