*** Cecil Day-Lewis (1904 - 1972)


1. ADDRESS TO THE MOTHER

	This was your world and this I owe you--
	Room for growing, a site for building,
	The braced sinew, the hands agreeing,
	Mind foreseeing and nerve for facing.
	You were my world, my breath, my seasons,
	Where blood ran easy and springs failed not;
	Kind was clover to feet exploring
	A broad earth and all to discover.
	Simple that world, of two dimensions,
	Of stone mansions and good examples;
	Each image actual, nearness was no
	Fear, and distance without a mirage.
	Dawn like a greyhound leapt the hilltops,
	A million leaves held up the noonday,
	Evening was slow with bells pealing,
	And night compelling to breast and pillow.
	This was my world--oh, this you gave me--
	Safety for seed, petal uncurled there;
	Love asked no proving or price, a country
	Sunny for play, for spring manoeuvres.
	
	Woman, ask no more of me,
	Chill not the blood with jealous feud;
	This is a separate country now,
	Will pay respects but no tribute.
	Demand no atavistic rites,
	Preference in trade or tithe of grain;
	Bound by the limiting matrix I
	Increased you once, will not again.
	My vision’s patented, my plant
	Set up, my constitution whole;
	New fears, old tunes cannot induce
	Nostalgia of the sickly soul.
	Would you prolong your day, transfuse
	Young blood into your veins? Beware
	Lest one oppressed by autumn’s weight
	May thrill to feel death in the air.
	Let love be like a natural day
	That folds her work and takes to bed;
	Ploughland and tree stand out in black,
	Enough memorial for the dead.


2. COME, LIVE WITH ME AND BE MY LOVE

	Come, live with me and be my love,
	And we will all the pleasures prove
	Of peace and plenty, bed and board,
	That chance employment may afford.
	
	I’ll handle dainties on the docks
	And thou shalt read of summer frocks:
	At evening by the sour canals
	We’ll hope to hear some madrigals.
	
	Care on thy maiden brow shall put
	A wreath of wrinkles, and thy foot
	Be shod with pain: not silken dress
	But toil shall tire thy loveliness.
	
	Hunger shall make thy modest zone
	And cheat fond death of all but bone--
	If these delight thy mind may move,
	Then live with me and be my love.


3. CONDEMNED

	Tempt me no more; for I
	Have known the lightning’s hour,
	The poet’s inward pride,
	The certainty of power.
	
	Bayonets are closing round.
	I shrink; yet I must wring
	A living from despair
	And out of steel a song.
	
	Though song, though breath be short,
	I’ll share not the disgrace
	Of those that ran away
	Or never left the base.
	
	Comrades, my tongue can speak
	No comfortable words,
	Calls to a for lorn hope,
	Gives work and not rewards.
	
	Oh keep the sickle sharp
	And follow still the plough:
	Others may reap, though some
	See not the winter through.
	
	Father, who endest all,
	Pity our broken sleep;
	For we lie down with tears
	And waken but to weep.
	
	And if our blood alone
	Will melt this iron earth,
	Take it. It is well spent
	Easing a saviour’s birth.


4. THE CONFLICT

	I sang as one 
	Who on a tilting deck sings 
	To keep their courage up, thought the wave hangs 
	That shall cut off their sun. 
	
	As storm-cocks sing, 
	Flinging their natural answer in the wind’s teeth, 
	And care not if it is waste of breath 
	Or birth-control of spring. 
	
	As ocean-flyer clings 
	To height, to the last drop of spirit driving on 
	While yet ahead is land to be won 
	And work for wings. 
	
	Singing I was at peace, 
	Above the clouds, outside the ring: 
	For sorrow finds a swift release in song 
	And pride in poise. 
	
	Yet living here, 
	As one between two massive powers I live 
	Whom neutrality cannot save 
	Nor occupation cheer. 
	
	None such shall be left alive: 
	The innocent wing is soon shot down, 
	And private stars fade in the blood-red dawn 
	Where two worlds strive. 
	
	The red advance of life 
	Contracts pride, calls out the common blood, 
	Beats song into a single-blade, 
	Makes a depth-charge of grief. 
	
	Move then with new desires, 
	For where we used to build and love 
	Is no man’s land, and only ghosts can live 
	Between two fires.


5. THE ECSTATIC

	Lark, skylark, spilling your rubbed and round 
	Pebbles of sounds in air’s still lake, 
	Whose widening circles fill the noon; yet none 
	Is known so small beside the sun: 
	
	Be strong your fervent soaring, your skyward air! 
	Tremble there, a nerve of song! 
	Float up there where voice and wing are one, 
	A singing star, a note of light! 
	
	Buoyed, embayed in heaven’s noon-wide reaches--
	For soon Light’s tide will turn--Oh Stay! 
	Cease not till day streams to the west, then down 
	That estuary drop down to peace.


6. ELEGY BEFORE DEATH

	Come to the orangery. Sit down awhile.
	The sun is setting: the verandah frames
	An illuminated leaf of Italy.
	Gold and green and blue, stroke upon stroke,
	Seem to tell what nature and man could make of it
	If only their marriage were made in heaven. But see,
	Even as we hold the picture,
	The colors are fading already, the lines collapsing
	Fainting into the dream they will soon be.
	
	Again? Again we are balled who have sought
	So long in a melting Now the formula
	Of Always. There is no fast dye. Always?--
	That is the word the sirens sing
	On bone island. Oh stop your ears, and stop
	All this vain peering through the haze,
	The fortunate haze wherein we change and ripen,
	And never mind for what. Let us even embrace
	The shadows wheeling away our windfall days.
	
	Again again again, the frogs are screeling
	Down by the lilypond. Listen! I’ll echo them--
	Gain gain gain . . . Could we compel
	One grain of one vanishing moment to deliver
	Its golden ghost, loss would be gain
	And Love step naked from illusion’s shell.
	Did we but dare to see it,
	All things to us, you and I to each other,
	Stand in this naked potency of farewell.
	
	The villa was built for permanence. Man laid down
	Like wine his heart, planted young trees, young pictures,
	Young thoughts to ripen for an heir.
	Look how these avenues take the long view
	Of things ephemerall With what aplomb
	The statues greet us at the grassy stair!
	Time on the sundial was a snail’s migration
	Over a world of warmth, and each day passing
	Left on the fertile heart another layer.
	
	The continuity they took for granted
	We wistfully glamorize. So life’s devalued:
	Worth not a rhyme
	These statues, groves, books, bibelots, masterpieces,
	If we have used them only to grout a shaken
	Confidence or stop up the gaps of time.
	We must ride the flood, or go under
	With all our works, to emerge, when it recedes,
	Derelicts sluggish from the dishonoring slime.
	
	Our sun is setting. Terrestrial planes shift
	And slide towards dissolution, the terraced gardens
	Quaver like waves, and in the garden urn
	Geraniums go ashen. Now are we tempted, each
	To yearn that his struggling counterpoint, carried away
	Drowned by the flood’s finale, shall return
	To silence. Why do we trouble
	A master theme with cadenzas
	That ring out, fade out over its fathomless unconcern?
	
	Love, more than our holidays are numbered.
	Not one day but a whole life is drained off
	Through this pinprick of doubt into the dark.
	Rhadamanthine moment! Shall we be judged
	Self-traitors? Now is a chance to make our Aux
	Stand and deliver its holy spark,
	Now, when the tears rise and the levees crumble,
	To tap the potency of farewell.
	What ark is there but love? Let us embark.
	
	A weeping firmament, a sac of waters,
	A passive chaos--time without wind or tide,
	Where on brief motiveless eddy seethe
	Lost faces, furniture, animals, oblivion’s litter--
	Envelope me, just as the incipient poem
	Is globed in nescience, and beneath
	A heart purged of all but memory, grows.
	No landfall yet? No rift in the film? . . . I send you
	My dove into the future, to your death.


7. EPITAPH FOR AN ENEMY

	You ask, "What sort of man
	Was this?"--No worthier than
	A pendulum which makes
	Between its left and right
	Involuntary arcs,
	Proving from morn to night
	No contact anywhere
	With human or sublime--
	A punctual tick, a mere
	Accessory of Time.
	
	His leaden act was done,
	He stopt, and Time went on.


8. A HARD FROST

	A frost came in the night and stole my world
	And left this changeling for it--a precocious
	Image of spring, too brilliant to be true:
	White lilac on the window-pane, each grass-blade
	Furred like a catkin, maydrift loading the hedge.
	The elms behind the house are elms no longer
	But blossomers in crystal, stems of the mist
	That hangs yet in the valley below, amorphous
	As the blind tissue whence creation formed.
	
	The sun looks out and the fields blaze with diamonds
	Mockery spring, to lend this bridal gear
	For a few hours to a raw country maid,
	Then leave her all disconsolate with old fairings
	Of aconite and snowdrop! No, not here
	Amid this flounce and filigree of death
	Is the real transformation scene in progress,
	But deep below where frost
	Worrying the stiff clods unclenches their
	Grip on the seed and lets
	the future breathe.


9. IS IT FAR TO GO?

	_Is it far to go?_
	A step--no further.
	_Is it hard to go?_
	Ask the melting snow,
	The eddying feather.
	
	_What can I take there?_
	Not a hank, not a hair.
	_What shall I leave behind?_
	Ask the hastening wind,
	The fainting star.
	
	_Shall I be gone long?_
	For ever and a day.
	_To whom there belong?_
	Ask the stone to say,
	Ask my song.
	
	_Who will say farewell?_
	The beating bell.
	_Will anyone miss me?_
	That I dare not tell--
	Quick, Rose, and kiss me.


10. NEWSREEL

	Enter the dream-house, brothers and sisters, leaving 
	Your debts asleep, your history at the door: 
	This is the home for heroes, and this loving 
	Darkness a fur you can afford. 
	
	Fish in their tank electrically heated 
	Nose without envy the glass wall: for them 
	Clerk, spy, nurse, killer, prince, the great and the defeated, 
	Move in a mute day-dream. 
	
	Bathed in this common source, you gape incurious 
	At what your active hours have willed--
	Sleep-walking on that silver wall, the furious 
	Sick shapes and pregnant fancies of your world. 
	
	There is the mayor opening the oyster season: 
	A society wedding: the autumn hats look swell: 
	An old crocks’ race, and a politician 
	In fishing-waders to prove that all is well. 
	
	Oh, look at the warplanes! Screaming hysteric treble 
	In the low power-dive, like gannets they fall steep. 
	But what are they to trouble--
	These silver shadows-- to trouble your watery, womb-deep sleep? 
	
	See the big guns, rising, groping, erected 
	To plant death in your world’s soft womb. 
	Fire-bud, smoke-blossom, iron seed projected-- 
	Are these exotics? They will grow nearer home! 
	
	Grow nearer home-- and out of the dream-house stumbling 
	One night into a strangling air and the flung 
	Rags of children and thunder of stone niagaras tumbling, 
	You’ll know you slept too long.


11. TWO TRAVELLERS

	One of us in the compartment stares 
	Out of his window the whole day long 
	With attentive mein, as if he knows, 
	There is hid in the journeying scene a song 
	To recall or compose 
	From snatches of vision, hints of vanishing airs. 
	
	He’ll mark the couched hares 
	In grass whereover the lapwing reel and twist: 
	He notes how the shockheaded sunflowers climb 
	Like boys on the wire by the railway line; 
	And for him those morning rivers are love-in-a-mist, 
	And the chimneystacks prayers. 
	
	The other is plainly a man of affairs, 
	A seasoned commuter. His looks assert, 
	As he opens a briefcase intent on perusing 
	Facts and figures, he’d never divert 
	With profitless musing 
	The longest journey, or notice the dress it wears. 
	
	Little he cares 
	For the coloured drift of his passage: no, not a thing 
	Values in all that is hurrying past, 
	Though dimly he senses from first to last 
	How flaps and waves the smoke of his travelling 
	At the window-squares. 
	
	One is preoccupied, one just stares, 
	While the whale-ribbed terminus nears apace 
	Where passengers all must change, and under 
	Its arch triumphal quickly disperse 
	So you may wonder 
	Watching these two whom the train indifferently bears.


12. THE VOLUNTEER

	Tell them in England, if they ask
	What brought us to these wars,
	To this plateau beneath the night’s
	Grave manifold of stars--
	
	It was not fraud or foolishness,
	Glory, revenge, or pay:
	We came because our open eyes 
	Could see no other way.
	
	There was no other way to keep
	Man’s flickering truth alight:
	These stars will witness that our course
	Burned briefer, not less bright.
	
	Beyond the wasted olive-groves,
	The furthest lift of land,
	There calls a country that was ours
	And here shall be regained.
	
	Shine on us, memoried and real,
	Green-water-silken meads:
	Rivers of home, refresh our path
	Whom here your influence leads.
	
	Here in a parched and stranger place
	We fight for England free,
	The good our fathers won for her,
	The land they hoped to see.


13. WALKING AWAY

	It is eighteen years ago, almost to the day--
	A sunny day with leaves just turning,
	The touch-lines new-ruled--since I watched you play
	Your first game of football, then, like a satellite
	Wrenched from its orbit, go drifting away
	
	Behind a scatter of boys. I can see
	You walking away from me towards the school
	With the pathos of a half-fledged thing set free
	Into a wilderness, the gait of one
	Who finds no path where the path should be.
	
	That hesitant figure, eddying away
	Like a winged seed loosened from its parent stem,
	Has something I never quite grasp to convey
	About nature’s give-and-take--the small, the scorching
	Ordeals which fire one’s irresolute clay.
	
	I have had worse partings, but none that so
	Gnaws at my mind still. Perhaps it is roughly
	Saying what God alone could perfectly show--
	How selfhood begins with a walking away,
	And love is proved in the letting go.


14. WHERE ARE THE WAR POETS?

	They who in folly or mere greed 
	Enslaved religion, markets, laws, 
	Borrow our language now and bid 
	Us to speak up in freedom’s cause. 
	
	It is the logic of our times, 
	No subject for immortal verse-- 
	That we who lived by honest dreams 
	Defend the bad against the worse


15. WINTER NIGHT

	This evening holds her breath
	And makes a crystal pause;
	The streams of light are frozen,
	Shining above their source.
	
	Now if ever might one
	Break through the sensual gate;
	Seraph’s wing glimpse far-glinting.
	Is it, is it too late?
	
	We look up at the sky.
	Yes, it is mirror clear;
	Too well we recognise
	The physiognomy there.
	
	Friend, let us look to earth,
	Be stubborn, act and sleep.
	Here at our feet the skull
	Keeps a stiff upper lip;
	
	Feeling the weight of winter,
	Grimaces underground;
	But does not need to know
	Why spirit was flesh-bound.

