*** John Donne (1572 - 1631)


1. AIR AND ANGELS

	Twice or thrice had I lov’d thee, 
	Before I knew thy face or name; 
	So in a voice, so in a shapeless flame 
	Angels affect us oft, and worshipp’d be; 
	        Still when, to where thou wert, I came, 
	Some lovely glorious nothing I did see. 
	        But since my soul, whose child love is, 
	Takes limbs of flesh, and else could nothing do, 
	        More subtle than the parent is 
	Love must not be, but take a body too; 
	        And therefore what thou wert, and who, 
	               I bid Love ask, and now 
	That it assume thy body, I allow, 
	And fix itself in thy lip, eye, and brow. 
	
	Whilst thus to ballast love I thought, 
	And so more steadily to have gone, 
	With wares which would sink admiration, 
	I saw I had love’s pinnace overfraught; 
	        Ev’ry thy hair for love to work upon 
	Is much too much, some fitter must be sought; 
	        For, nor in nothing, nor in things 
	Extreme, and scatt’ring bright, can love inhere; 
	        Then, as an angel, face, and wings 
	Of air, not pure as it, yet pure, doth wear, 
	        So thy love may be my love’s sphere; 
	               Just such disparity 
	As is ‘twixt air and angels’ purity, 
	‘Twixt women’s love, and men’s, will ever be. 


2. THE ANNIVERSARY

	All Kings, and all their favourites,
	        All glory of honours, beauties, wits,
	   The sun itself, which makes times, as they pass,
	   Is elder by a year now than it was
	   When thou and I first one another saw:
	   All other things to their destruction draw,
	        Only our love hath no decay;
	   This no tomorrow hath, nor yesterday,
	   Running it never runs from us away,
	But truly keeps his first, last, everlasting day.
	
	        Two graves must hide thine and my corse;
	        If one might, death were no divorce.
	   Alas, as well as other Princes, we
	   (Who Prince enough in one another be)
	   Must leave at last in death these eyes and ears,
	   Oft fed with true oaths, and with sweet salt tears;
	        But souls where nothing dwells but love
	   (All other thoughts being inmates) then shall prove
	   This, or a love increasèd there above,
	When bodies to their graves, souls from their graves remove.
	
	        And then we shall be throughly blessed;
	        But we no more than all the rest.
	   Here upon earth we’re Kings, and none but we
	   Can be such Kings, nor of such subjects be;
	   Who is so safe as we? where none can do
	   Treason to us, except one of us two.
	        True and false fears let us refrain,
	   Let us love nobly, and live, and add again
	   Years and years unto years, till we attain
	To write threescore: this is the second of our reign.


3. THE BAIT

	Come live with me, and be my love, 
	And we will some new pleasures prove 
	Of golden sands, and crystal brooks, 
	With silken lines, and silver hooks. 
	
	There will the river whispering run 
	Warm’d by thy eyes, more than the sun; 
	And there the ‘enamour’d fish will stay, 
	Begging themselves they may betray. 
	
	When thou wilt swim in that live bath, 
	Each fish, which every channel hath, 
	Will amorously to thee swim, 
	Gladder to catch thee, than thou him. 
	
	If thou, to be so seen, be’st loth, 
	By sun or moon, thou dark’nest both, 
	And if myself have leave to see, 
	I need not their light having thee. 
	
	Let others freeze with angling reeds, 
	And cut their legs with shells and weeds, 
	Or treacherously poor fish beset, 
	With strangling snare, or windowy net. 
	
	Let coarse bold hands from slimy nest 
	The bedded fish in banks out-wrest; 
	Or curious traitors, sleeve-silk flies, 
	Bewitch poor fishes’ wand’ring eyes. 
	
	For thee, thou need’st no such deceit, 
	For thou thyself art thine own bait: 
	That fish, that is not catch’d thereby, 
	Alas, is wiser far than I. 


4. THE CANONIZATION

	For God’s sake hold your tongue, and let me love, 
	        Or chide my palsy, or my gout, 
	My five gray hairs, or ruined fortune flout, 
	        With wealth your state, your mind with arts improve, 
	               Take you a course, get you a place, 
	               Observe his honor, or his grace, 
	Or the king’s real, or his stampèd face 
	        Contemplate; what you will, approve, 
	        So you will let me love. 
	
	Alas, alas, who’s injured by my love? 
	        What merchant’s ships have my sighs drowned? 
	Who says my tears have overflowed his ground? 
	        When did my colds a forward spring remove? 
	               When did the heats which my veins fill 
	               Add one more to the plaguy bill? 
	Soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out still 
	        Litigious men, which quarrels move, 
	        Though she and I do love. 
	
	Call us what you will, we are made such by love; 
	        Call her one, me another fly, 
	We’re tapers too, and at our own cost die, 
	        And we in us find the eagle and the dove. 
	               The phœnix riddle hath more wit 
	               By us; we two being one, are it.
	So, to one neutral thing both sexes fit.
	        We die and rise the same, and prove
	        Mysterious by this love.
	
	We can die by it, if not live by love,
	        And if unfit for tombs and hearse
	Our legend be, it will be fit for verse;
	        And if no piece of chronicle we prove,
	               We’ll build in sonnets pretty rooms;
	               As well a well-wrought urn becomes
	The greatest ashes, as half-acre tombs,
	        And by these hymns, all shall approve
	        Us canonized for Love.
	
	And thus invoke us: “You, whom reverend love
	        Made one another’s hermitage;
	You, to whom love was peace, that now is rage;
	        Who did the whole world’s soul contract, and drove
	               Into the glasses of your eyes
	               (So made such mirrors, and such spies,
	That they did all to you epitomize)
	        Countries, towns, courts: beg from above
	        A pattern of your love!”


5. THE EXPIRATION

	So, so breake off this last lamenting kisse, 
	   Which sucks two soules, and vapours Both away, 
	Turne thou ghost that way, and let mee turne this, 
	   And let our selves benight our happiest day, 
	We ask’d none leave to love; nor will we owe 
	   Any, so cheape a death, as saying, Goe; 
	
	Goe; and if that word have not quite kil’d thee, 
	   Ease mee with death, by bidding mee goe too. 
	Oh, if it have, let my word worke on mee, 
	   And a just office on a murderer doe. 
	Except it be too late, to kill me so, 
	   Being double dead, going, and bidding, goe. 


6. THE FLEA

	Mark but this flea, and mark in this,   
	How little that which thou deniest me is;   
	It sucked me first, and now sucks thee,
	And in this flea our two bloods mingled be;   
	Thou know’st that this cannot be said
	A sin, nor shame, nor loss of maidenhead,
	   Yet this enjoys before it woo,
	   And pampered swells with one blood made of two,
	   And this, alas, is more than we would do.
	
	Oh stay, three lives in one flea spare,
	Where we almost, nay more than married are.   
	This flea is you and I, and this
	Our marriage bed, and marriage temple is;   
	Though parents grudge, and you, w’are met,   
	And cloistered in these living walls of jet.
	   Though use make you apt to kill me,
	   Let not to that, self-murder added be,
	   And sacrilege, three sins in killing three.
	
	Cruel and sudden, hast thou since
	Purpled thy nail, in blood of innocence?   
	Wherein could this flea guilty be,
	Except in that drop which it sucked from thee?   
	Yet thou triumph’st, and say’st that thou   
	Find’st not thy self, nor me the weaker now;
	   ’Tis true; then learn how false, fears be:
	   Just so much honor, when thou yield’st to me,
	   Will waste, as this flea’s death took life from thee.


7. THE INDIFFERENT

	I can love both fair and brown, 
	Her whom abundance melts, and her whom want betrays, 
	Her who loves loneness best, and her who masks and plays, 
	Her whom the country formed, and whom the town, 
	Her who believes, and her who tries, 
	Her who still weeps with spongy eyes, 
	And her who is dry cork, and never cries; 
	I can love her, and her, and you, and you, 
	I can love any, so she be not true. 
	
	Will no other vice content you? 
	Will it not serve your turn to do as did your mothers? 
	Or have you all old vices spent, and now would find out others? 
	Or doth a fear that men are true torment you? 
	O we are not, be not you so; 
	Let me, and do you, twenty know. 
	Rob me, but bind me not, and let me go. 
	Must I, who came to travail thorough you, 
	Grow your fixed subject, because you are true? 
	
	Venus heard me sigh this song, 
	And by love’s sweetest part, variety, she swore, 
	She heard not this till now; and that it should be so no more. 
	She went, examined, and returned ere long, 
	And said, Alas! some two or three 
	Poor heretics in love there be, 
	Which think to ’stablish dangerous constancy. 
	But I have told them, Since you will be true, 
	You shall be true to them who are false to you. 


8. A LECTURE UPON THE SHADOW

	Stand still, and I will read to thee 
	A lecture, love, in love’s philosophy. 
	        These three hours that we have spent, 
	        Walking here, two shadows went 
	Along with us, which we ourselves produc’d. 
	But, now the sun is just above our head, 
	        We do those shadows tread, 
	        And to brave clearness all things are reduc’d. 
	So whilst our infant loves did grow, 
	Disguises did, and shadows, flow 
	From us, and our cares; but now ‘tis not so. 
	That love has not attain’d the high’st degree, 
	Which is still diligent lest others see. 
	
	Except our loves at this noon stay, 
	We shall new shadows make the other way. 
	        As the first were made to blind 
	        Others, these which come behind 
	Will work upon ourselves, and blind our eyes. 
	If our loves faint, and westwardly decline, 
	        To me thou, falsely, thine, 
	        And I to thee mine actions shall disguise. 
	The morning shadows wear away, 
	But these grow longer all the day; 
	But oh, love’s day is short, if love decay. 
	Love is a growing, or full constant light, 
	And his first minute, after noon, is night. 


9. LOVE’S DEITY

	I long to talk with some old lover’s ghost, 
	     Who died before the god of love was born. 
	I cannot think that he, who then lov’d most, 
	     Sunk so low as to love one which did scorn. 
	But since this god produc’d a destiny, 
	And that vice-nature, custom, lets it be, 
	     I must love her, that loves not me. 
	
	  Sure, they which made him god, meant not so much, 
	     Nor he in his young godhead practis’d it. 
	But when an even flame two hearts did touch, 
	     His office was indulgently to fit 
	Actives to passives. Correspondency 
	Only his subject was; it cannot be 
	     Love, till I love her, that loves me. 
	
	  But every modern god will now extend 
	     His vast prerogative as far as Jove. 
	To rage, to lust, to write to, to commend, 
	     All is the purlieu of the god of love. 
	O! were we waken’d by this tyranny 
	To ungod this child again, it could not be 
	     I should love her, who loves not me. 
	
	  Rebel and atheist too, why murmur I, 
	     As though I felt the worst that love could do? 
	Love might make me leave loving, or might try 
	     A deeper plague, to make her love me too; 
	Which, since she loves before, I’am loth to see. 
	Falsehood is worse than hate; and that must be, 
	     If she whom I love, should love me. 


10. THIS IS MY PLAY’S LAST SCENE

	This is my play’s last scene; here heavens appoint 
	My pilgrimage’s last mile; and my race, 
	Idly, yet quickly run, hath this last pace, 
	My span’s last inch, my minute’s latest point; 
	And gluttonous death will instantly unjoint 
	My body and my soul, and I shall sleep a space; 
	But my’ever-waking part shall see that face 
	Whose fear already shakes my every joint. 
	Then, as my soul to’heaven, her first seat, takes flight, 
	And earth-born body in the earth shall dwell, 
	So fall my sins, that all may have their right, 
	To where they’are bred, and would press me, to hell. 
	Impute me righteous, thus purg’d of evil, 
	For thus I leave the world, the flesh, the devil. 


11. THE TRIPLE FOOL

	I am two fools, I know, 
	     For loving, and for saying so 
	         In whining poetry; 
	But where’s that wiseman, that would not be I, 
	         If she would not deny? 
	Then as th’ earth’s inward narrow crooked lanes 
	   Do purge sea water’s fretful salt away, 
	I thought, if I could draw my pains 
	   Through rhyme’s vexation, I should them allay. 
	Grief brought to numbers cannot be so fierce, 
	For he tames it, that fetters it in verse. 
	
	     But when I have done so, 
	     Some man, his art and voice to show, 
	         Doth set and sing my pain; 
	And, by delighting many, frees again 
	         Grief, which verse did restrain. 
	To love and grief tribute of verse belongs, 
	   But not of such as pleases when ‘tis read. 
	Both are increased by such songs, 
	   For both their triumphs so are published, 
	And I, which was two fools, do so grow three; 
	Who are a little wise, the best fools be. 

