*** Mona Van Duyn (1921 - 2004)


1. THE GENTLE SNORER

	When summer came, we locked up our lives and fled 
	to the woods in Maine, and pulled up over our heads 
	a comforter filled with batts of piney dark, 
	tied with crickets’ chirretings and the bork 
	of frogs; we hid in a sleep of strangeness from 
	the human humdrum.
	
	A pleasant noise the unordered world makes wove 
	around us. Burrowed, we heard the scud of waves, 
	wrack of bending branch, or plop of a fish 
	on his heavy home; the little beasts rummaged the brush. 
	We dimmed to silence, slipped from the angry pull 
	of wishes and will.
	
	And then we had a three-week cabin guest 
	who snored; he broke the wilderness of our rest. 
	As all night long he sipped the succulent air, 
	that rhythm we shared made visible to the ear 
	a rich refreshment of the blood. We fed in 
	unison with him.
	
	A sound we dreamed and woke to, over the snuff 
	of wind, not loud enough to scare off the roof 
	the early morning chipmunks. Under our skins 
	we heard, as after disease, the bright, thin 
	tick of our time. Sleeping, he mentioned death 
	and celebrated breath.
	
	He went back home. The water flapped the shore. 
	A thousand bugs drilled at the darkness. Over 
	the lake a loon howled. Nothing spoke up for us, 
	salvagers always of what we have always lost; 
	and we thought what the night needed was more of man, 
	he left us so partisan.


2. LETTER FROM A FATHER

	I
	
	Ulcerated tooth keeps me awake, there is
	such pain, would have to go to the hospital to have
	it pulled or would bleed to death from the blood thinners,
	but can’t leave Mother, she falls and forgets her salve
	and her tranquilizers, her ankles swell so and her bowels
	are so bad, she almost had a stoppage and sometimes
	what she passes is green as grass. There are big holes
	in my thigh where my leg brace buckles the size of dimes.
	My head pounds from the high pressure. It is awful
	not to be able to get out, and I fell in the bathroom
	and the girl could hardly get me up at all.
	Sure thought my back was broken, it will be next time.
	Prostate is bad and heart has given out,
	feel bloated after supper. Have made my peace
	because am just plain done for and have no doubt
	that the Lord will come any day with my release.
	You say you enjoy your feeder, I don’t see why
	you want to spend good money on grain for birds
	and you say you have a hundred sparrows, I’d buy
	poison and get rid of their diseases and turds. 
	
	
	II
	
	We enjoyed your visit, it was nice of you to bring
	the feeder but a terrible waste of your money
	for that big bag of feed since we won’t be living
	more than a few weeks long. We can see
	them good from where we sit, big ones and little ones
	but you know when I farmed I used to like to hunt
	and we had many a good meal from pigeons
	and quail and pheasant but these birds won’t
	be good for nothing and are dirty to have so near
	the house. Mother likes the redbirds though.
	My bad knee is so sore and I can’t hardly hear
	and Mother says she is hoarse form yelling but I know
	it’s too late for a hearing aid. I belch up all the time
	and have a sour mouth and of course with my heart
	it’s no use to go to a doctor. Mother is the same.
	Has a scab she thinks is going to turn to a wart.
	
	
	III
	
	The birds are eating and fighting, Ha! Ha! All shapes
	and colors and sizes coming out of our woods
	but we don’t know what they are. Your Mother hopes
	you can send us a kind of book that tells about birds.
	There is one the folks called snowbirds, they eat on the ground,
	we had the girl sprinkle extra there, but say,
	they eat something awful. I sent the girl to town
	to buy some more feed, she had to go anyway.
	
	
	IV
	
	Almost called you on the telephone
	but it costs so much to call thought better write.
	Say, the funniest thing is happening, one
	day we had so many birds and they fight
	and get excited at their feed you know
	and it’s really something to watch and two or three
	flew right at us and crashed into our window
	and bang, poor little things knocked themselves silly.
	They come to after while on the ground and flew away.
	And they been doing that. We felt awful
	and didn’t know what to do but the other day
	a lady from our Church drove out to call
	and a little bird knocked itself out while she sat
	and she brought it in her hands right into the house,
	it looked like dead. It had a kind of hat
	of feathers sticking up on its head, kind of rose
	or pinky color, don’t know what it was,
	and I petted it and it come to life right there
	in her hands and she took it out and it flew. She says
	they think the window is the sky on a fair
	day, she feeds birds too but hasn’t got
	so many. She says to hang strips of aluminum foil
	in the window so we’ll do that. She raved about
	our birds. P.S. The book just come in the mail.
	
	
	V
	
	Say, that book is sure good, I study
	in it every day and enjoy our birds.
	Some of them I can’t identify
	for sure, I guess they’re females, the Latin words
	I just skip over. Bet you’d never guess
	the sparrow I’ve got here, House Sparrow you wrote,
	but I have Fox Sparrows, Song Sparrows, Vesper Sparrows,
	Pine Woods and Tree and Chipping and White Throat
	and White Crowned Sparrows. I have six Cardinals,
	three pairs, they come at early morning and night,
	the males at the feeder and on the ground the females.
	Juncos, maybe 25, they fight
	for the ground, that’s what they used to call snowbirds. I miss
	the Bluebirds since the weather warmed. Their breast
	is the color of a good ripe muskmelon. Tufted Titmouse
	is sort of blue with a little tiny crest.
	And I have Flicker and Red-Bellied and Red-
	Headed Woodpeckers, you would die laughing
	to see Red-Bellied, he hangs on with his head
	flat on the board, his tail braced up under,
	wing out. And Dickcissel and Ruby Crowned Kinglet
	and Nuthatch stands on his head and Veery on top
	the color of a bird dog and Hermit Thrush with spot
	on breast, Blue Jay so funny, he will hop
	right on the backs of the other birds to get the grain.
	We bought some sunflower seeds just for him.
	And Purple Finch I bet you never seen,
	color of a watermelon, sits on the rim
	of the feeder with his streaky wife, and the squirrels,
	you know, they are cute too, they sit tall
	and eat with their little hands, they eat bucketfuls.
	I pulled my own tooth, it didn’t bleed at all.
	
	
	VI
	
	It’s sure a surprise how well Mother is doing,
	she forgets her laxative but bowels move fine.
	Now that windows are open she says our birds sing
	all day. The girl took a Book of Knowledge on loan
	from the library and I am reading up
	on the habits of birds, did you know some males have three
	wives, some migrate some don’t. I am going to keep
	feeding all spring, maybe summer, you can see
	they expect it. Will need thistle seed for Goldfinch and Pine
	Siskin next winter. Some folks are going to come see us
	from Church, some bird watchers, pretty soon.
	They have birds in town but nothing to equal this.
	
	So the world woos its children back for an evening kiss.