*** Richard Eberhart (1904 - 2005)


1. AERIALISM

	To sail by the sea pleases inly
	When the wave comes onto the shore
	In great staves like music
	Playing against your muscles to the orchestrated,
	Intricately shifting movements of the vane.
	Then it is to test the far out motion,
	Facing to the South, to fly the lines over,
	To fly the kite out over the ocean,
	Four hundred feet out, say, the wind
	Sagging the lines between you and it,
	So that there is a certain peril in the control
	By time-lapse; also the edge of the wind
	May endanger, by lack of its steadiness,
	The intrusive tactic into the wind.
	But now tipped over, the mast almost horizontal
	You edge it up wind as far as it will go,
	With skill try to keep it motionless and still,
	Then, with a sense of shearing the minimum,
	By forcing it just to horizontal, O be deft,
	Down almost to the very touch of the waves
	You love to let it.
	
	If disaster results, you rush to the scene,
	Try to catch the swamped bird on the in-come.
	It must be caught before the last breaker
	For the last breaker invariably breaks it up.
	
	Then another attempt of similar aviation.
	This time more safely not over the ocean,
	You try, by the same minute hand motions,
	Trying to gauge errors of the wind’s differential,
	To land the kite uswind on the beach,
	Often like the most skittery bird,
	Impatient as a spirit, an earthless thing,
	“Light as the wind,” the lithe being of the kite
	Will dance with an enthralling delicacy.
	Just at the touch, or less than touch, of the sand,
	Straining and quivering to be up, flirting,
	A creature of the completest absence of mind.
	An elemental spirit, soul of the graceful.
	
	Then a practiced hand, tightening the controls,
	Can bring the full vigor of upward compulsion.
	
	Evening flight makes evening an advancer,
	Too soon an all darkener. But stand you there
	
	When you can hardly see what you are doing,
	O metaphysical adventure!
	
	Until the moon arises,
	And you can mask it.
	
	O strange and impalpable evanescence
	To be flying by the light of the moon,
	With dark-adapted eyes, but uncertain
	At any instant what your relation
	To the sail is, or how to maintain it,
	As it is always with us and reality,
	In the eccentric heart of philosophy,
	
	Surely this supposition of control
	Yet without certainty of the control
	
	Is where nature has us,
	And we have set our minds
	
	For centuries up in the heavens
	Where they fly, secreted, dark,
	
	Riding on the winds of chance.


2. ANGLO-SAXON SONG

	I must think of man as a suffering being.
	Happiness, the bright boon of warriors, disappears.
	I must think; I have felt over-much; love
	Drives into the heart the poisonous shaft.
	
	I must hoard all sufferings of men.
	O pride of accomplishment, the hero’s banner;
	Dare to feel, to sense again illusion.
	Ornaments of conquest; peace, hard hearth-stone.
	
	I must not peer into the crooked reach
	Where mind crumbles, spills out hot gore, heart!
	The dark threat of being born; “the pain
	Of living”; inconsequence of mighty death.


3. BLESSED ARE THE ANGELS IN HEAVEN

	Blessed are the angels in heaven
	We are not with them on earth
	And blessed is their rationality
	Denied us from our birth
	
	And if any can say
	In our writhen, human condition
	Proud, red words to make us gay
	Let him say them and let him be
	
	A man of courage in a broken time
	And a great singer in the evening
	The master of our irrationality
	And lover of our scrivening
	
	And the angels in heaven who are blessed
	Will not hear him calling, calling
	For they have nothing to do with us
	And bind us to our barking heritage.


4. THE BLINDNESS OF POETS

	The blindness of poets is what puts them to pain.
	They think they can make the world over again.
	Accepting man
	They think they can make him a god.
	Who is to blame?
	For man is lame.
	Man’s life is a game.
	
	See the musician with his mated score.
	His blithe machinery tells love more and more.
	Yet his flesh’s sleazy
	Listings sheer immortality,
	And no odium enlarges
	From windowy podium
	Music is a fane.
	
	It is the sculptor makes a man a man,
	That marble image neither god nor man
	Is symbol of struggle,
	And might of muscle,
	And a beautiful marble,
	Trouble of inevitable being,
	Freezes us, and frees us for seeing.


5. THE BLUE GRAINS

	Whether blue grains shall stay, as they are,
	In the shift of heaven, it is,
	Thick and rich, for music to say, as a star
	Asks not permission of bliss.
	
	So eventualities of love pertain
	To the majestical eventualities of fate,
	Surely working, which made Helen
	The master-mistress of a nation’s fate,
	
	And whether skin or soul shall win,
	In chaotic intricacies
	Is music’s medium in couched reaches
	Of year’s birds and humming bees.


6. THE DREAM

	In a dream I was in a tunnel struggling
	A chalky tunnel, and torturous place,
	With at the end a suggestion of light,
	A space of light and gruff old optimistic strokes
	For though convulsed, frisked, I felt I would reach the light
	
	And as in a dream things happen without pain,
	In a childhood sequence of untractable reality,
	In this pleasurable though unpredictable predicament
	I struggled, drawn directly by the great light,
	The tunnel was merely there, exfoliating.
	
	Then as if angels whisked you, an unseen force
	Yet seemingly not a force, for all was fervent balance,
	I was in high regions of beautiful world and life,
	I visited the extreme palaces, stroked the glowing air,
	Went up through hitched forests to a gold plateau
	
	And all was triumph, magnitude, deep vistas,
	All was largess of harmonies, freedom of form,
	Luminous periodicities in a static realm,
	The unimaginable godhead, divine peculiarity,
	The child’s, the death’s-head’s unconquerable vanity.


7. DREAM JOURNEY OF THE HEAD AND HEART

	My head, so rarely rent
	For all the rending time does me
	Into a dreaming vortex went
	To see what I could see.
	
	I wanted to go down those steeps
	Into a place of the unknown,
	For surely, I thought, my head
	Would save me with strong bone.
	
	I went downward, circling wide
	In cold, diminishing cones
	Until, when far away from warmth
	I walked on bare and icy stones.
	
	They were harsh but jewel-like, thrice
	I tried to turn about and go
	But the fascination of profundity
	Urged me onward, swart and slow.
	
	The strictures came with further travail
	As inward came the walls and ribs,
	More brilliant seemed the lights
	In tossing, skeletal cribs
	
	Illuminating darkness with strange rites
	As my balked walk was probed
	Endlessly I seemed to stop
	And now I was disrobed.
	
	Head, ravenous intelligence,
	Help me out of this thin place,
	I cried, but nothing in the head
	Caused radiance in the face
	
	Until the heart, with pity of nothingness,
	Woke in a dream of grace,
	When I rose back into the world
	On sufferance of the human race.


8. DUBLIN AFTERNOON

	Death was lovable, I thought.
	Seduction, somber, of unnumbered years
	In the steep tombs of St. Michan’s.
	I touched the corpses, a little hot
	
	And then I dropped into the dust,
	O so much so, I thought I waked,
	Feeling serene memories of Autumn:
	There, behind the spider-curtained air--
	
	(But it was not like being not)
	Love of death is love of love
	Yet from that august dream, when I felt
	Stir the fesh of him who I had been
	
	I recognized the curse of mind again.


9. EASTER ABSOLUTES

	Disaster lurks in Easter absolutes,
	The sun is straining blood through time,
	Heaven, is innocence so far away?
	Hell, are you gaping in your fury?
	
	To think, to feel, to see, to be
	Control confusion and force dispute
	Cringing before the cold, glad Easter
	Where dwell the ruthless relatives.
	
	Heavens of contemplation, and first
	Belief, that runs lamb-like here,
	Give me the order of the soul’s sway
	And harmony that teaches mastery.
	
	Christ now come from out the tomb,
	None other, and walk upon the ruined meadows,
	Dream-like vision, powerful beyond reality,
	Where the spirit is jocund, where it would go.


10. FORMS OF THE HUMAN

	I wanted to be more human
	For I felt I thought too much
	And for all the thinking I did--
	More rabbits in the same hutch.
	
	And how to be more human, I said?
	I will tell you the way, I said.
	I know how to do it, I said.
	But what I said was not what I did.
	
	I took an old garden hoe
	And dug the earth, and planted there,
	Not forgetting the compost too,
	Three small beans that one might grow.
	
	Three grew tall, but one was wild
	So I cut off the other two,
	And now I have a wild bean flower
	The sweetest that ever grew.


11. THE FORUM

	Each came to the Forum, exposed his views,
	And heated grew, and then eased off.
	None shook the Greeks down from their pedestals,
	Each tinctured the spirit of our time.
	
	Religion was cursed, bun stood its inner ground,
	Rhyme was trounced, but boomeranged about.
	Form was tried and found a repentant wanton,
	Art queried, but strengthened its devotees.
	
	The eyeball in its smithy socket can
	Make up the whole mind of man.
	While that intricate, reflective gem,
	The poem, gives love back to men.
	
	In dissonances, quicknesses, in gleams
	Each poet catches a flying spirit
	And he would from his blood’s frantic force
	New light, dazzling, see and fit.


12. THE FURY OF AERIAL BOMBARDMENT

	You would think the fury of aerial bombardment
	Would rouse God to relent; the infinite spaces
	Are still silent. He looks on shock-pried faces.
	History, even, does not know what is meant.
	
	You would feel that after so many centuries                
	God would give man to repent; yet he can kill
	As Cain could, but with multitudinous will,
	No farther advanced than in his ancient furies
	
	Was man made stupid to see his own stupidity?
	Is God by definition indifferent, beyond us all?                  
	Is the eternal truth man’s fighting soul
	Wherein the Beast ravens in its own avidity?
	
	Of Van Wettering I speak, and Averill,
	Names on a list, whose faces I do not recall
	But they are gone to early death, who late in school      
	Distinguished the belt feed lever from the belt holding pawl.


13. THE GIANTESS

	Idleness gilds an encompassing giantess
	Who lies upon the heavy land of torpor.
	Her yellow fesh, empty in indolence,
	Poisons desire; she is mordant and depraved.
	
	I have walked upon the golden stones of time
	And fallen on her lurking on the hills.
	My senses shrink within her slow, brutal languor.
	She holds a sullen summer smile of lassitude.
	
	She draws the spirit down upon the stones
	And makes it as a gorged and sleeping snake,
	Monster of disuse, elongate in her charms,
	Where time is working its worn dreamlessness.
	
	She moves in slowness of a long caress
	And mauls the future. Languid and primeval,
	She sucks evil away in one vast innocence,
	And holds her victim mindless like a night.
	
	Such hours of leaden torpor in her arms
	Control an elemental misery;
	While senseless of her flesh, her sensual power
	Corrupts the longing and the love of death.
	
	She is the mood of land-gone sailors when,
	Their copra hoisted out at hot Copan,
	They seek the thatch of love, and hope, but find
	The girls are gone, never to return again.


14. GRAPE VINE SHOOTS

	I have watched their caution over months,
	Extending upward and across the air:
	What faith is theirs, what patience!
	
	The green shoots of the new year
	From where I trained them to the rusty fence
	Believe in the wind, in space itself.
	
	They bend out as if they could not bend so far.
	They strain upward with a sturdy delicacy.
	It is their quiet assurance that moves me.
	
	How could they lean across the air so far
	Or push so almost straight upright
	Without a strange and surcharged certainty?
	
	They know the wind will one day on their tendrils
	Push a puissant force, fixing their green fingers
	Just long enough to close and keep.
	
	They feel that space must give itself away,
	Gifted space, presenting some fine object
	Keenly, closely, surely to cling to.
	
	Beyond aesthetic blond sight my blood
	Abounds in love of your intent
	As in the vine I await the grape.


15. THE GROUNDHOG

	In June, amid the golden fields,
	I saw a groundhog lying dead.
	Dead lay he; my senses shook,
	And mind outshot  our naked frailty.
	
	There lowly in the vigorous summer
	His form began its senseless change,
	And made my senses waver dim
	Seeing nature ferocious in him.
	
	Inspecting close maggots’ might
	And seething cauldron of his being,    
	Half with loathing, half with a strange love,
	I poked him with an angry stick.
	
	The fever arose, became a flame
	And Vigour circumscribed the skies,
	Immense energy in the sun,                    
	And through my frame a sunless trembling.
	
	My stick had done nor good nor harm.
	Then stood I silent in the day
	Watching the object, as before;
	And kept my reverence for knowledge          
	
	Trying for control, to be still,
	To quell the passion of the blood;
	Until I had bent down on my knees
	Praying for joy in the sight of decay.
	
	And so I left; and I returned                      
	In Autumn strict of eye, to see
	The sap gone out of the groundhog,
	But the bony sodden hulk remained
	
	But the year had lost its meaning,
	And in intellectual chains                                                  
	I lost both love and loathing,
	Mured up in the wall of wisdom.
	
	Another summer took the fields again
	Massive and burning, full of life,
	But when I chanced upon the spot              
	There was only a little hair left,
	
	And bones bleaching in the sunlight
	Beautiful as architecture;
	I watched them like a geometer,
	And cut a walking stick from a birch.
	
	It has been three years, now.
	There is no sign of the groundhog.
	I stood there in the whirling summer,
	My hand capped a withered heart,
	
	And thought of China and of Greece,          
	Of Alexander in his tent;
	Of Montaigne in his tower,
	Of Saint Theresa in her wild lament.


16. HARK BACK

	To have stepped lightly among European marbles
	Dwelling in a pantheon of air;
	
	To have altered the gods in a fact of being;
	
	To have envisaged the marriage
	Of everything new with the old,
	
	And sprung a free spirit in the world
	
	Is to have caught my own spirit
	On a bicycle in the morning
	
	Riding out of Paris,
	Heading South.
	
	My flesh felt so good
	I was my own god.


17. IF I COULD ONLY LIVE

	If I could only live at the pitch that is near madness
	When everything is as it was in my childhood
	Violent, vivid, and of infinite possibility
	That the sun and the moon broke over my head.
	
	Then I cast time out of the trees and fields,
	Then I stood immaculate in the Ego;
	Then I eyed the world with all delight,
	Reality was the perfection of my sight.
	
	And time has big handles on the hands,
	Fields and trees a way of being themselves.
	I saw battalions of the race of mankind
	Standing stolid, demanding a moral answer.
	
	I gave the moral answer, and I died
	And into a world of complexity came
	Where nothing is possible but Necessity
	And the truth wailing there like a red babe.


18. INDIAN SUMMER

	I saw my days as passionate integers,
	They leaped upon the wind as leaves
	Leaping upon the wind; not Spring leaves
	Fixed; I see them all as Autumn leaves.
	
	It is the season of my mellowest appetite,
	And germane to my soul; cruel times forgot,
	Unvexing, the joyful. Plain days unspecified.
	The clear enchantment of dry exhalations!
	
	I would speak a word deep and pure,
	Pure and deep, deep, deep and pure.
	And these Autumnal days speak for me here--
	Realization--else what is Autumn for?
	
	I think the Indian Summer’s long regard
	Flanks all the days with resonance--
	That I shall never be more richly blessed
	Than I am breathing in it now.


19. JEALOUSY

	The leaves fairly burst out; summer’s ability
	Was a fore-shape of a visual utility,
	The leaves believing in their own fertility.
	
	To him who in the paradox of inability
	Was able to see the ultimate inutility
	The leaves, like all, spelled infertility.
	
	Ability to take himself out of the world’s
	Utility, by the gigantic act of suicide’s
	Fertility, was what shook the naked nature.
	
	It was his inability to fore-shape the leaves,
	Felt senseless inutility, the sensuous trees,
	That dressed infertility in mental loneliness.
	
	The trees were laughing at his nullity.
	It may be that error has its own stability.
	The shaping eye owes fidelity to the senses.
	
	Fatality is an instance of the sun.
	Mentality is man but not his master.
	The Creator as fabulist of ineluctability.


20. THE KISS OF STILLNESS

	When stillness steps barefooted in
	And like a lover locks the door,
	My room becomes a shadowy place
	That I have never known before.
	
	And as she weaves her spell around me
	Urgent as the growth of roses,
	Sinuously her rhythm falls
	And on my naked being closes.
	
	I have forgotten how the wind
	Springs up the air like winging geese;
	And how the rain comes down on roofs
	Aware of springtime, crooning peace.
	
	I have forgotten how the waves
	Rush to the taut rocks, thundering
	The sea’s heart as they lash the shore,
	But break with muttered wondering.
	
	I have forgotten skies that moan
	And in the stress of wild storms tremble;
	Cliffs that slowly cold and sunshine
	Try, and shatter, and dissemble.
	
	Tumult clanging through tall towns
	Is hurrying life I cannot keep;
	And pain as terrible as fire
	Is like an unremembered sleep.
	
	Then as the stillness, like a lover
	Lingering, with full love lingers,
	Suddenly and strange I feel
	Along my throat her cool white fingers.
	
	I am one with every stone,
	I am one with every seed,
	Mingled with the air and earth,
	Woven into man and weed.
	
	I am the rhythms of the ocean,
	I am dawns of aeoned peace.
	I am man before his coming.
	I am Egypt. I am Greece.
	
	The singing of the starlight, I,
	And I am man when he is gone.
	All living things that breathe and die,
	All being, lonely and alone.


21. LATE SUMMER

	Etched old heads
	Of men of seventy
	I see you bending to a Martini
	Telling your exploits
	
	How many
	How many
	Have not achieved
	Your state of grace.
	
	Astute old heads,
	Each feature a statement
	Of nature attentive,
	
	Death the grotesque
	Took all the others,
	
	Old sovereign heads
	Clarified in Salem,
	In an eighteenth century house,
	Certified in Castine,
	
	Now, going toward a new decade,
	I cherish the incised major
	Of eyebrow and stance,
	Sapid old men of the seventies.
	
	You have been
	In Africa or in Asia,
	The winds are blowing,
	Cherish the Martini.
	
	I read your skin of sixteen,
	Your bridegroom flush,
	Your further, your father anger.
	
	It has fled,
	The times have fled,
	Life like a dream flown,
	Time pipes you abroad.
	
	Your tucked features
	On an August evening
	Speak for a grace of nature,
	
	Teak old heads
	Of men of seventy.


22. (FROM) LETTER I

	Art is the product of a driving will,
	In Western man more evident than in Eastern
	Yet the passive Oriental fabricant of a holku
	Still directs it to a delicate repose.
	Destiny is the shaper of the will,
	Its sometime killer, in a long argument in time.
	It is the fate of circumstances, the texture
	Of the times, multifarious objectifications,
	Pressures of families, friends, and state,
	Confrontation of the evil of managerial individuals,
	Callousness and pestiferousness of mankind,
	The turn of decades turning for the worse,
	Political strife leading to stultifying war
	That shapes the will to forms of art it takes
	Or shapes the art despite the sharpening will.
	
	It has often been said in extenuation
	That poetry, if not of lies, is made of pseudo-statements
	Incapable of proof: a web of phantasies
	Leading man into the dangerous lands of Myth.
	By devious travel he will voyage and will come
	Into far sight of the mountains of illusion;
	Between Scylla and Charybdis if not overwhelmed
	By squalls of ancient fury, or by topmast felled,
	On the rocky shores of fabulous Sicily
	He will lose his men and wreck his boat.
	Or struggling up the rocky cliff at Taormina
	Where on the perilous topcrest sits the stamped jewel
	That is the Greek theater with its slender columns,
	A windowless realm of the late imagination
	Looking across one way the dialectical waters
	While to the west the white summit of chaste Aetna
	Burns in the blue dome ethereal, imponderable,
	He will come to these sights derelict and spent
	For he cannot tell the past from the present,
	Maimed he will be, he will be thrown in chains
	Killed by the cruel king like those who sought fame
	Far from home by thus adventuring to die
	In a land of olives under a white sky.
	
	The counsel of the scientist in his study
	Is not to voyage beyond the rule of measure,
	By materialistic means to manipulate fact,
	If, to be sure, he cannot manipulate the weather.
	Poetry with his truth is irreconcilable
	And the heart of poetry is unanalyzable.
	The incapability of proof of poetic statement
	Shows ancient courage in the heart of man, not meant
	To unravel the secrets of the universe
	But, by His will, to praise the Lord in verse.
	For it is the unknowable and the unfathomable,
	The unpredictable and the unreasonable
	That reveal to man where he is able,
	Who needs not give account to the unaccountable
	Nor vaunt himself to say that he has the answer
	To immortality, evil or good, the dance, the dancer.
	The poet would always voyage to Cythère.
	
	Across an infinitude of unstable air
	His will to praise the realm of the unknown
	Is stubborn and ancient in his marrow bone.
	For it is by his myths, his dreams, these in his heart
	That man knows himself man, and the poet makes his art.
	If any proof be needed that he is wrong,
	The most ancient wish of man was sung in song.
	Poetry loves where there is fallacy
	And lives where there is error and frailty,
	It mirrors well, and spurns not, humanity,
	A natural element as deep as is the sea.
	Have no fear of it; it will live long
	Though it slumber often in many a tongue,
	And though, like man, it never will know God.


23. LIGHT FROM ABOVE

	The vigor and majesty of the air,
	Empurpled in October, in an afternoon
	
	Of scudding clouds with sun breaking through
	Showing a militant light on mountain and river,
	
	Is the imperial power
	Greater than man’s works
	
	I praise and sing; my headlong delight
	In unsymbolic gestures of eternity;
	
	For here, surely, above the worn farms,
	Their stoical souls and axe patience,
	
	Whatever man learned from the soil, from
	Society, and from his time-locked
	
	Is the greater, the grand, the impersonal gesture
	And the imperial power; here, the great sky,
	
	Full of profound adventure beyond man’s losses,
	Tosses the locks of a strong, abrasive radiance
	
	From the beginning, and through the time of man,
	And into the future beyond our love and wit,
	
	And in the vigor and majesty of the air
	I, empurpled, think on unity
	
	Glimpsed in pure visual belief
	When the sky expresses beyond our powers
	
	The fiat of a great assurance


24. LOOKING DOWN

	I want to walk upon a tree
	That is a bridge across a river
	(I’ll hold to branches as I go),
	And watch the sleepy water slow
	To silence underneath, and dream
	A little over sands that gleam
	Beneath the shallow water. I
	Have need of looking down from sky
	And clouds to water, and I wish
	To see below some thin bright fish
	That take old sunlight from the sand
	And have a drowsiness from land
	Looming around them like a night
	(Flaming and stunned in the water’s light).
	
	If I stand still upon a tree
	For long, I think that I may be
	Aware, by looking straightly down
	(By looking very closely down),
	Of what it is that is so still
	In water, even though it thrill
	With roar of mountains whence it came.
	And I shall never be the same
	Knowing this stillness looking down,
	Before I cross and walk to town.


25. THE LOST POEM

	Buried among papers, among savage years,
	Irretrievable, the richest poem was lost.
	In desperate and frenzied Saturnalias
	He sought it even in redemptive hours.
	These hieroglyphs, continuous in the mind,
	Were dark clouds of knowing and unknowing.
	He searched the books again, prodigal time,
	For the lost poem of vision and control.
	
	Buried among effects, lost to living language,
	The dark secret of its formidable grace
	Made anguish frequent for so whole a knowledge,
	Forced kinship with disparate phenomena;
	As the soul worked in its frenetic passages,
	The image of the lost poem, priceless on its paper,
	Secreted somewhere in time’s croak and chaos,
	Bestrode imagination, and made gladness cruel.
	
	It was on that parchment, hieratic, milky,
	He wrote the soul’s inevitable passion,
	And fixed upon the junctures of the spirit
	Miraculous juice, else afar, immortal.
	It was there the antique harmony prevailed
	And there the newest love was real, was true.
	And on that imaginary field, the greenest earth,
	Evil and good were mated under the sun.


26. L’APRES-MIDI D’UN FAUNE

	Caught in the gossamer veil of tone, the frail
	Ecstatic quivering of leaves at dawn,
	Under the golden fingers of the sun,
	
	Held for an instant the play of fugitive light
	Shimmering along the boughs of trees, falling
	Delicately down, incredibly chiselling the ground,
	
	Won from the massive turn of the earth the flush
	Of the vivid sky when day is near to its ruin,
	Vibrant at dusk with glory and desolation,
	
	Fixed into rapture utterly the rhythm of life,
	Throbbing and wafting, tremulous with tumult,
	Wound on a core of sound in the luminous air.


27. MEDITATION BY AN OLD BARN IN THE HEAT OF SUMMERTIME

	The spirit fails and fades,
	And then you know reality,
	Hard reality of words, the bare bones,
	The bare ideas, which did no good,
	The life which did no good,
	The death which did no good,
	The spirit which did no good.
	
	But memory, in loveliness and grace of flesh,
	Brings blossom and lightness to the eye,
	And the brown thrasher confused among the rose bushes,
	Glimpse of a woman just in the waves,
	Stance of the Admiral adjusting his pipe at the Club,
	Throngs of aircraft, hums of bees,
	The antiaircraft which makes you say: like thunder:
	
	Something connects them all,
	Something inescapable,
	The red cardinal I cannot see in the green tree,
	In old Virginia.
	The essential color blindness,
	Central, controlling ignorance
	After many years of awkwardness
	That is the waywardness of order.
	
	Something about the fall
	Of man,
	A cradling creature
	Who continuously kills his neighbor,
	Upon whom disgust has no measure
	But laughter (the ironic is a treasure)
	Against his heavy witless foolery,
	And there is a tooth in blasphemy,
	The skirl, why is he not better?
	
	O Evanescence! that takes away
	Even the knowledge of oneself,
	Does not let you know who you are,
	Shifts the winds of circumstance,
	Veils by days, by months, by years,--
	Have I put my mind upon it,
	The subtle essence that is always evanescent,
	The substance that is unknown, working against man?
	
	That not philosophy, its integration,
	Not government, its suppositions,
	Art, its reality,
	Nor religion, its mystical consolations
	Have heart before a very breath of air?
	Magnificent! were it not for the human condition, but
	Cathedral spire and bombs away,
	Juke box, feathery oratory,
	
	Are man’s witnesses; his action never ceases.
	Against the evanescent he seeks protections.


28. NEW HAMPSHIRE, FEBRUARY

	Nature had made them hide in crevices,
	Two wasps so cold they looked like bark.
	Why I do not know, but I took them
	And I put them
	In a metal pan, both day and dark.
	
	Like God touching his finger to Adam
	I felt, and thought of Michelangelo,
	For whenever I breathed on them,
	The slightest breath,
	They leaped, and preened as if to go.
	
	My breath controlled them always quite.
	More sensitive than electric sparks
	They came into life
	Or they withdrew to ice,
	While I watched, suspending remarks.
	
	Then one in a blind career got out,
	And fell to the kitchen for. I
	Crushed him with my cold ski boot,
	By accident. The other
	Had not the wit to try or die.
	
	And so the other is still my pet.
	The moral of this is plain.
	But I will shirk it.
	You will not like it. And
	God does not live to explain.


29. NIGHT WATCH ON THE PACIFIC

	There are no hills that lead the spirit up
	To watch the colors tip-toe on the air,
	Or hear the sound held in a buttercup.
	There are no hills to see, yet everywhere
	The endless ocean holds the color’s heart
	And keeps in each cool wave the core of sound.
	I am grown suddenly still, and dwell apart,
	Like one in an amazing kingdom found.


30. OF TRUTH: THE PROTAGONIST SPEAKING

	O the wicked, winking incidence of truth!
	The wicked wink and incidents of truth;
	The wink, the flicker, the flight, the snicker, the flare,
	The raging actor fying, baring bodkin.
	When I fetch it, it is gone; where leave it,
	Find it. Unruly, leonine, most unruly substance!
	Substance? It haunts me like all shadows. All shades
	Of meaning whipping in and out are there.
	This torturer is a great lover of professors,
	Psychiatrists, chaplains, sits on their faces’ skin
	But when I look at them it’s on my own,
	Then flies to another place, leaves me in arrears.
	King bat! He leaps out of the ink of the sages;
	Or benched judge plying a black batlet;
	He is the blood-dressed ghost walking all battlefields,
	I sense his uncanny wing in the air of the age.
	Mysterious essence! to be so wary-vaporish,
	That cannot be found honestly anywhere,
	Refusing with an absolute sublimity
	Satisfaction to the adept at adding up.
	The learned doctor has got him in his indices?
	The lecturer has him in his leaves? The leaves
	Have him in their lectures? The lawyers have him
	In legalism? The President has got him in his speeches?
	Has the astronomer caught him in the starlight?
	The epileptic, paling, in a jagged flash? The hirsute
	Pommeller in a left to the jaw, and a right
	To the jaw? The pilot seeing the icing wing?
	The janitors banding together to strike at Yale?
	Or does he reside in beddings of cold terror
	In the root and remorseless heart of cancer?
	Does he dwell in the realm of sleety accident
	Where he rides with death at the automobile wheel?
	Devil or angel, child or seer or both,
	The absolute in the relative, the relative in
	The absolute, the Bible or the yelping babe,
	He comes at me but I cannot come at him.
	As the spectacular is suspect, but passivity
	Is a means often given undue prominence,
	Truth is I avow a vast middle quality,
	Not voided, although it never will be known.


31. OFFERING TO THE BODY

	I give up to my body the gross fact
	That it is not perfect, as I expected
	When in youth I preened myself in my excess,
	Believing that nothing of it was suspect.
	
	What long day-shine of ramifying revery
	I enjoyed in the apple orchard and jungle
	Of extreme vegetation when I was replete
	With an ardor so powerful it was exact.
	
	Then in those days I loved myself alone,
	Was both male and female, both old and young,
	Living the long summer days in wholeness, and
	In harmony with self and all living beings.
	
	Nothing was so great as to be alive alone
	And stand and walk and sit and dream
	In the incomparable hours that had no ending,
	In endless world of delight that would ever seem.
	
	I offer my body the high estate of my esteem,
	I look upon it with joy of its long dream,
	I wonder as I wondered when I was young
	Of the intricacies and mechanisms of its means.
	
	I am as close to it as to the spiritual,
	Although this conglomeration of sinews and muscle
	Aggravates time to bring it down to nothing,
	Making of the very complex the very simple.
	
	I write to the paradox of the living flesh
	That it seems capable but is doomed to end
	And while I have a flowing hand may state the truth
	That truth is beyond the body, lofted to sky,
	
	So that, seeing the body fail, time take it away,
	I offer it the grace of a passing bow of words,
	Salute its efforts as its efforts rise and fall,
	All a strange tale, and a strange tale to tell.


32. ONLY IN THE DREAM

	Only in the dream that is like sleep
	When time has taken the measure of live things
	By stark origination
	Is mankind redeemed.
	
	Only in the melancholy of the music
	Of the midnight within the blood
	Comes the fulfillment
	After faring years.
	
	Only in the balance of dark tenderness
	When everything is seen in its purity
	Do we penetrate
	The myth of mankind.
	
	Only in the mastery of love
	Is anything known of the world,
	Death put aside
	With pure intent.
	
	Only in the long wastes of loss
	Comes the mystical touch on the brow
	That triumph grow,
	Insatiable, again.


33. ORDER AGAIN

	I return to order as one ailing.
	I become the thing I long for and desire.
	I am a momentary order
	Speaking harmony before disaster.
	
	It is something to have forsaken faiths.
	It is much to see every eye afresh.
	It is a kind of resurrection
	To have outlived each prejudice.
	
	Now the sun is a misty master,
	And the air is a moist forgiveness.
	Now I believe I am free
	Who wished to believe himself free.
	
	To speak for order in a time of chaos
	Is the tough, root rights of man,
	And rite of undeniable, tensile strength,
	To those who have hidden springs.
	
	Let then a symphony begin,
	And subtle sweep, and waiting string,
	That the fine harmonies in-ring
	And the soul dwell in immaterial things.
	
	And let us be as we were once,
	Before experience and time compelled us,
	Let us revel in the pure delight
	Of the first kingdoms of our sight.
	
	I return to order where I was
	Before the necessity of the world
	And I dream upon that kingdom
	As the drowning see the skies above them.


34. ORDER AND DISORDER

	A passion came to me in the form of order,
	To order all things in the mind.
	Seek then frenzy, the foliating blood, then,
	Seek the schisms of the stars, the will.
	
	And did the passion come from order’s self?
	I heard in the wind the falling of a leaf.
	And as the night’s weak eye bore down on mine,
	Was I its killer, was I its thief?
	
	Strange things go on in the subtle night,
	In the darkness the ages murmur and tremble.
	Plato conceives, and Aristotle measures,
	Buddha thinks deep, and Christ is burning white.
	
	Each is an order, but each is a blight.
	I feel my blood abounding, massive in darkness.
	Each was an order, but each its order closing
	In total harmony, save only Christ.
	
	And the passion was a wild air of night,
	It was a violation of the mind in its order,
	A tumult, a transgression, ingression,
	Christ’s blood the strain in truth’s disorder.


35. PLAIN SONG TALK

	I speak of the history of the world,
	So deep there is no fathoming it,
	At the depths of which one cannot speak,
	Before which we whistle in the wind.
	
	Our days and years are a vain attempt
	To quell the meaning of the universe,
	But we are worsted as the days go by,
	We are shuffled into a bin of night.
	
	I speak of the hopes we had in youth,
	The diminishing powers we had as time went by,
	Of sufferings old or new, and always doubt.
	And of death the less said the better.


36. (FROM) POEM IN CONSTRUCTION

	I wrote Helen a letter but got no reply
	They say marriage is equivalent to to die.
	I long for that girl of Park Avenue
	And I long for her blue tiny shoe,
	I long, in fact, for the past, the past, the big sky.
	
	For now all I have is a book crammed with ink,
	Now all I have to do is to sit still and think
	With nothing but black characters around,
	Nothing at all to take at one bound,
	I’m the bookish man who must compendiously shrink
	
	When I look to the future I see the big guns
	I feel the maggots eating, those angelic ones,
	My compound fracture where I lie
	On a field or in a cast, to die
	Of the evil of a world the delicate heart stuns.
	
	O the folly and wreckage of man I dote on!
	O the mind that ponders folly I gloat on!
	The ancient contemplation of the navel
	Can still be a spiritual revel,
	While the mad world founders on, anon on.
	
	Europe was, after all, like a jewel box
	And gem of great price, a magnificent hoax
	Seemingly limitless, magnificent
	For a red youth to be spent
	Among her mountains, cathedrals and ancient
	
	She lay there like a mysterious woman
	With a myriad invitations and summons
	Wanting to be taken, but faking
	Wanton, uncommunicative nakedness,
	English head, Parisian heart in common.
	
	She was a physical, but also a spiritual call,
	She held my life for years in her thrall,
	Wander-love best, in melancholy
	Came to a rest, if not holy
	By a Greek temple, a mossy dell or a col.
	
	Chartres had its charm many a time;
	Grenoble, Tours, Nice, Amiens, Nimes,
	Chateaubriand still at St. Malo;
	The old foods to miss at Mont St. Michel;
	And ramparts of Carcassonne in December wintershine.
	
	London the male part and Paris the female
	With offspring of a beryled Taormina tale,
	Life stretching vexed limbs between
	Charybdis-Scylla sea-green
	And Aetna’s white grain that the spirit not fail!
	
	And Rome the city: the cost, the conquest, the catacombs!
	The old ghosts, the air’s gold, and the old domes!
	Where the wear of the worldly
	Imperial power turned early a surly
	Light before cut Florence’s high tome and cone.
	
	I discover in memory how it is to be free,
	Not in the event are there many eyes to see;
	But eternal elation enlivens
	In meditation time’s environs
	As equally eternal despair goads the mystery.
	
	And still the evil of all centuries, contiguous
	To every heart that this late roams the world,
	Flares through the bomb-light a fierce flag unfurled
	And still the doleful light is in us
	And root of war growing, murder-conspicuous.
	
	“They daily torture the poor Christ anew”
	Somebody said, I remember it clearly
	And it stays with me daily, yearly,
	It is a statement that is clean and is true,
	It goes through the action of me and of you.
	
	But I think of her there, her hair all golden,
	Wherever her blue eyes dart
	Is a world of music at a start
	And a roaming, and a ranging, a glory not told in
	Mere fugitive replies of a risible pen.
	
	America of the abolished towers to escape
	In my kind of fighting: what was justice but
	Raging on every ancient city’s jutty
	Of rugged, or time-sequestered beauty,
	Discoverable sanctity of some lucid cape?
	
	Or lively abolition of such ease,
	The long galleries of Chinese sights!
	Buddha’s ecstatic calm, the still nights,
	Endless without decrease and without increase
	Will of a world, will-less-a world appeased?
	
	Where the dull ox turned the dull stone
	Out of time, and the woman there
	So silent was in the immobile air
	Like a statue she, and a fly had gone
	Up and down her face unturned upon.
	
	And the Chinese bells of the temple tolled
	Such nameless depth in the full heart
	The full throat uttered no cry,
	The breath made never a sigh,
	The peace of the place: green veils of mold.
	
	Trance defined is trance traduced;
	The leap of the heart is the race produced.
	Incessant surges the summer
	Often the sea invites the swimmer
	And on the body the lashing tide of action is loosed.
	
	O the glory of the unresolvable!
	The might and persistence of our lack of control!
	Buddha benign, Christ afire
	End our longing, light our desire.
	But words are the wicked talent of the soul.


37. POLITICS

	To be rational about politics
	Is to take a rash step
	For surely as they change
	You will find yourself out of step.
	
	An irrational attitude is better,
	Some bold improbable commitment
	Which may overlap boundaries
	And land you right for 1999.
	
	To eschew them is the classic mark,
	Yet politics assail us inwardly
	As governments mull our disorder,
	And should we wish to be aloof?
	
	A shrewd eye may see a spectacle,
	Savor a style, inject a note,
	But shrewdness is unpolitical,
	Politics is the people’s choice.
	
	Rush in, unreasonable roysterer,
	Disrupt the game in the grand manner,
	It is serious to be mistaken,
	It is pleasant to be two-faced.


38. THE PRETERNATURAL WILDNESS OF THE SUBLIMINAL SPIRIT

	    Touch the quick of the matter,
	    Wild newness in the world,
	    New legends written over the old.
	
	Newness leaps in the lights
	Of the Cathedral Square at Mexico City,
	Lights at dusk over the square of revolution,
	Hundreds of pricking revolutionary songs,
	
	Where mingled bloods bespeak democracy,
	Where Negrita was long since a word of praise,
	Where Cortes wept by the old tree still living,
	Even though Keats made his boyish mistake.
	
	Look, it is December of Our Lady of Guadalupe,
	The Indians come by thousands in breakless devotion,
	I mingle with the throngs of the world on their knees,
	Whose poetry is a richness beyond intelligence.
	
	Look, we have come to a Paradise on earth, Purua,
	Reverse of wilderness, a Paradise worked from nature
	Where like Roman emperors in radioactive baths
	Bubbles arise around our bodies like endless lightness.
	
	Look, we see the mummies of Guanajuato,
	Descending narrow steps down into the tomb,
	Here are the Christian souls standing up as corpses,
	One woman, fuxed, holds before her a mummified foetus.
	
	When we were coming to this necropolis,
	The sweet blue coffin of a baby dead in a year
	We saw carried on the shoulders of the young parents
	To the cemetery where the mummies dwell.
	
	They placed this tender baby in a place of bones,
	In the dignity of the long journey upward,
	Great Mother! I would cry my heart out hard
	But for the solace of Our Lady of Guadalupe!
	
	Look, we take a thousand curves of the mountains,
	Lovers of the Zapotecs more than of the Aztecs,
	We come through cacti to hot, pacific Acapulco
	There we see the passionate, plunging end,
	
	Look, see, the passionate end of the continent,
	Young boys who pray before they leap,
	Where we have always leaped before we prayed,
	They leap toward death, but escape to life
	
	Down a hundred and thirty feet of cliff
	Into the rising of the tide, a great dash
	Of small man from a gaunt height,
	They dive into danger, they dive to live.
	
	Here is brown Salvadore who has caught the sea bass
	Off Puerto Vallarta, cut and streaked with salt,
	We sit under primitive shade by the Pacific,
	He poles us to the hot, lulled waters inland
	
	To the ancient iguana, which swart Salvadore
	Reveals unmoving on a tree from his dugout canoe
	Far up a mangrove bayou in the bird-calling morning,
	Armored. the animal is more armored than man.
	
	What more time-defeating than to see an iguana
	With hands for his feet, and hands for his hands,
	Infinitely older than man, armored and plated,
	Look from his ancient eyes on ancient Mexico,
	
	A prince of endeavor, beyond the brunt of Shakespeare,
	I salute your archaic eye, archaic creature,
	I salute you at the top of the tropical morning,
	Survivor of Alexander and Hitler, semaphore dictators.
	
	
	Look, we have seen Popacatapetl
	Beyond the valley of the temple of the moon,
	And the Eternal Woman lying in the skies,
	We have drunk the mystical draft of altitude.
	
	
	Six on a side on burros play polo
	As the Pacific strikes the sands with salvos.
	The red and the yellow, they urge on the burros,
	Crying out in harsh cries, burro, burro,
	
	And as a man hits the ball hard on the sand,
	He falls off the creature; the beasts will not rise
	To the passion of man for victory,
	It is a hopeless melee of comic spectacle.
	
	The soft brutes with their serene faces
	Refuse in their absolute poise of nature
	To go faster, or turn quicker, or run
	Hard on the goal with beatings and proddings,
	
	Their resistance is splendid and final.
	They react to the enthusiasm of man,
	Who endlessly thinks he can change them,
	With a profound superiority of nature
	
	So that they do not know who is winning or losing,
	Who it is who falls off or stays on,
	What is the meaning of this Sunday fracas
	And why they are making such a commotion,
	
	But the burros of Mexico are the victors,
	Who, tireless and put upon by mankind,
	Show their dignity by the side of the Pacific,
	They do not frolic to lose their integrity.
	
	
	And, I saw a father who had three young daughters,
	Who offered tequila before hot-pepper lunch,
	Show such love to them in unself-conscious caresses
	As to stun the heart with reverence,
	
	Who taught that the adult is a child,
	The child is an adult, and in this holy communion
	Love exists as a single reality,
	Beyond poverty and wealth, before tequila.
	
	    Touch the quick of the matter,
	    Wild newness in the world.
	    Brotherhood, brotherhood!
	
	I saw in Morelia where they let us in the doors
	Just before the great doors closed, in the close
	A thousand children sitting in lines around a square,
	Await the pageant of an ancient mystery.
	
	All was order, harmony, and expectation.
	Mary sat upon a donkey, dressed in heavenly blue.
	And Joseph led the beast around the ancient square
	While all the children watched in praise, singing till dusk.
	
	In St. Miguel de Allende, down from the square,
	We chanced into a church and sat in the rear
	Where hundreds of children sang the service,
	Exuberant whistles shook the nave and stones,
	
	Passionate cries in the face of Christ Our Lord,
	As if nothing could be more pagan or child like,
	Then they carried the Virgin on young shoulders
	Long through the throngs of the Mexican solidarity.
	
	And all the children rushed out of the doors
	To receive Christmas presents from loving women,
	It seemed as if love were a living thing,
	It seemed as if mystery were bearable.
	
	
	In the tombs of ancient Mitla near Oaxaca,
	And in the tombs of Monte Alban, and where Quetzalcoatl,
	The blond god of the powerful Aztecs, where
	The stone serpents gaze through centuries on man.
	
	Where the rich, mysterious past suffuses
	The inexplicable nature of the universe
	And makes us wonder on ourselves,
	On the value of the individual will,
	
	In these tombs and through these ancient mysteries
	Of being, conquest, endurance, and belief,
	We who would leap out of the planet,
	Electing new worlds of the universe,
	
	See in the valley of the Pyramids,
	Hear in the bells of Taxco and Oaxaca,
	Feel in the devout at Guadalupe,
	Sense in the conflicts of revolution,
	
	Through lives and deaths of governments,
	In the mixing of Spanish and Indian blood
	In Mexico man’s passionate realization,
	The struggle of mankind for brotherhood.


39. THE PROJECT

	The mail box, the roadway, and the dump truck
	a day in June blue and gold
	
	The play rock, the high swing, the pine stand
	a race of children readying time
	
	A prospect of a legendary Connecticut
	angler flicking his fly in amber evening
	
	Tumble of waters at Diana’s pool
	Dive, shimmer and roil of bathers, devotees.
	
	It is the pageant of the American summer
	Blue, gold, and high, an elegance of time.
	
	When freefoot lads find a decaying animal
	In the woods, one yells “Helpl Don’t breathe it!”


40. RICHES

	The wheel turns, turns the wheel, the wheel turns.
	Ceaseless, ceaseless, ceaseless, turns the wheel.
	The flame burns, burns the flame, the flame burns-
	Always, always, always, blue as steel.
	
	There is no end, there is no hope, no hope.
	Desire breeds new desire, there is no end.
	The waves break, yearn, break, yearn. They grope and grope.
	They settle back. They yearn again. They spend.
	
	The inner eternal will is senseless will,
	The impelling force behind the wheel is blind.
	All life spins, whizzes, veers, revolves unstill.
	Freedom is but a figment of the mind.
	
	Say No to life, say No, say No to life.
	A momentary respite from the wheel
	Is all that comes. Then strife continues--strife
	That’s witless, long, indifferent, and real.


41. SEARCH

	I am torn because I cannot find on earth
	An answer to the sunset’s aching cry.
	And in philosophers I feel the dearth
	Of all philosophy. I long to die.
	
	For man gropes like a worm along the earth
	And cannot see his way, and does not know
	What his own death may be, or what his birth,
	Or why the rainbow comes, or why the snow.
	
	I call upon the moon, and then the sun,
	And search the moving heavens with my eyes.
	Then it is spring! And flowers leap up and run,
	Torching the earth, exultant to the skies!


42. SEEING IS DECEIVING

	Having fed impalpably on the ineluctable
	In yearlong passion of the unfathomed,
	To realign the mystery of the ineffable,
	
	Haltingly, haltingly, in lofty clashes,
	Longsight glare, in total psychic refusal,
	He would not allow his eyes to see the rose.
	
	The rose that is with blood transfused,
	The rose absolute, rose of all the world,
	Flower of the flesh, flesh of the very flower,
	
	Intruding organ of most rage-potential sense,
	Rich rugged rose, the years in their dark make,
	Sagest blossoms that can break and bless,
	
	He would not in a high perfection sit,
	Staring the day away in anarchy
	That saw a heaven in imperfection’s makeshifts,
	
	And told the world in the etcher’s fine escape,
	The gardens clamant in the blare of June,
	Birds precise, clouds fixed, grasses interlaced
	
	With grasses as they are, and nature had,
	But crying against perfection of the sight
	He broke perfection with the inner eye,
	
	Somber, strange, amorphous, vast, replete,
	And all his organs in the dark of time
	Created the secret of an ultimatum.


43. SINGULAR, DESOLATE, OUT OF IT

	I saw an old man walking along the street
	Apparently far beyond my liveliness.
	I shuddered, God let me not be like him.
	Although far off, I discovered myself in him.
	
	I forgot the old man for another decade,
	So singular, so desolate, so out of it.
	Now, without the power to be myself again,
	God spent time, and made me look like him.


44. THE SKIER AND THE MOUNTAIN

	The gods are too airy: feathery as the snow
	When its consistency is just the imagination’s,
	I recognize, but also in an airy, gauzy way
	That it will capture me, I will never capture it.
	The imagination is too elusive, too like me.
	The gods are the airiness of my spirit.
	I have dreamed upon them tiptop dreams,
	Yet they elude me, like the next step on the ski
	I pole along, push upward, I see the summit,
	Yet the snow on which I glide is treachery.
	The gods are too airy. It is their elusive nature
	I in my intellectual pride have wished to know.
	I have thought I knew what I was doing,
	Gliding over the cold, resisting element,
	Toward some summit all my strength could take.
	The gods are the fascination of the place, they escape
	The genius of the place they make. They evade
	The blood of our question. Imagination is a soaring,
	It never allows the firm, inevitable step.
	The gods tantalize me, and the gods’ imaginations.
	I am thus the captured actor, the taken one,
	The used, I am used up by the will of the gods,
	I am their imagination, lost to self and to will.
	In this impossibility is my humility.
	
	I saw an old country god of the mountain,
	Far up, leaning out of the summit mist,
	Born beyond time, and wise beyond our wisdom.
	He was beside an old, gnarled trunk of a tree
	Blasted by the winds. Stones outcropped the snow,
	There where the summit was bare, or would be bare.
	I thought him a dream-like creature, a god beyond evil,
	And thought to speak of the portent of my time,
	To broach some ultimate question. No bird
	Flew in this fying mist. As I raised my voice
	To shape the matters of the intellect
	And integrate the spirit, the old, wise god,
	Natural to the place, positive and free,
	Vanished as he had been supernatural dream.
	I was astonished by his absence, deprived
	Of the astonishment of his presence, standing
	In a reverie of the deepest mist, cloud and snow,
	Solitary on the mountain slope: the vision gone,
	Even as the vision came. This was then the gods’ meaning,
	That they leave us in our true humanity,
	Elusive, shadowy gods of our detachment,
	Who lead us to the summits, and keep their secrets.


45. SONG

	Cover me over, clover;
	Cover me over, grass.
	The mellow day is over
	And there is night to pass.
	
	Green arms about my head,
	Green fingers on my hands.
	Earth has no quieter bed
	In all her quiet lands.


46. SONG FOR THE DEATH OF MY UNCLE IN ILLINOIS

	Here is such perfection as the world dreamed of.
	But earth receives him, and the worms begin to choir
	Even as the boys are singing _Te Deum Laudamus_.
	There, is the perfection man knows not of.
	
	And as the heavy burden of the years
	(I wept no tear) bore Honour, Justice, Fame
	I made a solemn resolution; I would
	Dole the dream beyond the earth and sky,
	
	Erect an arbitrary word and sign,
	For sightlessness the seeing word,
	For thoughtlessness a sacred chamber music,
	Mysterious from the womb unto the tomb
	
	Idea’s, Ideas’ flying!
	
	These things I thought on a humid day
	These things I felt as the world whirled away
	(The saving elf out of the serving bourse),
	Walking stiff-collared behind the Packard hearse.


47. SPECULATIVE NATURE NOTE

	And now as the strength and panorama
	Unfolds when evening turns into night,
	What should I say of natural splendor,
	So foreign to this age?
	
	How could I express the subdued joy
	Of waters silent in the long eventide,
	How could a poet express
	So great a calm, so great a joy?
	
	It is as if all we have suffered,
	All we know of temporality,
	Were lit with a supernal radiance
	Which we cannot believe, but see.
	
	We cannot believe, because of suffering,
	But here we see ultimate reality
	In a moment of nature, calm, serene,
	Before words could speak.


48. SPEECH OF ACCEPTANCE

	About which you can do nothing,
	Do nothing.
	
	If the wind bangs the shutters
	In the middle of the night
	
	You cannot stop
	The dark or the wind
	
	No use to toss
	Yourself around.
	
	If you achieve sleep
	The world will not exist.
	
	About which you can do nothing
	Do nothing.


49. THE SPIDER

	I.
	
	The spider expects the cold of winter.
	When the shadows fall in long Autumn
	He congeals in a nest of paper, prepares
	The least and minimal existence,
	Obedient to nature. No other course
	Is his; no other availed him when
	In high summer he spun and furled
	The gaudy catches. I am that spider,
	Caught in nature, summer and winter.
	You are the symbol of the seasons too.
	
	
	II.
	
	Now to expatiate and temporize
	This artful brag. I never saw so quieting
	A sight as the dawn, dew-clenched foot--
	Wide web hung on summer barn-eaves, spangled.
	It moves to zephyrs that is tough as steel.
	I never saw so finely-legged a creature
	Walk so accurate a stretch as he,
	Proud, capable, patient, confident.
	To the eye he gave close penetration
	Into real myth, the myth of you and me.
	
	
	III.
	
	Yet, by moving eyesight off from this
	There is another dimension. Near the barn,
	Down meadow to shingle, no place for spiders,
	The sea in large blue breathes in brainstorm tides,
	Pirates itself away to ancient Spain,
	Pirouettes past Purgatory to Paradise.
	Do I feed deeper on a spider,
	A close-hauled view upon windless meaning,
	Or deeper a day or dance or doom bestride
	On ocean’s long reach, on parables of God?


50. THE STRUGGLE

	Longing went out from him like a flag
	Run up the mast of heavens. Rains were torn
	From tremendous downpours. The careening ships
	Strode in the chaos of the moral seas.
	Everything
	Was what it is not.
	
	In the blasts of heavenly conjecture,
	Maledictions crashing like tied thunderbolts,
	The skies opened as in better centuries;
	Mercy appeared, white-throated, visionary.
	All would
	Become what it is not.
	
	Desire was against imperishable death,
	A seed-bursting openness, an avenging
	Unquenchable archangel, militant, consuming
	The ether. Heaven defend the earth. All care
	That love
	Become what it is not.


51. SUMATRA SHORE LEAVE

	The bells of a Chinese temple sang
	A monody in sunned Sabang,
	A singing timberless of tone,
	Like water falling on a stone.
	And he was glad, glad to be
	A sailor resting from the sea
	Where Indians and Arabs go,
	Most slowly, slow and slow;
	Where swart Malayan women walk
	Dreamfully along and talk;
	Where skirted, bearded, dark-skin Turks
	Go hand in hand, and no one works.
	China women with bound doll feet
	Like marionettes move down the street,
	And underneath the arbored trees,
	Mild-eyed, squatting in twos or threes,
	Chinamen smoke, peaceful and still.
	Gazing afar at the palms on the hill,
	Pondering Buddha, these Chinamen-
	Or counting in mind their hoarded yen.
	And there are girls whose smiles are worth
	Some subtle Asiatic mirth
	Ununderstood and wonderful:
	Girls dark, and shy, and beautiful.
	
	He had not known harbor or town
	So free from tumult, fret, or frown,
	Of all the sunny towns that are
	Spun under a southern star
	Upon the oriental South.
	Here Love with amorous mellow mouth
	Drinks from the chalice of delight
	Sun-mulled wine from dawn till night.
	Here the ponderer plucks a lute;
	The drowsed land is ripe with fruit;
	And all man’s conquest and man’s glory
	Is but a story-teller’s story,
	Incredible and strangely told
	Of men far off amazed with gold,
	Who bend beneath some heavy plan
	To trample down a fellow-man,
	Thus harvest wealth, and fame, and power.
	
	This is Sabang; hour on hour
	The full day ripens in the sun,
	And time has always just begun.
	Primeval silence without stir
	Holds the earth like gossamer.
	For love is slowly blossoming
	In quietness too still to sing.
	And here he lingers, murmuring
	The name of some forgotten king,
	Who had a wonder-welling heart:
	Richard Ghormley Eberhart.


52. SUNDAY IN OCTOBER

	The farmer, in the pride of sea-won acres,
	Showed me his honey mill, the honey-gate.
	Late afternoon was hazy on the land,
	The sun was a warm gauzy providence.
	
	The honey mill, the honey-gate. And then,
	Near by, the bees. They came in from the fields,
	The sun behind them, from the fields and trees,
	Like soft banners, waving from the sea.
	
	He told me of their thousands, their ways,
	Of pounds of honey in the homely apiaries.
	The stores were almost full, in Autumn air,
	Against the coming chill, and the long cold.
	
	He was about ready to rob them now,
	The combs. He’d leave them just enough to keep them.
	I thought it a rather subtle point he made,
	Wishing Providence would be as sure.


53. TALK AT DAWN

	To be aphrodisiacal would be
	To be maniacal, pliable,
	Undeniable. It would be to be fictive.
	
	A weather-beaten man would be
	Not, probably, aphrodisiacal.
	He might be, nevertheless, viable.
	
	But, the sensory system a cavation
	In which years drop in lucent dreams
	Precludes the argument in our favor.
	
	For, if no whims were allowed to fructify
	Debility would inform ministers of state,
	Statecraft’s espial would not fluctuate.
	
	Then, ministers of the church would extemporize
	Failing to denominize, denominate,
	They would more than ordinarily penalize.
	
	And, professional dignitaries
	With Henry James would too long tarry,
	Yeats unmystify, or Joyce parry.
	
	So, to be aphrodisiacal would be
	To be maniacal, and pliable,
	Undeniable, perfervidly enjoyable.


54. A TESTAMENT

	It is what I never quite understood
	About my formidable day
	Was the truth, the trust, and the good
	Where the final values play.
	
	It was the ungraspable part
	As events and crises interfered
	Was the bold quest of my art,
	The blood, the crystal tear.
	
	It was the lack of direct mating
	With authority, politics or powers
	Gave thrust to loving and hating,
	Allowing the purest hours.
	
	It is the world’s inability
	To nourish my senses whole
	Brings on the subtle utility
	Of the total strength of soul.
	
	I arise from the clear, the deep,
	Ages will find it clear,
	Love that is a grasp, a leap,
	And faith, landfall of fear.


55. THRUSH SONG AT DAWN

	Bird song is flute song and a glory
	Of the morning when the sun unascending
	Holds his other glory of mentality
	
	And the dawn has not the mental mockery
	But the birds from sweet subconscious wells
	Pierce through all barriers to sense,
	
	They send and giving sing divinity,
	So sweetly charged with subterranean meaning
	They are like angels in the morning
	
	Come from ancient time, a fast enchantment,
	To bless our mortal songless weakness
	And trail a vocal glory all the day.
	
	I would not be a bird, but I would hear
	Deep in some lost purity, beneath the mind,
	There in the sweet, dark coil of time,
	
	As in a mother, the thrush as savior,
	And a sovereign mediator; or any other
	Lung-red singing: Richness propounds confusion,
	
	That pleasure that will never cease to be
	Where we are played upon without a fault
	By magic tones we love but do not have to know.


56. TIME PASSES

	All is a kind of toys, all is a kind of play
	In the great stack house of poetry.
	Whether to say it out, or play it fey
	Deposits truth upon society
	
	Which does not know which way it went
	Until shuflings of many a fall
	Settle the account of each event
	And show at last that style is all.
	
	The toys of the mind, the toys of the word
	In high displays, in richest glow
	Tell it better than it was
	When the shifting heart would come and go,
	
	So that society knows now
	In the great stack house of poetry
	The soul that shone upon the snow
	And the eye of every pain.


57. TO COME CLOSER UNTO THEE

	To come closer unto Thee
	I tried animal lust. But see,
	It dissolved in a pool of science,
	And I lost my clairvoyance.
	
	Then I ate the fruit of the mind
	Rushing reach-high into the garden;
	Flavour of intellect would be kind
	When the arteries began to harden,
	
	I thought: sure mind fails not,
	Hoarder of life’s heart ever.
	But I forgot what I thought,
	While worms were eating Plato’s dialogues.
	
	By the river of Christ’s blood, I cried,
	Like Thee let me be, like Thee. I tried,
	But that was further evidence of pride,
	And I grew so weak I almost died.
	
	If action’s bad and contemplation’s worse,
	Christ His Christ and I myself,
	High in life as lost in a hearse,
	I might as well go to the movies.


58. TO EVADE THE WHIRLWIND

	To evade the whirlwind and to espouse the sky
	Is now all my mental imagery.
	The rocket’s red glare is dense nowhere
	For mankind’s best ruddied energy.
	
	The myth of mankind demands the honest heart.
	The occult seas and occult trees treat
	Of things foreknown but in their farthest art:
	Most male is being hale in this heavenly heat.
	
	So now I pose the symbol of the sky
	That’s breathed with the heart and seen with the eye,
	Felt with the cheek, but hurt with the brutal sigh
	That treats it as offending Adam, as a sigh.


59. TO H. E. B.

	WHEN Eve ate the apple
	My woes began,
	But I didn’t believe then
	That I would believe in Original Sin.
	When Adam delved
	I began to fail,
	But I didn’t comprehend
	The majesty of the Supra Rational.
	
	That Cain and Abel
	Should be such brothers
	And not love each other
	Seemed not in the nature of things.
	These were old fables
	Of the dimly understood,
	When men began to construct
	Evil and Good.
	
	Then the great passion of pied air
	Flew through the days,
	The days used the years,
	The years grew to tears--
	Logic made the stories go
	And Imagination moved the key.
	Somewhere Love came in,
	Quietly, mysteriously.
	
	The force as odd as any
	After all is said
	Has more sense in it
	Than hounding the dead.
	And the bond of the obvious
	Blood in its beauty
	Controls more, is not moral,
	Simply is.
	
	When nothing can be understood,
	World-systems crumble,
	Love is of the essence,
	Poetically speaking.
	As in music
	The truth is in between the tones,
	Neither action nor will
	Tell what is going on;
	It is something glancing off
	Allures always,
	The rich sense
	Of the all, the impossible, the ineffable.


60. TWENTY-TWO

	I am going somewhere now--
	You stay here if you like.
	It doesn’t matter where--
	We just are not alike.
	I must be going far
	To find the burning sun,
	And I’ll be starting out
	Again when I have done.
	You stay here if you like--
	I’m restless for the noon,
	I must be going far.
	I’ll not be back, not soon.


61. UNDER THE HILL

	When darkness crept and grew
	The hushed wide earth lay still.
	I listened; I thought I knew
	The vibrance under the hill.
	If I were now just dead
	I could not make less sound.
	I slowly bent my head
	Intently to the ground.
	I listened again. My feet
	Took root within the soil;
	Earth grew within me, sweet
	In my limbs. I knew the soil
	Had claimed my body whole.
	I listened. There came no sound
	Across the darkening knoll
	Or over the matted ground.
	
	I had become a thing
	Of earth. My face felt air
	As leaves feel winds that bring
	A sudden cool. My hair
	Was grass, my flesh was sand--
	Strange that it happened there
	Upon the solid land!
	My blood turned water. My bone
	Took on the strength of stone.
	
	Mixed with earth and sky,
	I bore all things to die.
	I caused the twig to sprout
	And every flower come out.
	Flaming the earth with spring
	I made each robin sing,
	Then sent the long heat down
	Tinging green leaves with brown.
	I made the summer old
	With singing autumn gold,
	And stilled all things that grow,
	And covered the world with snow.
	
	When darkness crept and grew
	The hushed wide earth lay still.
	Being earth, at last I knew
	The vibrance under the hill.


62. UNITED 555

	Saint Paul never saw a sight like this.
	Seven miles up, fifty five below outside,
	Wide open flat top of cloud vista to the far horizon,
	As the sun descends reddening the upworld spectacle.
	
	Saint Paul never got off the ground, and, for that matter,
	Christ was nailed to a Cross a few feet above the earth.
	Here I sit seven miles up not feeling anything.
	No visceral reaction, dollar martini, endless visual vista.
	
	I must say it could not be more beautiful.
	O think of Akhnaton, who never got off the ground either.
	Raciest to think of the baboons in East Africa at Treetops,
	Who could not imagine to come to such a pass as this.
	
	Christ and Paul never knew what height is,
	They never polluted the atmosphere.
	I am Twentieth Century Man riding high,
	Going into the sunset, Seven Up, feeling no pain.


63. VERMONT IDYLL

	These are the days of yellow and red
	Thrown up across a far field,
	October’s eyeball-striking glory,
	A day that imitates the summer.
	The leaves are falling, will come winter.
	
	You lie upon the grass, the sun is hot,
	Your skin is moist, you think of summer,
	But when you stand and walk a cool
	Cleanliness of the lengthening day
	Reaches a white winter in the bones.
	
	And then the silence of this time
	Is opened by an engine’s oncome
	Coming slowly with growing invasion,
	Changing meditation,
	Until goes past, across, the manure spreader.
	
	The red and yellow sentinels stand by.
	The lurcher machine, immigrant, throws out
	Its rich burden over unplowed grass,
	A secret ritual of rebirth,
	The hand of man applying the levers.
	
	Only a moment without man’s agency
	It seemed a timeless perfection
	Was one with consciousness,
	A stasis like a dreaming mind
	Between summer and winter.
	
	Nearby, a car rotting among thistles
	Had jagged glass, teeth of broken windows.
	In the back, a ruined cushion with a hole
	In the center. A discarded plow rusted too,
	As time was stalking.


64. THE VILLAGE DAILY

	Worn linotype machines are clicking fast,
	And there’s a pungent smell of printer’s ink
	About this ancient shop--its plates of zinc,
	And dingy placards on the wall long cast.
	Below, the presses grind the paper past,
	And feel quick cool metallic slaps, and drink
	The stone-smooth inks that on bare papers clink
	With spank, spank, spank, and heavier clouts at last.
	
	The daily village paper goes to press
	While all the people lie asleep in bed.
	The mechanism trains a finty eye
	To find new stuff for momentary stress;
	And every night it sets in rigid lead
	Those who are born, who marry, and who die.


65. THE VOYAGE

	To make a headway against the tide,
	The tide-rip and the windy afternoon,
	The skillful sailor, salt consigned,
	Impressed the canvas to new subtlety.
	
	The engine off, a sporting gesture.
	Found him moving aft, heading fore.
	Heading forward, we go backward
	Where we were. The day is pure
	
	And time seems stopped somewhere.
	The sounding shore, we passed far back,
	As ancient as Circean chant
	And lure, comes to sound once more.
	
	Now the consternated sailor winces,
	His skill debased, the wind long gone.
	The open ocean, a lolling torpid giant,
	Occasions nothing but philosophy.
	
	He turns the engine on again
	As a last resort, Man cannot endure
	To be going backward going forward.
	The sirens wail in the rocks’ sonority.


66. WENTWORTH PLACE

	As one who lingers on a sunlit hill
	To draw the late warm rays of afternoon
	Around him, lest the quiet dusk should still
	Within his summer brain the sounds of June,
	I dreamed, enchanted in this little room,
	Of larks upblown, of earth grown warm with morning,
	Bees in drowsy plunder on a bloom,
	And water moving with a kind of scorning
	Voiced against the river stones. But I
	When at the pinnacle of triumphing
	Remembered, and I felt the summer die
	Along my blood, like birds that wheel and wing
	Away. And night fell down upon the fen;
	And hollow was the heart I turned to men.


67. THE WIND AS AN ABSTRACT GOD

	Every day one looks for the signs of the wind,
	Which has now become a living thing, obsessive,
	Thought of in terms of sail-lifting pleasure,
	A rustle in the holly trees; will it be
	Enough? The flag is always indicating,
	At the Cavalier. Often in excess of élan
	You have tromped all your gear down to the beach
	In the anticipation of eight knots, or
	Taken the smooth seven-footer that will sail in six,
	Its pale blue cover to go slowly and stately,
	But by this token it is also less maneuverable.
	
	Your knowledge of the wind was faulty, and even
	Though there is wind at the edges of the waves
	Your helper lifts aloft, and you reel in hard,
	But the kite will not rise, but falls, unbroken.
	
	The fascination of the thing is in the wind!
	
	Somerimes sailing, the kite well exercising,
	The wind will drop, and nothing can be done
	Nothing, nothing.
	You go, with all your gear, reluctant, home.
	
	And you had learned obedience to nature,
	Desirous man, had learned obedience to nature,
	Before you sulked home with your sticks and fabrics.


68. WINDY

	And then the sea
	Rose up in spray,
	And made a tree
	In a queer way.
	
	The sea poised there
	In fowered rain
	Transcendent, fair--
	And then was sea again.


69. WINTER KILL

	Word traps catch big bears in silence.
	They hunt the woods for years in freedom,
	Keeping the counsels of the bees and snows.
	Then, once unwary, a foot is caught in a trap.
	The big black mountain comes atumble down.
	
	His picture is put in the local paper.
	The expressionless hunter stands in sullen pride;
	A small son touches the nose of the brute.
	The gun rests easy by the icy carcass;
	People come to stare at the winter kill.
	
	I would have him noble on the mountain side,
	Roaming and treading, untrapped by man.
	Man kills him only half for meaning,
	Half out of thoughtlessness. The steaks
	Are passed around as tokens to the neighbors.
	
	Word traps catch big bears another way
	When the meaning is total. The way a poem prinks
	Into the heart from a forest hill
	Is to have it in words, but never to have it.
	Which is to say it is elusive still.


70. WORLD’S HAVOC

	So far away back, so very far,
	How can I communicate with you?
	
	The evanescence of true feeling
	Vanishes as it is resurrected.
	
	Is there return through the years?
	I look at my sleeping children with tenderness,
	
	I kiss the brow of the wise, sleeping boy,
	I look at the strong, small, sleeping daughter.
	
	It is mysteriously, infinitely wordless;
	I think my parents may have touched me so.
	
	The deepest bonds are invisible, incalculable,
	Unassimilable; what is left of the deepest truth,
	
	The purest love, the most sacrificial, most human.
	In the subtle decry of time?
	
	So far back, so very far, nothing,
	Is there nothing, time, nothing at all?


71. A YOUNG GREEK, KILLED IN THE WARS

	The lacy towers, the words so tall,
	The serene hautboys floating the timed
	Memory so like its forgetfulness,
	These are sigils and tones of belief.
	
	To treachery give the Cheshire smile,
	A bit sedate, touching a plane tree.
	The clouds are gathering over the Acropolis,
	Nature amorphous to man’s precision.
	
	They dug a trench, and threw him in a grave
	Shallow as youth; and poured the wine out
	Soaking the tunic and the dry Attic air.
	They covered him lightly, and left him there.
	
	When music comes upon the airs of Spring,
	Faith fevers the blood; counter to harmony,
	The mind makes its rugged testaments.
	Melancholy moves, preservative and predatory.
	
	The light is a container of treachery,
	The light is the preserver of the Parthenon.
	The light is lost from that young eye.
	Hearing music, I speak, lest he should die.

