*** Max Ehrmann (1872 - 1945)


1. A PRAYER

	Let me do my work each day; and if the darkened hours
	of despair overcome me, may I not forget the strength 
	that comforted me in the desolation of other times.
	
	May I still remember the bright hours that found me walking over 
	the silent hills of my childhood, or dreaming on the margin of a 
	quiet river, when a light glowed within me, and I promised 
	my early God to have courage amid the tempests of the changing years.
	
	Spare me from bitterness and from the sharp passions of unguarded moments. 
	May I not forget that poverty and riches are of the spirit. 
	
	Though the world knows me not, may my thoughts and actions 
	be such as shall keep me friendly with myself.
	
	Lift up my eyes from the earth, and let me not forget the uses 
	of the stars. Forbid that I should judge others lest I condemn myself. 
	
	Let me not follow the clamor of the world, but walk calmly in my path.
	
	Give me a few friends who will love me for what I am; 
	and keep ever burning before my vagrant steps the  kindly light of hope.
	
	And though age and infirmity overtake me, and I come not within sight 
	of the castle of my dreams, teach me still to be thankful for life, 
	and for time’s olden memories that are good and sweet; 
	and may the evening’s twilight find me gentle still.



2. REFORMING ONESELF

	It has been raining again. 
	I have been indoors, meditating on the shortcomings of life.
	I wish there were more kindly persons in the world. 
	Our competitive life develops selfishness and unkindness.
	I am determined to do something about it. 
	I cannot hope to convert many persons. 
	To convert one person, I shall do well.
	I will begin with the person I know best--myself.
	When it rains and one is much indoors one is 
	likely to meditate on the shortcomings of life.
	Let me think--how shall I make myself kind, gentle considerate?
	I do believe it has stopped raining.
	I can go out now. I’ll go and shoot on the archery range.
	I’ll not bother to reform myself today. Perhaps tomorrow--
	if it is raining, and I must stay indoors, 
	and meditate on the shortcomings of life.
