*** T. S. Eliot (1888 - 1965)


1. ASH WEDNESDAY

	I

	Because I do not hope to turn again
	Because I do not hope
	Because I do not hope to turn
	Desiring this man’s gift and that man’s scope
	I no longer strive to strive towards such things
	(Why should the agèd eagle stretch its wings?)
	Why should I mourn
	The vanished power of the usual reign?

	Because I do not hope to know
	The infirm glory of the positive hour
	Because I do not think
	Because I know I shall not know
	The one veritable transitory power
	Because I cannot drink
	There where trees flower and springs flow for there is
	nothing again

	Because I know that time is always time
	And place is always and only place
	And what is actual is actual only for one time
	And only for one place
	I rejoice that things are as they are and
	I renounce the blessèd face
	And renounce the voice
	Because I cannot hope to turn again
	Consequently I rejoice having to construct something
	Upon which to rejoice

	And pray to God to have mercy upon us
	And pray that I may forget
	These matters that with myself I too much discuss
	Too much explain
	Because I do not hope to turn again
	Let these words answer
	For what is done not to be done again
	May the judgement not be too heavy upon us

	Because these wings are no longer wings to fly
	But merely vans to beat the air
	The air which is now thoroughly small and dry
	Smaller and dryer than the will
	Teach us to care and not to care Teach us to sit still.

	Pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death
	Pray for us now and at the hour of our death.


	II

	Lady three white leopards sat under a juniper-tree
	In the cool of the day having fed to sateity
	On my legs my heart my liver and that which had been
	contained
	In the hollow round of my skull. And God said
	Shall these bones live? shall these
	Bones live? And that which had been contained
	In the bones (which were already dry) said chirping:
	Because of the goodness of this Lady
	And because of her loveliness and because
	She honours the Virgin in meditation
	We shine with brightness. And I who am here dissembled
	Proffer my deeds to oblivion and my love
	To the posterity of the desert and the fruit of the gourd.
	It is this which recovers
	My guts the strings of my eyes and the indigestible portions
	Which the leopards reject. The Lady is withdrawn
	In a white gown to contemplation in a white gown.
	Let the whiteness of bones atone to forgetfulness.
	There is no life in them. As I am forgotten
	And would be forgotten so I would forget
	Thus devoted concentrated in purpose. And God said
	Prophesy to the wind to the wind only for only
	The wind will listen. And the bones sang chirping
	With the burden of the grasshopper saying

	_Lady of silences
	Calm and distressed
	Torn and most whole
	Rose of memory
	Rose of forgetfulness
	Exhausted and life-giving
	Worried reposeful
	The single Rose
	Is now the Garden
	Where all loves end
	Terminate torment
	Of love unsatisfied
	The greater torment
	Of love satisfied
	End of the endless
	Journey to no end
	Conclusion of all that
	Is inconclusible
	Speech without word and
	Word of no speech
	Grace to the Mother
	For the Garden
	Where all love ends._

	Under a juniper-tree the bones sang scattered and shining
	We are glad to be scattered we did little good to each
	other
	Under a tree in the cool of day with the blessing of sand
	Forgetting themselves and each other united
	In the quiet of the desert. This is the land which ye
	Shall divide by lot. And neither division nor unity
	Matters. This is the land. We have our inheritance.


	III

	At the first turning of the second stair
	I turned and saw below
	The same shape twisted on the banister
	Under the vapour in the fetid air
	Struggling with the devil of the stairs who wears
	The deceitul face of hope and of despair.

	At the second turning of the second stair
	I left them twisting turning below;
	There were no more faces and the stair was dark
	Damp jaggèd like an old man’s mouth drivelling beyond
	repair
	Or the toothed gullet of an agèd shark.

	At the first turning of the third stair
	Was a slotted window bellied like the figs’s fruit
	And beyond the hawthorn blossom and a pasture scene
	The broadbacked figure drest in blue and green
	Enchanted the maytime with an antique flute.
	Blown hair is sweet brown hair over the mouth blown
	Lilac and brown hair;
	Distraction music of the flute stops and steps of the mind
	over the third stair
	Fading fading; strength beyond hope and despair
	Climbing the third stair.

	Lord I am not worthy
	Lord I am not worthy

	but speak the word only.


	IV

	Who walked between the violet and the violet
	Whe walked between
	The various ranks of varied green
	Going in white and blue in Mary’s colour
	Talking of trivial things
	In ignorance and knowledge of eternal dolour
	Who moved among the others as they walked
	Who then made strong the fountains and made fresh the springs

	Made cool the dry rock and made firm the sand
	In blue of larkspur blue of Mary’s colour
	Sovegna vos

	Here are the years that walk between bearing
	Away the fiddles and the flutes restoring
	One who moves in the time between sleep and waking wearing

	White light folded sheathing about her folded.
	The new years walk restoring
	Through a bright cloud of tears the years restoring
	With a new verse the ancient rhyme. Redeem
	The time. Redeem
	The unread vision in the higher dream
	While jewelled unicorns draw by the gilded hearse.

	The silent sister veiled in white and blue
	Between the yews behind the garden god
	Whose flute is breathless bent her head and signed but spoke
	no word

	But the fountain sprang up and the bird sang down
	Redeem the time redeem the dream
	The token of the word unheard unspoken

	Till the wind shake a thousand whispers from the yew

	And after this our exile


	V

	If the lost word is lost if the spent word is spent
	If the unheard unspoken
	Word is unspoken unheard;
	Still is the unspoken word the Word unheard
	The Word without a word the Word within
	The world and for the world;
	And the light shone in darkness and
	Against the Word the unstilled world still whirled
	About the centre of the silent Word.

	O my people what have I done unto thee.

	Where shall the word be found where will the word
	Resound? Not here there is not enough silence
	Not on the sea or on the islands not
	On the mainland in the desert or the rain land
	For those who walk in darkness
	Both in the day time and in the night time
	The right time and the right place are not here
	No place of grace for those who avoid the face
	No time to rejoice for those who walk among noise and deny
	the voice

	Will the veiled sister pray for
	Those who walk in darkness who chose thee and oppose thee
	Those who are torn on the horn between season and season
	time and time between
	Hour and hour word and word power and power those who wait
	In darkness? Will the veiled sister pray
	For children at the gate
	Who will not go away and cannot pray:
	Pray for those who chose and oppose

	O my people what have I done unto thee.

	Will the veiled sister between the slender
	Yew trees pray for those who offend her
	And are terrified and cannot surrender
	And affirm before the world and deny between the rocks
	In the last desert before the last blue rocks
	The desert in the garden the garden in the desert
	Of drouth spitting from the mouth the withered apple-seed.

	O my people.


	VI

	Although I do not hope to turn again
	Although I do not hope
	Although I do not hope to turn

	Wavering between the profit and the loss
	In this brief transit where the dreams cross
	The dreamcrossed twilight between birth and dying
	(Bless me father) though I do not wish to wish these things
	From the wide window towards the granite shore
	The white sails still fly seaward seaward flying
	Unbroken wings

	And the lost heart stiffens and rejoices
	In the lost lilac and the lost sea voices
	And the weak spirit quickens to rebel
	For the bent golden-rod and the lost sea smell
	Quickens to recover
	The cry of quail and the whirling plover
	And the blind eye creates
	The empty forms between the ivory gates
	And smell renews the salt savour of the sandy earth

	This is the time of tension between dying and birth
	The place of solitude where three dreams cross
	Between blue rocks
	But when the voices shaken from the yew-tree drift away
	Let the other yew be shaken and reply.

	Blessèd sister holy mother spirit of the fountain spirit
	of the garden
	Suffer us not to mock ourselves with falsehood
	Teach us to care and not to care
	Teach us to sit still
	Even among these rocks
	Our peace in His will
	And even among these rocks
	Sister mother
	And spirit of the river spirit of the sea
	Suffer me not to be separated

	And let my cry come unto Thee.



2. AUNT HELEN

	Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
	And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
	Cared for by servants to the number of four.
	Now when she died there was silence in heaven
	And silence at her end of the street.
	The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet--
	He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
	The dogs were handsomely provided for,
	But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
	The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
	And the footman sat upon the dining-table
	Holding the second housemaid on his knees--
	Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.



3. THE BOSTON EVENING TRANSCRIPT

	The readers of the Boston Evening Transcript
	Sway in the wind like a field of ripe corn.
	When evening quickens faintly in the street,
	Wakening the appetites of life in some
	And to others bringing the Boston Evening Transcript,
	I mount the steps and ring the bell, turning
	Wearily, as one would turn to nod good-bye to Rochefoucauld,
	If the street were time and he at the end of the street,
	And I say, “Cousin Harriet, here is the Boston Evening Transcript.”



4. BURBANK WITH A BAEDEKER: BLEISTEIN WITH A CIGAR

	_Tra-la-la-la-la-la-laire--nil nisi divinum stabile
	est; caetera fumus--the gondola stopped, the old
	palace was there, how charming its grey and pink--
	goats and monkeys, with such hair too!--so the
	countess passed on until she came through the
	little park, where Niobe presented her with a
	cabinet, and so departed._


	Burbank crossed a little bridge
	Descending at a small hotel;
	Princess Volupine arrived,
	They were together, and he fell.

	Defunctive music under sea
	Passed seaward with the passing bell
	Slowly: the God Hercules
	Had left him, that had loved him well.

	The horses, under the axletree
	Beat up the dawn from Istria
	With even feet. Her shuttered barge
	Burned on the water all the day.

	But this or such was Bleistein’s way:
	A saggy bending of the knees
	And elbows, with the palms turned out,
	Chicago Semite Viennese.

	A lustreless protrusive eye
	Stares from the protozoic slime
	At a perspective of Canaletto.
	The smoky candle end of time

	Declines. On the Rialto once.
	The rats are underneath the piles.
	The jew is underneath the lot.
	Money in furs. The boatman smiles,

	Princess Volupine extends
	A meagre, blue-nailed, phthisic hand
	To climb the waterstair. Lights, lights,
	She entertains Sir Ferdinand

	Klein. Who clipped the lion’s wings
	And flea’d his rump and pared his claws?
	Thought Burbank, meditating on
	Time’s ruins, and the seven laws.



5. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD

	April is the cruellest month breeding
	Lilacs out of the dead land mixing
	Memory and desire stirring
	Dull roots with spring rain.
	Winter kept us warm covering
	Earth in forgetful snow feeding
	A little life with dried tubers.
	Summer surprised us coming over the Starnbergersee
	With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade
	And went on in sunlight into the Hofgarten
	And drank coffee and talked for an hour.
	Bin gar keine Russin stamm’ aus Litauen echt deutsch.
	And when we were children staying at the archduke’s
	My cousin’s he took me out on a sled
	And I was frightened. He said Marie
	Marie hold on tight. And down we went.
	In the mountains there you feel free.
	I read much of the night and go south in the winter.

	What are the roots that clutch what branches grow
	Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man
	You cannot say or guess for you know only
	A heap of broken images where the sun beats
	And the dead tree gives no shelter the cricket no relief
	And the dry stone no sound of water. Only
	There is shadow under this red rock
	(Come in under the shadow of this red rock)
	And I will show you something different from either
	Your shadow at morning striding behind you
	Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;
	I will show you fear in a handful of dust.
	_Frisch weht der Wind
	Der Heimat zu
	Mein Irisch Kind
	Wo weilest du?_
	“You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
	“They called me the hyacinth girl.”
	--Yet when we came back late from the Hyacinth garden
	Your arms full and your hair wet I could not
	Speak and my eyes failed I was neither
	Living nor dead and I knew nothing
	Looking into the heart of light the silence.
	_Oed’ und leer das Meer_.

	Madame Sosostris famous clairvoyante
	Had a bad cold nevertheless
	Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe
	With a wicked pack of cards. Here said she
	Is your card the drowned Phoenician Sailor
	(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
	Here is Belladonna the Lady of the Rocks
	The lady of situations.
	Here is the man with three staves and here the Wheel
	And here is the one-eyed merchant and this card
	Which is blank is something he carries on his back
	Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find
	The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.
	I see crowds of people walking round in a ring.
	Thank you. If you see dear Mrs. Equitone
	Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:
	One must be so careful these days.

	Unreal City
	Under the brown fog of a winter dawn
	A crowd flowed over London Bridge so many
	I had not thought death had undone so many.
	Sighs short and infrequent were exhaled
	And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
	Flowed up the hill and down King William Street
	To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours
	With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.
	There I saw one I knew and stopped him crying “Stetson!
	“You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!
	“That corpse you planted last year in your garden
	“Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
	“Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?
	“Oh keep the Dog far hence that’s friend to men
	“Or with his nails he’ll dig it up again!
	“You! hypocrite lecteur!--mon semblable--mon frère!”



6. BURNT NORTON

	Time present and time past
	Are both perhaps present in time future,
	And time future contained in time past.
	If all time is eternally present
	All time is unredeemable.
	What might have been is an abstraction
	Remaining a perpetual possibility
	Only in a world of speculation.
	What might have been and what has been
	Point to one end, which is always present.
	Footfalls echo in the memory
	Down the passage which we did not take
	Towards the door we never opened
	Into the rose-garden. My words echo
	Thus, in your mind.
	But to what purpose
	Disturbing the dust on a bowl of rose-leaves
	I do not know.
	Other echoes
	Inhabit the garden. Shall we follow?
	Quick, said the bird, find them, find them,
	Round the corner. Through the first gate,
	Into our first world, shall we follow
	The deception of the thrush? Into our first world.
	There they were, dignified, invisible,
	Moving without pressure, over the dead leaves,
	In the autumn heat, through the vibrant air,
	And the bird called, in response to
	The unheard music hidden in the shrubbery,
	And the unseen eyebeam crossed, for the roses
	Had the look of flowers that are looked at.
	There they were as our guests, accepted and accepting.
	So we moved, and they, in a formal pattern,
	Along the empty alley, into the box circle,
	To look down into the drained pool.
	Dry the pool, dry concrete, brown edged,
	And the pool was filled with water out of sunlight,
	And the lotos rose, quietly, quietly,
	The surface glittered out of heart of light,
	And they were behind us, reflected in the pool.
	Then a cloud passed, and the pool was empty.
	Go, said the bird, for the leaves were full of children,
	Hidden excitedly, containing laughter.
	Go, go, go, said the bird: human kind
	Cannot bear very much reality.
	Time past and time future
	What might have been and what has been
	Point to one end, which is always present.



7. CONVERSATION GALANTE

	I observe: “Our sentimental friend the moon!
	Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
	It may be Prester John’s balloon
	Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
	To light poor travellers to their distress.”
	She then: “How you digress!”

	And I then: “Some one frames upon the keys
	That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
	The night and moonshine; music which we seize
	To body forth our vacuity.”
	She then: “Does this refer to me?”
	“Oh no, it is I who am inane.”

	“You, madam, are the eternal humorist,
	The eternal enemy of the absolute,
	Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist!
	With your air indifferent and imperious
	At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--”
	And--“Are we then so serious?”



8. A COOKING EGG

	_En l’an trentiesme de mon aage
	Que toutes mes hontes j’ay beues . . ._


	Pipit sate upright in her chair
	Some distance from where I was sitting;
	Views of the Oxford Colleges
	Lay on the table, with the knitting.

	Daguerreotypes and silhouettes,
	Her grandfather and great great aunts,
	Supported on the mantelpiece
	An Invitation to the Dance.


	I shall not want Honour in Heaven
	For I shall meet Sir Philip Sidney
	And have talk with Coriolanus
	And other heroes of that kidney.

	I shall not want Capital in Heaven
	For I shall meet Sir Alfred Mond:
	We two shall lie together, lapt
	In a five per cent Exchequer Bond.

	I shall not want Society in Heaven,
	Lucretia Borgia shall be my Bride;
	Her anecdotes will be more amusing
	Than Pipit’s experience could provide.

	I shall not want Pipit in Heaven:
	Madame Blavatsky will instruct me
	In the Seven Sacred Trances;
	Piccarda de Donati will conduct me.


	But where is the penny world I bought
	To eat with Pipit behind the screen?
	The red-eyed scavengers are creeping
	From Kentish Town and Golder’s Green;

	Where are the eagles and the trumpets?

	Buried beneath some snow-deep Alps.
	Over buttered scones and crumpets
	Weeping, weeping multitudes
	Droop in a hundred A.B.C.’s



9. COUSIN NANCY

	Miss Nancy Ellicott Strode across the hills and broke them,
	Rode across the hills and broke them--
	The barren New England hills--
	Riding to hounds
	Over the cow-pasture.

	Miss Nancy Ellicott smoked
	And danced all the modern dances;
	And her aunts were not quite sure how they felt about it,
	But they knew that it was modern.

	Upon the glazen shelves kept watch
	Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith,
	The army of unalterable law.



10. THE CULTIVATION OF CHRISTMAS TREES

	There are several attitudes towards Christmas,
	Some of which we may disregard:
	The social, the torpid, the patently commercial,
	The rowdy (the pubs being open till midnight),
	And the childish--which is not that of the child
	For whom the candle is a star, and the gilded angel
	Spreading its wings at the summit of the tree
	Is not only a decoration, but an angel.

	The child wonders at the Christmas Tree:
	Let him continue in the spirit of wonder
	At the Feast as an event not accepted as a pretext;
	So that the glittering rapture, the amazement
	Of the first-remembered Christmas Tree,
	So that the surprises, delight in new possessions
	(Each one with its peculiar and exciting smell),
	The expectation of the goose or turkey
	And the expected awe on its appearance,

	So that the reverence and the gaiety
	May not be forgotten in later experience,
	In the bored habituation, the fatigue, the tedium,
	The awareness of death, the consciousness of failure,
	Or in the piety of the convert
	Which may be tainted with a self-conceit
	Displeasing to God and disrespectful to children
	(And here I remember also with gratitude
	St.Lucy, her carol, and her crown of fire):

	So that before the end, the eightieth Christmas
	(By “eightieth” meaning whichever is last)
	The accumulated memories of annual emotion
	May be concentrated into a great joy
	Which shall be also a great fear, as on the occasion
	When fear came upon every soul:
	Because the beginning shall remind us of the end
	And the first coming of the second coming.



11. A DEDICATION TO MY WIFE

	To whom I owe the leaping delight
	That quickens my senses in our wakingtime
	And the rhythm that governs the repose of our sleepingtime,
	the breathing in unison.

	Of lovers whose bodies smell of each other
	Who think the same thoughts without need of speech,
	And babble the same speech without need of meaning. . .

	No peevish winter wind shall chill
	No sullen tropic sun shall wither
	The roses in the rose-garden which is ours and ours only

	But this dedication is for others to read:
	These are private words addressed to you in public.



12. THE DRY SAVAGES

	I

	I do not know much about gods; but I think that the river
	Is a strong brown god--sullen, untamed and intractable,
	Patient to some degree, at first recognised as a frontier;
	Useful, untrustworthy, as a conveyor of commerce;
	Then only a problem confronting the builder of bridges.
	The problem once solved, the brown god is almost forgotten
	By the dwellers in cities--ever, however, implacable.
	Keeping his seasons and rages, destroyer, reminder
	Of what men choose to forget. Unhonoured, unpropitiated
	By worshippers of the machine, but waiting, watching and waiting.
	His rhythm was present in the nursery bedroom,
	In the rank ailanthus of the April dooryard,
	In the smell of grapes on the autumn table,
	And the evening circle in the winter gaslight.

	The river is within us, the sea is all about us;
	The sea is the land’s edge also, the granite
	Into which it reaches, the beaches where it tosses
	Its hints of earlier and other creation:
	The starfish, the horseshoe crab, the whale’s backbone;
	The pools where it offers to our curiosity
	The more delicate algae and the sea anemone.
	It tosses up our losses, the torn seine,
	The shattered lobsterpot, the broken oar
	And the gear of foreign dead men. The sea has many voices,
	Many gods and many voices.
	The salt is on the briar rose,
	The fog is in the fir trees.
	The sea howl
	And the sea yelp, are different voices
	Often together heard: the whine in the rigging,
	The menace and caress of wave that breaks on water,
	The distant rote in the granite teeth,
	And the wailing warning from the approaching headland
	Are all sea voices, and the heaving groaner
	Rounded homewards, and the seagull:
	And under the oppression of the silent fog
	The tolling bell
	Measures time not our time, rung by the unhurried
	Ground swell, a time
	Older than the time of chronometers, older
	Than time counted by anxious worried women
	Lying awake, calculating the future,
	Trying to unweave, unwind, unravel
	And piece together the past and the future,
	Between midnight and dawn, when the past is all deception,
	The future futureless, before the morning watch
	When time stops and time is never ending;
	And the ground swell, that is and was from the beginning,
	Clangs
	The bell.


	II

	Where is there an end of it, the soundless wailing,
	The silent withering of autumn flowers
	Dropping their petals and remaining motionless;
	Where is there and end to the drifting wreckage,
	The prayer of the bone on the beach, the unprayable
	Prayer at the calamitous annunciation?

	There is no end, but addition: the trailing
	Consequence of further days and hours,
	While emotion takes to itself the emotionless
	Years of living among the breakage
	Of what was believed in as the most reliable--
	And therefore the fittest for renunciation.

	There is the final addition, the failing
	Pride or resentment at failing powers,
	The unattached devotion which might pass for devotionless,
	In a drifting boat with a slow leakage,
	The silent listening to the undeniable
	Clamour of the bell of the last annunciation.

	Where is the end of them, the fishermen sailing
	Into the wind’s tail, where the fog cowers?
	We cannot think of a time that is oceanless
	Or of an ocean not littered with wastage
	Or of a future that is not liable
	Like the past, to have no destination.

	We have to think of them as forever bailing,
	Setting and hauling, while the North East lowers
	Over shallow banks unchanging and erosionless
	Or drawing their money, drying sails at dockage;
	Not as making a trip that will be unpayable
	For a haul that will not bear examination.

	There is no end of it, the voiceless wailing,
	No end to the withering of withered flowers,
	To the movement of pain that is painless and motionless,
	To the drift of the sea and the drifting wreckage,
	The bone’s prayer to Death its God. Only the hardly, barely prayable
	Prayer of the one Annunciation.

	It seems, as one becomes older,
	That the past has another pattern, and ceases to be a mere sequence--
	Or even development: the latter a partial fallacy
	Encouraged by superficial notions of evolution,
	Which becomes, in the popular mind, a means of disowning the past.
	The moments of happiness--not the sense of well--being,
	Fruition, fulfilment, security or affection,
	Or even a very good dinner, but the sudden illumination--
	We had the experience but missed the meaning,
	And approach to the meaning restores the experience
	In a different form, beyond any meaning
	We can assign to happiness. I have said before
	That the past experience revived in the meaning
	Is not the experience of one life only
	But of many generations--not forgetting
	Something that is probably quite ineffable:
	The backward look behind the assurance
	Of recorded history, the backward half-look
	Over the shoulder, towards the primitive terror.
	Now, we come to discover that the moments of agony
	(Whether, or not, due to misunderstanding,
	Having hoped for the wrong things or dreaded the wrong things,
	Is not in question) are likewise permanent
	With such permanence as time has. We appreciate this better
	In the agony of others, nearly experienced,
	Involving ourselves, than in our own.
	For our own past is covered by the currents of action,
	But the torment of others remains an experience
	Unqualified, unworn by subsequent attrition.
	People change, and smile: but the agony abides.
	Time the destroyer is time the preserver,
	Like the river with its cargo of dead negroes, cows and chicken coops,
	The bitter apple, and the bite in the apple.
	And the ragged rock in the restless waters,
	Waves wash over it, fogs conceal it;
	On a halcyon day it is merely a monument,
	In navigable weather it is always a seamark
	To lay a course by: but in the sombre season
	Or the sudden fury, is what it always was.


	III

	I sometimes wonder if that is what Krishna meant--
	Among other things--or one way of putting the same thing:
	That the future is a faded song, a Royal Rose or a lavender spray
	Of wistful regret for those who are not yet here to regret,
	Pressed between yellow leaves of a book that has never been opened.
	And the way up is the way down, the way forward is the way back.
	You cannot face it steadily, but this thing is sure,
	That time is no healer: the patient is no longer here.
	When the train starts, and the passengers are settled
	To fruit, periodicals and business letters
	(And those who saw them off have left the platform)
	Their faces relax from grief into relief,
	To the sleepy rhythm of a hundred hours.
	Fare forward, travellers! not escaping from the past
	Into different lives, or into any future;
	You are not the same people who left that station
	Or who will arrive at any terminus,
	While the narrowing rails slide together behind you;
	And on the deck of the drumming liner
	Watching the furrow that widens behind you,
	You shall not think ‘the past is finished’
	Or ‘the future is before us’.
	At nightfall, in the rigging and the aerial,
	Is a voice descanting (though not to the ear,
	The murmuring shell of time, and not in any language)
	‘Fare forward, you who think that you are voyaging;
	You are not those who saw the harbour
	Receding, or those who will disembark.
	Here between the hither and the farther shore
	While time is withdrawn, consider the future
	And the past with an equal mind.
	At the moment which is not of action or inaction
	You can receive this: “on whatever sphere of being
	The mind of a man may be intent
	At the time of death”--that is the one action
	(And the time of death is every moment)
	Which shall fructify in the lives of others:
	And do not think of the fruit of action.
	Fare forward.
	O voyagers, O seamen,
	You who came to port, and you whose bodies
	Will suffer the trial and judgement of the sea,
	Or whatever event, this is your real destination.’
	So Krishna, as when he admonished Arjuna
	On the field of battle.
	Not fare well,
	But fare forward, voyagers.


	IV

	Lady, whose shrine stands on the promontory,
	Pray for all those who are in ships, those
	Whose business has to do with fish, and
	Those concerned with every lawful traffic
	And those who conduct them.

	Repeat a prayer also on behalf of
	Women who have seen their sons or husbands
	Setting forth, and not returning:
	Figlia del tuo figlio,
	Queen of Heaven.

	Also pray for those who were in ships, and
	Ended their voyage on the sand, in the sea’s lips
	Or in the dark throat which will not reject them
	Or wherever cannot reach them the sound of the sea bell’s
	Perpetual angelus.


	V

	To communicate with Mars, converse with spirits,
	To report the behaviour of the sea monster,
	Describe the horoscope, haruspicate or scry,
	Observe disease in signatures, evoke
	Biography from the wrinkles of the palm
	And tragedy from fingers; release omens
	By sortilege, or tea leaves, riddle the inevitable
	With playing cards, fiddle with pentagrams
	Or barbituric acids, or dissect
	The recurrent image into pre-conscious terrors--
	To explore the womb, or tomb, or dreams; all these are usual
	Pastimes and drugs, and features of the press:
	And always will be, some of them especially
	When there is distress of nations and perplexity
	Whether on the shores of Asia, or in the Edgware Road.
	Men’s curiosity searches past and future
	And clings to that dimension. But to apprehend
	The point of intersection of the timeless
	With time, is an occupation for the saint--
	No occupation either, but something given
	And taken, in a lifetime’s death in love,
	Ardour and selflessness and self-surrender.
	For most of us, there is only the unattended
	Moment, the moment in and out of time,
	The distraction fit, lost in a shaft of sunlight,
	The wild thyme unseen, or the winter lightning
	Or the waterfall, or music heard so deeply
	That it is not heard at all, but you are the music
	While the music lasts. These are only hints and guesses,
	Hints followed by guesses; and the rest
	Is prayer, observance, discipline, thought and action.
	The hint half guessed, the gift half understood, is Incarnation.
	Here the impossible union
	Of spheres of existence is actual,
	Here the past and future
	Are conquered, and reconciled,
	Where action were otherwise movement
	Of that which is only moved
	And has in it no source of movement--
	Driven by daemonic, chthonic
	Powers. And right action is freedom
	From past and future also.
	For most of us, this is the aim
	Never here to be realised;
	Who are only undefeated
	Because we have gone on trying;
	We, content at the last
	If our temporal reversion nourish
	(Not too far from the yew-tree)
	The life of significant soil.



13. EAST COKER

	I

	In my beginning is my end. In succession
	Houses rise and fall, crumble, are extended,
	Are removed, destroyed, restored, or in their place
	Is an open field, or a factory, or a by-pass.
	Old stone to new building, old timber to new fires,
	Old fires to ashes, and ashes to the earth
	Which is already flesh, fur and faeces,
	Bone of man and beast, cornstalk and leaf.
	Houses live and die: there is a time for building
	And a time for living and for generation
	And a time for the wind to break the loosened pane
	And to shake the wainscot where the field-mouse trots
	And to shake the tattered arras woven with a silent motto.

	In my beginning is my end. Now the light falls
	Across the open field, leaving the deep lane
	Shuttered with branches, dark in the afternoon,
	Where you lean against a bank while a van passes,
	And the deep lane insists on the direction
	Into the village, in the electric heat
	Hypnotised. In a warm haze the sultry light
	Is absorbed, not refracted, by grey stone.
	The dahlias sleep in the empty silence.
	Wait for the early owl.

	In that open field
	If you do not come too close, if you do not come too close,
	On a summer midnight, you can hear the music
	Of the weak pipe and the little drum
	And see them dancing around the bonfire
	The association of man and woman
	In daunsinge, signifying matrimonie--
	A dignified and commodiois sacrament.
	Two and two, necessarye coniunction,
	Holding eche other by the hand or the arm
	Whiche betokeneth concorde. Round and round the fire
	Leaping through the flames, or joined in circles,
	Rustically solemn or in rustic laughter
	Lifting heavy feet in clumsy shoes,
	Earth feet, loam feet, lifted in country mirth
	Mirth of those long since under earth
	Nourishing the corn. Keeping time,
	Keeping the rhythm in their dancing
	As in their living in the living seasons
	The time of the seasons and the constellations
	The time of milking and the time of harvest
	The time of the coupling of man and woman
	And that of beasts. Feet rising and falling.
	Eating and drinking. Dung and death.

	Dawn points, and another day
	Prepares for heat and silence. Out at sea the dawn wind
	Wrinkles and slides. I am here
	Or there, or elsewhere. In my beginning.


	II

	What is the late November doing
	With the disturbance of the spring
	And creatures of the summer heat,
	And snowdrops writhing under feet
	And hollyhocks that aim too high
	Red into grey and tumble down
	Late roses filled with early snow?
	Thunder rolled by the rolling stars
	Simulates triumphal cars
	Deployed in constellated wars
	Scorpion fights against the Sun
	Until the Sun and Moon go down
	Comets weep and Leonids fly
	Hunt the heavens and the plains
	Whirled in a vortex that shall bring
	The world to that destructive fire
	Which burns before the ice-cap reigns.

	That was a way of putting it--not very satisfactory:
	A periphrastic study in a worn-out poetical fashion,
	Leaving one still with the intolerable wrestle
	With words and meanings. The poetry does not matter.
	It was not (to start again) what one had expected.
	What was to be the value of the long looked forward to,
	Long hoped for calm, the autumnal serenity
	And the wisdom of age? Had they deceived us
	Or deceived themselves, the quiet-voiced elders,
	Bequeathing us merely a receipt for deceit?
	The serenity only a deliberate hebetude,
	The wisdom only the knowledge of dead secrets
	Useless in the darkness into which they peered
	Or from which they turned their eyes. There is, it seems to us,
	At best, only a limited value
	In the knowledge derived from experience.
	The knowledge imposes a pattern, and falsifies,
	For the pattern is new in every moment
	And every moment is a new and shocking
	Valuation of all we have been. We are only undeceived
	Of that which, deceiving, could no longer harm.
	In the middle, not only in the middle of the way
	But all the way, in a dark wood, in a bramble,
	On the edge of a grimpen, where is no secure foothold,
	And menaced by monsters, fancy lights,
	Risking enchantment. Do not let me hear
	Of the wisdom of old men, but rather of their folly,
	Their fear of fear and frenzy, their fear of possession,
	Of belonging to another, or to others, or to God.
	The only wisdom we can hope to acquire
	Is the wisdom of humility: humility is endless.

	The houses are all gone under the sea.

	The dancers are all gone under the hill.


	III

	O dark dark dark. They all go into the dark,
	The vacant interstellar spaces, the vacant into the vacant,
	The captains, merchant bankers, eminent men of letters,
	The generous patrons of art, the statesmen and the rulers,
	Distinguished civil servants, chairmen of many committees,
	Industrial lords and petty contractors, all go into the dark,
	And dark the Sun and Moon, and the Almanach de Gotha
	And the Stock Exchange Gazette, the Directory of Directors,
	And cold the sense and lost the motive of action.
	And we all go with them, into the silent funeral,
	Nobody’s funeral, for there is no one to bury.
	I said to my soul, be still, and let the dark come upon you
	Which shall be the darkness of God. As, in a theatre,
	The lights are extinguished, for the scene to be changed
	With a hollow rumble of wings, with a movement of darkness on darkness,
	And we know that the hills and the trees, the distant panorama
	And the bold imposing façade are all being rolled away--
	Or as, when an underground train, in the tube, stops too long between stations
	And the conversation rises and slowly fades into silence
	And you see behind every face the mental emptiness deepen
	Leaving only the growing terror of nothing to think about;
	Or when, under ether, the mind is conscious but conscious of nothing--
	I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope
	For hope would be hope for the wrong thing; wait without love,
	For love would be love of the wrong thing; there is yet faith
	But the faith and the love and the hope are all in the waiting.
	Wait without thought, for you are not ready for thought:
	So the darkness shall be the light, and the stillness the dancing.
	Whisper of running streams, and winter lightning.
	The wild thyme unseen and the wild strawberry,
	The laughter in the garden, echoed ecstasy
	Not lost, but requiring, pointing to the agony
	Of death and birth.

	You say I am repeating
	Something I have said before. I shall say it again.
	Shall I say it again? In order to arrive there,
	To arrive where you are, to get from where you are not,
	You must go by a way wherein there is no ecstasy.
	In order to arrive at what you do not know
	You must go by a way which is the way of ignorance.
	In order to possess what you do not possess
	You must go by the way of dispossession.
	In order to arrive at what you are not
	You must go through the way in which you are not.
	And what you do not know is the only thing you know
	And what you own is what you do not own
	And where you are is where you are not.


	IV

	The wounded surgeon plies the steel
	That questions the distempered part;
	Beneath the bleeding hands we feel
	The sharp compassion of the healer’s art
	Resolving the enigma of the fever chart.

	Our only health is the disease
	If we obey the dying nurse
	Whose constant care is not to please
	But to remind of our, and Adam’s curse,
	And that, to be restored, our sickness must grow worse.

	The whole earth is our hospital
	Endowed by the ruined millionaire,
	Wherein, if we do well, we shall
	Die of the absolute paternal care
	That will not leave us, but prevents us everywhere.

	The chill ascends from feet to knees,
	The fever sings in mental wires.
	If to be warmed, then I must freeze
	And quake in frigid purgatorial fires
	Of which the flame is roses, and the smoke is briars.

	The dripping blood our only drink,
	The bloody flesh our only food:
	In spite of which we like to think
	That we are sound, substantial flesh and blood--
	Again, in spite of that, we call this Friday good.


	V

	So here I am, in the middle way, having had twenty years--
	Twenty years largely wasted, the years of l’entre deux guerres
	Trying to use words, and every attempt
	Is a wholly new start, and a different kind of failure
	Because one has only learnt to get the better of words
	For the thing one no longer has to say, or the way in which
	One is no longer disposed to say it. And so each venture
	Is a new beginning, a raid on the inarticulate
	With shabby equipment always deteriorating
	In the general mess of imprecision of feeling,
	Undisciplined squads of emotion. And what there is to conquer
	By strength and submission, has already been discovered
	Once or twice, or several times, by men whom one cannot hope
	To emulate--but there is no competition--
	There is only the fight to recover what has been lost
	And found and lost again and again: and now, under conditions
	That seem unpropitious. But perhaps neither gain nor loss.
	For us, there is only the trying. The rest is not our business.

	Home is where one starts from. As we grow older
	The world becomes stranger, the pattern more complicated
	Of dead and living. Not the intense moment
	Isolated, with no before and after,
	But a lifetime burning in every moment
	And not the lifetime of one man only
	But of old stones that cannot be deciphered.
	There is a time for the evening under starlight,
	A time for the evening under lamplight
	(The evening with the photograph album).
	Love is most nearly itself
	When here and now cease to matter.
	Old men ought to be explorers
	Here or there does not matter
	We must be still and still moving
	Into another intensity
	For a further union, a deeper communion
	Through the dark cold and the empty desolation,
	The wave cry, the wind cry, the vast waters
	Of the petrel and the porpoise. In my end is my beginning.



14. EMPTY SILENCES

	Along the city streets
	It is still high tide,
	Yet the garrulous waves of life
	Shrink and divide
	With a thousand incidents
	Vexed and debated--
	This is the hour for which we waited--

	This is the ultimate hour
	When life is justified.
	The seas of experience
	That were so broad and deep,
	So immediate and steep,
	Are suddenly still.
	You may say what you will,
	At such peace I am terrified.
	There is nothing else beside.



15. EYES THAT I LAST SAW IN TEARS

	Eyes that last I saw in tears
	Through division
	Here in death’s dream kingdom
	The golden vision reappears
	I see the eyes but not the tears
	This is my affliction

	This is my affliction
	Eyes I shall not see again
	Eyes of decision
	Eyes I shall not see unless
	At the door of death’s other kingdom
	Where, as in this,
	The eyes outlast a little while
	A little while outlast the tears
	And hold us in derision.



16. THE FIRE SERMON

	The river’s tent is broken: the last fingers of leaf
	Clutch and sink into the wet bank. The wind
	Crosses the brown land unheard. The nymphs are departed.
	Sweet Thames run softly till I end my song.
	The river bears no empty bottles sandwich papers
	Silk handkerchiefs cardboard boxes cigarette ends
	Or other testimony of summer nights. The nymphs are departed.
	And their friends the loitering heirs of city directors;
	Departed have left no addresses.
	By the waters of Leman I sat down and wept . . .
	Sweet Thames run softly till I end my song
	Sweet Thames run softly for I speak not loud or long.
	But at my back in a cold blast I hear
	The rattle of the bones and chuckle spread from ear to ear.
	A rat crept softly through the vegetation
	Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
	While I was fishing in the dull canal
	On a winter evening round behind the gashouse
	Musing upon the king my brother’s wreck
	And on the king my father’s death before him.
	White bodies naked on the low damp ground
	And bones cast in a little low dry garret
	Rattled by the rat’s foot only year to year.
	But at my back from time to time I hear
	The sound of horns and motors which shall bring
	Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
	O the moon shone bright on Mrs. Porter
	And on her daughter
	They wash their feet in soda water
	_Et O ces voix d’enfants chantant dans la coupole!_

	Twit twit twit
	Jug jug jug jug jug jug
	So rudely forc’d.
	Tereu

	Unreal City
	Under the brown fog of a winter noon
	Mr. Eugenides the Smyrna merchant
	Unshaven with a pocket full of currants
	C.i.f. London: documents at sight
	Asked me in demotic French
	To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
	Followed by a weekend at the Metropole.

	At the violet hour when the eyes and back
	Turn upward from the desk when the human engine waits
	Like a taxi throbbing waiting
	I Tiresias though blind throbbing between two lives
	Old man with wrinkled female breasts can see
	At the violet hour the evening hour that strives
	Homeward and brings the sailor home from sea
	The typist home at teatime clears her breakfast lights
	Her stove and lays out food in tins.
	Out of the window perilously spread
	Her drying combinations touched by the sun’s last rays
	On the divan are piled (at night her bed)
	Stockings slippers camisoles and stays.
	I Tiresias old man with wrinkled dugs
	Perceived the scene and foretold the rest--
	I too awaited the expected guest.
	He the young man carbuncular arrives
	A small house agent’s clerk with one bold stare
	One of the low on whom assurance sits
	As a silk hat on a Bradford millionaire.
	The time is now propitious as he guesses
	The meal is ended she is bored and tired
	Endeavours to engage her in caresses
	Which still are unreproved if undesired.
	Flushed and decided he assaults at once;
	Exploring hands encounter no defence;
	His vanity requires no response
	And makes a welcome of indifference.
	(And I Tiresias have foresuffered all
	Enacted on this same divan or bed;
	I who have sat by Thebes below the wall
	And walked among the lowest of the dead.)
	Bestows one final patronising kiss
	And gropes his way finding the stairs unlit . . .

	She turns and looks a moment in the glass
	Hardly aware of her departed lover;
	Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass:
	“Well now that’s done: and I’m glad it’s over.”
	When lovely woman stoops to folly and
	Paces about her room again alone
	She smooths her hair with automatic hand
	And puts a record on the gramophone.

	“This music crept by me upon the waters”
	And along the Strand up Queen Victoria Street.
	O City city I can sometimes hear
	Beside a public bar in Lower Thames Street
	The pleasant whining of a mandoline
	And a clatter and a chatter from within
	Where fishmen lounge at noon: where the walls
	Of Magnus Martyr hold
	Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold.

	The river sweats
	Oil and tar
	The barges drift
	With the turning tide
	Red sails
	Wide
	To leeward swing on the heavy spar.
	The barges wash
	Drifting logs
	Down Greenwich reach
	Past the Isle of Dogs.
	Weialala leia
	Wallala leialala
	Elizabeth and Leicester
	Beating oars
	The stern was formed
	A gilded shell
	Red and gold
	The brisk swell
	Rippled both shores
	Southwest wind
	Carried down stream
	The peal of bells
	White towers
	Weialala leia
	Wallala leialala

	“Trams and dusty trees.
	Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew
	Undid me. By Richmond I raised my knees
	Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe.”

	“My feet are at Moorgate and my heart
	Under my feet. After the event
	He wept. He promised ‘a new start’.
	I made no comment. What should I resent?”
	“On Margate Sands.
	I can connect
	Nothing with nothing.
	The broken fingernails of dirty hands.
	My people humble people who expect
	Nothing.”
	la la

	To Carthage then I came

	Burning burning burning burning
	O Lord Thou pluckest me out
	O Lord Thou pluckest

	burning



17. A GAME OF CHESS

	The Chair she sat in like a burnished throne
	Glowed on the marble where the glass
	Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines
	From which a golden Cupidon peeped out
	(Another hid his eyes behind his wing)
	Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra
	Reflecting light upon the table as
	The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it
	From satin cases poured in rich profusion.
	In vials of ivory and coloured glass
	Unstoppered lurked her strange synthetic perfumes
	Unguent powdered or liquid--troubled confused
	And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air
	That freshened from the window these ascended
	In fattening the prolonged candle-flames
	Flung their smoke into the laquearia
	Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.
	Huge sea-wood fed with copper
	Burned green and orange framed by the coloured stone
	In which sad light a carvèd dolphin swam.
	Above the antique mantel was displayed
	As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene
	The change of Philomel by the barbarous king
	So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale
	Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
	And still she cried and still the world pursues
	“Jug Jug” to dirty ears.
	And other withered stumps of time
	Were told upon the walls; staring forms
	Leaned out leaning hushing the room enclosed.
	Footsteps shuffled on the stair.
	Under the firelight under the brush her hair
	Spread out in fiery points
	Glowed into words then would be savagely still.

	“My nerves are bad to-night. Yes bad. Stay with me.
	“Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
	“What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
	“I never know what you are thinking. Think.”

	I think we are in rats’ alley
	Where the dead men lost their bones.

	“What is that noise?”
	The wind under the door.
	“What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?”
	Nothing again nothing.
	“Do
	“You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember
	“Nothing?”

	I remember
	Those are pearls that were his eyes.
	“Are you alive or not? Is there nothing in your head?”
	But
	O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag--
	It’s so elegant
	So intelligent
	“What shall I do now? What shall I do?”
	I shall rush out as I am and walk the street
	“With my hair down so. What shall we do tomorrow?
	“What shall we ever do?”
	The hot water at ten.
	And if it rains a closed car at four.
	And we shall play a game of chess
	Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door.

	When Lil’s husband got demobbed I said--
	I didn’t mince my words I said to her myself
	HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
	Now Albert’s coming back make yourself a bit smart.
	He’ll want to know what you done with that money he gave you
	To get yourself some teeth. He did I was there.
	You have them all out Lil and get a nice set
	He said I swear I can’t bear to look at you.
	And no more can’t I I said and think of poor Albert
	He’s been in the army four years he wants a good time
	And if you don’t give it him there’s others will I said.
	Oh is there she said. Something o’ that I said.
	Then I’ll know who to thank she said and give me a straight look.
	HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
	If you don’t like it you can get on with it I said.
	Others can pick and choose if you can’t.
	But if Albert makes off it won’t be for lack of telling.
	You ought to be ashamed I said to look so antique.
	(And her only thirty-one.)
	I can’t help it she said pulling a long face
	It’s them pills I took to bring it off she said.
	(She’s had five already and nearly died of young George.)
	The chemist said it would be all right but I’ve never been the same.
	You _are_ a proper fool I said.
	Well if Albert won’t leave you alone there it is I said
	What you get married for if you don’t want children?
	HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
	Well that Sunday Albert was home they had a hot gammon
	And they asked me in to dinner to get the beauty of it hot--
	HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
	HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME
	Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.
	Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.
	Good night ladies good night sweet ladies good night good night.



18. GERONTION

	Thou hast nor youth nor age
	But as it were an after dinner sleep
	Dreaming of both.


	Here I am an old man in a dry month
	Being read to by a boy waiting for rain.
	I was neither at the hot gates
	Nor fought in the warm rain
	Nor knee deep in the salt marsh heaving a cutlass
	Bitten by flies fought.
	My house is a decayed house
	And the jew squats on the window sill the owner
	Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp
	Blistered in Brussels patched and peeled in London.
	The goat coughs at night in the field overhead;
	Rocks moss stonecrop iron merds.
	The woman keeps the kitchen makes tea
	Sneezes at evening poking the peevish gutter.

	I an old man
	A dull head among windy spaces.

	Signs are taken for wonders. “We would see a sign“:
	The word within a word unable to speak a word
	Swaddled with darkness. In the juvescence of the year
	Came Christ the tiger

	In depraved May dogwood and chestnut flowering Judas
	To be eaten to be divided to be drunk
	Among whispers; by Mr. Silvero
	With caressing hands at Limoges
	Who walked all night in the next room;
	By Hakagawa bowing among the Titians;
	By Madame de Tornquist in the dark room
	Shifting the candles; Fraulein von Kulp
	Who turned in the hall one hand on the door. Vacant shuttles
	Weave the wind. I have no ghosts
	An old man in a draughty house
	Under a windy knob.

	After such knowledge what forgiveness? Think now
	History has many cunning passages contrived corridors
	And issues deceives with whispering ambitions
	Guides us by vanities. Think now
	She gives when our attention is distracted
	And what she gives gives with such supple confusions
	That the giving famishes the craving. Gives too late
	What’s not believed in or if still believed
	In memory only reconsidered passion. Gives too soon
	Into weak hands what’s thought can be dispensed with
	Till the refusal propagates a fear. Think
	Neither fear nor courage saves us. Unnatural vices
	Are fathered by our heroism. Virtues
	Are forced upon us by our impudent crimes.
	These tears are shaken from the wrath-bearing tree.

	The tiger springs in the new year. Us he devours. Think at last
	We have not reached conclusion when I
	Stiffen in a rented house. Think at last
	I have not made this show purposelessly
	And it is not by any concitation
	Of the backward devils.
	I would meet you upon this honestly.
	I that was near your heart was removed therefrom
	To lose beauty in terror terror in inquisition.
	I have lost my passion: why should I need to keep it
	Since what is kept must be adulterated?
	I have lost my sight smell hearing taste and touch:
	How should I use it for your closer contact?

	These with a thousand small deliberations
	Protract the profit of their chilled delirium
	Excite the membrane when the sense has cooled
	With pungent sauces multiply variety
	In a wilderness of mirrors. What will the spider do
	Suspend its operations will the weevil
	Delay? De Bailhache Fresca Mrs. Cammel whirled
	Beyond the circuit of the shuddering Bear
	In fractured atoms. Gull against the wind in the windy straits
	Of Belle Isle or running on the Horn
	White feathers in the snow the Gulf claims
	And an old man driven by the Trades
	To a sleepy corner.

	Tenants of the house
	Thoughts of a dry brain in a dry season.



19. THE HIPPOPOTAMUS

	_Similiter et omnes revereantur Diaconos ut
	mandatum Jesu Christi; et Episcopum ut Jesum
	Christum existentem filium Patris; Presbyteros
	autem ut concilium Dei et conjunctionem
	Apostolorum. Sine his Ecclesia non vocatur; de
	quibus suadeo vos sic habeo.

	S. IGNATII AD TRALLIANOS.

	And when this epistle is read among you cause
	that it be read also in the church of the
	Laodiceans._


	The broad-backed hippopotamus
	Rests on his belly in the mud;
	Although he seems so firm to us
	He is merely flesh and blood.

	Flesh-and-blood is weak and frail
	Susceptible to nervous shock;
	While the True Church can never fail
	For it is based upon a rock.

	The hippo’s feeble steps may err
	In compassing material ends
	While the True Church need never stir
	To gather in its dividends.

	The ’potamus can never reach
	The mango on the mango-tree;
	But fruits of pomegranate and peach
	Refresh the Church from over sea.

	At mating time the hippo’s voice
	Betrays inflexions hoarse and odd
	But every week we hear rejoice
	The Church at being one with God.

	The hippopotamus’s day
	Is passed in sleep; at night he hunts;
	God works in a mysterious way-
	The Church can sleep and feed at once.

	I saw the ’potamus take wing
	Ascending from the damp savannas
	And quiring angels round him sing
	The praise of God in loud hosannas.

	Blood of the Lamb shall wash him clean
	And him shall heavenly arms enfold
	Among the saints he shall be seen
	Performing on a harp of gold.

	He shall be washed as white as snow
	By all the martyr’d virgins kiss
	While the True Church remains below
	Wrapt in the old miasmal mist.



20. THE HOLLOW MEN

	I.

	_Mistah Kurtz-he dead
	A penny for the Old Guy_



	We are the hollow men
	We are the stuffed men
	Leaning together
	Headpiece filled with straw. Alas!
	Our dried voices when
	We whisper together
	Are quiet and meaningless
	As wind in dry grass
	Or rats’ feet over broken glass
	In our dry cellar

	Shape without form shade without colour
	Paralysed force gesture without motion;

	Those who have crossed
	With direct eyes to death’s other Kingdom
	Remember us-if at all-not as lost
	Violent souls but only
	As the hollow men
	The stuffed men.


	II.

	Eyes I dare not meet in dreams
	In death’s dream kingdom
	These do not appear:
	There the eyes are
	Sunlight on a broken column
	There is a tree swinging
	And voices are
	In the wind’s singing
	More distant and more solemn
	Than a fading star.

	Let me be no nearer
	In death’s dream kingdom
	Let me also wear
	Such deliberate disguises
	Rat’s coat crowskin crossed staves
	In a field
	Behaving as the wind behaves
	No nearer-

	Not that final meeting
	In the twilight kingdom


	III.

	This is the dead land
	This is cactus land
	Here the stone images
	Are raised here they receive
	The supplication of a dead man’s hand
	Under the twinkle of a fading star.

	Is it like this
	In death’s other kingdom
	Waking alone
	At the hour when we are
	Trembling with tenderness
	Lips that would kiss
	Form prayers to broken stone.


	IV.

	The eyes are not here
	There are no eyes here
	In this valley of dying stars
	In this hollow valley
	This broken jaw of our lost kingdoms

	In this last of meeting places
	We grope together
	And avoid speech
	Gathered on this beach of the tumid river

	Sightless unless
	The eyes reappear
	As the perpetual star
	Multifoliate rose
	Of death’s twilight kingdom
	The hope only
	Of empty men.


	V.

	Here we go round the prickly pear
	Prickly pear prickly pear
	Here we go round the prickly pear
	At five o’clock in the morning.

	Between the idea
	And the reality
	Between the motion
	And the act
	Falls the Shadow
	For Thine is the Kingdom

	Between the conception
	And the creation
	Between the emotion
	And the response
	Falls the Shadow
	Life is very long

	Between the desire
	And the spasm
	Between the potency
	And the existence
	Between the essence
	And the descent
	Falls the Shadow
	For Thine is the Kingdom

	For Thine is
	Life is
	For Thine is the

	This is the way the world ends
	This is the way the world ends
	This is the way the world ends
	Not with a bang but a whimper.



21. HYSTERIA

	As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her
	laughter and being part of it, until her teeth were
	only accidental stars with a talent for squad-drill. I
	was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at each momentary
	recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her
	throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An
	elderly waiter with trembling hands was hurriedly
	spreading a pink and white checked cloth over the rusty
	green iron table, saying: “If the lady and gentleman
	wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and
	gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden . . .” I
	decided that if the shaking of her breasts could be
	stopped, some of the fragments of the afternoon might
	be collected, and I concentrated my attention with
	careful subtlety to this end.



22. THE JOURNEY OF THE MAGI

	A cold coming we had of it,
	Just the worst time of the year
	For a journey, and such a long journey:
	The ways deep and the weather sharp,
	The very dead of winter.
	And the camels galled, sorefooted, refractory,
	Lying down in the melting snow.
	There were times we regretted
	The summer palaces on slopes, the terraces,
	And the silken girls bringing sherbet.
	Then the camel men cursing and grumbling
	and running away, and wanting their liquor and women,
	And the night-fires going out, and the lack of shelters,
	And the cities hostile and the towns unfriendly
	And the villages dirty and charging high prices:
	A hard time we had of it.
	At the end we preferred to travel all night,
	Sleeping in snatches,
	With the voices singing in our ears, saying
	That this was all folly.

	Then at dawn we came down to a temperate valley,
	Wet, below the snow line, smelling of vegetation;
	With a running stream and a water-mill beating the darkness,
	And three trees on the low sky,
	And an old white horse galloped away in the meadow.
	Then we came to a tavern with vine-leaves over the lintel,
	Six hands at an open door dicing for pieces of silver,
	And feet kicking the empty wine-skins.
	But there was no information, and so we continued
	And arriving at evening, not a moment too soon
	Finding the place; it was (you might say) satisfactory.

	All this was a long time ago, I remember,
	And I would do it again, but set down
	This set down
	This: were we led all that way for
	Birth or Death? There was a Birth, certainly
	We had evidence and no doubt. I had seen birth and death,
	But had thought they were different; this Birth was
	Hard and bitter agony for us, like Death, our death.
	We returned to our places, these Kingdoms,
	But no longer at ease here, in the old dispensation,
	With an alien people clutching their gods.
	I should be glad of another death.



23. LA FIGLIA CHE PIANGE

	_O quam te memorem Virgo . . ._


	Stand on the highest pavement of the stair--
	Lean on a garden urn--
	Weave weave the sunlight in your hair--
	Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise--
	Fling them to the ground and turn
	With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
	But weave weave the sunlight in your hair.

	So I would have had him leave
	So I would have had her stand and grieve
	So he would have left
	As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised
	As the mind deserts the body it has used.
	I should find
	Some way incomparably light and deft
	Some way we both should understand
	Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand.

	She turned away but with the autumn weather
	Compelled my imagination many days
	Many days and many hours:
	Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
	And I wonder how they should have been together!
	I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
	Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
	The troubled midnight and the noon’s repose.



24. LITTLE GIDDING

	I

	Midwinter spring is its own season
	Sempiternal though sodden towards sundown,
	Suspended in time, between pole and tropic.
	When the short day is brightest, with frost and fire,
	The brief sun flames the ice, on pond and ditches,
	In windless cold that is the heart’s heat,
	Reflecting in a watery mirror
	A glare that is blindness in the early afternoon.
	And glow more intense than blaze of branch, or brazier,
	Stirs the dumb spirit: no wind, but pentecostal fire
	In the dark time of the year. Between melting and freezing
	The soul’s sap quivers. There is no earth smell
	Or smell of living thing. This is the spring time
	But not in time’s covenant. Now the hedgerow
	Is blanched for an hour with transitory blossom
	Of snow, a bloom more sudden
	Than that of summer, neither budding nor fading,
	Not in the scheme of generation.
	Where is the summer, the unimaginable
	Zero summer?

	If you came this way,
	Taking the route you would be likely to take
	From the place you would be likely to come from,
	If you came this way in may time, you would find the hedges
	White again, in May, with voluptuary sweetness.
	It would be the same at the end of the journey,
	If you came at night like a broken king,
	If you came by day not knowing what you came for,
	It would be the same, when you leave the rough road
	And turn behind the pig-sty to the dull facade
	And the tombstone. And what you thought you came for
	Is only a shell, a husk of meaning
	From which the purpose breaks only when it is fulfilled
	If at all. Either you had no purpose
	Or the purpose is beyond the end you figured
	And is altered in fulfilment. There are other places
	Which also are the world’s end, some at the sea jaws,
	Or over a dark lake, in a desert or a city--
	But this is the nearest, in place and time,
	Now and in England.

	If you came this way,
	Taking any route, starting from anywhere,
	At any time or at any season,
	It would always be the same: you would have to put off
	Sense and notion. You are not here to verify,
	Instruct yourself, or inform curiosity
	Or carry report. You are here to kneel
	Where prayer has been valid. And prayer is more
	Than an order of words, the conscious occupation
	Of the praying mind, or the sound of the voice praying.
	And what the dead had no speech for, when living,
	They can tell you, being dead: the communication
	Of the dead is tongued with fire beyond the language of the living.
	Here, the intersection of the timeless moment
	Is England and nowhere. Never and always.


	II

	Ash on and old man’s sleeve
	Is all the ash the burnt roses leave.
	Dust in the air suspended
	Marks the place where a story ended.
	Dust inbreathed was a house--
	The walls, the wainscot and the mouse,
	The death of hope and despair,
	This is the death of air.

	There are flood and drouth
	Over the eyes and in the mouth,
	Dead water and dead sand
	Contending for the upper hand.
	The parched eviscerate soil
	Gapes at the vanity of toil,
	Laughs without mirth.
	This is the death of earth.

	Water and fire succeed
	The town, the pasture and the weed.
	Water and fire deride
	The sacrifice that we denied.
	Water and fire shall rot
	The marred foundations we forgot,
	Of sanctuary and choir.
	This is the death of water and fire.

	In the uncertain hour before the morning
	Near the ending of interminable night
	At the recurrent end of the unending
	After the dark dove with the flickering tongue
	Had passed below the horizon of his homing
	While the dead leaves still rattled on like tin
	Over the asphalt where no other sound was
	Between three districts whence the smoke arose
	I met one walking, loitering and hurried
	As if blown towards me like the metal leaves
	Before the urban dawn wind unresisting.
	And as I fixed upon the down-turned face
	That pointed scrutiny with which we challenge
	The first-met stranger in the waning dusk
	I caught the sudden look of some dead master
	Whom I had known, forgotten, half recalled
	Both one and many; in the brown baked features
	The eyes of a familiar compound ghost
	Both intimate and unidentifiable.
	So I assumed a double part, and cried
	And heard another’s voice cry: ‘What! are you here?’
	Although we were not. I was still the same,
	Knowing myself yet being someone other--
	And he a face still forming; yet the words sufficed
	To compel the recognition they preceded.
	And so, compliant to the common wind,
	Too strange to each other for misunderstanding,
	In concord at this intersection time
	Of meeting nowhere, no before and after,
	We trod the pavement in a dead patrol.
	I said: ‘The wonder that I feel is easy,
	Yet ease is cause of wonder. Therefore speak:
	I may not comprehend, may not remember.’
	And he: ‘I am not eager to rehearse
	My thoughts and theory which you have forgotten.
	These things have served their purpose: let them be.
	So with your own, and pray they be forgiven
	By others, as I pray you to forgive
	Both bad and good. Last season’s fruit is eaten
	And the fullfed beast shall kick the empty pail.
	For last year’s words belong to last year’s language
	And next year’s words await another voice.
	But, as the passage now presents no hindrance
	To the spirit unappeased and peregrine
	Between two worlds become much like each other,
	So I find words I never thought to speak
	In streets I never thought I should revisit
	When I left my body on a distant shore.
	Since our concern was speech, and speech impelled us
	To purify the dialect of the tribe
	And urge the mind to aftersight and foresight,
	Let me disclose the gifts reserved for age
	To set a crown upon your lifetime’s effort.
	First, the cold friction of expiring sense
	Without enchantment, offering no promise
	But bitter tastelessness of shadow fruit
	As body and soul begin to fall asunder.
	Second, the conscious impotence of rage
	At human folly, and the laceration
	Of laughter at what ceases to amuse.
	And last, the rending pain of re-enactment
	Of all that you have done, and been; the shame
	Of motives late revealed, and the awareness
	Of things ill done and done to others’ harm
	Which once you took for exercise of virtue.
	Then fools’ approval stings, and honour stains.
	From wrong to wrong the exasperated spirit
	Proceeds, unless restored by that refining fire
	Where you must move in measure, like a dancer.’
	The day was breaking. In the disfigured street
	He left me, with a kind of valediction,
	And faded on the blowing of the horn.


	III

	There are three conditions which often look alike
	Yet differ completely, flourish in the same hedgerow:
	Attachment to self and to things and to persons, detachment
	From self and from things and from persons; and, growing between them, indifference
	Which resembles the others as death resembles life,
	Being between two lives--unflowering, between
	The live and the dead nettle. This is the use of memory:
	For liberation--not less of love but expanding
	Of love beyond desire, and so liberation
	From the future as well as the past. Thus, love of a country
	Begins as attachment to our own field of action
	And comes to find that action of little importance
	Though never indifferent. History may be servitude,
	History may be freedom. See, now they vanish,
	The faces and places, with the self which, as it could, loved them,
	To become renewed, transfigured, in another pattern.

	Sin is Behovely, but
	All shall be well, and
	All manner of thing shall be well.
	If I think, again, of this place,
	And of people, not wholly commendable,
	Of no immediate kin or kindness,
	But of some peculiar genius,
	All touched by a common genius,
	United in the strife which divided them;
	If I think of a king at nightfall,
	Of three men, and more, on the scaffold
	And a few who died forgotten
	In other places, here and abroad,
	And of one who died blind and quiet
	Why should we celebrate
	These dead men more than the dying?
	It is not to ring the bell backward
	Nor is it an incantation
	To summon the spectre of a Rose.
	We cannot revive old factions
	We cannot restore old policies
	Or follow an antique drum.
	These men, and those who opposed them
	And those whom they opposed
	Accept the constitution of silence
	And are folded in a single party.
	Whatever we inherit from the fortunate
	We have taken from the defeated
	What they had to leave us--a symbol:
	A symbol perfected in death.
	And all shall be well and
	All manner of thing shall be well
	By the purification of the motive
	In the ground of our beseeching.


	IV

	The dove descending breaks the air
	With flame of incandescent terror
	Of which the tongues declare
	The one discharge from sin and error.
	The only hope, or else despair
	Lies in the choice of pyre of pyre--
	To be redeemed from fire by fire.

	Who then devised the torment? Love.
	Love is the unfamiliar Name
	Behind the hands that wove
	The intolerable shirt of flame
	Which human power cannot remove.
	We only live, only suspire
	Consumed by either fire or fire.


	V

	What we call the beginning is often the end
	And to make and end is to make a beginning.
	The end is where we start from. And every phrase
	And sentence that is right (where every word is at home,
	Taking its place to support the others,
	The word neither diffident nor ostentatious,
	An easy commerce of the old and the new,
	The common word exact without vulgarity,
	The formal word precise but not pedantic,
	The complete consort dancing together)
	Every phrase and every sentence is an end and a beginning,
	Every poem an epitaph. And any action
	Is a step to the block, to the fire, down the sea’s throat
	Or to an illegible stone: and that is where we start.
	We die with the dying:
	See, they depart, and we go with them.
	We are born with the dead:
	See, they return, and bring us with them.
	The moment of the rose and the moment of the yew-tree
	Are of equal duration. A people without history
	Is not redeemed from time, for history is a pattern
	Of timeless moments. So, while the light fails
	On a winter’s afternoon, in a secluded chapel
	History is now and England.

	With the drawing of this Love and the voice of this Calling

	We shall not cease from exploration
	And the end of all our exploring
	Will be to arrive where we started
	And know the place for the first time.
	Through the unknown, unremembered gate
	When the last of earth left to discover
	Is that which was the beginning;
	At the source of the longest river
	The voice of the hidden waterfall
	And the children in the apple-tree
	Not known, because not looked for
	But heard, half-heard, in the stillness
	Between two waves of the sea.
	Quick now, here, now, always--
	A condition of complete simplicity
	(Costing not less than everything)
	And all shall be well and
	All manner of thing shall be well
	When the tongues of flame are in-folded
	Into the crowned knot of fire
	And the fire and the rose are one.



25. THE LOVE SONG OF J. ALFRED PRUFROCK

	_S’io credesse che mia risposta fosse
	A persona che mai tornasse al mondo
	Questa fiamma staria senza piu scosse.
	Ma perciocche giammai di questo fondo
	Non torno vivo alcun s’i’odo il vero
	Senza tema d’infamia ti rispondo._


	Let us go then you and I
	When the evening is spread out against the sky
	Like a patient etherized upon a table;
	Let us go through certain half-deserted streets
	The muttering retreats
	Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
	And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
	Streets that follow like a tedious argument
	Of insidious intent
	To lead you to an overwhelming question . . .
	Oh do not ask “What is it?”
	Let us go and make our visit.

	In the room the women come and go
	Talking of Michelangelo.

	The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes
	The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes
	Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening
	Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains
	Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys
	Slipped by the terrace made a sudden leap
	And seeing that it was a soft October night
	Curled once about the house and fell asleep.

	And indeed there will be time
	For the yellow smoke that slides along the street
	Rubbing its back upon the window panes;
	There will be time there will be time
	To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet
	There will be time to murder and create
	And time for all the works and days of hands
	That lift and drop a question on your plate;
	Time for you and time for me
	And time yet for a hundred indecisions
	And for a hundred visions and revisions
	Before the taking of a toast and tea.

	In the room the women come and go
	Talking of Michelangelo.

	And indeed there will be time
	To wonder “Do I dare?“ and “Do I dare?”
	Time to turn back and descend the stair
	With a bald spot in the middle of my hair--
	(They will say: “How his hair is growing thin!“)
	My morning coat my collar mounting firmly to the chin
	My necktie rich and modest but asserted by a simple pin--
	(They will say: “But how his arms and legs are thin!“)
	Do I dare
	Disturb the universe?
	In a minute there is time
	For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.

	For I have known them all already known them all:
	Have known the evenings mornings afternoons
	I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
	I know the voices dying with a dying fall
	Beneath the music from a farther room.
	So how should I presume?

	And I have known the eyes already known them all--
	The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase
	And when I am formulated sprawling on a pin
	When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall
	Then how should I begin
	To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
	And how should I presume?

	And I have known the arms already known them all--
	Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
	(But in the lamplight downed with light brown hair!)
	Is it perfume from a dress
	That makes me so digress?
	Arms that lie along a table or wrap about a shawl.
	And should I then presume?
	And how should I begin?

	. . . . . . . . .

	Shall I say I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
	And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
	Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves leaning out of windows?

	I should have been a pair of ragged claws
	Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.

	. . . . . . . . .

	And the afternoon the evening sleeps so peacefully!
	Smoothed by long fingers
	Asleep. . . tired. . . or it malingers.
	Stretched on the floor here beside you and me.
	Should I after tea and cakes and ices
	Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
	But though I have wept and fasted wept and prayed
	Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter
	I am no prophet--and here’s no great matter;
	I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker
	And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat and snicker
	And in short I was afraid.

	And would it have been worth it after all
	After the cups the marmalade the tea
	Among the porcelain among some talk of you and me
	Would it have been worth while
	To have bitten off the matter with a smile
	To have squeezed the universe into a ball
	To roll it toward some overwhelming question
	To say: “I am Lazarus come from the dead
	Come back to tell you all I shall tell you all“--
	If one settling a pillow by her head
	Should say: “That is not what I meant at all;
	That is not it at all.”

	And would it have been worth it after all
	Would it have been worth while
	After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets
	After the novels after the teacups after the skirts that trail along the
	floor--
	And this and so much more?--
	It is impossible to say just what I mean!
	But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
	Would it have been worth while
	If one settling a pillow or throwing off a shawl
	And turning toward the window should say:
	“That is not it at all
	That is not what I meant at all.”

	. . . . . . . . .

	No! I am not Prince Hamlet nor was meant to be;
	Am an attendant lord one that will do
	To swell a progress start a scene or two
	Advise the prince; no doubt an easy tool
	Deferential glad to be of use
	Politic cautious and meticulous;
	Full of high sentence but a bit obtuse;
	At times indeed almost ridiculous--
	Almost at times the Fool.

	I grow old . . . I grow old . . .
	I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.

	Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?
	I shall wear white flannel trousers and walk upon the beach.
	I have heard the mermaids singing each to each.

	I do not think that they will sing to me.

	I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
	Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
	When the wind blows the water white and black.

	We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
	By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
	Till human voices wake us and we drown.



26. MORNING AT THE WINDOW

	They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
	And along the trampled edges of the street
	I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
	Sprouting despondently at area gates.
	The brown waves of fog toss up to me
	Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
	And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
	An aimless smile that hovers in the air
	And vanishes along the level of the roofs.



27. MR. APOLLINAX

	When Mr. Apollinax visited the United States
	His laughter tinkled among the teacups.
	I thought of Fragilion, that shy figure among the birch-trees,
	And of Priapus in the shrubbery
	Gaping at the lady in the swing.
	In the palace of Mrs. Phlaccus, at Professor Channing-Cheetah’s
	He laughed like an irresponsible foetus.
	His laughter was submarine and profound
	Like the old man of the sea’s
	Hidden under coral islands
	Where worried bodies of drowned men drift down in the green silence,
	Dropping from fingers of surf.
	I looked for the head of Mr. Apollinax rolling under a chair
	Or grinning over a screen
	With seaweed in its hair.
	I heard the beat of centaur’s hoofs over the hard turf
	As his dry and passionate talk devoured the afternoon.
	“He is a charming man”--“But after all what did he mean?“--
	“His pointed ears . . . He must be unbalanced,“--
	“There was something he said that I might have challenged.”
	Of dowager Mrs. Phlaccus, and Professor and Mrs. Cheetah
	I remember a slice of lemon, and a bitten macaroon.



28. MR. ELIOT’S SUNDAY MORNING SERVICE

	Look look master here comes two religious
	caterpillars.
	The Jew of Malta.


	Polyphiloprogenitive
	The sapient sutlers of the Lord
	Drift across the window-panes.
	In the beginning was the Word.

	In the beginning was the Word.
	Superfetation of Greek text inserted here
	And at the mensual turn of time
	Produced enervate Origen.

	A painter of the Umbrian school
	Designed upon a gesso ground
	The nimbus of the Baptized God.
	The wilderness is cracked and browned

	But through the water pale and thin
	Still shine the unoffending feet
	And there above the painter set
	The Father and the Paraclete.


	The sable presbyters approach
	The avenue of penitence;
	The young are red and pustular
	Clutching piaculative pence.

	Under the penitential gates
	Sustained by staring Seraphim
	Where the souls of the devout
	Burn invisible and dim.

	Along the garden-wall the bees
	With hairy bellies pass between
	The staminate and pistilate
	Blest office of the epicene.

	Sweeney shifts from ham to ham
	Stirring the water in his bath.
	The masters of the subtle schools
	Are controversial polymath.



29. O LIGHT INVISIBLE

	Greater Light, we praise Thee for the less;
	The eastern light our spires touch at morning,
	The light that slants upon our western doors at evening.
	The twilight over stagnant pools at batflight,
	Moon light and star light, owl and moth light,
	Glow-worm glowlight on a grassblade.
	Light Invisible, we worship Thee!

	We thank Thee for the lights that we have kindled,
	The light of altar and of sanctuary;
	Small lights of those who meditate at midnight
	And lights directed through the coloured panes of windows
	And light reflected from the polished stone,
	The gilded carven wood, the coloured fresco.
	Our gaze is submarine, our eyes look upward
	And see the light that fractures through unquiet water.
	We see the light but see not whence it comes.
	Light Invisible, we glorify Thee!

	In our rhythm of earthly life we tire of light. We are glad when the day ends, when the play ends;
	  and ecstasy is too much pain.
	We are children quickly tired: children who are up in the night and fall asleep as the rocket
	  is fired; and the day is long for work or play.
	We tire of distraction or concentration, we sleep and are glad to sleep,
	Controlled by the rhythm of blood and the day and the night and the seasons.
	And we must extinguish the candle, put out the light and relight it;
	Forever must quench, forever relight the flame.
	Therefore we thank Thee for our little light, that is dappled with shadow.
	We thank Thee who hast moved us to building, to finding, to forming at the ends of our fingers
	  and beams of our eyes.



30. PORTRAIT OF A LADY

	_Thou hast committed--
	Fornication: but that was in another country
	And besides the wench is dead.
	The Jew of Malta._


	I

	Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
	You have the scene arrange itself--as it will seem to do--
	With “I have saved this afternoon for you“;
	And four wax candles in the darkened room
	Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead
	An atmosphere of Juliet’s tomb
	Prepared for all the things to be said or left unsaid.
	We have been let us say to hear the latest Pole
	Transmit the Preludes through his hair and finger-tips.
	“So intimate this Chopin that I think his soul
	Should be resurrected only among friends
	Some two or three who will not touch the bloom
	That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room.”
	--And so the conversation slips
	Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
	Through attenuated tones of violins
	Mingled with remote cornets
	And begins.

	“You do not know how much they mean to me my friends
	And how how rare and strange it is to find
	In a life composed so much so much of odds and ends
	(For indeed I do not love it . . . you knew? you are not blind!
	How keen you are!)
	To find a friend who has these qualities
	Who has and gives
	Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
	How much it means that I say this to you--
	Without these friendships--life what cauchemar!”
	Among the windings of the violins
	And the ariettes
	Of cracked cornets
	Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
	Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own
	Capricious monotone
	That is at least one definite “false note.”
	--Let us take the air in a tobacco trance
	Admire the monuments
	Discuss the late events
	Correct our watches by the public clocks.
	Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.


	II

	Now that lilacs are in bloom
	She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
	And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
	“Ah my friend you do not know you do not know
	What life is you should hold it in your hands“;
	(Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
	“You let it flow from you you let it flow
	And youth is cruel and has no remorse
	And smiles at situations which it cannot see.”
	I smile of course
	And go on drinking tea.
	“Yet with these April sunsets that somehow recall
	My buried life and Paris in the Spring
	I feel immeasurably at peace and find the world
	To be wonderful and youthful after all.”

	The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
	Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
	“I am always sure that you understand
	My feelings always sure that you feel
	Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.

	You are invulnerable you have no Achilles’ heel.
	You will go on and when you have prevailed
	You can say: at this point many a one has failed.

	But what have I but what have I my friend
	To give you what can you receive from me?
	Only the friendship and the sympathy
	Of one about to reach her journey’s end.

	I shall sit here serving tea to friends. . ..”

	I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
	For what she has said to me?
	You will see me any morning in the park
	Reading the comics and the sporting page.
	Particularly I remark An English countess goes upon the stage.
	A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance
	Another bank defaulter has confessed.
	I keep my countenance I remain self-possessed
	Except when a street piano mechanical and tired
	Reiterates some worn-out common song
	With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
	Recalling things that other people have desired.
	Are these ideas right or wrong?


	III

	The October night comes down; returning as before
	Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
	I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
	And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.

	“And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
	But that’s a useless question.
	You hardly know when you are coming back
	You will find so much to learn.”
	My smile falls heavily among the bric-à-brac.

	“Perhaps you can write to me.”
	My self-possession flares up for a second;
	This is as I had reckoned.

	“I have been wondering frequently of late
	(But our beginnings never know our ends!)
	Why we have not developed into friends.”
	I feel like one who smiles and turning shall remark
	Suddenly his expression in a glass.
	My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.

	“For everybody said so all our friends
	They all were sure our feelings would relate
	So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
	We must leave it now to fate.
	You will write at any rate.
	Perhaps it is not too late.
	I shall sit here serving tea to friends.”

	And I must borrow every changing shape
	To find expression . . . dance dance
	Like a dancing bear
	Cry like a parrot chatter like an ape.
	Let us take the air in a tobacco trance--
	Well! and what if she should die some afternoon
	Afternoon grey and smoky evening yellow and rose;
	Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
	With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
	Doubtful for quite a while
	Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
	Or whether wise or foolish tardy or too soon . . .
	Would she not have the advantage after all?
	This music is successful with a “dying fall”
	Now that we talk of dying--
	And should I have the right to smile?



31. PRELUDES

	I

	The winter evening settles down
	With smell of steaks in passageways.
	Six o’clock.
	The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
	And now a gusty shower wraps
	The grimy scraps
	Of withered leaves about your feet
	And newspapers from vacant lots;
	The showers beat
	On broken blinds and chimney-pots
	And at the corner of the street
	A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.
	And then the lighting of the lamps.


	II

	The morning comes to consciousness
	Of faint stale smells of beer
	From the sawdust-trampled street
	With all its muddy feet that press
	To early coffee-stands.

	With the other masquerades
	That time resumes
	One thinks of all the hands
	That are raising dingy shades
	In a thousand furnished rooms.


	III

	You tossed a blanket from the bed
	You lay upon your back and waited;
	You dozed and watched the night revealing
	The thousand sordid images
	Of which your soul was constituted;
	They flickered against the ceiling.
	And when all the world came back
	And the light crept up between the shutters
	And you heard the sparrows in the gutters
	You had such a vision of the street
	As the street hardly understands;
	Sitting along the bed’s edge where
	You curled the papers from your hair
	Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
	In the palms of both soiled hands.


	IV

	His soul stretched tight across the skies
	That fade behind a city block
	Or trampled by insistent feet
	At four and five and six o’clock;
	And short square fingers stuffing pipes
	And evening newspapers and eyes
	Assured of certain certainties
	The conscience of a blackened street
	Impatient to assume the world.

	I am moved by fancies that are curled
	Around these images and cling:
	The notion of some infinitely gentle
	Infinitely suffering thing.

	Wipe your hand across your mouth and laugh;
	The worlds revolve like ancient women
	Gathering fuel in vacant lots.



32. RHAPSODY ON A WINDY NIGHT

	Twelve o’clock.
	Along the reaches of the street
	Held in a lunar synthesis
	Whispering lunar incantations
	Disolve the floors of memory
	And all its clear relations
	Its divisions and precisions
	Every street lamp that I pass
	Beats like a fatalistic drum
	And through the spaces of the dark
	Midnight shakes the memory
	As a madman shakes a dead geranium.

	Half-past one
	The street lamp sputtered
	The street lamp muttered
	The street lamp said
	“Regard that woman
	Who hesitates toward you in the light of the door
	Which opens on her like a grin.
	You see the border of her dress
	Is torn and stained with sand
	And you see the corner of her eye
	Twists like a crooked pin.”

	The memory throws up high and dry
	A crowd of twisted things;
	A twisted branch upon the beach
	Eaten smooth and polished
	As if the world gave up
	The secret of its skeleton
	Stiff and white.
	A broken spring in a factory yard
	Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
	Hard and curled and ready to snap.

	Half-past two
	The street-lamp said
	“Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter
	Slips out its tongue
	And devours a morsel of rancid butter.”
	So the hand of the child automatic
	Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along
	the quay.
	I could see nothing behind that child’s eye.
	I have seen eyes in the street
	Trying to peer through lighted shutters
	And a crab one afternoon in a pool
	An old crab with barnacles on his back
	Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.

	Half-past three
	The lamp sputtered
	The lamp muttered in the dark.

	The lamp hummed:
	“Regard the moon
	La lune ne garde aucune rancune
	She winks a feeble eye
	She smiles into corners.
	She smooths the hair of the grass.
	The moon has lost her memory.
	A washed-out smallpox cracks her face
	Her hand twists a paper rose
	That smells of dust and old Cologne
	She is alone With all the old nocturnal smells
	That cross and cross across her brain.
	The reminiscence comes
	Of sunless dry geraniums
	And dust in crevices
	Smells of chestnuts in the streets
	And female smells in shuttered rooms
	And cigarettes in corridors
	And cocktail smells in bars.”

	The lamp said
	“Four o’clock
	Here is the number on the door.
	Memory!
	You have the key
	The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair
	Mount.
	The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall
	Put your shoes at the door sleep prepare for life.”

	The last twist of the knife.



33. A SILENT CITY

	The silence of the city, how awful at midnight!
	Mute as the battlements and crags and towers
	That Fancy makes in the clouds, yea, as mute
	As the moonlight that sleeps on the steady vanes.

	The cell of a departed anchoret,
	His skeleton and flitting ghost are there,
	Sole tenants--
	And all the city silent as the moon
	That steeps in quiet light the steady vanes
	Of her huge temples.



34. A SONG FOR SIMEON

	Lord, the Roman hyacinths are blooming in bowls and
	The winter sun creeps by the snow hills;
	The stubborn season has made stand.
	My life is light, waiting for the death wind,
	Like a feather on the back of my hand.
	Dust in sunlight and memory in corners
	Wait for the wind that chills towards the dead land.

	Grant us they peace.
	I have walked many years in this city,
	Kept faith and fast, provided for the poor,
	have given and taken honour and ease.
	There went never any rejected from my door.
	Who shall remember my house, where shall live my children’s children?
	When the time of sorrow is come?
	They will take to the goat’s path, and the fox’s home,
	Fleeing from foreign faces and the foreign swords.

	Before the time of cords and scourges and lamentation
	Grant us thy peace.
	Before the stations of the mountain of desolation,
	Before the certain hour of maternal sorrow,
	Now at this birth season of decease,
	Let the Infant, the still unspeaking and unspoken Word,
	Grant Israel’s consolation
	To one who has eighty years and no to-morrow.

	According to thy word.
	They shall praise Thee and suffer in every generation
	With glory and derision,
	Light upon light, mounting the saints’ stair.
	Not for me the martyrdom, the ecstasy of thought and prayer,
	Not for me the ultimate vision.
	Grant me thy peace.
	(And a sword shall pierce thy heart, Thine also).
	I am tired with my own life and the lives of those after me,
	I am dying in my own death and the deaths of those after me.
	Let they servant depart,
	Having seen thy salvation.



35. SWEENEY AMONG THE NIGHTINGALES

	Apeneck Sweeney spreads his knees
	Letting his arms hang down to laugh,
	The zebra stripes along his jaw
	Swelling to maculate giraffe.

	The circles of the stormy moon
	Slide westward toward the River Plate,
	Death and the Raven drift above
	And Sweeney guards the hornèd gate.

	Gloomy Orion and the Dog
	Are veiled; and hushed the shrunken seas;
	The person in the Spanish cape
	Tries to sit on Sweeney’s knees

	Slips and pulls the table cloth
	Overturns a coffee-cup,
	Reorganized upon the floor
	She yawns and draws a stocking up;

	The silent man in mocha brown
	Sprawls at the window-sill and gapes;
	The waiter brings in oranges
	Bananas figs and hothouse grapes;

	The silent vertebrate in brown
	Contracts and concentrates, withdraws;
	Rachel née Rabinovitch
	Tears at the grapes with murderous paws;

	She and the lady in the cape
	Are suspect, thought to be in league;
	Therefore the man with heavy eyes
	Declines the gambit, shows fatigue,

	Leaves the room and reappears
	Outside the window, leaning in,
	Branches of wisteria
	Circumscribe a golden grin;

	The host with someone indistinct
	Converses at the door apart,
	The nightingales are singing near
	The Convent of the Sacred Heart,

	And sang within the bloody wood
	When Agamemnon cried aloud,
	And let their liquid droppings fall
	To stain the stiff dishonoured shroud.



36. SWEENEY ERECT

	_And the trees about me,
	Let them be dry and leafless; let the rocks
	Groan with continual surges; and behind me
	Make all a desolation. Look, look, wenches!_


	Paint me a cavernous waste shore
	Cast in the unstilted Cyclades,
	Paint me the bold anfractuous rocks
	Faced by the snarled and yelping seas.

	Display me Aeolus above
	Reviewing the insurgent gales
	Which tangle Ariadne’s hair
	And swell with haste the perjured sails.

	Morning stirs the feet and hands
	(Nausicaa and Polypheme),
	Gesture of orang-outang
	Rises from the sheets in steam.

	This withered root of knots of hair
	Slitted below and gashed with eyes,
	This oval O cropped out with teeth:
	The sickle motion from the thighs

	Jackknifes upward at the knees
	Then straightens out from heel to hip
	Pushing the framework of the bed
	And clawing at the pillow slip.

	Sweeney addressed full length to shave
	Broadbottomed, pink from nape to base,
	Knows the female temperament
	And wipes the suds around his face.

	(The lengthened shadow of a man
	Is history, said Emerson
	Who had not seen the silhouette
	Of Sweeney straddled in the sun).

	Tests the razor on his leg
	Waiting until the shriek subsides.
	The epileptic on the bed
	Curves backward, clutching at her sides.

	The ladies of the corridor
	Find themselves involved, disgraced,
	Call witness to their principles
	And deprecate the lack of taste

	Observing that hysteria
	Might easily be misunderstood;
	Mrs. Turner intimates
	It does the house no sort of good.

	But Doris, towelled from the bath,
	Enters padding on broad feet,
	Bringing sal volatile
	And a glass of brandy neat.



37. WHAT THE THUNDER SAID

	After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
	After the frosty silence in the gardens
	After the agony in stony places
	The shouting and the crying
	Prison and palace and reverberation
	Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
	He who was living is now dead
	We who were living are now dying
	With a little patience

	Here is no water but only rock
	Rock and no water and the sandy road
	The road winding above among the mountains
	Which are mountains of rock without water
	If there were water we should stop and drink
	Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think
	Sweat is dry and feet are in the sand
	If there were only water amongst the rock
	Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit
	Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit
	There is not even silence in the mountains
	But dry sterile thunder without rain
	There is not even solitude in the mountains
	But red sullen faces sneer and snarl
	From doors of mudcracked houses
	If there were water
	And no rock
	If there were rock
	And also water
	And water
	A spring
	A pool among the rock
	If there were the sound of water only
	Not the cicada
	And dry grass singing
	But sound of water over a rock
	Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees
	Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
	But there is no water

	Who is the third who walks always beside you?
	When I count there are only you and I together
	But when I look ahead up the white road
	There is always another one walking beside you
	Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle hooded
	I do not know whether a man or a woman
	--But who is that on the other side of you?

	What is that sound high in the air
	Murmur of maternal lamentation
	Who are those hooded hordes swarming
	Over endless plains stumbling in cracked earth
	Ringed by the flat horizon only
	What is the city over the mountains
	Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air
	Falling towers
	Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
	Vienna London
	Unreal

	A woman drew her long black hair out tight
	And fiddled whisper music on those strings
	And bats with baby faces in the violet light
	Whistled and beat their wings
	And crawled head downward down a blackened wall
	And upside down in air were towers
	Tolling reminiscent bells that kept the hours
	And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells.

	In this decayed hole among the mountains
	In the faint moonlight the grass is singing
	Over the tumbled graves about the chapel
	There is the empty chapel only the wind’s home.
	It has no windows and the door swings
	Dry bones can harm no one.
	Only a cock stood on the rooftree
	Co co rico co co rico
	In a flash of lightning. Then a damp gust
	Bringing rain

	Ganga was sunken and the limp leaves
	Waited for rain while the black clouds
	Gathered far distant over Himavant.
	The jungle crouched humped in silence.
	Then spoke the thunder
	DA
	_Datta:_ what have we given?
	My friend blood shaking my heart
	The awful daring of a moment’s surrender
	Which an age of prudence can never retract
	By this and this only we have existed
	Which is not to be found in our obituaries
	Or in memories draped by the beneficent spider
	Or under seals broken by the lean solicitor
	In our empty rooms
	DA
	_Dayadhvam:_ I have heard the key
	Turn in the door once and turn once only
	We think of the key each in his prison
	Thinking of the key each confirms a prison
	Only at nightfall aetherial rumours
	Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus
	DA
	_Damyata:_ The boat responded
	Gaily to the hand expert with sail and oar
	The sea was calm your heart would have responded
	Gaily when invited beating obedient
	To controlling hands

	I sat upon the shore
	Fishing with the arid plain behind me
	Shall I at least set my lands in order?
	London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
	_Poi s’ascose nel foco che gli affina
	Quando fiam ceu chelidon_ -- O swallow swallow
	_Le Prince d’Aquitaine à la tour abolie_
	These fragments I have shored against my ruins
	Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo’s mad againe.
	Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.
	Shantih shantih shantih



38. WHISPERS OF IMMORTALITY

	Webster was much possessed by death
	And saw the skull beneath the skin;
	And breastless creatures under ground
	Leaned backward with a lipless grin.

	Daffodil bulbs instead of balls
	Stared from the sockets of the eyes!
	He knew that thought clings round dead limbs
	Tightening its lusts and luxuries.

	Donne I suppose was such another
	Who found no substitute for sense;
	To seize and clutch and penetrate
	Expert beyond experience

	He knew the anguish of the marrow
	The ague of the skeleton;
	No contact possible to flesh
	Allayed the fever of the bone.


	Grishkin is nice: her Russian eye
	Is underlined for emphasis;
	Uncorseted her friendly bust
	Gives promise of pneumatic bliss.

	The couched Brazilian jaguar
	Compels the scampering marmoset
	With subtle effluence of cat;
	Grishkin has a maisonette;

	The sleek Brazilian jaguar
	Does not in its arboreal gloom
	Distil so rank a feline smell
	As Grishkin in a drawing-room.

	And even the Abstract Entities
	Circumambulate her charm;
	But our lot crawls between dry ribs
	To keep our metaphysics warm.
