*** George Eliot (1819 - 1888)


1. BLUE WINGS

	Warm whisp’ring through the slender olive leaves
	Came to me a gentle sound,
	Whis’pring of a secret found
	In the clear sunshine ‘mid the golden sheaves:
	
	Said it was sleeping for me in the morn,
	Called it gladness, called it joy,
	Drew me on ‘Come hither, boy.’
	To where the blue wings rested on the corn.
	
	I thought the gentle sound had whispered true
	Thought the little heaven mine,
	Leaned to clutch the thing divine,
	And saw the blue wings melt within the blue!


2. THE CHOIR INVISIBLE

	Oh, may I join the choir invisible
	Of those immortal dead who live again
	In minds made better by their presence; live
	In pulses stirred to generosity,
	In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
	For miserable aims that end with self,
	In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
	And with their mild persistence urge men’s search
	To vaster issues. So to live is heaven:
	To make undying music in the world,
	Breathing a beauteous order that controls
	With growing sway the growing life of man.
	So we inherit that sweet purity
	For which we struggled, failed, and agonized
	With widening retrospect that bred despair.
	Rebellious flesh that would not be subdued,
	A vicious parent shaming still its child,
	Poor anxious penitence, is quick dissolved;
	Its discords, quenched by meeting harmonies,
	Die in the large and charitable air,
	And all our rarer, better, truer self
	That sobbed religiously in yearning song,
	That watched to ease the burden of the world,
	Laboriously tracing what must be,
	And what may yet be better,--saw within
	A worthier image for the sanctuary,
	And shaped it forth before the multitude,
	Divinely human, raising worship so
	To higher reverence more mixed with love,--
	That better self shall live till human Time
	Shall fold its eyelids, and the human sky
	Be gathered like a scroll within the tomb
	Unread forever. This is life to come,--
	Which martyred men have made more glorious
	For us who strive to follow. May I reach
	That purest heaven,--be to other souls
	The cup of strength in some great agony,
	Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love,
	Beget the smiles that have no cruelty,
	Be the sweet presence of a good diffused,
	And in diffusion ever more intense!
	So shall I join the choir invisible
	Whose music is the gladness of the world.


3. COUNT THAT DAY LOST

	If you sit down at set of sun 
	And count the acts that you have done, 
	And, counting, find 
	One self-denying deed, one word 
	That eased the heart of him who heard, 
	One glance most kind 
	That fell like sunshine where it went-- 
	Then you may count that day well spent. 
	
	But if, through all the livelong day, 
	You’ve cheered no heart, by yea or nay-- 
	If, through it all 
	You’ve nothing done that you can trace 
	That brought the sunshine to one face-- 
	No act most small 
	That helped some soul and nothing cost-- 
	Then count that day as worse than lost.


4. THE DEATH OF MOSES

	Moses, who spake with God as with his friend,
	And ruled his people with the twofold power
	Of wisdom that can dare and still be meek,
	Was writing his last word, the sacred name
	Unutterable of that Eternal Will
	Which was and is and evermore shall be.
	Yet was his task not finished, for the flock
	Needed its shepherd and the life-taught sage
	Leaves no successor; but to chosen men,
	The rescuers and guides of Israel,
	A death was given called the Death of Grace,
	Which freed them from the burden of the flesh
	But left them rulers of the multitude
	And loved companions of the lonely. This
	Was God’s last gift to Moses, this the hour
	When soul must part from self and be but soul.
	
	God spake to Gabriel, the messenger
	Of mildest death that draws the parting life
	Gently, as when a little rosy child
	Lifts up its lips from off the bowl of milk
	And so draws forth a curl that dipped its gold
	In the soft white—thus Gabriel draws the soul.
	“Go bring the soul of Moses unto me!”
	And the awe-stricken angel answered, “Lord,
	How shall I dare to take his life who lives
	Sole of his kind, not to be likened once
	In all the generations of the earth?”
	
	Then God called Michaël, him of pensive brow
	Snow-vest and flaming sword, who knows and acts:
	“Go bring the spirit of Moses unto me!”
	But Michaël with such grief as angels feel,
	Loving the mortals whom they succour, pled:
	“Almighty, spare me; it was I who taught
	Thy servant Moses; he is part of me
	As I of thy deep secrets, knowing them.”
	
	Then God called Zamaël, the terrible,
	The angel of fierce death, of agony
	That comes in battle and in pestilence
	Remorseless, sudden or with lingering throes.
	And Zamaël, his raiment and broad wings
	Blood-tinctured, the dark lustre of his eyes
	Shrouding the red, fell like the gathering night
	Before the prophet. But that radiance
	Won from the heavenly presence in the mount
	Gleamed on the prophet’s brow and dazzling pierced
	Its conscious opposite: the angel turned
	His murky gaze aloof and inly said:
	“An angel this, deathless to angel’s stroke.”
	
	But Moses felt the subtly nearing dark:—
	“Who art thou? and what wilt thou?” Zamaël then:
	“I am God’s reaper; through the fields of life
	I gather ripened and unripened souls
	Both willing and unwilling. And I come
	Now to reap thee.” But Moses cried,
	Firm as a seer who waits the trusted sign:
	“Reap thou the fruitless plant and common herb—
	Not him who from the womb was sanctified
	To teach the law of purity and love.”
	And Zamaël baffled from his errand fled.
	
	But Moses, pausing, in the air serene
	Heard now that mystic whisper, far yet near,
	The all-penetrating Voice, that said to him,
	“Moses, the hour is come and thou must die.”
	“Lord, I obey; but thou rememberest
	How thou, Ineffable, didst take me once
	Within thy orb of light untouched by death.”
	Then the voice answered, “Be no more afraid:
	With me shall be thy death and burial.”
	So Moses waited, ready now to die.
	
	And the Lord came, invisible as a thought,
	Three angels gleaming on his secret track,
	Prince Michaël, Zamaël, Gabriel, charged to guard
	The soul-forsaken body as it fell
	And bear it to the hidden sepulchre
	Denied for ever to the search of man.
	And the Voice said to Moses: “Close thine eyes.”
	He closed them. “Lay thine hand upon thine heart,
	And draw thy feet together.” He obeyed.
	And the Lord said, “O spirit! child of mine!
	A hundred years and twenty thou hast dwelt
	Within this tabernacle wrought of clay.
	This is the end: come forth and flee to heaven.”
	
	But the grieved soul with plaintive pleading cried,
	“I love this body with a clinging love:
	The courage fails me, Lord, to part from it.”
	
	“O child, come forth! for thou shalt dwell with me
	About the immortal throne where seraphs joy
	In growing vision and in growing love.”
	
	Yet hesitating, fluttering, like the bird
	With young wing weak and dubious, the soul
	Stayed. But behold! upon the death-dewed lips
	A kiss descended, pure, unspeakable—
	The bodiless Love without embracing Love
	That lingered in the body, drew it forth
	With heavenly strength and carried it to heaven.
	
	But now beneath the sky the watchers all,
	Angels that keep the homes of Israel
	Or on high purpose wander o’er the world
	Leading the Gentiles, felt a dark eclipse:
	The greatest ruler among men was gone.
	And from the westward sea was heard a wail,
	A dirge as from the isles of Javanim,
	Crying, “Who now is left upon the earth
	Like him to teach the right and smite the wrong?”
	And from the East, far o’er the Syrian waste,
	Came slowlier, sadlier, the answering dirge:
	“No prophet like him lives or shall arise
	In Israel or the world for evermore.”
	
	But Israel waited, looking toward the mount,
	Till with the deepening eve the elders came
	Saying, “His burial is hid with God.
	We stood far off and saw the angels lift
	His corpse aloft until they seemed a star
	That burnt itself away within the sky.”
	
	The people answered with mute orphaned gaze
	Looking for what had vanished evermore.
	Then through the gloom without them and within
	The spirit’s shaping light, mysterious speech,
	Invisible Will wrought clear in sculptured sound,
	The thought-begotten daughter of the voice,
	Thrilled on their listening sense: “He has no tomb.
	He dwells not with you dead, but lives as Law.”


5. I AM LONELY

	The world is great: the birds all fly from me, 
	The stars are golden fruit upon a tree 
	All out of reach: my little sister went, 
	And I am lonely. 
	
	The world is great: I tried to mount the hill 
	Above the pines, where the light lies so still, 
	But it rose higher: little Lisa went 
	And I am lonely. 
	
	The world is great: the wind comes rushing by. 
	I wonder where it comes from; sea birds cry 
	And hurt my heart: my little sister went, 
	And I am lonely. 
	
	The world is great: the people laugh and talk, 
	And make loud holiday: how fast they walk! 
	I’m lame, they push me: little Lisa went, 
	And I am lonely.


6. I GRANT YOU AMPLE LEAVE

	“I grant you ample leave
	To use the hoary formula ‘I am’
	Naming the emptiness where thought is not;
	But fill the void with definition, ‘I’
	Will be no more a datum than the words
	You link false inference with, the ‘Since’ & ‘so’
	That, true or not, make up the atom-whirl.
	Resolve your ‘Ego’, it is all one web
	With vibrant ether clotted into worlds:
	Your subject, self, or self-assertive ‘I’
	Turns nought but object, melts to molecules,
	Is stripped from naked Being with the rest
	Of those rag-garments named the Universe.
	Or if, in strife to keep your ‘Ego’ strong
	You make it weaver of the etherial light,
	Space, motion, solids & the dream of Time--
	Why, still ‘tis Being looking from the dark,
	The core, the centre of your consciousness,
	That notes your bubble-world: sense, pleasure, pain,
	What are they but a shifting otherness,
	Phantasmal flux of moments?--”


7. SWEET SPRINGTIME

	It was in the prime
	Of the sweet springtime
	In the linnet’s throat
	Trembled the love note,
	And the love-stirred air
	Thrilled the blossoms there.
	Little shadows danced,
	Each a tiny elf
	Happy in large light
	And the thinnest self. 
	
	It was but a minute
	In a far-off spring,
	But each gentle thing,
	Sweetly wooing linnet,
	Soft thrilled hawthorn tree,
	Happy shadowy elf,
	With the thinnest self,
	Live on still in me.
	It was in the prime
	Of the past springtime!

