*** William Everson (1912 - 1994)


1. DUST AND THE GLORY

	On a low Lorrainian knoll a leaning peasant sinking a pit
	Meets rotted rock and a slab.
	The slab cracks and is split, the old grave opened,
	His spade strikes iron and keenly rings.
	Out of the earth he picks an ancient sword,
	Hiltless with rust and the blade a long double curve,
	Steel of no Roman nor Teuton king,
	But metal struck in the sleeping East and lost in the raids.
	He turns it awhile in the thick hands,
	His thumb searching the eaten edge, and throws it aside.
	The brown strip winks in the light and is sunk;
	Winks once in a thousand years, in the sun and the singing air,
	And is lost again in the ground.
	Attila, you rode your hordes from the Asian slopes and swept to the west;
	In the screaming dawns you struck the rich earth and left it smoking;
	Struck and butchered and lived like the crimson arc of a cutting knife,
	Roaring down Rome and the north-born Goths.
	Through the reeling years you ran like a wolf,
	Side-slashing blindly from border to border the length of that bleeding land
	Till your own lust killed you, and the dark swarm broke.
	In the nights the moon crawls to the west and is hidden;
	The dawns bloom in the east; The fogs gather.
	Attila, in your frenzy of life you burned, but for nothing;
	You roared for an instant, shook the world’s width, broke the fierce tribes.
	You are outdone: the earth that you raped has been ravaged more foully;
	The cities you sacked have been burnt and rebuilt a hundred times.
	From your day to this the valleys you plundered
	Have known killing and looting, the sharp violence,
	The running thunder shaking the night,
	A gasping moment of peace and then at it again!
	Yet you struck deep: in the fields the earth gives up a curious sword;
	The bright-haired folk of a German farm
	Regard with doubt a baby born with oval eyes;
	In a gusty hut an old man hugs the hearth
	And tells an ancient story.


2. KINGFISHER FLAT

	In the long drought 
	Impotence clutched on the veins of passion 
	Encircles our bed, a serpent of stone. 
	
	I think of the Fisher King, 
	All his domain parched in a sterile fixation of purpose, 
	Clenched on the core of the burning question 
	Gone unasked. 
	
	Oh, wife and companion! 
	The ancient taboo hangs over us, 
	A long suspension tightens its grip 
	On the seed of my passion and the flower of your hope. 
	Masks of drought deceive us. An inexorable forbearance 
	Falsifies the face of things, and makes inflexible 
	The flow of this life, the movement of this love. 
	
	I hear quaking grass 
	Shiver under the windowsill, and out along the road 
	The ripe mallow and the wild oat 
	Rustle in the wind. Deeper than the strict 
	Interdiction of denial or the serpentine coiling of time, 
	Woman and earth lie sunk in sleep, unsatisfied. 
	Each holds that bruise to her heart like a stone 
	And aches for rain.


3. THE POET IS DEAD

	Snow on the headland, 
	The strangely beautiful 
	Oblique concurrence, 
	The strangely beautiful 
	Setting of death. 
	
	The great tongue 
	Dries in the mouth. I told you. 
	The voiceless throat 
	Cools silence. And the sea-granite eyes. 
	Washed the sibilant waters 
	That stretched lips kiss peace. 
	
	The poet is dead. 
	
	Nor will ever again hear the sea lions 
	Grunt in the kelp at Point Lobos. 
	Nor look to the south when the grunion 
	Run the Pacific, and the plunging 
	Shearwaters, insatiable, 
	Stun themselves in the sea.


4. SEED

	Some seed in me, 
	Some troublous birth, 
	Like an awkward awakening, 
	stirs into life. 
	
	Terrible and instinctive 
	It touches my guts. 
	I fear and resist it, 
	Crouch down on my norms, a man’s 
	Patent assurances. 
	
	I don’t know its nature. 
	I have no term for it. 
	I cannot see its shape. 
	But, there, inscrutable, 
	Just underground, 
	Is the long-avoided tatency. 
	
	Like the mushrooms in the oak wood, 
	Where the high-sloped mountain 
	Benches the sea, 
	When the faint rains of November 
	Damp down the duff, 
	Wakening their spores--
	Like them, 
	Gross, thick and compelling, 
	What I fear and desire 
	Pokes up its head.


5. WE IN THE FIELDS

	Dawn and a high film, the sun burned it,
	But noon had a thick sheet, and the clouds coming,
	The low rain-bringers, trooping in from the north,
	From the far cold fog-breeding seas, the womb of the storms.
	Dusk brought a wind and the sky opened;
	All down the west the broken strips lay snared in the light,
	Bellied and humped and heaped on the hills.
	The set sun threw the blaze up,
	The sky lived redly, banner on banner of far-burning flame,
	From south to the north, the furnace-door wide and the smoke rolling.
	We in the fields, the watchers from the burnt slope,
	Facing the west, facing the bright sky,
	Hopelessly longing to know the red beauty.
	But the unable eyes, the too-small intelligence,
	The insufficient organs of reception not a thousandth part enough to take and retain.
	We stared, and no speaking, and felt the deep loneness of incomprehension.--
	The flesh must turn cloud, the spirit, air,
	The transformation to sky and the burning,
	Absolute oneness with the west and the down sun.
	But we, being earth-stuck, watched from the fields
	Till the rising rim shut out the light,
	Till the sky changed, the long wounds healed,
	Till the rain fell.

