*** Robert Fitzgerald (1910 - 1985)


1. CHARLES RIVER NOCTURNE

	Reflecting remote swords, chilled in the calm
	And liquid darkness, lights on the esplanade
	Prolong the night’s edge downward all night long
	
	To those whose nostrils ache with the strong darkness,
	
	Those who in hunger press against the waters
	
	Those without birth or death, to whom the cold
	Ocean long laboring in her regal womb
	Whispers a word of foam.
	
	                            The lavish cars
	Move westward in an eddy and dance of shadow
	Under the dazed lamps on the lifeless shore.


2. COBB WOULD HAVE CAUGHT IT

	In sunburnt parks where Sundays lie, 
	Or the wide wastes beyond the cities, 
	Teams in grey deploy through sunlight. 
	
	Talk it up, boys, a little practice. 
	
	Coming in stubby and fast, the baseman 
	Gathers a grounder in fat green grass, 
	Picks it stinging and clipped as wit 
	Into th eleather: a swinging step 
	Wings it deadeye down to first. 
	Smack. Oh, attaboy, attyoldboy. 
	
	Catcher reverses his cap, pulls down 
	Sweaty casque, and squats in the dust: 
	Pitcher rubs new ball on his pants, 
	Chewing, puts a jet behind him; 
	Nods past batter, taking his time. 
	Batter settles, tugs at his cap: 
	A spinning ball: step and swing to it, 
	Caught like a cheek before it ducks 
	By shivery hickory: socko, baby: 
	Cleats dig into dust. Outfielder, 
	On his way, looking over shoulder, 
	Makes it a triple. A long peg home. 
	
	Innings and afternoons. Fly lost in sunset. 
	Throwing arm gone bad. There’s your old ball game. 
	Cool reek of the field. Reek of companions.


3. FOR THE OTHERS

	They will come to my house, to the street’s end
	In the tedious season,
	Naming the dry leaf, and the wind at morning
	Bearing death.
	
	From the tastefully cut helms, the craftsmen’s speech,
	I shall turn clearly
	To grip in daylight time’s still edge
	Finding my body, sight, touch, hearing, strange
	Identity then with what mind in what place
	Of all that make the story?
	
	                                  Birds
	Sing in the dark trees at the world’s end
	In the evening of time. The bearded men
	Stand there among the horses. The lutes play.
	And there are valleys in the mountains
	And women cutting the hay, and carrying it
	In under the hot rain.
	
	                          These we know.
	
	O father, father,
	These many days and many harvests
	We have endured, and the grey sea under mists,
	The agony of our daughters, and
	Old men dying in candlelight
	At the summer’s passage--
	
	                              remembering
	
	Landfalls, delay of autumn, grief among dreams.


4. METAPHYSICAL

	_In festo Christi Regis_
	
	The level slope of colored sea
	Rises degree upon degree
	To hide the brazen ball of sun.
	Ponderous is the planet side,
	And nothing here but heart can slide,
	And nothing but the day is done.
	
	Glory the heavens here declare
	Heavens in gloom deny elsewhere.
	The jackal and the gaping shark
	Possess the shambles of the night.
	As upward eyries take the light
	The downward longitudes are dark.
	
	Eyes on the telluric rim
	In tangent angles peering dim
	Find shape and hour dark or down.
	But centered lordship knows the art
	Of bearing so toward every part
	The studded sphere becomes his crown.
	
	Rays of his mercy are besought
	To magnetize my speck of thought.
	Elated let the evening fall,
	Abysmal be the golden day;
	The ravaged carcass far away
	Be supple in the life of all.


5. MIDSUMMER

	The adolescent night, breath of the town,
	Porch-swings and whispers, maple leaves unseen
	Deploying moonlight quieter than a man dead
	After the locusts’ song. These homes were mine
	And are not now forever, these on the steps
	Children I think removed to many places,
	Lost among hushed years, and so strangely known.
	
	This business is well ended. If in the dark
	The firefly made his gleam and sank therefrom
	Yet someone’s hand would have him, the wet grass
	Bed him no more . . . From corners of the lawn
	The dusk-white dresses flutter and are past . . .
	Before our bed-time there were things to say
	Remembering tree-bark, crickets, and the first star.
	
	After, and as the sullenness of time
	Went on from summer, here in a land alien
	Made I my perfect fears and flower of thought.
	Sleep being no longer swift in the arms of pain,
	Revisitations are convenient with a cough
	And there is something I would say again
	If I had not forever, if there were time.


6. NIGHT IMAGES

	Late in the cold night wakened, and heard wind, 
	And lay with eyes closed and silent, knowing 
	These words how bodiless they are, this darkness 
	Empty under my roof and the panes rattling 
	Roughed by wind. And so lay and imagined 
	Somewhere far off black seas heavy-shouldered 
	Plunging on sand and the ebb off-streaming and 
	Thunder forever. So lying bethought me, friend, 
	What traffic ghouls have, or this be legend, 
	In low inland hollows of the earth, under 
	Shade of moon, the night moaning, and bitter frost; 
	And feared the riches of my bones, long given 
	Into this earth, should tumble to their hands. 
	No girl or ghost beside me, and I lonely, 
	Remembering gardens, lilac scent, or twilight 
	Descending late in summer on that town, 
	I lay and found my years departed from me, 
	And feared the cold bed and the wind, absurdly 
	Alone with silence and the trick of tears.


7. NIGHT PRAYER

	Anguish and delight are now
	Coiled in darkness on the bough,
	And iron time deflowers spring,
	Secretly, the secret thing.
	Mind and body, as they must,
	Invent a terminus to lust,
	Preserving the despair they make
	Pray the Lord my soul to take.
	
	When this incontinent despair
	Turns sick with love in sunless air
	A firmer bed than bed of stone
	Take up my cast of flesh and bone,
	A sharper song than rue or willow
	Weep me dead upon my pillow.
	I who strangled life with sleep
	Pray the Lord my soul to keep.


8. THE SHORE OF LIFE

	I. 
	
	I came then to the city of my brethren.   
	Not Carthage, not Alexandria, not London.
	
	The wide blue river cutting through the stone   
	Arrowy and cool lay down beside her,   
	And the hazy and shining sea lay in the offing.
	
	Ferries, pouring the foam before them, sliding   
	Into her groaning timbers, rang and rang;   
	And the chains tumbled taut in the winches.
	
	Upstream the matted tugs in the heavy water,   
	Their soiling smoke unwrapped by the salt wind,   
	Footed with snowy trampling and snowy sound.
	
	On tethers, pointing the way of the tide,
	The crusted freighters swung with their sides gushing.
	
	On evening’s ship pointing northward,   
	A golden sailor at sunset stood at the bow,   
	As aloft in the strands a tramcar with tiny clanging
	Slowly soared over, far upward and humming still.
	
	
	II. 
	
	Not Athens, Alexandria, Vienna or London.
	
	And evening vast and clean above the city   
	Washed the high storeys with sea-light, with a silken
	Sky-tint on the planes and the embrasures:
	The clump of crags and glitter sinking eastward   
	With the slow world, the shadow-lipping shores,   
	Pale after-conflagration of the air.
	
	On terraces, by windows of tiredness,
	The eyes dropped from that glow to the dusk atremble,
	Alive with its moving atomic monotone:
	
	There the hot taxis at the pounding corner   
	Fitted their glossy flanks and shifted, waiting,   
	And the girls went by with wavering tall walking,
	Their combed heads nodding in the evening:
	
	The hour of shops closing, the cocktail hour,   
	Lighting desire and cigarettes and lighting   
	The strange lamps on the streaming avenue.


9. SYMPATHY OF PEOPLES

	No but come closer. Come a little   
	Closer. Let the wall-eyed hornyhanded   
	Panhandler hit you for a dime
	Sir and shiver. Snow like this
	Drives its pelting shadows over Bremen,   
	Over sad Louvain and the eastern   
	Marshes, the black wold. It sighs
	Into the cold sea of the north,
	That vast contemptuous revery between   
	Antiquity and you. Turn up your collar,   
	Pull your hatbrim down. Commune   
	Briefly with your ignorant heart
	For those bewildered raging children   
	Europe surrenders her old gentry to.
	
	All their eyes turn in the night from   
	Your fretfulness and forgetfulness,   
	Your talk; they turn away, friend.
	Their eyes dilated with dreams of power   
	Fix on the image of the mob wet   
	With blood scaling the gates of order.   
	Anarchist and incendiary
	Caesar bind that brotherhood
	To use and crush the civil guard,   
	Debauch the debauché, level
	Tenement and court with soaring   
	Sideslipping squadrons and hard regiments,   
	Stripped for the smoking levée of the   
	Howitzer, thunderstruck under the net.
	
	The great mouth of hunger closes
	On swineherd and princess, on the air   
	Of jongleur and forest bell; Grendel   
	Swims from the foul deep again.   
	Deputy, cartelist, academician
	Question in haste any plumeless captain   
	Before the peremptory descent   
	Of mankind, flattered and proud.   
	With whitening morning on the waste   
	You may discern through binoculars   
	A long line of the shawled and frozen,   
	Moving yet motionless, as if those   
	Were populations whom the sun failed   
	And the malicious moon enchanted   
	To wander and be still forever   
	The prey of wolves and bestial mazes.


10. WINTER NIGHT

	The grey day left the dusk in doubt.
	Now it is dark.
	Nightfall, and no stars are out,
	But this black wind will set its mark
	Like anger on the souls that stir
	From chimney-side or sepulchre.
	From hill to pasture moans the snow.
	The farms hug tight
	Their shaking ribs against the blow.
	
	There is no mercy in this night,
	Nor scruple to its wrath. The dead
	Sleep light with this wind overhead.

