*** John Gould Fletcher (1886 - 1950)


1. 1946

	Over the scattered trees, over the sunbrowned meadow,
	The bells wove their rhythm of delicate, proud, airborne music;
	Fragments of lacework through the far-air falling,
	Trails of tone going outward, loops and loud curves of sound
	The bells threw a sabbath of peace against the shadow
	Of a mid-century torn with war, with lust, with famine;
	Borne from their Belgian coast, they shaped the enclosing magic;
	Sky blessing spread upon a wide Pacific ground.

	Here as in days gone by, through centuries forgotten,
	They sang through the sky to man, they wove the secret
	Will of eternity, that passes to peace through strife.
	Quivering from plain to peak, they shaped the heavenly garments,
	And, as in older lands, they moved; angelic footfalls
	Going, but none knew how, apart from death to life.



2. ALONG THE HIGHWAY

	Here did we travel on to clouds,
	High pinnacles of eternal hope,
	And rainstorms, too, that slashed the earth,
	We, chasing fourteen changetul springs;
	You still had guided me aright,
	To heart’s full happiness. I had seen
	The earth we traveled grow a home:--
	A place to dream in and to know
	Love of our kind, who, winter nights,
	Know earth’s cold charity, numbing bone.

	My dear, whatever halts us now
	Is not reality but a ghost
	From the grey past. Within our hands
	We hold reality. It is ours.
	And driving towards it we can find
	Pinnacles of the eternal cloud,
	And rainstorms slaking sunny earth,
	And joys we never dreamed to know.



3. THE BLACK ROCK

	I

	Off the long headland, threshed about by round-backed breakers,
	There is a black rock, standing high at the full tide;
	Off the headland there is emptiness,
	And the moaning of the ocean,
	And the black rock standing alone.

	In the orange wake of sunset,
	When the gulls have fallen silent,
	And the winds slip out and meet together from the edges of the sea,
	Settled down in the dark water,
	Fragment of the earth abandoned,
	Ragged and huge the black rock stands.

	It is as if it listened,
	Stood and listened very intently
	To the everlasting swish and boom and hiss of spray,
	Listened to the creeping-on of night;
	While afar off, to the westward,
	Dark clouds silently are packed together,
	With a dull red glow between.

	It is listening, it is lonely;
	For the sunlight
	Showed it houses near the headland,
	Trees and flowers;
	For the sunlight caused to grow upon it scanty blades of grass,
	For the crannies of the rock,
	Here and there;
	For the sunlight brought it back remembrance of a world.
	Long rejected

	And long lost;
	Showed it white sails near the coast,
	Children paddling in the bay,
	Signs of life and kinship with mankind
	Long forgot.
	Now the sunset leaves it there,
	Bare, rejected, a black scrap of rock,
	Battered by the tides,
	Wallowing in the sea.

	Bleak, adrift,
	Shattered like a monstrous ship of stone,
	Left aground
	By the waters, on its voyage;
	With no foot to touch its deck,
	With no hand to lift its sails,
	There it stands.


	II

	Gulls wheel near it in the sunlight,
	White backs flash;
	Gray wings eddy, curl, are lifted, swept away,
	On a wave;
	Gulls pass rapidly in the sunlight
	Round about it.

	Gulls pass, screaming harshly to the wave-thrusts,
	Laughing in uncanny voices;
	Lonely flocks of great white birds,
	Like to ghosts;

	But the black rock does not welcome them,
	Knows by heart already all their cries;
	Hears, repeated, for the millionth millionth time
	All the bitterness of ocean
	Howling through their voices.

	It still dreams of other things,
	Of the cities and the fields,
	And the lands near to the coast
	Where the lonely grassy valleys
	Full of dun herds deeply browsing,
	Sweep in wide curves to the sea;

	It still holds the memory
	Of the wild bees booming, murmuring,
	In the fields of thyme and clover,
	And the shadows of broad trees
	Towards noon:

	It still lifts its huge scarred sides
	Vainly to the burning glare of sun,
	With the memory of doom
	Thick upon them;
	And the hope that by some fate
	It may come once more to be
	Part of all the earth it had;

	Freed from clamor of the waves,
	From the broken planks and wreckage
	Drifting aimless here and there,
	With the tides;
	Freed to share its life with earth,
	And to be a dwelling-place
	For the outcast tribes of men,
	Once again.


	III

	In the morning,
	When the dark clouds whirl swift over,
	From the southeast, dragging with them
	Heavy curtains of gray rain,

	The black rock rejoices.
	All its little gullies drip with cool refreshing showers.
	All the crannies, all the steeps,
	All the meagre sheltered places
	Fill with drip and tinkle of the rain.

	But when the afternoon between the clouds
	Leaves adrift cool patches of the sea,
	Between floes of polar snow;
	Then the rock is all aflame;
	Diamond, emeralds, topazes,
	Burn and shatter, and it seems
	Like a garden filled with flowers.

	Like a garden where the rapid wheeling lights
	And black shadows lift and sway and fall;
	Spring and summer and red autumn chase each other
	Moment after moment, on its face,

	So, till sunset
	Lifts once more its lonely crimson torch,
	Menacing and mournful, far away;
	Then an altar left abandoned, it stands facing all the horizon
	Where the light departs.

	Massive black and crimson towers,
	Cities carven by the wind from out the clouds of sunset look at it;
	It has dreamed them, it has made this sacrifice,
	Now it sees their rapid passing,
	Soon it will be bleak and all alone.


	IV

	Abrupt and broken rock,
	Black rock, awash in the midst of the waters,
	Lonely, aloof, deserted,
	Impotent to change;

	Storm-clouds lift off,
	The dawn strikes the hills far inland.
	But you are forever tragic and apart,
	Forever battling with the sea;

	Till the waves have ground you to dust--
	Till the ages are all accomplished,
	Till you have relinquished the last reluctant fragment
	To the gnawing teeth of the wave;

	I know the force of your patience,
	I have shared your grim silent struggle,
	The mad dream you have, and will not abandon,
	To cover your strength with gay flowers;

	Keel of the world, apart,
	I have lived like you.

	Some men are soil of the earth;
	Their lives are broad harvest fields
	Green in the spring, and gold in their season,
	Then barren and mown;

	But those whom my soul has loved
	Are bare rocks standing off headlands;
	Cherishing, perhaps, a few bitter wild flowers,
	That bloom in the granite, year after year.



4. BLAKE

	Blake saw
	Angels in a London street;
	God the Father on a hill,
	Christ before a tavern door.
	Blake saw
	All these shapes, and more.

	Blake knew
	Other men saw not as he;
	So he tried to give his sight
	To that beggarman, the world.
	“You are mad,”
	Was all the blind world said.

	Blake died
	Singing songs of praise to God.
	“They are not mine,” he told his wife,
	“I may praise them, they are not mine.”
	Then he died. And the world called Blake divine.



5. BLUE WATER

	Sea-violins are playing on the sands;
	Curved bows of blue and white are flying over the pebbles,
	See them attack the chords--dark basses, glinting trebles.
	Dimly and faint they croon, blue violins.
	“Suffer without regret,” they seem to cry,
	“Though dark your suffering is, it may be music,
	Waves of blue heat that wash midsummer sky;
	Sea-violins that play along the sands.”



6. THE EVERLASTING CONTRADICTION

	Yesterday I borrowed thirty silver pence
	From Judas: he gave them with a grin.
	Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.

	Yesterday the Magdalen came to me and said,
	“I am starving.”
	I answered, “First, to bed.”
	Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.

	Yesterday the Virgin passed sorrowing in the street.
	I fung a brick at her. Then, as was meet,
	I bore her to the house of Caiphas.
	Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.

	Yesterday Pilate asked me for water: I must go.
	He beat me, for the ewer trembled so.
	Today, O Christ, I kneel before your cross.

	Yesterday, today, tomorrow, I am vile:
	You hang there motionless and dead long while--
	In your eyes, nothing; on your lips, a smile.
	The world is rotten : would ‘twould crash and pile
	Upon me kneeling yet before your cross!



7. IRRADIATIONS

	I

	The spattering of the rain upon pale terraces
	Of afternoon is like the passing of a dream
	Amid the roses shuddering ’gainst the wet green stalks
	Of the streaming trees the passing of the wind
	Upon the pale lower terraces of my dream
	Is like the crinkling of the wet grey robes
	Of the hours that come to turn over the urn
	Of the day and spill its rainy dream.
	Vague movement over the puddled terraces:
	Heavy gold pennons a pomp of solemn gardens
	Half hidden under the liquid veil of spring:
	Far trumpets like a vague rout of faded roses
	Burst ’gainst the wet green silence of distant forests:
	A clash of cymbals then the swift swaying footsteps
	Of the wind that undulates along the languid terraces.
	Pools of rain the vacant terraces
	Wet, chill and glistening
	Towards the sunset beyond the broken doors of to-day.


	II

	The iridescent vibrations of midsummer light
	Dancing, dancing, suddenly flickering and quivering
	Like little feet or the movement of quick hands clapping,
	Or the rustle of furbelows or the clash of polished gems.
	The palpitant mosaic of the midday light
	Colliding, sliding, leaping and lingering:
	O, I could lie on my back all day,
	And mark the mad ballet of the midsummer sky.


	III

	Over the roof-tops race the shadows of clouds;
	Like horses the shadows of clouds charge down the street.
	Whirlpools of purple and gold,
	Winds from the mountains of cinnabar,
	Lacquered mandarin moments, palanquins swaying and balancing
	Amid the vermilion pavilions, against the jade balustrades.
	Glint of the glittering wings of dragon-flies in the light:
	Silver filaments, golden flakes settling downwards,
	Rippling, quivering flutters, repulse and surrender,
	The sun broidered upon the rain,
	The rain rustling with the sun.
	Over the roof-tops race the shadows of clouds;
	Like horses the shadows of clouds charge down the street.


	IV

	The balancing of gaudy broad pavilions
	Of summer against the insolent breeze:
	The bellying of the sides of striped tents,
	Swelling taut, shuddering in quick collapse,
	Silent under the silence of the sky.
	Earth is streaked and spotted
	With great splashes and dapples of sunlight:
	The sun throws an immense circle of hot light upon the world,
	Rolling slowly in ponderous rhythm
	Darkly, musically forward.
	All is silent under the steep cone of afternoon:
	The sky is imperturbably profound.
	The ultimate divine union seems about to be accomplished,
	All is troubled at the attainment
	Of the inexhaustible infinite.
	The rolling and the tossing of the sides of immense pavilions
	Under the whirling wind that screams up the cloudless sky.


	V

	Flickering of incessant rain
	On flashing pavements:
	Sudden scurry of umbrellas:
	Bending, recurved blossoms of the storm.
	The winds came clanging and clattering
	From long white highroads whipping in ribbons up summits;
	They strew upon the city gusty wafts of apple-blossom,
	\nd the rustling of innumerable translucent leaves.
	Uneven tinkling, the lazy rain
	Dripping from the eaves.


	VI

	The fountain blows its breathless spray
	from me to you and back to me.
	Whipped, tossed, curdled,
	Crashing, quivering:
	I hurl kisses like blows upon your lips.
	The dance of a bee drunken with sunlight:
	Inadiant ecstasies, white and gold,
	Sigh and relapse.
	The fountain tosses pallid spray
	Far in the sorrowful, silent sky.



8. LINCOLN

	I

	Like a gaunt, scraggly pine
	Which lifts its head above the mournful sandhills;
	And patiently, through dull years of bitter silence,
	Untended and uncared for, begins to grow.

	Ungainly, labouring, huge,
	The wind of the north has twisted and gnarled its branches;
	Yet in the heat of midsummer days, when thunder-clouds ring the horizon,
	A nation of men shall rest beneath its shade.

	And it shall protect them all,
	Hold everyone safe there, watching aloof in silence;
	Until at last one mad stray bolt from the zenith
	Shall strike it in an instant down to earth.


	II

	There was a darkness in this man; an immense and hollow darkness,
	Of which we may not speak, nor share with him, nor enter;
	A darkness through which strong roots stretched downwards into the earth
	Towards old things;
	Towards the herdman-kings who walked the earth and spoke with God,
	Towards the wanderers who sought for they knew not what, and found their goal at last;
	Towards the men who waited, only waited patiently when all seemed lost,
	Many bitter winters of defeat;
	Down to the granite of patience
	These roots swept, knotted fibrous roots, prying, piercing, seeking,
	And drew from the living rock and the living waters about it
	The red sap to carry upwards to the sun.

	Not proud, but humble,
	Only to serve and pass on, to endure to the end through service;
	For the ax is laid at the root of the trees, and all that bring not forth good fruit
	Shall be cut down on the day to come and cast into the fire.


	III

	There is silence abroad in the land to-day,
	And in the hearts of men, a deep and anxious silence;
	And, because we are still at last, those bronze lips slowly open,
	Those hollow and weary eyes take on a gleam of light.

	Slowly a patient, firm-syllabled voice cuts through the endless silence
	Like labouring oxen that drag a plow through the chaos of rude clay-fields:
	“I went forward as the light goes forward in early spring,
	But there were also many things which I left behind.

	“Tombs that were quiet;
	One, of a mother, whose brief light went out in the darkness,
	One, of a loved one, the snow on whose grave is long falling,
	One, only of a child, but it was mine.

	Have you forgot your graves? Go, question them in anguish,
	Listen long to their unstirred lips. From your hostages to silence,
	Learn there is no life without death, no dawn without sun-setting,
	No victory but to Him who has given all.”


	IV

	The clamour of cannon dies down, the furnace-mouth of the battle is silent.
	The midwinter sun dips and descends, the earth takes on afresh its bright colours.
	But he whom we mocked and obeyed not, he whom we scorned and mistrusted,
	He has descended, like a god, to his rest.

	Over the uproar of cities,
	Over the million intricate threads of life wavering and crossing,
	In the midst of problems we know not, tangling, perplexing, ensnaring,
	Rises one white tomb alone.

	Beam over it, stars.
	Wrap it round, stripes—stripes red for the pain that he bore for you—
	Enfold it forever, O flag, rent, soiled, but repaired through your anguish;
	Long as you keep him there safe, the nations shall bow to your law.

	Strew over him flowers;
	Blue forget-me-nots from the north, and the bright pink arbutus
	From the east, and from the west rich orange blossoms,
	But from the heart of the land take the passion-flower.

	Rayed, violet, dim,
	With the nails that pierced, the cross that he bore and the circlet,
	And beside it there, lay also one lonely snow-white magnolia,
	Bitter for remembrance of the healing which has passed.



9. MEMORIAL FOR 1940

	If we could but silence the gongs in thousands of cities,
	Throttle the sirens, quench the low roar of the motors,
	Muffle the click of the tickers, slow down the traffic,
	Drown out all mechanical noise and suddenly create silence,
	We might come to know at last the meaning of this world;
	Which is as a wave come from the dark, a sudden, unexpected movement,
	Always arrested, never completed, made vital by half-realized beauty;
	And which--though unfinished--flings this final generation
	Like all those lost in the past, drowned in war, to die, gasping on the shore.

	Driven and driven and driven,
	Living despite of dying, dying because of living,
	Is life’s last terrible giving;
	Poured out, overflowing, overwhelming, foaming away on the pavement,
	Froth of life, must of death, spilled deep upon the stones.
	We cannot halt it since we are part of it,
	We cannot hold it, since it holds us as this offering.
	Our doing is part of its dream, our darkness is all of its triumph.
	It is given and it abides, whether we will or no.

	But now, since the silence will not rise and surround us,
	Leaving us wondering about ourselves, looking each to the other,
	Sketching the gesture that will finish with consummation
	We shall not know what meaning was held by that dream.
	Not men, but a man; not life but be led; not triumph but brutal obedience--
	And laws graven deep in cold blood for the free play of instinct and wisdom.
	Since we have neither clear thoughts of ourselves nor the quiet of heaven--
	Which is made out of fire and dark even as we, only wider and greater--
	No joy shall be ours without horror, no peace without clamor.
	With guns, tanks, aeroplanes, ships of iron, lies, bullyings, threats,
	propaganda, We shall go forward to a far alien land, and we shall there bury
	This light that burned flickeringly, under mountains of dead men, tumuli of faith unremembered;
	To burst forth as volcanic fire to the future, and blaze across the world



10. NEW YORK

	Out of the black granite she is rising surprising as sunrise
	over the head of the Sphinx, glittering towers coated in
	linked scales that seem as if they might melt away-they are
	so pale--but that day pours multitudes about them to smile
	and to threaten, to sin and to ‘scape the reckoning, to coagulate
	in iron knots against fate, to blot out life’s misery with
	rejoicing, to clamor and to pray.
	Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant skies.

	Beneath, the earth is propped and caverned; monstrous
	halls drop with vaulted echoing roofs dripping and sorrowful
	far below; the bells toll and the trains start slowly,
	clanging, shaking the earth and the sad towers above them
	as they go banging their cargo of lost ones towards the secret
	gates of the sea; falling, falling with thunder and flame
	roaring and crawling, shooting and dying away.
	Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant skies.

	Aloft, red girders of riveted steel hang motionless over the
	abyss. Down below the traffic slides, and from precipitous
	sides unroll golden threads, like spiders contriving, carrying
	their freight. Men with hammers are striving to hack new
	projections on. the edifice: and from the last impenetrable
	overhanging beam, a man is dangling on his belly guiding
	the weight. The clouds explode in hissing ripples of snow
	about him; the skies are dim and the stream of life falls
	through them sighing, like wheat that crashes into the hopper.
	But the last pinnacles eat into the clouds and from their
	bronze sides pours down the day, sweeping away the sordid
	flood of men in streams of weeping glory.
	Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant skies.

	Screaming and flickering, like loosened floods of blue
	flame, the streets run together amid the houses that huddle
	and leap and lower over them. The houses quiver with rage
	and heat from heads to feet; the façades seem wavering,
	toppling, tearing with their weight: the glaring panes bulge
	outwards, and the bent red girders ooze away beneath them.
	But above it all, above all the chaos, the struggle and the
	loss, the clouds part. Ivory and gold, heart of light petrified,
	bold and immortally beautiful, lifts a tower like a full lily
	stalk, with crammed pollen-coated petals, flame calyx, fretted
	and carven. White phoenix that beats its wings in the light,
	shrill ecstasy of leaping lines poised in flight, partaker of joy
	in the skies, mate of the sun.
	Restless hammers are carving new cities from the stagnant skies.



11. NIGHT SONG

	Ask me no more but love,
	--See, the west is all roses!--
	Darkness comes down from above;
	No more--the hour closes;

	Ask me no more but love,
	I have no other might.
	Sun of my dusk, dream of my dawn, I come to you
	Sure as the stars to-night!



12. RAINS IN THE DESERT

	The huge red-buttressed mesa over yonder
	Is merely a far-off temple where the sleepy sun is burning
	Its altar fires of pinyon and toyon for the day.

	The old priests sleep, white-shrouded;
	Their pottery whistles lie beside them, the prayer-sticks closely feathered.
	On every mummied face there glows a smile.

	The sun is rolling slowly
	Beneath the sluggish folds of the sky-serpents,
	Coiling, uncoiling, blue black, sparked with fires.

	The old dead priests
	Feel in the thin dried earth that is heaped about them,
	Above the smell of scorching, oozing pinyon,
	The acrid smell of rain.

	And now the showers
	Surround the mesa like a troop of silver dancers:
	Shaking their rattles, stamping, chanting, roaring,
	Whirling, extinguishing the last red wisp of light.



13. THE ROCK

	This rock, too, was a word;
	A word of flame and force when that which hurled
	The stars into their places in the night
	First stirred.

	And, in the summer’s heat,
	Lay not your hand on it, for while the iron hours beat
	Gray anvils in the sky, it glows again
	With unfulfilled desire.

	Touch it not; let it stand
	Ragged, forlorn, still looking at the land;
	The dry blue chaos of mountains in the distance,
	The slender blades of grass it shelters are
	Its own dark thoughts of what is near and far.
	Your thoughts are yours, too; naked let them stand.



14. THE SILENCE

	There is a silence which I carry about with me always--
	A silence perpetual, for it is self-created:
	A silence of heat, of water, of unchecked fruitfulness,
	Through which each year the heavy harvests bloom, and burst, and fall.

	Deep, matted green silence of my South,
	Often, within the push and the scorn of great cities,
	I have seen that mile-wide waste of water swaying out to you,
	And on its current glimmering I am going to the sea.

	There is a silence I have achieved--I have walked beyond its threshold.
	I know it is without horizons, boundless, fathomless, perfect.
	And some day maybe, far away,
	I shall curl up in it at last and sleep an endless sleep.



15. THE SKATERS

	Black swallows swooping or gliding
	In a flurry of entangled loops and curves;
	The skaters skim over the frozen river.
	And the grinding click of their skates as they impinge upon the surface,
	Is like the brushing together of thin wing-tips of silver.



16. SONNETS AT SUNSET

	I

	Except when unexpected, death is still
	Something that we must build for, every day;
	The skull that watches the untroubled way:
	Guest at the banquet, brightness of hour unfulfilled.
	Descending curtain to the time-quickened play
	Which has no audience, but the past. The shrill
	Scream of the knife, stab of the fire that spilled
	Another hope like ours, a stay that would not stay.

	We are the victims death has not yet taken
	Away from our task of serving life. This world
	Is never too much with us, when we know
	That all which is given must be soon forsaken,
	The crown cast off, the task laid down. Now whirled
	Beyond the world’s verge, death stands here, aglow.


	II

	Strange that this inner fire which was the soul,
	Fixed in the breastbone, running to the head,
	Closer than hands or feet, should be thus cold.
	All is most motionless if one man be dead.
	But yet this body, fit for nothing good,
	Is scarred and marked by that long battle made
	With spirit, which the soul forced forth. The flood
	Of flesh formed by the soul knew not one battle stayed.

	One sees the joy that spirit brought. One sees
	The shattering impact of soul’s fire. One finds
	Before the dead, life made both many and one:

	Defeat and victory, agony and ease
	All in one helpless shape. The many kinds
	Of being merge to a breath before the sun.


	III

	This is the shape that young Gotama saw,
	When with his charioteer he rode abroad;
	The body of one dead laid by the road,
	Eyes staring sightless, and thrust-open jaw.
	And yet there is still pity here and awe
	In this cold rigid face. Death has bestowed
	A final touch of beauty. Lighted is man’s load.
	Amid the horror, glory stands without flaw.

	Memory that fades, and moan that makes alike,
	Death brings to man nothing and everything:--
	God poised amid the ruin God has made,
	The light that mocked us, moving to a shade:
	A transitory glow time cannot strike,
	And the cold hair stroked by an angel’s wing.



17. SONNETS OF LIFE

	I

	At one time I had faith; now that is gone.
	At one time I had hope; that is gone, too.
	At one time love, like a broad burning sun
	Lit up my path and made my old life new.
	But that time now is past; bowed with the years
	Before I am old, and broken with the weight
	Of too much knowledge, drained of useless tears,
	For the last moment of life I idly wait.
	Who can live long with a cold empty heart?
	Should I live long or little, this I know:
	That when to darkness I at last depart,
	I shall have given all I could bestow;
	I shall take with me nothing in my death,
	Having cast on mankind my love, hope, faith.


	II

	Joy taught me grief and grief has brought me laughter;
	Life gives me death; shall death not offer life?
	From so much toil must nothing follow after,
	Is there no prize for pain, no crown for strife?
	Who knows, who knows? From what far shore is blown
	Silence we hear though it speak naught to us?
	From what dark sphere pours the great night that, sown
	With stars and sleet, by quickening shall renew us?
	Is there a mockery in the light of day,
	And in dark night a secret well of sorrow,
	That through the sunlight’s power we pass away
	But in dumb sleep join yesterday to tomorrow?--
	Shaping the web of time that, red or green,
	Falls like a blanket quenching truth unseen.


	III

	Now were I free to choose my way of going
	What would I soonest take for my reward?
	No mighty victory to the dumb sky glowing,
	No golden city by the midnight starred.
	This, only this--more strength to bear the weight
	Of a day’s burden that--my back knows well--
	Holds all the past packed dense; to share the fate
	Of life about me, mingling heaven and hell;
	Some souls to love, nor crave love in return;
	Some friends to keep, nor doubt their loyalties;
	Bread broken oft in tears--so let me burn
	A lost spark, voiceless in the raging seas!
	Till at the last, in slackening dark release,
	Grant me, O Life, the cold eternal peace.


	IV

	Immeasurably the empty vault of heaven
	Cold, dark and naked looms above, unlighted;
	An ocean without bounds whereto, fate-driven,
	The soul of man must go, when time is plighted.
	A thousand prayers into this void are hurled,
	But none are answered, none could ever be;
	Within its depths how many a ruined world
	Reflects some broken gleam of majesty!
	Man is the tragic afterthought of time,
	Peering into the gulf, he there discovers
	The long march, slowly rising from the slime,
	To the last summit he must share with others--
	Spirits unseen. Quick as life’s cup is made,
	Death fills it up with hemlock and nightshade.


	V

	The setting sun drifts slowly over the world;
	The light breeze rises, moving steadily on ;
	Through pinnacles of dewy leaves unfurled
	Soon will sweet sleep and darkness bring the dawn.
	So many thousand years have shaped this clay,
	So old this world was ere I came to be;
	Life seems a midge’s dance within a ray,
	And death the sky’s unanswering vacancy.
	So must all perish, every living spark
	Sink to the final void from whence it rose,
	And the warm earth roll horror-stricken, dark
	Beneath the weight of equatorial snows.
	No matter, since great deeds, once pure and bold,
	Today grow idle dreams, a tale long told.


	VI

	Each morning I cried out, “Where is the Christ?”
	Lifting my empty hands to the dumb heaven;
	And every nightfall weariness sufficed
	To make my soul forget how it had striven.
	The world still bowed before the Lords of Hell--
	Odin, Priapus, Mammon--every day
	Ten million Tudases strove their Lord to sell,
	And heaven was dumb and had no word to say.
	Then weary, hopeless, beaten by the lies
	Of life I wandered on a city street:
	And there a starving man with piteous eyes
	Stopped me and asked me for a bite to eat:
	I who had called on Christ in my mad pride,
	Like Caiaphas now idly turned aside.


	VII

	Less than a grain of sand is man, far less;
	Less than the wind the utterance of his heart;
	Less than the rain his power to damn or bless,
	Less than the dust the temples of his art.
	He is a feeble force, a flickering flame
	Upon the summit of a mountain; high
	Across the night he strives to scrawl his name:
	But soon he fades; too soon has power to die.
	And there is lesser effort in his thought
	Than in the atom’s whirling drift of spheres;
	Though he has learned through cunning dearly bought
	To count the stars, he cannot count his tears.
	O outcast heir of dumb eternity,
	What is there left for you to do but die?


	VIII

	Not in the night, for night has need of men;
	Not in the noon, for noon is sick of power;
	But in the dusk of early dawning, then
	Over the hillslopes let it come, mine hour.
	As the earth wakens, let me see the Word
	Blaze through the eastern gates, and be outspread
	In orient glory, by mankind unheard,
	A shadowless ring of light, about earth’s head.
	So even death will be daunted, and the grave
	Will be consumed in a mounting crown of rays
	Up to the zenith rising, wave on wave;
	To mark for me the last of earthly days.
	As the world wakens to its work again,
	Let me slip out, a ship, athwart the tides of men.



18. SPRING

	At the first hour, it was as if one said, “Arise.”
	At the second hour, it was as if one said, “Go forth.”
	And the winter constellations that are like patient ox-eyes
	Sank below the white horizon at the north.

	At the third hour, it was as if one said, “I thirst”;
	At the fourth hour, all the earth was still:
	Then the clouds suddenly swung over, stooped, and burst;
	And the rain flooded valley, plain and hill.

	At the fifth hour, darkness took the throne;
	At the sixth hour, the earth shook and the wind cried;
	At the seventh hour, the hidden seed was sown;
	At the eighth hour, it gave up the ghost and died.

	At the ninth hour, they sealed up the tomb;
	And the earth was then silent for the space of three hours.
	But at the twelfth hour, a single lily from the gloom
	Shot forth, and was followed by a whole host of flowers.



19. TO THE UNKNOWN GOD

	I

	YOU, who are life entwined with death in fiery bonds of longing,
	Dazzling flame in the night, black cloud across the noon-days
	You are eternal; transient because eternal:
	You are all things on-circling into one.
	Force of the darkened moment
	Fresh-pulsing through my being,
	Madly caressing my naked heart, I hold you.
	Sprung from the dust of earth, I meet you face to face.

	You who have carved the foreheads of the mountains,
	Darted the billion spears of the rain down-pouring,
	Crashed in the fall of the torrent, roared in the glittering river,
	Murmured and whistled and hummed in the uprisen sea:

	You gardener of the earth! Ten million blossoms
	Bloom heedlessly and die for you each moment;
	Forests cast down their leaves, renew in spring-like splendor,
	On hills and plains great herds heed your wild voice.

	Dancer amid the hurricanes of heaven,
	Breath of the black typhoon, shaper of sudden earthquake,
	Lord of the tidal wave, king of the fire and the tempest,
	To you be praise eternal!

	You who have buried the universe in darkness,
	Have fashioned countless suns to wheel apart in darkness,
	Have fashioned man to bear the torch of soul athwart the darkness,
	You, hid in the pulse of atoms through the darkness:

	Since we are lost in boundless night, and never
	May we find out the light of truth that conquers every shadow:
	Since what is locked away in our own hearts eludes us,
	To you be praise forever!

	Praise for each moment of life that is in vain;
	Praise for each idle breath, red praise from dawn to sunset,
	Dark praise in seas of sleep, praise for awakening sorrow,
	Praise, endless praise unspoken!

	Praise above all for every sin and failure;
	Praise for all here that stumbles, falls, and struggles.
	Since error is burning life and death is black perfection,
	Praise that no life is perfect!

	Praise for each bitter moment of helpless courage,
	Praise for each grinding care, each dragging sorrow,
	Praise for despair that counsels us to perish,
	Praise for both hell and heaven!

	Praise because naught abides; praise because all is ever
	The seed that is born and dies, renews itself to alter,
	Hurrying from shape to shape the soul new-formed, unmeasured,
	By time or space or life or love or death.

	Out of a thousand million living voices,
	Out of a thousand billion burning planets,
	Out of the boundless infinite, past and present, summed up in this moment,
	Praise without end, and glory!


	II

	Have mercy, O God, upon all mankind here upon earth,
	Because we have nothing left to offer you:
	Nothing but our broken bodies,
	Nothing but our broken hearts,
	Nothing but our broken lives,
	Our labors which are endless,
	Our sorrows which are useless,
	Our infamy which is perfect.
	Because of this, O God,
	Have mercy now upon us!

	Have mercy upon us because we were born to sorrow;
	Because the first thing that we feel is pain,
	And the second, hunger;
	Because the winter makes us shiver and the summer pant for breath;
	Because in heat or cold, in day or night we labor
	Labor, struggle, suffer, fight with time and hunger
	Only to win strength for a further struggle;
	Cheating ourselves of ease and sleep because we dare not take them,
	Worrying, quarrelling, oppressing the sickly and the weak,
	Lying, stealing, defrauding, and laughing at those we defraud;
	Judging each other in hypocrisy, and applauding ourselves for our judgments;
	Because the beginning and the end of life are alike injustice and sorrow,
	Have mercy now upon us!
	Have mercy upon us, O God, because the end is darkness;
	Because faithless, hopeless, loveless, we yet cry out to you;
	Though you deafen your ears for eternity, and will never make us an answer,
	Though we have nothing left but to cry out and to pass on into darkness,
	Because we are madmen mouthing before the eternal silence!
	From the depths of our degradation, from the bottom of our broken hearts,
	From the night of our hopeless lives, from the despairs of our failing strength,
	From the shame of our lying lips, from the pollution of our impure minds,
	From the sloth of our sordid souls, from our greed, from our need, from our anger,
	From our madness, from our horror, from the stark staring night of our hell,
	But for one little instant, because we cry out without cause,
	Without reason, without excuse, merely because we dare cry out,
	Have mercy now upon us!


	III

	With your outlaws, O God, let me stand up at the judgment:
	With those who blasphemed you because they sought you always;
	With those who denied you because you denied yourself to them,
	With those who were broken on the great terrible wheel of this earth,
	With those who hated themselves because they loved you,
	With those who labored against themselves because you cursed their labor,
	With those to whom life was vain struggle and time was worth nothing but for a glimpse of your
	  face,
	With your outlaws, O God, I claim at last a place.
	Grant me, O God,
	Not to know bodies only but also the souls behind them:
	Not the green garment of grass the earth wears, but the fire of her naked flesh,
	Not the blue cloud-ridden sky but the song of the lark as it soars
	Like a young bridegroom, joyous, through the mystery of those spaces.
	Let me long desperately after the flesh but still more desperately after the spirit,
	Let me be never satisfied, let me pass on through life still seeking,
	Let me look at the stars aloof and love them, immoral and lawless:
	Let me look upon men and women and love them, even though you warn me not to love them.
	Since all the temples made by hands fall soon to dust and ruin,
	Since this song too is useless, a vain cry uncomprehended,
	Since I, at bottom, am lawless and you have promised and said
	That the Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence and the violent shall take it by storm,
	Place me now among the violent, among those who admit of no gods,
	Class me among the outcasts, the broken and weary, the followers of every lost cause upon earth:
	Make me now one of them, fill me with their fury, let me, as they, seek you face to face,
	Beyond the last illusion, where amid the shouting stars
	Throned upon fire, in garments sealed with endless sacrifice,
	Sacred and glorious, flesh and spirit fused and merged in one,
	You turn the great wheel of the world under your bleeding feet.


	IV

	Stony and grey, and agelessly old and chill,
	He sits who craves no part in human will:

	Unspeaking and unwearied, stirring not,
	The single living force time has forgot.

	About him rage ten billion suns. Their eyes
	Blaze on him, but he looks without surprise;

	Watching their shapes before him shift and run,
	And caring not what is undone or done.

	For weary, idle, very old and stale
	To him is now creation’s endless tale.

	And naught within it all can he now see,
	Its infinite naught but vacuity.

	All is but shapeless dust his feet have trod,
	In vain upstirring it. Not any God

	As equal to himself he found; again
	He has sought here and there, but all in vain.

	Vain, idle, useless; neither in heaven nor hell
	Nor in mankind’s dumb longing can he dwell:

	Only within the void. Withdrawn behind
	The veil of time can he rest now resigned.

	Sometimes the fall of a lost star through night
	He sees, but does not alter his fixed sight.

	Sometimes a world explodes, and people shriek
	As they are torn to bits. He does not speak.

	Sometimes a new star-cluster swift expands
	Out of dead dust dark whirled. He does not move his
	hands.
	Only from age to age across that face,
	Vast, stony, lifeless, without any trace

	Of hope or struggle, slowly falls a tear
	And slides down cheek and chin till it drops clear

	Into the abyss of nothingness. And no spot
	Of space receives it. ‘Tis as if it were not.

	And still he does not move. And still he sees,
	Out of the darkness crawling, new eternities

	Which ebb and flow, though still his dark heart dreams
	That all those tears, which have fallen down in streams

	From his eyes since the birth of time, have grown
	An endless ocean, serene, still, alone,

	Whose brackish waters quench the failing power
	Of the far stars; and rising, hour by hour,

	Will conquer worlds of ice and flame and men,
	And when the last has sunken, then, oh then,

	Brooding on that still ocean will he be
	Alone at last to all eternity.


	V

	We have no power of life that is not shared;
	We have no past that is not ours; today
	Each burning moment that we live is filled
	With deep incredible meanings, born in song.

	We are the bearers of the word unheard.
	The sharers of the flame unseen. We know
	That love and death are one, yet in between,
	Life, like a point of steel, plucks at our strings anew.

	We have no force to lift a little finger
	Without awaking, in the harp of unimagined power,
	Some tune that travels on.
	We are the players in your symphony,

	O God, and when strings break,
	And the faint frozen fingers cannot strike
	Aught but the shuddering rattle of death upon them,
	On far, far, distant strings the song of life is waking:

	Waking and rising and calling
	To the dumb sleepers under earth,
	Stirring the dust of long-forgotten planets
	On million-miled horizons yet unseen.

	Play on, play on and strike
	The red strings of the will until they quiver.
	Through fire, whirlwind, death, despair, and darkness
	Like a great wave sounds high the symphony;
	We are, O God, one broken immortal music:

	And we will play on still,
	Though earth respond not, nor the skies make echo,
	Till dust of man on dust of earth is scattered,
	And the last sunset’s wave of flame enfolds us.
