*** Ford Madox Ford (1873 - 1939)


1. ANTWERP

	I
	
	GLOOM! 
	An October like November; 
	August a hundred thousand hours, 
	And all September, 
	A hundred thousand, dragging sunlit days, 
	And half October like a thousand years . . . 
	And doom! 
	That then was Antwerp . . . 
	                             In the name of God, 
	How could they do it? 
	Those souls that usually dived 
	Into the dirty caverns of mines; 
	Who usually hived 
	In whitened hovels; under ragged poplars; 
	Who dragged muddy shovels, over the grassy mud, 
	Lumbering to work over the greasy sods. . . 
	Those men there, with the appearance of clods 
	Were the bravest men that a usually listless priest of God 
	Ever shrived. . . 
	And it is not for us to make them an anthem. 
	If we found words there would come no wind that would fan them 
	To a tune that the trumpets might blow it, 
	Shrill through the heaven that’s ours or yet Allah’s, 
	Or the wide halls of any Valhallas. 
	We can make no such anthem. So that all that is ours 
	For inditing in sonnets, pantoums, elegiacs, or lays 
	Is this: 
	“In the name of God, how could they do it?” 
	
	
	II
	
	For there is no new thing under the sun, 
	Only this uncomely man with a smoking gun 
	In the gloom . . . 
	What the devil will he gain by it? 
	Digging a hole in the mud and standing all day in the rain by it 
	Waiting his doom; 
	The sharp blow, the swift outpouring of the blood, 
	Till the trench of gray mud 
	Is turned to a brown purple drain by it. 
	Well, there have been scars 
	Won in many wars . . .
	Punic, 
	Lacedæmonian, wars of Napoleon, wars for faith, wars for honour, for love, for possession, 
	But this Belgian man in his ugly tunic, 
	His ugly round cap, shooting on, in a sort of obsession, 
	Overspreading his miserable land, 
	Standing with his wet gun in his hand . . . 
	Doom! 
	He finds that in a sudden scrimmage, 
	And lies, an unsightly lump on the sodden grass . . . 
	An image that shall take long to pass! 
	
	
	III
	
	For the white-limbed heroes of Hellas ride by upon their horses 
	Forever through our brains. 
	The heroes of Cressy ride by upon their stallions; 
	And battalions and battalions and battalions-- . . . 
	The Old Guard, the Young Guard, the men of Minden and of Waterloo, 
	Pass, for ever staunch, 
	Stand, for ever true; 
	And the small man with the large paunch, 
	And the gray coat, and the large hat, and the hands behind the back, 
	Watches them pass 
	In our minds for ever . . . 
	But that clutter of sodden corses 
	On the sodden Belgian grass-- 
	That is a strange new beauty. 
	
	
	IV
	
	With no especial legends of marchings or triumphs or duty, 
	Assuredly that is the way of it, 
	The way of beauty . . . 
	And that is the highest word you can find to say of it. 
	For you cannot praise it with words 
	Compounded of lyres and swords, 
	But the thought of the gloom and the rain 
	And the ugly coated figure, standing beside a drain, 
	Shall eat itself into your brain: 
	And you will say of all heroes, “They fought like the Belgians!” 
	And you will say: “He wrought like a Belgian his fate out of gloom.” 
	And you will say: “He bought like a Belgian his doom.” 
	And that shall be an honourable name; 
	“Belgian” shall be an honourable word; 
	As honourable as the fame of the sword, 
	As honourable as the mention of the many-chorded lyre, 
	And his old coat shall seem as beautiful as the fabrics woven in Tyre. 
	
	
	V
	
	And what in the world did they bear it for? 
	I don’t know. 
	And what in the world did they dare it for? 
	Perhaps that is not for the likes of me to understand. 
	They could very well have watched a hundred legions go 
	Over their fields and between their cities 
	Down into more southerly regions. 
	They could very well have let the legions pass through their woods, 
	And have kept their lives and their wives and their children and cattle and goods. 
	I don’t understand. 
	Was it just love of their land? 
	Oh, poor dears! 
	Can any man so love his land? 
	Give them a thousand thousand pities 
	And rivers and rivers of tears 
	To wash off the blood from the cities of Flanders. 
	
	
	VI
	
	This is Charing Cross; 
	It is midnight; 
	There is a great crowd 
	And no light. 
	A great crowd, all black that hardly whispers aloud. 
	Surely, that is a dead woman--a dead mother! 
	She has a dead face; 
	She is dressed all in black; 
	She wanders to the bookstall and back, 
	At the back of the crowd; 
	And back again and again back, 
	She sways and wanders. 
	
	This is Charing Cross; 
	It is one o’clock. 
	There is still a great cloud, and very little light; 
	Immense shafts of shadows over the black crowd 
	That hardly whispers aloud. . . 
	And now! . . That is another dead mother, 
	And there is another and another and another . . . 
	And little children, all in black, 
	All with dead faces, waiting in all the waiting-places, 
	Wandering from the doors of the waiting-room 
	In the dim gloom. 
	These are the women of Flanders.
	They await the lost. 
	They await the lost that shall never leave the dock; 
	They await the lost that shall never again come by the train 
	To the embraces of all these women with dead faces; 
	They await the lost who lie dead in trench and barrier and foss, 
	In the dark of the night. 
	This is Charing Cross; it is past one of the clock; 
	There is very little light. 
	
	There is so much pain. 
	
	
	_L’Envoi_
	
	And it was for this that they endured this gloom; 
	This October like November, 
	That August like a hundred thousand hours, 
	And that September, 
	A hundred thousand dragging sunlit days, 
	And half October like a thousand years . . . 
	Oh, poor dears!



2. BUCKSHEE

	I
	
	I THINK God must have been a stupid man
	To have sent a spirit, chivalrous and loyal,
	Cruel and tender, arrogant and so meek,
	Gallant and timorous, halting and as swift
	As a hawk descending-to have sent such a spirit,
	Certain in all its attributes, into this age
	Of our banal world.
	
	He had Infinity
	Which must embrace infinities of worlds,
	And had Eternity
	And could have chosen any other age.
	He had Omnipotence
	And could have framed a fitting world and time.
	
	But, bruised and bruising, wounded, contumacious,
	An eagle pinioned, an eagle on the wing;
	A leopard maimed, a leopard in its spring,
	A swallow caged, a swallow in the spacious
	And amethystine palpitating blue:
	A night-bird of the heath, shut off from the heath,
	A deathless being daubed with the mud of death,
	A moth all white, draggled with blood and dew,
	’Haitchka, the undaunted, loyal spirit of you
	
	Came to our world of cozening and pimping,
	Our globe compact of virtues all half-virtue,
	Of vices scarce half-vices; made of truth
	Blurred in the edges, and of lies so limping
	They will not stir the pulse in the utterance
	From a New World that’s new and knows not youth
	Unto our France that’s France but knows not France,
	Where charity and every virtue hurt you,
	O coin of gold dropped into leaden palms,
	Manna and frankincense and myrrh and balms
	And bitter herbs and spices of the South
	
	Because God was a stupid man and threw
	Into our outstretched palms, ’Haitchka, you.
	
	
	II. _Compagnie Transatlantique_
	
	What a dead year! The sea
	Swings, a dull amethyst;
	And the doves and sparrows droop
	Grey, and the gulls in the mist
	On the dull wet rim of the sea.
	
	Slowly, slowly, heavily, heavily; dully, so dully, the
	heavens lower.
	Slowly, slowly, heavily, dully, the sands of the hourglass
	descend.
	I have neither foe nor friend;
	I am neither erect nor stoop;
	I am neither enslaved nor wield power.
	Will this endless day never end,
	Or this month or this year?
	Slow, heavy, dull, drear,
	Why should they end?
	
	The mists are riven;
	The sea swings free.
	There’s blue in the heaven
	And horns on the sea.
	
	_Iô! Iô!_ the conches blow.
	
	The sparrows and doves
	All follow their loves.
	White the gulls troop
	In a lane on the sea.
	There’s a horn on the hill!
	A furrow is driven
	(Though you are invisible still)
	Straight from the sky-line to me.
	And
	
	_Iô! Iô!_ the conches blow.
	_Iô! Iô! ’Ha-itchka!_
	
	
	III. _Fleuve Profonde_s
	
	_Nuitée à l’américaine.
	
	Your brilliant friend
	Brilliantly lectures me on the feminine characters
	Of my female characters.
	
	Our striking host,
	Having strikingly struck his striking head
	Against the bottom panel of his bedroom door,
	Has been conveyed to bed
	
	By several combined but unconcerted efforts.
	
	Hear how he sings . . .
	
	The other guests
	Dispersed among the apartments of the apartment.
	Dazedly hearing the appraisements of Elaine
	Concerning half-forgotten feminines, I sit
	Beside her brilliance on the divan-edge,
	My knees drawn up to my chin in the dim light.
	We seem to be alone.
	
	She tosses back
	Her brilliant mane and white uplifted chin.
	Long throat! Makes incantation with her spidery, white,
	Butterfly-moving fingers. I JUST LOATHE
	MISS WANNOP!
	
	_There
	Drift sounds of harpsichords,
	Of saxophones and ukuleles, drums,
	Mandolins, mandragoras, slapped faces, spirituals,
	Lacing the Paris night._
	
	That’s four o’clock,
	The Luxemburg clock drones out.
	
	_But . . . hear them SING!_
	
	Beside her I
	Sit like a drummer, peddling rubber pants
	And comforters in the Atlas mountain valleys
	Beside their largest lion. Knees drawn up
	Almost to the chin; peeping, a-shiver, sideways,
	At a lip-licking monster.
	I am all unused
	To talk about my books.
	
	IF I COULD GET
	MY FINGERS ON YOUR ROTTEN CULLY’S
	THROAT.
	
	She can’t mean me. By rights I am the lion!
	
	I’M ALL FOR SYLVIA.
	
	Then it’s Tietjens’ throat
	In jeopardy . . . 
	_But hear them rolling along._
	
	_It aint sayin nothin_ . . . A black light’s shining
	_It aint doin nothin_ . . . Across the shadows
	_It keeps on rollin_ . . . A ray of granite
	
	I LOATHE YOUR TIETJENS
	
	. . . A cone of granite--
	
	What’s that dark shining?
	
	BUT THAT’S ’AITCHKA
	I LOATHE THAT WOMAN . . . NO, NOT ’AITCHKA
	HOW STUPID OF YOU . . . THE WANNOP TROLLOP
	MY BEST MOST INTIMATE FRIEND
	
	You too had drawn
	Your knees up to your chin. And, motionless,
	In an unwinking scrutiny you sat,
	A cone of granite, a granite falcon,
	A granite guardian of granite Pharaohs.
	The leather chair
	You’d chosen for your vigils made with you
	A cone, Egyptian, chiselled, oriental,
	Hard, without motion. Polished shining granite.
	Did you watch to save your dearest friend from me,
	Or me from your dearest friend! . . . I wish they’d sing
	Another rhythm. You gaze before you.
	
	_It must be seven. Are you-all going?_
	
	_Yes, Ezra’s going. Not one more hot dog.
	The Halles for breakfast._
	
	I LOVE YOUR SYLVIA--
	SHE KEPT HIM JUMPING, SHE LOATHED HIS VITALS,
	SHE GAVE HIM THUMBSCREWS, THE CALLOUS MEALSACK.
	
	_Yes, Marjie’s going. Bill, ARE you coming?_
	
	I know why _she’s_ your dearest friend.
	
	Elaine aw COME on . . . (Aitchka, bring her.)
	Why, where’s ’Aitchka? . . . She’s with that writer.
	Oh, with that WRITER. Aw, with THAT writer--
	She’ll keep HIM rolling along.
	
	Schenehaia means “pretty creature.” 
	Schenehaia! For short ’Aitchka.
	She’ll keep him rolling along!
	
	
	IV. _Chez nos Amis_
	
	Silent in the background, she
	Glowers now and then at me
	With a smouldering tigress’ eye
	That does dream of cruelty.
	
	Leopard, ounce or ocelot
	She by turns is cold or hot;
	She is sinuous and black,
	Long of limb and lithe of back.
	
	The deep places of the mind
	She can probe, and thus can find
	Every weakness, every blot,
	Every weary aching spot.
	
	She will scrutinize her prey,
	Turn disdainfully away,
	Sinuous and dark and cold.
	Then she’ll spring and then she’ll hold.
	
	Then with what a dreadful heat
	She will mangle breasts and feet
	And hands and lacerate a heart.
	. . . And then listlessly depart.
	
	
	V. _L’interprète-au Caveau Rouge_
	
	They sing too fast for you? I will interpret:
	That aged, faded, leonine-faced carle
	In dim old tights and frayed striped gaberdine
	Now quavers the famous sonnet. This is it:
	
	_Sonnet de Ronsard:_
	
	_When you are old, and dim the candles burn,
	Seated beside your fire, with distafs gossiping,
	And reading out this verse say: “Here’s a thing!
	“Ronsard m’a célébrée du temps que j’étais jeune.”
	There shall be no old spinster shall not turn,
	Though half asleep above the brands that sing
	And, hearing of my name, cry: “Here’s a thing--
	Ronsard extols our dame from out his urn.”
	
	My soul shall wander through the myrile dust
	Of fields Elysian, thou as thou must
	Shalt bend, all bent, above the dying brands.
	
	Ah, lady, seize the hour--the minute flies;
	Resort thee thither where thy true love lies,
	Nor wait till hail torture thy tender hands.
	
	You did not know I was a poet? Few
	Possess that knowledge. I’ve the trick at times--
	Give me the subject, I will find you rhymes.
	This Provençale, bright-cheeked, high-stomachered,
	With coal-black eyes shall sing a thing. The tune
	Might make you cry if you had any heart.
	
	_Plaisir d’Amour:_
	
	Love’s sweets are sweet for such a little day,
	Her bitterness shall last your whole long life.
	
	The world forsook, I followed Sylvia.
	Me now she leaves to be another’s wife.
	
	“Whilst still the waters of this stream shall glide
	Between its banks of meadow-sweet and bracken,
	“Tis thee I’ll love.”
	
	Thus, thus, once Sylvia cried.
	The waters flow-their verge she has forsaken.
	
	Love’s truths are sweet for such a little day!
	Her bitter falsehoods last a whole long life.
	
	Now here’s your favorite she’s going to sing.
	Knowing, it’s said, what gentlemen prefer,
	She’s flaxen-locked, but once was _brune piquante_
	And _Prix du Conservatoire_. Poor thing, she’ll write
	Her autograph on your programme if you smile at her.
	But she’s a lovely voice.
	
	
	_Auprès de ma Blonde:_
	
	She. Down in my father’s garden sweet blooms the lilac tree,
	Down in my father’s garden sweet blooms the lilac tree.
	And all the birds of Heaven there nest in company.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman fine it is to be!
	
	She. Down in my father’s garden sweet blooms the lilac tree,
	And all the birds of heaven there nest in company-
	The quail, the speckled partridge, the turtle fair to see.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman fine it is to be!
	
	She. And all the birds of Heaven there nest in company,
	The quail, the speckled partridge, the turtle fair to see;
	And eke my pretty stockdove sings night and day for me.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	She. The quail, the speckled partridge, the turtle fair to see,
	And eke my pretty stockdove sings night and day for me.
	She mourneth for such fair ones as not yet wedded be.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman fine it is to be!
	
	She. And eke my pretty stockdove sings night and day for me,
	She mourneth for such fair ones as not yet wedded be,
	But I have my fair husband, so mourns she not for me.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	She. She mourneth for such fair ones as not yet wedded be.
	But I have my fair husband, so mourns she not for me.
	He. Now tell me this, ah fair one, where may thy true love be?
	Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	She. But I have my fair husband, so mourns she not for me.
	He. Now tell me this, ah fair one, where may thy true love be?
	She. The fause Dutch have him taken, he lies in Batavie.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	He. Now tell me this, ah fair one, where may thy true love be?
	She. The fause Dutch have him taken, he lies in Batavie.
	He. What would’ee give, my fair one, thine own true love to see?
	Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	She. The fause Dutch have him taken, he lies in Batavie.
	He. What would’ee give, my fair one, thine own true love to see?
	She. Oh, I would give Versailles and Paris, that great citie.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	He. What would’ee give, my fair one, thine own true love to see?
	She. Oh, I would give Versailles and Paris, that great citie,
	St. Dennis, Notre Dame, and the spires of my countrie.
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	She. Oh, I would give Versailles and Paris, that great citie,
	St. Dennis, Notre Dame, all the spires of my countrie,
	And eke my pretty stockdove that sings alway for me!
	He. Where lieth my leman, blonde and warm and blonde is she!
	Where lieth my leman, fine it is to be!
	
	
	
	
	VI. Champètre
	
	Yesterday I found a bee-orchid.
	But when I gave it you, you never raised your eyebrows.
	“That a bee-orchid? It’s like neither bee nor orchid”
	Was all you said. And dropped it amongst the tea-table débris,
	And went on gazing out over the lake;
	As once you dropped my letters into a Sixth Avenue garbage-can,
	And went on gazing up West Ninth Street
	Towards Wanamaker’s.
	
	Years ago
	We boys went spread out over Caesar’s Camp
	With the Channel at our backs. In the sun shone
	Across the strip of blue the pink-blue cliffs of France.
	And the wind whispered in the couch-grass
	And in the heat of the sun the small herbs’ scents were pungent
	And sweet and stirring.
	And one of us would find a bee-orchid.
	From fold to fold of the Downs the cry would go;
	“A bee-orchid!” “Ho! A bee-orchid!” “Hullo! A bee . . . _or_chid!”
	And God promised us the kingdoms of the earth, and a corner in France
	And the heart of an oriental woman.
	Well, here is the corner of France.
	The kingdoms of the Earth are rather at a discount,
	We should not know what to do with them if we had them.
	And you, you have no heart.
	
	
	VII. _Ripostes_
	
	What did you do in Sodom Town?
	How did you sin in Paris?
	   I heard the small talk rise and die down
	   And thought: “Her hands are tiny and brown.
	   Curse on the time that tarries!”
	
	What did you do twixt then and now,
	Since it is past eleven?
	   I heard the talk run anyhow
	   And thought: “How brown and broad her brow,
	   And her white teeth how even!”
	
	What will you do twixt now and when
	You hide beneath carven marble?
	   I do not know; but I know, then
	   I’ll hear you laugh with gentlemen
	   With your laugh like the blackbird’s warble.
	
	
	VIII. _Vers L’oubli_
	
	We shall have to give up watering the land
	Almost altogether.
	The maize must go.
	But the chilis and tomatoes may still have
	A little water. The gourds must go.
	We must begin to give a little to the mandarines
	And the lemon trees. Yes, and the string beans.
	We will do our best to save
	The chrysanthemums
	Because you like them.
	Then, if only another big storm comes
	Like the one of Saturday fortnight’s,
	We might just barely do it . . . So
	We may get through to the autumn.
	At any rate we are through with the season of short nights,
	And water given at dusk will remain in the earth until
	The torrid sun and the immense north wind
	They call the mistral burn up the face of our hill
	
	You will find
	There will be no change in the weather now until
	October. August nearly over, the season of storms is done
	Altogether. There will be nothing but this hot sun
	And no rain at all
	Till well into the Fall.
	
	Till then we must trust to the fruits
	Though their trees are dried down to the ends of their roots.
	The muscats are done.
	The bunch that hangs by the kitchen door
	Is the last but two we shall save.
	But the wine-grapes and figs and quinces and gages will go on
	Nearly till September.
	(If you lay down some of the muscat wine-grapes on paper on the garret floor
	They will shrink and grow sweeter till honey
	Is acid beside them.)
	
	How singular and vocal and sweet those birds’ voices are.
	For them we thank the drouth.
	Without it they never care
	To come to us from their woods of the infinitely distant South.
	
	I wish we could have saved more of the plants, but the weather has tried them
	Beyond their endurance. And there is no goodness in our land
	On this side of the hill.
	Even the wood has hardly enough heart to make fuel
	Though with vine-prunings in the winter days--
	When the sea below us is like ruffled satin,
	And the sky an infinite number of subtle greys,
	And the mistral sings an infinite number of lays in Latin--
	
	And you crouch beside the hearth, we shall manage to make up a blaze
	To get up and go to bed by. . . . But I like the baked, severe, bare
	Hill with sea below and the great storms sooner or later. And for me
	There is no satisfaction anywhere greater
	Than is given by that house-side, silver-grey
	And very high,
	With the single black cypress against the sky
	Over the hill,
	And the palm-heads waving away at the mistral’s will.
	
	Well then:
	We have outlived a winter season and a season of spring
	And more than one season of harvesting,
	In this land
	Where the harvests come by twos and threes
	One on the other’s heels.
	Do you remember what grew where the egg-plants and chilis now stand?
	Or the opium poppies with heads like feathery wheels?
	Do you remember when the lemons were little and the oranges smaller than peas?
	We have outlived sweet corn and haricots,
	The short season of plentiful water and the rose
	That covered the cistern in the time of showers
	And do you remember the thin bamboo canes?
	
	We have outlived innumerable growths of flowers,
	The two great hurricanes
	And the innumerable battlings back and forth
	Of the mistral from the Alps in the north
	And of siroccos filled with the hot breath--
	“Sirocco, thou that man unto short madness hurrieth!”--
	From the sands of Africa infinite miles to the South.
	
	And having so, ephemeral, outlived the herbs of the hill
	We may maybe come through the drouth
	To the winter’s mouth
	And the season of green things
	And flowing cisterns and springs.
	
	Hark at the voices of those birds in the great catalpa’s shade
	Hard by the hole where the swifts once made
	Their nest on the rafter, thrilling all through the night.
	Singular birds with their portentous singular flight
	And human voices. They came all the way
	Over the sea to the bay
	From Africa.
	It is only our drouth that could have lured them away
	So far from the South. It was perhaps they
	Ulysses took for the syrens calling, “Away!”
	When he took shelter here from the thunderous main.
	And perhaps we may never again
	Hear their incomparable full resonance,
	Compact of wailing and indifferent mirth
	And undecipherable honeyed laughter,
	Or not on this earth under this torrid sun.
	For they say
	It is only once in a century they come this way
	In time of drouth from their eyries far to the South
	In Africa.
	
	Or perhaps we shall hear them only after,
	All harvest gathered in and the time of all fruits being done,
	We--oh but not too severed in time nor walking apart--
	Shall pluck and cry the one to the other along the folds of Cap Brun
	“The Herb Oblivion!”
	
	For this is a corner of France,
	And this the kingdoms of the earth beneath the sun,
	And this the garden sealed and set apart
	And that the fountain of Touvence.
	And, yes, you have a heart.



3. ON HEAVEN

	I
	
	That day the sunlight lay on the farms; 
	On the morrow the bitter frost that there was! 
	That night my young love lay in my arms, 
	The morrow how bitter it was! 
	
	And because she is very tall and quaint 
	And golden, like a quattrocento saint, 
	I desire to write about Heaven; 
	To tell you the shape and the ways of it, 
	And the joys and the toil in the maze of it, 
	For these there must be in Heaven, 
	Even in Heaven! 
	
	For God is a good man, God is a kind man, 
	And God’s a good brother, and God is no blind man, 
	And God is our father. 
	
	I will tell you how this thing began: 
	How I waited in a little town near Lyons for many years, 
	And yet knew nothing of passing time, or of her tears, 
	But, for nine slow years, lounged away at my table in the shadowy sunlit square 
	Where the small cafes are. 
	
	The Place is small and shaded by great planes, 
	Over a rather human monument 
	Set up to Louis Dixhuit in the year 
	Eighteen fourteen, a funnny thing with dolphins 
	About a pyramid of green-dripped, sordid stone. 
	But the enormous, monumental planes 
	Shade it all in, and in the flecks of sun 
	Sit market women. There’s a paper shop 
	Painted all blue, a shipping agency, 
	Three or four cafes; dank, dark colonnades 
	Of an eighteen-forty Mairie. i’d no wish 
	To wait for her where it was picturesque, 
	Or ancient or historic, or to love 
	Over well any place in the land before she came 
	And loved it too. I didn’t even go 
	To Lyons for the opera, Arles for the bulls, 
	Or Avignon for glimpses of the Rhone. 
	Not even to Beaucaire! I sat about 
	And played long games of dominoes with the maire, 
	Or passing commis-voyageurs. And so 
	I sat and watched the trains come in, and read 
	The Libre Parole and sipped the thin, fresh wine 
	They call Piquette, and got to know the people, 
	The kindly, southern people . . . 
	
	Until, when the years were over, she came in her swift red car, 
	Shooting out past a pram; and she slowed and stopped and lighted absently down, 
	A little dazed, in the heart of the town; 
	And nodded imperceptibly, 
	With a sideways look at me. 
	
	So our days here began. 
	
	And the wrinkled old woman who keeps the cafe, 
	And the man 
	Who sells the Libre Parole, 
	And the sleepy gendarme, 
	And the fat facteur who delivers letters only in the shady, 
	Pleasanter kind of streets; 
	And the boy I often gave a penny, 
	And the maire himself, and the little girl who loves toffee 
	And me because I have given her many sweets; 
	And the one-eyed droll 
	Bookseller of the rue Grand de Provence,-- 
	Chancing to be going home to bed, 
	Smiled with their kindly, fresh benevolence, 
	Because they knew I had waited for a lady 
	Who should come in a swift, red, English car, 
	To the square where the little cafes are. 
	And the old, old woman touched me on the wrist 
	With a wrinkled finger, 
	And said: ‘Why do you linger?-- 
	Too many kisses can never be kissed! 
	And comfort her--nobody here will think harm--
	Take her instantly to your arm! 
	it is a little strange, you know, to your dear, 
	To be dead! 
	
	But one is English, 
	Though one be never so much of a ghost; 
	And if most of your life has been spent in the craze to relinquish 
	What you want most, 
	You will go on relinquishing, 
	You will go on vanquishing 
	Human longings, even 
	in Heaven. 
	
	God! You will have forgotten what the rest of the world is on fire for--
	The madness of desire for the long and quiet embrace, 
	The coming nearer of a tear-wet face; 
	Forgotten the desire to slake 
	The thirst, and the long, slow ache, 
	And to interlace 
	Lash with lash, lip with lip, limb with limb, and the fingers of the hand 
	with the hand 
	And . . . 
	
	You will have forgotten . . . 
	But they will all awake; 
	Aye, all of them shall awaken 
	in this dear place. 
	And all that then we took 
	Of all that we might have taken, 
	Was that one embracing look, 
	Coursing over features, over limbs, between eyes, a making sure, and a 
	long sigh, 
	Having the tranquility 
	Of trees unshaken, 
	And the softness of sweet tears, 
	And the dearness of the dear brook 
	To wash away past years 
	(For that too is the quality of Heaven, 
	That you are conscious always of great pain 
	Only when it is over 
	And shall not come again. 
	Thank God, thank God, it shall not come again, 
	Though your eyes be never so wet with the tears 
	Of many years!) 
	
	
	II
	
	And so she stood a moment by the door 
	Of the long, red car. Royally she stepped down, 
	Settling one long foot and leaning back 
	Amongst her russet fires. And she looked round . . . 
	Of course it must be strange to come from England 
	Straight into Heaven. You must take it in, 
	Slowly, for a long instant, with some fear . . . 
	Now that affiche, in orange, on the kiosque: 
	‘Six Spanish bulls will fight on Sunday next 
	At Arles, in the arena’ . . . Well, it’s strange 
	Till you get used to our ways. And, on the Mairie, 
	The untidy poster telling of the concours 
	De vers de soie, of silkworms. The cocoons 
	Pile, yellow, all across the little Places 
	of ninety townships in the environs 
	Of Lyons, the city famous for her silks. 
	What if she’s pale? it must be more than strange, 
	After these years, to come out here from England 
	To a strange place, to the stretched-out arms of me, 
	A man never fully known, only divined, 
	Loved, guessed at, pledged to, in your Sussex mud, 
	Amongst the frost-bound farms by the yeasty sea. 
	Oh, the long look; the long, long searching look! 
	And how my heart beat! 
	Well, you see, in England 
	She had a husband. And four families--
	His, hers, mine, and another woman’s too--
	Would have gone crazy. And, with all the rest, 
	Eight parents, and the children, seven aunts 
	And sixteen uncles and a grandmother. 
	There were, besides, our names, a few real friends, 
	And the decencies of life. A monstrous heap! 
	They made a monstrous heap. i’ve lain awake 
	Whole aching nights to tot the figures up! 
	Heap after heaps, of complications, griefs, 
	Worries, tongue-clackings, nonsenses and shame 
	For not making good. You see the coil there was! 
	And the poor strained fibres of our tortured brains, 
	And the voice that called from depth in her to depth 
	in me . . . my God, in the dreadful nights, 
	Through the roar of the great black winds, through the sound of the sea! 
	Oh agony! Agony! From out my breast 
	it called whilst the dark house slept, and stairheads creaked; 
	From within my breast it screamed and made no sound; 
	And wailed . . . And made no sound. 
	And howled like the damned . . . No sound! No sound! 
	Only the roar of the wind, the sound of the sea, 
	The tick of the clock . . . 
	And our two voices, noiseless through the dark. 
	Oh God! Oh God! 
	
	(That night my young love lay in my arms . . . 
	
	There was a bitter frost lay on the farms 
	in England, by the shiver 
	And the crawling of the tide; 
	By the broken silver of the English Channel, 
	Beneath the aged moon that watched alone--
	Poor, dreary, lonely old moon to have to watch alone, 
	Over the dreary beaches mangled with ancient foam 
	Like shrunken flannel; 
	The moon, an intent, pale face, looking down 
	Over the English Channel. 
	
	But soft and warm She lay in the crook of my arm. 
	And came to no harm since we had come quietly home 
	Even to Heaven: 
	Which is situate in a little old town 
	Not very far from the side of the Rhone, 
	That mighty river 
	That is, just there by the Crau, in the lower reaches, 
	Far wider than the Channel.) 
	
	But, in the market place of the other little town, 
	Where the Rhone is a narrower, greener affair, 
	When she had looked at me, she beckoned with her long white hand, 
	A little languidly, since it is a strain, if a blessed strain, to have just 
	died, 
	And going back again, 
	into the long, red, English racing-car, 
	Made room for me amongst the furs at her side. 
	And we moved away from the kind looks of the kindly people 
	into the wine of the hurrying air. 
	And very soon even the tall grey steeple 
	of Lyons cathedral behind us grew little and far 
	And was no more there . . . 
	And, thank God, we had nothing any more to think of, 
	And, thank God, we had nothing any more to talk of, 
	Unless, as it chanced, the flashing silver stalk of the pampas 
	Growing down to the brink of the Rhone, 
	On the lawn of a little chateau, giving onto the river. 
	And we were alone, alone, alone . . . 
	At last alone . . . 
	
	The poplars on the hill-crests go marching rank on rank, 
	And far away to the left, like a pyramid, marches the ghost of Mont Blanc. 
	There are vines and vines and vines, all down to the river bank. 
	There will be a castle here, 
	And an abbey there; 
	And huge quarries and a long white farm, 
	With long thatched barns and a long wine shed, 
	As we ran alone, all down to the Rhone. 
	
	And that day there was no puncturing of the tyres to fear; 
	And no trouble at all with the engine and gear; 
	Smoothly and softly we ran between the great poplar alley 
	All down the valley of the Rhone. 
	For the dear, good God knew how we needed rest and to be alone. 
	But, on other days, just as you must have perfect shadows to make perfect 
	Rembrandts, 
	He shall affect us with little lets and hindrances of His own 
	Devising--just to let us be glad that we are dead . . . 
	Just for remembrance. 
	
	
	III
	
	Hard by the castle of God in the Alpilles, 
	in the eternal stone of Alpilles, 
	There’s this little old town, walled round by the old, grey gardens . . . 
	There were never such olives as grew in the gardens of God, 
	The green-grey trees, the wardens of agony 
	And failure of gods, 
	Of hatred and faith, of truth, of treachery 
	They whisper; they whisper that none of the living prevail; 
	They whirl in the great mistral over the white, dry sods, 
	Like hair blown back from white foreheads in the enormous gale 
	Up to the castle walls of God . . . 
	
	But in the town that’s our home, 
	Once you are past the wall, 
	Amongst the trunks of the planes, 
	Though they roar never so mightily overhead in the day, 
	All this tumult is quieted down, and all 
	The windows stand open because of the heat of the night 
	That shall come. 
	And, from each little window, shines in the twilight a light, 
	And, beneath t the eternal planes 
	With the huge, gnarled trunks that were aged and grey 
	At the creation of Time. 
	The Chinese lanthorns, hung out at the doors of hotels, 
	Shimmering in the dusk, here on an orange tree, there on a sweet-scented 
	lime, 
	There on a golden inscription: ‘Hotel of the Three Holy Bells, ’ 
	Or ‘Hotel Sublime, ’ or ‘inn of the Real Good Will’. 
	And yes, it is very warm and still, 
	And all the world is afoot after the heat of the day, 
	in the cool of the even in Heaven. 
	And it is here that I have brought my dear to pay h er all that I owed her, 
	Amidst thus crowd, with the soft voices, the soft footfalls, the rejoicing 
	laughter. 
	And after the twilight there falls such a warm, soft darkness, 
	And still there will come stealing under the planes a drowsy odour, 
	Compounded of all cyclamen, of oranges, or rosemary and bay, 
	To take the remembrance of the toil of the day away. 
	
	So we sat at a little table, under an immense plane, 
	And we remembered again 
	The blisters and foments 
	And terrible harassments of the tired brain, 
	The cold and the frost and the pain, 
	As if we were looking at a picture and saying: ‘This is true! 
	Why this is a truly painted 
	Rendering of that street where--you remember?--I fainted.’ 
	And we remembered again 
	Tranquilly, our poor few tranquil moments, 
	The falling of the sunlight through the panes, 
	The flutter for ever in the chimney of the quiet flame, 
	The mutter of our two poor tortured voices, always a-whisper. 
	And the endless nights when I would cry out, running through all 
	the gamut of misery, even to a lisp, her name; 
	And we remembered our kisses, nine, maybe, or eleven--
	if you count two that I gave and she did not give again. 
	
	And always the crowd drifted by in the cool of the even, 
	And we saw the faces of friends, 
	And the faces of those to who one day we must make amends, 
	Smiling in welcome. 
	And I said: ‘On another day--
	And such a day may well come soon--
	We will play dominoes with Dick and Evelyn and Frances 
	For a while afternoon. 
	And, in the time to come, Genee 
	Shall dance for us, fluttering over the ground as the sunlight dances.’ 
	And Arlesiennes with the beautiful faces went by us, 
	And gipsies and Spanish shepherds, noiseless in sandals of straw, sauntered 
	night us, 
	Wearing slouch hats and old sheep-skins, and casting admiring glances 
	From dark, foreign eyes at my dear . . . 
	(And ah, it is Heaven alone, to have her alone and so near!) 
	So all this world rejoices 
	in the cool of the even 
	in Heaven . . . 
	And, when the cool of the even was fully there, 
	Came a great ha-ha of voices. 
	Many children run together, and all laugh and rejoice and call, 
	Hurrying with little arms flying, and little feet flying, and little 
	hurrying haunches, 
	From the door of a stable, 
	Where, in an olla podrida, they had been playing at the corrida 
	With the black Spanish bull, whose nature 
	is patience with children. And so, through the gaps of the branches 
	Of Jasmine on our screen beneath the planes, 
	We saw, coming down from the road that leads to the olives and Alpilles, 
	A man of great stature, 
	in a great cloak, 
	With a great stride, 
	And a little joke 
	For all and sundry, coming down with a hound at his side. 
	And he stood at the cross-roads, passing the time of day 
	in a great, kind voice, the voice of a man-and-a-half!--
	With a great laugh, and a great clap on the back, 
	For a fellow in black--a priest I should say, 
	Or may be a lover, 
	Wearing black for his mistress’s mood. 
	‘A little toothache, ’ we could hear him say; ‘but that’s so good 
	When it gives over.’ So he passed from sight 
	in the soft twilight, into the soft night, 
	in the soft riot and tumult of the crowd. 
	
	And a magpie flew down, laughing, holding up his beak to us, 
	And I said: ‘That was God! Presently, when he has walked through the town 
	And the night has settled down, 
	So that you may not be afraid, 
	in the darkness, he will come to our table and speak to us.’ 
	And past us many saints went walking in a company--
	The kindly, thoughtful saints, devising and laughing and talking, 
	And smiling at us with their pleasant solicitude. 
	And because the thick of the crowd followed to the one side God, 
	Or to the other the saints, we sat in solitude 
	in the distance the saints went singing all in chorus, 
	And our Lord went on the other side of the street, 
	Holding a little boy. 
	Taking him to pick the musk-roses that open at dusk, 
	For wreathing the statue of Jove, 
	Left on the Alpilles above 
	By the Romans; since Jove, 
	Even Jove, 
	Must not want for his quota of honour and love; 
	But round about him there must be, 
	With all its tender jollity, 
	The laughter of children in Heaven, 
	Making merry with roses in Heaven. 
	
	Yet never he looked at us, knowing that that would be such joy 
	As must be over-great for hearts that needed quiet; 
	Such a riot and tumult of joy as quiet hearts are not able 
	To taste to the full . . . 
	
	. . . And my dear one sat in the shadows; very softly she wept:--
	Such joy is in Heaven, 
	in the cool of the even, 
	After the burden and toil of the days, 
	After the heat and haze 
	in the vine-hills; or in the shady 
	Whispering groves in high passes up in the Alpilles, 
	Guarding the castle of God. 
	
	And I went on talking towards her unseen face: 
	‘So it is, so it goes, in this beloved place, 
	There shall be never a grief but passes; no, not any; 
	There shall be such bright light and no blindness; 
	There shall be so little awe and so much loving-kindness; 
	There shall be a little longing and enough care, 
	There shall be a little labor and enough of toil 
	To bring back the lost flavour of our human coil; 
	Not enough to taint it; 
	And all that we desire shall prove as fair as we can paint it.’ 
	For, though that may be the very hardest trick of all 
	God set Himself, who fashioned this goodly hall. 
	Thus has He made Heaven; 
	Even Heaven. 
	
	For God is a very clever mechanician; 
	And if He made this proud and goodly ship of the world, 
	From the maintop to the hull, 
	Do you think He could not finish it to the full, 
	With a flag and all, 
	And make it sail, tall and brave, 
	On the waters, beyond the grave? 
	it should cost but very little rhetoric 
	To explain for you that last, fine, conjuring trick; 
	To give to each man after his heart 
	Who knows very well what each man has in his heart: 
	To let you pass your life in a night-club where they dance, 
	if that is your idea of heaven; if you will, in the South of France; 
	if you will, on the turbulent sea; if you will, in the peace of the night; 
	Where you will; how you will; 
	Or in the long death of a kiss, that may never pall; 
	He would be a very little God if He could not do all this, 
	And He is still 
	The great God of all. 
	
	For God is a good man; God is a kind man; 
	in the darkness He came walking to our table beneath the planes, And spoke 
	So kindly to my dear, 
	With a little joke, 
	Giving himself some pains 
	To take away her fear 
	Of His stature, 
	So as not to abash her, 
	in no way at all to dash her new pleasure beneath the planes, 
	in the cool of the even 
	in Heaven. 
	
	That, that is God’s nature, 
	For God’s a good brother, and God is no blind man, 
	And God’s a good mother and loves sons who’re rovers, 
	And God is our father and loves all good lovers. 
	He has a kindly smile for many a poor sinner; 
	He takes note to make it up to poor wayfarers on sodden roads; 
	Such as bear heavy loads 
	He takes note of, and of all that toil on bitter seas and frosty lands, 
	He takes care that they shall have good at His hands; 
	Well He takes note of a poor old cook, 
	Cooking your dinner; 
	And much He loves sweet joys in such as ever took 
	Sweet joy on earth. He has a kindly smile for a kiss 
	Given in a shady nook. 
	And in the golden book 
	Where the accounts of His estate are kept, 
	All the round, golden sovereigns of bliss, 
	Known by poor lovers, married or never yet married, 
	While the green world waked, or the black world quietly slept; 
	All joy, all sweetness, each sweet sight that’s sighed-- 
	Their accounts are kept, 
	And carried 
	By the love of God to His own credit’s side. 
	So that is why He came to our table to welcome my dear, dear bride, 
	in the cool of the even 
	in front of a cafe in Heaven.



4. A HOUSE

	_The House._  I am the House!	
	  I resemble	
	  The drawing of a child	
	  That draws “just a house.” Two windows and two doors,	
	  Two chimney pots;	
	  Only two floors.	
	  Three windows on the upper one; a fourth	
	  Looks towards the north.	
	  I am very simple and mild;	
	  I am very gentle and sad and old.	
	  I have stood too long.	
	_The Tree._  I am the great Tree over above this House!	
	  I resemble	
	  The drawing of a child. Drawing “just a tree”	
	  The child draws Me!	
	  Heavy leaves, old branches, old knots:	
	  I am more old than the house is old.	
	  I have known nights so cold	
	  I used to tremble;	
	  For the sap was frozen in my branches,	
	  And the mouse,	
	  That stored her nuts in my knot-holes, died. I am strong	
	  Now . . . Let a storm come wild	
	  Over the Sussex Wold,	
	  I no longer fear it.	
	  I have stood too long!	
	_The Nightingale._  I am the Nightingale. The summer through I sit	
	  In the great tree, watching the house, and throw jewels over it!	
	  There is no one watching but I; no other soul to waken	
	  Echoes in this valley night!	
	_The Unborn Son of the House._  You are mistaken!	
	  I am the Son of the House!--	
	  That shall have silver limbs, and clean straight haunches,	
	  Lean hips, clean lips and a tongue of gold;	
	  That shall inherit	
	  A golden voice, and waken	
	  A whole world’s wonder!	
	_The Nightingale._  Young blood! You are right,	
	  So you and I only	
	  Listen and watch and waken	
	  Under	
	  The stars of the night.	
	_The Dog of the House._  You are mistaken!	
	  This house stands lonely.	
	  Let but a sound sound in the seven acres that surround	
	  Their sleeping house,	
	  And I, seeming to sleep, shall awaken.	
	  Let but a mouse	
	  Creep in the bracken,	
	  I seeming to drowse, I shall hearken.	
	  Let but a shadow darken	
	  Their threshold; let but a finger	
	  Lie long or linger,	
	  Holding their latch:	
	  I am their Dog. And I watch!	
	  I am just Dog. And being His hound	
	  I lie	
	  All night with my head on my paws,	
	  Watchful and whist!	
	_The Nightingale._  So you and I and their Son and I	
	  Watch alone, under the stars of the sky.	
	_The Cat of the House._  I am the Cat. And you lie!	
	  I am the Atheist!	
	  All laws	
	  I coldly despise.	
	  I have yellow eyes;	
	  I am the Cat on the Mat the child draws	
	  When it first has a pencil to use.	
	_The Milch-goat._  I am the Goat. I give milk!	
	_The Cat of the House._  I muse	
	  Over the hearth with my ’minishing eyes	
	  Until after	
	  The last coal dies.	
	  Every tunnel of the mouse,	
	  Every channel of the cricket,	
	  I have smelt.	
	  I have felt	
	  The secret shifting of the mouldered rafter,	
	  And heard	
	  Every bird in the thicket.	
	  I see	
	  You,	
	  Nightingale up in your tree!	
	_The Nightingale._  The night takes a turn towards coldness; the stars	
	  Waver and shake.	
	  Truly more wake,	
	  More thoughts are afloat;	
	  More folk are afoot than I knew!	
	_The Milch-goat._  I, even I, am the Goat!	
	_Cat of the House._  Enough of your stuff of dust and of mud!	
	  I, born of a race of strange things,	
	  Of deserts, great temples, great kings,	
	  In the hot sands where the nightingale never sings!	
	  Old he-gods of ingle and hearth,	
	  Young she-gods of fur and of silk--	
	  Not the mud of the earth--	
	  Are the things that I dream of!	
	_The Milch-goat._  Tibby-Tab, more than you deem of	
	  I dream of when chewing the cud	
	  For my milk:	
	  Who was born	
	  Of a Nan with one horn and a liking for gin	
	  In the backyard of an inn.	
	  A child of Original Sin,	
	  With a fleece of spun-silk	
	  And two horns in the bud--	
	  I, made in the image of Pan,	
	  With my corrugate, vicious-cocked horn,	
	  Now make milk for a child yet unborn.	
	  That’s a come-down!	
	  And you with your mouse-colored ruff,	
	  Discoursing your stuff-of-a-dream,	
	  Sell your birthright for cream,	
	  And bolt from a cuff or a frown.	
	  That’s a come-down!	
	  So let be! That’s enough!	
	_The House._  The top star of the Plough now mounts	
	  Up to his highest place.	
	  The dace	
	  Hang silent in the pool.	
	  The night is cool	
	  Before the dawn. Behind the blind	
	  Dies down the one thin candle.	
	  Our harried man,	
	  My lease-of-a-life-long Master,	
	  Studies against disaster;	
	  Gropes for some handle	
	  Against too heavy Fate; pores over his accounts,	
	  Studying into the morn	
	  For the sake of his child unborn.	
	_The Unborn Son of the House._  The vibrant notes of the spheres,	
	  Thin, sifting sounds of the dew,	
	  I hear. The mist on the meres	
	  Rising I hear . . . So here’s	
	  To a lad shall be lusty and bold,	
	  With a voice and a heart ringing true!	
	  To a house of a livelier hue!	
	_The House._  That is true!	
	  I have stood here too long and grown old.	
	_Himself._  What is the matter with the wicks?	
	  What on earth’s the matter with the wax?	
	  The candle wastes in the draught;	
	  The blind’s worn thin!	
	  . . . Thirty-four and four, ten . . .	
	  And ten . . . are forty-nine!	
	  And twenty pun twelve and six was all	
	  I made by the clover.	
	  It’s a month since I laughed:	
	  I have given up wine.	
	  And then . . .	
	  The Income Tax!	
	_The Dog of the House._  The mare’s got out of the stable!	
	_The Cat of the House._  She’s able, over and over,	
	  To push up the stable latch . . .	
	  Over and over again. You would say she’s a witch,	
	  With a spite on our Man!	
	_The Milch-goat._  Heu! Did you see how she ran!	
	  She’s after the clover; she’s over the ditch,	
	  Doing more harm than a dozen of goats	
	  When there’s no one to watch.	
	  Yet she is the sober old mare with her skin full of oats,	
	  Whereas we get dry bracken and heather;	
	  Snatching now and then a scrap of old leather,	
	  Or half an old tin,	
	  As the price of original sin!	
	_Himself._  I shall live to sell	
	  The clock from the hall;	
	  I shall have to pawn my old Dad’s watch,	
	  Or fell	
	  The last old oak; or sell half the stock . . .	
	  Or all!	
	  Or the oak chest out of the hall.	
	  One or the other--or all.	
	  God, it is hell to be poor	
	  For ever and ever, keeping the Wolf from the door!	
	_The Cat of the House._  Wouldn’t you say	
	  That Something, heavy and furry and grey,	
	  Was sniffing round the door?	
	  Wouldn’t you say	
	  Skinny fingers, stretching from the thicket,	
	  Felt for the latch of the wicket?	
	_Himself._  You would almost say	
	  These blows were repercussions	
	  Of an avenging Fate!	
	  But how have we earned them . . .	
	  The sparks that fell on the cornricks and burned them	
	  Still in the ear;	
	  And all the set-backs of the year--	
	  Frost, drought and demurrage,	
	  The tiles blown half off the roof?	
	  What is it, what is it all for?	
	  Chastisement of pride? I swear we have no pride!	
	  We ride	
	  Behind an old mare with a flea-bitten hide!	
	  Or over-much love for a year-old bride?	
	  But it’s your duty to love your bride!. . . But still,	
	  All the sows that died,	
	  And the cows all going off milk;	
	  The cream coming out under proof;	
	  The hens giving over laying;	
	  The bullocks straying,	
	  Getting pounded over the hill!	
	  It used to be something--cold feet going over	
	  The front of a trench after Stand-to at four!	
	  But these other things--God, how they make you blench!	
	  Aye, these are the pip-squeaks that call for	
	  Four-in-the-morning courage . . .	
	  May you never know, my wench,	
	  That’s asleep up the stair!	
	_Herself  [in her sleep]._  I’ll have a kitchen all white tiles;	
	  And a dairy, all marble the shelves and the floor;	
	  And a larder, cream-white and full of air.	
	  I’ll have whitewood kegs for the flour,	
	  And blackwood kegs for the rice and barley,	
	  And silvery jugs for the milk and cream . . .	
	  O glorious Me!	
	  And hour by hour by hour by hour,	
	  On piles of cushions from hearth to door,	
	  I’ll sit sewing my silken seams,	
	  I’ll sit dreaming my silver dreams;	
	  With a little, mettlesome, brown-legged Charley,	
	  To leave his ploys and come to my knee,	
	  And question how God can be Three-in-One	
	  And One-in-Three.	
	  And all the day and all the day	
	  Nothing but hoys for my dearest one;	
	  And no care at all but to kiss and twine;	
	  And nought to contrive for but ploys and play	
	  For my son, my son, my son, my son!	
	  Only at nine,	
	  With the dinner finished, the men at their wine;	
	  And the girls in the parlor at forfeits for toffee,	
	  I’ll make such after-dinner coffee . . .	
	  But it’s all like a dream!	
	_Himself._  If Dixon could pay!. . . But he never will.	
	  He promised to do it yesterday . . . But poor old Dicky’s been through the mill.	
	  And it’s late--it’s too late to sit railing at Fate!	
	  He’d pay if he could; but he’s got his fix on . . .	
	  Yet . . . If he could pay--	
	  God!--It would carry us over the day	
	  Of Herself!	
	_The Clock in the Room._  I am the Clock on the Shelf!	
	  Is . . . Was . . . Is . . . Was!	
	  Too late . . . Because . . . Too late . . . Because . . .	
	  One!. . . Two!. . . Three!. . . Four!	
	_Himself._  Just over The Day and a week or two more!	
	  And we’d maybe get through.	
	  Not with a hell of a lot	
	  Of margin to spare . . . But just through!	
	_The Clock in the Hall._  One!. . . Two!. . . One!. . . Two!	
	  As . . . your . . . hours . . . pass	
	  I re . . . cord them	
	  Though you . . . waste them	
	  Or have . . . stored them	
	  ALL . . .	
	    One!	
	    Two!	
	    Three!	
	    Four!	
	    Begun!	
	    Half through!	
	    Let be!	
	    No more at all!	
	  I am the Great Clock in the Hall!	
	_Himself._  It is four by the clock:	
	  The creak of the stair	
	  Might waken Herself;	
	  It would give her a shock	
	  If I went up the stair.	
	  I will doze in the chair.	
	_The House._  Sad! Sad!	
	  Poor lad!	
	  I am getting to talk like the clock!	
	  Year after year! Shock after shock!	
	  Sunlight and starlight; moonlight and shadows!	
	  I’ve seen him sit on his three-legged stool,	
	  And heard him whimper, going to school.	
	  But he’s paid all the debts that a proper lad owes	
	  Stoutly enough . . . You might call me a clock	
	  With a face of old brick-work instead of the brass	
	  Of a dial.	
	  For I mark the generations as they pass:	
	  Generation on generation,	
	  Passing like shadows over the dial	
	  To triumph or trial;	
	  Over the grass, round the paths till they lie all	
	  Silent under the grass.	
	_Himself._  And it isn’t as if we courted the slap-up people . . .	
	_The House._  Now does he remember the night when he came from the station	
	  In Flood-year December?	
	_Himself._  Or kicked our slippers over the steeple,	
	  Or leaving the whites ate only the yolk.	
	  We’re such simple folk!	
	  With an old house . . . Just any old house!	
	  Only she’s clean: you won’t find a flea or a louse!	
	  We’ve a few old cows--	
	  Just any old cows!--	
	  No champion short-horns with fabulous yields . . .	
	  Two or three good fields;	
	  And the old mare, going blinder and blinder . . .	
	  And too much Care to ride behind her!	
	_The House._  I’d like him to remember . . .	
	  There were floods out far and wide;	
	  And that was my last night of pride,	
	  With all my windows blazing across the tide . . .	
	  I wish he would remember . . .	
	_Himself._  Just to get through; keeping a stiff upper lip!	
	  Just . . . through!. . . With my lamb unshorn;	
	  So that she mayn’t like me be torn by care!	
	  It’s not	
	  Such a hell of a lot!	
	  Just till the child is born . . .	
	  You’d think: God, you’d think	
	  They could let us little people . . . creep	
	  Past in the shadows . . .	
	  But the sea’s . . . too . . . deep!	
	  Not to sink . . . Not . . . sink!	
	  Just to get through . . .	
	  Christ, I can’t keep . . . It’s too . . . deep . . .	
	_The Cat of the House._  He has fallen asleep. Up onto his knee!	
	  I shall sleep in the pink.	
	_The House._  You see!	
	  His mind turns to me	
	  As soon as he sleeps. For he called me a ship	
	  On my last day of pride,	
	  And he dreams of me now as a ship	
	  As I looked in the days of my pride.	
	  Then, he was driving his guests from the station,	
	  And the floods were wide	
	  All over the countryside . . .	
	  All my windows lit up and wide,	
	  And blazing like torches down a tide,	
	  Over the waters . . .	
	_The Mare  [From the cloverfield]._  That wouldn’t be me!	
	  When I was young I lived in Dover,	
	  In Kent, by the sea. So he didn’t drive me.	
	  When I was young I went much faster	
	  Over the sticks as slick as a hare,	
	  With a gunner officer for a master.	
	  And I took officers out to lunch	
	  With their doxies to Folkestone. It wouldn’t be me!	
	_The Milch-goat._  Munch; munch . . . Munch; munch!	
	  In the Master’s clover . . . But poor old Me!	
	_The Unborn Son of the House._  Malodorous Image-of-Sin-with-a-Beard,	
	  It is time I was heard.	
	_The House._  That Christmas night . . .	
	_Son of the House._  It would have to be Christmas	
	  With floods so they missed Mass . . .	
	_The House._  Your Dad’s never missed Mass	
	  At Christmas!. . .	
	  So all my windows, blazing with light	
	  Called out Welcome across the night.	
	  And the Master’s voice came over to me:	
	  “The poor old shanty looks just like a ship,	
	  Lit up and sailing across the sea!”	
	  That was my lad . . .	
	  And another, just as young and as glad,	
	  As they used to be, all, before the war,	
	  Said: “And all of her lamps have all their wicks on!”	
	  That would be Dickson . . .	
	_Son of the House._  My mother, when her pains have loosed her	
	  And I am grown to man’s estate,	
	  Shall go in gold and filagree;	
	  And I’ll be king and have a king’s glory . . .	
	_The Rooster._  Kickeriko! Kickerikee!	
	  I am the Rooster!	
	_Son of the House._  The Dad, with no hair on his pate,	
	  Reading my story . . .	
	_The Rooster._  I am the Bird of the Dawn, calling the world to arouse.	
	  I, even I, am the cock of the house!	
	_The Skylark._  Time I was up in the sky!	
	  It is time for the dew to dry.	
	  I am the Bird of the Dawn!	
	_The Nightingale._  Time I was down on my nest.	
	  The moon has gone down in the west:	
	  Day-folk, goodbye!	
	_The House-dog._  Here’s our young maid! What a yawn!	
	_The Milch-goat._  The houseboy is crossing the lawn	
	  Under the fir.	
	  Will he give me a Swede?	
	  That’s the thing I most need!	
	_The House._  What a stir! What a stir!	
	  Did you ever?	
	  All of a sudden it’s day	
	  With its tumult and fever!	
	  I must have nodded away!	
	_The Drake._  I am the Drake! I’m the Drake.	
	  We too have been all night awake;	
	  But making no fuss, not one of the seven of us.	
	  For our heads were far under our legs	
	  Drinking the dregs of the lake.	
	  Therefore my ladies lay eggs,	
	  Ducksegg green!	
	_The Maid._  Where have you hid	
	  The copper-lid?	
	  Where on earth have you been?	
	  Where on earth is it hidden?	
	_Houseboy._  I didn’t!	
	_Maid._  You did!	
	_Houseboy._  I didn’t . . . I never . . .	
	_Maid._  I see you . . .	
	_Houseboy._  You never!	
	_Maid._  How on earth can I ever	
	  Cook the pigs’ food if I can’t find the lid	
	  Of the copper?	
	_Houseboy._  You whopper! I never	
	  Touched the old lid of your copper!	
	_Maid._  The lid’s lying out in the midden.	
	  Himself must have took it!	
	_Houseboy._  So there then! Give over!
	
	_Maid._  Did you ever! What next!	
	  Our Master’s asleep in his chair!	
	  I’ll wager you never a leg he’s stirred	
	  Since four of the clock, with the cat on his knee!	
	_Postman._  This letter’s registered!	
	_Maid  [To Himself]._  Ned Postman wants a receipt in ink . . .	
	_Himself  [Opening letter]._  To sink . . . No, not to sink!	
	_Maid._  It’s a registered letter	
	  The postman wants a receipt in ink for.	
	_Herself  [Calling from upper window]._  Charley!	
	  The mare’s in the clover,	
	  Making for the barley.	
	  She’s knocking down the sticks . . .	
	_Himself._  It’s over--	
	  We’re over this terrible fix	
	  For a quarter or so!	
	_Herself._  And we were in such a terrible fix!--	
	  And you never let me know!	
	_Himself._  Not quite enough to take to drink for . . .	
	  [To Houseboy.]  Fetch the mare from the barley,	
	  You’d better . . .	
	_Herself._  Oh, Charley!	
	_Himself._  I said: Not quite enough to take to drink for!	
	  It was like being master of a ship,	
	  Watching a grey torpedo slip	
	  Through waves all green.	
	  It would have been . . .	
	  And all one’s folk aboard . . .	
	_Herself._  Yourself! Yourself! You’ll surely now afford	
	  Yourself a new coat . . .	
	  And a proper chain and collar for the goat!	
	_Himself._  Good Lord!	
	  Yourself! Yourself! You may go to town	
	  And see a show: there are five or six on,	
	  And you can have the little new gown	
	  You said you’d fix on . . .	
	_Herself._  But, O Yourself, we can’t afford it!	
	_Himself._  You’ve not had a jaunt since the honeymoon . . .	
	  Thirteen months and a day. And very soon . . .	
	_The Unborn Son of the House._  I shall so pronk it and king it and lord it--	
	  Over the sunshine and under the moon . . .	
	_Himself._  If Fate be kind and do not frown,	
	  And do not smite us knee and hip,	
	  This poor old patched-up thing of a ship	
	  May take us yet over fields all green,	
	  And you be a little dimity queen . . .	
	_Son of the House._  As the years roll on and the days go by,	
	  I shall grow and grow in majesty . . .	
	_Herself._  You always say I’ve no majesty!--	
	  Not even enough for a cobbler’s queen!	
	_The House._  By and by	
	  They’ll be talking of copper roofs for the stye!	
	_The Pigs._  We were wondering when you would come to the Pigs!	
	  Yet they say it’s we that pay the rent!	
	_Himself._  Great golden ships in ancient rigs	
	  Went sailing under the firmament,	
	  And still sail under the sky and away--	
	  Tall ships and small . . .	
	  And great ships sink and no soul to say.	
	  But, God being good, in the last resort	
	  I will bring our cockle-shell into port	
	  In a land-locked bay,	
	  And no more go sailing at all!	
	_Herself._  Kind God! We are safe for a year and a day!	
	  And he is so skilful, my lord and my master,	
	  So skilled to keep us all from disaster;	
	  Such a clever, kindly, Working One!	
	  That I’ll yet have my dairy with slabs of marble,	
	  A sweet-briar thicket where sweet birds warble,	
	  And an ordered life in a household whereof he	
	  Most shall praise the nine-o’clock coffee;	
	  And a little, mettlesome, brown-kneed One	
	  To lie on my heart when the long day’s done . . .	
	_Rooster._  Pullets, go in; run out of the sun!	
	  He’s climbing high and the hayseed’s dun.	
	  I am the Rooster with marvelous legs!	
	  Pullets, run nestwards and lay your eggs!	
	_Herself._  For my son; my son; my son; my son!	
	 
	EPILOGUE
	
	_The House Itself._  I am their House! I resemble	
	  The drawing of a child.	
	  Drawing, “just a house,” a child draws one like me,	
	  With a stye beside it maybe, or a willow-tree,	
	  Or aspens that tremble.	
	  That’s as may be . . .	
	 
	  But all the other houses of all nations	
	  Grand or simple, in country or town,	
	  All, all the houses standing beneath the sky	
	  Shall have very much the same fate as I!	
	  They shall see the pressing of generations	
	  On the heels of generations;	
	  Shall bear with folly; shall house melancholy;	
	  At seasons dark and holy shall be hung with holly;	
	  On given days they shall have the blinds drawn down,	
	  And so pass into the hands--	
	  Houses and lands into the hands	
	  Of new generations.	
	  These shall remain	
	  For a short space or a long,	
	  Masterful, cautious or strong;	
	  Confident or overbold.	
	  But at last all strong hands falter;	
	  Frosts come; great winds and drought;	
	  The tiles blow loose; the steps wear out;	
	  The rain	
	  Percolates down by the rafter.	
	  Their youths wear out;	
	  Until, maybe, they become very gentle and mild.	
	  For certain they shall become very gentle and old,	
	  Having stood too long.	
	  And so, all over again,	
	  The circle comes round:	
	  Over and over again.	
	  And . . .	
	  If You rise on this earth a thousand years after	
	  I have fallen to the ground,	
	  Your fate shall be the same:	
	  Only the name	
	  Shall alter!



5. IN TENEBRIS

	All within is warm, 
	Here without it’s very cold, 
	Now the year is grown so old 
	And the dead leaves swarm. 
	
	In your heart is light, 
	Here without it’s very dark, 
	When shall I hear the lark? 
	When see aright? 
	
	Oh, for a moment’s space! 
	Draw the clinging curtains wide 
	Whilst I wait and yearn outside 
	Let the light fall on my face.



6. IN THE LITTLE OLD MARKET-PLACE

	It rains, it rains,
	From gutters and drains
	And gargoyles and gables:
	It drips from the tables
	That tell us the tolls upon grains,
	Oxen, asses, sheep, turkeys and fowls
	Set into the rain-soaked wall
	Of the old Town Hall.
	
	The mountains being so tall
	And forcing the town on the river,
	The market’s so small
	That, with the wet cobbles, dark arches and all,
	The owls
	(For in dark rainy weather the owls fly out
	Well before four), so the owls
	In the gloom
	Have too little room
	And brush by the saint on the fountain
	In veering about.
	
	The poor saint on the fountain!
	Supported by plaques of the giver
	To whom we’re beholden;
	His name was de Sales
	And his wife’s name von Mangel.
	
	(Now is he a saint or archangel?)
	He stands on a dragon
	On a ball, on a column
	Gazing up at the vines on the mountain:
	And his falchion is golden
	And his wings are all golden.
	He bears golden scales
	And in spite of the coils of his dragon, without hint of alarm of invective
	Looks up at the mists on the mountain.
	
	(Now what saint or archangel
	Stands winged on a dragon,
	Bearing golden scales and a broad bladed sword all golden?
	Alas, my knowledge
	Of all the saints of the college,
	Of all these glimmering, olden
	Sacred and misty stories
	Of angels and saints and old glories . . .
	Is sadly defective.)
	The poor saint on the fountain . . .
	
	On top of his column
	Gazes up sad and solemn.
	But is it towards the top of the mountain
	Where the spindrifty haze is
	That he gazes?
	Or is it into the casement
	Where the girl sits sewing?
	There’s no knowing.
	
	Hear it rain!
	And from eight leaden pipes in the ball he stands on
	That has eight leaden and copper bands on,
	There gurgle and drain
	Eight driblets of water down into the basin.
	
	And he stands on his dragon
	And the girl sits sewing
	High, very high in her casement
	And before her are many geraniums in a parket
	All growing and blowing
	In box upon box
	From the gables right down to the basement
	With frescoes and carvings and paint . . .
	
	The poor saint!
	It rains and it rains,
	In the market there isn’t an ox,
	And in all the emplacement
	For waggons there isn’t a waggon,
	Not a stall for a grape or a raisin,
	Not a soul in the market
	Save the saint on his dragon
	With the rain dribbling down in the basin,
	And the maiden that sews in the casement.
	
	They are still and alone,
	Mutterseelens alone,
	And the rain dribbles down from his heels and his crown,
	From wet stone to wet stone.
	It’s grey as at dawn,
	And the owls, grey and fawn,
	Call from the little town hall
	With its arch in the wall,
	Where the fire-hooks are stored.
	
	From behind the flowers of her casement
	That’s all gay with the carvings and paint,
	The maiden gives a great yawn,
	But the poor saint --
	No doubt he’s as bored!
	Stands still on his column
	Uplifting his sword
	With never the ease of a yawn
	From wet dawn to wet dawn . . .



7. THE IRON MUSIC

	The French guns roll continuously
	And our guns, heavy, slow;
	Along the Ancre, sinuously,
	The transport wagons go,
	And the dust is on the thistles
	And the larks sing up on high . . .
	_But I see the Golden Valley
	Down by Tintern on the Wye._
	
	For it’s just nine weeks last Sunday
	Since we took the Chepstow train,
	And I’m wondering if one day
	We shall do the like again;
	for the four-point-two’s come screaming
	Thro’ the sausages on high;
	_So there’s little use in dreaming
	How we walked above the Wye._
	
	Dust and corpses in the thistles
	Where the pas-shells burst like snow,
	And the shrapnel screams and whistles
	On the Bécourt road below,
	And the High Wood bursts and bristles
	Where the mine-clouds foul the sky . . .
	_But I’m with you up at Wyndcroft,
	Over Tintern on the Wye._



8. THE OLD HOUSES OF FLANDERS

	The old houses of Flanders,
	They watch by the high cathedrals;
	They overtop the high town-halls;
	They have eyes, mournful, tolerant and sardonic, for the ways of men
	In the high, white, tiled gables.
	
	The rain and the night have settled down on Flanders;
	It is all wet darkness; you can see nothing.
	
	Then those old eyes, mournful, tolerant and sardonic,
	Look at great, sudden, red lights,
	Look upon the shades of the cathedrals;
	And the golden rods of the illuminated rain,
	For a second . . .
	
	And those old eyes,
	Very old eyes that have watched the ways of men for generations,
	Close for ever.
	The high, white shoulders of the gables
	Slouch together for a consultation,
	Slant drunkenly over in the lea of the flaming cathedrals.
	
	They are no more, the old houses of Flanders.



9. ONE LAST PRAYER

	Let me wait, my dear,
	One more day,
	Let me linger near,
	Let me stay.
	Do not bar the gate of draw the blind
	Or lock the door that yields,
	Dear, be kind!
	
	I have only you beneath the skies
	To rest my eyes
	From the cruel green of the fields
	And the cold, white seas
	And the weary hills
	And the naked trees.
	I have known the hundred ills
	Of the hated wars.
	Do not close the bars,
	Or draw the blind.
	I have only you beneath the stars:
	Dear, be kind!



10. SANCTUARY

	Shadowed by your dear hair, your dear kind eyes
	Look on wine-purple seas, whitened afar
	With marble foam, where the dim islands are.
	We sit forgetting. For the great pines rise
	Above dark cypress to the dim white skies
	So clear and black and still-to one great star.
	The marble dryads and the veined white jar
	Gleam from the grove. Glimmering, the white owl flies
	In the dark shade . . .
	
	If ever life was harsh
	Here we forget--or ever friends turned foes.
	The sea cliffs beetle down above the marsh
	And through sea-holly the black panther goes.
	And in the shadows of this secret place
	Your kind, dear eyes shine in your dear, dear face.



11. SEVEN SHEPHERDS

	Seven shepherds herd their sheep
	Down seven sleepy stubble fields.
	Seven angels stand and weep
	And say, “How small the harvest-yields!”
	
	Seven greybeards prate of tillage
	Round the ingle of the inn:
	Seven call our age an ill age,
	Seven wave their mugs and sing.
	
	And all the signboards of our village
	Creak as they swing.
	But the seven stars above our village
	Twinkle and spin.



12. THE SILVER MUSIC

	In Chepstow stands a castle;
	My love and I went there;
	The foxgloves on the wall all heard
	Her footsteps on the stair.
	
	The sun was high in heaven,
	And the perfume on the air
	Came from purple cat’s valerian . . .
	But her footsteps on the stair
	Made a sound like silver music
	Thro’ the perfume in the air.
	
	Oh I’m weary for the castle,
	And I’m weary for the Wye,
	And the flowered walls are purple
	And the purple walls are high.
	And above the cat’s valerian
	The foxgloves brush the sky.
	But I must plod along the road
	That leads to Germany.
	
	And another soldier fellow
	Shall come courting of my dear
	And it’s I shall not be with her
	With my lips beside her ear.
	For it’s he shall walk beside her
	In the perfume of the air
	To the silver silver music
	Of her footstep on the stair.



13. A SOLIS ORTUS CARDINE

	Oh quiet peoples sleeping bed by bed
	Beneath grey roof-trees in the glimmering West,
	We who can see the silver grey and red
	Rise over No Man’s Land--salute your rest.
	
	Oh quiet comrades, sleeping in the clay
	Beneath a turmoil you need no more mark,
	We who have lived through yet another day
	Salute your graves at setting in of dark.
	
	And rising from your beds or from the clay
	You, dead, or far from lines of slain and slayers,
	Thro’ your eternal or your finite day
	Give us your prayers!



14. THAT EXPLOIT OF YOURS

	I meet with two soldiers sometimes here in Hell 
	The one, with a tear on the seat of hi red pantaloons 
	Was stuck by a pitchfork, 
	Climbing a wall to steal apples. 
	
	The second has a seeming silver helmet, 
	Having died from a fall from his horse on some tram-lines 
	In Dortmund. 
	
	These two 
	Meeting in the vaulted and vaporous caverns of Hell 
	Exclaim always in identical tones: 
	‘I at least have done my duty to Society and the Fatherland!’ 
	It is strange how the cliché` prevails . . .
	For I will bet my hat that you sent me here to Hell 
	Are saying the selfsame words at this very moment 
	Concerning that exploit of yours.



15. THERE SHALL BE MORE JOY

	The little angels of Heaven 
	Each wear a long white dress, 
	And in the tall arcadings 
	Play ball and play at chess; 
	
	With never a soil on their garments, 
	Not a sigh the whole day long, 
	Not a bitter note in their pleasure, 
	Not a bitter note in their song. 
	
	But they shall know keener pleasure, 
	And they shall know joy more rare--
	Keener, keener pleasure 
	When you, my dear, come there. 
	
	The little angels of Heaven 
	Each wear a long white gown, 
	And they lean over the ramparts 
	Waiting and looking down.



16. WHAT THE ORDERLY DOG SAW

	I
	
	The seven white peacocks against the castle wall
	In the high trees and the dusk are like tapestry;
	The sky being orange, the high wall a purple barrier,
	The canal dead silver in the dusk:
	And you are far away.
	
	Yet I see infinite miles of mountains,
	Little lights shining in rows in the dark of them--
	Infinite miles of marshes;
	Thin wisps of mist, shimmering like blue webs
	Over the dusk of them.
	
	Great curves and horns of sea,
	And dusk and dusk, and the little village;
			And you, sitting in the firelight.
	
	
	II
	
	Around me are the two hundred and forty men of B Company,
	Mud-colored;
	Going about their avocations,
	Resting between their practice of the art
	Of killing men;
	As I too rest between my practice
	Of the art of killing men.
	Their pipes glow over the mud and their mud-color, moving like fireflies beneath the trees--
	I too being mud-colored--
	Beneath the trees and the peacocks.
	When they come up to me in the dusk
	They start, stiffen and salute, almost invisibly.
	And the forty-two prisoners from the battalion guard-room
	Crouch over the tea-cans in the shadow of the wall.
	And the bread hunks glimmer, beneath the peacocks--
			And you are far away.
	
	
	III
	
	Presently I shall go in
	I shall write down the names of the forty-two
	Prisoners in the battalion guard-room
	On fair white foolscap:
	Their names, rank and regimental numbers;
	Corps, Companies, Punishments and Offences,
	Remarks, and By whom confined.
	Yet in spite of all I shall see only
	The infinite miles of dark mountain,
	The infinite miles of dark marshland,
	Great curves and horns of sea;
	The little village;
	And you,
	Sitting in the firelight.



17. WHEN THE WORLD WAS IN BUILDING

	Thank Goodness, the moving is over,
	They’ve swept up the straw in the passage
	And life will begin . . .
	This tiny, white, tiled cottage by the bridge! . . .
	When we’ve had tea I will punt you
	To Paradise for the sugar and onions . . .
	We will drift home in the twilight,
	The trout will be rising . . .
