*** Robert Frost (1874 - 1963)


1. AFTER APPLE-PICKING

	My long two-pointed ladder’s sticking through a tree
	Toward heaven still
	And there’s a barrel that I didn’t fill
	Beside it and there may be two or three
	Apples I didn’t pick upon some bough.
	But I am done with apple-picking now.
	Essence of winter sleep is on the night
	The scent of apples: I am drowsing off.
	I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight
	I got from looking through a pane of glass
	I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough
	And held against the world of hoary grass.
	It melted and I let it fall and break.
	But I was well
	Upon my way to sleep before it fell
	And I could tell
	What form my dreaming was about to take.
	Magnified apples appear and disappear
	Stem end and blossom end
	And every fleck of russet showing clear.
	My instep arch not only keeps the ache
	It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round.
	I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend.
	And I keep hearing from the cellar bin
	The rumbling sound
	Of load on load of apples coming in.
	For I have had too much
	Of apple-picking: I am overtired
	Of the great harvest I myself desired.
	There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch
	Cherish in hand lift down and not let fall.
	For all
	That struck the earth
	No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble
	Went surely to the cider-apple heap
	As of no worth.
	One can see what will trouble
	This sleep of mine whatever sleep it is.
	Were he not gone
	The woodchuck could say whether it’s like his
	Long sleep as I describe its coming on
	Or just some human sleep.



2. BIRCHES

	When I see birches bend to left and right
	Across the lines of straighter darker trees
	I like to think some boy’s been swinging them.
	But swinging doesn’t bend them down to stay.
	Ice-storms do that. Often you must have seen them
	Loaded with ice a sunny winter morning
	After a rain. They click upon themselves
	As the breeze rises and turn many-coloured
	As the stir cracks and crazes their enamel.
	Soon the sun’s warmth makes them shed crystal
	shells
	Shattering and avalanching on the snow-crust--
	Such heaps of broken glass to sweep away
	You’d think the inner dome of heaven had fallen.
	They are dragged to the withered bracken by the
	load
	And they seem not to break; though once they are
	bowed
	So low for long they never right themselves:
	You may see their trunks arching in the woods
	Years afterwards trailing their leaves on the ground
	Like girls on hands and knees that throw their hair
	Before them over their heads to dry in the sun.
	But I was going to say when Truth broke in
	With all her matter-of-fact about the ice-storm
	I should prefer to have some boy bend them
	As he went out and in to fetch the cows--
	Some boy too far from town to learn baseball
	Whose only play was what he found himself
	Summer or winter and could play alone.
	One by one he subdued his father’s trees
	By riding them down over and over again
	Until he took the stiffness out of them
	And not one but hung limp not one was left
	For him to conquer. He learned all there was
	To learn about not launching out too soon
	And so not carrying the tree away
	Clear to the ground. He always kept his poise
	To the top branches climbing carefully
	With the same pains you use to fill a cup
	Up to the brim and even above the brim.
	Then he flung outward feet first with a swish
	Kicking his way down through the air to the ground.
	So was I once myself a swinger of birches.
	And so I dream of going back to be.
	It’s when I’m weary of considerations
	And life is too much like a pathless wood
	Where your face burns and tickles with the cobwebs
	Broken across it and one eye is weeping
	From a twig’s having lashed across it open.
	I’d like to get away from earth awhile
	And then come back to it and begin over.
	May no fate wilfully misunderstand me
	And half grant what I wish and snatch me away
	Not to return. Earth’s the right place for love:
	I don’t know where it’s likely to go better.
	I’d like to go by climbing a birch tree
	And climb black branches up a snow-white trunk
	_Toward_ heaven till the tree could bear no more
	But dipped its top and set me down again.
	That would be good both going and coming back.
	One could do worse than be a swinger of birches.



3. BLUEBERRIES

	“You ought to have seen what I saw on my way
	To the village through Mortenson’s pasture to-day:
	Blueberries as big as the end of your thumb
	Real sky-blue and heavy and ready to drum
	In the cavernous pail of the first one to come!
	And all ripe together not some of them green
	And some of them ripe! You ought to have seen!”

	“I don’t know what part of the pasture you mean.”

	“You know where they cut off the woods--let me
	see--
	It was two years ago--or no!--can it be
	No longer than that?--and the following fall
	The fire ran and burned it all up but the wall.”

	“Why there hasn’t been time for the bushes to
	grow.
	That’s always the way with the blueberries though:
	There may not have been the ghost of a sign
	Of them anywhere under the shade of the pine
	But get the pine out of the way you may burn
	The pasture all over until not a fern
	Or grass-blade is left not to mention a stick
	And presto they’re up all around you as thick
	And hard to explain as a conjurer’s trick.”

	“It must be on charcoal they fatten their fruit.
	I taste in them sometimes the flavour of soot.

	And after all really they’re ebony skinned:
	The blue’s but a mist from the breath of the wind
	A tarnish that goes at a touch of the hand
	And less than the tan with which pickers are
	tanned.”

	“Does Mortenson know what he has do you
	think?”

	“He may and not care and so leave the chewink
	To gather them for him--you know what he is.
	He won’t make the fact that they’re rightfully his
	An excuse for keeping us other folk out.”

	“I wonder you didn’t see Loren about.”

	“The best of it was that I did. Do you know
	I was just getting through what the field had to show
	And over the wall and into the road
	When who should come by with a democrat-load
	Of all the young chattering Lorens alive
	But Loren the fatherly out for a drive.”

	“He saw you then? What did he do? Did he
	frown?”

	“He just kept nodding his head up and down.
	You know how politely he always goes by.
	But he thought a big thought--I could tell by his
	eye--
	Which being expressed might be this in effect:
	‘I have left those there berries I shrewdly suspect
	To ripen too long. I am greatly to blame.‘”

	“He’s a thriftier person than some I could name.”

	“He seems to be thrifty; and hasn’t he need
	With the mouths of all those young Lorens to feed?
	He has brought them all up on wild berries they
	say
	Like birds. They store a great many away.
	They eat them the year round and those they
	don’t eat
	They sell in the store and buy shoes for their feet.”

	“Who cares what they say? It’s a nice way to live
	Just taking what Nature is willing to give
	Not forcing her hand with harrow and plow.”

	“I wish you had seen his perpetual bow--
	And the air of the youngsters! Not one of them
	turned
	And they looked so solemn-absurdly concerned.”

	“I wish I knew half what the flock of them know
	Of where all the berries and other things grow
	Cranberries in bogs and raspberries on top
	Of the boulder-strewn mountain and when they
	will crop.
	I met them one day and each had a flower
	Stuck into his berries as fresh as a shower;
	Some strange kind--they told me it hadn’t a name.”

	“I’ve told you how once not long after we came
	I almost provoked poor Loren to mirth
	By going to him of all people on earth
	To ask if he knew any fruit to be had
	For the picking. The rascal he said he’d be glad
	To tell if he knew. But the year had been bad.
	There _had_ been some berries--but those were all
	gone.
	He didn’t say where they had been. He went on:
	‘I’m sure--I’m sure’--as polite as could be.
	He spoke to his wife in the door ‘Let me see
	Marne _we_ don’t know any good berrying place?’
	It was all he could do to keep a straight face.”

	“If he thinks all the fruit that grows wild is for him
	He’ll find he’s mistaken. See here for a whim
	We’ll pick in the Mortensons’ pasture this year.
	We’ll go in the morning that is if it’s clear
	And the sun shines out warm: the vines must be
	wet.
	It’s so long since I picked I almost forget
	How we used to pick berries: we took one look
	round
	Then sank out of sight like trolls underground
	And saw nothing more of each other or heard
	Unless when you said I was keeping a bird
	Away from its nest and I said it was you.
	‘Well one of us is.‘ For complaining it flew
	Around and around us. And then for a while
	We picked till I feared you had wandered a mile
	And I thought I had lost you. I lifted a shout
	Too loud for the distance you were it turned out
	For when you made answer your voice was as low
	As talking--you stood up beside me you know.”

	“We shan’t have the place to ourselves to enjoy--
	Not likely when all the young Lorens deploy.
	They’ll be there to-morrow or even to-night.
	They won’t be too friendly--they may be polite--
	To people they look on as having no right
	To pick where they’re picking. But we won’t
	complain.
	You ought to have seen how it looked in the rain
	The fruit mixed with water in layers of leaves
	Like two kinds of jewels a vision for thieves.”



4. BOND AND FREE

	Love has earth to which she clings
	With hills and circling arms about--
	Wall within wall to shut fear out.
	But Thought has need of no such things
	For Thought has a pair of dauntless wings.

	On snow and sand and turf I see
	Where Love has left a printed trace
	With straining in the world’s embrace.
	And such is Love and glad to be.
	But thought has shaken his ankles free.

	Thought cleaves the interstellar gloom
	And sits in Sirius’ disc all night
	Till day makes him retrace his flight
	With smell of burning on every plume
	Back past the sun to an earthly room.

	His gains in heaven are what they are.
	Yet some say Love by being thrall
	And simply staying possesses all
	In several beauty that Thought fares far
	To find fused in another star.



5. BROWN’S DESCENT

	Brown lived at such a lofty farm
	That everyone for miles could see
	His lantern when he did his chores
	In winter after half-past three.

	And many must have seen him make
	His wild descent from there one night
	‘Cross lots ‘cross walls ‘cross everything
	Describing rings of lantern light.

	Between the house and barn the gale
	Got him by something he had on
	And blew him out on the icy crust
	That cased the world and he was gone!

	Walls were all buried trees were few:
	He saw no stay unless he stove
	A hole in somewhere with his heel.
	But though repeatedly he strove

	And stamped and said things to himself
	And sometimes something seemed to yield
	He gained no foothold but pursued
	His journey down from field to field.

	Sometimes he came with arms outspread
	Like wings revolving in the scene
	Upon his longer axis and
	With no small dignity of mien.

	Faster or slower as he chanced
	Sitting or standing as he chose
	According as he feared to risk
	His neck or thought to spare his clothes

	He never let the lantern drop.
	And some exclaimed who saw afar
	The figures he described with it
	“I wonder what those signals are

	Brown makes at such an hour of night!
	He’s celebrating something strange.
	I wonder if he’s sold his farm
	Or been made Master of the Grange.”

	He reeled he lurched he bobbed he checked;
	He fell and made the lantern rattle
	(But saved the light from going out).
	So half-way down he fought the battle

	Incredulous of his own bad luck.
	And then becoming reconciled
	To everything he gave it up
	And came down like a coasting child.

	“Well--I--be----“ that was all he said
	As standing in the river road
	He looked back up the slippery slope
	(Two miles it was) to his abode.

	Sometimes as an authority
	On motor-cars I’m asked if I
	Should say our stock was petered out
	And this is my sincere reply:

	Yankees are what they always were.
	Don’t think Brown ever gave up hope
	Of getting home again because
	He couldn’t climb that slippery slope;

	Or even thought of standing there
	Until the January thaw
	Should take the polish off the crust.
	He bowed with grace to natural law

	And then went round it on his feet
	After the manner of our stock;
	Not much concerned for those to whom
	At that particular time o’clock

	It must have looked as if the course
	He steered was really straight away
	From that which he was headed for--
	Not much concerned for them I say.

	But now he snapped his eyes three times;
	Then shook his lantern saying “Ile’s
	‘Bout out!“ and took the long way home
	By road a matter of several miles.



6. THE CODE

	There were three in the meadow by the brook
	Gathering up windrows piling cocks of hay
	With an eye always lifted toward the west
	Where an irregular sun-bordered cloud
	Darkly advanced with a perpetual dagger
	Flickering across its bosom. Suddenly
	One helper thrusting pitchfork in the ground
	Marched himself off the field and home. One stayed.
	The town-bred farmer failed to understand.

	“What was there wrong?”

	“Something you just now said.”

	“What did I say?”

	“About our taking pains.

	“To cock the hay?--because it’s going to shower?
	I said that more than half an hour ago.
	I said it to myself as much as you.”

	“You didn’t know. But James is one big fool.
	He thought you meant to find fault with his work.
	That’s what the average farmer would have meant.
	James would take time of course to chew it over
	Before he acted: he’s just got round to act.”

	“He is a fool if that’s the way he takes me.”

	“Don’t let it bother you. You’ve found out
	something.
	The hand that knows his business won’t be told
	To do work better or faster--those two things.
	I’m as particular as anyone:
	Most likely I’d have served you just the same.
	But I know you don’t understand our ways.
	You were just talking what was in your mind
	What was in all our minds and you weren’t hinting.

	Tell you a story of what happened once:
	I was up here in Salem at a man’s
	Named Sanders with a gang of four or five
	Doing the haying. No one liked the boss.
	He was one of the kind sports call a spider
	All wiry arms and legs that spread out wavy
	From a humped body nigh as big’s a biscuit.
	But work! that man could work especially
	If by so doing he could get more work
	Out of his hired help. I’m not denying
	He was hard on himself. I couldn’t find
	That he kept any hours--not for himself.
	Daylight and lantern-light were one to him:
	I’ve heard him pounding in the barn all night.
	But what he liked was someone to encourage.
	Them that he couldn’t lead he’d get behind
	And drive the way you can you know in mowing--
	Keep at their heels and threaten to mow their legs
	off.
	I’d seen about enough of his bulling tricks
	(We call that bulling). I’d been watching him.
	So when he paired off with me in the hayfield
	To load the load thinks I Look out for trouble.
	I built the load and topped it off; old Sanders
	Combed it down with a rake and says ‘O. K.’
	Everything went well till we reached the barn
	With a big jag to empty in a bay.
	You understand that meant the easy job
	For the man up on top of throwing _down_
	The hay and rolling it off wholesale
	Where on a mow it would have been slow lifting.
	You wouldn’t think a fellow’d need much urging
	Under those circumstances would you now?
	But the old fool seizes his fork in both hands
	And looking up bewhiskered out of the pit
	Shouts like an army captain ‘Let her come!
	Thinks I D’ye mean it? ‘What was that you
	said?’
	I asked out loud so’s there’d be no mistake
	‘Did you say Let her come?‘ ‘Yes let her come.’
	He said it over but he said it softer.
	Never you say a thing like that to a man
	Not if he values what he is. God I’d as soon
	Murdered him as left out his middle name.
	I’d built the load and knew right where to find it.
	Two or three forkfuls I picked lightly round for
	Like meditating and then I just dug in
	And dumped the rackful on him in ten lots
	I looked over the side once in the dust
	And caught sight of him treading-water-like
	Keeping his head above. ‘Damn ye’ I says
	‘That gets ye!‘ He squeaked like a squeezed rat.
	That was the last I saw or heard of him.
	I cleaned the rack and drove out to cool off.
	As I sat mopping hayseed from my neck
	And sort of waiting to be asked about it
	One of the boys sings out ‘Where’s the old man?’
	‘I left him in the barn under the hay.
	If ye want him ye can go and dig him out.’
	They realised from the way I swobbed my neck
	More than was needed something must be up.
	They headed for the barn; I stayed where I was.
	They told me afterward. First they forked hay
	A lot of it out into the barn floor.
	Nothing! They listened for him. Not a rustle.
	I guess they thought I’d spiked him in the temple
	Before I buried him or I couldn’t have managed.
	They excavated more. ‘Go keep his wife
	Out of the barn.‘ Someone looked in a window
	And curse me if he wasn’t in the kitchen
	Slumped way down in a chair with both his feet
	Stuck in the oven the hottest day that summer.
	He looked so clean disgusted from behind
	There was no one that dared to stir him up
	Or let him know that he was being looked at.
	Apparently I hadn’t buried him
	(I may have knocked him down); but my just
	trying
	To bury him had hurt his dignity.
	He had gone to the house so’s not to meet me.
	He kept away from us all afternoon.
	We tended to his hay. We saw him out
	After a while picking peas in his garden:
	He couldn’t keep away from doing something.”

	“Weren’t you relieved to find he wasn’t dead?”

	“No! and yet I don’t know--it’s hard to say.
	I went about to kill him fair enough.”

	“You took an awkward way. Did he discharge
	you?”
	“Discharge me? No! He knew I did just right.”



7. THE COW IN APPLE-TIME

	Something inspires the only cow of late
	To make no more of a wall than an open gate
	And think no more of wall-builders than fools.
	Her face is flecked with pomace and she drools
	A cider syrup. Having tasted fruit
	She scorns a pasture withering to the root.
	She runs from tree to tree where lie and sweeten
	The windfalls spiked with stubble and worm-eaten.
	She leaves them bitten when she has to fly.
	She bellows on a knoll against the sky.
	Her udder shrivels and the milk goes dry.



8. THE DEATH OF THE HIRED MAN

	Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table
	Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step
	She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage
	To meet him in the doorway with the news
	And put him on his guard. “Silas is back.”

	She pushed him outward with her through the door
	And shut it after her. “Be kind“ she said.
	She took the market things from Warren’s arms
	And set them on the porch then drew him down
	To sit beside her on the wooden steps.

	“When was I ever anything but kind to him?
	But I’ll not have the fellow back“ he said.
	“I told him so last haying didn’t I?
	‘If he left then’ I said ‘that ended it.’
	What good is he? Who else will harbour him
	At his age for the little he can do?
	What help he is there’s no depending on.
	Off he goes always when I need him most.

	‘He thinks he ought to earn a little pay
	Enough at least to buy tobacco with
	So he won’t have to beg and be beholden.’
	‘All right’ I say ‘I can’t afford to pay
	Any fixed wages though I wish I could.’
	‘Someone else can.‘ ‘Then someone else will have
	to.’
	I shouldn’t mind his bettering himself
	If that was what it was. You can be certain
	When he begins like that there’s someone at him
	Trying to coax him off with pocket-money--
	In haying time when any help is scarce.
	In winter he comes back to us. I’m done.”

	“Sh! not so loud: he’ll hear you“ Mary said.

	“I want him to: he’ll have to soon or late.”

	“He’s worn out. He’s asleep beside the stove.
	When I came up from Rowe’s I found him here
	Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep
	A miserable sight and frightening too--
	You needn’t smile--I didn’t recognise him--
	I wasn’t looking for him--and he’s changed.
	Wait till you see.”

	“Where did you say he’d been?”

	“He didn’t say. I dragged him to the house
	And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke.
	I tried to make him talk about his travels.
	Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off.”

	“What did he say? Did he say anything?”

	“But little.”

	“Anything? Mary confess
	He said he’d come to ditch the meadow for me.”

	“Warren!”

	“But did he? I just want to know.”

	“Of course he did. What would you have him say?
	Surely you wouldn’t grudge the poor old man
	Some humble way to save his self-respect.
	He added if you really care to know
	He meant to clear the upper pasture too.
	That sounds like something you have heard before?
	Warren I wish you could have heard the way
	He jumbled everything. I stopped to look
	Two or three times--he made me feel so queer--
	To see if he was talking in his sleep.
	He ran on Harold Wilson--you remember--
	The boy you had in haying four years since.
	He’s finished school and teaching in his college.
	Silas declares you’ll have to get him back.
	He says they two will make a team for work:
	Between them they will lay this farm as smooth!
	The way he mixed that in with other things.
	He thinks young Wilson a likely lad though daft
	On education--you know how they fought
	All through July under the blazing sun
	Silas up on the cart to build the load
	Harold along beside to pitch it on.”

	“Yes I took care to keep well out of earshot.”

	“Well those days trouble Silas like a dream.
	You wouldn’t think they would. How some things
	linger!
	Harold’s young college boy’s assurance piqued him.
	After so many years he still keeps finding
	Good arguments he sees he might have used.
	I sympathise. I know just how it feels
	To think of the right thing to say too late.
	Harold’s associated in his mind with Latin.
	He asked me what I thought of Harold’s saying
	He studied Latin like the violin
	Because he liked it--that an argument!
	He said he couldn’t make the boy believe
	He could find water with a hazel prong--
	Which showed how much good school had ever done
	him.
	He wanted to go over that. But most of all
	He thinks if he could have another chance
	To teach him how to build a load of hay----”

	“I know that’s Silas’ one accomplishment.
	He bundles every forkful in its place
	And tags and numbers it for future reference
	So he can find and easily dislodge it
	In the unloading. Silas does that well.
	He takes it out in bunches like big birds’ nests.
	You never see him standing on the hay
	He’s trying to lift straining to lift himself.”

	“He thinks if he could teach him that he’d be
	Some good perhaps to someone in the world.
	He hates to see a boy the fool of books.
	Poor Silas so concerned for other folk
	And nothing to look backward to with pride
	And nothing to look forward to with hope
	So now and never any different.”

	Part of a moon was falling down the west
	Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills.
	Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw
	And spread her apron to it. She put out her hand
	Among the harp-like morning-glory strings
	Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves
	As if she played unheard the tenderness
	That wrought on him beside her in the night.
	“Warren“ she said “he has come home to die:
	You needn’t be afraid he’ll leave you this time.”

	“Home“ he mocked gently.

	“Yes what else but home?

	It all depends on what you mean by home.
	Of course he’s nothing to us any more
	Than was the hound that came a stranger to us
	Out of the woods worn out upon the trail.”

	“Home is the place where when you have to go
	there
	They have to take you in.”

	“I should have called it
	Something you somehow haven’t to deserve.”

	Warren leaned out and took a step or two
	Picked up a little stick and brought it back
	And broke it in his hand and tossed it by.
	“Silas has better claim on us you think
	Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles
	As the road winds would bring him to his door.
	Silas has walked that far no doubt to-day.
	Why didn’t he go there? His brother’s rich
	A somebody--director in the bank.”

	“He never told us that.”

	“We know it though.”

	“I think his brother ought to help of course.
	I’ll see to that if there is need. He ought of right
	To take him in and might be willing to--
	He may be better than appearances.
	But have some pity on Silas. Do you think
	If he’d had any pride in claiming kin
	Or anything he looked for from his brother
	He’d keep so still about him all this time?”

	“I wonder what’s between them.”

	“I can tell you.
	Silas is what he is--we wouldn’t mind him--
	But just the kind that kinsfolk can’t abide.
	He never did a thing so very bad.
	He don’t know why he isn’t quite as good
	As anyone. He won’t be made ashamed
	To please his brother worthless though he is.”

	“_I_ can’t think Si ever hurt anyone.”

	“No but he hurt my heart the way he lay
	And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged
	chair-back.
	He wouldn’t let me put him on the lounge.
	You must go in and see what you can do.
	I made the bed up for him there to-night.
	You’ll be surprised at him--how much he’s broken.
	His working days are done; I’m sure of it.”

	“I’d not be in a hurry to say that.”

	“I haven’t been. Go look see for yourself.
	But Warren please remember how it is:
	He’s come to help you ditch the meadow.
	He has a plan. You mustn’t laugh at him.
	He may not speak of it and then he may.
	I’ll sit and see if that small sailing cloud
	Will hit or miss the moon.”

	It hit the moon.
	Then there were three there making a dim row
	The moon the little silver cloud and she.

	Warren returned--too soon it seemed to her
	Slipped to her side caught up her hand and waited.

	“Warren“ she questioned.

	“Dead“ was all he answered.



9. AN ENCOUNTER

	Once on the kind of day called “weather breeder”
	When the heat slowly hazes and the sun
	By its own power seems to be undone
	I was half boring through half climbing through
	A swamp of cedar. Choked with oil of cedar
	And scurf of plants and weary and over-heated
	And sorry I ever left the road I knew
	I paused and rested on a sort of hook
	That had me by the coat as good as seated
	And since there was no other way to look
	Looked up toward heaven and there against the
	blue
	Stood over me a resurrected tree
	A tree that had been down and raised again--
	A barkless spectre. He had halted too
	As if for fear of treading upon me.
	I saw the strange position of his hands--
	Up at his shoulders dragging yellow strands
	Of wire with something in it from men to men.
	“You here?“ I said. “Where aren’t you nowadays?
	And what’s the news you carry--if you know?
	And tell me where you’re off for--Montreal?
	Me? I’m not off for anywhere at all.
	Sometimes I wander out of beaten ways
	Half looking for the orchid Calypso.”



10. FLOWER-GATHERING

	I left you in the morning
	And in the morning glow
	You walked a way beside me
	To make me sad to go.
	Do you know me in the gloaming
	Gaunt and dusty grey with roaming?
	Are you dumb because you know me not
	Or dumb because you know?

	All for me? And not a question
	For the faded flowers gay
	That could take me from beside you
	For the ages of a day?
	They are yours and be the measure
	Of their worth for you to treasure
	The measure of the little while
	That I’ve been long away.



11. GOING FOR WATER

	The well was dry beside the door
	And so we went with pail and can
	Across the fields behind the house
	To seek the brook if still it ran;

	Not loth to have excuse to go
	Because the autumn eve was fair
	(Though chill) because the fields were ours
	And by the brook our woods were there.

	We ran as if to meet the moon
	That slowly dawned behind the trees
	The barren boughs without the leaves
	Without the birds without the breeze.

	But once within the wood we paused
	Like gnomes that hid us from the moon
	Ready to run to hiding new
	With laughter when she found us soon.

	Each laid on other a staying hand
	To listen ere we dared to look
	And in the hush we joined to make
	We heard we knew we heard the brook.

	A note as from a single place
	A slender tinkling fall that made
	Now drops that floated on the pool
	Like pearls and now a silver blade.



12. THE GUM-GATHERER

	There overtook me and drew me in
	To his down-hill early-morning stride
	And set me five miles on my road
	Better than if he had had me ride
	A man with a swinging bag for load
	And half the bag wound round his hand.
	We talked like barking above the din
	Of water we walked along beside.
	And for my telling him where I’d been
	And where I lived in mountain land
	To be coming home the way I was
	He told me a little about himself.
	He came from higher up in the pass
	Where the grist of the new-beginning brooks
	Is blocks split off the mountain mass--
	And hopeless grist enough it looks
	Ever to grind to soil for grass.
	(The way it is will do for moss.)
	There he had built his stolen shack.
	It had to be a stolen shack
	Because of the fears of fire and loss
	That trouble the sleep of lumber folk:
	Visions of half the world burned black
	And the sun shrunken yellow in smoke.
	We know who when they come to town
	Bring berries under the wagon seat
	Or a basket of eggs between their feet;
	What this man brought in a cotton sack
	Was gum the gum of the mountain spruce.
	He showed me lumps of the scented stuff
	Like uncut jewels dull and rough.
	It comes to market golden brown;
	But turns to pink between the teeth.

	I told him this is a pleasant life
	To set your breast to the bark of trees
	That all your days are dim beneath
	And reaching up with a little knife
	To loose the resin and take it down
	And bring it to market when you please.



13. THE HILL WIFE

	Loneliness (_Her Word_)

	One ought not to have to care
	So much as you and I
	Care when the birds come round the house
	To seem to say good-bye;

	Or care so much when they come back
	With whatever it is they sing;
	The truth being we are as much
	Too glad for the one thing

	As we are too sad for the other here--
	With birds that fill their breasts
	But with each other and themselves
	And their built or driven nests.



14. HOME BURIAL

	He saw her from the bottom of the stairs
	Before she saw him. She was starting down
	Looking back over her shoulder at some fear.
	She took a doubtful step and then undid it
	To raise herself and look again. He spoke
	Advancing toward her: “What is it you see
	From up there always--for I want to know.”
	She turned and sank upon her skirts at that
	And her face changed from terrified to dull.
	He said to gain time: “What is it you see?”
	Mounting until she cowered under him.
	“I will find out now--you must tell me dear.”
	She in her place refused him any help
	With the least stiffening of her neck and silence.
	She let him look sure that he wouldn’t see
	Blind creature; and a while he didn’t see.
	But at last he murmured “Oh“ and again “Oh.”

	“What is it--what?“ she said.
	“Just that I see.”

	“You don’t“ she challenged. “Tell me what it is.”

	“The wonder is I didn’t see at once.
	I never noticed it from here before.
	I must be wonted to it--that’s the reason.
	The little graveyard where my people are!
	So small the window frames the whole of it.
	Not so much larger than a bedroom is it?
	There are three stones of slate and one of marble
	Broad-shouldered little slabs there in the sunlight
	On the sidehill. We haven’t to mind _those._
	But I understand: it is not the stones
	But the child’s mound----”

	Don’t don’t don’t don’t“ she cried.

	She withdrew shrinking from beneath his arm
	That rested on the banister and slid downstairs;
	And turned on him with such a daunting look
	He said twice over before he knew himself:
	“Can’t a man speak of his own child he’s lost?”

	“Not you! Oh where’s my hat? Oh I don’t
	need it!
	I must get out of here. I must get air.
	I don’t know rightly whether any man can.”

	“Amy! Don’t go to someone else this time.
	Listen to me. I won’t come down the stairs.”
	He sat and fixed his chin between his fists.
	“There’s something I should like to ask you dear.”

	“You don’t know how to ask it.”

	“Help me then.”

	Her fingers moved the latch for all reply.

	“My words are nearly always an offence.
	I don’t know how to speak of anything
	So as to please you. But I might be taught
	I should suppose. I can’t say I see how.
	A man must partly give up being a man
	With women-folk. We could have some
	arrangement
	By which I’d bind myself to keep hands off
	Anything special you’re a-mind to name.
	Though I don’t like such things ‘twixt those that
	love.
	Two that don’t love can’t live together without
	them.
	But two that do can’t live together with them.”
	She moved the latch a little. “Don’t--don’t go.
	Don’t carry it to someone else this time.
	Tell me about it if it’s something human.
	Let me into your grief. I’m not so much
	Unlike other folks as your standing there
	Apart would make me out. Give me my chance.
	I do think though you overdo it a little.
	What was it brought you up to think it the thing
	To take your mother-loss of a first child
	So inconsolably--in the face of love.
	You’d think his memory might be satisfied----”

	“There you go sneering now!”

	“I’m not I’m not!
	You make me angry. I’ll come down to you.
	God what a woman! And it’s come to this
	A man can’t speak of his own child that’s dead.”
	“You can’t because you don’t know how.
	If you had any feelings you that dug
	With your own hand--how could you?--his little
	grave;
	I saw you from that very window there
	Making the gravel leap and leap in air
	Leap up like that like that and land so lightly
	And roll back down the mound beside the hole.
	I thought Who is that man? I didn’t know you.
	And I crept down the stairs and up the stairs
	To look again and still your spade kept lifting.
	Then you came in. I heard your rumbling voice
	Out in the kitchen and I don’t know why
	But I went near to see with my own eyes.
	You could sit there with the stains on your shoes
	Of the fresh earth from your own baby’s grave
	And talk about your everyday concerns.
	You had stood the spade up against the wall
	Outside there in the entry for I saw it.”

	“I shall laugh the worst laugh I ever laughed.
	I’m cursed. God if I don’t believe I’m cursed.”
	“I can repeat the very words you were saying.

	‘Three foggy mornings and one rainy day
	Will rot the best birch fence a man can build.’
	Think of it talk like that at such a time!
	What had how long it takes a birch to rot
	To do with what was in the darkened parlour?
	You _couldn’t_ care! The nearest friends can go
	With anyone to death comes so far short
	They might as well not try to go at all.
	No from the time when one is sick to death
	One is alone and he dies more alone.
	Friends make pretence of following to the grave
	But before one is in it their minds are turned
	And making the best of their way back to life
	And living people and things they understand.
	But the world’s evil. I won’t have grief so
	If I can change it. Oh I won’t I won’t!”

	“There you have said it all and you feel better.
	You won’t go now. You’re crying. Close the door.
	The heart’s gone out of it: why keep it up?
	Amy! There’s someone coming down the road!”

	“_You_--oh you think the talk is all. I must go--
	Somewhere out of this house. How can I make
	you----”

	“If--you--do!“ She was opening the door wider.
	“Where do you mean to go? First tell me that.
	I’ll follow and bring you back by force. I _will!_--”



15. HOUSE FEAR

	Always--I tell you this they learned--
	Always at night when they returned
	To the lonely house from far away
	To lamps unlighted and fire gone gray
	They learned to rattle the lock and key
	To give whatever might chance to be
	Warning and time to be off in flight:
	And preferring the out- to the in-door night
	They learned to leave the house-door wide
	Until they had lit the lamp inside.



16. A HUNDRED COLLARS

	Lancaster bore him--such a little town
	Such a great man. It doesn’t see him often
	Of late years though he keeps the old homestead
	And sends the children down there with their mother
	To run wild in the summer--a little wild.
	Sometimes he joins them for a day or two
	And sees old friends he somehow can’t get near.
	They meet him in the general store at night
	Preoccupied with formidable mail
	Rifling a printed letter as he talks.
	They seem afraid. He wouldn’t have it so:
	Though a great scholar he’s a democrat
	If not at heart at least on principle.
	Lately when coming up to Lancaster
	His train being late he missed another train
	And had four hours to wait at Woodsville Junction
	After eleven o’clock at night. Too tired
	To think of sitting such an ordeal out
	He turned to the hotel to find a bed.

	“No room“ the night clerk said. “Unless----”
	Woodsville’s a place of shrieks and wandering lamps
	And cars that shock and rattle--and _one_ hotel.

	“You say ‘unless.‘”

	“Unless you wouldn’t mind
	Sharing a room with someone else.”

	“Who is it?”

	“A man.

	“So I should hope. What kind of man?”

	“I know him: he’s all right. A man’s a man.
	Separate beds of course you understand.”

	The night clerk blinked his eyes and dared him on.
	“Who’s that man sleeping in the office chair?
	Has he had the refusal of my chance?”

	“He was afraid of being robbed or murdered.
	What do you say?”

	“I’ll have to have a bed.”

	The night clerk led him up three flights of stairs
	And down a narrow passage full of doors
	At the last one of which he knocked and entered
	“Lafe here’s a fellow wants to share your
	room.”

	“Show him this way. I’m not afraid of him
	I’m not so drunk I can’t take care of myself.”
	The night clerk clapped a bedstead on the foot.
	“This will be yours. Good-night“ he said and
	went.

	“Lafe was the name I think?”

	“Yes _Lay_fayette.
	You got it the first time. And yours?”

	“Magoon.

	Doctor Magoon.”

	“A Doctor?”

	“Well a teacher.”

	“Professor Square-the-circle-till-you’re-tired?
	Hold on there’s something I don’t think of now
	That I had on my mind to ask the first
	Man that knew anything I happened in with.
	I’ll ask you later--don’t let me forget it.”
	The Doctor looked at Lafe and looked away.
	A man? A brute. Naked above the waist
	He sat there creased and shining in the light
	Fumbling the buttons in a well-starched shirt.
	“I’m moving into a size-larger shirt.
	I’ve felt mean lately; mean’s no name for it.
	I just found what the matter was to-night:
	I’ve been a-choking like a nursery tree
	When it outgrows the wide band of its name tag.
	I blamed it on the hot spell we’ve been having.
	‘Twas nothing but my foolish hanging back
	Not liking to own up I’d grown a size.
	Number eighteen this is. What size do you wear?”

	The Doctor caught his throat convulsively.
	“Oh--ah--fourteen--fourteen.”

	“Fourteen! You say so!
	I can remember when I wore fourteen.
	And come to think I must have back at home
	More than a hundred collars size fourteen.
	Too bad to waste them all. You ought to have them.
	They’re yours and welcome; let me send them to
	you.
	What makes you stand there on one leg like that?
	You’re not much furtherer than where Kike left you
	You act as if you wished you hadn’t come.
	Sit down or lie down friend; you make me nervous.”

	The Doctor made a subdued dash for it
	And propped himself at bay against a pillow.

	“Not that way with your shoes on Kike’s white
	bed.
	You can’t rest that way. Let me pull your shoes
	off.”

	“Don’t touch me please--I say don’t touch me
	please.
	I’ll not be put to bed by you my man.”

	“Just as you say. Have it your own way then.
	‘My man’ is it? You talk like a professor.
	Speaking of who’s afraid of who however
	I’m thinking I have more to lose than you
	If anything should happen to be wrong.
	Who wants to cut your number fourteen throat!
	Let’s have a show down as an evidence
	Of good faith. There is ninety dollars.
	Come if you’re not afraid.”

	“_I_‘m not afraid.
	There’s five: that’s all I carry.”

	“I can search you?
	Where are you moving over to? Stay still.

	You’d better tuck your money under you
	And sleep on it the way I always do
	When I’m with people I don’t trust at night.”

	“Will you believe me if I put it there
	Right on the counterpane--that I do trust you?”

	“You’d say so Mister Man.--I’m a collector.
	My ninety isn’t mine--you won’t think that.
	I pick it up a dollar at a time
	All round the country for the _Weekly News_
	Published in Bow. You know the _Weekly News?_”

	“Known it since I was young.”

	“Then you know me.
	Now we are getting on together--talking.
	I’m sort of Something for it at the front.
	My business is to find what people want:
	They pay for it and so they ought to have it.
	Fairbanks he says to me--he’s editor--
	Feel out the public sentiment--he says.
	A good deal comes on me when all is said.
	The only trouble is we disagree
	In politics: I’m Vermont Democrat--
	You know what that is sort of double-dyed;
	The _News_ has always been Republican.
	Fairbanks he says to me ‘Help us this year’
	Meaning by us their ticket. ‘No’ I says
	‘I can’t and won’t. You’ve been in long enough:
	It’s time you turned around and boosted us.
	You’ll have to pay me more than ten a week
	If I’m expected to elect Bill Taft.
	I doubt if I could do it anyway.‘”

	“You seem to shape the paper’s policy.”

	“You see I’m in with everybody know ‘em all.
	I almost know their farms as well as they do.”

	“You drive around? It must be pleasant work.”

	“It’s business but I can’t say it’s not fun.
	What I like best’s the lay of different farms
	Coming out on them from a stretch of woods
	Or over a hill or round a sudden corner.
	I like to find folks getting out in spring
	Raking the dooryard working near the house.
	Later they get out further in the fields.
	Everything’s shut sometimes except the barn;
	The family’s all away in some back meadow.
	There’s a hay load a-coming--when it comes.
	And later still they all get driven in:
	The fields are stripped to lawn the garden patches
	Stripped to bare ground the apple trees
	To whips and poles. There’s nobody about.
	The chimney though keeps up a good brisk
	smoking.
	And I lie back and ride. I take the reins
	Only when someone’s coming and the mare
	Stops when she likes: I tell her when to go.
	I’ve spoiled Jemima in more ways than one.
	She’s got so she turns in at every house
	As if she had some sort of curvature
	No matter if I have no errand there.
	She thinks I’m sociable. I maybe am.
	It’s seldom I get down except for meals though.
	Folks entertain me from the kitchen doorstep
	All in a family row down to the youngest.”

	“One would suppose they might not be as glad
	To see you as you are to see them.”

	“Oh
	Because I want their dollar. I don’t want
	Anything they’ve not got. I never dun.
	I’m there and they can pay me if they like.
	I go nowhere on purpose: I happen by.
	Sorry there is no cup to give you a drink.
	I drink out of the bottle--not your style.
	Mayn’t I offer you----?”

	“No no no thank you.

	“Just as you say. Here’s looking at you then.--
	And now I’m leaving you a little while.

	You’ll rest easier when I’m gone perhaps--
	Lie down--let yourself go and get some sleep.
	But first--let’s see--what was I going to ask you?
	Those collars--who shall I address them to
	Suppose you aren’t awake when I come back?”

	“Really friend I can’t let you. You--may need
	them.”

	“Not till I shrink when they’ll be out of style.”

	“But really--I have so many collars.”

	“I don’t know who I rather would have have them.
	They’re only turning yellow where they are.
	But you’re the doctor as the saying is.
	I’ll put the light out. Don’t you wait for me:
	I’ve just begun the night. You get some sleep.
	I’ll knock so-fashion and peep round the door
	When I come back so you’ll know who it is.
	There’s nothing I’m afraid of like scared people.
	I don’t want you should shoot me in the head.
	What am I doing carrying off this bottle?
	There now you get some sleep.”

	He shut the door
	The Doctor slid a little down the pillow.



17. HYLA BROOK

	By June our brook’s run out of song and speed.
	Sought for much after that it will be found
	Either to have gone groping underground
	(And taken with it all the Hyla breed
	That shouted in the mist a month ago
	Like ghost of sleigh-bells in a ghost of snow)--
	Or flourished and come up in jewel-weed
	Weak foliage that is blown upon and bent
	Even against the way its waters went.
	Its bed is left a faded paper sheet
	Of dead leaves stuck together by the heat--
	A brook to none but who remember long.
	This as it will be seen is other far
	Than with brooks taken otherwhere in song.
	We love the things we love for what they are.



18. THE IMPULSE

	It was too lonely for her there
	And too wild
	And since there were but two of them
	And no child

	And work was little in the house
	She was free
	And followed where he furrowed field
	Or felled tree.

	She rested on a log and tossed
	The fresh chips
	With a song only to herself
	On her lips.

	And once she went to break a bough
	Of black alder.
	She strayed so far she scarcely heard
	When he called her--

	And didn’t answer--didn’t speak--
	Or return.
	She stood and then she ran and hid
	In the fern.

	He never found her though he looked
	Everywhere
	And he asked at her mother’s house
	Was she there.

	Sudden and swift and light as that
	The ties gave
	And he learned of finalities
	Besides the grave.



19. INTO MY OWN

	One of my wishes is that those dark trees
	So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze
	Were not as ‘twere the merest mask of gloom
	But stretched away unto the edge of doom.

	I should not be withheld but that some day
	Into their vastness I should steal away
	Fearless of ever finding open land
	Or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand.

	I do not see why I should e’er turn back
	Or those should not set forth upon my track
	To overtake me who should miss me here
	And long to know if still I held them dear.

	They would not find me changed from him they
	knew--
	Only more sure of all I thought was true.



20. MENDING WALL

	Something there is that doesn’t love a wall
	That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it
	And spills the upper boulders in the sun;
	And makes gaps even two can pass abreast.
	The work of hunters is another thing:
	I have come after them and made repair
	Where they have left not one stone on a stone
	But they would have the rabbit out of hiding
	To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean
	No one has seen them made or heard them made
	But at spring mending-time we find them there.
	I let my neighbour know beyond the hill;
	And on a day we meet to walk the line
	And set the wall between us once again.
	We keep the wall between us as we go.
	To each the boulders that have fallen to each.
	And some are loaves and some so nearly balls
	We have to use a spell to make them balance:
	“Stay where you are until our backs are turned!”
	We wear our fingers rough with handling them.
	Oh just another kind of out-door game
	One on a side. It comes to little more:
	There where it is we do not need the wall:
	He is all pine and I am apple orchard.
	My apple trees will never get across
	And eat the cones under his pines I tell him.
	He only says “Good fences make good neighbours.”
	Spring is the mischief in me and I wonder
	If I could put a notion in his head:
	“_Why_ do they make good neighbours? Isn’t it
	Where there are cows? But here there are no cows.
	Before I built a wall I’d ask to know
	What I was walling in or walling out
	And to whom I was like to give offence.
	Something there is that doesn’t love a wall
	That wants it down.“ I could say “Elves“ to him
	But it’s not elves exactly and I’d rather
	He said it for himself. I see him there
	Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top
	In each hand like an old-stone savage armed.
	He moves in darkness as it seems to me
	Not of woods only and the shade of trees.
	He will not go behind his father’s saying
	And he likes having thought of it so well
	He says again “Good fences make good
	neighbours.”



21. THE MOUNTAIN

	The mountain held the town as in a shadow.
	I saw so much before I slept there once:
	I noticed that I missed stars in the west
	Where its black body cut into the sky.
	Near me it seemed: I felt it like a wall
	Behind which I was sheltered from a wind.
	And yet between the town and it I found
	When I walked forth at dawn to see new things
	Were fields a river and beyond more fields.
	The river at the time was fallen away
	And made a widespread brawl on cobble-stones;
	But the signs showed what it had done in spring;
	Good grass-land gullied out and in the grass
	Ridges of sand and driftwood stripped of bark.
	I crossed the river and swung round the mountain.
	And there I met a man who moved so slow
	With white-faced oxen in a heavy cart
	It seemed no harm to stop him altogether.

	“What town is this?“ I asked.

	“This? Lunenburg.”
	Then I was wrong: the town of my sojourn
	Beyond the bridge was not that of the mountain
	But only felt at night its shadowy presence.
	“Where is your village? Very far from here?”

	“There is no village--only scattered farms.
	We were but sixty voters last election.
	We can’t in nature grow to many more:
	That thing takes all the room!“ He moved his goad.
	The mountain stood there to be pointed at.
	Pasture ran up the side a little way
	And then there was a wall of trees with trunks:
	After that only tops of trees and cliffs
	Imperfectly concealed among the leaves.
	A dry ravine emerged from under boughs
	Into the pasture.

	“That looks like a path.
	Is that the way to reach the top from here?--
	Not for this morning but some other time:
	I must be getting back to breakfast now.”

	“I don’t advise your trying from this side.
	There is no proper path but those that _have_
	Been up I understand have climbed from Ladd’s.
	That’s five miles back. You can’t mistake the place:
	They logged it there last winter some way up.
	I’d take you but I’m bound the other way.”

	“You’ve never climbed it?”

	“I’ve been on the sides
	Deer-hunting and trout-fishing. There’s a brook
	That starts up on it somewhere--I’ve heard say
	Right on the top tip-top--a curious thing.
	But what would interest you about the brook
	It’s always cold in summer warm in winter.
	One of the great sights going is to see
	It steam in winter like an ox’s breath.
	Until the bushes all along its banks
	Are inch-deep with the frosty spines and bristles--
	You know the kind. Then let the sun shine on it!”

	“There ought to be a view around the world
	From such a mountain--if it isn’t wooded
	Clear to the top.“ I saw through leafy screens
	Great granite terraces in sun and shadow
	Shelves one could rest a knee on getting up--
	With depths behind him sheer a hundred feet;
	Or turn and sit on and look out and down
	With little ferns in crevices at his elbow.

	“As to that I can’t say. But there’s the spring
	Right on the summit almost like a fountain.
	That ought to be worth seeing.”

	“If it’s there.
	You never saw it?”

	I guess there’s no doubt
	About its being there. I never saw it.
	It may not be right on the very top:
	It wouldn’t have to be a long way down
	To have some head of water from above
	And a _good distance_ down might not be noticed
	By anyone who’d come a long way up.
	One time I asked a fellow climbing it
	To look and tell me later how it was.”

	“What did he say?”

	“He said there was a lake
	Somewhere in Ireland on a mountain top.”

	“But a lake’s different. What about the spring?”

	“He never got up high enough to see.
	That’s why I don’t advise your trying this side.
	He tried this side. I’ve always meant to go
	And look myself but you know how it is:
	It doesn’t seem so much to climb a mountain
	You’ve worked around the foot of all your life.
	What would I do? Go in my overalls
	With a big stick the same as when the cows
	Haven’t come down to the bars at milking time?
	Or with a shotgun for a stray black bear?
	‘Twouldn’t seem real to climb for climbing it.”

	“I shouldn’t climb it if I didn’t want to--
	Not for the sake of climbing. What’s its name?”

	“We call it Hor: I don’t know if that’s right.”

	“Can one walk round it? Would it be too far?”

	“You can drive round and keep in Lunenburg
	But it’s as much as ever you can do
	The boundary lines keep in so close to it.
	Hor is the township and the township’s Hor--
	_And_ a few houses sprinkled round the foot
	Like boulders broken off the upper cliff
	Rolled out a little farther than the rest.”

	“Warm in December cold in June you say?”

	“I don’t suppose the waters changed at all.
	You and I know enough to know it’s warm
	Compared with cold and cold compared with warm.
	But all the fun’s in how you say a thing.”

	“You’ve lived here all your life?”

	“Ever since Hor

	Was no bigger than a----“ What I did not hear.
	He drew the oxen toward him with light touches
	Of his slim goad on nose and offside flank
	Gave them their marching orders and was moving.



22. MOWING

	There was never a sound beside the wood but one
	And that was my long scythe whispering to the
	ground.
	What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself;
	Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun
	Something perhaps about the lack of sound--
	And that was why it whispered and did not speak.
	It was no dream of the gift of idle hours
	Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf:
	Anything more than the truth would have seemed
	too weak
	To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows
	Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers
	(Pale orchises) and scared a bright green snake.
	The fact is the sweetest dream that labour knows.
	My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make.



23. MY NOVEMBER GUEST

	My Sorrow when she’s here with me
	Thinks these dark days of autumn rain
	Are beautiful as days can be;
	She loves the bare the withered tree;
	She walks the sodden pasture lane.

	Her pleasure will not let me stay.
	She talks and I am fain to list:
	She’s glad the birds are gone away
	She’s glad her simple worsted grey
	Is silver now with clinging mist.

	The desolate deserted trees
	The faded earth the heavy sky
	The beauties she so truly sees
	She thinks I have no eye for these
	And vexes me for reason why.

	Not yesterday I learned to know
	The love of bare November days
	Before the coming of the snow
	But it were vain to tell her so
	And they are better for her praise.



24. NOTHING GOLD CAN STAY

	Nature’s first green is gold,
	Her hardest hue to hold.
	Her early leaf’s a flower;
	But only so an hour.
	Then leaf subsides to leaf.
	So Eden sank to grief,
	So dawn goes down to day.
	Nothing gold can stay.



25. OCTOBER

	O hushed October morning mild
	Thy leaves have ripened to the fall;
	To-morrow’s wind if it be wild
	Should waste them all.
	The crows above the forest call;
	To-morrow they may form and go.
	O hushed October morning mild
	Begin the hours of this day slow
	Make the day seem to us less brief.
	Hearts not averse to being beguiled
	Beguile us in the way you know;
	Release one leaf at break of day;
	At noon release another leaf;
	One from our trees one far away;
	Retard the sun with gentle mist;
	Enchant the land with amethyst.
	Slow slow!
	For the grapes’ sake if they were all
	Whose leaves already are burnt with frost
	Whose clustered fruit must else be lost--
	For the grapes’ sake along the wall.



26. THE OFT-REPEATED DREAM

	She had no saying dark enough
	For the dark pine that kept
	Forever trying the window-latch
	Of the room where they slept.

	The tireless but ineffectual hands
	That with every futile pass
	Made the great tree seem as a little bird
	Before the mystery of glass!

	It never had been inside the room
	And only one of the two
	Was afraid in an oft-repeated dream
	Of what the tree might do.



27. AN OLD MAN’S WINTER NIGHT

	All out of doors looked darkly in at him
	Through the thin frost almost in separate stars
	That gathers on the pane in empty rooms.
	What kept his eyes from giving back the gaze
	Was the lamp tilted near them in his hand.
	What kept him from remembering what it was
	That brought him to that creaking room was age.
	He stood with barrels round him--at a loss.
	And having scared the cellar under him
	In clomping there he scared it once again
	In clomping off;--and scared the outer night
	Which has its sounds familiar like the roar
	Of trees and crack of branches common things
	But nothing so like beating on a box.
	A light he was to no one but himself
	Where now he sat concerned with he knew what
	A quiet light and then not even that.
	He consigned to the moon such as she was
	So late-arising to the broken moon
	As better than the sun in any case
	For such a charge his snow upon the roof
	His icicles along the wall to keep;
	And slept. The log that shifted with a jolt
	Once in the stove disturbed him and he shifted
	And eased his heavy breathing but still slept.
	One aged man--one man--can’t keep a house
	A farm a countryside or if he can
	It’s thus he does it of a winter night.



28. OUT OUT

	The buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yard
	And made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of
	wood
	Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.
	And from there those that lifted eyes could count
	Five mountain ranges one behind the other
	Under the sunset far into Vermont.
	And the saw snarled and rattled snarled and rattled
	As it ran light or had to bear a load.
	And nothing happened: day was all but done.
	Call it a day I wish they might have said
	To please the boy by giving him the half hour
	That a boy counts so much when saved from work.
	His sister stood beside them in her apron
	To tell them “Supper.“ At the word the saw
	As if to prove saws knew what supper meant
	Leaped out at the boy’s hand or seemed to leap--
	He must have given the hand. However it was
	Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!
	The boy’s first outcry was a rueful laugh.
	As he swung toward them holding up the hand
	Half in appeal but half as if to keep
	The life from spilling. Then the boy saw all--
	Since he was old enough to know big boy
	Doing a man’s work though a child at heart--
	He saw all spoiled. “Don’t let him cut my hand off--
	The doctor when he comes. Don’t let him sister!”
	So. But the hand was gone already.
	The doctor put him in the dark of ether.
	He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.
	And then--the watcher at his pulse took fright.
	No one believed. They listened at his heart.
	Little--less--nothing!--and that ended it.
	No more to build on there. And they since they
	Were not the one dead turned to their affairs.



29. THE OVEN BIRD

	There is a singer everyone has heard
	Loud a mid-summer and a mid-wood bird
	Who makes the solid tree trunks sound again.
	He says that leaves are old and that for flowers
	Mid-summer is to spring as one to ten.
	He says the early petal-fall is past
	When pear and cherry bloom went down in showers
	On sunny days a moment overcast;
	And comes that other fall we name the fall.
	He says the highway dust is over all.
	The bird would cease and be as other birds
	But that he knows in singing not to sing.
	The question that he frames in all but words
	Is what to make of a diminished thing.



30. THE PASTURE

	I’m going out to clean the pasture spring;
	I’ll only stop to rake the leaves away
	(And wait to watch the water clear I may):
	I shan’t be gone long.--You come too.

	I’m going out to fetch the little calf
	That’s standing by the mother. It’s so young
	It totters when she licks it with her tongue.
	I shan’t be gone long.--You come too.



31. PUTTING IN THE SEED

	You come to fetch me from my work to-night
	When supper’s on the table and we’ll see
	If I can leave off burying the white
	Soft petals fallen from the apple tree
	(Soft petals yes but not so barren quite
	Mingled with these smooth bean and wrinkled
	pea);
	And go along with you ere you lose sight
	Of what you came for and become like me
	Slave to a springtime passion for the earth.
	How Love bums through the Putting in the Seed
	On through the watching for that early birth
	When just as the soil tarnishes with weed
	The sturdy seedling with arched body comes
	Shouldering its way and shedding the earth crumbs.



32. RANGE-FINDING

	The battle rent a cobweb diamond-strung
	And cut a flower beside a ground bird’s nest
	Before it stained a single human breast.
	The stricken flower bent double and so hung.
	And still the bird revisited her young.
	A butterfly its fall had dispossessed
	A moment sought in air his flower of rest
	Then lightly stooped to it and fluttering clung.

	On the bare upland pasture there had spread
	O’ernight ‘twixt mullein stalks a wheel of thread
	And straining cables wet with silver dew.
	A sudden passing bullet shook it dry.
	The indwelling spider ran to greet the fly
	But finding nothing sullenly withdrew.



33. RELUCTANCE

	Out through the fields and the woods
	And over the walls I have wended;
	I have climbed the hills of view
	And looked at the world and descended;
	I have come by the highway home
	And lo it is ended.

	The leaves are all dead on the ground
	Save those that the oak is keeping
	To ravel them one by one
	And let them go scraping and creeping
	Out over the crusted snow
	When others are sleeping.

	And the dead leaves lie huddled and still
	No longer blown hither and thither;
	The last lone aster is gone;
	The flowers of the witch-hazel wither;
	The heart is still aching to seek
	But the feet question “Whither?”

	Ah when to the heart of man
	Was it ever less than a treason
	To go with the drift of things
	To yield with a grace to reason
	And bow and accept the end
	Of a love or a season?



34. REVELATION

	We make ourselves a place apart
	Behind light words that tease and flout
	But oh the agitated heart
	Till someone really find us out.

	A pity if the case require
	(Or so we say) that in the end
	We speak the literal to inspire
	The understanding of a friend.

	But so with all from babes that play
	At hide-and-seek to God afar
	So all who hide too well away
	Must speak and tell us where they are.



35. THE ROAD NOT TAKEN

	Two roads diverged in a yellow wood
	And sorry I could not travel both
	And be one traveller long I stood
	And looked down one as far as I could
	To where it bent in the undergrowth;

	Then took the other as just as fair
	And having perhaps the better claim
	Because it was grassy and wanted wear;
	Though as for that the passing there
	Had worn them really about the same

	And both that morning equally lay
	In leaves no step had trodden black.
	Oh I kept the first for another day!
	Yet knowing how way leads on to way
	I doubted if I should ever come back.

	I shall be telling this with a sigh
	Somewhere ages and ages hence:
	Two roads diverged in a wood and I--
	I took the one less travelled by
	And that has made all the difference.



36. THE RUNAWAY

	Once when the snow of the year was beginning to
	fall
	We stopped by a mountain pasture to say “Whose
	colt?”
	A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall
	The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head
	And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt.
	We heard the miniature thunder where he fled
	And we saw him or thought we saw him dim and
	grey
	Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes.
	“I think the little fellow’s afraid of the snow.
	He isn’t winter-broken. It isn’t play
	With the little fellow at all. He’s running away.
	I doubt if even his mother could tell him ‘Sakes
	It’s only weather.‘ He’d think she didn’t know!
	Where is his mother? He can’t be out alone.”
	And now he comes again with a clatter of stone
	And mounts the wall again with whited eyes
	And all his tail that isn’t hair up straight.
	He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies.
	“Whoever it is that leaves him out so late
	When other creatures have gone to stall and bin
	Ought to be told to come and take him in.”



37. A SERVANT TO SERVANTS

	I didn’t make you know how glad I was
	To have you come and camp here on our land.
	I promised myself to get down some day
	And see the way you lived but I don’t know!
	With a houseful of hungry men to feed
	I guess you’d find. . . . It seems to me
	I can’t express my feelings any more
	Than I can raise my voice or want to lift
	My hand (oh I can lift it when I have to).
	Did ever you feel so? I hope you never.
	It’s got so I don’t even know for sure
	Whether I _am_ glad sorry or anything.
	There’s nothing but a voice-like left inside
	That seems to tell me how I ought to feel
	And would feel if I wasn’t all gone wrong.
	You take the lake. I look and look at it.
	I see it’s a fair pretty sheet of water.
	I stand and make myself repeat out loud
	The advantages it has so long and narrow
	Like a deep piece of some old running river
	Cut short off at both ends. It lies five miles
	Straight away through the mountain notch
	From the sink window where I wash the plates
	And all our storms come up toward the house
	Drawing the slow waves whiter and whiter and
	whiter.
	It took my mind off doughnuts and soda biscuit
	To step outdoors and take the water dazzle
	A sunny morning or take the rising wind
	About my face and body and through my wrapper
	When a storm threatened from the Dragon’s Den
	And a cold chill shivered across the lake.
	I see it’s a fair pretty sheet of water
	Our Willoughby! How did you hear of it?
	I expect though everyone’s heard of it.
	In a book about ferns? Listen to that!
	You let things more like feathers regulate
	Your going and coming. And you like it here?
	I can see how you might. But I don’t know!
	It would be different if more people came
	For then there would be business. As it is
	The cottages Len built sometimes we rent them
	Sometimes we don’t. We’ve a good piece of shore
	That ought to be worth something and may yet.
	But I don’t count on it as much as Len.
	He looks on the bright side of everything
	Including me. He thinks I’ll be all right
	With doctoring. But it’s not medicine--
	Lowe is the only doctor’s dared to say so--
	It’s rest I want--there I have said it out--
	From cooking meals for hungry hired men
	And washing dishes after them--from doing
	Things over and over that just won’t stay done.
	By good rights I ought not to have so much
	Put on me but there seems no other way.
	Len says one steady pull more ought to do it.
	He says the best way out is always through.
	And I agree to that or in so far
	As that I can see no way out but through--
	Leastways for me--and then they’ll be convinced.
	It’s not that Len don’t want the best for me.
	It was his plan our moving over in
	Beside the lake from where that day I showed you
	We used to live--ten miles from anywhere
	We didn’t change without some sacrifice
	But Len went at it to make up the loss.
	His work’s a man’s of course from sun to sun
	But he works when he works as hard as I do--
	Though there’s small profit in comparisons.
	(Women and men will make them all the same.)
	But work ain’t all. Len undertakes too much.
	He’s into everything in town. This year
	It’s highways and he’s got too many men
	Around him to look after that make waste.
	They take advantage of him shamefully
	And proud too of themselves for doing so.
	We have four here to board great good-for-nothings
	Sprawling about the kitchen with their talk
	While I fry their bacon. Much they care!
	No more put out in what they do or say
	Than if I wasn’t in the room at all.
	Coming and going all the time they are:
	I don’t learn what their names are let alone
	Their characters or whether they are safe
	To have inside the house with doors unlocked.
	I’m not afraid of them though if they’re not
	Afraid of me. There’s two can play at that.
	I have my fancies: it runs in the family.
	My father’s brother wasn’t right. They kept him
	Locked up for years back there at the old farm.
	I’ve been away once--yes I’ve been away.
	The State Asylum. I was prejudiced;
	I wouldn’t have sent anyone of mine there;
	You know the old idea--the only asylum
	Was the poorhouse and those who could afford
	Rather than send their folks to such a place
	Kept them at home; and it does seem more human.
	But it’s not so: the place is the asylum.
	There they have every means proper to do with
	And you aren’t darkening other people’s lives--
	Worse than no good to them and they no good
	To you in your condition; you can’t know
	Affection or the want of it in that state.
	I’ve heard too much of the old-fashioned way.
	My father’s brother he went mad quite young.
	Some thought he had been bitten by a dog
	Because his violence took on the form
	Of carrying his pillow in his teeth;
	But it’s more likely he was crossed in love
	Or so the story goes. It was some girl.
	Anyway all he talked about was love.
	They soon saw he would do someone a mischief
	If he wa’n’t kept strict watch of and it ended
	In father’s building him a sort of cage
	Or room within a room of hickory poles
	Like stanchions in the barn from floor to ceiling--
	A narrow passage all the way around.
	Anything they put in for furniture
	He’d tear to pieces even a bed to lie on.
	So they made the place comfortable with straw
	Like a beast’s stall to ease their consciences.
	Of course they had to feed him without dishes.
	They tried to keep him clothed but he paraded
	With his clothes on his arm--all of his clothes.
	Cruel--it sounds. I s’pose they did the best
	They knew. And just when he was at the height
	Father and mother married and mother came
	A bride to help take care of such a creature
	And accommodate her young life to his.
	That was what marrying father meant to her.
	She had to lie and hear love things made dreadful
	By his shouts in the night. He’d shout and shout
	Until the strength was shouted out of him
	And his voice died down slowly from exhaustion.
	He’d pull his bars apart like bow and bow-string
	And let them go and make them twang until
	His hands had worn them smooth as any ox-bow.
	And then he’d crow as if he thought that child’s
	play--
	The only fun he had. I’ve heard them say though
	They found a way to put a stop to it.
	He was before my time--I never saw him;
	But the pen stayed exactly as it was
	There in the upper chamber in the ell
	A sort of catch-all full of attic clutter.
	I often think of the smooth hickory bars.
	It got so I would say--you know half fooling--
	“It’s time I took my turn upstairs in jail“--
	Just as you will till it becomes a habit.
	No wonder I was glad to get away.
	Mind you I waited till Len said the word.
	I didn’t want the blame if things went wrong.
	I was glad though no end when we moved out
	And I looked to be happy and I was
	As I said for a while--but I don’t know!
	Somehow the change wore out like a prescription.
	And there’s more to it than just window-views
	And living by a lake. I’m past such help--
	Unless Len took the notion which he won’t
	And I won’t ask him--it’s not sure enough.
	I ‘spose I’ve got to go the road I’m going:
	Other folks have to and why shouldn’t I?
	I almost think if I could do like you
	Drop everything and live out on the ground--
	But it might be come night I shouldn’t like it
	Or a long rain. I should soon get enough
	And be glad of a good roof overhead.
	I’ve lain awake thinking of you I’ll warrant
	More than you have yourself some of these nights.
	The wonder was the tents weren’t snatched away
	From over you as you lay in your beds.
	I haven’t courage for a risk like that.
	Bless you of course you’re keeping me from work
	But the thing of it is I need to _be_ kept.
	There’s work enough to do--there’s always that;
	But behind’s behind. The worst that you can do
	Is set me back a little more behind.
	I shan’t catch up in this world anyway.
	I’d rather you’d not go unless you must.



38. THE SMILE

	(_Her Word_)

	I didn’t like the way he went away.
	That smile! It never came of being gay.
	Still he smiled--did you see him?--I was sure!
	Perhaps because we gave him only bread
	And the wretch knew from that that we were poor.
	Perhaps because he let us give instead
	Of seizing from us as he might have seized.
	Perhaps he mocked at us for being wed
	Or being very young (and he was pleased
	To have a vision of us old and dead).
	I wonder how far down the road he’s got.
	He’s watching from the woods as like as not.



39. THE SOUND OF TREES

	I wonder about the trees.
	Why do we wish to bear
	Forever the noise of these
	More than another noise
	So close to our dwelling place?
	We suffer them by the day
	Till we lose all measure of pace
	And fixity in our joys
	And acquire a listening air.
	They are that that talks of going
	But never gets away;
	And that talks no less for knowing
	As it grows wiser and older
	That now it means to stay.
	My feet tug at the floor
	And my head sways to my shoulder
	Sometimes when I watch trees sway
	From the window or the door.
	I shall set forth for somewhere
	I shall make the reckless choice
	Some day when they are in voice
	And tossing so as to scare
	The white clouds over them on.
	I shall have less to say
	But I shall be gone.



40. STORM-FEAR

	When the wind works against us in the dark
	And pelts with snow
	The lower chamber window on the east
	And whispers with a sort of stifled bark
	The beast
	“Come out! Come out!“--
	It costs no inward struggle not to go
	Ah do!
	I count our strength
	Two and a child
	Those of us not asleep subdued to mark
	How the cold creeps as the fire dies at length--
	How drifts are piled
	Dooryard and road ungraded
	Till even the comforting barn grows far away
	And my heart owns a doubt
	Whether ‘tis in us to arise with day
	And save ourselves unaided.



41. A TIME TO TALK

	When a friend calls to me from the road
	And slows his horse to a meaning walk
	I don’t stand still and look around
	On all the hills I haven’t hoed
	And shout from where I am What is it?
	No not as there is a time to talk.
	I thrust my hoe in the mellow ground
	Blade-end up and five feet tall
	And plod: I go up to the stone wall
	For a friendly visit.



42. TO THE THAWING WIND

	Come with rain O loud Southwester!
	Bring the singer bring the nester;
	Give the buried flower a dream;
	Make the settled snow-bank steam;
	Find the brown beneath the white;
	But whate’er you do to-night
	Bathe my window make it flow
	Melt it as the ice will go;
	Melt the glass and leave the sticks
	Like a hermit’s crucifix;
	Burst into my narrow stall;
	Swing the picture on the wall;
	Run the rattling pages o’er;
	Scatter poems on the floor;
	Turn the poet out of door.



43. THE TUFT OF FLOWERS

	I went to turn the grass once after one
	Who mowed it in the dew before the sun.

	The dew was gone that made his blade so keen
	Before I came to view the levelled scene.

	I looked for him behind an isle of trees;
	I listened for his whetstone on the breeze.

	But he had gone his way the grass all mown
	And I must be as he had been--alone

	“As all must be“ I said within my heart
	“Whether they work together or apart.”

	But as I said it swift there passed me by
	On noiseless wing a bewildered butterfly

	Seeking with memories grown dim o’er night
	Some resting flower of yesterday’s delight.

	And once I marked his flight go round and round
	As where some flower lay withering on the ground.

	And then he flew as far as eye could see
	And then on tremulous wing came back to me.

	I thought of questions that have no reply
	And would have turned to toss the grass to dry;

	But he turned first and led my eye to look
	At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook

	A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared
	Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared.

	I left my place to know them by their name
	Finding them butterfly weed when I came.

	The mower in the dew had loved them thus
	By leaving them to flourish not for us

	Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him.
	But from sheer morning gladness at the brim.

	The butterfly and I had lit upon
	Nevertheless a message from the dawn.

	That made me hear the wakening birds around
	And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground

	And feel a spirit kindred to my own;
	So that henceforth I worked no more alone;

	But glad with him I worked as with his aid
	And weary sought at noon with him the shade;

	And dreaming as it were held brotherly speech
	With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach.

	“Men work together“ I told him from the heart
	“Whether they work together or apart.”



44. A VANTAGE POINT

	If tired of trees I seek again mankind
	Well I know where to hie me--in the dawn
	To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn.
	There amid lolling juniper reclined
	Myself unseen I see in white defined
	Far off the homes of men and farther still
	The graves of men on an opposing hill
	Living or dead whichever are most to mind.

	And if by noon I have too much of these
	I have but to turn on my arm and lo
	The sun-burned hillside sets my face aglow
	My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze
	I smell the earth I smell the bruised plant
	I look into the crater of the ant.



45. THE WOOD-PILE

	Out walking in the frozen swamp one gray day
	I paused and said “I will turn back from here.
	No I will go on farther--and we shall see.”
	The hard snow held me save where now and then
	One foot went through. The view was all in lines
	Straight up and down of tall slim trees
	Too much alike to mark or name a place by
	So as to say for certain I was here
	Or somewhere else: I was just far from home.
	A small bird flew before me. He was careful
	To put a tree between us when he lighted
	And say no word to tell me who he was
	Who was so foolish as to think what _he_ thought.
	He thought that I was after him for a feather--
	The white one in his tail; like one who takes
	Everything said as personal to himself.
	One flight out sideways would have undeceived him.
	And then there was a pile of wood for which
	I forgot him and let his little fear
	Carry him off the way I might have gone
	Without so much as wishing him good-night.
	He went behind it to make his last stand.
	It was a cord of maple cut and split
	And piled--and measured four by four by eight.
	And not another like it could I see.
	No runner tracks in this year’s snow looped near it.
	And it was older sure than this year’s cutting
	Or even last year’s or the year’s before.
	The wood was gray and the bark warping off it
	And the pile somewhat sunken. Clematis
	Had wound strings round and round it like a bundle.
	What held it though on one side was a tree
	Still growing and on one a stake and prop
	These latter about to fall. I thought that only
	Someone who lived in turning to fresh tasks
	Could so forget his handiwork on which
	He spent himself the labour of his axe
	And leave it there far from a useful fireplace
	To warm the frozen swamp as best it could
	With the slow smokeless burning of decay.
