*** Théophile Gautier (1811 - 1872)


1. SEA GLOOM

	The sea-gulls restless gleam and glance,
	The mad white coursers cleave the length
	Of ocean as they rear and prance
	And toss their manes in stormy strength.
	
	The day is ending. Raindrops choke
	The sunset furnaces. The gloom
	Brings the great steamboat spitting smoke,
	And beating down its long black plume.
	
	And I, more wan than heaven wide,
	For land of soot and fog am bound,
	For land of smoke and suicide--
	And right good weather have I found!
	
	How eagerly I now would pierce
	The gulf that groweth wild and hoar!
	The vessel rocks. The waves are fierce.
	The salt wind freshens more and more.
	
	Ah! bitter is my soul’s unrest.
	The very ocean sighing heaves
	In pity its unhopeful breast,
	Like some good friend that knows and grieves.
	
	Let be--lost love’s despair supreme!
	Let be--illusions fair that rose
	And fell from pedestals of dream!
	One leap! The dark wet ridges close.
	
	Away! ye sufferings gone by,
	That evermore returning brood,
	And press the wounds that sleeping lie,
	To make them weep afresh their blood.
	
	Away! regret, whose crimson heart
	Hath seven swords. Yea, One, maybe,
	Doth know the anguish and the smart--
	Mother of Seven Sorrows, She!
	
	Each ghostly grief sinks down the vast,
	And struggles with the waves that throb
	To close about it, and at last
	Drown it forever with a sob.
	
	Soul’s ballast, treasures of life’s hand,
	Sink! and we’ll wreck together down.
	Pale on the pillow of the sand
	I’ll rest me well at evening brown.
	
	But, now, a woman, as I gaze,
	Sits in the bridge’s darker nook,
	A woman, who doth sweetly raise
	Her eyes to mine in one long look.
	
	‘T is Sympathy with outstretched arms,
	Who smileth to me through the gray
	Of dusk with all her thousand charms.
	Hail, azure eyes! Green sea, away!
	
	The sea-gulls restless gleam and glance.
	The mad white coursers cleave the length
	Of Ocean as they rear and prance
	And toss their manes in stormy strength.



2. SMOKE

	Beneath yon tree sits humble
	A squalid, hunchbacked house,
	With roof precipitous,
	And mossy walls that crumble.
	
	Bolted and barred the shanty.
	But from its must and mould,
	Like breath of lips in cold,
	Comes respiration scanty.
	
	A vapour upward welling,
	A slender, silver streak,
	To God bears tidings meek
	Of the soul in the little dwelling.



3. SPRING’S FIRST SMILE

	While up and down the earth men pant and plod,
	March, laughing at the showers and days unsteady,
	And whispering secret orders to the sod,
	For Spring makes ready.
	
	And slyly when the world is sleeping yet,
	He smooths out collars for the Easter daisies,
	And fashions golden buttercups to set
	In woodland mazes.
	
	Coif-maker fine, he worketh well his plan.
	Orchard and vineyard for his touch are prouder.
	From a white swan he hath a down to fan
	The trees with powder.
	
	While Nature still upon her couch doth lean,
	Stealthily hies he to the garden closes,
	And laces in their bodices of green
	Pale buds of roses.
	
	Composing his solfeggios in the shade,
	He whistles them to blackbirds as he treadeth,
	And violets in the wood, and in the glade
	Snowdrops, he spreadeth.
	
	Where for the restless stag the fountain wells,
	His hidden hand glides soft amid the cresses,
	And scatters lily-of-the-valley bells,
	In silver dresses.
	
	He sinks the sweet, vermilion strawberries
	Deep in the grasses for thy roving fingers,
	And garlands leaflets for thy forehead’s ease,
	When sunshine lingers.
	
	When, labour done, he must away, turns he
	On April’s threshold from his fair creating,
	And calleth unto Spring: “Come, Spring--for see,
	The woods are waiting!”



4. THE SUPPER OF ARMOR

	Bjorn, a strange cœnobite,
	On the plateau of a bare rock,
	Inhabits, out of the world and time,
	The tower of a fortress demolished.
	
	At his door the modern spirit
	In vain lifts up the weighty knocker.
	Bjorn bolts his postern shut
	And his castle keeps tight-locked.
	
	When every eye is toward the dawn
	Bjorn, perched upon his dungeon,
	Gazes still the horizon upon
	At the place of the setting sun.
	
	Retrospective soul, he lodges
	In his fortress in the past,
	The pendulum of his grandfather clock
	Some centuries ago worked last.
	
	Underneath his ogives feudal
	He wanders, waking up the echoes,
	And his steps, the flagstones moot all,
	Seem to be followed by even steps.
	
	He sees no laymen nor any presters,
	Nor gentlemen, nor men of town,
	But the portraits of his ancestors
	Talk with him again and now.
	
	And certain nights, to lend him spice,
	Finding dinner alone a bore there,
	Bjorn, a funerary caprice,
	Asks to supper all his forebears.
	
	The phantoms, when tolls the midnight bell,
	Arrive in armor pie-a-cap,
	Bjorn, who shivers in spite of himself,
	Salutes by lifting high his hanap. 
	
	To seat itself, each panoply
	With its kneejoint makes an angle,
	Whose articulation yields
	Grating like an old doorbolt.
	
	And all of a piece, the suit of armor,
	Gauche casket of a body not there,
	Making a dull and hollow murmur,
	Falls twixt the arms of an easy chair.
	
	Landgraves, rhinegraves, also burgraves,
	Come from heaven or from hell,
	They are all there, silent and grave,
	Stiff convives of hardened steel!
	
	In the dark, a wild beam plays
	On a monster, wyvern, two-necked eagle,
	From the heraldic bestiary
	Upon their crests by many blows mangled.
	
	From the snout of beats deformed
	Raising up their nails arrogant,
	Spring forth varied plumes enormous,
	Lambrequins extravagant,
	
	But the open helmets are void
	As the timbre on coats of arms;
	Only two flames that are livid
	Gleam within like strange alarms.
	
	Every bit of scrap iron sits
	In the hall of the old manor,
	And, on the wall, a shadow flits
	Giving each guest a page of honor.
	
	The liquors in the fire of candles
	Are purplish with a tint that’s suspect,
	Each course within its red sauce spangled
	Takes on a singularmost aspect.
	
	Now and again a corslet sparkles,
	A morion shines for just a moment,
	A piece that’s come unhinged quite tumbles
	Down upon the tablecloth groaning.
	
	One listens to the beating wings
	Of bats that are invisible,
	And along the wainscoting
	Flags of infidel nations tremble.
	
	With the most fantastical movements
	Curling their phalanges of bronze
	Gauntlets pour into the helmets
	Glassfuls of the Rhineland’s wines,
	
	Or with a dagger’s edge, they cut
	On golden plates a wild boar...
	While vague noises pass from out
	The organs of the corridor.
	
	With a voice that still is hoarse
	From the dampness of the tomb,
	Max hums, playful drunkenness,
	A lied, in thirteen hundred, new.
	
	Albrecht, having wine that’s fierce,
	Quarrels with his quondam cousins,
	Whom he pounds on, humped and beastly,
	As he did the Saracens.
	
	Overheated, Fritz unhelms,
	Where no skull was ever sunk,
	Never thinking his unmasked self
	Looks just like a headless trunk.
	
	Quickly now they roll pell-mell
	Beneath the table, among the crocks,
	Head below, showing the sole
	Of their shoes curvate with hooks.
	
	It’s a hideous battlefield
	Where an armet hits a pot,
	Where the dead by each cut yield
	No blood but each course in a vomit.
	
	--
	
	And Bjorn, his fist upon his thigh,
	Contemplates them, drawn and haggard,
	Whileas, through the Swiss stained glass,
	Sunup casts its blue regard.
	
	The troupe, whom a sunbeam crosses,
	Grows pale like a torch at noon,
	And the drunkenmost back tosses
	The stirrup cup before the tomb.
	
	The cock crows, the specters fly
	And with a lofty air replete,
	On the marble pillow lay
	Their heads still aching from the feast!
