*** Khalil Gibran (1883 - 1931)


1. AHAZ THE PORTLY

	Well do I remember the last time I saw Jesus the Nazarene. Judas had come to me at the noon hour of that Thursday, and bidden me prepare supper for Jesus and His friends.
	He gave me two silver pieces and said, “Buy all that you deem needful for the meal.”
	And after He was gone my wife said to me, “This is indeed a distinction.” For Jesus had become a prophet and He had wrought many miracles.
	At twilight He came and His followers, and they sat in the upper chamber around the board, but they were silent and quiet.
	Last year also and the year before they had come and then they had been joyous. They broke the bread and drank the wine and sang our ancient strains; and Jesus would talk to them till midnight.
	After that they would leave Him alone in the upper chamber and go to sleep in other rooms; for after midnight it was His desire to be alone.
	And He would remain awake; I would hear His steps as I lay upon my bed.
	But this last time He and His friends were not happy.
	My wife had prepared fishes from the Lake of Galilee, and pheasants from Houran stuffed with rice and pomegranate seeds, and I had carried them a jug of my cypress wine.
	And then I had left them for I felt that they wished to be alone.
	They stayed until it was full dark, and then they all descended together from the upper chamber, but at the foot of the stairs Jesus tarried awhile. And He looked at me and my wife, and He placed His hand upon the head of my daughter and He said, “Good night to you all. We shall come back again to your upper chamber, but we shall not leave you at this early hour. We shall stay until the sun rises above the horizon.
	“In a little while we shall return and ask for more bread and more wine. You and your wife have been good hosts to us, and we shall remember you when we come to our mansion and sit at our own board.”
	And I said, “Sir, it was an honor to serve you. The other innkeepers envy me because of your visits, and in my pride I smile at them in the market-place. Sometimes I even make a grimace.”
	And He said, “All innkeepers should be proud in serving. For he who gives bread and wine is the brother of him who reaps and gathers the sheaves for the threshing-floor, and of him who crushes the grapes at the winepress. And you are all kindly. You give of your bounty even to those who come with naught but hunger and thirst.”
	Then He turned to Judas Iscariot who kept the purse of the company, and He said, “Give me two shekels.”
	And Judas gave Him two shekels saying: “These are the last silver pieces in my purse.”
	Jesus looked at him and said, “Soon, oversoon, your purse shall be filled with silver.”
	Then He put the two pieces into my hand and said, “With these buy a silken girdle for your daughter, and bid her wear it on the day of the passover, in remembrance of me.”
	And looking again into the face of my daughter, He leaned down and kissed her brow. And then He said once more, “Good-night to you all.”
	And He walked away.
	I have been told that what He said to us has been recorded upon a parchment by one of His friends, but I repeat it to you even as I heard it from His own lips.
	Never shall I forget the sound of His voice as He said those words, “Good night to you all.”
	If you would know more of Him, ask my daughter. She is a woman now, but she cherishes the memory of her girlhood. And her words are more ready than mine.



2. AL-NAY

	Give me the Nay and sing,
	The secret song of eternity.
	The laments of the Nay will linger
	Beyond the decline of existence.
	Have you, like me,
	Chosen the forest dwelling
	Rather than the castle?
	Have you followed the stream
	And climbed the rocks?
	Have you anointed your body
	With fragrance distilled in light?
	Have you been drunk with dawn
	In the goblets full of pure air?
	 
	Have you, like me,
	Sat down at dusk,
	Among the glowing languor
	Of vines laden with grapes?
	Have you lain down on the grass at night
	And covered yourself with heavens,
	Opening your heart to the future,
	Forgetful of the past?
	 
	Give me the Nay and sing,
	The song in tune with hearts.
	The laments of the Nay will linger
	Beyond the fading of sins.
	Give me the Nay and sing,
	Unmindful of troubles and cures.
	For each man
	Is nothing more than a watercolor sketch. 



3. AMBITION

	Three men met at a tavern table. One was a weaver, another a carpenter and the third a ploughman.
	Said the weaver, “I sold a fine linen shroud today for two pieces of gold. Let us have all the wine we went.”
	“And I,” said the carpenter, “I sold my best coffin. We will have a great roast with the wine.”
	“I only dug a grave,” said the ploughman, “but my patron paid me double. Let us have honey cakes too.”
	And all that evening the tavern was busy, for they called often for wine and meat and cakes. And they were merry.
	And the host rubbed his hands and smiled at his wife; for his guests were spending freely.
	When they left the moon was high, and they walked along the road singing and shouting together.
	The host and his wife stood in the tavern door and looked after them.
	“Ah!” said the wife, “these gentlemen! So freehanded and so gay! If only they could bring us such luck every day! Then our son need not be a taven-keeper and work hard. We could educate him, and he could become a priest.”



4. AND WHEN MY JOY WAS BORN

	And hen my joy was born I held it in my arms and stood on the house-top shouting, “Come ye, my neighbours, come and see, for Joy this day is born unto me. Come and behold this gladsome thing that laugheth in the sun.”
	But none of my neighbours came to look upon my Joy, and great was my astonishment.
	And every day for seven moons I proclaimed my Joy from the house-top--and yet no one heeded me. And my Joy and I were alone, unsought and unvisited.
	Then my Joy grew pale and weary because no other heart but mine held its loveliness and no other lips kissed its lips.
	Then my Joy died of isolation.
	And now I only remember my dead Joy in remembering my dead Sorrow. But memory is an autumn leaf that murmurs in the wind and then is heard no more.



5. ANDREW ON PROSTITUTES

	The bitterness of death is less bitter than life without Him. The days were hushed and made still when he was silenced. Only the echo in my memory repeats His words. But not His voice.
	Once I heard Him say: “Go forth in your longing to the fields, and sit by the lilies, and you shall hear them humming in the sun. They weave not cloth for raiment, nor do they raise wood or stone for shelter; yet they sing.
	“He who works in the night fulfills their needs and the dew of His grace is upon their petals.
	“And are not you also His care who never wearies nor rests?”
	And once I heard Him say, “The birds of the sky are counted and enrolled by Your Father even as the hairs of your head are numbered. Not a bird shall lie at the archer’s feet, neither shall a hair of your head turn gray or fall into the emptiness of age without His will.”
	And once again He said, “I have heard you murmur in your hearts: ‘Our God shall be more merciful unto us, children of Abraham, than unto those who knew Him not in the beginning.’
	“But I say unto you that the owner of the vineyard who calls a laborer in the morning to reap, and calls another at sundown, and yet renders wages to the last even as to the first, that man is indeed justified. Does he not pay out of his own purse and with his own will?
	“So shall my Father open the gate of His mansion at the knocking of the Gentiles even as at your knocking. For His ear heeds the new melody with the same love that it feels for the oft-heard song. And with a special welcome because it is the youngest string of His heart.”
	And once again I heard Him say, “Remember this: a thief is a man in need, a liar is a man in fear; the hunter who is hunted by the watchman of your night is also hunted by the watchman of his own darkness.
	“I would have you pity them all.
	“Should they seek your house, see that you open your door and bid them sit at your board. If you do not accept them you shall not be free from whatever they have committed.”
	And on a day I followed Him to the market-place of Jerusalem as the others followed Him. And He told us the parable of the prodigal son, and the parable of the merchant who sold all his possessions that he might buy a pearl.
	But as He was speaking the Pharisees brought into the midst of the crowd a woman whom they called a harlot. And they confronted Jesus and said to Him, “She defiled her marriage vow, and she was taken in the act.”
	And He gazed at her; and He placed His hand upon her forehead and looked deep into her eyes.
	Then he turned to the men who had brought her to Him, and He looked long at them; and He leaned down and with His finger He began to write upon the earth.
	He wrote the name of every man, and beside the name He wrote the sin that every man had committed.
	And as He wrote they escaped in shame into the streets.
	And ere He had finished writing only that woman and ourselves stood before Him.
	And again He looked into her eyes, and He said, “You have loved overmuch. They who brought you here loved but little. But they brought you as a snare for my ensnaring.
	“And now go in peace.
	“None of them is here to judge you. And if it is in your desire to be wise even as you are loving, then seek me; for the Son of Man will not judge you.”
	And I wondered then whether He said this to her because He Himself was not without sin.
	But since that day I have pondered long, and I know now that only the pure of heart forgive the thirst that leads to dead waters.
	And only the sure of foot can give a hand to him who stumbles.
	And again and yet again I say, the bitterness of death is less bitter than life without Him.



6. ANNA THE MOTHER OF MARY

	Jesus the son of my daughter, was born here in Nazareth in the month of January. And the night that Jesus was born we were visited by men from the East. They were Persians who came to Esdraelon with the caravans of the Midianites on their way to Egypt. And because they did not find rooms at the inn they sought shelter in our house.
	And I welcomed them and I said, “My daughter has given birth to a son this night. Surely you will forgive me if I do not serve you as it behooves a hostess.”
	Then they thanked me for giving them shelter. And after they had supped they said to me: “We would see the new-born.”
	Now the Son of Mary was beautiful to behold, and she too was comely.
	And when the Persians beheld Mary and her babe, they took gold and silver from their bags, and myrrh and frankincense, and laid them all at the feet of the child.
	Then they fell down and prayed in a strange tongue which we did not understand.
	And when I led them to the bedchamber prepared for them they walked as if they were in awe at what they had seen.
	When morning was come they left us and followed the road to Egypt.
	But at parting they spoke to me and said, “The child is not but a day old, yet we have seen the light of our God in His eyes and the smile of our God upon His mouth.
	“We bid you protect Him that He may protect you all.”
	And so saying, they mounted their camels and we saw them no more.
	Now Mary seemed not so much joyous in her first-born, as full of wonder and surprise.
	She would look upon her babe, and then turn her face to the window and gaze far away into the sky as if she saw visions.
	And there were valleys between her heart and mine.
	And the child grew in body and in spirit, and He was different from other children. He was aloof and hard to govern, and I could not lay my hand upon Him.
	But He was beloved by everyone in Nazareth, and in my heart I knew why.
	Oftentimes He would take away our food to give to the passerby. And He would give other children the sweet meat I had given Him, before He had tasted it with His own mouth.
	He would climb the trees of my orchard to get the fruits, but never to eat them Himself.
	And He would race with other boys, and sometimes, because He was swifter of foot, He would delay so that they might pass the stake ere He should reach it.
	And sometimes when I led Him to His bed He would say, “Tell my mother and the others that only my body will sleep. My mind will be with them till their mind come to my morning.”
	And many other wondrous words He said when He was a boy, but I am too old to remember.
	Now they tell me I shall see Him no more. But how shall I believe what they say?
	I still hear His laughter, and the sound of His running about my house. And whenever I kiss the cheek of my daughter His fragrance returns to my heart, and His body seems to fill my arms.
	But is it not passing strange that my daughter does not speak of her first-born to me?
	Sometimes it seems that my longing for Him is greater than hers. She stands as firm before the day as if she were a bronzen image, while my heart melts and runs into streams.
	Perhaps she knows what I do not know. Would that she might tell me also.



7. ANNAS THE HIGH PRIEST

	He was of the rabble, a brigand, a mountebank and a self-trumpeter. He appealed only to the unclean and the disinherited, and for this He had to go the way of all the tainted and the defiled.
	He made sport of us and of our laws; He mocked at our honor and jeered at our dignity. He even said He would destroy the temple and desecrate the holy places. He was shameless, and for this He had to die a shameful death.
	He was a man from Galilee of the Gentiles, an alien, from the North Country where Adonis and Ashtarte still claim power against Israel and the God of Israel.
	He whose tongue halted when He spoke the speech of our prophets was loud and ear-splitting when he spoke the bastard language of the low-born and the vulgar.
	What else was there for me but to decree His death?
	Am I not a guardian of the temple? Am I not a keeper of the law? Could I have turned my back on Him, saying in all tranquility: “He is a madman among madmen. Let Him alone to exhaust Himself raving; for the mad and the crazed and those possessed with devils shall be naught in the path of Israel”?
	Could I have been deaf unto Him when he called us liars. hypocrites, wolves, vipers, and the sons of vipers?
	Nay I could not be deaf to Him, for He was not a madman. He was self-possessed; and in His big-sounding sanity He denounced and challenged us all.
	For this I had Him crucified, and His crucifixion was a signal and warning unto the others who are stamped with the same damned seal.
	I know well I have been blamed for this, even by some of the elders in the Sanhedrim. But I was mindful then as I am mindful now, that one man should die for the people rather than the people be led astray by one man.
	Jesus was conquered by an enemy from without. I shall see that Judea is not conquered again, by an enemy from within.
	No man from the cursed North shall reach our Holy of Holies nor lay His shadow across the Ark of the Covenant.



8. ASSAPH CALLED THE ORATOR OF TYRE

	What shall I say of His speech? Perhaps something about His person lent power to His words and swayed those who heard Him. For He was comely, and the sheen of the day was upon His countenance.
	Men and women gazed at Him more than they listened to His argument. But at times He spoke with the power of a spirit, 
	and that spirit had authority over those who heard Him.
	In my youth I had heard the orators of Rome and Athens and Alexandria. The young Nazarene was unlike them all.
	They assembled their words with an art to enthral the ear, but when you heard Him your heart would leave you and go wandering into regions not yet visited.
	He would tell a story or relate a parable, and the like of His stories and parables had never been heard in Syria. He seemed to spin them out of the seasons, even as time spins the years and the generations.
	He would begin a story thus: “The ploughman went forth to the field to sow his seeds.”Or, “Once there was a rich man who had many vineyards.”
	Or, “A shepherd counted his sheep at eventide and found that one sheep was missing.”And such words would carry His listeners into their simpler selves, and into the ancient of their days.
	At heart we are all ploughmen, and we all love the vineyard. And in the pastures of our memory there is a shepherd and a flock and the lost sheep.
	And there is the plough-share and the winepress and the threshing-floor.
	He knew the source of our older self, and the persistent thread of which we are woven.
	The Greek and the Roman orators spoke to their listeners of life as it seemed to the mind. The Nazarene spoke of a longing that lodged in the heart.
	They saw life with eyes only a little clearer than yours and mine. He saw life in the light of God.
	I often think that He spoke to the crowd as a mountain would speak to the plain.
	And in His speech there was a power that was not commanded by the orators of Athens or of Rome.



9. THE ASTRONOMER

	In the shadow of the temple my friend and I saw a blind man sitting alone. And my friend said, “Behold the wisest man of our land.”
	Then I left my friend and approached the blind man and greeted him. And we conversed.
	After a while I said, “Forgive my question, but since when hast thou been blind?”
	“From my birth,” he answered.
	Said I, “And what path of wisdom followest thou?”
	Said he, “I am an astronomer.”
	Then he placed his hand upon his breast, saying, “I watch all these suns and moons and stars.”



10. AT THE FAIR

	There came to the Fair a girl from the country-side, most comely. There was a lily and a rose in her face. There was a sunset in her hair, and dawn smiled upon her lips.
	No sooner did the lovely stranger appear in their sight than the young men sought her and surrounded her. One would dance with her, and another would cut a cake in her honor. And they all desired to kiss her cheek. For after all, was it not the Fair?
	But the girl was shocked and started, and she thought ill of the young men. She rebuked them, and she even struck one or two of them in the face. Then she ran away from them.
	And on her way home that evening she was saying in her heart, “I am disgusted. How unmannerly and ill bred are these men. It is beyond all patience.”
	A year passed during which that very comely girl thought much of Fairs and men. Then she came again to the Fair with the lily and the rose in her face, the sunset in her hair and the smile of dawn upon her lips.
	But now the young men, seeing her, turned from her. And all the day long she was unsought and alone.
	And at eventide as she walked the road toward her home she cried in her heart, “I am disgusted. How unmannerly and ill bred are these youths. It is beyond all patience.”



11. BARABBAS

	They released me and chose Him. Then He rose and I fell down.
	And they held Him a victim and a sacrifice for the passover.
	I was freed from my chains, and walked with the throng behind Him, but I was a living man going to my own grave.
	I should have fled to the desert where shame is burned out by the sun.
	Yet I walked with those who had chosen Him to bear my crime.
	When they nailed Him on His cross I stood there.
	I saw and I heard but I seemed outside of my body.
	The thief who was crucified on His right said to Him, “Are you bleeding with me, even you, Jesus of Nazareth?”
	And Jesus answered and said, “Were it not for this nail that stays my hand I would reach forth and clasp your hand.
	“We are crucified together. Would they had raised your cross nearer to mine.”
	Then He looked down and gazed upon His mother and a young man who stood beside her.
	He said, “Mother, behold your son standing beside you.
	“Woman, behold a man who shall carry these drops of my blood to the North Country.”
	And when he heard the wailing of the women of Galilee He said, “Behold, they weep and I thirst.
	“I am held too high to reach their tears.
	“I will not take vinegar and gall to quench this thirst.”
	Then His eyes opened wide to the sky, and He said, “Father, why hast Thou foresaken us?”
	And then He said in compassion, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”
	When He uttered those words methought I saw all men prostrated before God beseeching forgiveness for the crucifixion of this one man.
	Then again He said with a great voice: “Father, into Thy hand I yield back my spirit.”
	And at last He lifted up His head and said, “Now it is finished, but only upon this hill.”
	And He closed His eyes.
	Then lightning cracked the dark skies, and there was a great thunder.
	 
	I know now that those who slew Him in my stead achieved my endless torment.
	His crucifixion endured but for an hour.
	But I shall be crucified unto the end of my years.



12. BARCA, A MERCHANT OF TYRE

	I believe that neither the Romans nor the Jews understood Jesus of Nazareth, nor did His disciples who now preach His name.
	The Romans slew Him and that was a blunder. The Galileans would make a god of Him and that is a mistake.
	Jesus was the heart of man.
	I have sailed the Seven Seas with my ships, and bartered with kings and princes and with cheats and the wily in the market-places of distant cities; but never have I seen a man who understood merchants as He did.
	I heard Him once tell this parable:
	“A merchant left his country for a foreign land. He had two servants, and he gave each a handful of gold, saying: ‘Even as I go abroad, you also shall go forth and seek profit. Make just exchange, and see that you serve in giving and taking.’
	“And after a year the merchant returned.
	“And he asked his two servants what they had done with his gold.
	“The first servant said, ‘Behold, Master, I have bought and sold, and I have gained.’
	“And the merchant answered, ‘The gain shall be yours, for you have done well, and have been faithful to me and to yourself.’
	“Then the other servant stood forth and said, ‘sir, I feared the loss of your money; and I did not buy nor sell. Behold, it is all here in this purse.’
	“And the merchant took the gold, and said, ‘Little is your faith. To barter and lose is better than not to go forth. For even as the wind scatters her seed and waits for the fruit, so must all merchants. It were fitter for you henceforth to serve others.’”
	When Jesus spoke thus, though He was no merchant, He disclosed the secret of commerce.
	Moreover, His parables often brought to my mind lands more distant than my journeys, and yet nearer than my house and my goods.
	But the young Nazarene was not a god; and it is a pity His followers seek to make a god of such a sage.



13. BARTHOLOMEW IN EPHESUS

	The enemies of Jesus say that He addressed His appeal to slaves and outcasts, and would have incited them against their lords. They say that because He was of the lowly He invoked His own kind, yet that He sought to conceal His own origin.
	But let us consider the followers of Jesus, and His leadership.
	In the beginning He chose for companions few men from the North Country, and they were freemen. They were strong of body and bold of spirit, and in these past twoscore years they have had the courage to face death with willingness and defiance.
	Think you that these men were slaves or outcasts?
	And think you that the proud princes of Lebanon and Armenia have forgotten their station in accepting Jesus as a prophet of God?
	Or think you the high-born men and women of Antioch and Byzantium and Athens and Rome could be held by the voice of a leader of slaves?
	Nay, the Nazarene was not with the servant against his master; neither was He with the master against his servant. He was with no man against another man.
	He was a man above men, and the streams that ran in His sinews sang together with passion and with might.
	If nobility lies in being protective, He was the noblest of all men. If freedom is in thought and word and action, He was the freest of all men. If high birth is in pride that yields only to love and in aloofness that is ever gentle and gracious, then He was of all men the highest born.
	Forget not that only the strong and the swift shall win the race and the laurels, and that Jesus was crowned by those who loved Him, and also by His enemies though they knew it not.
	Even now He is crowned every day by the priestesses of Artemis in the secret places of her temple.



14. ON BEAUTY

	You who roamed distracted in the byways of proliferous religions and roved the valleys of contrary doctrines; you who found
	the freedom to disbelieve preferable to the chains of submission and the arenas of denial safer than the redoubts of obedience;
	you adopted beauty as your religion and revered it as your lord. For it is manifest in the perfection of the creatures and is apparent in the conclusions reached by the intellect. Cast aside those who liken godliness to whimsy and who try to combine their greed for wealth with their desire for a happy afterlife. Believe in the divinity of beauty, which is the beginning of your appreciation of life and the origin of your love for joy. Then turn in repentance unto it, for it draws your hearts nigh to the throne of woman, who is the mirror of your feelings; and it is the trainer of your souls in the realm of nature, which is where your lives originated.
	You who are lost in the night of idle talk and drowned in the abyss of false imaginings, know that in beauty is a reality that
	extinguishes doubt and prevents skepticism, a dazzling light that safeguards you from the gloom of falsehood.
	Contemplate the wakefulness of spring and the advent of the morn, for beauty is the lot of those who contemplate.
	Listen to the melodies of the birds, the rustling of the boughs, the purling of the stream; beauty is the share of listeners.
	Observe the meekness of the child, the gracefulness of the youth, the power of the mature, and the wisdom of the aged; 
	beauty is the charm of those who watch.
	Rhapsodize about the narcissus of the eyes, the rose of the cheeks, the anemones of the lips; beauty is glorified by those who
	rhapsodize. Praise the tree-limb stature, the night-black hair, the ivory neck; beauty is gladdened by those who praise. Hallow
	the body as a temple to comeliness and sanctify the heart as a sacrifice to love; love recompenses the adorers.
	Sing praises, you to whom the verses of beauty have been revealed, and rejoice; for no fear comes upon you, nor do you sorrow.



15. BEFORE THE THRONE OF BEAUTY

	One heavy day I ran away from the grim face of society and the dizzying clamor of the city and directed my weary step to the spacious alley. I pursued the beckoning course of the rivulet and the musical sounds of the birds until I reached a lonely spot where the flowing branches of the trees prevented the sun from the touching the earth.
	I stood there, and it was entertaining to my soul--my thirsty soul who had seen naught but the mirage of life instead of its sweetness.
	I was engrossed deeply in thought and my spirits were sailing the firmament when a hour, wearing a sprig of grapevine that covered part of her naked body, and a wreath of poppies about her golden hair, suddenly appeared to me. As she she realized my astonishment, she greeted me saying, “Fear me not; I am the Nymph of the Jungle.”
	“How can beauty like yours be committed to live in this place? Please tell me who your are, and whence you come?” I asked. She sat gracefully on the green grass and responded, “I am the symbol of nature! I am the ever virgin your forefathers worshipped, and to my honor they erected shrines and temples at Baalbek and Jbeil.” And I dared say, “But those temples and shrines were laid waste and the bones of my adoring ancestors became a part of the earth; nothing was left to commemorate their goddess save a pitiful few and the forgotten pages in the book of history.”
	She replied, “Some goddesses live in the lives of their worshippers and die in their deaths, while some live an eternal and infinite life. My life is sustained by the world of beauty which you will see where ever you rest your eyes, and this beauty is nature itself; it is the beginning of the shepherds joy among the hills, and a villagers happiness in the fields, and the pleasure of the awe filled tribes between the mountains and the plains. This Beauty promotes the wise into the throne the truth.”
	Then I said, “Beauty is a terrible power!” And she retorted, “Human beings fear all things, even yourselves. You fear heaven, the source of spiritual peace; you fear nature, the haven of rest and tranquility; you fear the God of goodness and accuse him of anger, while he is full of love and mercy.”
	After a deep silence, mingled with sweet dreams, I asked, “Speak to me of that beauty which the people interpret and define, each one according to his own conception; I have seen her honored and worshipped in different ways and manners.”
	She answered, “Beauty is that which attracts your soul, and that which loves to give and not to receive. When you meet Beauty, you feel that the hands deep within your inner self are stretched forth to bring her into the domain of your heart. It is the magnificence combined of sorrow and joy; it is the Unseen which you see, and the Vague which you understand, and the Mute which you hear--it is the Holy of Holies that begins in yourself and ends vastly beyond your earthly imagination.”
	Then the Nymph of the Jungle approached me and laid her scented hands upon my eyes. And as she withdrew, I found me alone in the valley. When I returned to the city, whose turbulence no longer vexed me, I repeated her words:
	“Beauty is that which attracts your soul, and that which loves to give and not to receive.”



16. BENJAMIN THE SCRIBE

	It has been said that Jesus was the enemy of Rome and Judea.
	But I say that Jesus was the enemy of no man and no race.
	I have heard Him say, “The birds of the air and the mountain tops are not mindful of the serpents in their dark holes.
	“Let the dead bury their dead. Be you yourself among the living, and soar high.”
	I was not one of His disciples. I was but one of the many who went after Him to gaze upon His face.
	He looked upon Rome and upon us who are the slaves of Rome, as a father looks upon his children playing with toys and fighting among themselves for the larger toy. And He laughed from His height.
	He was greater than State and race; He was greater than revolution.
	He was single and alone, and He was an awakening.
	He wept all our unshed tears and smiled all our revolts.
	We knew it was in His power to be born with all who are not yet born, and to bid them see, not with their eyes but with His vision.
	Jesus was the beginning of a new kingdom upon the earth, and that kingdom shall remain.
	He was the son and the grandson of all the kings who builded the kingdom of the spirit.
	And only the kings of spirit have ruled our world.



17. BEYOND MY SOLITUDE

	Beyond my solitude is another solitude, and to him who dwells therein my aloneness is a crowded market-place and my silence a confusion of sounds.
	Too young am I and too restless to seek that above-solitude. The voices of yonder valley still hold my ears and its shadows bar my way and I cannot go.
	Beyond these hills is a grove of enchantment and to him who dwells therein my peace is but a whirlwind and my enchantment an illusion.
	Too young am I and too riotous to seek that sacred grove. The taste of blood is clinging in my mouth, and the bow and the arrows of my fathers yet linger in my hand and I cannot go.
	Beyond this burdened self lives my freer self; and to him my dreams are a battle fought in twilight and my desires the rattling of bones.
	Too young am I and too outraged to be my freer self.
	And how shall I become my freer self unless I slay my burdened selves, or unless all men become free?
	How shall the eagle in me soar against the sun until my fledglings leave the nest which I with my own beak have built for them?



18. BIRBARAH OF YAMMOUNI

	Jesus was patient with the dullard and the stupid, even as the winter awaits the spring.
	He was patient like a mountain in the wind.
	He answered with kindliness the harsh questionings of His foes.
	He could even be silent to cavil and dispute, for He was strong and the strong can be forbearing.
	But Jesus was also impatient.
	He spared not the hypocrite.
	He yielded not to men of cunning nor to the jugglers of words.
	And He would not be governed.
	He was impatient with those who believed not in light because they themselves dwelt in shadow; and with those who sought after signs in the sky rather than in their own hearts.
	He was impatient with those who weighed and measured the day and the night before they would trust their dreams to dawn or eventide.
	Jesus was patient.
	Yet He was the most impatient of men.
	He would have you weave the cloth though you spend years between the loom and the linen.
	But He would have none tear an inch off the woven fabric.



19. THE BLESSED CITY

	In my youth I was told that in a certain city every one lived according to the Scriptures.
	And I said, “I will seek that city and the blessedness thereof.” And it was far. And I made great provision for my journey. And after forty-days I beheld the city and on the forty-first day I entered into it.
	And lo! the whole company of the inhabitants had each but a single eye and but one hand. And I was astonished and said to myself, “Shall they of this so holy city have but one eye and one hand?”
	Then I saw that they too were astonished, for they were marvelling greatly at my two hands and my two eyes. And as they were speaking together I inquired of them saying, “Is this indeed the Blessed City, where each man lives according to the Scriptures?” And they said, “Yes, this is that city.”
	“And what,” said I, “hath befallen you, and where are your right eyes and your right hands?”
	And all the people were moved. And they said, “Come thou and see.”
	And they took me to the temple in the midst of the city. And in the temple I saw a heap of hands and eyes. All withered. Then said I, “Alas! what conqueror hath committed this cruelty upon you?”
	And there went a murmur amongst them. And one of their elders stood forth and said, “This doing is of ourselves. God hath made us conquerors over the evil that was in us.”
	And he led me to a high altar, and all the people followed. And he showed me above the alter and inscription graven, and I read:
	“If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut if off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of th members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.”
	Then I understood. And I turned about to all the people and cried, “Hath no man or woman among you two eyes or two hands?”
	And they answered me saying, “No, not one. There is none whole save such as are yet too young to read the Scripture and to understand its commandment.”
	And when we had comeout of the temple, I straightway left that Blessed City; for I was not too young, and I could read the scripture.



20. BODY AND SOUL

	A man and a woman sat by a window that opened upon Spring. They sat close one unto the other. And the woman said, “I love you. You are handsome, and you are rich, and you are always well-attired.”
	And the man said, “I love you. You are a beautiful thought, a thing too apart to hold in the hand, and a song in my dreaming.”
	But the woman turned from him in anger, and she said, “Sir, please leave me now. I am not a thought, and I am not a thing that passes in your dreams. I am a woman. I would have you desire me, a wife, and the mother of unborn children.”
	And they parted. And the man was saying in his heart, “Behold another dream is even now turned into mist.”
	And the woman was saying, “Well, what of a man who turns me into a mist and a dream?”



21. ON BODY AND SOUL

	How long will you lament, my Soul, when you know how frail I am? How long will you clamor, when I possess only human words with which to depict your dreams?
	Look, my Soul, for I have spent my life listening to your teachings. Think, my torturer, for I have worn out my body following your footsteps.
	My heart was my monarch, but now it has become your slave. My patience was my confidante, but under your influence it has become my critic. Youth was my boon companion, but now it reproaches me. And all this has befallen me from the gods. How will you demand more, and what do you crave?
	I have repudiated my essence and abandoned the delights of my life. I forsook my glory, and only you remain to me, so judge with justice, for justice is your glory. Or summon death and release your ward from prison.
	Have mercy, my Soul. For you have burdened me with a love that I cannot bear: you and Love are a unified force, whereas I and matter are fragmented in our weakness, and can your bonds long persist when stretched between force and weakness?
	Have mercy, my Soul. For you showed me happiness from a great distance. You and happiness are on a lofty mountain, while wretchedness and I subsist in the depths of a ravine. Can loftiness and abasement ever meet?
	Have mercy, my Soul. For you revealed Love to me and then concealed it. You and your beauty in light, and ignorance and I in the darkness. Can light and darkness ever mix?
	You, my Soul, rejoice in the afterlife before it even arrives, while this body suffers from life even while it lives.
	You approach eternity in haste, and this body takes slow steps toward annihilation. You do not tarry and it does not hasten; and this, my Soul, is the utmost misery.
	You rise toward the heights, attracted by the heavens, whereas this body plummets downward because of the earth’s gravity. You do not console it, and it does not congratulate you; and that is rancor.
	You, my Soul, are rich with your wisdom, but this body is poor by reason of its instincts. You show it no forbearance, and it does not follow; and that is the utmost wretchedness.
	You go in the silence of the night toward the beloved and enjoy his embraces, and this body remains ever a martyr to yearning and separation.
	Have mercy, my Soul; have mercy.



22. BUILDERS OF BRIDGES

	In Antioch where the river Assi goes to meet the sea, a bridge was built to bring one half of the city nearer to the other half. It was built of large stones carried down from among the hills, on the backs of the mules of Antioch.
	When the bridge was finished, upon a pilar thereof was engraved in Greek and in Aramaic, “This bridge was builded by King Antiochus II.”
	And all the people walked across the good bridge over the goodly river Assi.
	And upon an evening, a youth, deemed by some a little mad, descended to the pillar where the words were engraven, and he covered over the graving with charcoal, and above it wrote, “The stones of this bridge were brought down from the hills by the mules. In passing to and fro over it you are riding upon the backs of the mules of Antioch, builders of this bridge.”
	And when the people read what the youth had written, some of them laughed and some marveled. And some said, “Ah yes, we know who has done this. Is he not a little mad?”
	But one mule said, laughing, to another mule, “Do you not remember that we did carry those stones? And yet until now it has been said that the bridge was builded by King Antiochus.”



23. ON BUYING AND SELLING

	And a merchant said, “Speak to us of Buying and Selling.” And he answered and said:
	
	To you the earth yields her fruit, and you shall not want if you but know how to fill your hands.
	It is in exchanging the gifts of the earth that you shall find abundance and be satisfied.
	Yet unless the exchange be in love and kindly justice, it will but lead some to greed and others to hunger.
	When in the market place you toilers of the sea and fields and vineyards meet the weavers and the potters and the gatherers of spices,--
	Invoke then the master spirit of the earth, to come into your midst and sanctify the scales and the reckoning that weighs value against value.
	And suffer not the barren-handed to take part in your transactions, who would sell their words for your labor.
	To such men you should say, “Come with us to the field, or go with our brothers to the sea and cast your net;
	For the land and the sea shall be bountiful to you even as to us.”
	And if there come the singers and the dancers and the flute players,--buy of their gifts also.
	For they too are gatherers of fruit and frankincense, and that which they bring, though fashioned of dreams, is raiment and food for your soul.
	And before you leave the marketplace, see that no one has gone his way with empty hands.
	For the master spirit of the earth shall not sleep peacefully upon the wind till the needs of the least of you are satisfied.



24. CAIAPHAS

	In speaking of that man Jesus and of His death let us consider two salient facts: the Torah must needs be held in safety by us, and this kingdom must needs be protected by Rome.
	Now that man was defiant to us and to Rome. He poisoned the mind of the simple people, and He led them as if by magic against us and against Caesar.
	My own slaves, both men and women, after hearing him speak in the market-place, turned sullen and rebellious. Some of them left my house and escaped to the desert whence they came.
	Forget not that the Torah is our foundation and our tower of strength. No man shall undermine us while we have this power to restrain his hand, and no man shall overthrow Jerusalem so long as its walls stand upon the ancient stone that David laid.
	If the seed of Abraham is indeed to live and thrive this soil must remain undefiled.
	And that man Jesus was a defiler and a corrupter. We slew Him with a conscience both deliberate and clean. And we shall slay all those who would debase the laws of Moses or seek to befoul our sacred heritage.
	We and Pontius Pilatus knew the danger in that man, and that it was wise to bring Him to an end.
	I shall see that His followers come to the same end, and the echo of His words to the same silence.
	If Judea is to live all men who oppose her must be brought down to the dust. And ere Judea shall die I will cover my grey head with ashes even as did Samuel the prophet, and I will tear off this garment of Aaron and clothe me in sackcloth until I go hence for ever.



25. ON CHILDREN

	And a woman who held a babe against her bosom said, “Speak to us of Children.” And he said:
	
	Your children are not your children.
	They are the sons and daughters of Life’s longing for itself.
	They come through you but not from you,
	And though they are with you, yet they belong not to you.
	You may give them your love but not your thoughts.
	For they have their own thoughts.
	You may house their bodies but not their souls,
	For their souls dwell in the house of tomorrow, which you cannot visit, not even in your dreams.
	You may strive to be like them, but seek not to make them like you.
	For life goes not backward nor tarries with yesterday.
	You are the bows from which your children as living arrows are sent forth.
	The archer sees the mark upon the path of the infinite, and He bends you with His might that His arrows may go swift and far.
	Let your bending in the archer’s hand be for gladness;
	For even as he loves the arrow that flies, so He loves also the bow that is stable.



26. THE CITY OF THE DEAD

	Yesterday I drew myself from the noisome throngs and proceeded into the field until I reached a knoll upon which Nature had spread her comely garments. Now I could breathe.
	I looked back, and the city appeared with its magnificent mosques and stately residences veiled by the smoke of the shops.
	I commenced analyzing man’s mission, but could conclude only that most of his life was identified with struggle and hardship. Then I tried not to ponder over what the sons of Adam had done, and centered my eyes on the field which is the throne of God’s glory. In one secluded corner of the field I observed a burying ground surrounded by poplar trees.
	There, between the city of the dead and the city of the living, I meditated. I thought of the eternal silence in the first and the endless sorrow in the second.
	In the city of the living I found hope and despair; love and hatred, joy and sorrow, wealth and poverty, faith and infidelity.
	In the city of the dead there is buried earth in earth that Nature converts, in the night’s silence, into vegetation, and then into animal, and then into man. As my mind wandered in this fashion, I saw a procession moving slowly and reverently, accompanied by pieces of music that filled the sky with sad melody. It was an elaborate funeral. The dead was followed by the living who wept and lamented his going. As the cortege reached the place of interment the priests commenced praying and burning incense, and musicians blowing and plucking their instruments, mourning the departed. Then the leaders came forward one after the other and recited their eulogies with fine choice of words.
	At last the multitude departed, leaving the dead resting in a most spacious and beautiful vault, expertly designed in stone and iron, and surrounded by the most expensively-entwined wreaths of flowers.
	The farewell-bidders returned to the city and I remained, watching them from a distance and speaking softly to myself while the sun was descending to the horizon and Nature was making her many preparations for slumber.
	Then I saw two men laboring under the weight of a wooden casket, and behind them a shabby-appearing woman carrying an infant on her arms. Following last was a dog who, with heartbreaking eyes, stared first at the woman and then at the casket.
	It was a poor funeral. This guest of Death left to cold society a miserable wife and an infant to share her sorrows and a faithful dog whose heart knew of his companion’s departure.
	As they reached the burial place they deposited the casket into a ditch away from the tended shrubs and marble stones, and retreated after a few simple words to God. The dog made one last turn to look at his friend’s grave as the small group disappeared behind the trees.
	I looked at the city of the living and said to myself, “That place belongs to the few.” Then I looked upon the trim city of the dead and said, “That place, too, belongs to the few. Oh Lord, where is the haven of all the people?”
	As I said this, I looked toward the clouds, mingled with the sun’s longest and most beautiful golden rays. And I heard a voice within me saying, “Over there!”



27. CLAUDIUS A ROMAN SENTINEL

	After he was taken, they entrusted Him to me. And I was ordered by Pontius Pilatus to keep Him in custody until the following morning.
	My soldiers led Him prisoner, and He was obedient to them.
	At midnight I left my wife and children and visited the arsenal. It was my habit to go about and see all that was well with my battalions in Jerusalem; and that night I visited the arsenal where He was held.
	My soldiers and some of the young Jews were making sport of Him. They had stripped Him of His garment, and they had put a crown of last year’s brier-thorns upon His head.
	They had seated Him against a pillar, and they were dancing and shouting before Him.
	And they had given Him a reed to hold in His hand.
	As I entered someone shouted, “Behold, O Captain, the King of the Jews.”
	I stood before Him and looked at Him, and I was ashamed. I knew not why.
	I had fought in Gallia and in Spain, and with my men I had faced death. Yet never had I been in fear, nor been a coward. But when I stood before that man and He looked at me I lost heart. It seemed as though my lips were sealed, and I could not utter no word.
	And straightway I left the arsenal.
	This chanced thirty years ago. My sons who were babes then are men now. And they are serving Caesar and Rome.
	But often in counselling them I have spoken of Him, a man facing death with the sap of life upon His lips, and with compassion for His slayers in His eyes.
	And now I am old. I have lived the years fully. And I think truly that neither Pompey nor Caesar was so great a commander as that Man of Galilee.
	For since His unresisting death an army has risen out of the earth to fight for Him... And He is better served by them, though dead, than ever Pompey or Caesar was served, though living.



28. CLEOPAS OF BETHROUNE

	When Jesus spoke the whole world was hushed to listen. His words were not for our ears but rather for the elements of which God made this earth.
	He spoke to the sea, our vast mother, that gave us birth. He spoke to the mountain, our elder brother whose summit is a promise.
	And He spoke to the angels beyond the sea and the mountain to whom we entrusted our dreams ere the clay in us was made hard in the sun.
	And still His speech slumbers within our breast like a love-song half forgotten, and sometimes it burns itself through to our memory.
	His speech was simple and joyous, and the sound of His voice was like cool water in a land of drought.
	Once He raised His hand against the sky, and His fingers were like the branches of a sycamore tree; and He said with a great voice:
	“The prophets of old have spoken to you, and your ears are filled with their speech. But I say unto you, empty your ears of what you have heard.”
	And these words of Jesus, “But I say unto you,” were not uttered by a man of our race nor of our world; but rather by a host of seraphim marching across the sky of Judea.
	Again and yet again He would quote the law and the prophets, and then he would say, “But I say unto you.”
	Oh, what burning words, what waves of seas unknown to the shores of our mind, “But I say unto you.”
	What stars seeking the darkness of the soul, and what sleepless souls awaiting the dawn.
	To tell of the speech of Jesus one must needs have His speech or the echo thereof.
	I have neither the speech nor the echo.
	I beg you to forgive me for beginning a story that I cannot end. But the end is not yet upon my lips. It is still a love song in the wind.



29. ON CLOTHES

	And the weaver said, “Speak to us of Clothes.” And he answered:
	
	Your clothes conceal much of your beauty, yet they hide not the unbeautiful.
	And though you seek in garments the freedom of privacy you may find in them a harness and a chain.
	Would that you could meet the sun and the wind with more of your skin and less of your raiment,
	For the breath of life is in the sunlight and the hand of life is in the wind.
	Some of you say, “It is the north wind who has woven the clothes to wear.”
	But shame was his loom, and the softening of the sinews was his thread.
	And when his work was done he laughed in the forest.
	Forget not that modesty is for a shield against the eye of the unclean.
	And when the unclean shall be no more, what were modesty but a fetter and a fouling of the mind?
	And forget not that the earth delights to feel your bare feet and the winds long to play with your hair.



30. A COBBLER IN JERUSALEM

	I loved him not, yet I did not hate Him. I listened to Him not to hear His words but rather he sound of His voice; for His voice pleased me.
	All that He said was vague to my mind, but the music thereof was clear to my ear.
	Indeed were it not for what others have said to me of His teaching, I should not have known even so much as whether He was with Judea or against it.



31. THE CREATION

	The God separated a spirit from Himself and fashioned it into Beauty. He showered upon her all the blessings of gracefulness and kindness. He gave her the cup of happiness and said, “Drink not from this cup unless you forget the past and the future, for happiness is naught but the moment.” And He also gave her a cup of sorrow and said, “Drink from this cup and you will understand the meaning of the fleeting instants of the joy of life, for sorrow ever abounds.”
	And the God bestowed upon her a love that would desert he forever upon her first sigh of earthly satisfaction, and a sweetness that would vanish with her first awareness of flattery. And He gave her wisdom from heaven to lead to the all-righteous path, and placed in the depth of her heart and eye that sees the unseen, and created in he an affection and goodness toward all things. He dressed her with raiment of hopes spun by the angels of heaven from the sinews of the rainbow. And He cloaked her in the shadow of confusion, which is the dawn of life and light.
	Then the God took consuming fire from the furnace of anger, and searing wind from the desert of ignorance, and sharpcutting sands from the shore of selfishness, and coarse earth from under the feet of ages, and combined them all and fashioned Man. He gave to Man a blind power that rages and drives him into a madness which extinguishes only before gratification of desire, and placed life in him which is the specter of death.
	And the god laughed and cried. He felt an overwhelming love and pity for Man, and sheltered him beneath His guidance.



32. ON CRIME AND PUNISHMENT

	Then one of the judges of the city stood forth and said, “Speak to us of Crime and Punishment.” And he answered saying:
	
	It is when your spirit goes wandering upon the wind,
	That you, alone and unguarded, commit a wrong unto others and therefore unto yourself.
	And for that wrong committed must you knock and wait a while unheeded at the gate of the blessed.
	Like the ocean is your god-self;
	It remains for ever undefiled.
	And like the ether it lifts but the winged.
	Even like the sun is your god-self;
	It knows not the ways of the mole nor seeks it the holes of the serpent.
	But your god-self does not dwell alone in your being.
	Much in you is still man, and much in you is not yet man,
	But a shapeless pygmy that walks asleep in the mist searching for its own awakening.
	And of the man in you would I now speak.
	For it is he and not your god-self nor the pygmy in the mist, that knows crime and the punishment of crime.
	Oftentimes have I heard you speak of one who commits a wrong as though he were not one of you, but a stranger unto you and an intruder upon your world.
	But I say that even as the holy and the righteous cannot rise beyond the highest which is in each one of you,
	So the wicked and the weak cannot fall lower than the lowest which is in you also.
	And as a single leaf turns not yellow but with the silent knowledge of the whole tree,
	So the wrong-doer cannot do wrong without the hidden will of you all.
	Like a procession you walk together towards your god-self.
	You are the way and the wayfarers.
	And when one of you falls down he falls for those behind him, a caution against the stumbling stone.
	Ay, and he falls for those ahead of him, who though faster and surer of foot, yet removed not the stumbling stone.
	And this also, though the word lie heavy upon your hearts:
	The murdered is not unaccountable for his own murder,
	And the robbed is not blameless in being robbed.
	The righteous is not innocent of the deeds of the wicked,
	And the white-handed is not clean in the doings of the felon.
	Yea, the guilty is oftentimes the victim of the injured,
	And still more often the condemned is the burden-bearer for the guiltless and unblamed.
	You cannot separate the just from the unjust and the good from the wicked;
	For they stand together before the face of the sun even as the black thread and the white are woven together.
	And when the black thread breaks, the weaver shall look into the whole cloth, and he shall examine the loom also.
	If any of you would bring judgment the unfaithful wife,
	Let him also weight the heart of her husband in scales, and measure his soul with measurements.
	And let him who would lash the offender look unto the spirit of the offended.
	And if any of you would punish in the name of righteousness and lay the axe unto the evil tree, let him see to its roots;
	And verily he will find the roots of the good and the bad, the fruitful and the fruitless, all entwined together in the silent heart of the earth.
	And you judges who would be just,
	What judgment pronounce you upon him who though honest in the flesh yet is a thief in spirit?
	What penalty lay you upon him who slays in the flesh yet is himself slain in the spirit?
	And how prosecute you him who in action is a deceiver and an oppressor,
	Yet who also is aggrieved and outraged?
	And how shall you punish those whose remorse is already greater than their misdeeds?
	Is not remorse the justice which is administered by that very law which you would fain serve?
	Yet you cannot lay remorse upon the innocent nor lift it from the heart of the guilty.
	Unbidden shall it call in the night, that men may wake and gaze upon themselves.
	And you who would understand justice, how shall you unless you look upon all deeds in the fullness of light?
	Only then shall you know that the erect and the fallen are but one man standing in twilight between the night of his pygmy-self and the day of his god-self,
	And that the corner-stone of the temple is not higher than the lowest stone in its foundation.



33. THE CRIMINAL

	A young man of strong body, weakened by hunger, sat on the walker’s portion of the street stretching his hand toward all who passed, begging and repeating his hand toward all who passed, begging and repeating the sad song of his defeat in life, while suffering from hunger and from humiliation.
	When night came, his lips and tongue were parched, while his hand was still as empty as his stomach.
	He gathered himself and went out from the city, where he sat under a tree and wept bitterly. Then he lifted his puzzled eyes to heaven while hunger was eating his inside, and he said, “Oh Lord, I went to the rich man and asked for employment, but he turned me away because of my shabbiness; I knocked at the school door, but was forbidden solace because I was empty- handed; I sought any occupation that would give me bread, but all to no avail. In desperation I asked alms, but They worshippers saw me and said “He is strong and lazy, and he should not beg.”
	“Oh Lord, it is Thy will that my mother gave birth unto me, and now the earth offers me back to You before the Ending.”
	His expression then changed. He arose and his eyes now glittered in determination. He fashioned a thick and heavy stick from the branch of the tree, and pointed it toward the city, shouting, “I asked for bread with all the strength of my voice, and was refused. Not I shall obtain it by the strength of my muscles! I asked for bread in the name of mercy and love, but humanity did not heed. I shall take it now in the name of evil!”
	The passing years rendered the youth a robber, killer and destroyer of souls; he crushed all who opposed him; he amassed fabulous wealth with which he won himself over to those in power. He was admired by colleagues, envied by other thieves, and feared by the multitudes.
	His riches and false position prevailed upon the Emir to appoint him deputy in that city--the sad process pursued by unwise governors. Thefts were then legalized; oppression was supported by authority; crushing of the weak became commonplace; the throngs curried and praised.
	Thus does the first touch of humanity’s selfishness make criminals of the humble, and make killers of the sons of peace; thus does the early greed of humanity grow and strike back at humanity a thousand fold!



34. CRITICS

	One nightfall a man travelling on horseback towards the sea reached an inn by the roadside. He dismounted and, confident in man and night like all riders towards the sea, he tied his horse to a tree beside the door and entered into the inn.
	At midnight, when all were asleep, a thief came and stole the traveller’s horse. In the morning the man awoke, and discovered that his horse was stolen. And he grieved for his horse, and that a man had found it in his heart to steal.
	Then his fellow lodgers came and stood around him and began to talk.
	And the first man said, “How foolish of you to tie your horse outside the stable.”
	And the second said, “Still more foolish, without even hobbling the horse!”
	And the third man said, “It is stupid at best to travel to the sea on horseback.”
	And the fourth said, “Only the indolent and the slow of foot own horses.”
	The traveller was much astonished. At last he cried, “My friends, because my horse was stolen, you have hastened one and all to tell me my faults and my shortcomings. But strange, not one word of reproach have you uttered about the man who stole my horse.”



35. CRUCIFIED

	I cried to men, “I would be crucified!”
	And they said, “Why should your blood be upon our heads?”
	And I answered, “How else shall you be exalted except by crucifying madmen?”
	And they heeded and I was crucified. And the crucifixion appeased me.
	And when I was hanged between earth annd heaven they lifted up their heads to see me. And they were exalted, for their heads had never before been lifted.
	But as they stood looking up at me one called out, “For what art thou seeking atone?”
	And another cried, “In what cause dost thou sacrifice thyself?”
	And a third said, “Thinkest thou with this price to buy world glory?”
	Then said a fourth, “Behold, how he smiles! Can such pain be forgiven?”
	And I answered them all, and said:
	“Remember only that I smiled. I do not atone--nor sacrifice--nor wish for glory; and I have nothing to forgive. I thirsted--and I besought you to give me my blood to drink. For what is there can quench a madman’s thirst but his own blood? I was dumb--and I asked wounds of you for mouths. I was imprisoned on your days and nights--and I sought a door into larger days and nights.
	And now I go--as others already crucified have gone. And think not we are weary of crucifixion. For we must be crucified by larger and yet larger men, between greater earths and greater heavens.”



36. THE CURSE

	And old man of the sea once said to me, “It was thirty years ago that a sailor ran away with my daughter. And I cursed them both in my heart, for of all the world I loved but my daughter.
	“Not long after that, the sailor youth went down with his ship to the bottom of the sea, and with him my lovely daughter was lost unto me.
	“Now therefore behold in me the murderer of a youth and a maid. It was my curse that destroyed them. And now on my way to the grave I seek God’s forgiveness.”
	This the old man said. But there was a tone of bragging in his words, and it seems that he is still proud of the power of his curse.



37. CYBOREA

	My son was a good man and upright. He was tender and kind to me, and he loved his kin and his countrymen. And he hated our enemies, the cursed Romans, who wear purple cloth though they spin no thread nor sit at any loom; and who reap and gather where they have not ploughed nor sowed the seed.
	My son was but seventeen when he was caught shooting arrows at the Roman legion passing through our vineyard.
	Even at that age he would speak to the other youths of the glory of Israel, and he would utter many strange things that I did not understand.
	He was my son, my only son.
	He drank life from these breasts now dry, and he took his first steps in this garden, grasping these fingers that are now like trembling reeds.
	With these selfsame hands, young and fresh then like the grapes of Lebanon, I put away his first sandals in a linen kerchief that my mother had given me. I still keep them there in that chest, beside the window.
	He was my first-born, and when he took his first step, I too took my first step. For women travel not save when led by their children.
	And now they tell me he is dead by his own hand; that he flung himself from the High Rock in remorse because he had betrayed his friend Jesus of Nazareth.
	I know my son is dead. But I know he betrayed no one; for he loved his kin and hated none but the Romans.
	My son sought the glory of Israel, and naught but that glory was upon his lips and in his deeds.
	When he met Jesus on the highway he left me to follow Him. And in my heart I knew that he was wrong to follow any man.
	When he bade me farewell I told him that he was wrong, but he listened not.
	Our children do not heed us; like the high tide of today, they take no counsel with the high tide of yesterday.
	I beg you question me no further about my son.
	I loved him and I shall love him forevermore.
	If love were in the flesh I would burn it out with hot irons and be at peace. But it is in the soul, unreachable.
	And now I would speak no more. Go question another woman more honored than the mother of Judas.
	Go to the mother of Jesus. The sword is in her heart also; she will tell you of me, and you will understand.



38. THE DANCER

	Once there came to the court of the Prince of Birkasha a dancer with her musicians. And she was admitted to the court, and she danced before the prince to the music the lute and the flute and the zither.
	She danced the dance of flames, and the dance of swords and spears; she danced the dance of stars and the dance of space. And then she danced the dance of flowers in the wind.
	After this she stood before the throne of the prince and bowed her body before him. And the prince bade her to come nearer, and he said unto her, “Beautiful woman, daughter of grace and delight, whence comes your art? And how is it that you command all the elements in your rhythms and your rhymes?”
	And the dancer bowed again before the prince, and she answered, “Mighty and gracious Majesty, I know not the answer to your questionings. Only this I know: The philosopher’s soul dwells in his head, the poet’s soul is in the heart; the singer’s soul lingers about his throat, but the soul of the dancer abides in all her body.”



39. DAVID, ONE OF HIS FOLLOWERS

	I did not know the meaning of His discourses or His parables until He was no longer among us. Nay, I did not understand until His words took living forms before my eyes and fashioned themselves into bodies that walk in the procession of my own day.
	Let me tell you this: On a night as I sat in my house pondering, and remembering His words and His deeds that I might inscribe them in a book, three thieves entered my house. And though I knew they came to rob me of my goods, I was too mindful of what I was doing to meet them with the sword, or even to say, “What do you here?”
	But I continued writing my remembrances of the Master.
	And when the thieves had gone then I remembered His saying, “He who would take your cloak, let him take your other cloak also.”
	And I understood.
	As I sat recording His words no man could have stopped me even were he to have carried away all my possessions.
	For though I would guard my possessions and also my person, I know there lies the greater treasure.



40. ON DEATH

	Then Almitra spoke, saying, “We would ask now of Death.”
	And he said:
	You would know the secret of death.
	But how shall you find it unless you seek it in the heart of life?
	The owl whose night-bound eyes are blind unto the day cannot unveil the mystery of light.
	If you would indeed behold the spirit of death, open your heart wide unto the body of life.
	For life and death are one, even as the river and the sea are one.
	In the depth of your hopes and desires lies your silent knowledge of the beyond;
	And like seeds dreaming beneath the snow your heart dreams of spring.
	Trust the dreams, for in them is hidden the gate to eternity.
	Your fear of death is but the trembling of the shepherd when he stands before the king whose hand is to be laid upon him in honor.
	Is the shepherd not joyful beneath his trembling, that he shall wear the mark of the king?
	Yet is he not more mindful of his trembling?
	For what is it to die but to stand naked in the wind and to melt into the sun?
	And what is to cease breathing, but to free the breath from its restless tides, that it may rise and expand and seek God unencumbered?
	Only when you drink from the river of silence shall you indeed sing.
	And when you have reached the mountain top, then you shall begin to climb.
	And when the earth shall claim your limbs, then shall you truly dance.



41. ON DEFEAT

	Take heart, O imprisoned sovereign, for your tribulations in your cell are no greater than mine in my body.
	Lie down and resign yourself to your fate, O fearsome one. For to be perturbed in the face of vicissitudes befits jackals, and caged monarchs can acquit themselves well only by showing contempt for the dungeon and the jailer.
	Quieten your alarm, O youth of high resolve, and look at me. For I subsist among the slaves of life as you subsist behind bars. What difference is there between us, save a restless dream that follows my soul but fears to come near you?
	We are both exiled from our homelands, remote from our families and loved ones. Compose yourself and endure patiently, as I do, the torments of days and nights, ridiculing those weaklings who vanquished us by virtue of their numbers, not by means of their individual determination.
	What good can come of visitors, clamor, and the deaf who hear not?
	I shouted before you did in their ears, and caught the attention only of gloomy shades. Just as you did, I reviewed their ranks, and found none among them but cowards who wax bold and overbearing before those in chains, and weaklings who hold their heads high and affect severity before prisoners in their cells.
	Gaze, mighty king, upon those who crowd around your prison now. Search their faces and you will find what you saw in the mien of the least of your subjects and courtiers in the trackless desert. Some are like rabbits in their faintness of heart; some are like foxes in their cunning; and some equal snakes in their vileness. But none has the blamelessness of a rabbit, the intelligence of a fox, or the wisdom of a serpent.
	Look, that one is like a filthy pig, but his flesh cannot be eaten. That one resembles a coarse water buffalo, but his hide is useless. That one is like a dim-witted donkey, but walks on two legs. That one looks like an ill-omened raven, but sells his croaking in temples. That one is like a haughty, preening peacock, but his feathers are borrowed.
	Gaze, dreaded emperor, upon these mansions and edifices, for they are cramped nests wherein live human beings who pride themselves on the ornamented ceilings that block their view of the stars. They delight in the solidity of the walls which hide them from the rays of the sun. These buildings are murky caves, in the shadow of which the blossoms of youth wither, in the corners of which the torch of love turns to ash, and in the air of which the traces of dreams dissolve into columns of smoke. They are bizarre subterranean vaults, wherein the child’s cradle swings toward the couch of the deathly ill, while the bridal bed sits beside the bier of a corpse.
	Look, glorious prisoner, look at those wide avenues and narrow alleyways, for they are valleys of peril for those who travel them, with thieves crouched at every turn and bandits concealed on every side. They are an arena of continual battle between one object of desire and another, onto which descend spirits at war, though they lack swords, wrestling and snapping at one another without fangs. Or they are, rather, a forest of fear wherein dwell animals of tame appearance, with perfumed tails and polished horns, who are governed not by survival of the fittest but by endurance of the wiliest and most cunning. Their customs are not attributable to the best and strongest but to the most base and dishonest. As for their kings, they are no lions the like of yourself but, rather, odd creatures who possess the beaks of vultures, the claws of hyenas, the tongues of scorpions, and the croaking voices of frogs.
	My spirit be your sacrifice, O captive king, for I have stood with you a long time and have talked at too great a length. But the heart that has been dethroned empathizes with overthrown monarchs, and the lonely, imprisoned soul takes delight in the company of lonesome prisoners. Make allowances for a youth who talks incessantly, preferring this amusement to eating itself, who imbibes thoughts instead of ale.
	Until we meet again, O fearsome despot. Should it not be in this strange world, it will be in the world of specters, where the spirits of kings gather together with those of martyrs.



42. DREAMS

	A man dreamed a dream, and when he awoke he went to his soothsayer and desired that his dream be made plain unto him.
	And the soothsayer said to the man, “Come to me with the dreams that you behold in your wakefulness and I will tell you their meaning. But the dreams of your sleep belong neither to my wisdom nor to your imagination.”



43. DYNASTIES

	The queen of Ishana was in travail of childbirth; and the king and the mighty men of his court were waiting in breathless anxiety in the great hall of the Winged Bulls.
	At eventide there came suddenly a messenger in haste and prostrated himself before the king, and said, “I bring glad tidings unto my lord the king, and unto the kingdom and the slaves of the king. Mihrab the Cruel, thy life-long enemy, the king of Bethroun, is dead.”
	When the king and the mighty men heard this, they all rose and shouted for joy; for the powerful Mihrab, had he lived longer, had assuredly overcome Ishana and carried the inhabitants captive.
	At this moment the court physician also entered the hall of Winged Bulls, and behind him came the royal midwives. And the physician prostrated himself before the king, and said, “My lord the king shall live for ever, and through countless generations shall he rule over the people of Ishana. For unto thee, O King, is born this very hour a son, who shall be thy heir.”
	Then indeed was the soul of the king intoxicated with joy, that in the same moment his foe was dead and the royal line was established.
	Now in the city of Ishana lived a true prophet. And the prophet was young, and bold of spirit. And the king that very night ordered that the prophet should be brought before him. And when he was brought, the king said unto him, “Prophesy now, and foretell what shall be the future of my son who is this day born unto the kingdom.”
	And the prophet hesitated not, but said, “Hearken, O King, and I will indeed prophesy of the future of thy son that is this day born. The soul of thy enemy, even of thy enemy King Mihrab, who died yester-eve, lingered but a day upon the wind. Then it sought for itself a body to enter into. And that which it entered into was the body of thy son that is born unto thee this hour.”
	Then the king was enraged, and with his sword he slew the prophet.
	And from that day to this, the wise men of Ishana say one to another secretly, “Is it not known, and has it not been said from of old, that Ishana is ruled by an enemy?”



44. THE EAGLE AND THE SKYLARK

	A skylark and an eagle met on a rock upon a high hill. The skylark said, “Good morrow to you, Sir.” And the eagle looked down upon him and said faintly, “Good morrow.”
	And the skylark said, “I hope all things are well with you, Sir.”
	“Aye,” said the eagle, “all is well with us. But do you not know that we are the king of birds, and that you shall not address us before we ourselves have spoken?”
	Said the skylark, “Methinks we are of the same family.”
	The eagle looked upon him with disdain and he said, “Who ever has said that you and I are of the same family?”
	Then said the shylark, “But I would remind you of this, I can fly even as high as you, and I can sing and give delight to the other creatures of this earth. And you give neither pleasure nor delight.”
	Then the eagle was angered, and he said, “Pleasure and delight! You little presumptuous creature! With one thrust of my beak I could destroy you. You are but the size of my foot.”
	Then the skylark flew up and alighted upon the back of the eagle and began to pick at his feathers. The eagle was annoyed, and he flew swift and high that he might rid himself of the little bird. But he failed to do so. At last he dropped back to that very rock upon the high hill, more fretted than ever, with the little creature still upon his back, and cursing the fate of the hour.
	Now at that moment a small turtle came by and laughed at the sight, and laughed so hard the she almost turned upon her back.
	And the eagle looked down upon the turtle and he said, “You slow creeping thing, ever one with the earth, what are you laughing at?”
	And the turtle said, “Why I see that you are turned horse, and that you have a small bird riding you, but the small bird is the better bird.”
	And the eagle said to her, “Go you about your business. This is a family affair between my brother, the lark, and myself.”



45. ON EATING AND DRINKING

	Then an old man, a keeper of an inn, said, “Speak to us of Eating and Drinking.” And he said:
	
	Would that you could live on the fragrance of the earth, and like an air plant be sustained by the light.
	But since you must kill to eat, and rob the young of its mother’s milk to quench your thirst, let it then be an act of worship,
	And let your board stand an altar on which the pure and the innocent of forest and plain are sacrificed for that which is purer and still more innocent in many.
	When you kill a beast say to him in your heart, “By the same power that slays you, I to am slain; and I too shall be consumed.
	For the law that delivered you into my hand shall deliver me into a mightier hand.
	Your blood and my blood is naught but the sap that feeds the tree of heaven.”
	And when you crush an apple with your teeth, say to it in your heart, “Your seeds shall live in my body,
	And the buds of your tomorrow shall blossom in my heart,
	And your fragrance shall be my breath,
	And together we shall rejoice through all the seasons.”
	And in the autumn, when you gather the grapes of your vineyard for the winepress, say in you heart, “I to am a vineyard, and my fruit shall be gathered for the winepress,
	And like new wine I shall be kept in eternal vessels.”
	And in winter, when you draw the wine, let there be in your heart a song for each cup;
	And let there be in the song a remembrance for the autumn days, and for the vineyard, and for the winepress.



46. EIGHTH

	The only one who has been unjust to me is the one to whose brother I have been unjust.
	When you see a man led to prison say in your heart, “Mayhap he is escaping from a narrower prison.”
	And when you see a man drunken say in your heart, “Mayhap he sought escape from something still more unbeautiful.”
	Oftentimes I have hated in self-defense; but if I were stronger I would not have used such a weapon.
	How stupid is he who would patch the hatred in his eyes with the smile of his lips.
	Only those beneath me can envy or hate me.
	I have never been envied nor hated; I am above no one.
	Only those above me can praise or belittle me.
	I have never been praised nor belittled; I am below no one.
	Your saying to me, “I do not understand you,” is praise beyond my worth, and an insult you do not deserve.
	How mean am I when life gives me gold and I give you silver, and yet I deem myself generous.
	When you reach the heart of life you will find yourself not higher than the felon, and not lower than the prophet.
	Strange that you should pity the slow-footed and not the slow-minded,
	And the blind-eyed rather than the blind-hearted.
	It is wiser for the lame not to break his crutches upon the head of his enemy.
	How blind is he who gives you out of his pocket that he may take out of your heart.
	Life is a procession. The slow of foot finds it too swift and he steps out;
	And the swift of foot finds it too slow and he too steps out.
	If there is such a thing as sin some of us commit it backward following our forefathers’ footsteps;
	And some of us commit it forward by overruling our children.
	The truly good is he who is one with all those who are deemed bad.
	We are all prisoners but some of us are in cells with windows and some without.
	Strange that we all defend our wrongs with more vigor than we do our rights.
	Should we all confess our sins to one another we would all laugh at one another for our lack of originality.
	Should we all reveal our virtues we would also laugh for the same cause.
	An individual is above man-made laws until he commits a crime against man-made conventions; After that he is neither above anyone nor lower than anyone.
	Government is an agreement between you and myself. You and myself are often wrong.
	Crime is either another name of need or an aspect of a disease.
	Is there a greater fault than being conscious of the other person’s faults?
	If the other person laughs at you, you can pity him; but if you laugh at him you may never forgive yourself.
	If the other person injures you, you may forget the injury; but if you injure him you will always remember.
	In truth the other person is your most sensitive self given another body.
	How heedless you are when you would have men fly with your wings and you cannot even give them a feather.
	Once a man sat at my board and ate my bread and drank my wine and went away laughing at me.
	Then he came again for bread and wine, and I spurned him;
	And the angels laughed at me.
	Hate is a dead thing. Who of you would be a tomb?
	It is the honor of the murdered that he is not the murderer.
	The tribune of humanity is in its silent heart, never its talkative mind.
	They deem me mad because I will not sell my days for gold;
	And I deem them mad because they think my days have a price.
	They spread before us their riches of gold and silver, of ivory and ebony, and we spread before them our hearts and our spirits.
	And yet they deem themselves the hosts and us the guests.
	I would not be the least among men with dreams and the desire to fulfill them, rather than the greatest with no dreams and no desires.
	The most pitiful among men is he who turns his dreams into silver and gold.
	We are all climbing toward the summit of our hearts’ desire. Should the other climber steal your sack and your purse and wax fat on the one and heavy on the other, you should pity him; the climbing will be harder for his flesh, and the burden will make his way longer.
	And should you in your leanness see his flesh puffing upward, help him a step; it will add to your swiftness.
	You cannot judge any man beyond your knowledge of him, and how small is your knowledge.
	I would not listen to a conqueror preaching to the conquered.
	The truly free man is he who bears the load of the bond slave patiently.
	A thousand years ago my neighbor said to me, “I hate life, for it is naught but a thing of pain.”
	And yesterday I passed by a cemetery and saw life dancing upon his grave.
	Strife in nature is but disorder longing for order.
	Solitude is a silent storm that breaks down all our dead branches;
	Yet it sends our living roots deeper into the living heart of the living earth.
	Once I spoke of the sea to a brook, and the brook thought me but an imaginative exaggerator;
	And once I spoke of a brook to the sea, and the sea thought me but a depreciative defamer.
	How narrow is the vision that exalts the busyness of the ant above the singing of the grasshopper.
	The highest virtue here may be the least in another world.
	The deep and the high go to the depth or to the height in a straight line; only the spacious can move in circles.



47. ELMADAM THE LOGICIAN

	You bid me speak of Jesus the Nazarene, and much have I to tell, but the time has not come. Yet whatever I say of Him now is the truth; for all speech is worthless save when it discloses the truth.
	Behold a man disorderly, against all order; a mendicant, opposed to all possessions; a drunkard who would only make merry with rogues and castaways.
	He was not the proud son of the State, nor was He the protected citizen of the Empire; therefore He had contempt for both State and Empire.
	He would live as free and dutiless as the fowls of the air, and for this the hunters brought Him to earth with arrows.
	No one shall open the flood gates of his ancestors without drowning. It is the law. And because the Nazarene broke the law, He and His witless followers were brought to naught.
	And there lived many others like Him, men who would change the course of our destiny.
	They themselves were changed, and they were the losers.
	There is a grapeless vine that grows by the city walls. It creeps upward and clings to the stones. Should that vine say in her heart, “With my might and my weight I shall destroy these walls,” what would other plants say? Surely they would laugh at her foolishness.
	Now sir, I cannot but laugh at this man and His ill-advised disciples.



48. EPHRAIM OF JERICHO

	When he came again to Jericho I sought Him out and said to Him, “Master, on the morrow my son will take a wife. I beg you come to the wedding-feast and do us honour, even as you honoured the wedding at Cana of Galilee.”
	And He answered, “It is true that I was once a guest at a wedding-feast, but I shall not be a guest again. I am myself now the Bridegroom.”
	And I said, “I entreat you, Master, come to the wedding-feast of my son.”
	And He smiled as though He would rebuke me, and said, “Why do you entreat me? Have you not wine enough?”
	And I said, “My jugs are full, Master; yet I beseech you, come to my son’s wedding-feast.”
	Then He said, “Who knows? I may come, I may surely come, if your heart is an altar in your temple.”
	Upon the morrow my son was married, but Jesus came not to the wedding-feast. And though we had many guests, I felt that no one had come.
	In very truth, I myself who welcomed the guests, was not there.
	Perhaps my heart had not been an altar when I invited Him. Perhaps I desired another miracle.



49. THE EXCHANGE

	Once upon a crossroad a poor Poet met a rich Stupid, and they conversed. And all that they said revealed but their discontent.
	Then the Angel of the Road passed by, and he laid his hand upon the shoulder of the two men.
	And behold, a miracle: The two men had now exchanged their possessions.
	And they parted. But strange to relate, the Poet looked and found naught in his hand but dry moving sand; and the Stupid closed his eyes and felt naught but a moving cloud in his heart.



50. THE EYE

	Said the Eye one day, “I see beyond these valleys a mountain veiled with blue mist. Is it not beautiful?”
	The Ear listened, and after listening intently awhile, said, “But where is any mountain? I do not hear.”
	Then the Hand spoke and said, “I am trying in vain to feel it or touch it, and I can find no mountain.”
	And the Nose said, “There is no mountain, I cannot smell it.”
	Then the Eye turned the other way, and they all began to talk together about the Eye’s strange delusion. And they said, “Something must be the matter with the Eye.”



51. FACES

	I have seen a face with a thousand countenances, and a face that was but a single countenance as if held in a mould.
	I have seen a face whose sheen I could look through to the ugliness beneath, and a face whose sheen I had to lift to see how beautiful it was.
	I have seen an old face much lined with nothing, and a smooth face in which all things were graven.
	I know faces, because I look through the fabric my own eye weaves, and behold the reality beneath.



52. ON FAULTS

	Yesterday--and how remote yesterday is, yet how near--I went with my soul to the great ocean, to wash away with its waters the dust and mire of the earth that had clung to us.
	When we reached the shore we searched for a vacant spot that would shield us from prying eyes. While we two were walking along we looked up and, behold, a man was sitting on a dusty rock. He grasped in his hand a bag, from which he took fistful after fistful of salt which he cast into the ocean.
	My soul said to me, “That man is a cynic, who sees nothing of life but its shadow. A cynic is not worthy to lay eyes upon our naked bodies. Let us leave this place, since there is no way we can bathe here.”
	We departed from that spot and walked on until we arrived at an inlet. There we discovered a man standing on a white stone, holding in his hand a jewel-studded box. He was taking from it cubes of sugar and tossing them into the ocean.
	My soul said to me, “This man is an optimist, who sees good omens where none exist. Beware lest an optimist see our naked bodies.”
	We began walking once more, until we happened upon a man standing near the shore, picking up dead fish and tenderly returning them to the ocean.
	My soul said to me, “This is a compassionate person, who attempts to resuscitate those already in their graves. Let us avoid him.”
	We finally arrived at a place where we saw a man drawing his fantasies in the sand. The waves came and erased his sketches, but he kept on doing what he was doing, time and again.
	My soul said to me, “Here is a mystic who has set up in his imagination an idol to worship. Let us leave him and his affairs.”
	We strolled on until we espied, near a placid bay, a man scooping the foam from the surface of the water and shaking it into a carnelian bowl.
	My soul said to me, (“This is a dreamer, who weaves a robe from spider webs that he might array himself in it. He has no right to see our naked bodies.”)
	We resumed our trek, and abruptly we heard a voice shouting, “This is the deep sea, this is the mighty, terrifying ocean.” We searched for the speaker and beheld a man standing with his back to the ocean. He had placed a seashell over his ear and was listening to its rumbling.
	My soul said to me, “Let us go, for this is a materialist, who has turned his back on everything he cannot fathom and busies his essence with particulars that accord with his own premises.”
	We walked on until we saw a man in a grassy place between the stones who had buried his head in the sand. I said to my soul, “Come, my soul, let us bathe here. For that man cannot see us.”
	
	My soul shook her head, saying, “No, a thousand times no. The one you see is the worst of all people. He is pious and pure and veils himself from the tragedy of life, so that life has hidden its joys from his soul.”
	Then a profound sorrow appeared on the face of my soul. In a voice broken with bitterness, she said, “Let us get away from this shore, for there is no sheltered, concealed spot here where we can bathe. And I will never agree to loose my golden tresses in this wind, or to bare my tender breasts to this void, or to disrobe and stand naked before this light.”
	My soul and I departed from that great ocean, and began to seek for the most great ocean.



53. THE FIELD OF ZAAD

	Upon the road of Zaad a traveler met a man who lived in a nearby village, and the traveler, pointing with his hand to a vast field, asked the man saying, “Was not this the battle-ground where King Ahlam overcame his enemies?”
	And the man answered and said, “This has never been a battle-ground. There once stood on this field the great city of Zaad, and it was burnt down to ashes. But now it is a good field, is it not?”
	And the traveler and the man parted.
	Not a half mile farther the traveler met another man, and pointing to the field again, he said, “So that is where the great city of Zaad once stood?”
	And the man said, “There has never been a city in this place. But once there was a monastery here, and it was destroyed by the people of the South Country.”
	Shortly after, on that very road of Zaad, the traveler met a third man, and pointing once more to the vast field he said, “Is it not true that this is the place where once there stood a great monastery?”
	But the man answered, “There has never been a monastery in this neighborhood, but our fathers and our forefathers have told us that once there fell a great meteor on this field.”
	Then the traveler walked on, wondering in his heart. And he met a very old man, and saluting his he said, “Sir, upon this road I have met three men who live in the neighborhood and I have asked each of them about this field, and each one denied what the other had said, and each one told me a new tale that the other had not told.”
	Then the old man raised his head, and answered, “My friend, each and every one of these men told you what was indeed so; but few of us are able to add fact to different fact and make a truth thereof.”



54. FIFTH

	If it were not for our conception of weights and measures we would stand in awe of the firefly as we do before the sun.
	A scientist without imagination is a butcher with dull knives and out-worn scales.
	But what would you, since we are not all vegetarians?
	When you sing the hungry hears you with his stomach.
	Death is not nearer to the aged than to the new-born; neither is life.
	If indeed you must be candid, be candid beautifully; otherwise keep silent, for there is a man in our neighborhood who is dying.
	Mayhap a funeral among men is a wedding feast among the angels.
	A forgotten reality may die and leave in its will seven thousand actualities and facts to be spent in its funeral and the building of a tomb.
	In truth we talk only to ourselves, but sometimes we talk loud enough that others may hear us.
	The obvious is that which is never seen until someone expresses it simply.
	If the Milky Way were not within me how should I have seen it or known it?
	Unless I am a physician among physicians they would not believe that I am an astronomer.
	Perhaps the sea’s definition of a shell is the pearl.
	Perhaps time’s definition of coal is the diamond.
	Fame is the shadow of passion standing in the light.
	A root is a flower that disdains fame.
	There is neither religion nor science beyond beauty.
	Every great man I have known had something small in his make-up; and it was that small something which prevented inactivity or madness or suicide.
	The truly great man is he who would master no one, and who would be mastered by none.
	I would not believe that a man is mediocre simply because he kills the criminals and the prophets.
	Tolerance is love sick with the sickness of haughtiness.
	Worms will turn; but is it not strange that even elephants will yield?
	A disagreement may be the shortest cut between two minds.
	I am the flame and I am the dry bush, and one part of me consumes the other part.
	We are all seeking the summit of the holy moutain; but shall not our road be shorter if we consider the past a chart and not a guide?
	Wisdom ceases to be wisdom when it becomes too proud to weep, too grave to laugh, and too self-ful to seek other than itself.
	Had I filled myself with all that you know what room should I have for all that you do not know?
	I have learned silence from the talkative, toleration from the intolerant, and kindness from the unkind; yet strange, I am ungrateful to these teachers.
	A bigot is a stone-leaf orator.
	The silence of the envious is too noisy.
	When you reach the end of what you should know, you will be at the beginning of what you should sense.
	An exaggeration is a truth that has lost its temper.
	If you can see only what light reveals and hear only what sound announces,
	Then in truth you do not see nor do you hear.
	A fact is a truth unsexed.
	You cannot laugh and be unkind at the same time.
	The nearest to my heart are a king without a kingdom and a poor man who does not know how to beg.
	A shy failure is nobler than an immodest success.
	Dig anywhere in the earth and you will find a treasure, only you must dig with the faith of a peasant.
	Said a hunted fox followed by twenty horsemen and a pack of twenty hounds, “Of course they will kill me. But how poor and how stupid they must be. Surely it would not be worth while for twenty foxes riding on twenty asses and accompanied by twenty wolves to chase and kill one man.”
	It is the mind in us that yields to the laws made by us, but never the spirit in us.
	A traveler am I and a navigator, and every day I discover a new region within my soul.
	A woman protested saying, “Of course it was a righteous war. My son fell in it.”
	I said to Life, “I would hear Death speak.”
	And Life raised her voice a little higher and said, “You hear him now.”
	When you have solved all the mysteries of life you long for death, for it is but another mystery of life.
	Birth and death are the two noblest expressions of bravery.
	My friend, you and I shall remain strangers unto life,
	And unto one another, and each unto himself,
	Until the day when you shall speak and I shall listen
	Deeming your voice my own voice;
	And when I shall stand before you
	Thinking myself standing before a mirror.
	They say to me, “Should you know yourself you would know all men.”
	And I say, “Only when I seek all men shall I know myself.”



55. FINDING GOD

	Two men were walking in the valley, and one man pointed with his finger toward the mountain side, and said, “See you that hermitage? There lives a man who has long divorced the world. He seeks but after God, and naught else upon this earth.”
	And the other man said, “He shall not find God until he leaves his hermitage, and the aloneness of his hermitage, and returns to our world, to share our joy and pain, to dance with our dancers at the wedding feast, and to weep with those who weep around the coffins of our dead.”
	And the other man was convinced in his heart, though in spite of his conviction he answered, “I agree with all that you say, yet I believe the hermit is a good man. And it may it not well be that one good man by his absence does better than the seeming goodness of these many men?”



56. FIRST

	Once I filled my hand with mist.
	Then I opened it and lo, the mist was a worm.
	And I closed and opened my hand again, and behold there was a bird.
	And again I closed and opened my hand, and in its hollow stood a man with a sad face, turned upward.
	And again I closed my hand, and when I opened it there was naught but mist.
	But I heard a song of exceeding sweetness.
	It was but yesterday I thought myself a fragment quivering without rhythm in the sphere of life.
	Now I know that I am the sphere, and all life in rhythmic fragments moves within me.
	They say to me in their awakening, “You and the world you live in are but a grain of sand upon the infinite shore of an infinite sea.”
	And in my dream I say to them, “I am the infinite sea, and all worlds are but grains of sand upon my shore.”
	Only once have I been made mute. It was when a man asked me, “Who are you?”
	The first thought of God was an angel.
	The first word of God was a man.
	We were fluttering, wandering, longing creatures a thousand thousand years before the sea and the wind in the forest gave us words.
	Now how can we express the ancient of days in us with only the sounds of our yesterdays?
	The Sphinx spoke only once, and the Sphinx said, “A grain of sand is a desert, and a desert is a grain of sand; and now let us all be silent again.”
	I heard the Sphinx, but I did not understand.
	Long did I lie in the dust of Egypt, silent and unaware of the seasons.
	Then the sun gave me birth, and I rose and walked upon the banks of the Nile,
	Singing with the days and dreaming with the nights.
	And now the sun threads upon me with a thousand feet that I may lie again in the dust of Egypt.
	But behold a marvel and a riddle!
	The very sun that gathered me cannot scatter me.
	Still erect am I, and sure of foot do I walk upon the banks of the Nile.
	Remembrance is a form of meeting.
	Forgetfulness is a form of freedom.
	We measure time according to the movement of countless suns; and they measure time by little machines in their little pockets.
	Now tell me, how could we ever meet at the same place and the same time?
	Space is not space between the earth and the sun to one who looks down from the windows of the Milky Way.
	Humanity is a river of light running from the ex-eternity to eternity.
	Do not the spirits who dwell in the ether envy man his pain?
	On my way to the Holy City I met another pilgrim and I asked him, “Is this indeed the way to the Holy City?”
	And he said, “Follow me, and you will reach the Holy City in a day and a night.”
	And I followed him. And we walked many days and many nights, yet we did not reach the Holy City.
	And what was to my surprise he became angry with me because he had misled me.
	Make me, oh God, the prey of the lion, ere. You make the rabbit my prey.
	One may not reach the dawn save by the path of the night.
	My house says to me, “Do not leave me, for here dwells your past.”
	And the road says to me, “Come and follow me, for I am your future.”
	And I say to both my house and the road, “I have no past, nor have I a future. If I stay here, there is a going in my staying; and if I go there is a staying in my going. Only love and death will change all things.”
	How can I lose faith in the justice of life, when the dreams of those who sleep upon feathers are not more beautiful than the dreams of those who sleep upon the earth?
	Strange, the desire for certain pleasures is a part of my pain.
	Every seed is a longing.



57. THE FORERUNNER

	You are your own forerunner, and the towers you have builded are but the foundation of your giant-self. And that self too shall be a foundation.
	And I too am my own forerunner, for the long shadow stretching before me at sunrise shall gather under my feet at the noon hour. Yet another sunrise shall lay another shadow before me, and that also shall be gathered at another noon.
	Always have we been our own forerunners, and always shall we be. And all that we have gathered and shall gather shall be but seeds for fields yet unploughed. We are the fields and the ploughmen, the gatherers and the gathered.
	When you were a wandering desire in the mist, I too was there, a wandering desire. Then we sought one another, and out of our eagerness dreams were born. And dreams were time limitless, and dreams were space without measure.
	And when you were a silent word upon life’s quivering lips, I too was there, another silent word. Then life uttered us and we came down the years throbbing with memories of yesterday and with longing for tomorrow, for yesterday was death conquered and tomorrow was birth pursued.
	And now we are in God’s hands. You are a sun in His right hand and I an earth in His left hand. Yet you are not more, shining, than I, shone upon.
	And we, sun and earth, are but the beginning of a greater sun and a greater earth. And always shall we be the beginning.
	You are your own forerunner, you the stranger passing by the gate of my garden.
	And I too am my own forerunner, though I sit in the shadows of my trees and seem motionless.



58. FOURTH

	A poet is a dethroned king sitting among the ashes of his palace trying to fashion an image out of the ashes.
	Poetry is a deal of joy and pain and wonder, with a dash of the dictionary.
	In vain shall a poet seek the mother of the songs of his heart.
	Once I said to a poet, “We shall not know your worth until you die.”
	And he answered saying, “Yes, death is always the revealer. And if indeed you would know my worth it is that I have more in my heart than upon my tongue, and more in my desire than in my hand.”
	If you sing of beauty though alone in the heart of the desert you will have an audience.
	Inspiration will always sing; inspiration will never explain.
	We often sing lullabies to our children that we ourselves may sleep.
	All our words are but crumbs that fall down from the feast of the mind.
	Thinking is always the stumbling stone to poetry.
	A great singer is he who sings our silences.
	How can you sing if your mouth be filled with food?
	How shall your hand be raised in blessing if it is filled with gold?
	They say the nightingale pierces his bosom with a thorn when he sings his love song.
	So do we all. How else should we sing?
	Genius is but a robin’s song at the beginning of a slow spring.
	Even the most winged spirit cannot escape physical necessity.
	A madman is not less a musician than you or myself; only the instrument on which he plays is a little out of tune.
	The song that lies silent in the heart of a mother sings upon the lips of her child.
	No longing remains unfulfilled.
	I have never agreed with my other self wholly. The truth of the matter seems to lie between us.
	Your other self is always sorry for you. But your other self grows on sorrow; so all is well.
	There is no struggle of soul and body save in the minds of those whose souls are asleep and whose bodies are out of tune.
	When you reach the heart of life you shall find beauty in all things, even in the eyes that are blind to beauty.
	We live only to discover beauty. All else is a form of waiting.
	Sow a seed and the earth will yield you a flower. Dream your dream to the sky and it will bring you your beloved.
	The devil died the very day you were born.
	Now you do not have to go through hell to meet an angel.
	Many a woman borrows a man’s heart; very few could possess it.
	If you would possess you must not claim.
	When a man’s hand touches the hand of a woman they both touch the heart of eternity.
	Love is the veil between lover and lover.
	Every man loves two women; the one is the creation of his imagination, and the other is not yet born.
	Men who do not forgive women their little faults will never enjoy their great virtues.
	Love that does not renew itself every day becomes a habit and in turn a slavery.
	Lovers embrace that which is between them rather than each other.
	Love and doubt have never been on speaking terms.
	Love is a word of light, written by a hand of light, upon a page of light.
	Friendship is always a sweet responsibility, never an opportunity.
	If you do not understand your friend under all conditions you will never understand him.
	Your most radiant garment is of the other person’s weaving;
	You most savory meal is that which you eat at the other person’s table;
	Your most comfortable bed is in the other person’s house.
	Now tell me, how can you separate yourself from the other person?
	Your mind and my heart will never agree until your mind ceases to live in numbers and my heart in the mist.
	We shall never understand one another until we reduce the language to seven words.



59. THE FOX

	A fox looked at his shadow at sunrise and said, “I wil have a camel for lunch today.”
	And all morning he went about looking for camels. But at noon he saw his shadow again--and he said, “A mouse will do.”



60. ON FREEDOM

	And an orator said, “Speak to us of Freedom.” And he answered:
	
	At the city gate and by your fireside I have seen you prostrate yourself and worship your own freedom,
	Even as slaves humble themselves before a tyrant and praise him though he slays them.
	Ay, in the grove of the temple and in the shadow of the citadel I have seen the freest among you wear their freedom as a yoke and a handcuff.
	And my heart bled within me; for you can only be free when even the desire of seeking freedom becomes a harness to you, and when you cease to speak of freedom as a goal and a fulfillment.
	You shall be free indeed when your days are not without a care nor your nights without a want and a grief,
	But rather when these things girdle your life and yet you rise above them naked and unbound.
	And how shall you rise beyond your days and nights unless you break the chains which you at the dawn of your understanding have fastened around your noon hour?
	In truth that which you call freedom is the strongest of these chains, though its links glitter in the sun and dazzle the eyes.
	And what is it but fragments of your own self you would discard that you may become free?
	If it is an unjust law you would abolish, that law was written with your own hand upon your own forehead.
	You cannot erase it by burning your law books nor by washing the foreheads of your judges, though you pour the sea upon them.
	And if it is a despot you would dethrone, see first that his throne erected within you is destroyed.
	For how can a tyrant rule the free and the proud, but for a tyranny in their own freedom and a shame in their won pride?
	And if it is a care you would cast off, that care has been chosen by you rather than imposed upon you.
	And if it is a fear you would dispel, the seat of that fear is in your heart and not in the hand of the feared.
	Verily all things move within your being in constant half embrace, the desired and the dreaded, the repugnant and the cherished, the pursued and that which you would escape.
	These things move within you as lights and shadows in pairs that cling.
	And when the shadow fades and is no more, the light that lingers becomes a shadow to another light.
	And thus your freedom when it loses its fetters becomes itself the fetter of a greater freedom.



61. ON FRIENDSHIP

	And a youth said, “Speak to us of Friendship.”
	
	Your friend is your needs answered.
	He is your field which you sow with love and reap with thanksgiving.
	And he is your board and your fireside.
	For you come to him with your hunger, and you seek him for peace.
	When your friend speaks his mind you fear not the ‘nay’ in your own mind, nor do you withhold the ‘ay.’
	And when he is silent your heart ceases not to listen to his heart;
	For without words, in friendship, all thoughts, all desires, all expectations are born and shared, with joy that is unacclaimed.
	When you part from your friend, you grieve not;
	For that which you love most in him may be clearer in his absence, as the mountain to the climber is clearer from the plain.
	And let there be no purpose in friendship save the deepening of the spirit.
	For love that seeks aught but the disclosure of its own mystery is not love but a net cast forth: and only the unprofitable is caught.
	And let your best be for your friend.
	If he must know the ebb of your tide, let him know its flood also.
	For what is your friend that you should seek him with hours to kill?
	Seek him always with hours to live.
	For it is his to fill your need, but not your emptiness.
	And in the sweetness of friendship let there be laughter, and sharing of pleasures.
	For in the dew of little things the heart finds its morning and is refreshed.



62. THE FROGS

	Upon a summer day a frog said to his mate, “I fear those people living in that house on the shore are disturbed by our night-songs.”
	And his mate answered and said, “Well, do they not annoy our silence during the day with their talking?”
	The frog said, “Let us not forget that we may sing too much in the night.”
	And his mate answered, “Let us not forget that they chatter and shout overmuch during the day.”
	Said the frog, “How about the bullfrog who that they clatter and shout overmuch during the day.”
	Said the frog, “How about the bullfrog who disturbs the whole neighborhood with his God-forbidden booming?”
	And his mate replied, “Aye, and what say you of the politician and the priest and the scientist who come to these shores and fill the air with noisy and rhymeless sound?”
	Then the frog said, “Well, let us be better than these human beings. Let us be quiet at night, and keep our songs in our hearts, even though the moon calls for our rhythm and the stars for our rhyme. At least, let us be silent for a night or two, or even for three nights.”
	And his mate said, “Very well, I agree. We shall see what your bountiful heart will bring forth.”
	That night the frogs were silent; and they were silent the following night also, and again upon the third night.
	And strange to relate, the talkative woman who lived in the house beside the lake came down to breakfast on that third day and shouted to her husband, “I have not slept these three nights. I was secure with sleep when the noise of the frogs was in my ear. But something must have happened. They have not sung now for three nights; and I am almost maddened with sleeplessness.”
	The frog heard this and turned to his mate and said, winking his eye, “And we were almost maddened with our silence, were we not?”
	And his mate answered, “Yes, the silence of the night was heavy upon us. And I can see now that there is no need for us to cease our singing for the comfort of those who must needs fill their emptiness with noise.”
	And that night the moon called not in vain for their rhythm nor the stars for their rhyme.



63. THE FULL MOON

	The full moon rose in glory upon the town, and all the dogs of that town began to bark at the moon.
	Only one dog did not bark, and he said to them in a grave voice, “Awake not stillness from her sleep, nor bring you the moon to the earth with your barking.”
	Then all the dogs ceased barking, in awful silence. But the dog who had spoken to them continued barking for silence, the rest of the night.



64. GARMENTS

	Upon a day Beauty and Ugliness met on the shore of a sea. And they said to one another, “Let us bathe in the sea.”
	Then they disrobed and swam in the waters. And after a while Ugliness came back to shore and garmented himself with the garments of Beauty and walked away.
	And Beauty too came out of the sea, and found not her raiment, and she was too shy to be naked, therefore she dressed herself with the raiment of Ugliness. And Beauty walked her way.
	And to this very day men and women mistake the one for the other.
	Yet some there are who have beheld the face of Beauty, and they know her notwithstanding her garments. And some there be who know the face of Ugliness, and the cloth conceals him not from their eyes.



65. GEORGUS OF BEIRUT

	He and his friends were in the grove of pines beyond my hedge, and He was talking to them.
	I stood near the hedge and listened. And I knew who He was, for His fame had reached these shores ere He Himself visited them.
	When He ceased speaking I approached Him, and I said, “Sir, come with these men and honour me and my roof.”
	And He smiled upon me and said, “Not this day, my friend. Not this day.”
	And there was a blessing in His words, and His voice enfolded me like a garment on a cold night.
	Then He turned to His friends and said, “Behold a man who deems us not strangers, and though He has not seen us ere this day, he bids us to His threshold.
	“Verily in my kingdom there are no strangers. Our life is but the life of all other men, given us that we may know all men, and in that knowledge love them.
	“The deeds of all men are but our deeds, both the hidden and the revealed.
	“I charge you not to be one self but rather many selves, the householder and the homeless, the ploughman and the sparrow that picks the grain ere it slumber in the earth, the giver who gives in gratitude, and the receiver who receives in pride and recognition.
	“The beauty of the day is not only in what you see, but in what other men see.
	“For this I have chosen you from among the many who have chosen me.”
	Then He turned to me again and smiled and said, “I say these things to you also, and you also shall remember them.”
	Then I entreated Him and said, “Master, will you not visit in my house?”
	And He answered, “I know your heart, and I have visited your larger house.”
	And as He walked away with His disciples He said, “Good-night, and may your house be large enough to shelter all the wanderers of the land.”



66. ON GIVING

	My Soul is heavy laden with its fruits, so is there anyone hungering who will harvest them, and eat of them, and be satiated?
	Is there no one among the people who has been fasting who will graciously break the fast upon my offspring and relieve me of the burden of my fecundity and abundance?
	My Soul is collapsing beneath the weight of gold ore and silver. Will anyone among the people fill his pockets and lighten my load?
	My Soul is overflowing with the wine of eons. Is there anyone thirsting who will pour, and drink, and slake his thirst?
	There stands a man in the middle of the road, thrusting toward passers-by a handful of gems, calling to them: “Look! Have mercy and snatch them from me. Take pity and relieve me of what I have!” As for the people, they walked on, paying no attention.
	Indeed, would that he were a beggar, entreating and stretching out his quivering hand toward the pedestrians, and bringing it back, empty and trembling. Would that he were sitting there blind, and the people were passing by, indifferent.
	There is the wealthy, munificent sheik, who raises his tent between the white, unexplored peaks and the foothills of the mountains. He lights the fire of a hospitable reception every night and sends his servants to monitor the roads, in hopes that they will lead to him a guest whom he might feed and honor. But the trails prove miserly, yielding no caller who might eat of his free banquet and sending no seeker to accept his gifts.
	Would that he were a cast-out pauper!
	Would that he were a homeless vagabond who roamed the lands, a staff in his hand and a begging bowl at his waist, and that when evening came the bends in the alleyways gathered together him and his companions among the vagrants and tramps, and that he sat next to them and shared out the bread of charity.
	There is the daughter of the great king, who awakens from her repose and rises from her bed. She clothes herself in purple and lavender, adorns herself with pearls and sapphires, sprays perfume on her hair, and soaks her fingers in liquid ambergris. Then she walks in her garden, where droplets of dew moisten the hems of her robes.
	In the quiet of the night the daughter of the great king walks in her garden, looking for her beloved, but no one in all the realm of her father loves her.
	Would that she were the daughter of a peasant, herding her father’s sheep in the valleys and returning at night to his hovel, her feet dusty with her toil, the odor of vineyards lingering in the folds of her clothing. Then, when night descended and the people of the quarter had fallen asleep, she would steal away to the place where her lover was awaiting.
	Would that she were a nun in a convent, her heart burning with incense, the fragrance of which the wind would waft abroad. Her spirit would ignite a candle, and the ether would convey the light of her Soul. She would genuflect in prayer, and the specters of the unseen would bear her prayers to the treasure-hold of time, where the devotions of worshipers are safeguarded beside the flames of lovers and the misgivings of hermits.
	Would that she were aged and timeworn, sitting and sunning herself with the one who shared her youth. For that would be better than to be the daughter of the great king whose realm contains no suitor to eat of her heart like bread or drink of her blood like wine.
	My Soul is heavy laden with its fruits; is there anyone on earth hungering who will harvest them, and eat them, and be satiated?
	My Soul is overflowing with its wine. Is there anyone thirsting who will pour, and drink, and slake his thirst?
	Would that I were a never-blossoming tree, which gave no fruit. For the pain of fecundity is more bitter than the anguish of barrenness, and the torments of the well-to-do with their inalienable wealth hold horrors greater than any suffered by a pauper who goes without food.
	Would that I were a dry well, and that the people tossed stones into me, for that would be easier than to be a spring of flowing water that the thirsty pass by, and from which they avoid drinking.
	Would that I were a crushed cane, trampled beneath the feet, for that would be better than to be a lyre with silver strings in the house of a master who has lost all his fingers and whose family is deaf.



67. ON GIVING AND TAKING

	Once there lived a man who had a valleyful of needles. And one day the mother of Jesus came to him and said: “Friend, my son’s garment is torn and I must needs mend it before he goeth to the temple. Wouldst thou not give me a needle?”
	And he gave her not a needle, but he gave her a learned discourse on Giving and Taking to carry to her son before he should go to the temple.



68. GOD

	In the ancient days, when the first quiver of speech came to my lips, I ascended the holy mountain and spoke unto God, saying, “Master, I am thy slave. Thy hidden will is my law and I shall obey thee for ever more.”
	But God made no answer, and like a mighty tempest passed away.
	And after a thousand years I ascended the holy mountain and again spoke unto God, saying, “Creator, I am thy creation. Out of clay hast thou fashioned me and to thee I owe mine all.”
	And God made no answer, but like a thousand swift wings passed away.
	And after a thousand years I climbed the holy mountain and spoke unto God again, saying, “Father, I am thy son. In pity and love thou hast given me birth, and through love and worship I shall inherit thy kingdom.”
	And God made no answer, and like the mist that veils the distant hills he passed away.
	And after a thousand years I climbed the sacred mountain and again spoke unto God, saying, “My God, my aim and my fulfilment; I am thy yesterday and thou art my tomorrow. I am thy root in the earth and thou art my flower in the sky, and together we grow before the face of the sun.”
	Then God leaned over me, and in my ears whispered words of sweetness, and even as the sea that enfoldeth a brook that runneth down to her, he enfolded me.
	And when I descended to the valleys and the plains God was there also.



69. GOD AND MANY GODS

	In the city of Kilafis a sophist stood on the steps of th Temple and preached many gods. And the people said in their hearts, “We know all this. Do they not live with us and follow us wherever we go?”
	Not long after, another man stood in the market place and spoke unto the people and said, “There is no god.” And many who heard him were glad of his tidings, for they were afraid of gods.
	And upon another day there came a man of great eloquence, an he said, “There is but one God.” And now the people were dismayed for in their hearts they feared the judgment of one God more than that of many gods.
	That same season there came yet another man, and he said to the people, “There are three gods, and they dwell upon the wind as one, and they have a vast and gracious mother who is also their mate and their sister.”
	Then everyone was comforted, for they said in their secret, “three gods in one must needs disagree over our failings, and besides, their gracious mother will surely be an advocate for us poor weaklings.”
	Yet even to this day there are those in the city of Kilafis who wrangle and argue with each other about many gods and no god, and one god and three gods in one, and a gracious mother of gods.



70. GOD’s FOOL

	Once there came from the desert to the great city of Sharia a man who was a dreamer, and he had naught but his garment and staff.
	And as he walked through the streets he gazed with awe and wonder at the temples and towers and palaces, for the city of Sharia was of surpassing beauty. And he spoke often to the passers-by, questioning them about their city--but they understood not his language, nor he their language.
	At the noon hour he stopped before a vast inn. It was built of yellow marble, and people were going in and coming out unhindered.
	“This must be a shrine,” he said to himself, and he too went in. But what was his surprise to find himself in a hall of great splendour and a large company of men and women seated about many tables. They were eating and drinking and listening to the musicians. ‘Nay,’ said the dreamer, ‘This is no worshipping. It must be a feast given by the prince to the people, in celebration of a great event.’
	At that moment a man, whom he took to be the slave of the prince, approached him, and bade him be seated. And he was served with meat and wine and most excellent sweets.
	When he was satisfied, the dreamer rose to depart. At the door he was stopped by a large man magnificently arrayed.
	‘Surely this is the prince himself,’ said the dreamer in his heart, and he bowed to him and thanked him.
	Then the large man said in the language of the city: ‘Sir, you have not paid for your dinner.’ And the dreamer did not understand, and again thanked him heartily.
	Then the large man bethought him, and he looked more closely upon the dreamer. And he saw that he was a stranger, clad in but a poor garment, and that indeed he had not wherewith to pay for his meal. Then the large man clapped his hands and called--and there came four watchmen of the city. And they listened to the large man.
	Then they took the dreamer between them, and they were two on each side of him. And the dreamer noted the ceremoniousness of their dress and of their manner and he looked upon them with delight. ‘These,’ said he, ‘are men of distinction.’
	And they walked all together until they came to the House of Judgement and they entered. The dreamer saw before him, seated upon a throne, a venerable man with flowing beard, robed majestically. And he thought he was the king. And he rejoiced to be brought before him.
	Now the watchmen related to the judge, who was the venerable man, the charge against the dreamer, and the judge appointed two advocates, one to present the charge and the other to defend the stranger. And the advocates rose, the one after the other, and delivered each his argument. And the dreamer thought himself to be listening to addresses of welcome, and his heart filled with gratitude to the king and the prince for all that was done for him.
	Then sentence was passed upon the dreamer, that upon a tablet about his neck his crime should be written, and that he should ride through the city on a naked horse, with a trumpeter and a drummer before him. And the sentence was carried out forthwith.
	Now as the dreamer rode through the city upon the naked horse, with the trumpeter and the drummer before him, the inhabitants of the city came running forth at the sound of the noise, and when they saw him they laughed one and all, and the children ran after him in companies from street to street. And the dreamer’s heart was filled with ecstasy, and his eyes shone upon them. For to him the tablet was a sign of the king’s blessing and the procession was in his honour.
	Now as he rode, he saw among the crowd a man who was from the desert like himself and his heart swelled with joy, and he cried out to him with a shout:
	‘Friend! Friend! Where are we? What city of the heart’s desire is this? What race of lavish hosts, who feast the chance guest in their palaces, whose princes companion him, whose kings hangs a token upon his breast and opens to him the hospitality of a city descended from heaven?’
	And he who was also of the desert replied not. He only smiled and slightly shook his head. And the procession passed on. And the dreamer’s face was uplifted and his eyes were overflowing with light.



71. THE GOLDEN BELT

	Once upon a day two men who met on the road were walking together toward Salamis, the City of Columns. In the mid-afternoon they came to a wide river and there was no bridge to cross it. They must needs swim, or seek another road unknown to them.
	And they said to one another, “Let us swim. After all, the river is not so wide.” And they threw themselves into the water and swam.
	And one of the men who had always known rivers and the ways of rivers, in mid-stream suddenly began to lose himself; and to be carried away by the rushing waters; while the other who had never swum before crossed the river straight-way and stood upon the farther bank. Then seeing his companion stil wrestling with the stream, he threw himself again into the waters and brought him also safely to the shore.
	And the man who had been swept away by the current said, “But you told me you could not swim. How then did you cross that river with such assurance?”
	And the second man answered, “My friend, do you see this belt which girdles me? It is full of golden coins that I have earned for my wife and my children, a full year’s work. It is the weight of this belt of gold tha carried me across the river, to my wife and my children. And my wife and my children were upon my shoulders as I swam.”
	And the two men walked on together toward Salamis.



72. ON GOOD AND EVIL

	And one of the elders of the city said, “Speak to us of Good and Evil.” And he answered:
	
	Of the good in you I can speak, but not of the evil.
	For what is evil but good tortured by its own hunger and thirst?
	Verily when good is hungry it seeks food even in dark caves, and when it thirsts, it drinks even of dead waters.
	You are good when you are one with yourself.
	Yet when you are not one with yourself you are not evil.
	For a divided house is not a den of thieves; it is only a divided house.
	And a ship without rudder may wander aimlessly among perilous isles yet sink not to the bottom.
	You are good when you strive to give of yourself.
	Yet you are not evil when you seek gain for yourself.
	For when you strive for gain you are but a root that clings to the earth and sucks at her breast.
	Surely the fruit cannot say to the root, “Be like me, ripe and full and ever giving of your abundance.”
	For to the fruit giving is a need, as receiving is a need to the root.
	You are good when you are fully awake in your speech,
	Yet you are not evil when you sleep while your tongue staggers without purpose.
	And even stumbling speech may strengthen a weak tongue.
	You are good when you walk to your goal firmly and with bold steps.
	Yet you are not evil when you go thither limping.
	Even those who limp go not backward.
	But you who are strong and swift, see that you do not limp before the lame, deeming it kindness.
	You are good in countless ways, and you are not evil when you are not good,
	You are only loitering and sluggard.
	Pity that the stags cannot teach swiftness to the turtles.
	In your longing for your giant self lies your goodness: and that longing is in all of you.
	But in some of you that longing is a torrent rushing with might to the sea, carrying the secrets of the hillsides and the songs of the forest.
	And in others it is a flat stream that loses itself in angles and bends and lingers before it reaches the shore.
	But let not him who longs much say to him who longs little, “Wherefore are you slow and halting?”
	For the truly good ask not the naked, “Where is your garment?” nor the houseless, “What has befallen your house?”



73. THE GOOD GOD AND THE EVIL GOD

	The Good God and the Evil God met on the mountain top.
	The Good God said, “Good day to you, brother.”
	The Evil God made no answer.
	And the Good God said, “You are in a bad humour today.”
	“Yes,” said the Evil God, “for of late I have been often mistaken for you, called by your name, and treated as if I were you, and it ill-pleases me.”
	And the Good God said, “But I too have been mistaken for you and called by your name.”
	The Evil God walked away cursing the stupidity of man.



74. THE GRAVE-DIGGER

	Once, as I was burying one of my dead selves, the grave-digger came by and said to me, “Of all those who come here to bury, you alone I like.”
	Said I, “You please me exceedingly, but why do you like me?”
	“Because,” said he, “They come weeping and go weeping--you only come laughing and go laughing.”



75. THE GREAT LONGING

	Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea.
	We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together is deep and strong and strange. Nay, it is deeper than my sister’s depth and stronger than my brother’s strength, and stranger than the strangeness of my madness.
	Aeons upon aeons have passed since the first grey dawn made us visible to one another; and though we have seen the birth and the fulness and the death of many worlds, we are still eager and young.
	We are young and eager and yet we are mateless and unvisited, and though we lie in unbroken half embrace, we are uncomforted. And what comfort is there for controlled desire and unspent passion? Whence shall come the flaming god to warm my sister’s bed? And what she-torrent shall quench my brother’s fire? And who is the woman that shall command my heart?
	. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
	Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea. We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together is deep and strong and strange.



76. THE GREATER SEA

	My soul and I went down to the great sea to bathe. And when we reached the shore, we went about looking for a hidden and lonely place.
	But as we walked, we saw a man sitting on a grey rock taking pinches of salt from a bag and throwing them into the sea.
	“This is the pessimist,” said my soul, “Let us leave this place. We cannot bathe here.”
	We walked on until we reached an inlet. There we saw, standing on a white rock, a man holding a bejewelled box, from which he took sugar and threw it into the sea.
	“And this is the optimist,” said my soul, “And he too must not see our naked bodies.”
	Further on we walked. And on a beach we saw a man picking up dead fish and tenderly putting them back into the water.
	“And we cannot bathe before him,” said my soul. “He is the humane philanthropist.”
	And we passed on.
	Then we came where we saw a man tracing his shadow on the sand. Great waves came and erased it. But he went on tracing it again and again.
	“He is the mystic,” said my soul, “Let us leave him.”
	And we walked on, till in a quiet cove we saw a man scooping up the foam and putting it into an alabaster bowl.
	“He is the idealist,” said my soul, “Surely he must not see our nudity.”
	And on we walked. Suddenly we heard a voice crying, “This is the sea. This is the deep sea. This is the vast and mighty sea.” And when we reached the voice it was a man whose back was turned to the sea, and at his ear he held a shell, listening to its murmur.
	And my soul said, “Let us pass on. He is the realist, who turns his back on the whole he cannot grasp, and busies himself with a fragment.”
	So we passed on. And in a weedy place among the rocks was a man with his head buried in the sand. And I said to my soul, “We can bathe here, for he cannot see us.”
	“Nay,” said my soul, “For he is the most deadly of them all. He is the puritan.”
	Then a great sadness came over the face of my soul, and into her voice.
	“Let us go hence,” she said, “For there is no lonely, hidden place where we can bathe. I would not have this wind lift my golden hair, or bare my white bosom in this air, or let the light disclose my scared nakedness.”
	Then we left that sea to seek the Greater Sea.



77. THE GREATER SELF

	This came to pass. After the coronation of Nufsibaal King of Byblus, he retired to his bed-chamber--the very room which the three hermit-magicians of the mountains had built for him. He took off his crown and his royal raiment, and stood in the centre of the room thinking of himself, now the all-powerful ruler of Byblus.
	Suddenly he turned; and he saw stepping out of the silver mirror which his mother had given him, a naked man. The king was startled, and he cried out to the man, “What would you?”
	And the naked man answered, “Naught but this: Why have they crowned you king?”
	And the king answered, “Because I am the noblest man in the land.”
	Then the naked man said, “If you were still more noble, you would not be king.”
	And the king said, “Because I am the mightiest man in the land they crowned me.”
	And the naked man said, “If you were mightier yet, you would not be king.”
	Then the king said, “Because I am the wisest man they crowned me king.”
	And the naked man said, “If you were still wiser you would not choose to be king.”
	Then the king fell to the floor and wept bitterly.
	The naked man looked down upon him. Then he took up the crown and with tenderness replaced it upon the king’s bent head.
	And the naked man, gazing lovingly upon the king, entered into the mirror.
	And the king roused, and straightway he looked into the mirror. And he saw there but himself crowned.



78. THE HAND OF DESTINY

	In the spring of the that wonderful year, I was in Beirut. The gardens were full of Nisan flowers and the earth was carpeted with green grass, and like a secret of earth revealed to Heaven. The orange trees and apple trees, looking like houris or brides sent by nature to inspire poets and excite the imagination, were wearing white garments of perfumed blossoms.
	Spring is beautiful everywhere, but it is most beautiful in Lebanon. It is a spirit that roams round the earth but hovers over Lebanon, conversing with kings and prophets, singing with the rives the songs of Solomon, and repeating with the Holy Cedars of Lebanon the memory of ancient glory. Beirut, free from the mud of winter and the dust of summer, is like a bride in the spring, or like a mermaid sitting by the side of a brook drying her smooth skin in the rays of the sun.
	One day, in the month of Nisan, I went to visit a friend whose home was at some distance from the glamorous city. As we were conversing, a dignified man of about sixty-five entered the house. As I rose to greet him, my friend introduced him to me as Farris Effandi Karamy and then gave him my name with flattering words. The old man looked at me a moment, touching his forehead with the ends of his fingers as if he were trying to regain his memory. Then he smilingly approached me saying, “You are the son of a very dear friend of mine, and I am happy to see that friend in your person.”
	Much affected by his words, I was attracted to him like a bird whose instinct leads him to his nest before the coming of the tempest. As we sat down, he told us about his friendship with my father, recalling the time which they spent together. An old man likes to return in memory to the days of his youth like a stranger who longs to go back to his own country. He delights to tell stories of the past like a poet who takes pleasure in reciting his best poem. He lives spiritually in the past because the present passes swiftly, and the future seems to him an approach to the oblivion of the grave. An hour full of old memories passed like the shadows of the trees over the grass. When Farris Effandi started to leave, he put his left hand on my shoulder and shook my right hand, saying, “I have not seen your father for twenty years. I hope you will l take his place in frequent visits to my house.” I promised gratefully to do my duty toward a dear friend of my father.
	When the old man left the house, I asked my friend to tell me more about him. He said, “I do not know any other man in Beirut whose wealth has made him kind and whose kindness has made him wealthy. He is one of the few who come to this world and leave it without harming any one, but people of that kind are usually miserable and oppressed because they are not clever enough to save themselves from the crookedness of others. Farris Effandi has one daughter whose character is similar to his and whose beauty and gracefulness are beyond description, and she will also be miserable because her father’s wealth is placing her already at the edge of a horrible precipice.”
	As he uttered these words, I noticed that his face clouded. Then he continued, “Farris Effandi is a good old man with a noble heart, but he lacks will power. People lead him like a blind man. His daughter obeys him in spite of her pride and intelligence, and this is the secret which lurks in the life of father and daughter. This secret was discovered by an evil man who is a bishop and whose wickedness hides in the shadow of his Gospel. He makes the people believe that he is kind and noble. He is the head of religion in this land of the religions. The people obey and worship him. He leads them like a flock of lambs to the slaughter house. This bishop has a nephew who is full of hatefulness and corruption. The day will come sooner or later when he will place his nephew on his right and Farris Effandi’s daughter on this left, and, holding with his evil hand the wreath of matrimony over their heads, will tie a pure virgin to a filthy degenerate, placing the heart of the day in the bosom of the night.
	“That is all I can tell you about Farris Effandi and his daughter, so do not ask me any more questions.”
	Saying this, he turned his head toward the window as if he were trying to solve the problems of human existence by concentrating on the beauty of the universe.
	As I left the house I told my friend that I was going to visit Farris Effandi in a few days for the purpose of fulfilling my promise and for the sake of the friendship which had joined him and my father. He stared at me for a moment, and I noticed a change in his expression as if my few simple words had revealed to him a new idea. Then he looked straight through my eyes in a strange manner, a look of love, mercy, and fear--the look of a prophet who foresees what no one else can divine. Then his lips trembled a little, but he said nothing when I started towards the door. That strange look followed me, the meaning of which I could not understand until I grew up in the world of experience, where hearts understand each other intuitively and where spirits are mature with knowledge.



79. HANNAH OF BETHSAIDA

	The sister of my father had left us in her youth to dwell in a hut beside her father’s ancient vineyard.
	She lived alone, and the people of the countryside sought her in their maladies, and she healed them with green herbs, and with roots and flowers dried in the sun.
	And they deemed her a seeress; but there were those also who called her witch and sorceress.
	One day my father said to me, “Take these loaves of wheaten bread to my sister, and take this jug of wine and this basket of raisins.”
	And it was all put upon the back of a colt, and I followed the road until I reached the vineyard, and the hut of my father’s sister. And she was gladdened.
	Now as we sat together in the cool of the day, a man came by upon the road, and He greeted the sister of my father, saying, “Good-even to you, and the blessing of the night be upon you.”
	Then she rose up; and she stood as in awe before Him and said, “Good-even to you, master of all good spirits, and conqueror of all evil spirits.”
	The man looked at her with tender eyes, and then He passed on by.
	But I laughed in my heart. Methought my father’s sister was mad. But now I know that she was not mad. It was I who did not understand.
	She knew of my laughter, though it was hidden.
	And she spoke, but not in anger. She said, “Listen, my daughter, and hearken and keep my word in remembrance: the man who but now passed by, like the shadow of a bird flying between the sun and the earth, shall prevail against the Caesars and the empire of the Caesars. He shall wrestle with the crowned bull of Chaldea, and the man-headed lion of Egypt, and He shall overcome them; and He shall rule the world.
	“But this land that now He walks shall come to naught; and Jerusalem, which sits proudly upon the hill, shall drift away in smoke upon the wind of desolation.”
	When she spoke thus, my laughter turned to stillness and I was quiet. Then I said, “Who is this man, and of what country and tribe does He come? And how shall He conquer the great kings and the empires of the great kings?”
	And she answered, “He is one born here in this land, but we have conceived Him in our longing from the beginning of years. He is of all tribes and yet of none. He shall conquer by the word of His mouth and by the flame of His spirit.”
	Then suddenly she rose and stood up like a pinnacle of rock; and she said, “May the angel of the Lord forgive me for pronouncing this word also: He shall be slain, and His youth shall be shrouded, and He shall be laid in silence beside the tongue-less heart of the earth. And the maidens of Judea shall weep for Him.”
	Then she lifted her hand skyward and spoke again, and she said, “But He shall be slain only in the body.
	“In the spirit He shall rise and go forth leading His host from this land where the sun is born, to the land where the sun is slain at eventide.
	“And His name shall be first among men.”
	She was an aged seeress when she said these things, and I was but a girl, a field unploughed, a stone not yet in a wall.
	But all that she beheld in the mirror of her mind has come to pass even in my day.
	Jesus of Nazareth rose from the dead and led men and women unto the people of the sunset. The city that yielded Him to judgment was given unto destruction; and in the Judgment Hall where He was tried and sentenced, the owl hoots a dirge while the night weeps the dew of her heart upon the fallen marble.
	And I am an old woman, and the years bend me down. My people are no more and my race is vanished.
	I saw Him but once again after that day, and once again heard His voice. It was upon a hill-top when He was talking to His friends and followers.
	And now I am old and alone, yet still He visits my dreams.
	He comes like a white angel with pinions; and with His grace He hushes my dread of darkness. And He uplifts me to dreams yet more distant.
	I am still a field unploughed, a ripe fruit that would not fall. The most that I possess is the warmth of the sun, and the memory of that man.
	I know that among my people these shall not rise again king nor prophet nor priest, even as the sister of my father foretold.
	We shall pass with the flowing of the rivers, and we shall be nameless.
	But those who crossed Him in mid-stream shall be remembered for crossing Him in mid-stream.



80. THE HERMIT AND THE BEASTS

	Once there lived among the green hills a hermit. He was pure of spirit and white of heart. And all the animals of the land and all the fowls of the air came to him in pairs and he spoke unto them. They heard him gladly, and they would gather near unto him, and would not go until nightfall, when he would send them away, entrusting them to the wind and the woods with his blessing.
	Upon an evening as he was speaking of love, a leopard raised her head and said to the hermit, “You speak to us of loving. Tell us, Sir, where is your mate?”
	And the hermit said, “I have no mate.”
	Then a great cry of surprise rose from the company of beasts and fowls, and they began to say among themselves, “How can he tell us of loving and mating when he himself knows naught thereof?” And quietly and in distain they left him alone.
	That night the hermit lay upon his mat with his face earthward, and he wept bitterly and beat his hands upon his breast.



81. THE HERMIT PROPHET

	Once there lived a hermit prophet, and thrice a moon he would go down to the great city and in the market places he would preach giving and sharing to the people. And he was eloquent, and his fame was upon the land.
	Upon an evening three men came to his hermitage and he greeted them. And they said, “You have been preaching giving and sharing, and you have sought to teach those who have much to give unto those who have little; and we doubt not that your fame has brought you riches. Now come and give us of your riches, for we are in need.”
	And the hermit answered and said, “My friends, I have naught but this bed and this mat and this jug of water. Take them if it is in your desire. I have neither gold nor silver.”
	Then they looked down with distain upon him, and turned their faces from him, and the last man stood at the door for a moment, and said, “Oh, you cheat! You fraud! You teach and preach that which you yourself do not perform.”



82. THE HOUSE OF FORTUNE

	My wearied heart bade me farewell and left for the House of Fortune. As he reached that holy city which the soul had blessed and worshipped, he commenced wondering, for he could not find what he had always imagined would be there. The city was empty of power, money, and authority.
	And my heart spoke to the daughter of Love saying, “Oh Love, where can I find Contentment? I heard that she had come here to join you.”
	And the daughter of Love responded, “Contentment has already gone to preach her gospel in the city, where greed and corruption are paramount; we are not in need of her.”
	Fortune craves not Contentment, for it is an earthly hope, and its desires are embraced by union with objects, while Contentment is naught but heartfelt.
	The eternal soul is never contented; it ever seeks exaltation. Then my heart looked upon Life of Beauty and said: “Thou art all knowledge; enlighten me as to the mystery of Woman.”And he answered, “Oh human heart, woman is your own reflection, and whatever you are, she is; wherever you live, she lives; she is like religion if not interpreted by the ignorant, and like a moon, if not veiled with clouds, and like a breeze, if not poisoned with impurities.”
	And my heart walked toward Knowledge, the daughter of Love and Beauty, and said, “Bestow upon me wisdom, that I might share it with the people.” And she responded, “Say not wisdom, but rather fortune, for real fortune comes not from outside, but begins in the Holy of Holies of life. Share of thyself with the people.”



83. ON HOUSES

	Then a mason came forth and said, “Speak to us of Houses.” And he answered and said:
	
	Build of your imaginings a bower in the wilderness ere you build a house within the city walls.
	For even as you have home-comings in your twilight, so has the wanderer in you, the ever distant and alone.
	Your house is your larger body.
	It grows in the sun and sleeps in the stillness of the night; and it is not dreamless. Does not your house dream? And dreaming, leave the city for grove or hilltop?
	Would that I could gather your houses into my hand, and like a sower scatter them in forest and meadow.
	Would the valleys were your streets, and the green paths your alleys, that you might seek one another through vineyards, and come with the fragrance of the earth in your garments.
	But these things are not yet to be.
	In their fear your forefathers gathered you too near together. And that fear shall endure a little longer. A little longer shall your city walls separate your hearths from your fields.
	And tell me, people of Orphalese, what have you in these houses? And what is it you guard with fastened doors?
	Have you peace, the quiet urge that reveals your power?
	Have you remembrances, the glimmering arches that span the summits of the mind?
	Have you beauty, that leads the heart from things fashioned of wood and stone to the holy mountain?
	Tell me, have you these in your houses?
	Or have you only comfort, and the lust for comfort, that stealthy thing that enters the house a guest, and becomes a host, and then a master?
	Ay, and it becomes a tamer, and with hook and scourge makes puppets of your larger desires.
	Though its hands are silken, its heart is of iron.
	It lulls you to sleep only to stand by your bed and jeer at the dignity of the flesh.
	It makes mock of your sound senses, and lays them in thistledown like fragile vessels.
	Verily the lust for comfort murders the passion of the soul, and then walks grinning in the funeral.
	But you, children of space, you restless in rest, you shall not be trapped nor tamed.
	Your house shall be not an anchor but a mast.
	It shall not be a glistening film that covers a wound, but an eyelid that guards the eye.
	You shall not fold your wings that you may pass through doors, nor bend your heads that they strike not against a ceiling, nor fear to breathe lest walls should crack and fall down.
	You shall not dwell in tombs made by the dead for the living.
	And though of magnificence and splendor, your house shall not hold your secret nor shelter your longing.
	For that which is boundless in you abides in the mansion of thesky, whose door is the morning mist, and whose windows are the songs and the silences of night.



84. HOW I BECAME A MADMAN

	You ask me how I became a madman. It happened thus: One day, long before many gods were born, I woke from a deep sleep and found all my masks were stolen--the seven masks I have fashioned and worn in seven lives--I ran maskless through the crowded streets shouting, “Thieves, thieves, the cursed thieves.”
	Men and women laughed at me and some ran to their houses in fear of me.
	And when I reached the market place, a youth standing on a house-top cried, “He is a madman.” I looked up to behold him; the sun kissed my own naked face for the first time. For the first time the sun kissed my own naked face and my soul was inflamed with love for the sun, and I wanted my masks no more. And as if in a trance I cried, “Blessed, blessed are the thieves who stole my masks.”
	Thus I became a madman.
	And I have found both freedom and safety in my madness; the freedom of loneliness and the safety from being understood, for those who understand us enslave something in us.
	But let me not be too proud of my safety. Even a thief in a jail is safe from another thief.



85. JEPHTHA OF CAESAREA

	This man who fills your day and haunts your night is repellent to me. Yet you would tire my eyes with His sayings and my mind with His deeds.
	I am weary of His words, and all that He did. His very name offends me, and the name of His countryside. I will none of Him.
	Why make you a prophet of a man who was but a shadow? Why see a tower in this sand-dune, or imagine a lake in the raindrops gathered together in this hoof-print?
	I scorn not the echo of caves in valleys nor the long shadows of the sunset; but I would not listen to the deceptions that hum in your head, nor study the reflections in your eyes.
	What word did Jesus utter that Halliel had not spoken? What wisdom did He reveal that was not of Gamaliel? What are His lispings to the voice of Philo? What cymbals did He beat that were not beaten ere ever He lived?
	I hearken to the echo from the caves into the silent valleys, and I gaze upon the long shadows of sunset; but I would not have this man’s heart echo the sound of another heart, nor would I have a shadow of the seers call himself a prophet.
	What man shall speak since Isaiah has spoken? Who dares sing since David? And shall wisdom be born now, after Solomon has been gathered to his fathers?
	And what of our prophets, whose tongues were swords and their lips flames?
	Left they a straw behind for this gleaner of Galilee? Or a fallen fruit for the beggar from the North Country? There was naught for Him save to break the loaf already baked by our ancestors, and to pour the wine which their holy feet had already passed from the grapes of old.
	It is the potter’s hand I honour not the man who buys the ware.
	I honour those who sit at the loom rather than the boor who wears the cloth.
	Who was this Jesus of Nazareth, and what is He? A man who dared not live His mind. Therefore He faded into oblivion and that is His end.
	I beg you, charge not my ears with His words or His deeds. My heart is overfull with the prophets of old, and that is enough.



86. JOANNA, THE WIFE OF HEROD’s STEWARD

	Jesus was never married but He was a friend of women, and He knew them as they would be known in sweet comradeship.
	And He loved children as they would be loved in faith and understanding.
	In the light of His eyes there was a father and a brother and a son.
	He would hold a child upon His knees and say, “Of such is your might and your freedom; and of such is the kingdom of the spirit.”
	They say that Jesus heeded not the law of Moses, and that He was over-forgiving to the prostitutes of Jerusalem and the country side.
	I myself at that time was deemed a prostitute, for I loved a man who was not my husband, and he was a Sadducee.
	And on a day the Sadducees came upon me in my house when my lover was with me, and they seized me and held me, and my lover walked away and left me.
	Then they led me to the market-place where Jesus was teaching.
	it was their desire to hold me up before Him as a test and a trap for Him.
	But Jesus judged me not. He laid shame upon those who would have had me shamed, and He reproached them.
	And He bade me go my way.
	And after that all the tasteless fruit of life turned sweet to my mouth, and the scentless blossoms breathed fragrance into my nostrils. I became a woman without a tainted memory, and I was free, and my head was no longer bowed down.



87. JOHN AT PATMOS

	Once more I would speak of Him.
	God gave me the voice and the burning lips though not the speech.
	And unworthy am I for the fuller word, yet I would summon my heart to my lips.
	Jesus loved me and I knew not why.
	And I loved Him because He quickened my spirit to heights beyond my stature, and to depths beyond my sounding.
	Love is a sacred mystery.
	To those who love, it remains forever wordless;
	But to those who do not love, it may be but a heartless jest.
	Jesus called me and my brother when we were laboring in the field.
	I was young then and only the voice of dawn had visited my ears.
	But His voice and the trumpet of His voice was the end of my labor and the beginning of my passion.
	And there were naught for me then but to walk in the sun and worship the loveliness of the hour.
	Could you conceive a majesty too kind to be majestic? And a beauty too radiant to seem beautiful?
	Could you hear in your dreams a voice shy of its own rapture?
	He called me and I followed Him.
	That evening I returned to my father’s house to get my other cloak.
	And I said to my mother, “Jesus of Nazareth would have me in His company.”
	And she said, “Go His way my son, even like your brother.”
	And I accompanied Him.
	His fragrance called me and commanded me, but only to release me.
	Love is a gracious host to his guests though to the unbidden his house is a mirage and a mockery.
	 
	Now you would have me explain the miracles of Jesus.
	We are all the miraculous gesture of the moment; our Lord and Master was the centre of that moment.
	Yet it was not in His desire that His gestures be known.
	I have heard Him say to the lame, “Rise and go home, but say not to the priest that I have made you whole.”
	And Jesus’ mind was not with the cripple; it was rather with the strong and the upright.
	His mind sought and held other minds and His complete spirit visited other spirits.
	And is so doing His spirit changed these minds and these spirits.
	It seemed miraculous, but with our Lord and Master it was simply like breathing the air of every day.
	 
	And now let me speak of other things.
	On a day when He and I were alone walking in a field, we were both hungry, and we came to a wild apple tree.
	There were only two apples hanging on the bough.
	And He held the trunk of the tree with His arm and shook it, and the two apples fell down.
	He picked them both up and gave one to me. The other He held in His hand.
	In my hunger I ate the apple, and I ate it fast.
	Then I looked at Him and I saw that He still held the other apple in His hand.
	And He gave it to me saying, “Eat this also.”
	And I took the apple, and in my shameless hunger I ate it.
	And as we walked on I looked upon His face.
	But how shall I tell you of what I saw?
	A night where candles burn in space,
	A dream beyond our reaching;
	A noon where all shepherds are at peace and happy that their flock are grazing;
	An eventide, and a stillness, and a homecoming;
	Then a sleep and a dream.
	All these things I saw in His face.
	He had given me the two apples. And I knew He was hungry even as I was hungry.
	But I now know that in giving them to me He had been satisfied. He Himself ate of other fruit from another tree.
	I would tell you more of Him, but how shall I?
	When love becomes vast love becomes wordless.
	And when memory is overladen it seeks the silent deep.



88. JOHN THE BAPTIST

	I am not silent in this foul hole while the voice of Jesus is heard on the battlefield. I am not to be held nor confined while He is free.
	They tell me the vipers are coiling round His loins, but I answer: The vipers shall awaken His strength, and He shall crush them with His heel.
	I am only the thunder of His lightning. Though I spoke first, His was the word and the purpose.
	They caught me unwarned. Perhaps they will lay hands on Him also. Yet not before He has pronounced His word in full. And He shall overcome them.
	His chariot shall pass over them, and the hoofs of His horses shall trample them, and He 
	shall be triumphant.
	They shall go forth with lance and sword, but He shall meet them with the power of the Spirit.
	His blood shall run upon the earth, but they themselves shall know the wounds and the pain thereof, and they shall be baptized in their tears until they are cleansed of their sins.
	Their legions shall march towards His cities with rams of iron, but on their way they shall be drowned in the River Jordan.
	And His walls and His towers shall rise higher, and the shields of His warriors shall shine brighter in the sun.
	They say I am in league with Him, and that our design is to urge the people to rise and revolt against the kingdom of Judea.
	I answer, and would that I had flames for words: if they deem this pit of iniquity a kingdom, let it fall into destruction and be no more. Let it go the way Sodom and Gomorrah, and let this race be forgotten by God, and this land be turned to ashes.
	Aye, behind these prison walls I am indeed an ally to Jesus of Nazareth, and He shall lead my armies, horse and foot. And I myself, though a captain, am not worthy to loose the strings of His sandals.
	Go to Him and repeat my words, and then in my name beg Him for comfort and blessing.
	I shall not be here long. At night ’twixt waking and waking I feel slow feet with measured steps treading above this body. And when I hearken, I hear the rain falling upon my grave.
	Go to Jesus, and say that John of Kedron whose soul is filled with shadows and then emptied again, prays for Him, while the grave-digger stands close by, and the swordman outstretches his hand for his wages.



89. JOHN THE BELOVED DISCIPLE

	You would have me speak of Jesus, but how can I lure the passion-song of the world into a hollowed reed?
	In every aspect of the day Jesus was aware of the Father. He beheld Him in the clouds and in the shadows of the clouds that pass over the earth. He saw the Father’s face reflected in the quiet pools, and the faint print of His feet upon the sand; and He often closed His eyes to gaze into the Holy Eyes.
	The night spoke to Him with the voice of the Father, and in solitude He heard the angel of the Lord calling to Him. And when He stilled Himself to sleep He heard the whispering of the heavens in His dreams.
	He was often happy with us, and He would call us brothers.
	Behold, He who was the first Word called us brothers, though we were but syllables uttered yesterday.
	You ask why I call Him the first Word.
	Listen, and I will answer:
	In the beginning God moved in space, and out of His measureless stirring the earth was born and the seasons thereof.
	Then God moved again, and life streamed forth, and the longing of life sought the height and the depth and would have more of itself.
	Then God spoke thus, and His words were man, and man was a spirit begotten by God’s Spirit.
	And when God spoke thus, the Christ was His first Word and that Word was perfect; and when Jesus of Nazareth came to the world the first Word was uttered unto us and the sound was made flesh and blood.
	Jesus the Anointed was the first Word of God uttered unto man, even as if an apple tree in an orchard should bud and blossom a day before the other trees. And in God’s orchard that day was an aeon.
	We are all sons and daughters of the Most High, but the Anointed One was His first-born, who dwelt in the body of Jesus of Nazareth, and He walked among us and we beheld Him.
	All this I say that you may understand not only in the mind but rather in the spirit. The mind weighs and measures but it is the spirit that reaches the heart of life and embraces the secret; and the seed of the spirit is deathless.
	The wind may blow and then cease, and the sea shall swell and then weary, but the heart of life is a sphere quiet and serene, and the star that shines therein is fixed for evermore.



90. JOHN THE SON OF ZEBEDEE

	You have remarked that some of us call Jesus the Christ, and some the Word, and others call Him the Nazarene, and still others the Son of Man.
	I will try to make these names clear in the light that is given me.
	The Christ, He who was in the ancient of days, is the flame of God that dwells in the spirit of man. He is the breath of life that visits us, and takes unto Himself a body like our bodies.
	He is the will of the Lord.
	He is the first Word, which would speak with our voice and live in our ear that we may heed and understand.
	And the Word of the Lord our God builded a house of flesh and bones, and was man like unto you and myself.
	For we could not hear the song of the bodiless wind nor see our greater self walking in the mist.
	Many times the Christ has come to the world, and He has walked many 
	lands. And always He has been deemed a stranger and a madman.
	Yet the sound of His voice descended never to emptiness, for the memory of man keeps 
	that which his mind takes no care to keep.
	This is the Christ, the innermost and the height, who walks with man towards eternity.
	Have you not heard of Him at the cross-roads of India? And in the land of the Magi, and upon the sands of Egypt?
	And here in your North Country your bards of old sang of Prometheus, the fire-bringer, he who was the desire of man fulfilled, the caged hope made free; and Orpheus, who came with a voice and a lyre to quicken the spirit in beast and man.
	And know you not of Mithra the king, and of Zoroaster the prophet of the Persians, who woke from man’s ancient sleep and stood at the bed of our dreaming?
	We ourselves become man anointed when we meet in the Temple Invisible, once every thousand years. Then comes one forth embodied, and at His coming our silence turns to singing.
	Yet our ears turn not always to listening nor our eyes to seeing.
	Jesus the Nazarene was born and reared like ourselves; His mother and father were like our parents, and He was a man.
	But the Christ, the Word, who was in the beginning, the Spirit who would have us live our fuller life, came unto Jesus and was with Him.
	And the Spirit was the versed hand of the Lord, and Jesus was the harp.
	The Spirit was the psalm, and Jesus was the turn thereof.
	And Jesus, the Man of Nazareth, was the host and the mouthpiece of the Christ, who walked with us in the sun and who called us His friends.
	In those days the hills of Galilee and her valleys heard but His voice. And I was a youth then, and trod in His path and pursued His footprints.
	I pursued His footprints and trod in His path, to hear the words of the Christ from the lips of Jesus of Galilee.
	Now you would know why some of us call Him the Son of Man.
	He Himself desired to be called by that name, for He knew the hunger and the thirst of man, and He beheld man seeking after His greater self.
	The Son of Man was Christ the Gracious, who would be with us all.
	He was Jesus the Nazarene who would lead His brothers to the Anointed One, even to the Word which was in the beginning with God.
	In my heart dwells Jesus of Galilee, the Man above men, the Poet who makes poets of us all, the Spirit who knocks at our door that we may wake and rise and walk out to meet truth naked and unencumbered.



91. JOSEPH OF ARIMATHEA

	There were two streams running in the heart of the Nazarene: the stream of kinship to God whom He called Father, and the stream of rapture which He called the kingdom of the Above-world.
	And in my solitude I thought of Him and I followed these two streams in His heart. Upon the banks of the one I met my own soul; and sometimes my soul was a beggar and a wanderer, and sometimes it was a princess in her garden.
	Then I followed the other stream in His heart, and on my way I met one who had been beaten and robbed of his gold, and he was smiling. And farther on I saw the robber who had robbed him, and there were unshed tears upon his face.
	Then I heard the murmur of these two streams in my own bosom also, and I was gladdened.
	When I visited Jesus the day before Pontius Pilatus and the elders laid hands on Him, we talked long, and I asked Him many questions, and He answered my questionings with graciousness; and when I left Him I knew He was the Lord and Master of this our earth.
	It is long since our cedar tree has fallen, but its fragrance endures, and will forever seek the four corners of the earth.



92. JOSEPH SURNAMED JUSTUS

	They say he was vulgar, the common offspring of common seed, a man uncouth and violent.
	They say that only the wind combed His hair, and only the rain brougth His clothes and His body together.
	They deem Him mad, and they attribute His words to demons.
	Yet behold, the Man despised sounded a challenge and the sound thereof shall never cease.
	He sang a song and none shall arrest that melody. It shall hover from generation to generation and it shall rise from sphere to sphere remembering the lips that gace it birth and the ears that cradled it.
	He was a stranger. Aye, He was a stranger, a wayfarer on His way to a shrine, a visitor who knocked at our door, a guest from a far country.
	And because He found not a gracious host, He has returned to His own place.



93. JOTHAM OF NAZARETH TO A ROMAN

	My friend, you like all other Romans would conceive life rather than live it. You would rule lands rather than be ruled by the spirit.
	You would conquer races and be cursed by them rather than stay in Rome and be blest and happy.
	You think but of armies marching and of ships launched into the sea.
	How shall you then understand Jesus of Nazareth, a man simple and alone, who came without armies or ships, to establish a kingdom in the heart and an empire in the free spaces of the soul?
	How shall you understand the man who was not a warrior, but who came with the power of the mighty ether?
	He was not a god, He was a man like unto ourselves; but in Him the myrrh of the earth rose to meet the frankincense of the sky; and in His words our lisping embraced the whispering of the unseen; and in His voice we heard a song unfathomable.
	Aye, Jesus was a man and not a god, and therein lies our wonder and our surprise.
	But you Romans wonder not save at the gods, and no man shall surprise you. Therefore you understand not the Nazarene.
	He belonged to the youth of the mind and you belong to its old age.
	You govern us today; but let us wait another day.
	Who knows that this man with neither armies nor ships shall govern tomorrow?
	We who follow the spirit shall sweat blood while journeying after Him. But Rome shall lie a white skeleton in the sun.
	We shall suffer much, yet we shall endure and we shall live. But Rome must needs fall into the dust.
	Yet if Rome, when humbled and made low, shall pronounce His name, He will heed her voice. And He will breathe new life into her bones that she may rise again, a city among the cities of the earth.
	But this He shall do without legions, nor with slaves to oar His galleys. He will be alone.



94. ON JOY AND SORROW

	Then a woman said, “Speak to us of Joy and Sorrow.” And he answered:
	
	Your joy is your sorrow unmasked.
	And the selfsame well from which your laughter rises was oftentimes filled with your tears.
	And how else can it be?
	The deeper that sorrow carves into your being, the more joy you can contain.
	Is not the cup that hold your wine the very cup that was burned in the potter’s oven?
	And is not the lute that soothes your spirit, the very wood that was hollowed with knives?
	When you are joyous, look deep into your heart and you shall find it is only that which has given you sorrow that is giving you joy.
	When you are sorrowful look again in your heart, and you shall see that in truth you are weeping for that which has been your delight.
	Some of you say, “Joy is greater than sorrow,” and others say, “Nay, sorrow is the greater.”
	But I say unto you, they are inseparable.
	Together they come, and when one sits alone with you at your board, remember that the other is asleep upon your bed.
	Verily you are suspended like scales between your sorrow and your joy.
	Only when you are empty are you at standstill and balanced.
	When the treasure-keeper lifts you to weigh his gold and his silver, needs must your joy or your sorrow rise or fall.



95. JUDAS THE COUSIN OF JESUS

	Upon a night in the month of August we were with the Master on a heath not far from the lake. The heath was called by the ancients the Meadow of Skulls.
	And Jesus was reclining on the grass and gazing at the stars.
	And of a sudden two men came rushing towards us breathless. They were as if in agony, and they fell prostrate at the feet of Jesus.
	And Jesus stood up and He said, “Whence came you?”
	And one of the men answered, “From Machaereus.”
	And Jesus looked upon him and was troubled, and He said, “What of John?”
	And the man said, “He was slain this day. He was beheaded in his prison cell.”
	Then Jesus lifted up His head. And then He walked a little way from us. After a while He stood again in our midst.
	And He said, “The king could have slain the prophet ere this day. Verily the king has tried the pleasure of His subjects. Kings of yore were not so slow in giving the head of a prophet to the head-hunters.
	“I grieve not for John, but rather for Herod, who let fall the sword. Poor king, like an animal caught and led with a ring and a rope.
	“Poor petty tetrarchs lost in their own darkness, they stumble and fall down. And what could you of the stagnant sea but dead fishes?”
	“I hate not kings. Let them rule men, but only when they are wiser than men.”
	And the Master looked at the two sorrowful faces and then He looked at us, and He spoke again and said, “John was born wounded, and the blood of his wounds streamed forth with his words. He was freedom not yet free from itself, and patient only with the straight and the just.
	“In truth he was a voice crying in the land of the deaf; and I loved him in his pain and his aloneness.
	“And I loved his pride that would give its head to the sword ere it would yield it to the dust.
	“Verily I say unto you that John, the son of Zachariah, was the last of his race, and like his forefathers he was slain between the threshold of the temple and the altar.”
	And again Jesus walked away from us.
	Then He returned and He said, “Forever it has been that those who rule for an hour would slay the rulers of years. And forever they would hold a trial and pronounce condemnation upon a man not yet born, and decree his death ere he commits the crime.
	“The son of Zachariah shall live with me in my kingdom and his day shall be long.”
	Then He turned to the disciples of John and said, “Every deed has its morrow. I myself may be the morrow of this deed. Go back to my friend’s friends, and tell them I shall be with them.”
	And the two men walked away from us, and they seemed less heavy-hearted.
	Then Jesus laid Himself down again upon the grass and outstretched His arms, and again He gazed at the stars.
	Now it was late. And I lay not far from Him, and I would fain have rested, but there was a hand knocking upon the gate of my sleep, and I lay awake until Jesus and the dawn called me again to the road.



96. THE KING

	The people of the kingdom of Sadik surrounded the palace of their king shouting in rebellion against him. And he came down the steps of the palace carrying his crown in one hand and his sceptre in the other. The majesty of his appearance silenced the multitude, and he stood before them and said, “My friends, who are no longer my subjects, here I yield my crown and sceptre unto you. I would be one of you. I am only one man, but as a man I would work together with you that our lot may be made better. There is no need for king. Let us go therefore to the fields and the vineyards and labor hand with hand. Only you must tell me to what field or vineyard I should go. All of you now are king.”
	And the people marveled, and stillness was upon them, for the king whom they had deemed the source of their discontent now yielding his crown and sceptre to them and became as one of them.
	Then each and every one of them went his way, and the king walked with one man to a field.
	But the Kingdom of Sadik fared not better without a king, and the mist of discontent was still upon the land. The people cried out in the market places saying that they have a king to rule them. And the elders and the youths said as if with one voice, “We will have our king.”
	And they sought the king and found him toiling in the field, and they brought him to his seat, and yielded unto his crown and his sceptre. And they said, “Now rule us, with might and with justice.”
	And he said, “I will indeed rule you with might, and may the gods of the heaven and the earth help me that I may also rule with justice.”
	Now, there came to his presence men and women and spoke unto him of a baron who mistreated them, and to whom they were but serfs.
	And straightway the king brought the baron before him and said, “The life of one man is as weighty in the scales of God as the life of another. And because you know not how to weigh the lives of those who work in your fiends and your vineyards, you are banished, and you shall leave this kingdom forever.”
	The following day came another company to the king and spoke of the cruelty of a countess beyond the hills, and how she brought them down to misery. Instantly the countess was brought to court, and the king sentenced her also to banishment, saying, “Those who till our fields and care for our vineyards are nobler than we who eat the bread they prepare and drink the wine of their wine-press. And because you know not this, you shall leave this land and be afar from this kingdom.”
	Then came men and women who said that the bishop made them bring stones and hew the stones for the cathedral, yet he gave them naught, though they knew the bishop’s coffer was full of gold and silver while they themselves were empty with hunger.
	And the king called for the bishop, and when the bishop came the king spoke and said unto his, “That cross you wear upon your bosom should mean giving life unto life. But you have taken life from life and you have given none. Therefore you shall leave this kingdom never to return.”
	Thus each day for a full moon men and women came to the king to tell him of the burdens laid upon them. And each and every day a full moon some oppressor was exiled from the land.
	And the people of Sadik were amazed, and there was cheer in their heart.
	And upon a day the elders and the youths came and surrounded the tower of the king and called for him. And he came down holding his crown with one hand and his sceptre with the other.
	And he spoke unto and said, “Now, what would you do of me? Behold, I yield back to you that which you desired me to hold.”
	But they cried. “Nay, nay, you are our rightful king. You have made clean the land of vipers, and you have brought the wolves to naught, and we welcome to sing our thanksgiving unto you. The crown is yours in majesty and the sceptre is yours in glory.”
	Then the king said, “Not I, not I. You yourselves are king. When you deemed me weak and a misruler, you yourselves were weak and misruling. And now the land fares well because it is in your will. I am but a thought in the mind of you all, and I exist not save in your actions. There is no such person as governor. Only the governed exist to govern themselves.”
	And the king re-entered his tower with his crown and his sceptre. And the elders and the youths went their various ways and they were content.
	And each and every one thought of himself as king with a crown in one hand and a sceptre in the other.



97. THE KING OF ARADUS

	Once the elders of the city of Aradus presented themselves before the king, and besought of him a decree to forbid to men all wine and all intoxicants within their city.
	And the king turned his back upon them and went out from them laughing.
	Then the elders departed in dismay.
	At the door of the palace they met the lord chamberlain. And the lord chamberlain observed that they were troubled, and he understood their case.
	Then he said, “Pity, my friends! Had you found the king drunk, surely he would have granted you your petition.”



98. THE KING-HERMIT

	They told me that in a forest among the mountains lives a young man in solitude who once was a king of a vast country beyond the Two Rivers. And they also said that he, of his own will, had left his throne and the land of his glory and come to dwell in the wilderness.
	And I said, “I would seek that man, and learn the secret of his heart; for he who renounces a kingdom must needs be greater than a kingdom.”
	On that very day I went to the forest where he dwells. And I found him sitting under a white cypress, and in his hand a reed as if it were a sceptre. And I greeted him even as I would greet a king. And he turned to me and said gently, “What would you in this forest of serenity? Seek you a lost self in the green shadows, or is it a home-coming in your twilight?”
	And I answered, “I sought but you--for I fain would know that which made you leave a kingdom for a forest.”
	And he said, “Brief is my story, for sudden was the bursting of the bubble. It happened thus: one day as I sat at a window in my palace, my chamberlain and an envoy from a foreign land were walking in my garden. And as they approached my window, the lord chamberlain was speaking of himself and saying, ‘I am like the king; I have a thirst for strong wine and a hunger for all games of chance. And like my lord the king I have storms of temper.’ And the lord chamberlain and the envoy disappeared among the trees. But in a few minutes they returned, and this time the lord chamberlain was speaking of me, and he was saying, ‘My lord the king is like myself--a good marksman; and like me he loves music and bathes thrice a day.’”
	After a moment he added, “On the eve of that day I left my palace with but my garment, for I would no longer be ruler over those who assume my vices and attribute to me their virtues.”
	And I said, “This is indeed a wonder, and passing strange.”
	And he said, “Nay, my friend, you knocked at the gate of my silences and received but a trifle. For who would not leave a kingdom for a forest where the seasons sing and dance ceaselessly? Many are those who have given their kingdom for less than solitude and the sweet fellowship of aloneness. Countless are the eagles who descend from the upper air to live with moles that they may know the secrets of the earth. There are those who renounce the kingdom of dreams that they may not seem distant from the dreamless. And those who renounce the kingdom of nakedness and cover their souls that others may not be ashamed in beholding truth uncovered and beauty unveiled. And greater yet than all of these is he who renounces the kingdom of sorrow that he may not seem proud and vainglorious.”
	Then rising he leaned upon his reed and said, “Go now to the great city and sit at its gate and watch all those who enter into it and those who go out. And see that you find him who, though born a king, is without kingdom; and him who though ruled in flesh rules in spirit--though neither he nor his subjects know this; abd him also who but seems to rule yet is in truth slave of his own slaves.”
	After he had said these things he smiled on me, and there were a thousand dawns upon his lips. Then he turned and walked away into the heart of the forest.
	And I returned to the city, and I sat at its gate to watch the passers-by even as he had told me. And from that day to this numberless are the kings whose shadows have passed over me and few are the subjects over whom my shadow passed.



99. KNOWLEDGE AND HALF-KNOWLEDGE

	Four frogs sat upon a log that lay floating on the edge of a river. Suddenly the log was caught by the current and swept slowly down the stream. The frogs were delighted and absorbed, for never before had they sailed.
	At length the first frog spoke, and said, “This is indeed a most marvellous log. It moves as if alive. No such log was ever known before.”
	Then the second frog spoke, and said, “Nay, my friend, the log is like other logs, and does not move. It is the river that is walking to the sea, and carries us and the log with it.”
	And the third frog spoke, and said, “It is neither the log nor the river that moves. The moving is in our thinking. For without thought nothing moves.”
	And the three frogs began to wrangle about what was really moving. The quarrel grew hotter and louder, but they could not agree.
	Then they turned to the fourth frog, who up to this time had been listening attentively but holding his peace, and they asked his opinion.
	And the fourth frog said, “Each of you is right, and none of you is wrong. The moving is in the log and the water and our thinking also.”
	And the three frogs became very angry, for none of them was willing to admit that his was not the whole truth, and that the other two were not wholly wrong.
	Then a strange thing happened. The three frogs got together and pushed the fourth frog off the log into the river.



100. LADY RUTH

	Three men once looked from afar upon a white house that stood alone on a green hill. One of them said, “That is the house of Lady Ruth. She is an old witch.”
	The second man said, “You are wrong. Lady Ruth is a beautiful woman who lives there consecrated unto her dreams.”
	The third man said, “You are both wrong. Lady Ruth is the holder of this vast land, and she draws blood from her serfs.”
	And they walked on discussing Lady Ruth. Then when they came to a crossroad they met an old man, and one of them asked him, saying, “Would you please tell us about the Lady Ruth who lives in that white house upon the hill?”
	And the old man raised his head and smiled upon them, and said, “I am ninety of years, and I remember Lady Ruth when I was but a boy. But Lady Ruth died eighty years ago, and now the house is empty. The owls hoot therein, sometimes, and people say the place is haunted.”



101. LAUGHTER AND TEARS

	As the Sun withdrew his rays from the garden, and the moon threw cushioned beams upon the flowers, I sat under the trees pondering upon the phenomena of the atmosphere, looking through the branches at the strewn stars which glittered like chips of silver upon a blue carpet; and I could hear from a distance the agitated murmur of the rivulet singing its way briskly into the valley.
	When the birds took shelter among the boughs, and the flowers folded their petals, and tremendous silence descended, I heard a rustle of feet though the grass. I took heed and saw a young couple approaching my arbor. The say under a tree where I could see them without being seen.
	After he looked about in every direction, I heard the young man saying, “Sit by me, my beloved, and listen to my heart; smile, for your happiness is a symbol of our future; be merry, for the sparkling days rejoice with us.
	“My soul is warning me of the doubt in your heart, for doubt in love is a sin.
	“Soon you will be the owner of this vast land, lighted by this beautiful moon; soon you will be the mistress of my palace, and all the servants and maids will obey your commands.
	“Smile, my beloved, like the gold smiles from my father’s coffers.
	“My heart refuses to deny you its secret. Twelve months of comfort and travel await us; for a year we will spend my father’s gold at the blue lakes of Switzerland, and viewing the edifices of Italy and Egypt, and resting under the Holy Cedars of Lebanon; you will meet the princesses who will envy you for your jewels and clothes.
	“All these things I will do for you; will you be satisfied?”
	In a little while I saw them walking and stepping on flowers as the rich step upon the hearts of the poor. As they disappeared from my sight, I commenced to make comparison between love and money, and to analyze their position in the heart.
	Money! The source of insincere love; the spring of false light and fortune; the well of poisoned water; the desperation of old age!
	I was still wandering in the vast desert of contemplation when a forlorn and specter-like couple passed by me and sat on the grass; a young man and a young woman who had left their farming shacks in the nearby fields for this cool and solitary place.
	After a few moments of complete silence, I heard the following words uttered with sighs from weather-bitten lips, “Shed not tears, my beloved; love that opens our eyes and enslaves our hearts can give us the blessing of patience. Be consoled in our delay our delay, for we have taken an oath and entered Love’s shrine; for our love will ever grow in adversity; for it is in Love’s name that we are suffering the obstacles of poverty and the sharpness of misery and the emptiness of separation. I shall attack these hardships until I triumph and place in your hands a strength that will help over all things to complete the journey of life.
	“Love--which is God--will consider our sighs and tears as incense burned at His altar and He will reward us with fortitude. Good-bye, my beloved; I must leave before the heartening moon vanishes.”
	A pure voice, combined of the consuming flame of love, and the hopeless bitterness of longing and the resolved sweetness of patience, said, “Good-bye, my beloved.”
	They separated, and the elegy to their union was smothered by the wails of my crying heart.
	I looked upon slumbering Nature, and with deep reflection discovered the reality of a vast and infinite thing--something no power could demand, influence acquire, nor riches purchase. Nor could it be effaced by the tears of time or deadened by sorrow; a thing which cannot be discovered by the blue lakes of Switzerland or the beautiful edifices of Italy.
	It is something that gathers strength with patience, grows despite obstacles, warms in winter, flourishes in spring, casts a breeze in summer, and bears fruit in autumn--I found Love.



102. ON LAWS

	Then a lawyer said, “But what of our Laws, master?” And he answered:
	
	You delight in laying down laws,
	Yet you delight more in breaking them.
	Like children playing by the ocean who build sand-towers with constancy and then destroy them with laughter.
	But while you build your sand-towers the ocean brings more sand to the shore,
	And when you destroy them, the ocean laughs with you.
	Verily the ocean laughs always with the innocent.
	But what of those to whom life is not an ocean, and man-made laws are not sand-towers,
	But to whom life is a rock, and the law a chisel with which they would carve it in their own likeness?
	What of the cripple who hates dancers?
	What of the ox who loves his yoke and deems the elk and deer of the forest stray and vagrant things?
	What of the old serpent who cannot shed his skin, and calls all others naked and shameless?
	And of him who comes early to the wedding-feast, and when over-fed and tired goes his way saying that all feasts are violation and all feasters law-breakers?
	What shall I say of these save that they too stand in the sunlight, but with their backs to the sun?
	They see only their shadows, and their shadows are their laws.
	And what is the sun to them but a caster of shadows?
	And what is it to acknowledge the laws but to stoop down and trace their shadows upon the earth?
	But you who walk facing the sun, what images drawn on the earth can hold you?
	You who travel with the wind, what weathervane shall direct your course?
	What man’s law shall bind you if you break your yoke but upon no man’s prison door?
	What laws shall you fear if you dance but stumble against no man’s iron chains?
	And who is he that shall bring you to judgment if you tear off your garment yet leave it in no man’s path?
	People of Orphalese, you can muffle the drum, and you can loosen the strings of the lyre, but who shall command the skylark not to sing?



103. LAWS AND LAW-GIVING

	Ages ago there was a great king, and he was wise. And he desired to lay laws unto his subjects.
	He called upon one thousand wise men of one thousand different tribes to his capital and lay down the laws.
	And all this came to pass.
	But when the thousand laws written upon parchment were put before the king and he read them, he wept bitterly in his soul, for he had not known that there were one thousand forms of crime in his kingdom.
	Then he called his scribe, and with a smile upon his mouth he himself dictated laws. And his laws were but seven.
	And the one thousand wise men left him in anger and returned to their tribes with the laws they had laid down. And every tribe followed the laws of its wise men.
	Therefore they have a thousand laws even to our own day.
	It is a great country, but it has one thousand prisons, and the prisons are full of women and men, breakers of a thousand laws.
	It is indeed a great country, but the people thereof are decendants of one thousand law-givers and of only one wise king.



104. LEVI, A DISCIPLE

	Upon an eventide He passed by my house, and my soul was quickened within me.
	He spoke to me and said, “Come, Levi, and follow me.”
	And I followed Him that day.
	And at eventide of the next day I begged Him to enter my house and be my guest. And He and His friends crossed my threshold and blessed me and my wife and my children.
	And I had other guests. They were publicans and men of learning, but they were against Him in their hearts.
	And when we were sitting about the board, one of the publicans questioned Jesus, saying, “Is it true that you and your disciples break the law, and make fire on the sabbath day?”
	And Jesus answered him saying, “We do indeed make fire on the sabbath day. We would inflame the sabbath day, and we would burn with our touch the dry stubble of all days.”
	And another publican said, “It was brought to us that you drink wine with the unclean at the inn.”
	And Jesus answered, “Aye, these also we would comfort. Came we here except to share the loaf and the cup with the uncrowned and the unshod amongst you?
	“Few, aye too few are the featherless who dare the wind, and many are the winged and fullfledged yet in the nest.
	“And we would feed them all with our beak, both the sluggish and the swift.”
	And another publican said, “Have I not been told that you would protect the harlots of Jerusalem?”
	Then in the face of Jesus I saw, as it were, the rocky heights of Lebanon, and He said, “It is true.
	“On the day of reckoning these women shall rise before the throne of my Father, and they shall be made pure by their own tears. But you shall be held down by the chains of your own judgment.
	“Babylon was not put to waste by her prostitutes; Babylon fell to ashes that the eyes of her hypocrites might no longer see the light of day.”
	And other publicans would have questioned Him, but I made a sign and bade them be silent, for I knew He would confound them; and they too were my guests, and I would not have them put to shame.
	When it was midnight the publicans left my house, and their souls were limping.
	Then I closed my eyes and I saw, as if in a vision, seven women in white raiment standing about Jesus. Their arms were crossed upon their bosoms, and their heads were bent down, and I looked deep into the mist of my dream and beheld the face of one of the seven women, and it shone in my darkness.
	It was the face of a harlot who lived in Jerusalem.
	Then I opened my eyes and looked at Him, and He was smiling at me and at the others who had not left the board.
	And I closed my eyes again, and I saw in a light seven men in white garments standing around Him. And I beheld the face of one of them.
	It was the face of the thief who was crucified afterward at His right hand.
	 
	And later Jesus and His comrades left my house for the road.



105. THE LION’s DAUGHTER

	Four slaves stood fanning an old queen who was asleep upon her throne. And she was snoring. And upon the queen’s lap a cat lay purring and gazing lazily at the slaves.
	The first slave spoke, and said, “How ugly this old woman is in her sleep. See her mouth droop; and she breathes as if the devil were choking her.”
	Then the cat said, purring, “Not half so ugly in her sleep as you in your waking slavery.”
	And the second slave said, “You would think sleep would smooth her wrinkles instead of deepening them. She must be dreaming of something evil.”
	And the cat purred, “Would that you might sleep also and dream of your freedom.”
	And the third slave said, “Perhaps she is seeing the procession of all those that she has slain.”
	And the cat purred, “Aye, she sees the procession of your forefathers and your descendants.”
	And the fourth slave said, “It is all very well to talk about her, but it does not make me less weary of standing and fanning.”
	And the cat purred, “You shall be fanning to all eternity; for as it is on earth, so it is in heaven.”
	At this moment the old queen nodded in her sleep, and her crown fell to the floor.
	And one of the slaves said, “That is a bad omen.”
	And the cat purred, “The bad omen of one is the good omen of another.”
	And the second slave said, “What if she should wake, and find her crown fallen! She would surely slay us.”
	And the cat purred, “Daily from your birth she has slain you and you know it not.”
	And the third slave said, “Yes, she would slay us and she would call it making a sacrifice to the gods.”
	And the cat purred, “Only the weak are sacrificed to the gods.”
	And the fourth slave silenced the others, and softly he picked up the crown and replaced it, without waking her, on the old queen’s head.
	And the cat purred, “Only a slave restores a crown that has fallen.”
	And after a while the old queen woke, and she looked about her and yawned. Then she said, “Methought I dreamed, and I saw four caterpillars chased by a scorpion around the trunk of an ancient oak tree. I like not my dream.”
	Then she closed her eyes and went to sleep again. And she snored. And the four slaves went on fanning her.
	And the cat purred, “Fan on, fan on, stupids. You fan but the fire that consumes you.



106. ON LOVE

	Then said Almitra, “Speak to us of Love.” And he raised his head and looked upon the people, and there fell a stillness upon them. And with a great voice he said:
	
	When love beckons to you follow him,
	Though his ways are hard and steep.
	And when his wings enfold you yield to him,
	Though the sword hidden among his pinions may wound you.
	And when he speaks to you believe in him,
	Though his voice may shatter your dreams as the north wind lays waste the garden.
	For even as love crowns you so shall he crucify you. Even as he is for your growth so is he for your pruning.
	Even as he ascends to your height and caresses your tenderest branches that quiver in the sun,
	So shall he descend to your roots and shake them in their clinging to the earth.
	Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto himself.
	He threshes you to make you naked.
	He sifts you to free you from your husks.
	He grinds you to whiteness.
	He kneads you until you are pliant;
	And then he assigns you to his sacred fire, that you may become sacred bread for God’s sacred feast.
	All these things shall love do unto you that you may know the secrets of your heart, and in that knowledge become a fragment of Life’s heart.
	But if in your fear you would seek only love’s peace and love’s pleasure,
	Then it is better for you that you cover your nakedness and pass out of love’s threshing-floor,
	Into the seasonless world where you shall laugh, but not all of your laughter, and weep, but not all of your tears.
	Love gives naught but itself and takes naught but from itself.
	Love possesses not nor would it be possessed;
	For love is sufficient unto love.
	When you love you should not say, “God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am in the heart of God.”
	And think not you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course.
	Love has no other desire but to fulfil itself.
	But if you love and must needs have desires, let these be your desires:
	To melt and be like a running brook that sings its melody to the night.
	To know the pain of too much tenderness.
	To be wounded by your own understanding of love;
	And to bleed willingly and joyfully.
	To wake at dawn with a winged heart and give thanks for another day of loving;
	To rest at the noon hour and meditate love’s ecstasy;
	To return home at eventide with gratitude;
	And then to sleep with a prayer for the beloved in your heart and a song of praise upon your lips.



107. LOVE AND HATE

	A woman said unto a man, “I love you.” And the man said, “It is in my heart to be worthy of your love.”
	Ant he woman said, “You love me not?”
	And the man only gazed upon her and said nothing.
	Then the woman cried aloud, “I hate you.”
	And the man said, “Then it is also in my heart to be worthy of your hate.”



108. THE LOVE SONG

	A poet once wrote a love song and it was beautiful. And he made many copies of it, and sent them to his friends and his acquaintances, both men and women, and even to a young woman whom he had met but once, who lived beyond the mountains.
	And in a day or two a messenger came from the young woman bringing a letter. And in the letter she said, “Let me assure you, I am deeply touched by the love song that you have written to me. Come now, and see my father and my mother, and we shall make arrangements for the betrothal.”
	And the poet answered the letter, and he said to her, “My friend, it was but a song of love out of a poet’s heart, sung by every man to every woman.”
	And she wrote again to him saying, “Hypocrite and liar in words! From this day unto my coffin-day I shall hate all poets for your sake.”



109. ON LOYALTY

	A poet is a bird of unearthly excellence, who escapes from his celestial realm arrives in this world warbling. If we do not cherish him, he spreads his wings and flies back into his homeland.
	All that spirits desire, spirits attain.



110. LUKE

	Jesus despised and scorned the hypocrites, and His wrath was like a tempest that scourged them. His voice was thunder in their ears and He cowed them.
	In their fear of Him they sought His death; and like moles in the dark earth they worked to undermine His footsteps. But He fell not into their snares.
	He laughed at them, for well He knew that the spirit shall not be mocked, nor shall it be taken in the pitfall.
	He held a mirror in His hand and therein He saw the sluggard and the limping and those who stagger and fall by the roadside on the way to the summit.
	And He pitied them all. He would even have raised them to His stature and He would have carried their burden. Nay, He would have bid their weakness lean on His strength.
	He did not utterly condemn the liar or the thief or the murderer, but He did utterly condemn the hypocrite whose face is masked and whose hand is gloved.
	Often I have pondered on the heart that shelters all who come from the wasteland to its sanctuary, yet against the hypocrite is closed and sealed.
	On a day as we rested with Him in the Garden of Pomegranates, I said to Him, “Master, you forgive and console the sinner and all the weak and the infirm save only the hypocrite alone.”
	And He said, “You have chosen your words well when you called the sinners weak and infirm. I do forgive them their weakness of body and their infirmity of spirit. For their failings have been laid upon them by their forefathers, or by the greed of their neighbours.
	“But I tolerate not the hypocrite, because he himself lays a yoke upon the guileless and the yielding.
	“Weaklings, whom you call sinners, are like the featherless young that fall from the nest. The hypocrite is the vulture waiting upon a rock for the death of the prey.
	“Weaklings are men lost in a desert. But the hypocrite is not lost. He knows the way yet he laughs between the sand and the wind.
	“For this cause I do not receive him.”
	Thus our Master spoke, and I did not understand. But I understand now.
	Then the hypocrites of the land laid hands upon Him and they judged Him; and in so doing they deemed themselves justified. For they cited the law of Moses in the Sanhedrim in witness and evidence against Him.
	And they who break the law at the rise of every dawn and break it again at sunset, brought about His death.



111. THE MADMAN

	It was in the garden of a madhouse that I met a youth with a face pale and lovely and full of wonder. And I sat beside him upon the bench, and I said, “Why are you here?”
	And he looked at me in astonishment, and he said, “It is an unseemly question, yet I will answer you. My father would make of me a reproduction of himself; so also would my uncle. My mother would have me the image of her seafaring husband as the perfect example for me to follow. My brother thinks I should be like him, a fine athlete.
	“And my teachers also, the doctor of philosophy, and the music-master, and the logician, they too were determined, and each would have me but a reflection of his own face in a mirror.
	“Therefore I came to this place. I find it more sane here. At least, I can be myself.”
	Then of a sudden he turned to me and he said, “But tell me, were you also driven to this place by education and good counsel?”
	And I answered, “No, I am a visitor.”
	And he answered, “Oh, you are one of those who live in the madhouse on the other side of the wall.”



112. THE MAN FROM THE DESERT

	I was a stranger in Jerusalem. I had come to the Holy City to behold the great temple, and to sacrifice upon the altar, for my wife had given twin sons to my tribe.
	And after I had made my offering, I stood in the portico of them temple looking down upon the money-changers and those who sold doves for sacrifice, and listening to the great noise in the court.
	And as I stood there came of a sudden a man into the midst of the money-changers and those who sold doves.
	He was a man of majesty, and He came swiftly.
	In His hand He held a rope of goat’s hide; and He began to overturn the tables of the money-changers and to beat the pedlars of birds with the rope.
	And I heard Him saying with a loud voice, “Render these birds unto the sky which is their nest.”
	Men and women fled from before His face, and He moved amongst them as the whirling wind moves on the sad-hills.
	All this came to pass in but a moment, and then the court of the Temple was emptied of the money-changers. Only the man stood there alone, and His followers stood at a distance.
	Then I turned my face and I saw another man in the portico of the temple. And I walked towards him and said, “Sir, who is this man who stands alone, even like another temple?” And he answered me, “This is Jesus of Nazareth, a prophet who has appeared of late in Galilee. Here in Jerusalem all men hate Him.”
	And I said, “My heart was strong enough to be with His whip, and yielding enough to be at His feet.”
	And Jesus turned towards His followers who were awaiting Him. But before He reached them, three of the temple doves flew back, and one alighted upon His left shoulder and the other two at His feet. And he touched each one tenderly. Then He walked on, and there were leagues in every step of His steps.
	Now tell me, what power had He to attack and disperse hundreds of men and women without opposition? I was told that they all hate Him, yet no one stood before Him on that day. Had He plucked out the fangs of hate on His way to the court of the temple?



113. MANASSEH

	Yes, I used to hear Him speak. There was always a ready word upon His lips.
	But I admired Him as a man rather than as a leader. He preached something beyond my liking, perhaps beyond my reason. And I would have no man preach to me.
	I was taken by His voice and His gestures, not by the substance of His speech. He charmed me but never convinced me; for He was too vague, too distant and obscure to reach my mind.
	I have known other men like Him. They are never constant nor are they consistent. It is with eloquence not with principles that they hold your ear and your passing thought, but never the core of your heart.
	What a pity that His enemies confronted Him and forced the issue. It was not necessary. I believe their hostility will add to His stature and turn His mildness to power.
	For is it not strange that in opposing a man you give Him courage? And in staying His feet you give Him wings?
	I know not His enemies, yet I am certain that in their fear of a harmless man they have lent Him strength and made Him dangerous.



114. MANNUS THE POMPEIIAN, TO A GREEK

	The Jews, like their neighbors the Phonicians and the Arabs, will not suffer their gods to rest for a moment upon the wind.
	They are over-thoughtful of their deity, and over-observant of one another’s prayer and worship and sacrifice.
	While we Romans build marble temples to our gods, these people would discuss their god’s nature. When we are in ecstasy we sing and dance round the altars of Jupiter and Juno, of Mars and Venus; but they in their rapture wear sackcloth and cover their heads with ashes--and even lament the day that gave them birth.
	And Jesus, the man who revealed God as a being of joy, they tortured Him, and then put Him to death.
	These people would not be happy with a happy god. They know only the gods of their pain.
	Even Jesus’ friends and disciples who knew His mirth and heard His laughter, make an image of His sorrow, and they worship that image.
	And in such worship they rise not to their deity; they only bring their deity down to themselves.
	I believe however that this philosopher, Jesus, who was not unlike Socrates, will have power over His race and mayhap over other races.
	For we are all creatures of sadness and of small doubts. And when a man says to us, “Let us be joyous with the gods,” we cannot but heed his voice. Strange that the pain of this man has been fashioned into a rite.
	These people would discover another Adonis, a god slain in the forest, and they would celebrate his slaying. It is a pity they heed not His laughter.
	But let us confess, as Roman to Greek. Do even we ourselves hear the laughter of Socrates in the streets of Athens? Is it ever in us to forget the cup of hemlock, even at the theatre of Dionysus?
	Do not rather our fathers still stop at the street corners to chat of troubles and to have a happy moment remembering the doleful end of all our great men?



115. ON MARRIAGE

	Then Almitra spoke again and said, “And what of Marriage, master?” And he answered saying:
	
	You were born together, and together you shall be forevermore.
	You shall be together when white wings of death scatter your days.
	Aye, you shall be together even in the silent memory of God.
	But let there be spaces in your togetherness,
	And let the winds of the heavens dance between you.
	Love one another but make not a bond of love:
	Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls.
	Fill each other’s cup but drink not from one cup.
	Give one another of your bread but eat not from the same loaf.
	Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each one of you be alone,
	Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the same music.
	Give your hearts, but not into each other’s keeping.
	For only the hand of Life can contain your hearts.
	And stand together, yet not too near together:
	For the pillars of the temple stand apart,
	And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other’s shadow.



116. MARY MAGDALEN

	His mouth was like the heart of a pomegranate, and the shadows in His eyes were deep.
	And He was gentle, like a man mindful of his own strength.
	In my dreams I beheld the kings of the earth standing in awe in His presence.
	I would speak of His face, but how shall I?
	It was like night without darkness, and like day without the noise of day.
	It was a sad face, and it was a joyous face.
	And well I remember how once He raised His hand towards the sky, and His parted fingers were like the branches of an elm.
	And I remember Him pacing the evening. He was not walking. He Himself was a road above the road; even as a cloud above the earth that would descend to refresh the earth.
	But when I stood before Him and spoke to him, He was a man, and His face was powerful to behold. And He said to me, “What would you, Miriam?”
	I would not answer Him, but my wings enfolded my secret, and I was made warm.
	And because I could bear His light no more, I turned and walked away, but not in shame. I was only shy, and I would be alone, with His fingers upon the strings of my heart.



117. MARY MAGDALEN THIRTY YEARS LATER

	Once again I say that with death Jesus conquered death, and rose from the grave a spirit and a power. And He walked in our solitude and visited the gardens of our passion.
	He lies not there in that cleft rock behind the stone.
	We who love Him beheld Him with these our eyes which He made to see; and we touched Him with these our hands which He taught to reach forth.
	I know you who believe not in Him. I was one of you, and you are many; but your number shall be diminished.
	Must your break your harp and your lyre to find the music therein?
	Or must you fell a tree ere you can believe ot bears fruit?
	You hate Jesus because someone from the North Country said He was the Son of God. But you hate one another because each of you deems himself too great to be the brother of the next man.
	You hate Him because someone said He was born of a virgin, and not of man’s seed.
	But you know not the mothers who go to the tomb in virginity, nor the men who go down to the grave choked with their own thirst.
	You know not that the earth was given in marriage to the sun, and that earth it is who sends us forth to the mountain and the desert.
	There is a gulf that yawns between those who love Him and those who hate Him, between those who believe and those who do not believe.
	But when the years have bridged that gulf you shall know that He who lived in us is deathless, that He was the Son of God even as we are the children of God; that He was born of a virgin even as we are born of the husbandless earth.
	It is passing strange that the earth gives not to the unbelievers the roots that would suck at her breast, nor the wings wherewith to fly high and drink, and be filled with the dews of her space.
	But I know what I know, and it is enough.



118. MATTHEW

	Upon an evening Jesus passed by a prison that was in the Tower of David. And we were walking after Him.
	Of a sudden He tarried and laid His cheek against the stones of the prison wall. And thus He spoke:
	“Brothers of my ancient day, my heart beats with your hearts behind the bars. Would that you could be free in my freedom and walk with me and my comrades.
	“You are confined, but not alone. Many are the prisoners who walk the open streets. Their wings are not shorn, but like the peacock they flutter yet cannot fly.
	“Brothers of my second day, I shall soon visit you in your cells and yield my shoulder to your burden. For the innocent and the guilty are not parted, and like the two bones of the forearm they shall never be cleaved.
	“Brothers of this day, which is my day, you swam against the current of their reasoning and you were caught. They say I too shall swim against that current. Perhaps I shall soon be with you, a law-breaker among the law-breakers.
	“Brothers of a day not yet come, these walls shall fall down, and out of the stones other shapes shall be fashioned by Him whose mallet is light, and whose chisel is the wind, and you shall stand free in the freedom of my new day.”
	Thus spoke Jesus and He walked on, and His hand was upon the prison wall until He passed by the Tower of David.



119. MELACHI OF BABYLON, AN ASTRONOMER

	You question me concerning the miracles of Jesus.
	Every thousand thousand years the sun and the moon and this earth and all her sister planets meet in a straight line, and they confer for a moment together.
	Then they slowly disperse and await the passing of another thousand thousand years.
	There are no miracles beyond the seasons, yet you and I do not know all the seasons. And what if a season shall be made manifest in the shape of a man?
	In Jesus the elements of our bodies and our dreams came together according to law. All that was timeless before Him became timeful in Him.
	They say He gave sight to the blind and walking to the paralysed, and that He drove devils out of madmen.
	Perchance blindness is but a dark thought that can be overcome by a burning thought. Perchance a withered limb is but idleness that can be quickened by energy. And perhaps the devils, these restless elements in our life, are driven out by the angels of peace and serenity.
	They say He raised the dead to life. If you can tell me what is death, then I will tell you what is life.
	In a field I have watched an acorn, a thing so still and seemingly useless. And in the spring I have seen that acorn take roots and rise, the beginning of an oak tree, towards the sun.
	Surely you would deem this a miracle, yet that miracle is wrought a thousand thousand times in the drowsiness of every autumn and the passion of every spring.
	Why shall it not be wrought in the heart of man? Shall not the seasons meet in the hand or upon the lips of a Man Anointed?
	If our God hsa given to earth the art to nestle seed whilst the seed is seemingly dead, why shall He not give to the heart of man to breathe life into another heart, even a heart seemingly dead?
	 
	I have spoken of these miracles which I deem but little beside the greater miracle, which is the man Himself, the Wayfarer, the man who turned my dross into gold, who taught me how to love those who hate me, and in so doing brought me comfort and gave sweet dreams to my sleep.
	This is the miracle in my own life.
	My soul was blind, my soul was lame. I was possessed by restless spirits, and I was dead.
	But now I see clearly, and I walk erect. I am at peace, and I live to witmess and proclaim my own being every hour of the day.
	And I am not one of His followers. I am but an old astronomer who visits the fields of space once a season, and who would be heedful of the law and the miracles thereof.
	And I am at the twilight of my time, but whenever I would seek its dawning, I seek the youth of Jesus.
	And for ever shall age seek youth. In me now it is knowledge that is seeking vision.



120. THE MOUSE AND THE CAT

	Once on an evening a poet met a peasant. The poet was distant and the peasant was shy, yet they conversed.
	And the peasant said, “Let me tell you a little story which I heard of late. A mouse was caught in a trap, and while he was happily eating the cheese that lay therein, a cat stood by. The mouse trembled awhile, but he knew he was safe within the trap.
	“Then the cat said, ‘You are eating your last meal, my friend.’
	“‘Yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘one life have I, therefore one death. But what of you? They tell me you have nine lives. Doesn’t that mean that you will have to die nine times?’”
	And the peasant looked at the poet and he said, “Is not this a strange story?”
	And the poet answered him not, but he walked away saying in his soul, “To be sure, nine lives have we, nine lives to be sure. And we shall die nine times, nine times shall we die. Perhaps it were better to have but one life, caught in a trap--the life of a peasant with a bit of cheese for the last meal. And yet, are we not kin unto the lions of the desert and the jungle?”



121. MY FRIEND

	My friend, I am not what I seem. Seeming is but a garment I wear--a care-woven garment that protects me from thy questionings and thee from my negligence.
	The “I” in me, my friend, dwells in the house of silence, and therein it shall remain for ever more, unperceived, unapproachable.
	I would not have thee believe in what I say nor trust in what I do--for my words are naught but thy own thoughts in sound and my deeds thy own hopes in action.
	When thou sayest, “The wind bloweth eastward,” I say, “Aye, it doth blow eastward”; for I would not have thee know that my mind doth not dwell upon the wind but upon the sea.
	Thou canst not understand my seafaring thoughts, nor would I have thee understand. I would be at sea alone.
	When it is day with thee, my friend, it is night with me; yet even then I speak of the noontide that dances upon the hills and of the purple shadow that steals its way across the valley; for thou canst not hear the songs of my darkness nor see my wings beating against the stars--and I fain would not have thee hear or see. I would be with night alone.
	When thou ascendest to thy Heaven I descend to my Hell--even then thou callest to me across the unbridgeable gulf, “My companion, my comrade,” and I call back to thee, “My comrade, my companion”--for I would not have thee see my Hell. The flame would burn thy eyesight and the smoke would crowd thy nostrils. And I love my Hell too well to have thee visit it. I would be in Hell alone.
	Thou lovest Truth and Beauty and Righteousness; and I for thy sake say it is well and seemly to love these things. But in my heart I laugh at thy love. Yet I would not have thee see my laughter. I would laugh alone.
	My friend, thou art good and cautious and wise; nay, thou art perfect--and I, too, speak with thee wisely and cautiously. And yet I am mad. But I mask my madness. I would be mad alone.
	My friend, thou art not my friend, but how shall I make thee understand? My path is not thy path, yet together we walk, hand in hand.



122. NAAMAN OF THE GADARENES

	His disciples are dispersed. He gave them the legacy of pain ere He Himself was put to death. They are hunted like the deer, and the foxes of the fields, and the quiver of the hunter is yet full of arrows.
	But when they are caught and led to death, they are joyous, and their faces shine like the face of the bridegroom at the wedding-feast. For He gave them also the legacy of joy.
	 
	I had a friend from the North Country, and his name was Stephen; and because he proclaimed Jesus as the Son of God, he was led to the market-place and stoned.
	And when Stephen fell to earth he outstretched his arms as if he would die as his Master had died. His arms were spread like wings ready for flight. And when the last gleam of light was fading in his eyes, with my own eyes I saw a smile upon his lips. It was a smile like the breath that comes before the end of winter for a pledge and a promise of spring.
	How shall I describe it?
	It seemed that Stephen was saying, “If I should go to another world, and other men should lead me to another market-place to stone me, even then I would proclaim Him for the truth which was in Him, and for that same truth which is in me now.”
	And I noticed that there was a man standing near, and looking with pleasure upon the stoning of Stephen.
	His name is Saul of Tarsus, and it was he who had yielded Stephen to the priests and the Romans and the crowd, for stoning.
	Saul was bald of head and short of stature. His shoulders were crooked and his features ill-sorted; and I liked him not.
	I have been told that he is now preaching Jesus from the house tops. It is hard to believe.
	But the grave halts not Jesus’ walking to the enemies’ camp to tame and take captive those who had opposed Him.
	Still I do not like that man of Tarsus, though I have been told that after Stephen’s death he was tamed and conquered on the road to Damascus. But his head is too large for his heart to be that of a true disciple.
	And yet perhaps I am mistaken. I am often mistaken.



123. NATHANIEL

	They say that Jesus of Nazareth was humble and meek.
	They say that though He was a just man and righteous, He was a weakling, and was often confounded by the strong and the powerful; and that when He stood before men of authority He was but a lamb among lions.
	But I say Jesus had authority over men, and that He knew His power and proclaimed it among the hills of Galilee, and in the cities of Judea and Phoenicia.
	What man yielding and soft would say, “I am life, and I am the way to truth” ?
	What man meek and lowly would say, “I am in God, our Father; and our God, the Father, is in me” ?
	What man unmindful of His own strength would say, “He who believes not in me believes not in this life nor in the life everlasting” ?
	What man uncertain of tomorrow would proclaim, “Your world shall pass away and be naught but scattered ashes ere my words shall pass away” ?
	Was He doubtful of Himself when He said to those who would confound Him with a harlot, “He who is without sin, let him cast a stone” ?
	Did He fear authority when He drove the money-changers from the court of the temple, though they were licensed by the priests?
	Were His wings shorn when He cried aloud, “My kingdom is above your earthly kingdoms” ?
	Was He seeking shelter in words when He repeated again and yet again, “Destroy this temple and I will rebuild it in 
	three days” ?
	Was it a coward who shook His hand in the face of the authorities and pronounced them “liars, low, filthy, and degenerate” ?
	Shall a man bold enough to say these things to those who ruled Judea be deemed meek and humble?
	Nay. The eagle builds not his nest in the weeping willow. And the lion seeks not his den among the ferns.
	I am sickened and the bowels within me stir and rise when I hear the faint-hearted call Jesus humble and meek, that they may justify their own faint-heartedness; and when the downtrodden, for comfort and companionship, speak of Jesus as a worm shining by their side.
	Yea, my heart is sickened by such men. It is the mighty hunter I would preach, and the mountainous spirit unconquerable.



124. THE NEW PLEASURE

	Last night I invented a new pleasure, and as I was giving it the first trial an angel and a devil came rushing toward my house. They met at my door and fought with each other over my newly created pleasure; the one crying, “It is a sin!”--the other, “It is a virtue!”



125. NICODEMUS THE POET

	Many are the fools who say that Jesus stood in His own path and opposed Himself; that He knew not His own mind, and in the absence of that knowledge confounded Himself.
	Many indeed are the owls who know no song unlike their own hooting.
	You and I know the jugglers of words who would honor only a greater juggler, men who carry their heads in baskets to the market-place and sell them to the first bidder.
	We know the pygmies who abuse the sky-man. And we know what the weed would say of the oak tree and the cedar.
	I pity them that they cannot rise to the heights.
	I pity the shrivelling thorn envying the elm that dares the seasons.
	But pity, though enfolded by the regret of all the angels, can bring them no light.
	I know the scarecrow whose rotting garments flutter in the corn, yet he himself is dead to the corn and to the singing wind.
	I know the wingless spider that weaves a net for all who fly.
	I know the crafty, the blowers of horns and the beaters of drums, who in the abundance of their own noise cannot hear the skylark nor the east wind in the forest.
	I know him who paddles against all streams, but never finds the source, who runs with all rivers, but never dares to the sea.
	I know him who offers his unskilled hands to the builder of the temple, and when his unskilled hands are rejected, says in the darkness of his heart, “I will destroy all that shall be builded.”
	I know all these. They are the men who object that Jesus said on a certain day, “I bring peace unto you,” and on another day, “I bring a sword.”
	They cannot understand that in truth He said, “I bring peace unto men of goodwill, and I lay a sword between him who would peace and him who would a sword.”
	They wonder that He who said, “My kingdom is not of this earth,” said also, “Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s”; and know not that if they would indeed be free to enter the kingdom of their passion, they must not resist the gate-keeper of their necessities. It behooves them gladly to pay that dole to enter into that city.
	There are the men who say, “He preached tenderness and kindliness and filial love, yet He would not heed His mother and His brothers when they sought Him in the streets of Jerusalem.”
	They do not know that His mother and brothers in their loving fear would have had Him return to the bench of the carpenter, whereas He was opening our eyes to the dawn of a new day.
	His mother and His brothers would have had Him live in the shadow of death, but He Himself was challenging death upon yonder hill that He might live in our sleepless memory.
	I know these moles that dig paths to nowhere. Are they not the ones who accuse Jesus of glorifying Himself in that He said to the multitude, “I am the path and the gate to salvation,” and even called Himself the life and the resurrection.
	But Jesus was not claiming more than the month of May claims in her high tide.
	Was He not to tell the shining truth because it was so shining?
	He indeed said that He was the way and the life and the resurrection of the heart; and I myself as a testimony to His truth.
	Do you not remember me, Nicodemus, who believed in naught but the laws and decrees and was in continual subjection to observances?
	And behold me now, a man who walks with life and laughs with the sun from the first moment it smiles upon the mountain until it yields itself to bed behind the hills.
	Why do you halt before the word salvation? I myself through Him have attained my salvation.
	I care not for what shall befall me tomorrow, for I know that Jesus quickened my sleep and made my distant dreams my companions and my road-fellows.
	Am I less man because I believe in a greater man?
	The barriers of flesh and bone fell down when the Poet of Galilee spoke to me; and I was held by a spirit, and was lifted to the heights, and in midair my wings gathered the song of passion.
	And when I dismounted from the wind and in the Sanhedrim my pinions were shorn, even then my ribs, my featherless wings, kept and guarded the song. And all the poverties of the lowlands cannot rob me of my treasure.
	I have said enough. Let the deaf bury the humming of life in their dead ears. I am content with the sound of His lyre, which He held and struck while the hands of His body were nailed and bleeding.



126. NIGHT AND THE MADMAN

	“I am like thee, O, Night, dark and naked; I walk on the flaming path which is above my day-dreams, and whenever my foot touches earth a giant oaktree comes forth.”
	“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou still lookest backward to see how large a foot-print thou leavest on the sand.”
	“I am like thee, O, Night, silent and deep; and in the heart of my loneliness lies a 
	Goddess in child-bed; and in him who is being born Heaven touches Hell.”
	“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou shudderest yet before pain, and the song of the abyss terrifies thee.”
	“I am like thee, O, Night, wild and terrible; for my ears are crowded with cries of
	conquered nations and sighs for forgotten lands.”
	“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou still takest thy little-self for a comrade, and with thy monster-self thou canst not be friend.”
	“I am like thee, O, Night, cruel and awful; for my bosom is lit by burning ships
	at sea, and my lips are wet with blood of slain warriors.”
	“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman; for the desire for a sister-spirit is yet upon thee, and thou hast not become a law unto thyself.”
	“I am like thee, O, Night, joyous and glad; for he who dwells in my shadow is
	now drunk with virgin wine, and she who follows me is sinning mirthfully.”
	“Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thy soul is wrapped in the veil of seven folds and thou holdest not thy heart in thine hand.”
	“I am like thee, O, Night, patient and passionate; for in my breast a thousand dead
	lovers are buried in shrouds of withered kisses.”
	“Yea, Madman, art thou like me? Art thou like me? And canst thou ride the tempest as a steed, and grasp the lightning as a sword?”
	“Like thee, O, Night, like thee, mighty and high, and my throne is built upon heaps of fallen Gods; and before me too pass the days to kiss the hem of my garment but never to gaze at my face.”
	“Art thou like me, child of my darkest heart? And dost thou think my untamed thoughts and speak my vast language?”
	“Yea, we are twin brothers, O, Night; for thou revealest space and I reveal my soul.”



127. NINTH

	Man is two men; one is awake in darkness, the other is asleep in light.
	A hermit is one who renounces the world of fragments that he may enjoy the world wholly and without interruption.
	There lies a green field between the scholar and the poet; should the scholar cross it he becomes a wise man; should the poet cross it, he becomes a prophet.
	Yestereve I saw philosophers in the market-place carrying their heads in baskets, and crying aloud, “Wisdom! Wisdom for sale!”
	Poor philosophers! They must needs sell their heads to feed their hearts.
	Said a philosopher to a street sweeper, “I pity you. Yours is a hard and dirty task.”
	And the street sweeper said, “Thank you, sir. But tell me what is your task?”
	And the philosopher answered saying, “I study man’s mind, his deeds and his desires.”
	Then the street sweeper went on with his sweeping and said with a smile, “I pity you too.”



128. THE OLD, OLD WINE

	Once there lived a rich man who was justly proud of his cellar and the wine therein. And there was one jug of ancient vintage kept for some occasion known only to himself.
	The governor of the state visited him, and he bethought him and said, “That jug shall not be opened for a mere governor.”
	And a bishop of the diocese visited him, but he said to himself, “Nay, I will not open that jug. He would not know its value, nor would its aroma reach his nostrils.”
	The prince of the realm came and supped with him. But he thought, “It is too royal a wine for a mere princeling.”
	And even on the day when his own nephew was married, he said to himself, “No, not to these guests shall that jug be brought forth.”
	And the years passed by, and he died, an old man, and he was buried like unto every seed and acorn.
	And upon the day that he was buried the ancient jug was brought out together with other jugs of wine, and it was shared by the peasants of the neighborhood. And none knew its great age.
	To them, all that is poured into a cup is only wine.



129. ONE OF THE MARY’s

	His head was always high, and the flame of God was in His eyes.
	He was often sad, but His sadness was tenderness shown to those in pain, and comradeship given to the lonely.
	When He smiled His smile was as the hunger of those who long after the unknown. It was like the dust of stars falling upon the eyelids of children. And it was like a morsel of bread in the throat.
	He was sad, yet it was a sadness that would rise to the lips and become a smile.
	It was like a golden veil in the forest when autumn is upon the world. And sometimes it seemed like moonlight upon the shores of the lake.
	He smiled as if His lips would sing at the wedding-feast.
	Yet He was sad with the sadness of the winged who will not soar above his comrade.



130. THE OTHER LANGUAGE

	Three days after I was born, as I lay in my silken cradle, gazing with astonished dismay on the new world round about me, my mother spoke to the wet-nurse, saying, “How is my child?”
	And the wet-nurse answered, “He does well madame, I have fed him three times; and never before have I seen a babe so young yet so gay.”
	And I was indignant; and I cried, “It is not true, mother; for my bed is hard, and the milk I have sucked is bitter to my mouth, and the odour of the breast is foul in my nostrils, and I am most miserable.”
	But my mother did not understand, nor did the nurse; for the language I spoke was that of the world from which I came.
	And on the twenty-first day of my life, as I was being christened, the priest said to my mother, “You should indeed be happy, madame, that your son was born a christian.”
	And I was surprised, and I said to the priest, “Then your mother in Heaven should be unhappy, for you were not born a christian.”
	But the priest too did not understand my language.
	And after seven moons, one day a soothsayer looked at me, and he said to my mother, “Your son will be a statesman and a great leader of men.”
	But I cried out, “That is a false prophecy; for I shall be a musician, and naught but a musician shall I be.”
	But even at that age my language was not understood--and great was my astonishment.
	And after three and thirty years, during which my mother, and the nurse, and the priest have all died, (the shadow of God be upon their spirits) the soothsayer still lives. And yesterday I met him near the gate of the temple; and while we were talking together he said, “I have always known you would become a great musician. Even in your infancy I prophesied and foretold your future.”
	And I believed him--for now I too have forgotten the language of that other world.



131. OTHER SEAS

	A fish said to another fish, “Above this sea of ours there is another sea, with creatures swimmming in it--and they live there even as we live here.”
	The fish replied, “Pure fancy! Pure fancy! When you know that everything that leaves our sea by even an inch, and stays out of it, dies. What proof have you of other lives in other seas?”



132. THE OTHER WANDERER

	Once on a time I met another man of the roads. He too was a little mad, and thus spoke to me:
	“I am a wanderer. Oftentimes it seems that I walk the earth among pygmies. And because my head is seventy cubits farther from the earth than theirs, it creates higher and freer thoughts.
	“But in truth I walk not among men but above them, and all they can see of me is my footprints in their open fields.
	“And often have I heard them discuss and disagree over the shape and size of my footprints. For there are some who say, ‘These are the tracks of a mammoth that roamed the earth in the far past.’ And others say, ‘Nay, these are places where meteors have fallen from the distant stars.’
	“But you, my friend, you know full well that they are naught save the footprints of a wanderer.”



133. OUT OF MY DEEPER HEART

	Out of my deeper heart a bird rose and flew skywards.
	Higher and higher did it rise, yet larger and larger did it grow.
	At first it was but like a swallow, then a lark, then an eagle, then as vast as a spring cloud, and then it filled the starry heavens.
	Out of my heart a bird flew skywards. And it waxed larger as it flew. Yet it left not my heart.
	O my faith, my untamed knowledge, how shall I fly to your height and see with you man’s larger self pencilled upon the sky?
	How shall I turn this sea within me into mist, and move with you in space immeasurable?
	How can a prisoner within the temple behold its golden domes?
	How shall the heart of a fruit be stretched to envelop the fruit also?
	O my faith, I am in chains behind these bars of silver and ebony, and I cannot fly with you.
	Yet out of my heart you rise skyward, and it is my heart that holds you, and I shall be content.



134. ON PAIN

	And a woman spoke, saying, “Tell us of Pain.” And he said:
	
	Your pain is the breaking of the shell that encloses your understanding.
	Even as the stone of the fruit must break, that its heart may stand in the sun, so must you know pain.
	And could you keep your heart in wonder at the daily miracles of your life, your pain would not seem less wondrous than your joy;
	And you would accept the seasons of your heart, even as you have always accepted the seasons that pass over your fields.
	And you would watch with serenity through the winters of your grief.
	Much of your pain is self-chosen.
	It is the bitter potion by which the physician within you heals your sick self.
	Therefore trust the physician, and drink his remedy in silence and tranquillity:
	For his hand, though heavy and hard, is guided by the tender hand of the Unseen,
	And the cup he brings, though it burn your lips, has been fashioned of the clay which the Potter has moistened with His own sacred tears.



135. THE PALACE AND THE HUT

	As night fell and the light glittered in the great house, the servants stood at the massive door awaiting the coming of the guests; and upon their velvet garments shown golden buttons.
	The magnificent carriages drew into the palace park and the nobles entered, dressed in gorgeous raiment and decorated with jewels. The instruments filled the air with pleasant melodies while the dignitaries danced to the soothing music.
	At midnight the finest and most palatable foods were served on a beautiful table embellished with all kinds of the rarest flowers. The feasters dined and drank abundantly, until the sequence of the wine began to play its part. At dawn the throng dispersed boisterously, after spending a long night of intoxication and gluttony which hurried their worn bodies into their deep beds with unnatural sleep.
	At eventide, a man attired in the dress of heavy work stood before the door of his small house and knocked at the door. As it opened, he entered and greeted the occupants in a cheerful manner, and then sat between his children who were playing at the fireplace. In a short time, his wife had the meal prepared and they sat at a wooden table consuming their food. After eating they gathered around the oil lamp and talked of the day’s events. When the early night had lapsed, all stood silently and surrendered themselves to the King of Slumber with a song of praise and a prayer of gratitude on their lips.



136. THE PATH

	There lived among the hills a woman and her son, and he was her first-born and her only child.
	And the boy died of a fever whilst the physician stood by.
	The mother was distraught with sorrow, and she cried to the physician and besought him saying, “Tell me, tell me, what was it that made quiet his striving and silent his song?”
	And the physician said, “It was the fever.”
	And the mother said, “What is the fever?”
	And the physician answered, “I cannot explain it. It is a thing infinately small that visits the body, and we cannot see it with the human eye.”
	The physician left her. And she kept repeating to herself, “Something infinately small. We cannot see it with our human eye.”
	And at evening the priest came to console her. And she wept and she cried out saying, “Oh, why have I lost my son, my only son, my first-born?”
	And the priest answered, “My child, it is the will of God.”
	And the woman said, “What is God and where is God? I would see God that I may tear my bosom before Him, and pour the blood of my heart at His feet. Tell me where I shall find Him.”
	And the priest said, “God is infinately vast. He is not to be seen with our human eye.”
	Then the woman cried out, “The infinately small has slain my son through the will of the infinately great! Then what are we? What are we?”
	At that moment the woman’s mother came into the room with the shroud for the dead boy, and she heard the words of the priest and also her daughter’s cry. And she laid down the shroud, and took her daughter’s hand in her own hand, and she said, “My daughter, we ourselves are the infinately small and the infinately great; and we are the path between the two.”



137. PEACE

	The tempest calmed after bending the branches of the trees and leaning heavily upon the grain in the field. The stars appeared as broken remnants of lightning, but now silence prevailed over all, as if Nature’s war had never been fought.
	At that hour a young woman entered her chamber and knelt by her bed sobbing bitterly. Her heart flamed with agony but she could finally open her lips and say, “Oh Lord, bring him home safely to me. I have exhausted my tears and can offer no more, oh Lord, full of love and mercy. My patience is drained and calamity is seeking possession of my heart. Save him, oh Lord, from the iron paws of War; deliver him from such unmerciful Death, for he is weak, governed by the strong. Oh Lord, save my beloved, who is Thine own son, from the foe, who is Thy foe. Keep him from the forced pathway to Death’s door; let him see me, or come and take me to him.”
	Quietly a young man entered. His head was wrapped in bandage soaked with escaping life.
	He approached he with a greeting of tears and laughter, then took her hand and placed against it his flaming lips. And with a voice with bespoke past sorrow, and joy of union, and uncertainty of her reaction, he said, “Fear me not, for I am the object of your plea. Be glad, for Peace has carried me back safely to you, and humanity has restored what greed essayed to take from us. Be not sad, but smile, my beloved. Do not express bewilderment, for Love has power that dispels Death; charm that conquers the enemy. I am your one. Think me not a specter emerging from the House of Death to visit your Home of Beauty.
	“Do not be frightened, for I am now Truth, spared from swords and fire to reveal to the people the triumph of Love over War. I am Word uttering introduction to the play of happiness and peace.”
	Then the young man became speechless and his tears spoke the language of the heart; and the angels of Joy hovered about that dwelling, and the two hearts restored the singleness which had been taken from them.
	At dawn the two stood in the middle of the field contemplating the beauty of Nature injured by the tempest. After a deep and comforting silence, the soldier said to his sweetheart, “Look at the Darkness, giving birth to the Sun.”



138. PEACE AND WAR

	Three dogs were basking in the sun and conversing. The first dog said dreamily, “It is indeed wondrous to be living in this day of dogdom. Consider the ease with which we travel under the sea, upon the earth and even in the sky. And meditate for a moment upon the inventions brought forth for the comfort of dogs, even for our eyes and ears and noses.”
	And the second dog spoke and he said, “We are more heedful of the arts. We bark at the moon more rhythmically than did our forefathers. And when we gaze at ourselves in the water we see that our features are clearer than the features of yesterday.”
	Then the third dog spoke and said, “But what interests me most and beguiles my mind is the tranquil understanding existing between dogdoms.”
	At that very moment they looked, and lo, the dog-catcher was approaching.
	The three dogs sprang up and scampered down the street; and as they ran the third dog said, “For God’s sake, run for your lives. Civilization is after us.”



139. PEACE CONTAGIOUS

	One branch in bloom said to his neighboring branch, “This is a dull and empty day.” And the other brance answered, “It is indeed empty and dull.”
	At that moment a sparrow alighted on one of the branches, and the another sparrow, nearby.
	And one of the sparrows chirped and said, “My mate has left me.”
	And the other sparrow cried, “My mate has also gone, and she will not return. And what care I?”
	Then the two birds began to twitter and scold, and soon they were fighting and making harsh noise upon the air.
	All of a sudden two other sparrows came sailing from th sky, and they sat quietly beside the restless two. And there was calm, and there was peace.
	Then the four flew away together in pairs.
	And the first branch said to his neighboring branch, “That was a mighty zig-zag of sound.”
	And the other branch answered, “Call it what you will, it is now both peaceful and spacious. And if the upper air makes peace it seems to me that those who dwell in the lower might make peace also. Will you not wave in the wind a little nearer to me?”
	And the first branch said, “Oh, perchance, for peace’ sake, ere the Spring is over.”
	And then he waved himself with the strong wind to embrace her.



140. THE PEARL

	Said one oyster to a neighboring oyster, “I have a very great pain within me. It is heavy and round and I am in distress.”
	And the other oyster replied with haughty complacence, “Praise be to the heavens and to the sea, I have no pain within me. I am well and whole both within and without.”
	At that moment a crab was passing by and heard the two oysters, and he said to the one who was well and whole both within and without, “Yes, you are well and whole; but the pain that your neighbor bears is a pearl of exceeding beauty.”



141. THE PERFECT WORLD

	God of lost souls, thou who art lost amongst the gods, hear me:
	Gentle Destiny that watchest over us, mad, wandering spirits, hear me:
	I dwell in the midst of a perfect race, I the most imperfect.
	I, a human chaos, a nebula of confused elements, I move amongst finished worlds--peoples of complete laws and pure order, whose thoughts are assorted, whose dreams are arranged, and whose visions are enrolled and registered.
	Their virtues, O God, are measured, their sins are weighed, and even the scountless things that pass in the dim twilight of neither sin nor virtue are recorded and catalogued.
	Here days and nights are divided into seasons of conduct and governed by rules of blameless accuracy.
	To eat, to drink, to sleep, to cover one’s nudity, and then to be weary in due time.
	To work, to play, to sing, to dance, and then to lie still when the clock strikes the hour.
	To think thus, to feel thus much, and then to cease thinking and feeling when a certain star rises above yonder horizon.
	To rob a neighbour with a smile, to bestow gifts with a graceful wave of the hand, to praise prudently, to blame cautiously, to destroy a soul with a word, to burn a body with a breath, and then to wash the hands when the day’s work is done.
	To love according to an established order, to entertain one’s best self in a pre-conceived manner, to worship the gods becomingly, to intrigue the devils artfully--and then to forget all as though memory were dead.
	To fancy with a motive, to contemplate with consideration, to be happy sweetly, to suffer nobly--and then to empty the cup so that tomorrow may fill it again.
	All these things, O God, are conceived with forethought, born with determination, nursed with exactness, governed by rules, directed by reason, and then slain and buried after a prescribed method. And even their silent graves that lie within the human soul are marked and numbered.
	It is a perfect world, a world of consummate excellence, a world of supreme wonders, the ripest fruit in God’s garden, the master-thought of the universe.
	But why should I be here, O God, I a green seed of unfulfilled passion, a mad tempest that seeketh neither east nor west, a bewildered fragment from a burnt planet?
	Why am I here, O God of lost souls, thou who art lost amongst the gods?



142. A PERSIAN PHILOSOPHER IN DAMASCUS

	I cannot tell the fate of this man, nor can I say what shall befall His disciples.
	A seed hidden in the heart of an apple is an orchard invisible. Yet should that seed fall upon a rock, it will come to naught.
	But this I say: The ancient God of Israel is harsh and relentless. Israel should have another God; one who is gentle and forgiving, who would look down upon them with pity; one who would descend with the rays of the sun and walk on the path of their limitations, rather than sit for ever in the judgment seat to weigh their faults and measure their wrong-doings.
	Israel should bring forth a God whose heart is not a jealous heart, and whose memory of their shortcomings is brief; one who would not avenge Himself upon them even to the third and the fourth generation.
	Man here in Syria is like man in all lands. He would look into the mirror of his own understanding and therein find his deity. He would fashion the gods after his own likeness, and worship that which reflects his own image.
	In truth man prays to his deeper longing, that it may rise and fulfil the sum of his desires.
	There is no depth beyond the soul of man, and the soul is the deep that calls unto itself; for there is no other voice to speak and there are no other ears to hear.
	Even we in Persia would see our faces in the disc of the sun and our bodies dancing in the fire that we kindle upon the altars.
	Now the God of Jesus, whom He called Father, would not be a stranger unto the people of Jesus, and He would fulfil their desires.
	The gods of Egypt have cast off their burden of stones and fled to the Nubian desert, to be free among those who are still free from knowing.
	The gods of Greece and Rome are vanishing into their own sunset. They were too much like men to live in the ecstasy of men. The groves in which their magic was born have been cut down by the axes of the Athenians and the exandrians.
	And in this land also the high places are made low by the lawyers of Beirut and the young hermits of Antioch.
	Only the old women and the weary men seek the temples of their forefathers; only the exhausted at the end of the road seek its beginning.
	But this man Jesus, this Nazarene, He has spoken of a God too vast to be unlike the soul of any man, too knowing to punish, too loving to remember the sins of His creatures. And this God of the Nazarene shall pass over the threshold of the children of the earth, and He shall sit at their hearth, and He shall be a blessing within their walls and a light upon their path.
	But my God is the God of Zoroaster, the God who is the sun in the sky and fire upon the earth and light in the bosom of man. And I am content. I need no other God.



143. PETER

	Once at sundown Jesus led us into the village of Beithsaida. We were a tired company, and the dust of the road was upon us. And we came to a great house in the midst of a garden, and the owner stood at the gate.
	And Jesus said to him, “These men are weary and footsore. Let them sleep in your house. The night is cold and they are in need of warmth and rest.”
	And the rich man said, “They shall not sleep in my house.”
	And Jesus said, “Suffer them then to sleep in your garden.”
	And the man answered, “Nay, they shall not sleep in my garden.”
	Then Jesus turned to us and said, “This is what your tomorrow will be, and this present is like your future. All doors shall be closed in your face, and not even the gardens that lie under the stars may be your couch.
	“Should your feet indeed be patient with the road and follow me, it may be you will find a basin and a bed, and perhaps bread and wine also. But if it should be that you find none of those things, forget not then that you have crossed one of my deserts.
	“Come, let us go forth.”
	And the rich man was disturbed, and his face was changed, and he muttered to himself words that I did not hear; and he shrank away from us and turned into his garden.
	And we followed Jesus upon the road.



144. PETER ON THE NEIGHBOR

	Once in Capernaum my Lord and Master spoke thus:
	“Your neighbour is your other self dwelling behind a wall. In understanding, all walls shall fall down.
	“Who knows but that your neighbour is your better self wearing another body? See that you love him as you would love yourself.
	“He too is a manifestation of the Most High, whom you do not know.
	“Your neighbour is a field where the springs of your hope walk in their green garments, and where the winters of your desire dream of snowy heights.
	“Your neighbour is a mirror wherein you shall behold your countenance made beautiful by a joy which you yourself if not know, and by a sorrow you yourself did not share.
	“I would have you love your neighbour even as I have loved you.”
	Then I asked Him saying, “How can I love a neighbour who loves me not, and who covets my property? One who would steal my possessions?”
	And He answered, “When you are ploughing and your manservant is sowing the seed behind you, would you stop and look backward and put to flight a sparrow feeding upon a few of your seeds? Should you do this, you were not worthy of the riches of your harvest.”
	When Jesus had said this, I was ashamed and I was silent. But I was not in fear, for He smiled upon me.



145. PHILEMON, A GREEK APOTHECARY

	The Nazarene was the Master Physician of His people. No other man knew so much of our bodies and of their elements and properties.
	He made whole those who were afflicted with diseases unknown to the Greeks and the Egyptians. They say He even called back the dead to life. And whether this be true or not true, it declares His power; for only to him who has wrought great things is the greatest ever attributed.
	They say also that Jesus visited India and the Country between the Two Rivers, and that there the priests revealed to Him the knowledge of all that is hidden in the recesses of our flesh.
	Yet that knowledge may have been given to Him direct by the gods, and not through the priests. For that which has remained unknown to all men for an eon may be disclosed to one man in but a moment. And Apollo may lay his hand on the heart of the obscure and make it wise.
	Many doors were open to the Tyrians and the Thebans, and to this man also certain sealed doors were opened. He entered the temple of the soul, which is the body; and He beheld the evil spirits that conspire against our sinews, and also the good spirits that spin the threads thereof.
	Methinks it was by the power of opposition and resistance that He healed the sick, but in a manner unknown to our philosophers. He astonished fever with His snow-like touch and it retreated; and He surprised the hardened limbs with His own calm and they yielded to Him and were at peace.
	He knew the ebbing sap within the furrowed bark--but how He reached the sap with His fingers I do not know. He knew the sound steel underneath the rust--but how He freed the sword and made it shine no man can tell.
	Sometimes it seems to me that He heard the murmuring pain of all things that grow in the sun, and that then He lifted them up and supported them, not only by His own knowledge, but also by disclosing to them their own power to rise and become whole.
	Yet He was not much concerned with Himself as a physician. He was rather preoccupied with the religion and the politics of this land. And this I regret, for first of all things we must needs be sound of body.
	But these Syrians, when they are visited by an illness, seek an argument rather than medicine.
	And pity it is that the greatest of all their physicians chose rather to be but a maker of speeches in the market-place.



146. PHILIP

	When our beloved died, all mankind died and all things for a space were still and gray. Then the east was darkened, and a tempest rushed out of it and swept the land. The eyes of the sky opened and shut, and the rain came down in torrents and carried away the blood that streamed from His hands and His feet.
	I too died. But in the depth of my oblivion I heard Him speak and say, “Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.”
	And His voice sought my drowned spirit and I was brought back to the shore.
	And I opened my eyes and I saw His white body hanging against the cloud, and His words that I had heard took the shape within me and became a new man. And I sorrowed no more.
	Who would sorrow for a sea that is unveiling its face, or for a mountain that laughs in the sun?
	Was it ever in the heart of man, when that heart was pierced, to say such words?
	What other judge of men has released His judges? And did ever love challenge hate with power more certain of itself?
	Was ever such a trumpet heard ’twixt heaven and earth?
	Was it known before that the murdered had compassion on his murderers? Or that the meteor stayed his footsteps for the mole?
	The seasons shall tire and the years grow old, ere they exhaust these words: “Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.”
	And you and I, though born again and again, shall keep them.
	And now I would go into my house, and stand an exalted beggar, at His door.



147. A PHILOSOPHER

	When he was with us He gazed at us and at our world with eyes of wonder, for His eyes were not veiled with the veil of years, and all that He saw was clear in the light of His youth.
	Though He knew the depth of beauty, He was for ever surprised by its peace and its majesty; and He stood before the earth as the first man had stood before the first day.
	We whose senses have been dulled, we gaze in full daylight and yet we do not see. We would cup our ears, but we do not hear; and stretch forth our hands, but we do not touch. And though all the incense of Arabia is burned, we go our way and do not smell.
	We see not the ploughman returning from his field at eventide; nor hear the shepherd’s flute when he leads his flock to the fold, nor do we stretch our arms to touch the sunset; and our nostrils hunger no longer for the roses of Sharon.
	Nay, we honor no kings without kingdoms; nor hear the sound of harps save when the strings are plucked by hands; nor do we see a child playing in our olive grove as if he were a young olive tree. And all words must needs rise from lips of flesh, or else we deem each other dumb and deaf.
	In truth we gaze but do not see, and hearken but do not hear; we eat and drink but do not taste. And there lies the difference between Jesus of Nazareth and ourselves.
	His senses were all continually made new, and the world to Him was always a new world.
	To Him the lisping of a babe was not less than the cry of all mankind, while to us it is only lisping.
	To Him the root of a buttercup was a longing towards God, while to us it is naught but a root.



148. THE PHILOSOPHER AND THE COBBLER

	There came to a cobbler’s shop a philosopher with worn shoes. And the philosopher said to the cobbler, “Please mend my shoes.”
	And the cobbler said, “I am mending another man’s shoes now, and there are still other shoes to patch before I can come to yours. But leave your shoes here, and wear this other pair today, and come tomorrow for your own.”
	Then the philosopher was indignant, and he said, “I wear no shoes that are not mine own.”
	And the cobbler said, “Well then, are you in truth a philosopher, and cannot enfold your feet with the shoes of another man? Upon this very street there is another cobbler who understands philosophers better than I do. Go you to him for mending.”



149. PILATE’s WIFE TO A ROMAN LADY

	I was walking with my maidens in the groves outside of Jerusalem when I saw Him with a few men and women sitting about Him; and He was speaking to them in a language which I only half understood.
	But one needs not a language to perceive a pillar of light or a mountain of crystal. The heart knows what the tongue may never utter and the ears may never hear.
	He was speaking to His friends of love and srength. I know He spoke of love because there was melody in His voice; and I know He spoke of strength because there were armies in His gestures. And He was tender, though even my husband could not have spoken with such authority.
	When He saw me passing by He stopped speaking for a moment and looked kindly upon me. And I was humbled; and in my soul I knew I had passed by a god.
	After that day His image visited my privacy when I would not be visited by man or woman; and His eyes searched my soul when my own eyes were closed. And His voice governs the stillness of my nights.
	I am held fast forevermore; and there is peace in my pain, and freedom in my tears.
	Beloved friend, you have never seen that man, and you will never see Him.
	He is gone beyond our senses, but of all men He is now the nearest to me.



150. ON PLEASURE

	Then a hermit, who visited the city once a year, came forth and said, “Speak to us of Pleasure.” And he answered, saying:
	
	Pleasure is a freedom song,
	But it is not freedom.
	It is the blossoming of your desires,
	But it is not their fruit.
	It is a depth calling unto a height,
	But it is not the deep nor the high.
	It is the caged taking wing,
	But it is not space encompassed.
	Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a freedom-song.
	And I fain would have you sing it with fullness of heart; yet I would not have you lose your hearts in the singing.
	Some of your youth seek pleasure as if it were all, and they are judged and rebuked.
	I would not judge nor rebuke them. I would have them seek.
	For they shall find pleasure, but not her alone:
	Seven are her sisters, and the least of them is more beautiful than pleasure.
	Have you not heard of the man who was digging in the earth for roots and found a treasure?
	And some of your elders remember pleasures with regret like wrongs committed in drunkenness.
	But regret is the beclouding of the mind and not its chastisement.
	They should remember their pleasures with gratitude, as they would the harvest of a summer.
	Yet if it comforts them to regret, let them be comforted.
	And there are among you those who are neither young to seek nor old to remember;
	And in their fear of seeking and remembering they shun all pleasures, lest they neglect the spirit or offend against it.
	But even in their foregoing is their pleasure.
	And thus they too find a treasure though they dig for roots with quivering hands.
	But tell me, who is he that can offend the spirit?
	Shall the nightingale offend the stillness of the night, or the firefly the stars?
	And shall your flame or your smoke burden the wind?
	Think you the spirit is a still pool which you can trouble with a staff?
	Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure you do but store the desire in the recesses of your being.
	Who knows but that which seems omitted today, waits for tomorrow?
	Even your body knows its heritage and its rightful need and will not be deceived.
	And your body is the harp of your soul,
	And it is yours to bring forth sweet music from it or confused sounds.
	And now you ask in your heart, “How shall we distinguish that which is good in pleasure from that which is not good?”
	Go to your fields and your gardens, and you shall learn that it is the pleasure of the bee to gather honey of the flower,
	But it is also the pleasure of the flower to yield its honey to the bee.
	For to the bee a flower is a fountain of life,
	And to the flower a bee is a messenger of love,
	And to both, bee and flower, the giving and the receiving of pleasure is a need and an ecstasy.
	People of Orphalese, be in your pleasures like the flowers and the bees.



151. THE PLUTOCRAT

	In my wanderings I once saw upon an island a man-headed, iron-hoofed monster who ate of the earth and drank of the sea incessantly. And for a long while I watched him. Then I approached him and said, “Have you never enough; is your hunger never satisfied and your thirst never quenched?”
	And he answered saying, “Yes, I am satisfied, nay, I am weary of eating and drinking; but I am afraid that tomorrow there will be no more earth to eat and no more sea to drink.”



152. POETS

	Four poets were sitting around a bowl of punch that stood on a table.
	Said the first poet, “Methinks I see with my third eye the fragrance of this wine hovering in space like a cloud of birds in an enchanted forest.”
	The second poet raised his head and said, “With my inner ear I can hear those mist-birds singing. And the melody holds my heart as the white rose imprisons the bee within her petals.”
	The third poet closed his eyes and stretched his arm upwards, and said, “I touch them with my hand. I feel their wings, like the breath of a sleeping fairy, brushing against my fingers.”
	Then the fourth poet rose and lifted up the bowl, and he said, “Alas, friends! I am too dull of sight and of hearing and of touch. I cannot see the fragrance of this wine, nor hear its song, nor feel the beating of its wings. I perceive but the wine itself. Now therefore must I drink it, that it may sharpen my senses and raise me to your blissful heights.”
	And putting the bowl to his lips, he drank the punch to the very last drop.
	The three poets, with their mouths open, looked at him aghast, and there was a thirsty yet unlyrical hatred in their eyes.



153. A POET’S DEATH IS HIS LIFE

	The dark wings of night enfolded the city upon which Nature had spread a pure white garment of snow; and men deserted the streets for their houses in search of warmth, while the north wind probed in contemplation of laying waste the gardens. There in the suburb stood an old hut heavily laden with snow and on the verge of falling. In a dark recess of that hovel was a poor bed in which a dying youth was lying, staring at the dim light of his oil lamp, made to flicker by the entering winds. He a man in the spring of life who foresaw fully that the peaceful hour of freeing himself from the clutches of life was fast nearing. He was awaiting Death’s visit gratefully, and upon his pale face appeared the dawn of hope; and on his lops a sorrowful smile; and in his eyes forgiveness.
	He was poet perishing from hunger in the city of living rich. He was placed in the earthly world to enliven the heart of man with his beautiful and profound sayings. He as noble soul, sent by the Goddess of Understanding to soothe and make gentle the human spirit. But alas! He gladly bade the cold earth farewell without receiving a smile from its strange occupants.
	He was breathing his last and had no one at his bedside save the oil lamp, his only companion, and some parchments upon which he had inscribed his heart’s feeling. As he salvaged the remnants of his withering strength he lifted his hands heavenward; he moved his eyes hopelessly, as if wanting to penetrate the ceiling in order to see the stars from behind the veil clouds.
	And he said, “Come, oh beautiful Death; my soul is longing for you. Come close to me and unfasten the irons life, for I am weary of dragging them. Come, oh sweet Death, and deliver me from my neighbors who looked upon me as a stranger because I interpret to them the language of the angels. Hurry, oh peaceful Death, and carry me from these multitudes who left me in the dark corner of oblivion because I do not bleed the weak as they do. Come, oh gentle Death, and enfold me under your white wings, for my fellowmen are not in want of me. Embrace me, oh Death, full of love and mercy; let your lips touch my lips which never tasted a mother’s kiss, not touched a sister’s cheeks, not caresses a sweetheart’s fingertips. Come and take me, by beloved Death.”
	Then, at the bedside of the dying poet appeared an angel who possessed a supernatural and divine beauty, holding in her hand a wreath of lilies. She embraced him and closed his eyes so he could see no more, except with the eye of his spirit. She impressed a deep and long and gently withdrawn kiss that left and eternal smile of fulfillment upon his lips. Then the hovel became empty and nothing was lest save parchments and papers which the poet had strewn with bitter futility.
	Hundreds of years later, when the people of the city arose from the diseases slumber of ignorance and saw the dawn of knowledge, they erected a monument in the most beautiful garden of the city and celebrated a feast every year in honor of that poet, whose writings had freed them. Oh, how cruel is man’s ignorance!



154. THE POMEGRANATE

	Once when I was living in the heart of a pomegranate, I heard a seed saying, “Someday I shall become a tree, and the wind will sing in my branches, and the sun will dance on my leaves, and I shall be strong and beautiful through all the seasons.”
	Then another seed spoke and said, “When I was as young as you, I too held such views; but now that I can weigh and measure things, I see that my hopes were vain.”
	And a third seed spoke also, “I see in us nothing that promises so great a future.”
	And a fourth said, “But what a mockery our life would be, without a greater future!”
	Said a fifth, “Why dispute what we shall be, when we know not even what we are.”
	But a sixth replied, “Whatever we are, that we shall continue to be.”
	And a seventh said, “I have such a clear idea how everything will be, but I cannot put it into words.”
	Then an eighth spoke--and a ninth--and a tenth--and then many--until all were speaking, and I could distinguish nothing for the many voices.
	And so I moved that very day into the heart of a quince, where the seeds are few and almost silent.



155. THE POMEGRANATES

	There was once a man who had many pomegranate trees in his orchard. And for many an autumn he would put his pomegranates on silvery trays outside of his dwelling, and upon the trays he would place signs upon which he himself had written, “Take one for aught. You are welcome.”
	But people passed by and no one took of the fruit.
	Then the man bethought him, and one autumn he placed no pomegranates on silvery trays outside of his dwelling, but he raised this sign in large lettering: “Here we have th best pomegranates in the land, but we sell them for more silver than any other pomegranates.”
	And now behold, all the men and women of the neighborhood came rushing to buy.



156. ON PRAYER

	Then a priestess said, “Speak to us of Prayer.” And he answered, saying:
	
	You pray in your distress and in your need; would that you might pray also in the fullness of your joy and in your days of abundance.
	For what is prayer but the expansion of yourself into the living ether?
	And if it is for your comfort to pour your darkness into space, it is also for your delight to pour forth the dawning of your heart.
	And if you cannot but weep when your soul summons you to prayer, she should spur you again and yet again, though weeping, until you shall come laughing.
	When you pray you rise to meet in the air those who are praying at that very hour, and whom save in prayer you may not meet.
	Therefore let your visit to that temple invisible be for naught but ecstasy and sweet communion.
	For if you should enter the temple for no other purpose than asking you shall not receive.
	And if you should enter into it to humble yourself you shall not be lifted:
	Or even if you should enter into it to beg for the good of others you shall not be heard.
	It is enough that you enter the temple invisible.
	I cannot teach you how to pray in words.
	God listens not to your words save when He Himself utters them through your lips.
	And I cannot teach you the prayer of the seas and the forests and the mountains.
	But you who are born of the mountains and the forests and the seas can find their prayer in your heart,
	And if you but listen in the stillness of the night you shall hear them saying in silence,
	“Our God, who art our winged self, it is thy will in us that willeth.
	It is thy desire in us that desireth.
	It is thy urge in us that would turn our nights, which are thine, into days which are thine also.
	We cannot ask thee for aught, for thou knowest our needs before they are born in us:
	Thou art our need; and in giving us more of thyself thou givest us all.”



157. ON PROGRESS

	How amazing time is, and how amazing we are. Time has been transformed, and we have changed; it has advanced and set us in
	motion; it has unveiled its face, inspiring us with bewilderment and exhilaration.
	Yesterday we complained of time and feared it, but today we love and embrace it. Indeed, we have begun to perceive its 
	purposes and characteristics, and to comprehend its secrets and enigmas.
	Yesterday we crawled apprehensively, like phantoms quaking between the terrors of night and the horrors of day. Today we stride 
	zealously toward the summits of mountains, where raging storms ensconce themselves and blazing lightning and crashing thunder 
	are engendered.
	Yesterday we ate bread kneaded with blood and drank water mingled with tears. But today we dine on manna from the hands of 
	dawn-sprites and sip wine fragrant with the breaths of spring.
	Yesterday we were playthings in the hand of fate, and fate was a drunken tyrant, bending us to the right and then to the left. 
	But today fate has sobered up, and we play with it and it plays back; we jest with it and it laughs; then we lead it and it follows
	behind us.
	Yesterday we burned incense before graven images and immolated sacrifices before irascible gods. But today we light incense only
	for ourselves and offer sacrifices only to our own essences. For the greatest and most gloriously beautiful of deities has made his
	temple in our breasts.
	Yesterday we obeyed kings and bent our necks before emperors. But today we kneel only to the truth, follow only beauty, and
	obey only love.
	Yesterday we humbly lowered our eyes before priests and dreaded the visions of oracles. But today the times have changed and
	we have changed, and we stare only at the countenance of the sun, listen only to the melodies of the sea, and tremble only with
	the typhoon.
	Yesterday we demolished the thrones of our souls in order to build from them the tombs of our grandfathers. But today our souls
	have been transformed into holy altars, which the ghosts of dusty centuries cannot approach and the grizzled fingers of the dead
	cannot touch.
	We were a silent, hidden thought in the folds of oblivion, and we have become a voice that causes the heavens to tremble.
	We were a faint spark buried in ash, but have become a fire blazing above the sheltered ravine.
	How many are the nights that we stayed up late, cradling our heads on the dirt with snow for a blanket, weeping for lost friendships
	and possessions. How many are the days we spent lying about like sheep without a shepherd, nibbling at our thoughts and chewing
	our emotions, remaining hungry and thirsty. How often we stood between waning day and onrushing night, mourning our fading youth,
	yearning for an unknown person, lonely for some obscure reason, staring at a dark, empty sky, listening to the groans of silence and
	nothingness.
	Those centuries passed, like a thieving wolf-pack through a cemetery, but today the sky has awakened and we have awakened. We
	spend white nights on celestial beds, staying up late with our imaginations, keeping our thoughts company and embracing our passions.
	Flames glimmer all around us, and we seize them with steady fingers; the spirits of genies ascend all around us, and we address
	them unequivocally. Hosts of the angels pass by us, and we entice them by the yearning in our hearts and make them drunk with the
	rhapsodies of our spirits.
	Yesterday we were and today we have become, and this is the will of the gods for their children. What, then, is your will, scions of
	the apes?
	Have you advanced even one stride forward since you issued from fissures in the earth? Or have you lifted your gaze toward the
	heights since the demons opened your eyes? Have you pronounced a single word from the Book of Truth since the serpents kissed
	your mouths with theirs?
	Or have you listened even an instant to the song of life since death stopped up your ears?
	I have been passing by you for seven thousand years and have seen you metamorphose like insects in the corners of grottoes. Seven minutes
	ago I looked at you from behind the pane of my window and found you ambling in filthy alleyways, led by the devils of apathy,
	the chains of servitude shackling your feet and the wings of death fluttering above your heads. You are today as you were yesterday
	and shall remain tomorrow and thereafter, just as I saw you in the beginning.
	Yesterday we were and today we have become, for this is the wont of the gods with the children of gods. What, then, is the way of
	apes with you, O scions of the apes?



158. PROLOGUE

	I have existed from all eternity and, behold, I am here; and I shall exist till the end of time, for my being has no end.
	I soared into limitless space and took wing in the imaginal world, approaching the circle of exalted light; and here I am now, mired in matter.
	I listened to the teachings of Confucius, imbibed the wisdom of Brahma, and sat beside Buddha beneath the tree of insight. And now I am here, wrestling with ignorance and unbelief. I was on Sinai when Yahweh shed His effulgence on Moses; at the River Jordan I witnessed the miracles of the Nazarene; and in Medina I heard the words of the Messenger to the Arabs. And here I am now, a captive of confusion. I beheld the might of Babylon, the glory of Egypt, and the grandeur of Greece; and I still see the weakness, degradation, and pettiness in all those works. I sat with the sorcerers of Endor, the seers of Assyria, the prophets of Palestine; and I persist in singing the truth. I memorized the wisdom revealed to India, the heartfelt odes wrought by the inhabitants of the Arabian peninsula, and the music that embodies the sentiments of the Western people: yet still I am blind and do not see, deaf and do not hear. I endured the brutality of grasping conquerors, suffered oppression at the hands of tyrannical rulers, and was enslaved by despots: yet a power remains whereby I struggle against the days.
	I saw and heard all that while still a child, and shall see and hear the exploits of youth and their consequences; then I shall grow old, and archieve perfection, and return unto God.
	I existed from all eternity and, behold, I am here; and I shall exist till the end of time, for my being has no end.



159. THE PROPHET AND THE CHILD

	Once on a day the prophet Sharia met a child in a garden. The child ran to him and said, “Good morrow to you, Sir,” and the prophet said, “Good morrow to you, Sir.” And in a moment, “I see that you are alone.”
	Then the child said, in laughter and delight, “It took a long time to lose my nurse. She thinks I am behind those hedges; but can’t you see that I am here?” Then he gazed at the prophet’s face and spoke again. “You are alone, too. What did you do with your nurse?”
	The prophet answered and said, “Ah, that is a different thing. In very truth I cannot lose her oftentime. But now, when I came into this garden, she was seeking after me behind the hedges.”
	The child clapped his hands and cried out, “So you are like me! Isn’t it good to be lost?” And then he said, “Who are you?”
	And the man answered, “They call me the prophet Sharia. And tell me, who are you?”
	“I am only myself,” said the child, “and my nurse is seeking after me, and she does not know where I am.”
	Then the prophet gazed into space saying, “I too have escaped my nurse for awhile, but she will find me out.”
	And the child said, “I know mine will find me out too.”
	At that moment a woman’s voice was heard calling the child’s name, “See,” said the child, “I told you she would be finding me.”
	And at the same moment another voice was heard, “Where art thou, Sharia?”
	And the prophet said, “See my child, they have found me also.”
	And turning his face upward, Sharia answered, “Here I am.”



160. THE QUEST

	A thousand years ago two philosophers met on a slope of Lebanon, and one said to the other, “Where goest thou?”
	And the other answered, “I am seeking after the fountain of youth which I know wells out among these hills. I have found writings which tell of that fountain flowering toward the sun. And you, what are you seeking?”
	The first man answered, “I am seeking after the mystery of death.”
	Then each of the two philosophers conceived that the other was lacking in his great science, and they began to wrangle, and to accuse each other of spiritual blindness.
	Now while the two philosophers were loud upon the wind, a stranger, a man who was deemed a simpleton in his own village, passed by, and when he heard the two in hot dispute, he stood awhile and listened to their arguement.
	Then he came near to them and said, “My good men, it seems that you both really belong to the same school of philosophy, and that you are speaking of the same thing, only you speak in different words. One of you is seeks the fountain of youth, and the other seeks the mystery of death. Yet indeed they are but one, and as they dwell in you both.”
	Then the stranger turned away saying, “Farewell sages.” And as he departed he laughed a patient laughter.
	The two philosophers looked at each other in silence for a moment, and then they laughed also. And one of them said, “Well now, shall we not walk and seek together.”



161. RACHAEL, A WOMAN DISCIPLE

	I often wonder whether Jesus was a man of flesh and blood like ourselves, or a thought without a body, in the mind, or an idea that visits the vision of man.
	Often it seems to me that He was but a dream dreamed by the countless men and women at the same time in a sleep deeper than sleep and a dawn more serene than all dawns.
	And it seems that in relating the dream, the one to the other, we began to deem it a reality that had indeed come to pass; and in giving it body of our fancy and a voice of our longing we made it a substance of our own substance.
	But in truth He was not a dream. We knew Him for three years and beheld Him with our open eyes in the high tide of noon.
	We touched His hands, and we followed Him from one place to another. We heard His discourses and witnessed His deeds. Think you that we were a thought seeking after more thought, or a dream in the region of dreams?
	Great events always seem alien to our daily lives, though their nature may be rooted in our nature. But though they appear sudden in their coming and sudden in their passing, their true span is for years and for generations.
	Jesus of Nazareth was Himself the Great Event. That man whose father and mother and brothers we know, was Himself a miracle wrought in Judea. Yea, all His own miracles, if placed at His feet, would not rise to the height of His ankles.
	And all the rivers of all the years shall not carry away our remembrance of Him.
	He was a mountain burning in the night, yet He was a soft glow beyond the hills. He was a tempest in the sky, yet He was a murmur in the mist of daybreak.
	He was a torrent pouring from the heights to the plains to destroy all things in its path. And He was like the laughter of children.
	Every year I had waited for spring to visit this valley. I had waited for the lilies and the cyclamen, and then every year my soul had been saddened within me; for ever I longed to rejoice with the spring, yet I could not.
	But when Jesus came to my seasons He was indeed a spring, and in Him was the promise of all the years to come. He filled my heart with joy; and like the violets I grew, a shy thing, in the light of His coming.
	And now the changing seasons of worlds not yet ours shall not erase His loveliness from this our world.
	Nay, Jesus was not a phantom, nor a conception of the poets. He was man like yourself and myself. But only to sight and touch and hearing; in all other ways He was unlike us.
	He was a man of joy; and it was upon the path of joy that He met the sorrows of all men. And it was from the high roofs of His sorrows that He beheld the joy of all men.
	He saw visions that we did not see, and heard voices that we did not hear; and He spoke as if to invisible multitudes, and ofttimes He spoke through us to races yet unborn.
	And Jesus was often alone. He was among us yet not one with us. He was upon the earth, yet He was of the sky. And only in our aloneness may we visit the land of His aloneness.
	He loved us with tender love. His heart was a winepress. You and I could approach with a cup and drink therefrom.
	One thing I did not use to understand in Jesus: He would make merry with His listeners; He would tell jests and play upon words, and laugh with all the fullness of His heart, even when there were distances in His eyes and sadness in His voice. But I understand now.
	I often think of the earth as a woman heavy with her first child. When Jesus was born, He was the first child. And when He died, He was the first man to die.
	For did it not appear to you that the earth was stilled on that dark Friday, and the heavens were at war with the heavens?
	And felt you not when His face disappeared from our sight as if we were naught but memories in the mist?



162. RAFCA

	This happened before He was known to the people.
	I was in my mother’s garden tending the rose-bushes, when He stopped at our gate.
	And He said, “I am thirsty. Will you give me water from your well?”
	And I ran and brought the silver cup, and filled it with water; and I poured into it a few drops from the jasmine vial.
	And He drank deep and was pleased.
	Then He looked into my eyes and said, “My blessing shall be upon you.”
	When He said that I felt as it were a gust of wind rushing through my body. And I was no longer shy; and I said, “Sir, I am betrothed to a man of Cana in Galilee. And I shall be married on the fourth day of the coming week. Will you not come to my wedding and grace my marriage with your presence?”
	And He answered, “I will come, my child.”
	Mind you, He said, “My child,” yet He was but a youth, and I was nearly twenty.
	Then He walked on down the road.
	And I stood at the gate of our garden until my mother called me into the house.
	On the fourth day of the following week I was taken to the house of my bridegroom and given in marriage.
	And Jesus came, and with Him His mother and His brother James.
	And they sat around the wedding-board with our guests whilst my maiden comrades sang the wedding-songs of Solomon the King. And Jesus ate our food and drank our wine and smiled upon me and upon the others.
	And He heeded all the songs of the lover bringing his beloved into his tent; and of the young vineyard-keeper who loved the daughter of the lord of the vineyard and led her to his mother’s house; and of the prince who met the beggar maiden and bore her to his realm and crowned her with the crown of his fathers.
	And it seemed as if He were listening to yet other songs also, which I could not hear.
	At sundown the father of my bridegroom came to the mother of Jesus and whispered saying, “We have no more wine for our guests. And the day is not yet over.”
	And Jesus heard the whispering, and He said, “The cup bearer knows that there is still more wine.”
	And so it was indeed--and as long as the guests remained there was fine wine for all who would drink.
	Presently Jesus began to speak with us. He spoke of the wonders of earth and heaven; of sky flowers that bloom when night is upon the earth, and of earth flowers that blossom when the day hides the stars.
	And He told us stories and parables, and His voice enchanted us so that we gazed upon Him as if seeing visions, and we forgot the cup and the plate.
	And as I listened to Him it seemed as if I were in a land distant and unknown.
	After a while one of the guests said to the father of my bridegroom, “You have kept the best wine till the end of the feast. Other hosts do not so.”
	And all believed that Jesus had wrought a miracle, that they should have more wine and better at the end of the wedding-feast than at the beginning.
	I too thought that Jesus had poured the wine, but I was not astonished; for in His voice I had already listened to miracles.
	And afterwards indeed, His voice remained close to my heart, even until I had been delivered of my first-born child.
	And now even to this day in our village and in the villages near by, the word of our guest is still remembered. And they say, “The spirit of Jesus of Nazareth is the best and the oldest wine.”



163. ON REASON AND PASSION

	And the priestess spoke again and said: “Speak to us of Reason and Passion.” And he answered saying:
	
	Your soul is oftentimes a battlefield, upon which your reason and your judgment wage war against passion and your appetite.
	Would that I could be the peacemaker in your soul, that I might turn the discord and the rivalry of your elements into oneness and melody.
	But how shall I, unless you yourselves be also the peacemakers, nay, the lovers of all your elements?
	Your reason and your passion are the rudder and the sails of your seafaring soul.
	If either your sails or our rudder be broken, you can but toss and drift, or else be held at a standstill in mid-seas.
	For reason, ruling alone, is a force confining; and passion, unattended, is a flame that burns to its own destruction.
	Therefore let your soul exalt your reason to the height of passion; that it may sing;
	And let it direct your passion with reason, that your passion may live through its own daily resurrection, and like the phoenix rise above its own ashes.
	I would have you consider your judgment and your appetite even as you would two loved guests in your house.
	Surely you would not honor one guest above the other; for he who is more mindful of one loses the love and the faith of both.
	Among the hills, when you sit in the cool shade of the white poplars, sharing the peace and serenity of distant fields and meadows--then let your heart say in silence, “God rests in reason.”
	And when the storm comes, and the mighty wind shakes the forest, and thunder and lightning proclaim the majesty of the sky,--then let your heart say in awe, “God moves in passion.”
	And since you are a breath In God’s sphere, and a leaf in God’s forest, you too should rest in reason and move in passion.



164. ON REBELLION AND LIBERTY

	When night fell and slumber draped its mantle over the face of the earth, I left my bed and walked toward the sea, saying to myself, “The sea sleeps not. And in the wakefulness of the sea is a balm for the spirit that does not rest.”
	I arrived at the shore, where the mists had rolled down from the mountain peaks and enveloped that locale the way a grey veil cloaks the face of a beautiful
	girl. I stood staring at the armies of waves, listening to their jubilant shouts, contemplating the eternal, clandestine powers that lay behind them--the powers
	that race with storms, rage alongside volcanoes, smile with the mouths of roses, and lilt with brooks.
	After a little while I looked around to find three apparitions sitting on a nearby boulder, the mists concealing yet not concealing them. I walked slowly toward
	them, as if some force in their being attracted me and subdued my will.
	When I had come within a few footsteps of them, I halted and stood staring at them fixedly, as though sorcery pervaded that place, blunting my determination
	and awakening the imagination latent in my spirit.
	At that very moment one of the three arose and, in a voice that seemed to issue from the depths of the sea, he said, “Life without love is like a tree without
	blossoms or fruit. Love without beauty is like flowers without fragrance and fruit without seeds.... Life, love, and beauty--three persons in one substance,
	independent, absolute, accepting no change or separation.” Having spoken these words, he sat down again in the same place.
	The second phantom stood and, in a voice like the roar of floodwaters, he said, “Life without rebellion is like the seasons without spring. Rebellion without
	truth is like spring in a bleak, arid desert.... Life, rebellion, and truth--three persons in one substance, accepting no separation or alteration.”
	The third specter now gained his feet and, in a voice like a thunderclap, he said, “Life without liberty is like a body without spirit. Liberty without thought is like
	a disturbed spirit.... Life, liberty, and thought--three persons in one substance, eternal, never-ending, and unceasing.”
	All three apparitions now arose, and with horrifying voices they said unanimously, “Love and what generates it. Rebellion and what creates it. Liberty and what
	nourishes it. Three manifestations of God. And God is the conscience of the rational world.”
	A silence fell then, replete with the rustling of unseen wings and the trembling of ethereal bodies. I closed my eyes, listening to the echo of the words I had heard.
	When I opened them and looked again, I saw only the sea, wrapped in a shroud of mist. I drew near to the boulder where the three apparitions had been sitting,
	and descried only a column of incense rising into the sky.



165. THE RED EARTH

	Said a tree to a man, “My roots are in the deep red earth, and I shall give you of my fruit.”
	And the man said to the tree, “How alike we are. My roots are also deep in the red earth. And the red earth gives you power to bestow upon me of your fruit, and the red earth teaches me to receive from you with thanksgiving.”



166. ON RELIGION

	And an old priest said,
	“Speak to us of Religion.”
	And he said:
	Have I spoken this day of aught else?
	Is not religion all deeds and all reflection,
	And that which is neither deed nor reflection, but a wonder and a surprise ever springing in the soul, even while the hands hew the stone or tend the loom?
	Who can separate his faith from his actions, or his belief from his occupations?
	Who can spread his hours before him, saying, “This for God and this for myself; This for my soul, and this other for my body?”
	All your hours are wings that beat through space from self to self.
	He who wears his morality but as his best garment were better naked.
	The wind and the sun will tear no holes in his skin.
	And he who defines his conduct by ethics imprisons his song-bird in a cage.
	The freest song comes not through bars and wires.
	And he to whom worshipping is a window, to open but also to shut, has not yet visited the house of his soul whose windows are from dawn to dawn.
	Your daily life is your temple and your religion.
	Whenever you enter into it take with you your all.
	Take the plough and the forge and the mallet and the lute,
	The things you have fashioned in necessity or for delight.
	For in revery you cannot rise above your achievements nor fall lower than your failures.
	And take with you all men:
	For in adoration you cannot fly higher than their hopes nor humble yourself lower than their despair.
	And if you would know God be not therefore a solver of riddles.
	Rather look about you and you shall see Him playing with your children.
	And look into space; you shall see Him walking in the cloud, outstretching His arms in the lightning and descending in rain.
	You shall see Him smiling in flowers, then rising and waving His hands in trees.



167. REPENTANCE

	On a moonless night a man entered into his neighbour’s garden and stole the largest melon he could find and brought it home.
	He opened it and found it still unripe.
	Then behold a marvel!
	The man’s conscience woke and smote him with remorse; and he repented having stolen the melon.



168. A RICH LEVI IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE NAZARENE

	He was a good carpenter. The doors He fashioned were never unlocked by thieves, and the windows he made were always ready to open to the east wind and to the west.
	And He made chests of cedar wood, polished and enduring, and ploughs and pitchforks strong and yielding to the hand.
	And He carved lecterns for our synagogues. He carved them out of the golden mulberry; and on both sides of the support, where the sacred book lies, He chiselled wings outspreading; and under the support, heads of bulls and doves, and large-eyed deer.
	All this He wrought in the manner of the Chaldeans and the Greeks. But there was that in His skill which was neither Chaldean nor Greek.
	Now this my house was builded by many hands thirty years ago. I sought builders and carpenters in all the towns of Galilee. They had each the skill and the art of building, and I was pleased and satisfied with all that they did.
	But come now, and behold two doors and a window that were fashioned by Jesus of Nazareth. They in their stability mock at all else in my house.
	See you not that these two doors are different from all other doors? And this window opening to the east, is it not different from other windows?
	All my doors and windows are yielding to the years save these which He made. They alone stand strong against the elements.
	And see those cross-beams, how he placed them; and these nails, how they are driven from one side of the board, and then caught and fastened so firmly upon the other side.
	And what is passing strange is that that labourer who was worthy the wages of two men received but the wage of one man; and that same labourer now is deemed a prophet in Israel.
	Had I known then that this youth with saw and plane was a prophet, I would have begged Him to speak rather than work, and then I would have overpaid Him for his words.
	And now I still have many men working in my house and fields. How shall I know the man whose own hand is upon his tool, from the man upon whose hand God lays His hand?
	Yea, how shall I know God’s hand?



169. A RICH MAN ON POSSESSIONS

	He spoke ill of rich men. And upon a day I questioned Him saying, “Sir, what shall I do to attain the peace of the spirit?”
	And He bade me give my possessions to the poor and follow Him.
	But He possessed nothing; therefore He knew not the assurance and the freedom of possessions, nor thr dignity and the self-respect that lie within.
	In my household there are sevenscore slaves and stewards; some labor in my groves and vineyards, and some direct my ships to distant isles.
	Now had I heeded Him and given my possessions to the poor, what would have befallen my slaves and my servants and their wives and children? They too would have become beggars at the gate of the city or the portico of the temple.
	Nay that good man did not fathom the secret of possessions. Because He and His followers lived on the bounty of others He thought all men should live likewise.
	Behold a contradiction and a riddle: Should rich men bestow their riches upon the poor, and must the poor have the cup and the loaf of the rich man ere they welcome him to their board?
	And must needs the holder of the tower be host to his tenants ere he calls himself lord of his own land?
	The ant that stores food for the winter is wiser than a grasshopper that sings one day and hungers another.
	Last sabbath one of His followers said in the market-place, “At the threshold of heaven where Jesus may leave His sandals, no other man is worthy to lay his head.”
	But I ask, at the threshold of whose house that honest vagabond could have left His sandals? He Himself never had a house nor a threshold; and often He went without sandals.



170. THE RIVER

	In the valley of Kadisha where the mighty river flows, two little streams met and spoke to one another.
	One stream said, “How came you, my friend, and how was your path?”
	And the other answered, “My path was most encumbered. The wheel of the mill was broken, and the master farmer who used to conduct me from my channel to his plants, is dead. I struggled down oozing with the filth of laziness in the sun. But how was your path, my brother?”
	And the other stream answered and said, “Mine was a different path. I came down the hills among fragrant flowers and shy willows; men and women drank of me with silvery cups, and little children paddled their rosy feet at my edges, and there was laughter all about me, and there were sweet songs. What a pity that your path was not so happy.”
	At that moment the river spoke with a loud voice and said, “Come in, come in, we are going to the sea. Come in, come in, speak no more. Be with me now. We are going to the sea. Come in, come in, for in me you shall forget you wanderings, sad or gay. Come in, come in. And you and I will forget all our ways when we reach the heart of our mother the sea.”



171. RUMANOUS, A GREEK POET

	He was a poet. He saw for our eyes and heard for our ears, and our silent words were upon His lips; and His fingers touched what we could not feel.
	Out of His heart there flew countless singing birds to the north and to the south, and the little flowers on the hill-sides stayed His steps towards the heavens.
	Oftentimes I have seen Him bending down to touch the blades of grass. And in my heart I have heard Him say: “Little green things, you shall be with me in my kingdom, even as the oaks of Besan, and the cedars of Lebanon.”
	He loved all things of loveliness, the shy faces of children, and the myrrh and frankincense from the south.
	He loved a pomegranate or a cup of wine given Him in kindness; it mattered not whether it was offered by a stranger in the inn or by a rich host.
	And He loved the almond blossoms. I have seen Him gathering them into His hands and covering His face with the petals, as though He would embrace with His love all the trees in the world.
	He knew the sea and the heavens; and He spoke of pearls which have light that is not of this light, and of stars that are beyond our night.
	He knew the mountains as eagles know them, and the valleys as they are known by the brooks and the streams. And there was a desert in His silence and a garden in His speech.
	Aye, He was a poet whose heart dwelt in a bower beyond the heights, and His songs though sung for our ears, were sung for other ears also, and to men in another land where life is for ever young and time is always dawn.
	Once I too deemed myself a poet, but when I stood before Him in Bethany, I knew what it is to hold an instrument with but a single string before one who commands all instruments. For in His voice there was the laughter of thunder and the tears of rain, and the joyous dancing of trees in the wind.
	And since I have known that my lyre has but one string, and that my voice weaves neither the memories of yesterday nor the hopes of tomorrow, I have put aside my lyre and I shall keep silence. But always at twilight I shall hearken, and I shall listen to the Poet who is the sovereign of all poets.



172. SABA OF ANTIOCH

	This day I heard Saul of Tarsus preaching the Christ unto the Jews of this city.
	He calls himself Paul now, the apostle to the Gentiles.
	I knew him in my youth, and in those days he persecuted the friends of the Nazarene. Well do I remember his satisfaction when his fellows stoned the radiant youth called Stephen.
	This Paul is indeed a strange man. His souls is not the soul of a free man.
	At times he seems like an animal in the forest, hunted and wounded, seeking a cave wherein he would hide his pain from the world.
	He speaks not of Jesus, nor does he repeat His words. He preaches the Messiah whom the prophets of old had foretold.
	And though he himself is a learned Jew he addresses his fellow Jews in Greek; and his Greek is halting, and he ill chooses his words.
	But he is a man of hidden powers and his presence is affirmed by those who gather around him. And at times he assures them of what he himself is not assured.
	We who knew Jesus and heard his discourses say that He taught man how to break the chains of his bondage that he might be free from his yesterdays.
	But Paul is forging chains for the man of tomorrow. He would strike with his own hammer upon the anvil in the name of one whom he does not know.
	The Nazarene would have us live the hour in passion and ecstasy.
	The man of Tarsus would have us be mindful of laws recorded in the ancient books.
	Jesus gave His breath to the breathless dead. And in my lone nights I believe and I understand.
	When He sat at the board, He told stories that gave happiness to the feasters, and spiced with His joy the meat and the wine.
	But Paul would prescribe our loaf and our cup.
	Suffer me not to turn my eyes the other way.



173. SAID A BLADE OF GRASS

	Said a blade of grass to an autumn leaf, “You make such a noise falling! You scatter all my winter dreams.”
	Said the leaf indignant, “Low-born and low-dwelling! Songless, peevish thing! You live not in the upper air and you cannot tell the sound of singing.”
	Then the autumn leaf lay down upon the earth and slept. And when spring came she waked again--and she was a blade of grass.
	And when it was autumn and her winter sleep was upon her, and above her through all the air the leaves were falling, she muttered to herself, “O these autumn leaves! They make such a noise! They scatter all my winter dreams.”



174. SAID A SHEET OF SNOW-WHITE PAPER

	Said a sheet of snow-white paper, “Pure was I created, and pure will I remain for ever. I would rather be burnt and turn to white ashes than suffer darkness to touch me or the unclean to come near me.”
	The ink-bottle heard what the paper was saying, and it laughed in its dark heart; but it never dared to approach her. And the multicoloured pencils heard her also, and they too never came near her.
	And the snow-white sheet of paper did remain pure and chaste for ever, pure and chaste--and empty.



175. THE SAINT

	In my youth I once visited a saint in his silent grove beyond the hills; and as we were conversing upon the nature of virtue a brigand came limping wearily up the ridge. When he reached the grove he knelt down before the saint and said, “O saint, I would be comforted! My sins are heavy upon me.”
	And the saint replied, “My sins, too, are heavy upon me.”
	And the brigand said, “But I am a thief and a plunderer.”
	And the saint replied, “I too am a thief and a plunderer.”
	And the brigand said, “But I am a murderer, and the blood of many men cries in my ears.”
	And the saint replied, “I am a murderer, and in my ears cries the blood of many men.”
	And the brigand said, “I have committed countless crimes.”
	And the saint replied, “I too have committed crimes without number.”
	Then the brigand stood up and gazed at the saint, and there was a strange look in his eyes. And when he left us he went skipping down the hill.
	And I turned to the saint and said, “Wherefore did you accuse yourself of uncommitted crimes? See you not this man went away no longer believing in you?”
	And the saint answered, “It is true he no longer believes in me. But he went away much comforted.”
	At that moment we heard the brigand singing in the distance, and the echo of his song filled the valley with gladness.



176. SATAN

	The people looked upon Father Samaan as their guide in the field of spiritual and theological matters, for he was an authority and a source of deep information on venial and mortal sins, well versed in the secrets of paradise, hell, and purgatory.
	Father Samaan's mission in North Lebanon was to travel from one village to another, preaching and curing the people from the spiritual disease of sin, and saving them from the horrible trap of Satan. The Reverend Father waged constant war with Satan. The fellahin honoured and respected this clergyman, and were always anxious to buy his advice or prayers with pieces of gold and silver; and at every harvest they would present him with the finest fruits of their fields.
	One evening in autumn, as Father Samaan walked his way towards a solitary village, crossing those valleys and hills, he heard a painful cry emerging from a ditch at the side of the road. He stopped and looked in the direction of the voice, and saw an unclothed man lying on the ground. Streams of blood oozed from deep wounds in his head and chest. He was moaning painfully for aid, saying, "Save me, help me. Have mercy on me, I am dying." Father Samaan looked with perplexity at the sufferer, and said within himself, "This man must be a thief. He probably tried to rob the wayfarers and failed. Someone has wounded him, and I fear that should he die I may be accused of having taken his life."
	Having thus pondered the situation, he resumed his journey, whereupon the dying man stopped him, calling out, "Do not leave me! I am dying!" Then the Father meditated again, and his face became pale as he realized he was refusing to help. His lips quivered, but he spoke to himself, saying, "He must surely be one of the madmen wandering in the wilderness. The sight of his wounds brings fear into my heart; what shall I do? Surely a spiritual doctor is not capable of treating flesh-wounded bodies." Father Samaan walked ahead a few paces when the near-corpse uttered a painful plaint that melted the heart of the rock and he gasped, "Come close to me! Come, for we have been friends a long time. You are Father Samaan, the good shepherd, and I am not a thief nor a madman. Come close, and do not let me die in this deserted place. Come, and I will tell you who I am."
	Father Samaan came close to the man, knelt, and stared at him; but he saw a strange face with contrasting features; he saw intelligence with slyness, ugliness with beauty, and wickedness with softness. He withdrew to his feet sharply, and exclaimed, "Who are you?"
	With a fainting voice, the dying man said, "Fear me not, Father, for we have been strong friends for long. Help me to stand, and take me to the nearby streamlet and cleanse my wounds with your linens." And the Father inquired, "Tell me who you are, for I do not know you, nor even remember having seen you."
	And the man replied with an agonizing voice, "You know my identity! You have seen me one thousand times and you speak of me each day. I am dearer to you than your own life." And the Father reprimanded, "You are a lying imposter! A dying man should tell the truth. I have never seen your evil face in my entire life. Tell me who you are, or I will suffer you to die, soaked in your escaping life." And the wounded man moved slowly and looked into the clergyman's eyes, and upon his lips appeared a mystic smile; and in a quiet, deep and smooth voice he said, "I am Satan."
	Upon hearing the fearful word, Father Samaan uttered a terrible cry that shook the far corners of the valley; then he stared, and realized that the dying man's body, with its grotesque distortions, coincided with the likeness of Satan in a religious picture hanging on the wall of the village church. He trembled and cried out, saying, "God has shown me your hellish image and justly caused me to hate you; cursed be you for evermore! The mangled lamb must be destroyed by the shepherd lest he will infect the other lambs!"
	Satan answered, "Be not in haste, Father, and lose not this fleeting time in empty talk. Come and close my wounds quickly, before life departs from my body." And the clergyman retorted, "The hands which offer a daily sacrifice to God shall not touch a body made of the secretion of hell. You must die accursed by the tongues of the ages, and the lips of humanity, for you are the enemy of humanity, and it is your avowed purpose to destroy all virtue."
	Satan moved in anguish, raising himself upon one elbow, and responded, "You know not what you are saying, nor understand the crime you are committing upon yourself. Give heed, for I will relate my story. Today I walked alone in this solitary valley. When I reached this place, a group of angels descended to attack, and struck me severely; had it not been for one of them, who carried a blazing sword with two sharp edges, I would have driven them off, but I had no power against the brilliant sword." And Satan ceased talking for a moment, as he pressed a shaking hand upon a deep wound in his side. Then he continued, "The armed angel—I believe he was Michael—was an expert gladiator. Had I not thrown myself to the friendly ground and feigned to have been slain, he would have torn me into brutal death."
	With voice of triumph, and casting his eyes heavenwards, the Father offered, "Blessed be Michael's name, who has saved humanity from this vicious enemy."
	And Satan protested, "My disdain for humanity is not greater than your hatred for yourself. You are blessing Michael, who never has come to your rescue. You are cursing me in the hour of my defeat, even though I was, and still am, the source of your tranquility and happiness. You deny me your blessing, and extend not your kindness, but you live and prosper in the shadow of my being. You have adopted my existence as an excuse and weapon for your career, and you employ my name in justification for your deeds. Has not my past caused you to be in need of my present and future? Have you reached your goal in amassing the required wealth? Have you found it impossible to extract more gold and silver from your followers, using my kingdom as a threat?
	"Do you not realize that you will starve to death if I were to die? What would you do tomorrow if you allowed me to die today? What vocation would you pursue if my name disappeared? For decades you have been roaming these villages and warning the people against falling into my hands. They have bought your advice with their poor dinars and with the products of their land. What would they buy from you tomorrow, if they discovered that their wicked enemy no longer existed? Your occupation would die with me, for the people would be safe from sin. As a clergyman, do you not realize that Satan's existence alone has created his enemy, the Church? That ancient conflict is the secret hand which removes the gold and silver from the faithful's pocket and deposits it forever into the pouch of the preacher and the missionary. How can you permit me to die here, when you know it will surely cause you to lose your prestige, your church, your home, and your livelihood?"
	Satan became silent for a moment and his humility was now converted into a confident independence, and he continued, "Father, you are proud, but ignorant. I will disclose to you the history of belief, and in it you will find he truth which joins both of our beings, and ties my existence with your very conscience.
	"In the first hour of the beginning of time, man stood before the face of the sun and stretched forth his arms and cried for the first time, saying, 'Behind the sky there is a great and loving and benevolent God.' The man turned his back to the great circle of light and saw his shadow upon the earth, and he hailed, 'In the depths of the earth there is a dark evil who loves wickedness.'
	"And the man walked towards his cave, whispering to himself, "I am between two compelling forces, one in whom I must take refuge, and the other against whom I must struggle.' And the ages marched in procession while man existed between two powers, one that he blessed because it exalted him, and one that he cursed because it frightened him. But he never perceived the meaning of a blessing or of a curse; he was between the two, like a tree between summer, when it blooms, and winter, when it shivers.
	"When a man saw the dawn of civilization, which is human understanding, the family as a unit came into being. Then came the tribes, whereupon labour was divided according to ability and inclination; one clan cultivated the land, another built shelters, others wove raiment or hunted food. Subsequently divination made its appearance upon the earth, and this was the first career adopted by man which possessed no essential urge or necessity."
	Satan ceased talking for a moment. Then he laughed and his mirth shook the empty valley, but his laughter reminded him of his wounds, and he placed his hand on his side, suffering with pain. He steadied himself and continued, "Divination appeared and grew on earth in strange fashion.
	"There was a man in the first tribe called La Wiss. I know not the origin of his name. He was an intelligent creature, but extremely indolent and he detested work in the cultivation of land, construction of shelters, grazing of cattle, or any pursuit requiring bodily movement or exertion. And since food, during that era, could not be obtained except by arduous toil, La Wiss slept many nights with an empty stomach.
	"One summer night, as the members of that clan were gathered round the hut of their chief, talking of the outcome of their day and waiting for their slumber time, a man suddenly leaped to his feet, pointed towards the moon, and cried out, saying, 'Look at the night god! His face is dark, and his beauty has vanished, and he has turned into a black stone hanging in the dome of the sky!' The multitude gazed at the moon, shouted in awe, and shook with fear, as if the hands of darkness had clutched their hearts, for they saw the night god slowly turning into a dark ball which changed the bright countenance of the earth and caused the hills and valleys before their eyes to disappear behind a black veil.
	"At that moment, La Wiss, who had seen an eclipse before, and understood its simple cause, stepped forward to make much of this opportunity. He stood in the midst of the throng, lifted his hands to the sky, and in a strong voice he addressed them, saying, 'Kneel and pray, for the evil god of obscurity is locked in struggle with the illuminating night god; if the evil god conquers him, we will all perish, but if the night god triumphs over him, we will remain alive. Pray now and worship. Cover your faces with earth. Close your eyes, and lift not your heads towards the sky, for he who witnesses the two gods wrestling will lose his sight and mind, and will remain blind and insane all his life! Bend your heads low, and with all your hearts urge the night god against his enemy, who is our mortal enemy!'
	"Thus did La Wiss continue talking, using many cryptic words of his own fabrication which they had never heard. After this crafty deception, as the moon returned to its previous glory, La Wiss raised his voice louder than before and said impressively, 'Rise now, and look at the night god who has triumphed over his evil enemy. He is resuming his journey among the stars. Let it be known that through your prayers you have helped him to overcome the devil of darkness. He is well pleased now, and brighter than ever.'
	"The multitude rose and gazed at the moon that was shining in full beam. Their fear became tranquility, and their confusion was now joy. They commenced dancing and singing and striking with their thick sticks upon sheets of iron, filling the valleys with their clamour and shouting.
	"That night, the chief of the tribe called La Wiss and spoke to him, saying, 'You have done something that no man has ever done. You have demonstrated knowledge of a hidden secret that no other among us understands. Reflecting the will of my people, you are to be the highest ranking member, after me, in the tribe. I am the strongest man, and you are the wisest and most learned person. You are the medium between our people and the gods, whose desires and deeds you are to interpret, and you will teach us those things necessary to gain their blessings and love.'
	"And La Wiss slyly assured, 'Everything the human god reveals to me in my divine dreams will be conveyed to you in awakeness, and you may be confident that I will act directly between you and him.' The chief was assured, and gave La Wiss two horses, seven calves, seventy sheep and seventy lambs; and he spoke to him, saying, 'The men of the tribe shall build for you a strong house, and we will give you at the end of each harvest season a part of the crop of the land so you may live as an honourable and respected master.'
	"La Wiss rose and started to leave, but the chief stopped him, saying, 'Who and what is the one whom you call the human god? Who is this daring god who wrestles with the glorious night god? We have never pondered him before.' La Wiss rubbed his forehead and answered him, saying, 'My honourable master, in the olden time, before the creation of man, all the gods were living peacefully together in an upper world behind the vastness of the stars. The god of gods was their father, and knew what they did not know, and did what they were unable to do. He kept for himself the divine secrets that existed beyond the eternal laws. During the seventh epoch of the twelfth age, the spirit of Bahtaar, who hated the great god, revolted and stood before his father, and said, 'Why do you keep for yourself the power of great authority upon all creatures, hiding away from us the secrets and laws of the universe? Are we not your children who believe in you and share with you the great understanding and the perpetual being?'
	"The god of gods became enraged and said, 'I shall preserve for myself the primary power and the great authority and the essential secrets, for I am the beginning and the end.'
	"And Bahtaar answered him saying, 'Unless you share with me your might and power, I and my children and my children's children will revolt against you!' At that moment, the god of gods stood upon his throne in the deep heavens, and drew forth a sword, and grasped the sun as a shield; and with a voice that shook all corners of the eternity he shouted out, saying, 'Descend, you evil rebel, to the dismal lower world where darkness and misery exist! There you shall remain in exile, wandering until the sun turns into ashes and the stars into dispersed particles!' In that hour, Bahtaar descended from the upper world into the lower world, where all the evil spirits dwelt. Thereupon, he swore by the secret of life that he would fight his father and brothers by trapping every soul who loved them.'
	"As the chief listened, his forehead wrinkled and his face turned pale. He ventured, 'Then the name of the evil god is Bahtaar?' and La Wiss responded, 'His name was Bahtaar when he was in the upper world, but when he entered into the lower world, he adopted successively the names Baalzaboul, Satanail, Balial, Zamiel, Ahriman, Mara, Abdon, Devil, and finally Satan, which is the most famous.'
	"The chief repeated the word Satan many times with a quivering voice that sounded like the rustling of the dry branches at the passing of the wind; then he asked, 'Why does Satan hate man as much as he hates the gods?'
	"And La Wiss responded quickly, 'He hates man because man is a descendant of Satan's brothers and sisters.' The chief exclaimed, 'Then Satan is the cousin of man!' In a voice mingled with confusion and annoyance, he retorted, 'Yes, master, but he is their great enemy who fills their days with misery and their nights with horrible dreams. He is the power who directs the tempest towards their hovels, and brings famine upon their plantation, and disease upon them and their animals. He is an evil and powerful god; he is wicked, and he rejoices when we are in sorrow, and he mourns when we are joyous. We must, through my konwledge, examine him thoroughly, in order to avoid his evil; we must study his character, so we will not step upon his trap-laden path.'
	"The chief leaned his head upon his thick stick and whispered, saying, 'I have learned now the inner secret of that strange power who directs the tempest towards our homes and brings the pestilence upon us and our cattle. The people shall learn all that I have comprehended now, and La Wiss will be blessed, honoured and glorified for revealing to them the mystery of their powerful enemy, and directing them away from the road of evil.'
	"And La Wiss left the chief of the tribe and went to his retiring place, happy over his ingenuity, and intoxicated with the wine of his pleasure and fancy. For the first time, the chief and all the tribe, except La Wiss, spent the night slumbering in beds surrounded by horrible ghosts, fearful spectres, and disturbing dreams."
	Satan ceased talking for a moment, while Father Samaan stared at him as one bewildered, and upon the Father's lips appeared the sickly laughter of death. Then Satan continued, "Thus divination came to this earth, and thus was my existence the cause for its appearance. La Wiss was the first who adopted my cruelty as a vocation. After the death of La Wiss, this occupation circulated through his children and prospered until it became a perfect and divine profession, pursued by those whose minds are ripe with knowledge, and whose souls are noble, and whose hearts are pure, and whose fancy is vast.
	"In Babylon, the people bowed seven times in worshipping before a priest who fought me with his chantings. In Nineveh, they looked upon a man, who claimed to have known my inner secrets, as a golden link between God and man. In Tibet, they called the person who wrestled with me the son of the sun and moon. In Byblus, Ephesus and Antioch, they offered their children's lives in sacrifice to my opponents. In Jerusalem and Rome, they placed their lives in the hands of those who claimed they hated me and fought me with all their might.
	"In every city under the sun my name was the axis of the educational circle of religion, arts, and philosophy. Had it not been for me, no temples would have been built, no towers or palaces would have been erected. I am the courage that creates resolution in man. I am the source that provokes originality of thought. I am the hand that moves man's hands. I am Satan everlasting. I am Satan whom people fight in order to keep themselves alive. If they cease struggling against me, slothfulness will deaden their minds and hearts and souls, in accordance with the weird penalties of their tremendous myth.
	"I am the enraged and mute tempest who agitates the minds of man and the hearts of women. And in fear of me, they will travel to places of worship to condemn me, or to places of vice to make me happy by surrendering to my will. The monk who prays in the silence of the night to keep me away from his bed is like the prostitute who invites me to her chamber. I am Satan everlasting and eternal.
	"I am the builder of convents and monasteries upon the foundation of fear. I build wine shops and wicked houses upon the foundations of lust and self-gratification. If I cease to exist, fear and enjoyment will be abolished from the world, and through their disappearance, desires and hopes will cease to exist in the human heart. Life will become empty and cold, like a harp with broken strings. I am Satan everlasting.
	"I am the inspiration of falsehood, slander, treachery, deceit and mockery, and if these elements were to be removed from this world, human society would become like a deserted field in which naught would thrive but thorns of virtue. I am Satan everlasting.
	"I am the father and mother of sin, and if sin were to vanish, the fighters of sin would vanish with it, along with their families and structures.
	"I am the heart of all evil. Would you wish for human motion to stop through cessation of my heartbeat? Would you accept the result after destroying the cause? I am the cause! Would you allow me to die in this deserted wilderness? Do you desire to sever the bond that exists between you and me? Answer me, clergyman!"
	And Satan stretched his arms and bent his head forward and gasped deeply; his face turned to grey and he resembled one of those Egyptian statues laid waste by the ages at the side of the Nile. Then he fixed his glittering eyes upon Father Samaan's face, and said, in a faltering voice, "I am tired and weak. I did wrong by using my waning strength to speak on things you already know. Now you may do as you please. You may carry me to your home and treat my wounds, or leave me in this place to die."
	Father Samaan quivered and rubbed his hands nervously, and with apology in his voice he said, "I know now what I had not known an hour ago. Forgive my ignorance. I know that your existence in this world creates temptation, and temptation is a measurement by which God adjudges the value of human souls. It is a scale which Almighty God uses to weigh the spirits. I am certain that if you die, temptation will die, and with its passing, death will destroy the ideal power which elevates and alerts man.
	"You must live, for if you die and the people know it, their fear of hell will vanish and they will cease worshipping, for naught would be sin. You must live, for in your life is the salvation of humanity from vice and sin.
	"As to myself, I shall sacrifice my hatred for you on the altar of my love for man."
	Satan uttered a laugh that rocked the ground, and he said, "What an intelligent person you are, Father! And what wonderful knowledge you possess in theological facts! You have found, through the power of your knowledge, a purpose for my existence which I had never understood, and now we realize our need for each other.
	"Come close to me, my brother; darkness is submerging the plains, and half of my blood has escaped upon the sand of this valley, and naught remains of me but the remnants of a broken body which death shall soon buy unless you render aid." Father Samaan rolled the sleeves of his robe and approached, and lifted Satan to his back and walked towards his home.
	In the midst of those valleys, engulfed with silence and embellished with the veil of darkness, Father Samaan walked towards the village with his back bent under his heavy burden. His black raiment and long beard were spattered with blood streaming from above him, but he struggled forward, his lips moving in fervent prayer for the life of the dying Satan.



177. THE SCARECROW

	Once I said to a scarecrow, “You must be tired of standing in this lonely field.”
	And he said, “The joy of scaring is a deep and lasting one, and I never tire of it.”
	Said I, after a minute of thought, “It is true; for I too have known that joy.”
	Said he, “Only those who are stuffed with straw can know it.”
	Then I left him, not knowing whether he had complimented or belittled me.
	A year passed, during which the scarecrow turned philosopher.
	And when I passed by him again I saw two crows building a nest under his hat.
	 



178. THE SCEPTRE

	Said a king to his wife, “Madame, you are not truly a queen. You are too vulgar and ungracious to be my mate.”
	Said his wife, “Sir, you deem yourself king, but indeed you are only a poor soundling.”
	Now these words angered the king, and he took his septre with his hand, and struck the queen upon her forehead with his golden sceptre.
	At that moment the lord chamberlain entered, and he said, “Well, well, Majesty! That sceptre was fashioned by the greatest artist of the land. Alas! Some day you and the queen shall be forgotten, but this sceptre shall be kept, a thing of beauty from generation to generation. And now that you have drawn blood from her Majesty’s head, Sire, the sceptre shall be the more considered and remembered.”



179. THE SCHOLAR AND THE POET

	Said the serpent to the lark, “Thou flyest, yet thou canst not visit the recesses of the earth where the sap of life moveth in perfect silence.”
	And the lark answered, “Aye, thou knowest over much, nay thou art wiser then all things wise--pity thou canst not fly.”
	And as if he did not hear, the serpent said, “Thou canst not see the secrets of the deep, nor move among the treasures of the hidden empire. It was but yesterday I lay in a cave of rubies. It is like the heart of a ripe pomegranate, and the faintest ray of light turns into a flame-rose. Who but me can behold such marvels?”
	And the lark said, “None, none but thee can lie among the crystal memories of the cycles--pity thou canst not sing.”
	And the serpent said, “I know a plant whose root descends to the bowels of the earth, and he who eats of that root becomes fairer than Ashtarte.”
	And the lark said, “No one, no one but thee could inveil the magic thought of the earth--pity thou canst not fly.”
	And the serpent said, “There is a purple stream that runneth under a mountain, and he who drinketh of it shall become immortal even as the gods. Surely no bird or beast can discover that purple stream.”
	And the lark answered, “If thou willest thou canst become deathless even as the gods--pity thou canst not sing.”
	And the serpent said, “I know a buried temple, which I visit once a moon. It was built by a forgotten race of giants, and upon its walls are graven the secrets of time and space, and he who reads them shall understand that which passeth all understanding.”
	And the lark said, “Verily, if thou so desirest thou canst encircle with thy pliant body all knowledge of time and space--pity thou canst not fly.”
	Then the serpent was disgusted, and as he turned and entered into his hole he muttered, “Empty-headed songster!”
	And the lark flew away singing, “Pity thou canst not sing. Pity, pity, my wise one, thou canst not fly.”



180. ON SELF-KNOWLEDGE

	And a man said, “Speak to us of Self-Knowledge.” And he answered, saying:
	
	Your hearts know in silence the secrets of the days and the nights.
	But your ears thirst for the sound of your heart’s knowledge.
	You would know in words that which you have always know in thought.
	You would touch with your fingers the naked body of your dreams.
	And it is well you should.
	The hidden well-spring of your soul must needs rise and run murmuring to the sea;
	And the treasure of your infinite depths would be revealed to your eyes.
	But let there be no scales to weigh your unknown treasure;
	And seek not the depths of your knowledge with staff or sounding line.
	For self is a sea boundless and measureless.
	Say not, “I have found the truth,” but rather, “I have found a truth.”
	Say not, “I have found the path of the soul.” Say rather, “I have met the soul walking upon my path.”
	For the soul walks upon all paths.
	The soul walks not upon a line, neither does it grow like a reed.
	The soul unfolds itself, like a lotus of countless petals.



181. THE SEVEN SELVES

	In the silent hour of the night, as I lay half asleep, my seven selves sat together and thus conversed in whispers:
	First Self: Here, in this madman, I have dwelt all these years, with naught to do but renew his pain by day and recreate his sorrow by night. I can bear my fate no longer, and now I must rebel.
	Second Self: Yours is a better lot than mine, brother, for it is given me to be this madman’s joyous self. I laugh his laughter and sing his happy hours, and with thrice winged feet I dance his brighter thoughts. It is I that would rebel against my weary existence.
	Third Self: And what of me, the love-ridden self, the flaming brand of wild passion and fantastic desires? It is I the love-sick self who would rebel against this madman.
	Fourth Self: I, amongst you all, am the most miserable, for naught was given me but the odious hatred and destructive loathing. It is I, the tempest-like self, the one born in the black caves of Hell, who would protest against serving this madman.
	Fifth Self: Nay, it is I, the thinking self, the fanciful self, the self of hunger and thirst, the one doomed to wander without rest in search of unknown things and things not yet created; it is I, not you, who would rebel.
	Sixth Self: And I, the working self, the pitiful labourer, who, with patient hands, and longing eyes, fashion the days into images and give the formless elements new and eternal forms--it is I, the solitary one, who would rebel against this restless madman.
	
	Seventh Self: How strange that you all would rebel against this man, because each and every one of you has a preordained fate to fulfil. Ah! could I but be like one of you, a self with a determined lot! But I have none, I am the do-nothing self, the one who sits in the dumb, empty nowhere and nowhen, when you are busy re-creating life. Is it you or I, neighbours, who should rebel?
	
	When the seventh self thus spake the other six selves looked with pity upon him but said nothing more; and as the night grew deeper one after the other went to sleep enfolded with a new and happy submission.
	
	But the seventh self remained watching and gazing at nothingness, which is behind all things.



182. SEVENTY

	The poet youth said to the princess, “I love you.” And the princess answered, “And I love you too, my child.”
	“But I am not your child. I am a man and I love you.”
	And she said, “I am the mother of sons and daughters, and they are fathers and mothers of sons and daughters; and one of the sons of my sons is older than you.”
	And the poet youth said, “But I love you.”
	It was not long after that the princess died. But ere her last breath was received again by the greater breath of earth, she said within her soul, “My beloved, mine only son, my youth-poet, it may yet be that some day we shall meet again, and I shall not be seventy.”



183. THE SHADOW

	Upon a June day the grass said to the shadow of an elm tree, “You move to right and left over-often, and you disturb my peace.”
	And the shadow answered and said, “Not I, not I. Look skyward. There is a tree that moves in the wind to the east and to the west, between the sun and the earth.”
	And the grass looked up, and for the first time beheld the tree. And it said in its heart, “Why, behold, there is a larger grass than myself.”
	And the grass was silent.



184. SHE WHO WAS DEAF

	Once there lived a rich man who had a young wife, and she was stone deaf.
	And upon a morning when they were breaking their feast, she spoke to him and she said, “Yesterday I visited the market place, and there were exibited silken raiment from Damascus, and coverchiefs from India, necklaces from Persia, and bracelets from Yamman. It seems that the caravans had but just brought these things to our city. And now behold me, in rags, yet the wife of a rich man. I would have some of those beautiful things.”
	The husband, still busy with his morning coffee said, “My dear, there is no reason why you should not go down to the Street and buy all that your heart may desire.”
	And the deaf wife said, “‘No!’ You always say, ‘No, no.’ Must I needs appear in tatters among our friends to shame your wealth and my people?”
	And the husband said, “I did not say, ‘No.’ You may go forth freely to the market place and purchase the most beautiful apparel and jewels that have come to our city.”
	But again the wife mis-read his words, and she replied, “Of all rich men you are the most miserly. You would deny me everything of beauty and loveliness, while other women of my age walk the gardens of the city clothed in rich raiment.”
	And she began to weep. And as her tears fell upon her breast she cried out again, “You always say, ‘Nay, nay’ to me when I desire a garment or a jewel.”
	Then the husband was moved, and he stood up and took out of his purse a handful of gold and placed it before her, saying in a kindly voice, “Go down to the market place, my dear, and buy all that you will.”
	From that day onward the deaf young wife, whenever she desired anything, would appear before her husband with a pearly tear in her eye, and he in silence would take out a handful of gold and place it in her lap.
	Now, it changed that the young woman fell in love with a youth whose habit it was to make long journeys. And whenever he was away she would sit in her casement and weep.
	When her husband found her thus weeping, he would say in his heart, “There must be some new caraven, and some silken garments and rare jewels in the Street.”
	And he would take a handful of gold and place it before her.



185. A SHEPHERD IN SOUTH LEBANON

	It was late summer when He and three other men first walked upon that road yonder. It was evening, and He stopped and stood there at the end of the pasture.
	I was playing upon my flute, and my flock was grazing all around me. When He stopped I rose and walked over and stood before Him.
	And He asked me, “Where is the grave of Elijah? Is it not somewhere near this place?”
	And I answered Him, “It is there, Sir, underneath that great heap of stones. Even unto this day every passer-by brings a stone and places it upon the heap.”
	And He thanked me and walked away, and His friends walked behind Him.
	And after three days Ganaliel who was also a shepherd, said to me that the man who had passed by was a prophet in Judea; but I did not believe him. Yet I thought of that man for many a moon.
	When spring came Jesus passed once more by this pasture, and this time He was alone.
	I was not playing on my flute that day for I had lost a sheep and I was bereaved, and my heart was downcast within me.
	And I walked towards Him and stood still before Him, for I desired to be comforted.
	And He looked at me and said, “You do not play upon your flute this day. Whence is the sorrow in your eyes?”
	And I answered, “A sheep from among my sheep is lost. I have sought her everywhere but I find her not. And I know not what to do.”
	And He was silent for a moment. Then He smiled upon me and said, “Wait here awhile and I will find your sheep.” And He walked away and disappeared among the hills.
	After an hour He returned, and my sheep was close behind Him. And as He stood before me, the sheep looked up into His face even as I was looking. Then I embraced her inn gladness.
	And He put His hand upon my shoulder and said, “From this day you shall love this sheep more than any other in your flock, for she was lost and now she is found.”
	And again I embraced my sheep in gladness, and she came close to me, and I was silent.
	But when I raised my head to thank Jesus, He was already walking afar off, and I had not the courage to follow Him.



186. SILENT SORROW

	My neighbors, you remember the dawn of youth with pleasure and regret its passing; but I remember it like a prisoner who recalls the bars and shackles of his jail. You speak of those years between infancy and youth as a golden era free from confinement and cares, but I call those years an era of silent sorrow which dropped as a seed into my heart and grew with it and could find no outlet to the world of Knowledge and wisdom until love came and opened the heart’s doors and lighted its corners. Love provided me with a tongue and tears. You people remember the gardens and orchids and the meeting places and street corners that witnessed your games and heard your innocent whispering; and I remember, too, the beautiful spot in North Lebanon. Every time I close my eyes I see those valleys full of magic and dignity and those mountains covered with glory and greatness trying to reach the sky. Every time I shut my ears to the clamor of the city I hear the murmur of the rivulets and the rustling of the branches. All those beauties which I speak of now and which I long to see, as a child longs for his mother’s breast, wounded my spirit, imprisoned in the darkness of youth, as a falcon suffers in its cage when it sees a flock of birds flying freely in the spacious sky. Those valleys and hills fired my imagination, but bitter thoughts wove round my heart a net of hopelessness.
	Every time I went to the fields I returned disappointed, without understanding the cause of my disappointment. Every time I looked at the gray sky I felt my heart contract. Every time I heard the singing of the birds and babbling of the spring I suffered without understanding the reason for my suffering. It is said that unsophistication makes a man empty and that emptiness makes him carefree. It may be true among those who were born dead and who exist like frozen corpses; but the sensitive boy who feels much and knows little is the most unfortunate creature under the sun, because he is torn by two forces. The first force elevates him and shows him the beauty of existence through a cloud of dreams; the second ties him down to the earth and fills his eyes with dust and overpowers him with fears and darkness.
	Solitude has soft, silky hands, but with strong fingers it grasps the heart and makes it ache with sorrow. Solitude is the ally of sorrow as well as a companion of spiritual exaltation.
	The boy’s soul undergoing the buffeting of sorrow is like a white lily just unfolding. It trembles before the breeze and opens its heart to daybreak and folds its leaves back when the shadow of night comes. If that boy does not have diversion or friends or companions in his games his life will be like a narrow prison in which he sees nothing but spiderwebs and hears nothing but the crawling of insects.
	That sorrow which obsessed me during my youth was not caused by lack of amusement, because I could have had it; neither from lack of friends, because I could have found them. That sorrow was caused by an inward ailment which made me love solitude. It killed in me the inclination for games and amusement. It removed from my shoulders the wings of youth and made me like a pong of water between mountains which reflects in its calm surface the shadows of ghosts and the colors of clouds and trees, but cannot find an outlet by which to pass singing to the sea.
	Thus was my life before I attained the age of eighteen. That year is like a mountain peak in my life, for it awakened knowledge in me and made me understand the vicissitudes of mankind. In that year I was reborn and unless a person is born again his life will remain like a blank sheet in the book of existence. In that year, I saw the angels of heaven looking at me through the eyes of a beautiful woman. I also saw the devils of hell raging in the heart of an evil man. He who does not see the angels and devils in the beauty and malice of life will be far removed from knowledge, and his spirit will be empty of affection.



187. SIMON THE CYRENE

	I was on my way to the fields when I saw Him carrying His cross; and multitudes were following Him.
	Then I too walked beside Him.
	His burden stopped Him many a time, for His body was exhausted.
	Then a Roman soldier approached me, saying, “Come, you are strong and firm built; carry the cross of this man.”
	When I heard these words my heart swelled within me and I was grateful.
	And I carried His cross.
	It was heavy, for it was made of poplar soaked through with the rains of winter.
	And Jesus looked at me. And the sweat of His forehead was running down upon His beard.
	Again He looked at me and He said, “Do you too drink this cup? You shall indeed sip its rim with me to the end of time.”
	So saying He placed His hand upon my free shoulder. And we walked together towards the Hill of the Skull.
	But now I felt not the weight of the cross. I felt only His hand. And it was like the wing of a bird upon my shoulder.
	Then we reached the hill top, and there they were to crucify Him.
	And then I felt the weight of the tree.
	He uttered no word when they drove the nails into His hands and feet, nor made He any sound.
	And His limbs did not quiver under the hammer.
	It seemed as if His hands and feet had died and would only live again when bathed in blood. Yet it seemed also as if He sought the nails as the prince would seek the sceptre; and that He craved to be raised to the heights.
	And my heart did not think to pity Him, for I was too filled to wonder.
	Now, the man whose cross I carried has become my cross.
	Should they say to me again, “Carry the cross of this man,” I would carry it till my road ended at the grave.
	But I would beg Him to place His hand upon my shoulder.
	This happened many years ago; and still whenever I follow the furrow in the field, and in that drowsy moment before sleep, I think always of that Beloved Man.
	And I feel His winged hand, here, on my left shoulder.



188. SIXTH

	He who listens to truth is not less than he who utters truth.
	No man can draw the line between necessities and luxuries. Only the angels can do that, and the angels are wise and wistful.
	Perhaps the angels are our better thought in space.
	He is the true prince who finds his throne in the heart of the dervish.
	Generosity is giving more than you can, and pride is taking less than you need.
	In truth you owe naught to any man. You owe all to all men.
	All those who have lived in the past live with us now. Surely none of us would be an ungracious host.
	He who longs the most lives the longest.
	They say to me, “A bird in the hand is worth ten in the bush.”
	But I say, “A bird and a feather in the bush is worth more than ten birds in the hand.”
	Your seeking after that feather is life with winged feet; nay, it is life itself.
	There are only two elements here, beauty and truth; beauty in the hearts of lovers, and truth in the arms of the tillers of the soil.
	Great beauty captures me, but a beauty still greater frees me even from itself.
	Beauty shines brighter in the heart of him who longs for it than in the eyes of him who sees it.
	I admire him who reveals his mind to me; I honor him who unveils his dreams. But why am I shy, and even a little ashamed before him who serves me?
	The gifted were once proud in serving princes.
	Now they claim honor in serving paupers.
	The angels know that too many practical men eat their bread with the sweat of the dreamer’s brow.
	Wit is often a mask. If you could tear it you would find either a genius irritated or cleverness juggling.
	The understanding attributes to me understanding and the dull, dullness. I think they are both right.
	Only those with secrets in their hearts could divine the secrets in our hearts.
	He who would share your pleasure but not your pain shall lose the key to one of the seven gates of Paradise.
	Yes, there is a Nirvanah; it is in leading your sheep to a green pasture, and in putting your child to sleep, and in writing the last line of your poem.
	We choose our joys and our sorrows long before we experience them.
	Sadness is but a wall between two gardens.
	When either your joy or your sorrow becomes great the world becomes small.
	Desire is half of life; idifference is half of death.
	The bitterest thing in our today’s sorrow is the memory of our yesterday’s joy.
	They say to me, “You must needs choose between the pleasures of this world and the peace of the next world.”
	And I say to them, “I have chosen both the delights of this world and the peace of the next. For I know in my heart that the Supreme Poet wrote but one poem, and it scans perfectly, and it also rhymes perfectly.”
	Faith is an oasis in the heart which will never be reached by the caravan of thinking.
	When you reach your height you shall desire but only for desire; and you shall hunger, for hunger; and you shall thirst for greater thirst.
	If you reveal your secrets to the wind you should not blame the wind for revealing them to the trees.
	The flowers of spring are winter’s dreams related at the breakfast table of the angels.
	Said a skunk to a tube-rose, “See how swiftly I run, while you cannot walk nor even creep.”
	Said the tube-rose to the skunk, “Oh, most noble swift runner, please run swiftly!”
	Turtles can tell more about roads than hares.
	Strange that creatures without backbones have the hardest shells.
	The most talkative is the least intelligent, and there is hardly a difference between an orator and an auctioneer.
	Be grateful that you do not have to live down the renown of a father nor the wealth of an uncle.
	But above all be grateful that no one will have to live down either your renown or your wealth.
	Only when a juggler misses catching his ball does he appeal to me.
	The envious praises me unknowingly.
	Long were you a dream in your mother’s sleep, and then she woke to give you birth.
	The germ of the race is in your mother’s longing.
	My father and mother desired a child and they begot me.
	And I wanted a mother and a father and I begot night and the sea.
	Some of our children are our justifications and some are but our regrets.
	When night comes and you too are dark, lie down and be dark with a will.
	And when morning comes and you are still dark stand up and say to the day with a will, “I am still dark.”
	It is stupid to play a role with the night and the day.
	They would both laugh at you.
	The mountain veiled in mist is not a hill; an oak tree in the rain is not a weeping willow.
	Behold here is a paradox; the deep and high are nearer to one another than the mid-level to either.
	When I stood a clear mirror before you, you gazed into me and saw your image.
	Then you said, “I love you.”
	But in truth you loved yourself in me.
	When you enjoy loving your neighbor it ceases to be a virtue.
	Love which is not always springing is always dying.
	You cannot have youth and the knowledge of it at the same time;
	For youth is too busy living to know, and knowledge is too busy seeking itself to live.



189. THE SLEEP WALKERS

	In the town where I was born lived a woman and her daughter, who walked in their sleep.
	One night, while silence enfolded the world, the woman and her daughter, walking, yet asleep, met in their mist-veiled garden.
	And the mother spoke, and she said: “At last, at last, my enemy! You by whom my youth was destroyed--who have built up your life upon the ruins of mine! Would I could kill you!”
	And the daughter spoke, and she said: “O hateful woman, selfish and old! Who stand between my freer self and me! Who would have my life an echo of your own faded life! Would you were dead!”
	At that moment a cock crew, and both women awoke. The mother said gently, “Is that you, darling?” And the daughter answered gently, “Yes, dear.”



190. THE STATUE

	Once there lived a man among the hills who possessed a statue wrought by an ancient master. It lay at his door face downward and he was not mindful of it.
	One day there passed by his house a man from the city, a man of knowledge, and seeing the statue he inquired of the owner if he would sell it.
	The owner laughed and said, “And pray who would want to buy that dull and dirty stone?”
	The man from the city said, “I will give you this piece of silver for it.”
	And the other man was astonished and delighted.
	The statue was removed to the city, upon the back of and elephant. And after many moons the man from the hills visited the city, and as he walked the streets he saw a crowd before a shop, and a man with a loud voice was crying, “Come ye in and behold the most beautiful, the most wonderful statue in all the world. Only two silver pices to look upon this most marvelous work of a master.”
	Thereupon the man from the hills paid two silver pieces and entered the shop to see the statue that he himself had sold for one spice of silver.



191. ON TALKING

	And then a scholar said, “Speak of Talking.” And he answered, saying:
	
	You talk when you cease to be at peace with your thoughts;
	And when you can no longer dwell in the solitude of your heart you live in your lips, and sound is a diversion and a pastime.
	And in much of your talking, thinking is half murdered.
	For thought is a bird of space, that in a cage of words many indeed unfold its wings but cannot fly.
	There are those among you who seek the talkative through fear of being alone.
	The silence of aloneness reveals to their eyes their naked selves and they would escape.
	And there are those who talk, and without knowledge or forethought reveal a truth which they themselves do not understand.
	And there are those who have the truth within them, but they tell it not in words.
	In the bosom of such as these the spirit dwells in rhythmic silence.
	When you meet your friend on the roadside or in the market place, let the spirit in you move your lips and direct your tongue.
	Let the voice within your voice speak to the ear of his ear;
	For his soul will keep the truth of your heart as the taste of the wine is remembered
	When the color is forgotten and the vessel is no more.



192. ON TEACHING

	Then said a teacher, “Speak to us of Teaching.”
	
	And he said:
	No man can reveal to you aught but that which already lies half asleep in the dawning of our knowledge.
	The teacher who walks in the shadow of the temple, among his followers, gives not of his wisdom but rather of his faith and his lovingness.
	If he is indeed wise he does not bid you enter the house of wisdom, but rather leads you to the threshold of your own mind.
	The astronomer may speak to you of his understanding of space, but he cannot give you his understanding.
	The musician may sing to you of the rhythm which is in all space, but he cannot give you the ear which arrests the rhythm nor the voice that echoes it.
	And he who is versed in the science of numbers can tell of the regions of weight and measure, but he cannot conduct you thither.
	For the vision of one man lends not its wings to another man.
	And even as each one of you stands alone in God’s knowledge, so must each one of you be alone in his knowledge of God and in his understanding of the earth.



193. TEARS AND LAUGHTER

	Upon the bank of the Nile at eventide, a hyena met a crocodile and they stopped and greeted one another.
	The hyena spoke and said, “How goes the day with you, Sir?”
	And the crocodile answered saying, “It goes badly with me. Sometimes in my pain and sorrow I weep, and then the creatures always say, ‘They are but crocodile tears.’ And this wounds me beyond all telling.”
	Then the hyena said, “You speak of your pain and your sorrow, but think of me also, for a moment. I gaze at the beauty of the world, its wonders and its miracles, and out of sheer joy I laugh even as the day laughs. And then the people of the jungle say, ‘It is but the laughter of a hyena.’”



194. ON THE NEXT WORLD

	My heart wearied within me, until it bad me farewell and journeyed to the Realm of Happiness in the next world. When it arrived at the shrine sanctified by the soul, it stood bewildered, for it did not witness there what it had so long envisioned. It saw not power, wealth, or sovereignty. It saw only the youth of beauty; his consort, the daughter of love; and their child, wisdom.
	My heart addressed the daughter of love, saying “Where is contentment, love? For I have heard that the inhabitants of this place partake thereof.”
	She replied, “Contentment has gone to preach in the city of overweening ambition, for we have no need of her. Happiness does not seek containment; rather, Happiness is a yearning that is embraced by union, whereas contentment is forgetfulness assailed by oblivion. The immortal soul is never contented, for it desires perfection and perfection in infinity.”
	My heart addressed the youth of beauty, saying, “Reveal to me the mystery of woman, Beauty, and enlighten me, for you are knowledge.”
	He replied, She is you, the human heart, and whatever describes you describes her. She and I are one, and wherever I alight she descends. She is like religion uncorrupted by the ignorant, like the moon not veiled by clouds, like a breeze unadulterated by the breaths of depravity.”
	My heart approached Wisdom, the daughter of Love and Beauty and said, “Give me wisdom, that I may convey it to humanity.”
	She replied, “It is happiness, which begins in the soul’s holiest of holies and never comes from without.”



195. ON THE STEPS OF THE TEMPLE

	Yestereve, on the marble steps of the Temple, I saw a woman sitting between two men. One side of her face was pale, the other was blushing.



196. THIRD

	I am ignorant of absolute truth. But I am humble before my ignorance and therein lies my honor and my reward.
	There is a space between man’s imagination and man’s attainment that may only be traversed by his longing.
	Paradise is there, behind that door, in the next room; but I have lost the key.
	Perhaps I have only mislaid it.
	You are blind and I am deaf and dumb, so let us touch hands and understand.
	The significance of man is not in what he attains, but rather in what he longs to attain.
	Some of us are like ink and some like paper.
	And if it were not for the blackness of some of us, some of us would be dumb;
	And if it were not for the whiteness of some of us, some of us would be blind.
	Give me an ear and I will give you a voice.
	Our mind is a sponge; our heart is a stream.
	Is it not strange that most of us choose sucking rather than running?
	When you long for blessings that you may not name, and when you grieve knowing not the cause, then indeed you are growing with all things that grow, and rising toward your greater self.
	When one is drunk with a vision, he deems his faint expression of it the very wine.
	You drink wine that you may be intoxicated; and I drink that it may sober me from that other wine.
	When my cup is empty I resign myself to its emptiness; but when it is half full I resent its half-fulness.
	The reality of the other person is not in what he reveals to you, but in what he cannot reveal to you.
	Therefore, if you would understand him, listen not to what he says but rather to what he does not say.
	Half of what I say is meaningless; but I say it so that the other half may reach you.
	A sense of humour is a sense of proportion.
	My loneliness was born when men praised my talkative faults and blamed my silent virtues.
	When Life does not find a singer to sing her heart she produces a philosopher to speak her mind.
	A truth is to be known always, to be uttered sometimes.
	The real in us is silent; the acquired is talkative.
	The voice of life in me cannot reach the ear of life in you; but let us talk that we may not feel lonely.
	When two women talk they say nothing; when one woman speaks she reveals all of life.
	Frogs may bellow louder than bulls, but they cannot drag the plough in the field not turn the wheel of the winepress, and of their skins you cannot make shoes.
	Only the dumb envy the talkative.
	If winter should say, “Spring is in my heart,” who would believe winter?
	Should you really open your eyes and see, you would behold your image in all images.
	And should you open your ears and listen, you would hear your own voice in all voices.
	It takes two of us to discover truth: one to utter it and one to understand it.
	Though the wave of words is forever upon us, yet our depth is forever silent.
	Many a doctrine is like a window pane. We see truth through it but it divides us from truth.
	Now let us play hide and seek. Should you hide in my heart it would not be difficult to find you. But should you hide behind your own shell, then it would be useless for anyone to seek you.
	A woman may veil her face with a smile.
	How noble is the sad heart who would sing a joyous song with joyous hearts.
	He who would understand a woman, or dissect genius, or solve the mystery of silence is the very man who would wake from a beautiful dream to sit at a breakfast table.
	I would walk with all those who walk. I would not stand still to watch the procession passing by.
	You owe more than gold to him who serves you. Give him of your heart or serve him.
	Nay, we have not lived in vain. Have they not built towers of our bones?
	Let us not be particular and sectional. The poet’s mind and the scorpion’s tail rise in glory from the same earth.
	Every dragon gives birth to a St. George who slays it.
	Trees are poems that the earth writes upon the sky. We fell them down and turn them into paper that we may record our emptiness.
	Should you care to write (and only the saints know why you should) you must needs have knowledge and art and music--the knowledge of the music of words, the art of being artless, and the magic of loving your readers.
	They dip their pens in our hearts and think they are inspired.
	Should a tree write its autobiography it would not be unlike the history of a race.
	If I were to choose between the power of writing a poem and the ecstasy of a poem unwritten, I would choose the ecstasy. It is better poetry.
	But you and all my neighbors agree that I always choose badly.
	Poetry is not an opinion expressed. It is a song that rises from a bleeding wound or a smiling mouth.
	Words are timeless. You should utter them or write them with a knowledge of their timelessness.



197. THOMAS

	My grandfather who was a lawyer once said, “Let us observe truth, but only when truth is made manifest unto us.”
	When Jesus called me I heeded Him, for His command was more potent than my will; yet I kept my counsel.
	When He spoke and the others were swayed like branches in the wind, I listened immovable. Yet I loved Him.
	Three years ago He left us, a scattered company to sing His name, and to be His witnesses unto the nations.
	At that time I was called Thomas the Doubter. The shadow of my grandfather was still upon me, and always I would have truth made manifest.
	I would even put my hand in my own wound to feel the blood ere I would believe in my pain.
	Now a man who loves with his heart yet holds a doubt in his mind, is but a slave in a galley who sleeps at his oar and dreams of his freedom, till the lash of the master wakes him.
	I myself was that slave, and I dreamed of freedom, but the sleep of my grandfather was upon me. My flesh needed the whip of my own day.
	Even in the presence of the Nazarene I had closed my eyes to see my hands chained to the oar.
	Doubt is a pain too lonely to know that faith is his twin brother.
	Doubt is a foundling unhappy and astray, and though his own mother who gave him birth should find him and enfold him, he would withdraw in caution and in fear.
	For Doubt will not know truth till his wounds are healed and restored.
	I doubted Jesus until He made Himself manifest to me, and thrust my own hand into His very wounds.
	Then indeed I believed, and after that I was rid of my yesterday and the yesterdays of my forefathers.
	The dead in me buried their dead; and the living shall live for the Anointed King, even for Him who was the Son of Man.
	Yesterday they told me that I must go and utter His name among the Persians and the Hindus.
	I shall go. And from this day to my last day, at dawn and at eventide, I shall see my Lord rising in majesty and I shall hear Him speak.



198. THE THREE ANTS

	Three ants met on the nose of a man who was lying asleep in the sun. And after they had saluted one another, each according to the custom of his tribe, they stood there conversing.
	The first and said, “These hills and plains are the most barren I have known. I have searched all day for a grain of some sort, and there is none to be found.”
	Said the second ant, “I too have found nothing, though I have visited every nook and glade. This is, I believe, what my people call the soft, moving land where nothing grows.”
	Then the third ant raised his head and said, “My friends, we are standing now on the nose of the Supreme Ant, the mighty and infinate Ant, whose body is so great that we cannot see it, whose shadow is so vast that we cannot trace it, whose voice is so loud that we cannot hear it; and He is omnipresent.”
	When the third ant spoke thus the other ants looked at each other and laughed.
	At that moment the man moved and in his sleep raised his hand and scratched his nose, and the three ants were crushed.



199. THE THREE GIFTS

	Once in the city of Becharre there lived a gracious prince who was loved and honored by all his subjects.
	But there was one exceedingly poor man who was bitter against the prince, and who wagged continually a pestilent tongue in his dispraise.
	The prince knew this, yet he was patient.
	But at last he bethought him; and upon a wintry night there came to the door of the man a servant of the prince, bearing a sack of flour, a bag of soap and a cone of sugar.
	And the servant said, “The prince sends you these gifts in token of rememberance.”
	The man was elated, for he thought the gifts were an homage from the prince. And in his pride we went to the bishop and told him what the prince had done, saying, “Can you not see how the prince desires my goodwill?”
	But the bishop said, “Oh, how wise a prince, and how little you understand. He speaks in symbols. The flour is for your empty stomach; the soap is for your dirty hide; and the sugar is to sweeten your bitter tongue.”
	From that day forward the man became shy even of himself. His hatred of the prince was greater than ever, and even more he hated the bishop who had revealed the prince unto him.
	But thereafter he kept silent.



200. ON TIME

	And an astronomer said, “Master, what of Time?” And he answered:
	
	You would measure time the measureless and the immeasurable.
	You would adjust your conduct and even direct the course of your spirit according to hours and seasons.
	Of time you would make a stream upon whose bank you would sit and watch its flowing.
	Yet the timeless in you is aware of life’s timelessness,
	And knows that yesterday is but today’s memory and tomorrow is today’s dream.
	And that that which sings and contemplates in you is still dwelling within the bounds of that first moment which scattered the stars into space.
	Who among you does not feel that his power to love is boundless?
	And yet who does not feel that very love, though boundless, encompassed within the center of his being, and moving not form love thought to love thought, nor from love deeds to other love deeds?
	And is not time even as love is, undivided and paceless?
	But if in you thought you must measure time into seasons, let each season encircle all the other seasons,
	And let today embrace the past with remembrance and the future with longing.



201. THE TWO CAGES

	In my father’s garden there are two cages. In one is a lion, which my father’s slaves brought from the desert of Ninavah; in the other is a songless sparrow.
	Every day at dawn the sparrow calls to the lion, “Good morrow to thee, brother prisoner.”



202. THE TWO GUARDIAN ANGELS

	On an evening two angels met at the city gate, and they greeted one another, and they conversed.
	The one angel said, “What are you doing these days, and what work is given you?”
	And the other answered, “It was been assigned me to be the guardian of a fallen man who lives down in the valley, a great sinner, most degraded. Let me assure you it is an important task, and I work hard.”
	The first fallen angel said, “That is an easy commission. I have often known sinners, and have been their guardian many a time. But it has now been assigned me to be the guardian of the good saint who lives in a bower out yonder. And I assure you that is an exceedingly difficult work, and most subtle.”
	Said the first angel, “This is but assumption. How can guarding a saint be harder than guarding a sinner?”
	And the other answered, “What impertinence, to call me assumptious! I have stated but the truth. Methinks it is you who are assumptious!”
	Then the angels wrangled and fought, first with words and then with fists and wings.
	While they were fighting an archangel came by. And he stopped them, and said, “Why do you fight? And what is it all about? Know you not that it is most unbecoming for guardian angels to fight at the city gate? Tell me, what is your disagreement?”
	Then both angels spoke at once, each claiming that the work given him was the harder, and that he deserved the greater recognition.
	The archangel shook his head and bethought him.
	Then he said, “My friends, I cannot say now which one of you has the greater claim upon honor and reward. But since the power is bestowed in me, therefore for peace’ sake and for good guardianship, I give each of you the other’s occupation, since each of you insists that the other’s task is the easier one. Now go hence and be happy at your work.”
	The angels thus ordered went their ways. But each one looked backward with greater anger at the archangel. And in his heart each was saying, “Oh, these archangels! Every day they make life harder and still harder for us angels!”
	But the archangel stood there, and once more he bethought him. And he said in his heart, “We have indeed, to be watchful and to keep guard over our guardian angels.”



203. THE TWO HERMITS

	Upon a lonely mountain, there lived two hermits who worshipped God and loved one another.
	Now these two hermits had one earthen bowl, and this was their only possession. 
	One day an evil spirit entered into the heart of the older hermit and he came to the younger and said, “It is long that we have lived together. The time has come for us to part. Let us divide our possessions.”
	Then the younger hermit was saddened and he said, “It grieves me, Brother, that thou shouldst leave me. But if thou must needs go, so be it,” and he brought the earthen bowl and gave it to him saying, “We cannot divide it, Brother, let it be thine.”
	Then the older hermit said, “Charity I will not accept. I will take nothing but mine own. It must be divided.”
	And the younger one said, “If the bowl be broken, of what use would it be to thee or to me? If it be thy pleasure let us rather cast a lot.”
	But the older hermit said again, “I will have but justice and mine own, and I will not trust justice and mine own to vain chance. The bowl must be divided.”
	Then the younger hermit could reason no further and he said, “If it be indeed thy will, and if even so thou wouldst have it let us now break the bowl.”
	But the face of the older hermit grew exceeding dark, and he cried, “O thou cursed coward, thou wouldst not fight.”



204. THE TWO HUNTERS

	Upon a day in May, Joy and Sorrow met beside a lake. They greeted one another, and they sat down near the quiet waters and conversed.
	Joy spoke of the beauty which is upon the earth, and the daily wonder of life in the forest and among the hills, and of the songs heard at dawn and eventide.
	And sorrow spoke, and agreed with all that Joy had said; for Sorrow knew the magic of the hour and the beauty thereof. And Sorrow was eloquent when he spoke of may in the fields and among the hills.
	And Joy and Sorrow talked long together, and they agreed upon all things of which they knew.
	Now there passed by on the other side of the lake two hunters. And as they looked across the water one of them said, “I wonder who are those two persons?” And the other said, “Did you say two? I see only one.”
	The first hunter said, “But there are two.” And the second said, “There is only one that I can see, and the reflection in the lake is only one.”
	“Nay, there are two,” said the first hunter, “and the reflection in the still water is of two persons.”
	But the second man said again, “Only one do I see.” And again the other said, “But I see two so plainly.”
	And even unto this day one hunter says that the other sees double; while the other says, “My friend is somewhat blind.”



205. TWO INFANTS

	A prince stood on the balcony of his palace addressing a great multitude summoned for the occasion and said, “Let me offer you and this whole fortunate country my congratulations upon the birth of a new prince who will carry the name of my noble family, and of whom you will be justly proud. He is the new bearer of a great and illustrious ancestry, and upon him depends the brilliant future of this realm. Sing and be merry!” The voices of the throngs, full of joy and thankfulness, flooded the sky with exhilarating song, welcoming the new tyrant who would affix the yoke of oppression to their necks by ruling the weak with bitter authority, and exploiting their bodies and killing their souls. For that destiny, the people were singing and drinking ecstatically to the heady of the new Emir.
	Another child entered life and that kingdom at the same time. While the crowds were glorifying the strong and belittling themselves by singing praise to a potential despot, and while the angels of heaven were weeping over the people’s weakness and servitude, a sick woman was thinking. She lived in an old, deserted hovel and, lying in her hard bed beside her newly born infant wrapped with ragged swaddles, was starving to death. She was a penurious and miserable young wife neglected by humanity; her husband had fallen into the trap of death set by the prince’s oppression, leaving a solitary woman to whom God had sent, that night, a tiny companion to prevent her from working and sustaining life.
	As the mass dispersed and silence was restored to the vicinity, the wretched woman placed the infant on her lap and looked into his face and wept as if she were to baptize him with tears. And with a hunger weakened voice she spoke to the child saying,”Why have you left the spiritual world and come to share with me the bitterness of earthly life? Why have you deserted the angels and the spacious firmament and come to this miserable land of humans, filled with agony, oppression, and heartlessness? I have nothing to give you except tears; will you be nourished on tears instead of milk? I have no silk clothes to put on you; will my naked, shivering arms give you warmth? The little animals graze in the pasture and return safely to their shed; and the small birds pick the seeds and sleep placidly between the branches.But you, my beloved, have naught save a loving but destitute mother.”
	Then she took the infant to her withered breast and clasped her arms around him as if wanting to join the two bodies in one, as before. She lifted her burning eyes slowly toward heaven and cried,
	“God! Have mercy on my unfortunate countrymen!”
	At that moment the clouds floated from the face of the moon, whose beams penetrated the transom of that poor home and fell upon two corpses.



206. THE TWO LEARNED MEN

	Once there lived in the ancient city of Afkar two learned men who hated and belittled each other’s learning. For one of them denied the existence of the gods and the other was a believer.
	One day the two met in the market-place, and amidst their followers they began to dispute and to argue about the existence or the non-existence of the gods. And after hours of contention they parted.
	That evening the unbeliever went to the temple and prostrated himself before the altar and prayed the gods to forgive his wayward past.
	And the same hour the other learned man, he who had upheld the gods, burned his sacred books. For he had become an unbeliever.



207. THE TWO POEMS

	Many centuries ago, on a road to Athens, two poets met, and they were glad to see one another.
	And one poet asked the other saying, “What have you composed of late, and how goes it with your lyre?”
	And the other poet answered and said with pride, “I have but now finished the greatest of my poems, perchance the greatest poem yet written in Greek. It is an invocation to Zeus the Supreme.”
	Then he took from beneath his cloak a parchment, saying, “Here, behold, I have it with me, and I would fain read it to you. Come, let us sit in the shade of that white cypress.”
	And the poet read his poem. And it was a long poem.
	And the other poet said in kindliness, “This is a great poem. It will live through the ages, and in it you shall be glorified.”
	And the first poet said calmly, “And what have you been writing these late days?”
	And the other another, “I have written but little. Only eight lines in remembrance of a child playing in a garden.” And he recited the lines.
	The first poet said, “Not so bad; not so bad.”
	And they parted.
	And now after two thousand years the eight lines of the one poet are read in every tongue, and are loved and cherished.
	And though the other poem has indeed come down through the ages in libraries and in the cells of scholars, and though it is remembered, it is neither loved nor read.



208. THE TWO PRINCESSES

	In the city of Shawakis lived a prince, and he was loved by everyone, men and women and children. Even the animals of the field came unto him in greeting.
	But all the people said that his wife, the princess, loved him not; nay, that she even hated him.
	And upon a day the princess of a neighboring city came to visit the princess of Shawakis. And they sat and talked together, and their words led to their husbands.
	And the princess of Sharakis said with passion, “I envy you your happiness with the prince, your husband, though you have been married these many years. I hate my husband. He belongs not to me alone, and I am indeed a woman most unhappy.”
	Then the visiting princess gazed at her and said, “My friend, the truth is that you love your husband. Aye, and you still have him for a passion unspent, and that is life in woman like unto Spring in a garden. But pity me, and my husband, for we do but endure one another in silent patience. And yet you and others deem this happiness.”



209. TWO WISHES

	In the silence of the night Death descended from God toward the earth. He hovered above a city and pierced the dwellings with his eyes. He say the spirits floating on wings of dreams, and the people who were surrendered to the Slumber.
	When the moon fell below the horizon and the city became black, Death walked silently among the houses--careful to touch nothing--until he reached a palace. He entered through the bolted gates undisturbed, and stood by the rich man’s bed; and as Death touched his forehead, the sleeper’s eyes opened, showing great fright.
	When he saw the specter, he summoned a voice mingled with fear and anger, and said, “God away, oh horrible dream; leave me, you dreadful ghost. Who are you? How did you enter this place? What do you want? Leave this place at once, for I am the lord of the house and will call my slaves and guards, and order them to kill you!”
	Then Death spoke, softly but with smoldering thunder, “I am Death. Stand and bow!”
	The man responded, “What do you want? What have you come here when I have not yet finished my affairs? What see you from strength such as mine? Go to the weak man, and take him away!
	“I loathe the sight of your bloody paws and hollow face, and my eyes take sick at your horrible ribbed winds and cadaverous body.”
	After a moment of fearful realization he added, “No, No, oh merciful Death! Mind not talk, for even fear reveals what the heart forbids.
	“Take a bushelful of my gold, or a handful of my slave’s souls, but leave me. I have accounts with Life requiring settling; I have due from people much gold; my ships have not reached the harbor; my demand, but spare my life. Death, I own harems of supernatural beauty; your choice is my gift to you. Give heed, Death--I have but one child, and I love him dearly for he is my only joy in this life. I offer supreme sacrifice--take him, but spare me!”
	Death murmured, “You are not rich, but pitifully poor.” Then Death took the hand of that earthly slave, removed his reality, and gave to the angels the heavy task of correction.
	And Death walked slowly amidst the dwellings of the poor until he reached the most miserable he could find. He entered and approached a bed upon which a youth slept fitfully. Death touched his eyes; the lad sprang up as he saw Death standing by, and, with a voice full of love and hope he said, “Here I am, my beautiful Death. Accept my soul, for you are the hope of my dreams. Be their accomplishment! Embrace me, oh beloved Death! You are merciful; do not leave me. You are God’s messenger; deliver me to Him. You are the right hand of Truth and the heart of Kindness; do not neglect me.
	“I have begged for you many times, but you did not come; I have sought you, but you avoided me; I called out to you, but you listened not. You hear me now--embrace my soul, beloved Death!”
	Death placed his softened hand upon the trembling lips, removed all reality, and enfolded it beneath his wings for secure conduct. And returning to the sky, Death looked back and whispered his warning:



210. TYRANNY

	Thus sings the she-dragon that guards the seven caves by the sea:
	“My mate shall come riding on the waves. His thundering roar shall fill the earth with fear, and the flames of his nostrils shall set the sky afire. At the eclipse of the moon we shall be wedded, and at the eclipse of the sun I shall give birth to a Saint George, who shall slay me.”
	Thus sings the she-dragon that guards the seven caves by the sea.



211. UPON THE SAND

	Said one man to another, “At the high tide of the sea, long ago, with the point of my staff I wrote a line upon the sand; and the people still pause to read it, and they are careful that naught shall erase it.”
	And the other man said, “And I to wrote a line upon the sand, but it was at low tide, and the waves of the vast sea washed it away. But tell me, what did you write?”
	And the first man answered and said, “I wrote this: ‘I am he who is.’ But what did you write?”
	And the other man said, “This I wrote: ‘I am but a drop of this great ocean.’”



212. URIAH, AN OLD MAN OF NAZARETH

	He was a stranger in our midst, and His life was hidden with dark veils.
	He walked not the path of our God, but followed the course of the foul and the infamous.
	His childhood revolted, and rejected the sweet milk of our nature.
	His youth was inflamed like dry grass that burns in the night.
	And when He became a man, He took arms against us all.
	Such men are conceived in the ebb tide of human kindness, and born in unholy tempests. And in tempests they live a day and the perish forever.
	Do you not remember Him, a boy overweening, who would argue with our learned elders, and laugh at their dignity?
	And remember you not His youth, when He lived by the saw and the chisel? He would not accompany our sons and daughters on their holidays. He would walk alone.
	And He would not return the salutation of those who hailed Him, as though He were above us.
	I myself met Him once in the field and greeted Him, and He only smiled, and in His smile I beheld arrogance and insult.
	Not long afterward my daughter went with her companions to the vineyards to gather the grapes, and she spoke to Him and He did not answer her.
	He spoke only to the whole company of grape-gatherers, as if my daughter had not been among them.
	When He abandoned His people and turned vagabond He became naught but a babbler. His voice was like a claw in our flesh, and the sound of His voice is still a pain in our memory.
	He would utter only evil of us and of our fathers and forefathers. And His tongue sought our bosoms like a poisoned arrow.
	Such was Jesus.
	If He had been my son, I would have committed Him with the Roman legions to Arabia, and I would have begged the captain to place Him in the forefront of the battle, so that the archer of the foe mmight mark Him, and free me of His insolence.
	But I have no son. And mayhap I should be grateful. For what if my son had been an enemy of his own people, and my gray hairs were now seeking the dust with shame, my white beard humbled?



213. VALUES

	Once a man unearthed in his field a marble statue of great beauty. And he took it to a collector who loved all beautiful things and offered it to him for sale, and the collector bought it for a large price. And they parted.
	And as the man walked home with his money he thought, and he said to himself, “How much life this money means! How can anyone give all this for a dead carved stone buried and undreamed of in the earth for a thousand years?”
	And now the collector was looking at his statue, and he was thinking, and he said to himself, “What beauty! What life! The dream of what a soul!--and fresh with the sweet sleep of a thousand years. How can anyone give all this for money, dead and dreamless?”



214. VISION

	There in the middle of the field, by the side of a crystalline stream, I saw a bird-cage whose rods and hinges were fashioned by an expert’s hands. In one corner lay a dead bird, and in another were two basins--one empty of water and the other of seeds. I stood there reverently, as if the lifeless bird and the murmur of the water were worthy of deep silence and respect--something worth of examination and meditation by the heard and conscience.
	As I engrossed myself in view and thought, I found that the poor creature had died of thirst beside a stream of water, and of hunger in the midst of a rich field, cradle of life; like a rich man locked inside his iron safe, perishing from hunger amid heaps of gold.
	Before my eyes I saw the cage turned suddenly into a human skeleton, and the dead bird into a man’s heart which was bleeding from a deep wound that looked like the lips of a sorrowing woman. A voice came from that wound saying, “I am the human heart, prisoner of substance and victim of earthly laws.
	“In God’s field of Beauty, at the edge of the stream of life, I was imprisoned in the cage of laws made by man.
	“In the center of beautiful Creation I died neglected because I was kept from enjoying the freedom of God’s bounty.
	“Everything of beauty that awakens my love and desire is a disgrace, according to man’s conceptions; everything of goodness that I crave is but naught, according to his judgment.
	“I am the lost human heart, imprisoned in the foul dungeon of man’s dictates, tied with chains of earthly authority, dead and forgotten by laughing humanity whose tongue is tied and whose eyes are empty of visible tears.”
	All these words I heard, and I saw them emerging with a stream of ever thinning blood from that wounded heart.
	More was said, but my misted eyes and crying should prevented further sight or hearing.



215. THE WANDERER

	I met him at the crossroads, a man with but a cloak and a staff, and a veil of pain upon his face. And we greeted one another, and I said to him, “Come to my house and be my guest.”
	And he came.
	My wife and my children met us at the threshold, and he smiled at them, and they loved his coming.
	Then we all sat together at the board and we were happy with the man for there was a silence and a mystery in him.
	And after supper we gathered to the fire and I asked him about his wanderings.
	He told us many a tale that night and also the next day, but what I now record was born out of the bitterness of his days though he himself was kindly, and these tales are of the dust and patience of his road.
	And when he left us after three days we did not feel that a guest had departed but rather that one of us was still out in the garden and had not yet come in.



216. WAR

	One night a feast was held in the palace, and there came a man and prostrated himself before the prince, and all the feasters looked upon him; and they saw that one of his eyes was out and that the empty socket bled. And the prince inquired of him, “What has befallen you?” And the man replied, “O prince, I am by profession a thief, and this night, because there was no moon, I went to rob the money-changer’s shop, and as I climbed in through the window I made a mistake and entered the weaver’s shop, and in the dark I ran into the weaver’s loom and my eye was plucked out. And now, O prince, I ask for justice upon the weaver.”
	Then the prince sent for the weaver and he came, and it was decreed that one of his eyes should be plucked out.
	“O prince,” said the weaver, “the decree is just. It is right that one of my eyes be taken. And yet, alas! both are necessary to me in order that I may see the two sides of the cloth that I weave. But I have a neighbor, a cobbler, who has also two eyes, and in his trade both eyes are not necessary.”
	Then the prince sent for the cobbler. And he came. And they took out one of the cobbler’s two eyes.
	And justice was satisfied.



217. WAR AND THE SMALL NATIONS

	Once, high above a pasture, where a sheep and a lamb were grazing, an eagle was circling and gazing hungrily down upon the lamb. And as he was about to descend and seize his prey, another eagle appeared and hovered above the sheep and her young with the same hungry intent. Then the two rivals began to fight, filling the sky with their fierce cries.
	The sheep looked up and was much astonished. She turned to the lamb and said, “How strange, my child, that these two noble birds should attack one another. Is not the vast sky large enough for both of them? Pray, my little one, pray in your heart that God may make peace between your winged brothers.”
	And the lamb prayed in his heart.



218. THE WEATHER-COCK

	Said the weather-cock to the wind, “How tedious and monotonous you are! Can you not blow any other way but in my face? You disturb my God-given stability.”
	And the wind did not answer. It only laughed in space.



219. THE WHALE AND THE BUTTERFLY

	Once on an evening a man and a woman found themselves together in a stagecoach. They had met before.
	The man was a poet, and as he sat beside the woman he sought to amuse her with stories, some that were of his own weaving, and some that were not his own.
	But even while he was speaking the lady went to sleep. Then suddenly the coach lurched, and she awoke, and she said, “I admire your interpretation of the story of Jonah and the whale.”
	And the poet said, “But Madame, I have been telling you a story of mine own about a butterfly and a white rose, and how they behaved the one to the other!”



220. WHEN MY SORROW WAS BORN

	When my sorrow was born I nursed it with care, and watched over it with loving tenderness.
	And my Sorrow grew like all living things, strong and beautiful and full of wondrous delights.
	And we loved one another, my Sorrow and I, and we loved the world about us; for Sorrow had a kindly heart and mine was kindly with Sorrow.
	And when we conversed, my Sorrow and I, our days were winged and our nights were girdled with dreams; for Sorrow had an eloquent tongue, and mine was eloquent with Sorrow.
	And when we sang together, my Sorrow and I, our neighbors sat at their windows and listenend; for our songs were deep as the sea and our melodies were full of strange memories.
	And when we walked together, my Sorrow and I, people gazed at us with gentle eyes and whispered in words of exceeding sweetness. And there were those who looked with envy upon us, for Sorrow was a noble thing and I was proud with Sorrow.
	But my Sorrow died, like all living things, and alone I am left to muse and ponder.
	And now when I speak my words fall heavily upon my ears.
	And when I sing my songs my neighbours come not to listen.
	And when I walk the streets no one looks at me.
	Only in my sleep I hear voices saying in pity, “See, there lies the man whose Sorrow is dead.”



221. THE WHITE TORCH

	The month of Nisan had nearly passed. I continued to visit the home of Farris Effendi and to meet Selma in that beautiful garden, gazing upon her beauty, marveling at her intelligence, and hearing the stillness of sorrow. I felt an invisible hand drawing me to her.
	Every visit gave me a new meaning to her beauty and a new insight into her sweet spirit, Until she became a book whose pages I could understand and whose praises I could sing, but which I could never finish reading. A woman whom Providence has provided with beauty of spirit and body is a truth, at the same time both open and secret, which we can understand only by love, and touch only by virtue; and when we attempt to describe such a woman she disappears like vapor.
	Selma Karamy had bodily and spiritual beauty, but how can I describe her to one who never knew her? Can a dead man remember the singing of a nightingale and the fragrance of a rose and the sigh of a brook? Can a prisoner who is heavily loaded with shackles follow the breeze of the dawn? Is not silence more painful than death? Does pride prevent me from describing Selma in plain words since I cannot draw her truthfully with luminous colors? A hungry man in a desert will not refuse to eat dry bread if Heaven does not shower him with manna and quails.
	In her white silk dress, Selma was slender as a ray of moonlight coming through the window. She walked gracefully and rhythmically. Her voice was low and sweet; words fell from her lips like drops of dew falling from the petals of flowers when they are disturbed by the wind.
	But Selma’s face! No words can describe its expression, reflecting first great internal suffering, then heavenly exaltation.
	The beauty of Selma’s face was not classic; it was like a dream of revelation which cannot be measured or bound or copied by the brush of a painter or the chisel of a sculptor. Selma’s beauty was not in her golden hair, but in the virtue of purity which surrounded it; not in her large eyes, but in the light which emanated from them; not in her red lips, but in the sweetness of her words; not in her ivory neck, but in its slight bow to the front. Nor was it in her perfect figure, but in the nobility of her spirit, burning like a white torch between earth and sky. Her beauty was like a gift of poetry. But poets care unhappy people, for, no matter how high their spirits reach, they will still be enclosed in an envelope of tears.
	Selma was deeply thoughtful rather than talkative, and her silence was a kind of music that carried one to a world of dreams and made him listen to the throbbing of his heart, and see the ghosts of his thoughts and feelings standing before him, looking him in the eyes.
	She wore a cloak of deep sorrow through her life, which increased her strange beauty and dignity, as a tree in blossom is more lovely when seen through the mist of dawn.
	Sorrow linked her spirit and mine, as if each saw in the other’s face what the heart was feeling and heard the echo of a hidden voice. God had made two bodies in one, and separation could be nothing but agony.
	The sorrowful spirit finds rest when united with a similar one. They join affectionately, as a stranger is cheered when he sees another stranger in a strange land. Hearts that are united through the medium of sorrow will not be separated by the glory of happiness. Love that is cleansed by tears will remain externally pure and beautiful.



222. THE WIDOW AND HER SON

	Night fell over North Lebanon and snow was covering the villages surrounded by the Kadeesha Valley, giving the fields and prairies the appearance of a great sheet of parchment upon which the furious Nature was recording her many deeds. Men came home from the streets while silence engulfed the night.
	In a lone house near those villages lived a woman who sat by her fireside spinning wool, and at her side was her only child, staring now at the fire and then at his mother.
	A terrible roar of thunder shook the house and the little boy shook with fright. He threw his arms about his mother, seeking protection from Nature in her affection. She took him to her bosom and kissed him; then she say him on her lap and said, “Do not fear, my son, for Nature is but comparing her great power to man’s weakness. There is a Supreme Being beyond the falling snow and the heavy clouds and the blowing wind, and He knows the needs of the earth, for He made it; and He looks upon the weak with merciful eyes.
	“Be brave, my boy. Nature smiles in Spring and laughs in Summer and yawns in Autumn, but now she is weeping; and with her tears she waters life, hidden under the earth.
	“Sleep, my dear child; your father is viewing us from Eternity. The snow and thunder bring us closer to him at this time.
	“Sleep, my beloved, for this white blanket which makes us cold, keeps the seeds warm, and these war-like things will produce beautiful flowers when Nisan comes.
	“Thus, my child, man cannot reap love until after sad and revealing separation, and bitter patience, and desperate hardship. Sleep, my little boy; sweet dreams will find your soul who is unafraid of the terrible darkness of night and the biting frost.”
	The little boy looked upon his mother with sleep-laden eyes and said, “Mother, my eyes are heavy, but I cannot go to bed without saying my prayer.”
	The woman looked at his angelic face, her vision blurred by misted eyes, and said, “Repeat with me, my boy--‘God, have mercy on the poor and protect them from the winter; warm their thin-clad bodies with Thy merciful hands; look upon the orphans who are sleeping in wretched houses, suffering from hunger and cold. Hear, oh Lord, the call of widows who are helpless and shivering with fear for their young. Open, oh Lord, the hearts of all humans, that they may see the misery of the weak. Have mercy upon the sufferers who knock on doors, and lead the wayfarers into warm places. Watch, oh Lord, over the little birds and protect the trees and fields from the anger of the storm; for Thou art merciful and full of love.’”
	As Slumber captured the boy’s spirit, his mother placed him in the bed and kissed his eyes with quivering lips. Then she went back and sat by the hearth, spinning the wool to make him raiment.



223. A WIDOW IN GALILEE

	My son was my first and my only born. He labored in our field and he was contented until he heard the man called Jesus speaking to the multitude.
	Then my son suddenly became different, as if a new spirit, foreign and unwholesome, had embraced his spirit.
	He abandoned the field and the garden; and he abandoned me also. He became worthless, a creature of the highways.
	That man Jesus of Nazareth was evil, for what good man would separate a son from his mother?
	The last thing my child said to me was this: “I am going with one of His disciples to the North Country. My life is established upon the Nazarene. You have given me birth, and for that I am grateful to you. But I needs must go. Am I not leaving with you our rich land, and all our silver and gold? I shall take naught but this garment and this staff.”
	Thus my son spoke, and departed.
	And now the Romans and the priests have laid hold upon Jesus and crucified Him; and they have done well.
	A man who would part mother and son could not be godly.
	The man who sends our children to the cities of the Gentiles cannot be our friend.
	I know my son will not return to me. I saw it in his eyes. And for this I hate Jesus of Nazareth who caused me to be alone in this unploughed field and this withered garden.
	And I hate all those who praise Him.
	Not many days ago they told me that Jesus once said, “My father and my mother and my brethren are those who hear my word and follow me.”
	But why should sons leave their mothers to follow His footsteps?
	And why should the milk of my breast be forgotten for a fountain not yet tasted? And the warmth of my arms be forsaken for the Northland, cold and unfriendly?
	 
	Aye, I hate the Nazarene, and I shall hate Him to the end of my days, for He has robbed me of my first-born, my only son.



224. ON WISDOM

	In the quiet of the night Wisdom came and stood beside my bed, gazing at me like a doting mother. She wiped away my tears and
	said, “I heard the cry of your soul and came to solace you. Open your heart to me, that I might fill it with light. Ask me, and I shall show you the path of truth.”
	I said, ‘Who am I, O Wisdom, and how did I arrive in this ghastly place? What are these powerful longings, numerous books, and eldritch markings?
	What are these thoughts that pass like a flock of doves? What is this speech, ordered in affection and scattered in delight? What are these
	consequences that sadden and enrapture, that embrace my spirit and besiege my heart? What are these eyes fixed upon me, that gaze
	upon my innermost self and ignore my pain? What are these voices mourning over my days, singing of my childhood? What is this youth, who
	plays with my desires, mock my sentiments, forgets the deeds of yesterday, rejoices in the trivialities of the moment, and loathes the tardiness
	of tomorrow? What is this world that is hastening me toward I know not what, viewing me with contempt? What is this earth, its mouth gaping
	to swallow bodies, whose bosom offers relief to the abode of ambition? What is this person who acquiesces in loving happiness, but
	accepts hell if he cannot attain it; who seeks the kiss of life and receives the blows of death; who buys a moment of pleasure with a year of
	regrets; who surrenders to the slumber and dreams that call to him; who walks along the canals of ignorance to the gulf of darkness? 
	What are all these things, O Wisdom?’
	She said, “You desire, O mortal, to view this world through the eyes of a god, and wish to comprehend the mysteries of the world to come by means of your human intellect; and this is the utmost folly. Go out into the open country, and you will find the bee hovering over flowers and the eagle picking apart its prey. Enter the house of your neighbor, and you will see a child bedazzled by the fire’s rays, while the mother busies herself with housework. Imitate the bee and do not spend the days of spring gazing upon the deeds of the eagle. Be as the child and delight in the flame’s brightness, and pay no heed to your mother and her affairs.
	“All that you see was and is for your sake. The numerous books, uncanny markings, and beautiful thoughts are the ghosts of souls who preceded you. The speech they weave is a link between you and your human siblings. The consequences that cause sorrow and rapture are the seeds that the past has sown in the field of the soul, and by which the future shall profit... This youth who plays with your desires is the very same person who opened the door of your heart so as to flood it with light. This earth with its gaping maw is the one who delivers you from bondage to your body. This world that hastens you is your heart, and your heart is all that you conceive of as a world. The person you consider ignorant and insignificant is the one who came from God, that he might learn bliss from grief and knowledge from gloom.”
	Wisdom placed her hand on my feverish forehead and said, “Advance and never halt, for advancing is perfection. Advance and do not fear the thorns in the path, for they draw only corrupt blood.”



225. THE WISE DOG

	One day there passed by a company of cats a wise dog.
	And as he came near and saw that they were very intent and heeded him not, he stopped.
	Then there arose in the midst of the company a large, grave cat and looked upon them and said, “Brethren, pray ye; and when ye have prayed again and yet again, nothing doubting, verily then it shall rain mice.”
	And when the dog heard this he laughed in his heart and turned from them saying, “O blind and foolish cats, has it not been written and have I not known and my fathers before me, that that which raineth for prayer and faith and supplication is not mice but bones.”



226. THE WISE KING

	Once there ruled in the distant city of Wirani a king who was both mighty and wise. And he was feared for his might and loved for his wisdom.
	Now, in the heart of that city was a well, whose water was cool and crystalline, from which all the inhabitants drank, even the king and his courtiers; for there was no other well.
	One night when all were asleep, a witch entered the city, and poured seven drops of strange liquid into the well, and said, “From this hour he who drinks this water shall become mad.”
	Next morning all the inhabitants, save the king and his lord chamberlain, drank from the well and became mad, even as the witch had foretold.
	And during that day the people in the narrow streets and in the market places did naught but whisper to one another, “The king is mad. Our king and his lord chamberlain have lost their reason. Surely we cannot be ruled by a mad king. We must dethrone him.”
	That evening the king ordered a golden goblet to be filled from the well. And when it was brought to him he drank deeply, and gave it to his lord chamberlain to drink.
	And there was great rejoicing in that distant city of Wirani, because its king and its lord chamberlain had regained their reason.



227. ON WORK

	Then a plowman said, “Speak to us of Work.” And he answered, saying:
	
	You work that you may keep pace with the earth and the soul of the earth.
	For to be idle is to become a stranger unto the seasons, and to step out of life’s procession, that marches in majesty and proud submission towards the infinite.
	When you work you are a flute through whose heart the whispering of the hours turns to music.
	Which of you would be a reed, dumb and silent, when all else sings together in unison?
	Always you have been told that work is a curse and a labor, a misfortune.
	But I say to you that when you work you fulfil a part of earth’s furthest dream, assigned to you when that dream was born,
	And in keeping yourself with labor you are in truth loving life,
	And to love life through labor is to be intimate with life’s inmost secret.
	But if you in your pain call birth an affliction and the support of the flesh a curse written upon your brow, then I answer that naught but the sweat of your brow shall wash away that which is written.
	You have been told also life is darkness, and in your weariness you echo what was said by the weary.
	And I say that life is indeed darkness save when there is urge,
	And all urge is blind save when there is knowledge,
	And all knowledge is vain save when there is work,
	And all work is empty save when there is love;
	And when you work with love you bind yourself to yourself, and to one another, and to God.
	And what is it to work with love?
	It is to weave the cloth with threads drawn from your heart, even as if your beloved were to wear that cloth.
	It is to build a house with affection, even as if your beloved were to dwell in that house.
	It is to sow seeds with tenderness and reap the harvest with joy, even as if your beloved were to eat the fruit.
	It is to charge all things you fashion with a breath of your own spirit,
	And to know that all the blessed dead are standing about you and watching.
	Often have I heard you say, as if speaking in sleep, “he who works in marble, and finds the shape of his own soul in the stone, is a nobler than he who ploughs the soil.
	And he who seizes the rainbow to lay it on a cloth in the likeness of man, is more than he who makes the sandals for our feet.”
	But I say, not in sleep but in the over-wakefulness of noontide, that the wind speaks not more sweetly to the giant oaks than to the least of all the blades of grass;
	And he alone is great who turns the voice of the wind into a song made sweeter by his own loving.
	Work is love made visible.
	And if you cannot work with love but only with distaste, it is better that you should leave your work and sit at the gate of the temple and take alms of those who work with joy.
	For if you bake bread with indifference, you bake a bitter bread that feeds but half man’s hunger.
	And if you grudge the crushing of the grapes, your grudge distils a poison in the wine.
	And if you sing though as angels, and love not the singing, you muffle man’s ears to the voices of the day and the voices of the night.



228. YESTERDAY AND TODAY

	The gold-hoarder walked in his palace park and with him walked his troubles. And over his head hovered worries as a vulture hovers over a carcass, until he reached a beautiful lake surrounded by magnificent marble statuary.
	He sat there pondering the water which poured from the mouths of the statues like thoughts flowing freely from a lover’s imagination, and contemplating heavily his palace which stood upon a knoll like a birth-mark upon the cheek of a maiden. His fancy revealed to him the pages of his life’s drama which he read with falling tears that veiled his eyes and prevented him from viewing man’s feeble additions to Nature.
	He looked back with piercing regret to the images of his early life, woven into pattern by the gods, until he could no longer control his anguish. He said aloud, “Yesterday I was grazing my sheep in the green valley, enjoying my existence, sounding my flute, and holding my head high. Today I am a prisoner of greed. Gold leads into gold, then into restlessness and finally into crushing misery.
	“Yesterday I was like a singing bird, soaring freely here and there in the fields. Today I am a slave to fickle wealth, society’s rules, and city’s customs, and purchased friends, pleasing the people by conforming to the strange and narrow laws of man. I was born to be free and enjoy the bounty of life, but I find myself like a beast of burden so heavily laden with gold that his back is breaking.
	“Where are the spacious plains, the singing brooks, the pure breeze, the closeness of Nature? Where is my deity? I have lost all! Naught remains save loneliness that saddens me, gold that ridicules me, slaves who curse to my back, and a palace that I have erected as a tomb for my happiness, and in whose greatness I have lost my heart.
	“Yesterday I roamed the prairies and the hills together with the Bedouin’s daughter; Virtue was our companion, Love our delight, and the moon our guardian. Today I am among women with shallow beauty who sell themselves for gold and diamonds.
	“Yesterday I was carefree, sharing with the shepherds all the joy of life; eating, playing, working, singing, and dancing together to the music of the heart’s truth. Today I find myself among the people like a frightened lamb among the wolves. As I walk in the roads, they gaze at me with hateful eyes and point at me with scorn and jealousy, and as I steal through the park I see frowning faces all about me.
	“Yesterday I was rich in happiness and today I am poor in gold.
	“Yesterday I was a happy shepherd looking upon his head as a merciful king looks with pleasure upon his contented subjects. Today I am a slave standing before my wealth, my wealth which robbed me of the beauty of life I once knew.
	“Forgive me, my Judge! I did not know that riches would put my life in fragments and lead me into the dungeons of harshness and stupidity. What I thought was glory is naught but an eternal inferno.”
	He gathered himself wearily and walked slowly toward the palace, sighing and repeating, “Is this what people call wealth? Is this the god I am serving and worshipping? Is this what I seek of the earth? Why can I not trade it for one particle of contentment? Who would sell me one beautiful thought for a ton of gold? Who would give me one moment of love for a handful of gems? Who would grant me an eye that can see others’ hearts, and take all my coffers in barter?”
	As he reached the palace gates he turned and looked toward the city as Jeremiah gazed toward Jerusalem. He raised his arms in woeful lament and shouted, “Oh people of the noisome city, who are living in darkness, hastening toward misery, preaching falsehood, and speaking with stupidity...until when shall you remain ignorant? Unit when shall you abide in the filth of life and continue to desert its gardens? Why wear you tattered robes of narrowness while the silk raiment of Nature’s beauty is fashioned for you? The lamp of wisdom is dimming; it is time to furnish it with oil. The house of true fortune is being destroyed; it is time to rebuild it and guard it. The thieves of ignorance have stolen the treasure of your peace; it is time to retake it!”
	At that moment a poor man stood before him and stretched forth his hand for alms. As he looked at the beggar, his lips parted, his eyes brightened with a softness, and his face radiated kindness. It was as if the yesterday he had lamented by the lake had come to greet him. He embraced the pauper with affection and filled his hands with gold, and with a voice sincere with the sweetness of love he said, “Come back tomorrow and bring with you your fellow sufferers. All your possessions will be restored.”
	He entered his palace saying, “Everything in life is good; even gold, for it teaches a lesson. Money is like a stringed instrument; he who does not know how to use it properly will hear only discordant music. Money is like love; it kills slowly and painfully the one who withholds it, and it enlivens the other who turns it upon his fellow man.”



229. YESTERDAY, TODAY AND TOMORROW

	I said to my friend, “You see her leaning upon the arm of that man. It was but yesterday that she leaned thus upon my arm.”
	And my friend said, “And tomorrow she will lean upon mine.”
	I said, “Behold her sitting close at his side. It was but yesterday she sat close beside me.”
	And he answered, “Tomorrow she will sit beside me.”
	I said, “See, she drinks wine from his cup, and yesterday she drank from mine.”
	And he said, “Tomorrow, from my cup.”
	Then I said, “See how she gazes at him with love, and with yielding eyes. Yesterday she gazed thus upon me.”
	And my friend said, “It will be upon me she gazes tomorrow.”
	I said, “Do you not hear her now murmuring songs of love into his ears? Those very songs of love she murmured but yesterday into my ears.”
	And my friend said, “And tomorrow she will murmur them in mine.”
	I said, “Why see, she is embracing him. It was but yesterday that she embraced me.”
	And my friend said, “She will embrace me tomorrow.”
	Then I said, “What a strange woman.”
	But he answered, “She is like unto life, possessed by all men; and like death, she conquers all men; and like eternity, she enfolds all men.”



230. A YOUNG PRIEST OF CAPERNAUM

	He was a magician, warp and woof, and a sorcerer, a man who bewildered the simple by charms and incantations. And He juggled with the words of our prophets and with the sanctities of our forefathers.
	Aye, He even bade the dead be His witnesses, and the voiceless graves His forerunners and authority.
	He sought the women of Jerusalem and the women of the countryside with the cunning of the spider that seeks the fly; and they were caught in His web.
	For women are weak and empty-headed, and they follow the man who would comfort their unspent passion with soft and tender words. Were it not for these women, infirm and possessed by His evil spirit, His name would have been erased from the memory of man.
	And who were the men who followed Him?
	They were of the horde that are yoked and trodden down. In their ignorance and fear they would never have rebelled against their rightful masters. But when He promised them high stations in His kingdom of mirage, they yielded to His fantasy as clay to the potter.
	Know you not, the slave in his dreaming would always be master; and the weakling would be a lion?
	The Galilean was a conjuror and a deceiver, a man who forgave the sins of all sinners that He might hear Hail and Hosanna from their unclean mouths; and who fed the faint heart of the hopeless and the wretched that He might have ears for His voice and a retinue at His command.
	He broke the Sabbath with those who break that He might gain the support of the lawless; and He spoke ill of our high priests that He might win attention in Sanhedrim, and by opposition increase His fame.
	I have said often that I hated that man. Ay, I hate Him more than I hate the Romans who govern our country. Even His coming was from Nazareth, a town cursed by our prophets, a dunghill of the Gentiles, from which no good shall ever proceed.



231. ZACCHAEUS

	You believe in what you hear said. Believe in the unsaid, for the silence of men is nearer the truth than their words.
	You ask if Jesus could have escaped His shameful death and saved His followers from persecution.
	I answer, He could indeed have escaped had He chosen, but He did not seek safety nor was He mindful of protecting His flock from wolves of the night.
	He knew His fate and the morrow of His constant lovers. He foretold and prophesied what should befall every one of us. He sought not His death; but He accepted death as a husband-man shrouding his corn with earth, accepts the winter, and then awaits the spring and harvest; and as a builder lays the largest stone in the foundation.
	We were men of Galilee and from the slopes of Lebanon. Our Master could have led us back to our country, to live with His youth in our gardens until old age should come and whisper us back into the years.
	Was anything barring His path back to the temples of our villages where others were reading the prophets and then disclosing their hearts?
	Could He not have said, “Now I go east with the west wind,” and so saying dismiss us with a smile upon His lips?
	Aye, He could have said, “Go back to your kin. The world is not ready for me. I shall return a thousand years hence. Teach your children to await my return.”
	He could have done this had He so chosen.
	But He knew that to build the temple invisible He must needs lay Himself the corner-stone, and lay us around as little pebbles cemented close to Himself.
	He knew that the sap of His tree must rise from its roots, and He poured His blood upon its roots; and to Him it was not sacrifice but rather gain.
	Death is the revealer. The death of Jesus revealed His life.
	Had He escaped you and His enemies, you would have been the conquerors of the world. Therefore He did not escape.
	Only He who desires all shall give all.
	Aye, Jesus could have escaped His enemies and lived to old age. But He knew the passing of the seasons, and He would sing His song.
	What man facing the armed world would not be conquered for the moment that he might overcome the ages?
	And now you ask who, in very truth, slew Jesus, the Romans or the priests of Jerusalem?
	Neither the Romans slew Him, nor the priests. The whole world stood to honour Him upon that hill.
