*** Dana Gioia (1950 - )


1. THE ANGEL WITH THE BROKEN WING

	I am the Angel with the Broken Wing,
	The one large statue in this quiet room.
	The staff finds me too fierce, and so they shut
	Faith’s ardor in this air-conditioned tomb.
	
	The docents praise my elegant design
	Above the chatter of the gallery.
	Perhaps I am a masterpiece of sorts--
	The perfect emblem of futility.
	
	Mendoza carved me for a country church.
	(His name’s forgotten now except by me.)
	I stood beside a gilded altar where
	The hopeless offered God their misery.
	
	I heard their women whispering at my feet--
	Prayers for the lost, the dying, and the dead.
	Their candles stretched my shadow up the wall,
	And I became the hunger that they fed.
	
	I broke my left wing in the Revolution
	(Even a saint can savor irony)
	When troops were sent to vandalize the chapel.
	They hit me once--almost apologetically.
	
	For even the godless feel something in a church,
	A twinge of hope, fear? Who knows what it is?
	A trembling unaccounted by their laws,
	An ancient memory they can’t dismiss.
	
	There are so many things I must tell God!
	The howling of the dammed can’t reach so high.
	But I stand like a dead thing nailed to a perch,
	A crippled saint against a painted sky.


2. CALIFORNIA HILLS IN AUGUST

	I can imagine someone who found
	these fields unbearable, who climbed
	the hillside in the heat, cursing the dust,
	cracking the brittle weeds underfoot,
	wishing a few more trees for shade.
	
	An Easterner especially, who would scorn
	the meagerness of summer, the dry
	twisted shapes of black elm,
	scrub oak, and chaparral, a landscape
	August has already drained of green.
	
	One who would hurry over the clinging
	thistle, foxtail, golden poppy,
	knowing everything was just a weed,
	unable to conceive that these trees
	and sparse brown bushes were alive.
	
	And hate the bright stillness of the noon
	without wind, without motion,
	the only other living thing
	a hawk, hungry for prey, suspended
	in the blinding, sunlit blue.
	
	And yet how gentle it seems to someone
	raised in a landscape short of rain--
	the skyline of a hill broken by no more
	trees than one can count, the grass,
	the empty sky, the wish for water.


3. CUCKOOS

	I heard them only once. Climbing in the mountains,
	I stopped to rest a moment on a ledge
	and listen to the river distantly below--
	when suddenly they began to call each other
	back and forth from trees across the valley,
	invisible in pinetops but bright and clear
	like the ring of crystal against crystal.
	I didn’t move but lay there wondering
	what they were like, amazed that folklore
	had made their cry the omen of betrayal.
	
	So now, reading how the Chinese took their call
	to mean _Pu ju kuei, pu ju kuei_--
	_Come home again, you must come home again_--
	I understand at last what they were telling me
	not then, back in that high, green valley,
	but here this evening in the memory of it
	returned by these birds that I have never seen


4. THE END OF THE WORLD

	“We’re going,” they said, “to the end of the world.”   
	So they stopped the car where the river curled,   
	And we scrambled down beneath the bridge   
	On the gravel track of a narrow ridge.
	
	We tramped for miles on a wooded walk
	Where dog-hobble grew on its twisted stalk.
	Then we stopped to rest on the pine-needle floor   
	While two ospreys watched from an oak by the shore.
	
	We came to a bend, where the river grew wide   
	And green mountains rose on the opposite side.   
	My guides moved back. I stood alone,
	As the current streaked over smooth flat stone.
	
	Shelf by stone shelf the river fell.
	The white water goosetailed with eddying swell.   
	Faster and louder the current dropped
	Till it reached a cliff, and the trail stopped.
	
	I stood at the edge where the mist ascended,   
	My journey done where the world ended.
	I looked downstream. There was nothing but sky,   
	The sound of the water, and the water’s reply.


5. FINDING A BOX OF FAMILY LETTERS

	The dead say little in their letters
	they haven’t said before.
	We find no secrets, and yet
	how different every sentence sounds
	heard across the years.
	          
	My father breaks my heart
	simply by being so young and handsome.
	He’s half my age, with jet-black hair.
	Look at him in his navy uniform
	grinning beside his dive-bomber.
	
	_Come back, Dad!_ I want to shout.
	He says he misses all of us
	(though I haven’t yet been born).
	He writes from places I never knew he saw,
	and everyone he mentions now is dead.
	
	There is a large, long photograph
	curled like a diploma--a banquet sixty years ago.
	My parents sit uncomfortably
	among tables of dark-suited strangers.
	The mildewed paper reeks of regret.
	
	I wonder what song the band was playing,
	just out of frame, as the photographer
	arranged your smiles. A waltz? A foxtrot?
	_Get out there on the floor and dance! 
	You don’t have forever._
	
	What does it cost to send a postcard
	to the underworld? I’ll buy
	a penny stamp from World War II
	and mail it downtown at the old post office
	just as the courthouse clock strikes twelve.
	
	Surely the ghost of some postal worker
	still makes his nightly rounds, his routine
	too tedious for him to notice when it ended.
	He works so slowly he moves back in time
	carrying our dead letters to their lost addresses.
	
	It’s silly to get sentimental.
	The dead have moved on. So should we.
	But isn’t it equally simple-minded to miss
	the special expertise of the departed
	in clarifying our long-term plans?
	
	They never let us forget that the line
	between them and us is only temporary.
	_Get out there and dance!_ the letters shout
	adding, Love always. _Can’t wait to get home!_
	And soon we will be. _See you there._


6. IN CHANDLER COUNTRY

	California night. The Devil’s wind,   
	the Santa Ana, blows in from the east,   
	raging through the canyon like a drunk   
	screaming in a bar.
	                           The air tastes like
	a stubbed-out cigarette. But why complain?   
	The weather’s fine as long as you don’t breathe.   
	Just lean back on the sweat-stained furniture,   
	lights turned out, windows shut against the storm,   
	and count your blessings.
	                                    Another sleepless night,
	when every wrinkle in the bedsheet scratches   
	like a dry razor on a sunburned cheek,   
	when even ten-year whiskey tastes like sand,   
	and quiet women in the kitchen run   
	their fingers on the edges of a knife
	and eye their husbands’ necks. I wish them luck.
	
	Tonight it seems that if I took the coins
	out of my pocket and tossed them in the air   
	they’d stay a moment glistening like a net   
	slowly falling through dark water.
	                                                  I remember
	the headlights of the cars parked on the beach,   
	the narrow beams dissolving on the dark   
	surface of the lake, voices arguing
	about the forms, the crackling radio,   
	the sheeted body lying on the sand,
	the trawling net still damp beside it. No,
	she wasn’t beautiful--but at that age
	when youth itself becomes a kind of beauty--
	“Taking good care of your clients, Marlowe?”
	
	Relentlessly the wind blows on. Next door   
	catching a scent, the dogs begin to howl.   
	Lean, furious, raw-eyed from the storm,   
	packs of coyotes come down from the hills   
	where there is nothing left to hunt.


7. THE LOST GARDEN

	If ever we see those gardens again,
	The summer will be gone--at least our summer.
	Some other mockingbird will concertize
	Among the mulberries, and other vines
	Will climb the high brick wall to disappear.
	
	How many footpaths crossed the old estate--
	The gracious acreage of a grander age--
	So many trees to kiss or argue under,
	And greenery enough for any mood.
	What pleasure to be sad in such surroundings.
	
	At least in retrospect. For even sorrow
	Seems bearable when studied at a distance,
	And if we speak of private suffering,
	The pain becomes part of a well-turned tale
	Describing someone else who shares our name.
	
	Still, thinking of you, I sometimes play a game.
	What if we had walked a different path one day,
	Would some small incident have nudged us elsewhere 
	The way a pebble tossed into a brook
	Might change the course a hundred miles downstream?
	
	The trick is making memory a blessing,
	To learn by loss the cool subtraction of desire,
	Of wanting nothing more than what has been,
	To know the past forever lost, yet seeing
	Behind the wall a garden still in blossom.


8. NIGHT WATCH

	I think of you standing on the sloping deck
	as the freighter pulls away from the coast of China,
	the last lights of Asia disappearing in the fog,
	and the engine’s drone dissolving in the old
	monotony of waves slapping up against the hull.
	
	Leaning on the rails, looking eastward to America
	across the empty weeks of ocean,
	how carefully you must have planned your life,
	so much of it already wasted on the sea.
	the vast country of your homelessness.
	
	Macao. Vladivostak. Singapore.
	Dante read by shiplamp on the bridge.
	The names of fellow seamen lost in war.
	These memories will die with you,
	but tonight they rise up burning in your mind
	
	interweaving like gulls crying in the wake,
	like currents on a chart, like gulfweed
	swirling in a star-soaked sea, and interchangeable
	as all the words for night--_la notte, noche, Nacht, nuit,_
	each sound half-foreign, half-familiar, like America.
	
	For now you know that mainland best from dreams.
	Your dead mother turning toward you slowly,
	always on the edge of words, yet always
	silent as the suffering madonna of a shrine.
	Or your father pounding his fist against the wall.
	
	There are so many ways to waste a life.
	Why choose between these icons of unhappiness,
	when there is the undisguised illusion of the sea,
	the comfort of old books and solitude to fill
	the long night watch, the endless argument of waves?
	
	Breathe in that dark and tangible air, for in a few weeks
	you will be dead, burned beyond recognition,
	left as a headstone in the unfamiliar earth
	with no one to ask, neither wife nor children,
	why your thin ashes have been buried here
	
	and not scattered on the shifting grey Pacific.


9. PLANTING A SEQUOIA

	All afternoon my brothers and I have worked in the orchard,
	Digging this hole, laying you into it, carefully packing the soil.
	Rain blackened the horizon, but cold winds kept it over the Pacific,
	And the sky above us stayed the dull gray
	Of an old year coming to an end.
	
	In Sicily a father plants a tree to celebrate his first son’s birth--
	An olive or a fig tree--a sign that the earth has one more life to bear.
	I would have done the same, proudly laying new stock into my father’s orchard,
	A green sapling rising among the twisted apple boughs,
	A promise of new fruit in other autumns.
	
	But today we kneel in the cold planting you, our native giant,
	Defying the practical custom of our fathers,
	Wrapping in your roots a lock of hair, a piece of an infant’s birth cord,
	All that remains above earth of a first-born son,
	A few stray atoms brought back to the elements.
	
	We will give you what we can--our labor and our soil,
	Water drawn from the earth when the skies fail,
	Nights scented with the ocean fog, days softened by the circuit of bees.
	We plant you in the corner of the grove, bathed in western light,
	A slender shoot against the sunset.
	
	And when our family is no more, all of his unborn brothers dead,
	Every niece and nephew scattered, the house torn down,
	His mother’s beauty ashes in the air,
	I want you to stand among strangers, all young and ephemeral to you,
	Silently keeping the secret of your birth.


10. ROUGH COUNTRY

	Give me a landscape made of obstacles,
	of steep hills and jutting glacial rock,
	where the low-running streams are quick to flood
	the grassy fields and bottomlands.
	A place
	no engineers can master--where the roads
	must twist like tendrils up the mountainside
	on narrow cliffs where boulders block the way.
	Where tall black trunks of lightning-scalded pine
	push through the tangled woods to make a roost 
	for hawks and swarming crows.
	And sharp inclines
	where twisting through the thorn-thick underbrush,
	scratched and exhausted, one turns suddenly
	to find an unexpected waterfall,
	not half a mile from the nearest road,
	a spot so hard to reach that no one comes--
	a hiding place, a shrine for dragonflies
	and nesting jays, a sign that there is still
	one piece of property that won’t be owned.


11. SPEAKING OF LOVE

	Speaking of love was difficult at first.
	We groped for those lost, untarnished words
	That parents never traded casually at home,
	The radio had not devalued.
	How little there seemed left to us.
	
	So, speaking of love, we chose
	The harsh and level language of denial
	Knowing only what we did not wish to say,
	Choosing silence in our terror of a lie.
	For surely love existed before words.
	
	But silence can become its own cliché,
	And bodies lie as skillfully as words,
	So one by one we spoke the easy lines
	The other had resisted but desired,
	Trusting that love renewed their innocence.
	
	Was it then that words become unstuck?
	That _star_ no longer seemed enough for star?
	Our borrowed speech demanded love so pure
	And so beyond our power that we saw
	How words were only forms of our regret.
	
	And so at last we speak again of love,
	Now that there is nothing left unsaid,
	Surrendering our voices to the past,
	Which has betrayed us. Each of us alone,
	Obsessed by memory, befriended by desire,
	
	With no words left to summon back our love.


12. SPECIAL TREATMENTS WARD

	I
	
	So this is where the children come to die,
	hidden on the hospital’s highest floor.
	They wear their bandages like uniforms
	and pull their iv rigs along the hall 
	with slow and careful steps. Or bald and pale,
	they lie in bright pajamas on their beds,
	watching another world on a screen.
	
	The mothers spend their nights inside the ward,
	sleeping on chairs that fold out into beds,
	too small to lie in comfort. Soon they slip
	beside their children, as if they might mesh
	those small bruised bodies back into their flesh.
	Instinctively they feel that love so strong
	protects a child. Each morning proves them wrong.
	
	No one chooses to be here. We play the parts
	that we are given--horrible as they are.
	We try to play them well, whatever that means.
	We need to talk, though talking breaks our hearts.
	The doctors come and go like oracles,
	their manner cool, omniscient, and oblique.
	There is a word that no one ever speaks.
	
	
	II
	
	I put this poem aside twelve years ago
	because I could not bear remembering 
	the faces it evoked, and every line
	seemed--still seems--so inadequate and grim.
	
	What right had I, whose son had walked away, 
	to speak for those who died? And I’ll admit
	I wanted to forget. I’d lost one child
	and couldn’t bear to watch another die.
	
	Not just the silent boy who shared our room,
	but even the bird-thin figures dimly glimpsed
	shuffling deliberately, disjointedly
	like ancient soldiers after a parade.
	
	Whatever strength the task required I lacked. 
	No well-stitched words could suture shut these wounds. 
	And so I stopped . . .
	But there are poems we do not choose to write.
	
	
	III
	
	The children visit me, not just in dream,
	appearing suddenly, silently--
	insistent, unprovoked, unwelcome.
	
	They’ve taken off their milky bandages
	to show the raw, red lesions they still bear.
	Risen they are healed but not made whole.
	
	A few I recognize, untouched by years.
	I cannot name them--their faces pale and gray
	like ashes fallen from a distant fire.
	
	What use am I to them, almost a stranger?
	I cannot wake them from their satin beds.
	Why do they seek me? They never speak.
	
	And vagrant sorrow cannot bless the dead.


13. THE SUNDAY NEWS

	Looking for something in the Sunday paper,
	I flipped by accident through _Local Weddings_,
	Yet missed the photograph until I saw
	Your name among the headings.
	
	And there you were, looking almost unchanged,
	Your hair still long, though now long out of style,
	And you still wore that stiff and serious look
	You called a smile.
	
	I felt as though we sat there face to face.
	My stomach tightened. I read the item through.
	It said too much about both families,
	Too little about you.
	
	Finished at last, I threw the paper down,
	Stung by jealousy, my mind aflame,
	Hating this man, this stranger whom you loved,
	This printed name.
	
	And yet I clipped it out to put away
	Inside a book like something I might use,
	A scrap I knew I wouldn’t read again
	Yet couldn’t bear to lose.