*** Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749 - 1832)


1. THE ERL-KING

	WHO rides there so late through the night dark and drear?
	The father it is, with his infant so dear;
	He holdeth the boy tightly clasp’d in his arm,
	He holdeth him safely, he keepeth him warm.
	
	“My son, wherefore seek’st thou thy face thus to hide?”
	“Look, father, the Erl-King is close by our side!
	Dost see not the Erl-King, with crown and with train?”
	“My son, ‘tis the mist rising over the plain.”
	
	“Oh, come, thou dear infant! oh come thou with me!
	Full many a game I will play there with thee;
	On my strand, lovely flowers their blossoms unfold,
	My mother shall grace thee with garments of gold.”
	
	“My father, my father, and dost thou not hear
	The words that the Erl-King now breathes in mine ear?”
	“Be calm, dearest child, ‘tis thy fancy deceives;
	‘Tis the sad wind that sighs through the withering leaves.”
	
	“Wilt go, then, dear infant, wilt go with me there?
	My daughters shall tend thee with sisterly care
	My daughters by night their glad festival keep,
	They’ll dance thee, and rock thee, and sing thee to sleep.”
	
	“My father, my father, and dost thou not see,
	How the Erl-King his daughters has brought here for me?”
	“My darling, my darling, I see it aright,
	‘Tis the aged grey willows deceiving thy sight.”
	
	“I love thee, I’m charm’d by thy beauty, dear boy!
	And if thou’rt unwilling, then force I’ll employ.”
	“My father, my father, he seizes me fast,
	Full sorely the Erl-King has hurt me at last.”
	
	The father now gallops, with terror half wild,
	He grasps in his arms the poor shuddering child;
	He reaches his courtyard with toil and with dread,--
	The child in his arms finds he motionless, dead.


2. THE FISHERMAN

	HE water rushed, the water swelled,
	A fisherman sat by,
	And gazed upon his dancing float
	With tranquil-dreaming eye.
	And as he sits, and as he looks,
	The gurgling waves arise;
	A maid, all bright with water drops,
	Stands straight before his eyes.
	
	She sang to him, she spake to him:
	“My fish why dost thou snare,
	With human wit and human guile,
	Into the killing air?
	Couldst see how happy fishes live
	Under the stream so clear,
	Thyself would plunge into the stream,
	And live for ever there.
	
	“Bathe not the lovely sun and moon
	Within the cool, deep sea,
	And with wave-breathing faces rise
	In twofold witchery?
	Lure not the misty heaven-deeps,
	So beautiful and blue?
	Lures not thine image, mirrored in
	The Fresh eternal dew?
	
	The water rushed, the water swelled,
	It clasped his feet, I wis’
	A thrill went through his yearning heart,
	As when two lovers kiss!
	She spake to him, she sang to him:
	Resistless was her strain;
	Half drew him in, half lured him in;
	He ne’er was seen again.


3. IN SUMMER

	How plain and height
	With dewdrops are bright!
	How pearls have crown’d
	The plants all around!
	How sighs the breeze
	Thro’ thicket and trees!
	How loudly in the sun’s clear rays
	The sweet birds carol forth their lays!
	
	But, ah! above,
	Where saw I my love,
	Within her room,
	Small, mantled in gloom,
	Enclosed around,
	Where sunlight was drown’d,
	How little there was earth to me,
	With all its beauteous majesty!


4. IT IS GOOD

	IN Paradise while moonbeams played,
	Jehovah found, in slumber deep,
	Adam fast sunk; He gently laid
	Eve near him -- she, too, fell asleep.
	There lay they now, on earth’s fair shrine,
	God’s two most beauteous thoughts divine--
	When this He saw, He cried: ‘Tis good!
	And scarce could move from where He stood.
	
	No wonder, that our joy’s complete
	While eye and eye responsive meet,
	When this blest thought of rapture moves us--
	That we’re with Him who truly loves us,
	And if He cries -- Good, let it be!
	‘Tis so for both, it seems to me.
	Thou’rt clasped within these arms of mine,
	Dearest of all God’s thoughts divine!


5. JUNE

	SHE behind yon mountain lives,
	Who my love’s sweet guerdon gives.
	Tell me, mount, how this can be!
	Very glass thou seem’st to me,
	And I seem to be close by,
	For I see her drawing nigh;
	Now, because I’m absent, sad,
	Now, because she sees me, glad!
	
	Soon between us rise to sight
	Valleys cool, with bushes light,
	Streams and meadows; next appear
	
	Mills and wheels, the surest token
	That a level spot is near,
	
	Plains far-stretching and unbroken.
	And so onwards, onwards roam,
	To my garden and my home!
	
	But how comes it then to pass?
	All this gives no joy, alas!--
	I was ravish’d by her sight,
	By her eyes so fair and bright,
	By her footstep soft and light.
	How her peerless charms I praised,
	When from head to foot I gazed!
	I am here, she’s far away,--
	I am gone, with her to stay.
	
	If on rugged hills she wander,
	
	If she haste the vale along,
	Pinions seem to flutter yonder,
	
	And the air is fill’d with song;
	With the glow of youth still playing,
	
	Joyous vigour in each limb,
	One in silence is delaying,
	
	She alone ‘tis blesses him.
	
	Love, thou art too fair, I ween!
	Fairer I have never seen!
	From the heart full easily
	Blooming flowers are cull’d by thee.
	If I think: “Oh, were it so,”
	Bone and marrow seen to glow!
	If rewarded by her love,
	Can I greater rapture prove?
	
	And still fairer is the bride,
	When in me she will confide,
	When she speaks and lets me know
	All her tale of joy and woe.
	All her lifetime’s history
	Now is fully known to me.
	Who in child or woman e’er
	Soul and body found so fair?


6. MARCH

	THE snow-flakes fall in showers,
	
	The time is absent still,
	When all Spring’s beauteous flowers,
	When all Spring’s beauteous flowers
	
	Our hearts with joy shall fill.
	
	With lustre false and fleeting
	
	The sun’s bright rays are thrown;
	The swallow’s self is cheating:
	The swallow’s self is cheating,
	
	And why? He comes alone!
	
	Can I e’er feel delighted
	
	Alone, though Spring is near?
	Yet when we are united,
	Yet when we are united,
	
	The Summer will be here.


7. THE METAMORPHOSIS OF PLANTS

	THOU art confused, my beloved, at, seeing the thousandfold 
	union
	
	Shown in this flowery troop, over the garden dispers’d;
	any a name dost thou hear assign’d; one after another
	
	Falls on thy list’ning ear, with a barbarian sound.
	None resembleth another, yet all their forms have a likeness;
	
	Therefore, a mystical law is by the chorus proclaim’d;
	Yes, a sacred enigma! Oh, dearest friend, could I only
	
	Happily teach thee the word, which may the mystery 
	solve!
	Closely observe how the plant, by little and little progressing,
	
	Step by step guided on, changeth to blossom and 
	fruit!
	First from the seed it unravels itself, as soon as the silent
	
	Fruit-bearing womb of the earth kindly allows Its 
	escape,
	And to the charms of the light, the holy, the ever-in-motion,
	
	Trusteth the delicate leaves, feebly beginning 
	to shoot.
	Simply slumber’d the force in the seed; a germ of the future,
	
	Peacefully lock’d in itself, ‘neath the integument 
	lay,
	Leaf and root, and bud, still void of colour, and shapeless;
	
	Thus doth the kernel, while dry, cover that motionless 
	life.
	Upward then strives it to swell, in gentle moisture confiding,
	
	And, from the night where it dwelt, straightway 
	ascendeth to light.
	Yet still simple remaineth its figure, when first it appeareth;
	
	And ‘tis a token like this, points out the child 
	‘mid the plants.
	Soon a shoot, succeeding it, riseth on high, and reneweth,
	
	Piling-up node upon node, ever the primitive form;
	Yet not ever alike: for the following leaf, as thou seest,
	
	Ever produceth itself, fashioned in manifold ways.
	Longer, more indented, in points and in parts more divided,
	
	Which. all-deform’d until now, slept in the organ 
	below,
	So at length it attaineth the noble and destined perfection,
	
	Which, in full many a tribe, fills thee with wondering 
	awe.
	Many ribb’d and tooth’d, on a surface juicy and swelling,
	
	Free and unending the shoot seemeth in fullness 
	to be;
	Yet here Nature restraineth, with powerful hands, the formation,
	
	And to a perfecter end, guideth with softness its 
	growth,
	Less abundantly yielding the sap, contracting the vessels,
	
	So that the figure ere long gentler effects doth 
	disclose.
	Soon and in silence is check’d the growth of the vigorous branches,
	
	And the rib of the stalk fuller becometh in form.
	Leafless, however, and quick the tenderer stem then up-springeth,
	
	And a miraculous sight doth the observer enchant.
	Ranged in a circle, in numbers that now are small, and now countless,
	
	Gather the smaller-sized leaves, close by the side 
	of their like.
	Round the axis compress’d the sheltering calyx unfoldeth,
	
	And, as the perfectest type, brilliant-hued coronals 
	forms.
	Thus doth Nature bloom, in glory still nobler and fuller,
	
	Showing, in order arranged, member on member uprear’d.
	Wonderment fresh dost thou feel, as soon as the stem rears the flower
	
	Over the scaffolding frail of the alternating leaves.
	But this glory is only the new creation’s foreteller,
	
	Yes, the leaf with its hues feeleth the hand all 
	divine,
	And on a sudden contracteth itself; the tenderest figures
	
	Twofold as yet, hasten on, destined to blend into 
	one.
	Lovingly now the beauteous pairs are standing together,
	
	Gather’d in countless array, there where the altar 
	is raised.
	Hymen hovereth o’er them, and scents delicious and mighty
	
	Stream forth their fragrance so sweet, all things 
	enliv’ning around.
	Presently, parcell’d out, unnumber’d germs are seen swelling,
	
	Sweetly conceald in the womb, where is made perfect 
	the fruit.
	Here doth Nature close the ring of her forces eternal;
	
	Yet doth a new one, at once, cling to the one gone 
	before,
	So that the chain be prolonged for ever through all generations,
	
	And that the whole may have life, e’en as enjoy’d 
	by each part.
	Now, my beloved one, turn thy gaze on the many-hued thousands
	
	Which, confusing no more, gladden the mind as they 
	wave.
	Every plant unto thee proclaimeth the laws everlasting,
	
	Every flowered speaks louder and louder to thee;
	But if thou here canst decipher the mystic words of the goddess,
	
	Everywhere will they be seen, e’en though the features 
	are changed.
	Creeping insects may linger, the eager butterfly hasten,--
	
	Plastic and forming, may man change e’en the figure 
	decreed!
	Oh, then, bethink thee, as well, how out of the germ of acquaintance,
	
	Kindly intercourse sprang, slowly unfolding its 
	leaves;
	Soon how friendship with might unveil’d itself in our bosoms,
	
	And how Amor, at length, brought forth blossom 
	and fruit
	Think of the manifold ways wherein Nature hath lent to our feelings,
	
	Silently giving them birth, either the first or 
	the last!
	Yes, and rejoice in the present day! For love that is holy
	
	Seeketh the noblest of fruits,--that where the 
	thoughts are the same,
	Where the opinions agree,--that the pair may, in rapt contemplation,
	
	Lovingly blend into one,--find the more excellent 
	world.


8. NOVEMBER SONG

	To the great archer--not to him
	
	To meet whom flies the sun,
	And who is wont his features dim
	
	With clouds to overrun--
	
	But to the boy be vow’d these rhymes,
	
	Who ‘mongst the roses plays,
	Who hear us, and at proper times
	
	To pierce fair hearts essays.
	
	Through him the gloomy winter night,
	
	Of yore so cold and drear,
	Brings many a loved friend to our sight,
	
	And many a woman dear.
	
	Henceforward shall his image fair
	
	Stand in yon starry skies,
	And, ever mild and gracious there,
	
	Alternate set and rise.


9. PROCEMION

	IN His blest name, who was His own creation,
	Who from all time makes making his vocation;
	The name of Him who makes our faith so bright,
	Love, confidence, activity, and might;
	In that One’s name, who, named though oft He be,
	Unknown is ever in Reality:
	As far as ear can reach, or eyesight dim,
	Thou findest but the known resembling Him;
	How high so’er thy fiery spirit hovers,
	Its simile and type it straight discovers
	Onward thou’rt drawn, with feelings light and gay,
	Where’er thou goest, smiling is the way;
	No more thou numbrest, reckonest no time,
	Each step is infinite, each step sublime.
	
	WHAT God would outwardly alone control,
	And on his finger whirl the mighty Whole?
	He loves the inner world to move, to view
	Nature in Him, Himself in Nature too,
	So that what in Him works, and is, and lives,
	The measure of His strength, His spirit gives.
	
	WITHIN us all a universe doth dwell;
	And hence each people’s usage laudable,
	That ev’ry one the Best that meets his eyes
	As God, yea e’en his God, doth recognise;
	To Him both earth and heaven surrenders he,
	Fears Him, and loves Him too, if that may be.


10. THE REUNION

	CAN it be! of stars the star,
	Do I press thee to my heart?
	In the night of distance far,
	What deep gulf, what bitter smart!
	Yes, ‘tis thou, indeed at last,
	Of my joys the partner dear!
	Mindful, though, of sorrows past,
	I the present needs must fear.
	
	When the still unfashioned earth
	Lay on God’s eternal breast,
	He ordained its hour of birth,
	With creative joy possessed.
	Then a heavy sigh arose,
	When He spake the sentence: -- “Be!”
	And the All, with mighty throes,
	Burst into reality.
	
	And when thus was born the light,
	Darkness near it feared to stay,
	And the elements with might
	Fled on every side away;
	Each on some far-distant trace,
	Each with visions wild employed,
	Numb, in boundless realms of space,
	Harmony and feeling-void.
	
	Dumb was all, all still and dead,
	For the first time, God alone!
	Then He formed the morning-red,
	Which soon made its kindness known:
	It unravelled from the waste
	Bright and glowing harmony,
	And once more with love was graced
	What contended formerly.
	
	And with earnest, noble strife,
	Each its own peculiar sought;
	Back to full, unbounded life,
	Sight and feeling soon were brought.
	Wherefore, if ‘tis done, explore
	_How?_ why give the manner, name?
	Allah need create no more,
	We his world ourselves can frame.
	
	So, with morning pinions brought,
	To thy mouth was I impelled;
	Stamped with thousand seals by night,
	Star-clear is the bond fast held.
	Paragons on earth are we
	Both of grief and joy sublime,
	And a second sentence: -- “Be!”
	Parts us not a second time.


11. TO THE DISTANT ONE

	AND have I lost thee evermore,
	Hast thou, oh, fair one, from me flown?
	Still in mine ear sounds, as of yore,
	Thine every word, thine every tone.
	
	As when at morn the wanderer’s eye
	Attempts to pierce the air in vain,
	When, hidden in the azure sky,
	The lark high o’er him chants his strain:
	
	So do I cast my troubled gaze
	Through bush, through forest, o’er the lea;
	Thou art invoked by all my lays;
	Oh, come then, loved one, back to me!

