*** Anthony Hecht (1923 - 2004)


1. AFTER THE RAIN

	The barbed-wire fences rust
	As their cedar uprights blacken
	After a night of rain.
	Some early, innocent lust
	Gets me outdoors to smell
	The teasle, the pelted bracken,
	The cold, mossed-over well,
	Rank with its iron chain,
	And takes me off for a stroll.
	Wetness has taken over.
	From drain and creeper twine
	It’s runnelled and trenched and edged
	A pebbled serpentine
	Secretly, as though pledged
	To attain a difficult goal
	And join some important river.
	The air is a smear of ashes
	With a cool taste of coins.
	Stiff among misty washes,
	The trees are as black as wicks,
	Silent, detached and old.
	A pallor undermines
	Some damp and swollen sticks.
	The woods are rich with mould.
	How even and pure this light!
	All things stand on their own,
	Equal and shadowless,
	In a world gone pale and neuter,
	Yet riddled with fresh delight.
	The heart of every stone
	Conceals a toad, and the grass
	Shines with a douse of pewter.
	Somewhere a branch rustles
	With the life of squirrels or birds,
	Some life that is quick and right.
	This queer, delicious bareness,
	This plain, uniform light,
	In which both elms and thistles,
	Grass, boulders, even words,
	Speak for a Spartan fairness,
	Might, as I think it over,
	Speak in a form of signs,
	If only one could know
	All of its hidden tricks,
	Saying that I must go
	With a cool taste of coins
	To join some important river,
	Some damp and swollen Styx.
	Yet what puzzles me the most
	Is my unwavering taste
	For these dim, weathery ghosts,
	And how, from the very first,
	An early, innocent lust
	Delighted in such wastes,
	Sought with a reckless thirst
	A light so pure and just.



2. ALCESTE IN THE WILDERNESS

	(In Le Misanthrope Alceste, having become disgusted with all forms and manners of society,
	  goes off into exile, leaving behind Philinte, who shall now become his rival in love.)

	Evening is clogged with gnats as the light fails,
	And branches bloom with gold and copper screams
	Of birds with fancy prices on their tails
	To plume a lady’s gear; the motet wails
	Through Africa upon dissimilar themes.

	A little snuff-box whereon Daphnis sings
	In pale enamels, touching love’s defeat,
	Calls up the color of her underthings
	And plays upon the taut memorial strings,
	Trailing her laces down into this heat.

	One day he found, topped with a smutty grin,
	The small corpse of a monkey, partly eaten.
	Force of the sun had split the bluish skin,
	Which, by their questioning and entering in,
	A swarm of bees had been concerned to sweeten.

	He could distill no essence out of this.
	That yellow majesty and molten light
	Should bless this carcass with a sticky kiss
	Argued a brute and filthy emphasis.
	The half-moons of the finger-nails were white,

	And where the nostrils opened on the skies,
	Issuing to the sinus, where the ant
	Crawled swiftly down to undermine the eyes
	Of cloudy aspic, nothing could diguise
	How terribly the thing looked like Philinte.

	Will-o-the-wisp, on the scum laden water,
	Burns in the night, a gaseous deceiver,
	In the pale shade of France’s foremost daughter.
	Heat gives his thinking cavity no quarter,
	For he is burning with the monkey’s fever.

	Before the bees have diagramed their comb
	Within the skull, before summer has cracked
	The back of Daphnis, naked, polychrome,
	Paris shall see the tempered exile home,
	Peruked and stately for the final act.



3. APPLICATION FOR A GRANT

	Noble executors of the munificent testament
	Of the late John Simon Guggenheim, distinguished bunch
	Of benefactors, there are certain kinds of men
	Who set their hearts on being bartenders,
	For whom a life upon duck-boards, among fifths,
	Tapped kegs and lemon twists, crowded with lushes
	Who can master neither their bladders nor consonants,
	Is the only life, greatly to be desired.
	There’s the man who yearns for the White House, there to compose
	Rhythmical lists of enemies, while someone else
	Wants to be known to the Tour d’Argent’s head waiter.
	As the Sibyl of Cumae said: It takes all kinds.
	Nothing could bribe your Timon, your charter member
	Of the Fraternal Order of Grizzly Bears to love
	His fellow, whereas it’s just the opposite
	With interior decorators; that’s what makes horse races.
	One man may have a sharp nose for tax shelters,
	Screwing the IRS with mirth and profit;
	Another devote himself to his shell collection,
	Deaf to his offspring, indifferent to the feast
	With which his wife hopes to attract his notice.
	Some at the Health Club sweating under bar bells
	Labor away like grunting troglodytes,
	Smelly and thick and inarticulate,
	Their brains squeezed out through their pores by sheer exertion.
	As for me, the prize for poets, the simple gift
	For amphybrachs strewn by a kind Euterpe,
	With perhaps a laurel crown of the evergreen
	Imperishable of your fine endowment
	Would supply my modest wants, who dream of nothing
	But a pad on Eighth Street and your approbation.



4. BIRDWATCHERS OF AMERICA

	It’s all very well to dream of a dove that saves,
	Picasso’s or the Pope’s,
	The one that annually coos in Our Lady’s ear
	Half the world’s hopes,
	And the other one that shall cunningly engineer
	The retirement of all businessmen to their graves,
	And when this is brought about
	Make us the loving brothers of every lout--
	But in our part of the country a false dusk
	Lingers for hours; it steams
	From the soaked hay, wades in the cloudy woods,
	Engendering other dreams.
	Formless and soft beyond the fence it broods
	Or rises as a faint and rotten musk
	Out of a broken stalk.
	There are some things of which we seldom talk;
	For instance, the woman next door, whom we hear at night,
	Claims that when she was small
	She found a man stone dead near the cedar trees
	After the first snowfall.
	The air was clear. He seemed in ultimate peace
	Except that he had no eyes. Rigid and bright
	Upon the forehead, furred
	With a light frost, crouched an outrageous bird.



5. DEATH SAUNTERING ABOUT

	The crowds have gathered here by the paddock gates
	And racing silks like the flags of foreign states
	Billow and snap in the sun,
	And thoroughbreds prance and paw the turf, the race
	Is hotly contested, for win and show and place,
	Before it has yet begun.

	The ladies’ gowns in corals and mauves and reds,
	Like fluently-changing variegated beds
	Of a wild informal garden,
	Float hither and yon where gentlemen advance
	Questions of form, the inscrutable ways of chance,
	As edges of shadow harden.

	Among these holiday throngs, a passer-by,
	Mute, unremarked, insouciant, saunter I,
	One who has placed
	Despite the tumult, the pounding of hooves, the sweat,
	And the urgent importance of everybody’s bet--
	No premium on haste.



6. DEATH THE ARCHBISHOP

	_. . . and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall
	  fail; because man goeth to his long home; and the mourners go about the streets._

	Ah my poor erring flock,
	Truant and slow to come unto my ways,
	Making an airy mock
	Of those choice pastures where my chosen graze,
	You loiter childishly in pleasure’s maze,
	nheedful of the clock.

	Mere tuneless vanities
	Deflect you from the music of my word;
	You haste or take your ease
	As if your cadences could be deferred,
	Giving your whole consent to brief, absurd
	And piping symphonies.

	The crozier, alb and cope
	Compose the ancient blazons of my truth
	Whose broad intent and scope
	Shows how discordant are the glees of youth,
	How weak the serum of that serpent’s tooth
	The ignorant call _hope_.

	Yet shall you come to see
	In articles and emblems of my faith
	That in mortality
	Lies all our comfort, as the preacher saith,
	And to the blessèd kingdom of the wraith
	I have been given the key.



7. DEATH THE COPPERPLATE PRINTER

	I turn Christ’s cross till it turns Catherine’s wheel,
	Ixion’s wheel becoming Andrew’s cross,
	All four being windlass ways
	To press my truth full home, force you to feel
	The brevity of your days,
	Your strength’s, health’s, teeth’s, desire’s and memory’s loss.

	The bitten plate, removed from its Dutch Bath
	Of mordants, has been set below a screw
	That will enforce my will
	Like the press that crushed Isaiah’s grapes of wrath.
	My lightest touch can kill,
	My costly first impressions can subdue.

	Slowly I crank my winch, and the bones crack,
	The skull splits open and the ribs give way.
	Who, then, thinks to endure?
	Confess the artistry of my attack;
	Admire the fine gravure,
	The trenched darks, the cross-hatching, the pale gray.

	This is no metaphor. Margaret Clitheroe,
	A pious woman, even as she prayed
	Was cheated of her breath
	By a court verdict that some years ago
	Ordered her pressed to death.
	I’m always grateful for such human aid.



8. DEATH THE MEXICAN REVOLUTIONARY

	Wines of the great châteaux
	Have been uncorked for you;
	Come, take this terrace chair;
	Examine the menu.
	The view from here is such
	As cannot find a match,
	For even as you dine
	You’re so placed as to watch
	Starvation in our streets
	That gives your canapé
	A more exquisite taste
	By contrast, like the play
	Of shadow and of light.
	The misery of the poor
	Appears, as on TV.
	Set off by the allure
	And glamour of the ads.
	We recommend the quail,
	Which you’d do well to eat
	Before your powers fail,
	For I inaugurate
	A brand-new social order
	Six cold, decisive feet
	South of the border.



9. DEATH THE PAINTER

	Snub-nosed, bone-fingered, deft with engraving tools,
	I have alone been given
	The powers of Joshua, who stayed the sun
	In its traverse of heaven.
	Here in this Gotham of unnumbered fools
	I have sought out and arrested everyone.

	Under my watchful eye all human creatures
	Convert to a _still life_,
	As with unique precision I apply
	White lead and palette knife.
	A model student of remodelled features,
	The final barber, the last beautician, I.

	You lordlings, what is Man, his blood and vitals,
	When all is said and done?
	A poor forked animal, a nest of flies.
	Tell us, what is this one
	Once shorn of all his dignities and titles,
	Divested of his testicles and eyes?



10. DEATH THE PUNCHINELLO

	_Kent: This is not altogether fool, my lord.
	Fool: No, faith, lords and great men will not let me. If I had a monopoly out, they would have
	  part on’t. And ladies too, they will not let me have all the fool to myself; they’ll be snatching._

	Two servants were paid to set his house on fire
	And, when he fled, to pierce him with little darts.
	And so this man, widely praised and admired,
	Envied by many, a soldier, philosopher,
	A young Adonis, was dead at forty-six.
	So much, alas, for Alcibiades.
	Now as for me, admittedly grotesque,
	Cheated of feature by dissembling Nature,
	Bearing an envious mountain on my back
	Where sits deformity to mock my body,
	I’m your imperishable comedian.
	I suffer multi-interments, executions,
	Yet like Donne’s lovers, I die and rise the same,
	Vulgar, mean, selfish, undefeatable.
	You wouldn’t think me much to look at me,
	A clown’s hooked nose and all the rest of it,
	Yet, for all that, I have a way with women.
	Love ’em and leave ’em, as I like to say.
	And nothing pleases the kids more than my cudgel.
	They see the justice of it, don’t you see.
	How, against all odds, this ugly man,
	Hated, unmanumitted just like them,
	Wields his big stick and whacks authority
	Hard on its wooden head. I lack the graces
	That everyone observed in the young Greek,
	Women and men alike. He grew so vain
	He wouldn’t play the flute, claimed it distorted
	The sculptural virtues of his classic features.
	That, I would venture to say, is not my problem.
	You find me always dressed, made-up, in white,
	All dredged in flour, like an apprentice baker,
	Though sometimes masked, like your Jack Ketch, in black.



11. DILEMMA

	“Dark and amusing he is, this handsome gallant,
	Of chamois-polished charm,
	Athlete and dancer of uncommon talent--
	Is there cause for alarm
	In his smooth demeanor, the proud tilt of his chin,
	This _cavaliere servente_, this Harlequin?

	“Gentle and kindly this other, ardent but shy,
	With an intelligence
	Who would not glory to be guided by--
	And would it not make sense
	To trust in someone so devoted, so
	Worshipful as this tender, pale Pierrot?

	“Since both of them delight, if I must choose
	I win a matchless mate,
	But by that very winning choice I lose--
	I pause, I hesitate,
	Putting decision off,” says Columbine,
	“And while I hesitate, they both are mine.”



12. DOUBLE SONNET

	I recall everything, but more than all,
	Words being nothing now, an ease that ever
	Remembers her to my unfailing fever,
	How she came forward to me, letting fall
	Lamplight upon her dress till every small
	Motion made visible seemed no mere endeavor
	Of body to articulate its offer,
	But more a grace won by the way from all
	Striving in what is difficult, from all
	Losses, so that she moved but to discover
	A practice of the blood, as the gulls hover,
	Winged with their life, above the harbor wall,
	Tracing inflected silence in the tall
	Air with a tilt of mastery and quiver
	Against the light, as the light fell to favor
	Her coming forth; this chiefly I recall.

	It is a part of pride, guiding the hand
	At the piano in the splash and passage
	Of sacred dolphins, making numbers human
	By sheer extravagance that can command
	Pythagorean heavens to spell their message
	Of some unlooked-for peace, out of the common;
	Taking no thought at all that man and woman,
	Lost in the trance of lamplight, felt the presage
	Of the unbidden terror and bone hand
	Of gracelessness, or the unspoken omen
	That yet shall render all, by its first usage,
	Speechless, inept, and totally unmanned.



13. ECLOGUE OF THE SHEPHERD AND THE TOWNIE

	_Shepherd:_

	Not the blue-fountained Florida hotel,
	Bell-capped, bellevued, straight-jacketed and decked
	With chromium palms and a fromage of moon,
	Not goodnight chocolates, nor the soothing slide
	Of huîtres and sentinel straight-up martinis,
	Neither the yacht heraldic nor the stretch
	Limos and pants, Swiss banks or Alpine stocks
	Shall solace you, or quiet the long pain
	Of cold ancestral disinheritance,
	Severing your friendly commerce with the beasts,
	Gone, lapsed, and cancelled, rendered obsolete
	As the gonfalon of Bessarabia,
	The shawm, the jitney, the equestrian order,
	The dark daguerreotypes of Paradise.


	_Townie:_

	No humble folding cot, no steaming sty
	Or sheep-dipped meadow now shall dignify
	Your brute and sordid commerce with the beasts,
	Scotch your flea-bitten bitterness or down
	The voice that keeps repeating, “Up your Ars
	Poetica, your earliest diapered dream
	Of the long-gone Odd Fellows amity
	Of bunny and scorpion, the entente cordiale
	Of lamb and lion, the old nursery fraud
	And droll Aesopic zoo in which the chatter
	Of chimp and chaffinch, manticore and mouse,
	Diverts us from all thought of entrecôtes,
	Prime ribs and rashers, filets mignonnettes,
	Provided for the paired pythons and jackals,
	Off to their catered second honeymoons
	On Noah’s forty-day excursion cruise.”


	_Shepherd:_

	Call it. if this should please you, but a dream,
	A bald, long-standing lie and mockery,
	Yet it deserves better than your contempt.
	Think also of that interstellar darkness,
	Silence and desolation from which the Tempter,
	Like a space capsule exiled into orbit,
	Looks down on our green cabinet of peace,
	A place classless and weaponless, without
	Envy or fossil fuel or architecture.
	Think of him as at dawn he views a snail
	Traveling with blind caution up the spine
	Of a frond asway with its little inching weight
	In windless nods that deepen with assent
	Till the ambler at last comes back to earth,
	Leaving his route, as on the boughs of heaven,
	Traced with a silver scrawl. The morning mist
	Haunts all about that action till the sun
	Makes of it a small glory, and the dew
	Holds the whole scale of rainbow, the accord
	Of stars and waters, luminously viewed
	At the same time by water-walking spiders
	That dimple a surface with their passages.
	In the lewd Viennese catalogue of dreams
	It’s one of the few to speak of without shame.


	_Townie:_

	It is the dream of a shepherd king or child,
	And is without all blemish except one:
	That it supposes all virtue to stem
	From pure simplicity. But many cures
	Of body and of spirit are the fruit
	Of cultivated thought. Kindness itself
	Depends on what we call consideration.
	Your fear of corruption is a fear of thought,
	Therefore you would be thoughtless. Think again.
	Consider the perfect hexagrams of snow,
	Those broadcast emblems of divinity,
	That prove in their unduplicable shapes
	Insights of Thales and Pythagoras.
	If you must dream, dream of the ratio
	Of Nine to Six to Four Palladio used
	To shape those rooms and chapels where the soul
	Imagines itself blessed, and finds its peace
	Even in chambers of the Malcontenta,
	Those just proportions we hypostatize
	Not as flat prairies but the City of God.



14. THE END OF THE WEEKEND

	A dying firelight slides along the quirt
	Of the cast iron cowboy where he leans
	Against my father’s books. The lariat
	Whirls into darkness. My girl in skin tight jeans
	Fingers a page of Captain Marriat
	Inviting insolent shadows to her shirt.
	We rise together to the second floor.
	Outside, across the lake, an endless wind
	Whips against the headstones of the dead and wails
	In the trees for all who have and have not sinned.
	She rubs against me and I feel her nails.
	Although we are alone, I lock the door.
	The eventual shapes of all our formless prayers:
	This dark, this cabin of loose imaginings,
	Wind, lip, lake, everything awaits
	The slow unloosening of her underthings
	And then the noise. Something is dropped. It grates
	against the attic beams. I climb the stairs
	Armed with a belt.
	A long magnesium shaft
	Of moonlight from the dormer cuts a path
	Among the shattered skeletons of mice.
	A great black presence beats its wings in wrath.
	Above the boneyard burn its golden eyes.
	Some small grey fur is pulsing in its grip.



15. THE FEAST OF STEPHEN

	I.

	The coltish horseplay of the locker room,
	Moist with the steam of the tiled shower stalls,
	With shameless blends of civet, musk and sweat,
	Loud with the cap-gun snapping of wet towels
	Under the steel-ribbed cages of bare bulbs,
	In some such setting of thick basement pipes
	And janitorial realities
	Boys for the first time frankly eye each other,
	Inspect each others’ bodies at close range,
	And what they see is not so much another
	As a strange, possible version of themselves,
	And all the sparring dance, adrenal life,
	Tense, jubilant nimbleness, is but a vague,
	Busy, unfocused ballet of self-love.


	II.

	If the heart has its reasons, perhaps the body
	Has its own lumbering sort of carnal spirit,
	Felt in the tingling bruises of collision,
	And known to captains as _esprit de corps_.
	What is this brisk fraternity of timing,
	Pivot and lobbing arc, or indirection,
	_Mens sana_ in men’s sauna, in the flush
	Of health and toilets, private and corporal glee,
	These fleet caroms, _plies_ and genuflections
	Before the salmon-leap, the leaping fountain
	All sheathed in glistening light, flexed and alert?
	From the vast echo-chamber of the gym,
	Among the stumbled shouts and shrill of whistles,
	The bounced basketball sound of a leather whip.


	III.

	Think of those barren places where men gather
	To act in the terrible name of rectitude,
	Of acned shame, punk’s pride, muscle or turf,
	The bully’s thin superiority.
	Think of the _Sturm-Abteilungs Kommandant_
	Who loves Beethoven and collects Degas,
	Or the blond boys in jeans whose narrowed eyes
	Are focussed by some hard and smothered lust,
	Who lounge in a studied mimicry of ease,
	Flick their live butts into the standing weeds,
	And comb their hair in the mirror of cracked windows
	Of an abandoned warehouse where they keep
	In darkened readiness for their occasion
	The rope, the chains, handcuffs and gasoline.


	IV.

	Out in the rippled heat of a neighbor’s field,
	In the kilowatts of noon, they’ve got one cornered.
	The bugs are jumping, and the burly youths
	Strip to the waist for the hot work ahead.
	They go to arm themselves at the dry-stone wall,
	Having flung down their wet and salty garments
	At the feet of a young man whose name is Saul.
	He watches sharply these superbly tanned
	Figures with a swimmer’s chest and shoulders,
	A miler’s thighs, with their self-conscious grace,
	And in between their sleek, converging bodies,
	Brilliantly oiled and burnished by the sun,
	He catches a brief glimpse of bloodied hair
	And hears an unintelligible prayer.



16. A FRIEND KILLED IN THE WAR

	Night, the fat serpent, slipped among the plants,
	Intent upon the apples of his eyes;
	A heavy bandoleer hung like a prize
	Around his neck, and tropical red ants
	Mounted his body, and he heard advance,
	Little by little, the thin female cries
	Of mortar shells. He thought of Paradise.
	Such is the vision that extremity grants.

	In the clean brightness of magnesium
	Flares, there were seven angels by a tree.
	Their hair flashed diamonds, and they made him doubt
	They were not really from Elysium.
	And his flesh opened like a peony,
	Red at the heart, white petals furling out.



17. A HILL

	In Italy, where this sort of thing can occur,
	I had a vision once; though you understand
	It was nothing at all like Dante’s, or the visions of saints,
	And perhaps not a vision at all. I was with some friends,
	Picking my way through a warm sunlit piazza
	In the early morning. A clear fretwork of shadows
	From huge umbrellas littered the pavement and made
	A sort of lucent shallows in which was moored
	A small navy of carts. Books, coins, old maps,
	Cheap landscapes and ugly religious prints
	Were all on sale. The colors and noise
	Like the flying hands were gestures of exultation,
	So that even the bargaining
	Rose to the ear like a voluble godliness.
	And then, where it happened, the noises suddenly stopped,
	And it got darker; pushcarts and people dissolved
	And even the great Farnese Palace itself
	Was gone, for all its marble; in its place
	Was a hill, mole-colored and bare. It was very cold,
	Close to freezing, with a promise of snow.
	The trees were like old ironwork gathered for scrap
	Outside a factory wall. There was no wind,
	And the only sound for a while was the little click
	Of ice as it broke in the mud under my feet.
	I saw a piece of ribbon snagged on a hedge,
	But no other sign of life. And then I heard
	What seemed the crack of a rifle. A hunter, I guessed;
	At least I was not alone. But just after that
	Came the soft and papery crash
	Of a great branch somewhere unseen falling to earth.
	And that was all, except for the cold and silence
	That promised to last forever, like the hill.
	Then prices came through, and fingers, and I was restored
	To the sunlight and my friends. But for more than a week
	I was scared by the plain bitterness of what I had seen.
	All this happened about ten years ago,
	And it hasn’t troubled me since, but at last, today,
	I remembered that hill; it lies just to the left
	Of the road north of Poughkeepsie; and as a boy
	I stood before it for hours in wintertime.



18. HORATIAN VIRTUE

	A blameless, upright life, an unblemished conscience,
	Plus the fact that clearly I’m not on anyone’s shit list,
	Neither the Fed’s nor any of my neighbors’,
	Bolsters me, Hanson,

	More solidly than a Saturday Night Special;
	Whether footslogging through Brooklyn at four AM
	Or risking the gloom-filled catacombs of the subway,
	Everything’s dandy.

	For when catastrophe struck at Three Mile Island
	I was miles away, singing about my Mabel,
	Mating my rhymes, while even the liquid coolant
	Turned radioactive.

	Things were quite tense in eastern Pennsylvania:
	Would the milk, the air, the bloodstreams all grow radiant,
	Women give birth to prodigies, their husbands
	Die prematurely?

	You could set me anywhere-on a desert island
	Without a TV set and no Man Friday,
	Condemned to a steady diet of bark and berries
	And frittered star-fish,

	Or banish me to the freezing wastes of Sodus,
	Where, by report, the men spit solid ice-cubes-
	And you’ld find me engrossed in innocent, flowing numbers,
	Measuring Mabel.



19. IT OUT-HERODS HEROD. PRAY YOU AVOID IT

	Tonight my children hunch
	Toward their Western, and are glad
	As, with a Sunday punch,
	The Good casts out the Bad.

	And in their fairy tales
	The warty giant and witch
	Get sealed in doorless jails
	And the match-girl strikes it rich.

	I’ve made myself a drink.
	The giant and witch are set
	To bust out of the clink
	When my children have gone to bed.

	All frequencies are loud
	With signals of despair;
	In flash and morse they crowd
	The rondure of the air.

	For the wicked have grown strong,
	Their numbers mock at death,
	Their cow brings forth its young,
	Their bull engendereth.

	Their very fund of strength,
	Satan, bestrides the globe;
	He stalks its breadth and length
	And finds out even Job.

	Yet by quite other laws
	My children make their case;
	Half God, half Santa Claus,
	But with my voice and face,

	A hero comes to save
	The poorman, beggarman, thief,
	And make the world behave
	And put an end to grief.

	And that their sleep be sound
	I say this childermas
	Who could not, at one time,
	Have saved them from the gas.



20. A LETTER

	I have been wondering
	What you are thinking about, and by now suppose
	It is certainly not me.
	But the crocus is up, and the lark, and the blundering
	Blood knows what it knows.
	It talks to itself all night, like a sliding moonlit sea.
	Of course, it is talking of you.
	At dawn, where the ocean has netted its catch of lights,
	The sun plants one lithe foot
	On that spill of mirrors, but the blood goes worming through
	Its warm Arabian nights,
	Naming your pounding name again in the dark heart-root.
	Who shall, of course, be nameless.
	Anyway, I should want you to know I have done my best,
	As I’m sure you have, too.
	Others are bound to us, the gentle and blameless
	Whose names are not confessed
	In the ceaseless palaver. My dearest, the clear unquaried blue

	Of those depths is all but blinding.
	You may remember that once you brought my boys
	Two little woolly birds.
	Yesterday the older one asked for you upon finding
	Your thrush among his toys.
	And the tides welled about me, and I could find no words.
	There is not much else to tell.
	One tries one’s best to continue as before,
	Doing some little good.
	But I would have you know that all is not well
	With a man dead set to ignore
	The endless repetitions of his own murmurous blood.



21. LOT’S WIFE

	How simple the pleasures of those childhood days,
	Simple but filled with exquisite satisfactions.
	The iridescent labyrinth of the spider,
	Its tethered tensor nest of polygons
	Puffed by the breeze to a little bellying sail--
	Merely observing this gave infinite pleasure.
	The sound of rain. The gentle graphite veil
	Of rain that makes of the world a steel engraving,
	Full of soft fadings and faint distances.
	The self-congratulations of a fly,
	Rubbing its hands. The brown bicameral brain
	Of a walnut. The smell of wax. The feel
	Of sugar to the tongue: a delicious sand.
	One understands immediately how Proust
	Might cherish all such postage-stamp details.
	Who can resist the charms of retrospection?



22. MATHEMATICS CONSIDERED AS A VICE

	I would invoke that man
	Who chipped for all posterity an ass
	(The one that Jesus rode)
	Out of hard stone, and set its either wing
	Among the wings of the most saintly clan
	On Chartres Cathedral, and that it might sing
	The praise to all who pass
	Of its unearthly load,
	Hung from its neck a harp-like instrument.
	I would invoke that man
	To aid my argument.

	The ass smiles on us all,
	Being astonished that an ass might rise
	To such sure eminence
	Not merely among asses but mankind,
	Simpers, almost, upon the western wall
	In praise of folly, who midst sow and kine,
	Saw with its foolish eyes
	Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense
	Enter the stable door, against all odds.
	The ass smiles on us all.
	Our butt at last is God’s.

	That man is but an ass--
	More perfectly, that ass is but a man
	Who struggles to describe
	Our rich, contingent and substantial world
	In ideal signs: the dunged and pagan grass,
	Misted in summer, or the mother-of-pearled
	Home of the bachelor-clam.
	A cold and toothless tribe
	Has he for brothers, who would coldly think.
	That man is but an ass
	Who smells not his own stink.

	For all his abstract style
	Speaks not to our humanity, and shows
	Neither the purity
	Of heaven, nor the impurity beneath,
	And cannot see the feasted crocodile
	Ringed with St. Francis’ birds to pick its teeth,
	Nor can his thought disclose
	To normal intimacy,
	Siamese twins, the double-beasted back,
	For all his abstract style
	Utters our chiefest lack.

	Despite his abstract style,
	Pickerel will dawdle in their summer pools
	Lit by the flitterings
	Of light dashing the gusty surfaces,
	Or lie suspended among shades of bile
	And lime in fluent shift, for all he says.
	And all the grey-haired mules,
	Simple and neuter things,
	Will bray hosannas, blessing harp and wing.
	For all his abstract style,
	The ass will learn to sing.



23. MORE LIGHT! MORE LIGHT!

	_for Heinrich Blücher and Hannah Arendt_

	Composed in the Tower before his execution
	These moving verses, and being brought at that time
	Painfully to the stake, submitted, declaring thus:
	“I implore my God to witness that I have made no crime.”

	Nor was he forsaken of courage, but the death was horrible,
	The sack of gunpowder failing to ignite.
	His legs were blistered sticks on which the black sap
	Bubbled and burst as he howled for the Kindly Light.

	And that was but one, and by no means one of the worst;
	Permitted at least his pitiful dignity;
	And such as were by made prayers in the name of Christ,
	That shall judge all men, for his soul’s tranquillity.

	We move now to outside a German wood.
	Three men are there commanded to dig a hole
	In which the two Jews are ordered to lie down
	And be buried alive by the third, who is a Pole.

	Not light from the shrine at Weimar beyond the hill
	Nor light from heaven appeared. But he did refuse.
	A Lüger settled back deeply in its glove.
	He was ordered to change places with the Jews.

	Much casual death had drained away their souls.
	The thick dirt mounted toward the quivering chin.
	When only the head was exposed the order came
	To dig him out again and to get back in.

	No light, no light in the blue Polish eye.
	When he finished a riding boot packed down the earth.
	The Lüger hovered lightly in its glove.
	He was shot in the belly and in three hours bled to death.

	No prayers or incense rose up in those hours
	Which grew to be years, and every day came mute
	Ghosts from the ovens, sifting through crisp air,
	And settled upon his eyes in a black soot.



24. NAMING THE ANIMALS

	Having commanded Adam to bestow
	Names upon all the creatures, God withdrew
	To empyrean palaces of blue
	That warm and windless morning long ago,
	And seemed to take no notice of the vexed
	Look on the young man’s face as he took thought
	Of all the miracles the Lord had wrought,
	Now to be labelled, dubbed, yclept, indexed.

	Before an addled mind and puddled brow,
	The feathered nation and the finny prey
	Passed by; there went biped and quadruped.
	Adam looked forth with bottomless dismay
	Into the tragic eyes of his first cow,
	And shyly ventured, “Thou shalt be called ‘Fred.’”



25. AN OFFERING FOR PATRICIA

	_The work has been going forward with the greatest difficulty, chiefly because I cannot concentrate.
	  I have no feeling about whether what I am writing is good or bad, and the whole business
	  is totally without excitement and pleasure for me. And I am sure I know the reason. It’s that
	  I can’t stand leaving unresolved my situation with Pat. I hear from her fairly frequently,
	  asking when I plan to come back, and she knows that I am supposed to appear at the poetry
	  reading in the middle of January. It is not mainly loneliness I feel, though I feel it; but I have
	  been lonely before. It is quite frankly the feeling that nothing is really settled between
	  us, and that in the mean time I worry about how things are going to work out. This has made
	  my work more difficult than it has ever been before._

	--From a letter to his parents dated November 9, 1955, Rome.


	Hardly enough for me that the pail of water
	Alive with the wrinkling light
	Brings clearness home and whiter
	Than mind conceives the walls mature to white,
	Or that the washed tomatoes whose name is given
	To love fulfill their bowl
	And the Roman sea is woven
	Together by threading fish and made most whole.

	I delight in each of these, delight moreover
	In the dark skill of those hands
	Closer to wise than clever
	Of our blind Italian landlady who stands
	Her shoes fouled with the lustful blood of rabbit
	Lightly dispatched and dressed
	Fixing it to the gibbet
	Of the clothesline where the laundry sails to rest.

	These textures solicit of us our instant homage
	But are disparate senseless things
	Unless a reigning image
	Bring them to purpose as your presence brings
	The world in offering, like a chaplet worn
	In Aphrodite’s name,
	The furious unicorn
	Come to the virgin’s lap tethered and tame.

	And thus it is as you stand in this morning’s shadows
	Where ancient chamber pots
	Are grown to little meadows
	Of mint and parsley; surely it’s love unknots
	The winds for Ulysses and recalls to man
	A summer without cease;
	Sprung from the same dishpan
	Onion and lily work their primal peace.



26. THE PLATE

	Now he has silver in him. When sometime
	Death shall boil down unnecessary fat
	To reach the nub of our identity,
	When in the run of crime
	The skull is rifled for the gold in teeth,
	And chemistry has eaten from the spine
	Superfluous life and vigor, why then he
	Will show a richness to be wondered at,
	And shall be thought a mine
	Whose claim and stake are stone and floral wreath.

	The body burns away, and burning gives
	Light to the eye and moisture to the lip
	And warmth to our desires, but it burns
	Whatever body lives
	Into extinction though it wear a plate
	Of armor in it: therefore do we thrive
	In fear of fire, in terror of the ship
	That carries us to fire. A soldier learns
	To bear the silver weight
	Where in his head the fire is most alive.



27. PROSPECTS

	We have set out from here for the sublime
	Pastures of summer shade and mountain stream;
	I have no doubt we shall arrive on time.
	Is all the green of that enameled prime
	A snapshot recollection or a dream?
	We have set out from here for the sublime
	Without provisions, without one thin dime,
	And yet, for all our clumsiness, I deem
	It certain that we shall arrive on time.
	No guidebook tells you if you’ll have to climb
	Or swim. However foolish we may seem,
	We have set out from here for the sublime
	And must get past the scene of an old crime
	Before we falter and run out of steam,
	Riddled by doubt that we’ll arrive on time.
	Yet even in winter a pale paradigm
	Of birdsong utters its obsessive theme.
	We have set out from here for the sublime;
	I have no doubt we shall arrive on time.



28. THIRD AVENUE IN SUNLIGHT

	Third Avenue in sunlight. Nature’s error.
	Already the bars are filled and John is there.
	Beneath a plentiful lady over the mirror
	He tilts his glass in the mild mahogany air.

	I think of him when he first got out of college,
	Serious, thin, unlikely to succeed;
	For several months he hung around the Village,
	Boldly T-shirted, unfettered but unfreed.

	Now he confides to a stranger, “I was first scout,
	And kept my glimmers peeled till after dark.
	Our outfit had as its sign a bloody knout,
	We met behind the museum in Central Park.

	Of course, we were kids.” But still those savages,
	War-painted, a flap of leather at the loins,
	File silently against him. Hostages
	Are never taken. One summer, in Des Moines,

	They entered his hotel room, tomahawks
	Flashing like barracuda. He tried to pray.
	Three years of treatment. Occasionally he talks
	About how he almost didn’t get away.

	Daily the prowling sunlight whets its knife
	Along the sidewalk. We almost never meet.
	In the Rembrandt dark he lifts his amber life.
	My bar is somewhat further down the street.



29. TO PHYLLIS

	If thou must wander in these Woods,
	As vagrant as Affection’s moods,
	Be thou directed, Phyllis, by
	Some vigilant Philosophy
	That may dissociate thy grief
	From seasons simple to the leaf.

	Such Learning, though it set thee free
	To relish Summer’s prodigy,
	To love all Ripeness, and to dote
	Freely upon the Poet’s Oat,
	May save thee breathing thy despair
	Into this wide incessant Air.

	For we must master, if we can,
	A Craft particular to Man,
	And study through our little Term
	To smile at the Ironic Worm
	Sequestered at the core of Love
	That smiles when it is spoken of.

	The Apple that was Venus’ prize
	Inclines to dazzle human eyes,
	And, winning in its golden hue,
	Core of the circumscribing Blue,
	Seems to enchant the willing Mind
	Out of the forces of the wind.

	Wherefore I offer thee the Plan
	Of a most earnest, gifted man
	Who learned “to use my selfe in jest,”
	And in this wise might we ingest
	The airy Differences that turn
	The Thinking Reed or potted Fern.

	The new-born Child, held like a Fowl
	High by the heels, is taught to howl
	For Air and for his mother’s Pap
	By an invigorating slap;
	Thus do our lives at once begin
	With an ambiguous Medicine.

	And therefore, Girl, when thou dost rove,
	Full of uncomplemented Love,
	Mourn not to see the Apple fall,
	For we are fallen, and may call
	Love into being only by
	The Shifts of Multiplicity.



30. THE TRANSPARENT MAN

	I’m mighty glad to see you, Mrs. Curtis,
	And thank you very kindly for this visit--
	Especially now when all the others here
	Are having holiday visitors, and I feel
	A little conspicuous and in the way.
	It’s mainly because of Thanksgiving. All these mothers
	And wives and husbands gaze at me soulfully
	And feel they should break up their box of chocolates
	For a donation, or hand me a chunk of fruitcake.
	What they don’t understand and never guess
	Is that it’s better for me without a family;
	It’s a great blessing. Though I mean no harm.
	And as for visitors, why, I have you,
	All cheerful, brisk and punctual every Sunday,
	Like church, even if the aisles smell of phenol.
	And you always bring even better gifts than any
	On your book-trolley. Though they mean only good,
	Families can become a sort of burden.
	I’ve only got my father, and he won’t come,
	Poor man, because it would be too much for him.
	And for me, too, so it’s best the way it is.
	He knows, you see, that I will predecease him,
	Which is hard enough. It would take a callous man
	To come and stand around and watch me failing.
	(Now don’t you fuss; we both know the plain facts.)
	But for him it’s even harder. He loved my mother.
	They say she looked like me; I suppose she may have.
	Or rather, as I grew older I came to look
	More and more like she must one time have looked,
	And so the prospect for my father now
	Of losing me is like having to lose her twice.
	I know he frets about me. Dr. Frazer
	Tells me he phones in every single day,
	Hoping that things will take a turn for the better.
	But with leukemia things don’t improve.
	It’s like a sort of blizzard in the bloodstream,
	A deep, severe, unseasonable winter,
	Burying everything. The white blood cells
	Multiply crazily and storm around,
	Out of control. The chemotherapy
	Hasn’t helped much, and it makes my hair fall out.
	I know I look a sight, but I don’t care.
	I care about fewer things; I’m more selective.
	It’s got so I can’t even bring myself
	To read through any of your books these days.
	It’s partly weariness, and partly the fact
	That I seem not to care much about the endings,
	How things work out, or whether they even do.
	What I do instead is sit here by this window
	And look out at the trees across the way.
	You wouldn’t think that was much, but let me tell you,
	It keeps me quite intent and occupied.
	Now all the leaves are down, you can see the spare,
	Delicate structures of the sycamores,
	The fine articulation of the beeches.
	I have sat here for days studying them,
	And I have only just begun to see
	What it is that they resemble. One by one,
	They stand there like magnificent enlargements
	Of the vascular system of the human brain.
	I see them there like huge discarnate minds,
	Lost in their meditative silences.
	The trunks, branches and twigs compose the vessels
	That feed and nourish vast immortal thoughts.
	So I’ve assigned them names. There, near the path,
	Is the great brain of Beethoven, and Kepler
	Haunts the wide spaces of that mountain ash.
	This view, you see, has become my Hall of Fame,
	It came to me one day when I remembered
	Mary Beth Finley who used to play with me
	When we were girls. One year her parents gave her
	A birthday toy called “The Transparent Man.”
	It was made of plastic, with different colored organs,
	And the circulatory system all mapped out
	In rivers of red and blue. She’d ask me over
	And the two of us would sit and study him
	Together, and do a powerful lot of giggling.
	I figure he’s most likely the only man
	Either of us would ever get to know
	Intimately, because Mary Beth became
	A Sister of Mercy when she was old enough.
	She must be thirty-one; she was a year
	Older than I, and about four inches taller.
	I used to envy both those advantages
	Back in those days. Anyway, I was struck
	Right from the start by the sea-weed intricacy,
	The fine-haired, silken-threaded filiations
	That wove, like Belgian lace, throughout the head.
	But this last week it seems I have found myself
	Looking beyond, or through, individual trees
	At the dense, clustered woodland just behind them,
	Where those great, nameless crowds patiently stand.
	It’s become a sort of complex, ultimate puzzle
	And keeps me fascinated. My eyes are twenty-twenty,
	Or used to be, but of course I can’t unravel
	The tousled snarl of intersecting limbs,
	That mackled, cinder grayness. It’s a riddle
	Beyond the eye’s solution. Impenetrable.
	If there is order in all that anarchy
	Of granite mezzotint, that wilderness,
	It takes a better eye than mine to see it.
	It set me on to wondering how to deal
	With such a thickness of particulars,
	Deal with it faithfully, you understand,
	Without blurring the issue. Of course I know
	That within a month the sleeving snows will come
	With cold, selective emphases, with massings
	And arbitrary contrasts, rendering things
	Deceptively simple, thickening the twigs
	To frosty veins, bestowing epaulets
	And decorations on every birch and aspen.
	And the eye, self-satisfied, will be misled,
	Thinking the puzzle solved, supposing at last
	It can look forth and comprehend the world.
	That’s when you have to really watch yourself.
	So I hope that you won’t think me plain ungrateful
	For not selecting one of your fine books,
	And I take it very kindly that you came
	And sat here and let me rattle on this way.
