*** Heinrich Heine (1797 - 1856)


1. DECLARATION

	Onward glimmering came the evening,
	Wilder tossèd the flood,
	And I sat on the strand, regarding
	The snowy dance of the billows,
	And soon my bosom swell’d like the sea;
	A deep home-sickness yearningly seized me
	For thee, thou darling form,
	Who everywhere surround’st me,
	And everywhere call’st me,
	Everywhere, everywhere,
	In the moan of the wind, in the roar of the ocean,
	In the sigh within my own breast.
	
	With brittle reed I wrote on the sand:
	“Agnes, I love thee!”
	But wicked billows soon pour’d themselves
	Over the blissful confession,
	Effacing it all.
	
	Ah too fragile reed, all fast-scatter’d sand,
	Ah fugitive billows, I’ll trust you no more!
	The heavens grow darker, my heart grows wilder
	And with vigorous hand from the forests of Norway
	Tear I the highest fir-tree,
	And plunge it deep
	In Etna’s glowing abyss, and thereafter
	With fire-imbued giant-pen
	I write on the dark veil of heaven:
	“Agnes, I love thee!”
	Every night gleams thenceforward
	On high that eternal fiery writing,
	And all generations of farthest descendants
	Read gladly the heavenly sentence:
	“Agnes, I love thee!”


2. IN THE CABIN AT NIGHT

	   The sea its pearls possesseth,
	   And heaven its stars containeth,
	   But, O my heart, my heart,
	   My heart its love hath also.
	
	   Vast is the sea and the heavens,
	   Yet vaster is my heart,
	   And fairer than pearls or the stars
	   Glitt’reth and beameth my love.
	
	   Thou little youthful maiden,
	   Come to my heart so vast;
	   My heart and the sea and the heavens
	   For very love are dying.
	
	   --
	
	   ’Gainst the azure veil of heaven,
	   Where the beauteous stars are twinkling,
	   Fain I’d press my lips with ardour,
	   Press them wildly, madly weeping.
	
	   Yonder stars the very eyes are
	   Of my loved one, thousand-changing
	   Glimmer they and greet me kindly
	   From the azure veil of heaven.
	
	   Tow’rd the azure veil of heaven,
	   Tow’rd the eyes of my beloved one,
	   Lift I up my arms in worship,
	   And I pray, and thus beseech them:
	
	   Beauteous eyes, ye lights of mercy,
	   O make happy my poor spirit,
	   Let me die, and as my guerdon,
	   Win both you and all your heaven!
	
	   --
	
	   From those heavenly eyes above me
	   Light and trembling sparks are falling
	   Through the night, and then my spirit
	   Loving-wide and wider stretcheth.
	
	   O ye heavenly eyes above me!
	   Weep yourselves into my spirit,
	   That my spirit may run over
	   With those tears so sweet and starry!
	
	   --
	
	   Cradled by the ocean billows,
	   And by thoughts that seem like visions,
	   Silent lie I in the cabin,
	   In the dark bed in the corner.
	
	   Through the open hatchway see I
	   There on high the stars all-radiant,
	   Those sweet eyes so dearly cherish’d
	   Of my sweet and dearly loved one.
	
	   Those sweet eyes so dearly cherish’d
	   Far above my head are watching,
	   And they tinkle and they beckon
	   From the azure veil of heaven.
	
	   Tow’rd the azure veil of heaven
	   Gaze I many an hour with rapture,
	   Till a white and misty curtain
	   From me hides those eyes so cherish’d.
	
	   ’Gainst the boarded side of the ship,
	   Where my dreaming head is lying,
	   Rave the billows, the furious billows.
	   They roar and they murmur
	   Thus soft in my ear:
	
		“O foolish young fellow!
		“Thine arm is short, and the heavens are wide,
		“And yonder stars are firmly nailed there;
		“In vain is thy yearning, in vain is thy sighing,
		“The best thou can’st do is to sleep!”
	
	   --
	
		I dreamt, and dreaming saw a spacious heath,
		Far overspread with white, with whitest snow,
		And ’neath that white snow buried I was lying,
		And slept the lonesome, chilly sleep of death.
	
		Yet from on high, from out the darkling heavens,
		Look’d down upon my grave those eyes all-starry,
		Those eyes so sweet! In triumph they were gleaming
		In calm and radiant but excessive love.


3. MEETING AGAIN

	One summer eve, in the woodbine bower
	 We sat once more at the window lonely;
	The moon arose with life-giving power,
	 But we appear’d two spectres only.
	
	Twelve years had pass’d since the last occasion
	 When we on this spot had sat together;
	Each tender glow, each loving persuasion
	 Had meanwhile been quench’d in life’s rough weather.
	
	I silently sat. The woman, however,
	 Just like her sex, amongst love’s ashes
	Must needs be raking, but vain her endeavour
	 To kindle again its long-quench’d flashes.
	
	And she recounted how she had contended
	 With evil thoughts, the story disclosing
	How hardly she once her virtue defended,--
	 I stupidly listened to all her prosing.
	
	When homeward I rode, the trees beside me
	 Like spirits beneath the moon’s rays flitted;
	Sad voices call’d, but onward I hied me,
	 Yes, I and the dead, who my side ne’er quitted.


4. THE NIGHT ON THE STRAND

	Starless and cold is the night,
	The ocean boils;
	And over the sea, flat on its belly,
	Lies the misshapen Northwind;
	With groaning and stifled mysterious voice,
	A sullen grumbler, good-humour’d for once,
	Prates he away to the waves,
	Telling many a wild tradition,
	Giant-legends, murderous-humorous,
	Primeval Sagas from Norway,
	And the while, far echoing, laughs he and howls he
	Exorcists’ songs of the Edda,
	Grey old Runic proverbs,
	So darkly-daring, and magic-forcible,
	That the white sons of Ocean
	Spring up on high, all exulting,
	In madden’d excitement.
	
	Meanwhile, along the flat shore,
	Over the flood-moisten’d sand,
	Paces a stranger, whose heart within him
	Is wilder far than wind and waters;
	There where he walks
	Sparks fly out, and shells are crackling,
	And he veils himself in his dark-grey mantle,
	And quickly moves on through the blustering night;--
	Guided in safety by yon little light,
	That sweetly, invitingly glimmers,
	From the lone fisherman’s cottage.
	
	Father and brother are out on the sea,
	And all all alone is staying
	Within the hut the fisherman’s daughter,
	The wondrously lovely fisherman’s daughter.
	By the hearth she’s sitting,
	And lists to the water-kettle’s
	Homely, sweet foreboding humming,
	And shakes in the fire the crackling brushwood
	And on it blows,
	So that the lights, all ruddy and flickering,
	Magic-sweetly are reflected
	On her fair blooming features,
	On her tender, snowy shoulder,
	Which, moving gently, peeps
	From out her coarse grey smock,
	And on her little, anxious hand,
	Which fastens firmer her under-garment,
	Over her graceful hip.
	
	But sudden, the door bursts open,
	The nightly stranger entereth in;
	Love-secure, his eye reposes
	On the snowy, slender maiden,
	Who, trembling, near him stands,
	Like to a startled lily;
	And he throws his mantle to earth,
	And laughs and speaks:
	
	“See now, my child, I’ve kept my word,
	“And I come, and with me hath come
	“The olden time, when the gods from the heavens
	“Came down to earth, to the daughters of mortals,
	“And the daughters of mortals embraced they,
	“And from them there issued
	“Sceptre-bearing races of monarchs,
	“And heroes, wonders of earth.
	
	“But start not, my child, any longer
	“Because of my godhead,
	“And I pray thee give me some tea mix’d with rum
	“For ’tis cold out of doors,
	“And amid such night breezes
	“Freeze even we, we godheads immortal,
	“And easily catch the divinest of colds,
	“And a cough that proves quite eternal.”


5. THE PHOENIX

	There comes a bird who hath flown from the westward,
	He flies tow’rd the east,
	Tow’rd the eastern garden-home,
	Where the spices so fragrant are growing,
	And palms are waving and wells are cooling--
	And, flying, the wondrous bird thus singeth
	She loves him, she loves him!
	His image she bears in her little bosom,
	And bears it sweetly and secretly hidden,
	Nor knows it herself!
	But in her vision, before her he stands,
	She prays, and she weeps, and she kisses his hands,
	And calls on his name,
	And calling awakes she and lieth all-startled,
	And rubbeth her beauteous eyes in amazement--
	She loves him! she loves him!


6. QUESTIONS

	By the sea, by the desert night-cover’d sea
	Standeth a youth,
	His breast full of sadness, his head full of doubtings,
	And with gloomy lips he asks of the billows:
	
	“O answer me life’s hidden riddle,
	“The riddle primeval and painful,
	“Over which many a head has been poring,
	“Heads in hieroglyphical nightcaps,
	“Heads in turbans and swarthy bonnets,
	“Heads in perukes, and a thousand other
	“Poor and perspiring heads of us mortals--
	“Tell me what signifies man?
	“From whence doth he come? And where doth he go?
	“Who dwelleth amongst the golden stars yonder?”
	
	The billows are murm’ring their murmur eternal,
	The wind is blowing, the clouds are flying,
	The stars are twinkling, all listless and cold,
	And a fool is awaiting an answer.


7. SEA SALUTATION

	Thalatta! Thalatta!
	Hail to thee, O thou Ocean eterne!
	Hail to thee ten thousand times
	From hearts all exulting,
	As formerly hail’d thee
	Ten thousand Grecian hearts,
	Misfortune-contending, homeward-aspiring,
	World-renown’d Grecian hearts.
	
	The billows were heaving,
	They heaved and they bluster’d,
	The sun shed hastily downwards
	His light so sportive and rosy-hued;
	The sudden-startled flocks of sea-mews
	Flutter’d along, loud screaming,
	The horses were stamping, the bucklers were ringing,
	And afar there resounded triumphantly:
	Thalatta! Thalatta!
	Hail to thee, O thou Ocean eterne!
	Like voices of home thy waters are rushing,
	Like visions of childhood saw I a glimmering
	Over thy heaving billowy-realm,
	And olden remembrance again tells me stories
	Of all the darling, beautiful playthings,
	Of all the glittering Christmas presents,
	Of all the ruddy coral branches,
	The gold fish, pearls and colour’d shells
	Which thou mysteriously dost keep
	Down yonder in bright crystal house.
	
	O how have I languish’d in drear foreign lands!
	Like to a wither’d flower
	In the tin case of a botanist,
	Lay in my bosom my heart;
	Methought whole winters long I sat
	An invalid, in darksome sick-room,
	And now I suddenly leave it,
	And with dazzling rays am I greeted
	By emerald springtime, the sunny-awaken’d,
	And the snowy blossoming trees are all rustling,
	And the youthful flowers upon me gaze
	With eyes all chequer’d and fragrant;
	There’s a perfume and humming and breathing and laughing,
	And the birds in the azure heavens are singing--
	Thalatta! Thalatta!
	
	Thou valiant retreating heart!
	How oft, how bitter-oft, wast thou
	Hard press’d by the Northern barbarian women
	From large victorious eyes
	Shot they their burning arrows;
	With words both crooked and polish’d
	They threatened to cleave my breast,
	With cuniform billets-doux harass’d they
	My poor distracted brain--
	In vain I held my shield to resist them,
	The arrows whizz’d and the blows crash’d heavily,
	And by the Northern barbarian women
	Back to the sea was I driven,
	And freely breathing I hailèd the sea,
	The darling life-saving sea,
	Thalatta! Thalatta!


8. SUNSET

	The beauteous sun
	Hath calmly descended down to the sea;
	The heaving waters already are dyed
	By dusky night;
	Nought but the evening’s red
	With golden light still spreadeth o’er them,
	And the rushing force of the flood
	’Gainst the shore presseth the snowy billows
	Which merrily, hastily skip,
	Like wool-cover’d flocks of lambkins
	Whom the singing sheep-boy at even
	Homeward doth drive.
	
	“How fair is the sun!”--
	So spake, after long silence, my friend,
	Who with me wander’d along the strand,
	And half in sport and half in sad earnest
	Assured he me that the sun was only
	A lovely woman, whom the old sea-god
	Out of convenience married;
	All the day long she joyously wander’d
	In the high heavens, deck’d out with purple,
	And glitt’ring with diamonds,
	And all-beloved and all-admired
	By every mortal creature,
	And every mortal creature rejoicing
	With her sweet glances’ light and warmth;
	But in the evening, impell’d all-disconsolate.
	Once more returneth she home
	To the moist house and desert arms
	Of her grey-headed spouse.
	
	“Believe me”--here added my friend,
	With laughter and sighing and laughter again:
	“They’re living below in the tenderest union!
	“Either they’re sleeping or quarrelling fiercely,
	“So that up here e’en the ocean is roaring,
	“And the fisherman hears in the rush of the waves
	“How the old man’s abusing his wife:
	“‘Thou round wench of the universe!
	“Beaming coquettish one!
	“‘All the day long thou art glowing for others,
	“‘At night for me thou art frosty and tired.’
	“After this curtain lecture
	“As a matter of course the proud sun
	“Bursts into tears, lamenting her misery,
	“And cries so sadly and long, that the sea-god
	“Suddenly springs from his bed all distracted,
	“And hastily swims to the surface of ocean,
	“To recover his breath and his senses.
	“I saw him myself, in the night just past,
	“Rising out of the sea as high as his bosom;
	“A jacket of yellow flannel he wore,
	“And a lily-white nightcap,
	“And a face all wither’d and dry.”


9. THUNDERSTORM

	Heavily lies on the ocean the storm,
	And through the darksome wall of clouds
	Quivers the forkèd lightning flash,
	Suddenly gleaming and suddenly vanishing,
	Like a thought from the head of Cronion.
	Over the desert, far-heaving water
	Afar the thunders are rolling,
	The snowy billowy horses are springing,
	Which Boreas’ self did engender
	Out of the beautiful mares of Erichton,
	And the seafowl are mournfully fluttering,
	Like shadowy corpses by Styx,
	By Charon repulsed from his desolate bark.
	
	Poor, but merry little ship,
	Yonder dancing the strangest dance!
	Æolus sends it his briskest attendants,
	Who wildly strike up for the frolicsome dance;
	The one is piping, another is blowing,
	The third is beating the hollow double-bass--
	And the staggering sailor stands at the rudder,
	And on the compass is steadily looking,
	That trembling soul of the vessel,
	And raises his hands in entreaty to heaven;
	“O rescue me, Castor, thou hero gigantic,
	And thou, knight of the ring, Polydeuces!”


10. THE WHIMS OF THE AMOROUS

	Upon the hedge the beetle sits sadly,
	He has fallen in love with a lady-fly madly.
	
	O fly of my soul, ’tis thou alone
	Art the wife I have chosen to be my own.
	
	O marry me, and be not cold,
	For I have a belly of glistening gold.
	
	My back is a mass of glory and show,
	There rubies glitter, there emeralds glow--
	
	O would that I were a fool just now!
	I’d never marry a beetle, I vow.
	
	I care not for emeralds, rubies, or gold,
	I know that no happiness riches enfold.
	
	’Tis tow’rd the ideal my thought soars high,
	For I am in truth a haughty fly.--
	
	The beetle flew off, with a heart like to break,
	The fly went away, a bath to take.
	
	O what has become of my maid, the bee,
	That she when I’m washing may wait on me,
	
	That she may stroke my soft hair outside,
	For I am now a beetle’s bride.
	
	In truth, a splendid party I’ll give,
	For handsomer beetle never did live.
	
	His back is a mass of glory and show,
	There rubies glitter, there emeralds glow.
	
	His belly is golden, and noble each feature;
	With envy will burst full many a creature.
	
	Make haste, Miss Bee, and dress my hair,
	And lace my waist, use perfumes rare.
	
	With otto of roses rub me o’er,
	And lavender oil on my feet then pour,
	
	That I mayn’t stink or nastily smell,
	When I in my bridegroom’s arms shall dwell.
	
	Already are flitting the dragonflies blue,
	As maids of honour to wait on me too.
	
	Into my bridal garland they’ll twine
	The blossoms white of the orange so fine.
	
	Full many musicians are asked to the place,
	And singers as well, of the grasshopper race.
	
	The bittern, drone, hornet, and gadfly all come,
	To blow on the trumpet, and beat the drum.
	
	They’re all to strike up for the glad wedding feast--
	The gay-wingèd guests, from greatest to least,
	
	Are coming in families dapper and brisk,
	The commoner insects amongst them frisk.
	
	The grasshoppers, wasps, and the aunts, and the cousins
	Are coming, whilst trumpets are blowing by dozens.
	
	The pastor, the mole, in black dignified state,
	Has also arrived, and the hour grows late.
	
	The bells are all sounding ding-dong, ding-a-dong--
	But where’s my dear bridegroom ling’ring so long?
	
	Ding dong, ding-a-dong, sound the bells all the day,
	The bridegroom however has flown far away.
	
	The bells are all sounding ding-dong, ding-a-dong--
	But where’s my dear bridegroom ling’ring so long?
	
	The bridegroom has meanwhile taken his seat
	On a distant dunghill, enjoying the heat.
	
	Seven years there sits he, until his forgotten
	Poor bride has long been dead and rotten.