*** Felicia Hemans (1793 - 1835)


1. CASABIANCA

	The boy stood on the burning deck
	Whence all but he had fled;
	The flame that lit the battle’s wreck
	Shone round him o’er the dead.
	Yet beautiful and bright he stood,
	As born to rule the storm;
	A creature of heroic blood,
	A proud, though childlike form.
	
	The flames roll’d on . . . he would not go
	Without his father’s word;
	That father, faint in death below,
	His voice no longer heard.
	
	He call’d aloud . . . “Say, father, say
	If yet my task is done!”
	He knew not that the chieftain lay
	Unconscious of his son.
	
	“Speak, father!” once again he cried
	“If I may yet be gone!”
	And but the booming shots replied,
	And fast the flames roll’d on.
	
	Upon his brow he felt their breath,
	And in his waving hair,
	And looked from that lone post of death,
	In still yet brave despair;
	
	And shouted but one more aloud,
	“My father, must I stay?”
	While o’er him fast, through sail and shroud
	The wreathing fires made way,
	
	They wrapt the ship in splendour wild,
	They caught the flag on high,
	And stream’d above the gallant child,
	Like banners in the sky.
	
	There came a burst of thunder sound . . . 
	The boy--oh! where was he?
	Ask of the winds that far around
	With fragments strewed the sea.
	
	With mast, and helm, and pennon fair,
	That well had borne their part;
	But the noblest thing which perished there
	Was that young faithful heart.



2. FLIGHT OF THE SPIRIT

	Whither, oh! whither wilt thou wing thy way?
	What solemn region first upon thy sight
	Shall break, unveiled for terror or delight?
	What hosts, magnificent in dread array,
	My spirit! when thy prison-house of clay
	After long strife is rent? Fond, fruitless quest!
	The unfledged bird, within his narrow nest,
	Sees but a few green branches oer him play,
	And through their parting leaves, by fits revealed,
	A glimpse of summer sky; nor knows the field
	Wherein his dormant powers must yet be tried.
	Thou art that bird!--of what beyond thee lies
	Far in the untracked immeasurable skies
	Knowing but this--that thou shalt find thy guide!



3. SABBATH SONNET

	How many blessed groups this hour are bending,
	Through England’s primrose meadow-paths, their way
	Towards spire and tower, ‘midst shadowy elms ascending,
	Whence the sweet chimes proclaim the hallowed day!
	The halls from old heroic ages gray
	Pour their fair children forth; and hamlets low,
	With those thick orchard-blooms the soft winds play,
	Send out their inmates in a happy flow,
	Like a freed vernal stream. I may not tread
	With them those pathways, to the feverish bed
	Of sickness bound; yet, O my God! I bless
	Thy mercy, that with Sabbath peace hath filled
	My chastened heart, and all its throbbings stilled
	To one deep calm of lowliest thankfulness.
