*** Hermann Hesse (1877 - 1962)


1. ON A JOURNEY

	Don’t be downcast, soon the night will come,
	When we can see the cool moon laughing in secret
	Over the faint countryside,
	And we rest, hand in hand.

	Don’t be downcast, the time will soon come
	When we can have rest. Our small crosses will stand
	On the bright edge of the road together,
	And rain fall, and snow fall,
	And the winds come and go.



2. I KNOW, YOU WALK

	I walk so often, late, along the streets,
	Lower my gaze, and hurry, full of dread,
	Suddenly, silently, you still might rise
	And I would have to gaze on all your grief
	With my own eyes,
	While you demand your happiness, that’s dead.
	I know, you walk beyond me, every night,
	With a coy footfall, in a wretched dress
	And walk for money, looking miserable!
	Your shoes gather God knows what ugly mess,
	The wind plays in your hair with lewd delight--
	You walk, and walk, and find no home at all.



3. LYING IN GRASS

	Is this everything now, the quick delusions of flowers,
	And the down colors of the bright summer meadow,
	The soft blue spread of heaven, the bees’ song,
	Is this everything only a god’s
	Groaning dream,
	The cry of unconscious powers for deliverance?
	The distant line of the mountain,
	That beautifully and courageously rests in the blue,
	Is this too only a convulsion,
	Only the wild strain of fermenting nature,
	Only grief, only agony, only meaningless fumbling,
	Never resting, never a blessed movement?
	No! Leave me alone, you impure dream
	Of the world in suffering!
	The dance of tiny insects cradles you in an evening radiance,
	The bird’s cry cradles you,
	A breath of wind cools my forehead
	With consolation.
	Leave me alone, you unendurably old human grief!
	Let it all be pain.
	Let it all be suffering, let it be wretched--
	But not this one sweet hour in the summer,
	And not the fragrance of the red clover,
	And not the deep tender pleasure
	In my soul.



4. THINKING OF A FRIEND AT NIGHT

	In this evil year, autumn comes early . . .
	I walk by night in the field, alone, the rain clatters,
	The wind on my hat . . . And you? And you, my friend?

	You are standing--maybe--and seeing the sickle moon
	Move in a small arc over the forests
	And bivouac fire, red in the black valley.
	You are lying--maybe--in a straw field and sleeping
	And dew falls cold on your forehead and battle jacket.

	It’s possible tonight you’re on horseback,
	The farthest outpost, peering along, with a gun in your fist,
	Smiling, whispering, to your exhausted horse.
	Maybe--I keep imagining--you are spending the night
	As a guest in a strange castle with a park
	And writing a letter by candlelight, and tapping
	On the piano keys by the window,
	Groping for a sound . . .

	--And maybe
	You are already silent, already dead, and the day
	Will shine no longer into your beloved
	Serious eyes, and your beloved brown hand hangs wilted,
	And your white forehead split open--Oh, if only,
	If only, just once, that last day, I had shown you, told you
	Something of my love, that was too timid to speak!

	But you know me, you know . . . and, smiling, you nod
	Tonight in front of your strange castle,
	And you nod to your horse in the drenched forest,
	And you nod to your sleep to your harsh clutter of straw,
	And think about me, and smile.
	And maybe,
	Maybe some day you will come back from the war,
	and take a walk with me some evening,
	And somebody will talk about Longwy, Luttich, Dammerkirch,
	And smile gravely, and everything will be as before,
	And no one will speak a word of his worry,
	Of his worry and tenderness by night in the field,
	Of his love. And with a single joke
	You will frighten away the worry, the war, the uneasy nights,
	The summer lightning of shy human friendship,
	Into the cool past that will never come back.



5. WITHOUT YOU

	My Pillow gazes upon me at night
	Empty as a gravestone;
	I never thought it would be so bitter
	To be alone,
	Not to lie down asleep in your hair.

	I lie alone in a silent house,
	The hanging lamp darkened,
	And gently stretch out my hands
	To gather in yours,
	And softly press my warm mouth
	Toward you, and kiss myself, exhausted and weak--
	Then suddenly I’m awake
	And all around me the cold night grows still.
	The star in the window shines clearly--
	Where is your blond hair,
	Where your sweet mouth?

	Now I drink pain in every delight
	And poison in every wine;
	I never knew it would be so bitter
	To be alone,
	Alone, without you.
