*** Robert Hillyer (1895 - 1961)


1. HOW SHOULD I THINK OF THEE

	How should I think of thee but with delight?
	How should I greet thy face but with a smile?
	And yet dark tears within my heart defile
	The dreams of thee that I would have so bright.
	If thou shouldst come and end this lonely while,
	These leaden hours of the sleepless night,
	Still should I fear to show thee what I write,
	Lest I repent in vain, and thou revile.
	
	Yet couldst thou read these scriptures of my heart,
	Graven in passion with no base control,
	For one brief moment, then, they might impart
	Some almost worthy offering from my soul.
	I write for thee, and cannot let thee read,
	Thus love denies itself its utmost need.


2. HOW STRANGE

	How strange it is that thine ethereal grace
	Should make me sorry by its loveliness,
	For surely beauty is designed to bless
	Those hours of youth that have so short a race,
	And yet the memory of some old distress
	Shadows me over when I see thy face,
	And yearning ever for one swift embrace
	Has tinged my joy in thee with bitterness.
	
	The young smiles flashing brightly free and fair,
	The laughing stars that in thy deep eyes shine,--
	It is not love for me that lights them there,
	I see their beauty, but they are not mine.
	Thy loveliness is joy poisoned with pain;
	Rapture to love, torment to love in vain.


3. THOU WERT MY ONLY HOPE

	Thou only wert my hope, and thou art gone.
	Thou, the one star in monotones of sky,
	Art vanished like a meteor, and I,
	Lost in the night, have ceased to pray for dawn.
	I watched thee fade, I saw thee passing by
	And tried to call thee, but my lips were dumb;
	It had been better hadst thou never come,--
	Remembered riches mock my poverty.
	
	Blow from afar the little sounds of bells,
	Wood-smoke hangs thinly on the autumn air,
	The town’s unconscious hush is like a prayer,
	And night sleeps pleasantly among the dells;
	I only wander on, and know not where,
	Through the great dark, pursued by faint farewells.


4. WHO FOLLOWS LOVE

	Who follows Love shall walk in outland places,
	Beyond the common cheer of hall and town,
	He shall forget all things, the friendly faces,
	The strife for wealth, the struggle for renown.
	A young crusader putting by his crown,
	A pilgrim following a holy vision,
	Heeding nor threat of king nor gibe of clown,
	The tyrant’s hatred nor the world’s derision,--
	
	Thus shall he wander; in no bright Elysian
	Meadows shall be his quest, but through the vast
	And midnight fears that shake his heart’s decision
	With staring madness, till he see at last
	Like Parsifal in ages long ago,
	Love’s flaming chalice out of darkness glow.

