*** Geoffrey Hill (1932 - 2016)


1. IN MEMORY OF JANE FRASER

	When snow like sheep lay in the fold
	And winds went begging at each door,
	And the far hills were blue with cold,
	And a cold shroud lay on the moor,
	
	She kept the siege. And every day
	We watched her brooding over death
	Like a strong bird above its prey.
	The room filled with the kettle’s breath.
	
	Damp curtains glued against the pane
	Sealed time away. Her body froze
	As if to freeze us all, and chain
	Creation to a stunned repose.
	
	She died before the world could stir.
	In March the ice unloosed the brook
	And water ruffled the sun’s hair.
	Dead cones upon the alder shook.



2. OVID IN THE THIRD REICH

	non peccat, quaecumque potest peccasse negare, 
	solaque famosam culpa professa facit. 
	
	_Amores, III, xiv_
	
	I love my work and my children. God 
	Is distant, difficult. Things happen. 
	Too near the ancient troughs of blood 
	Innocence is no earthly weapon.
	
	I have learned one thing: not to look down
	So much upon the damned. They, in their sphere, 
	Harmonize strangely with the divine
	Love. I, in mine, celebrate the love-choir.



3. REQUIEM FOR THE PLANTAGENET KINGS

	For whom the possessed sea littered, on both shores,
	Ruinous arms; being fired, and for good,
	To sound the constitution of just wars,
	Men, in their eloquent fashion, understood.
	
	Relieved of soul, the dropping-back of dust,
	Their usage, pride, admitted within doors;
	At home, under caved chantries, set in trust,
	With well-dressed alabaster and proved spurs
	They lie; they lie; secure in the decay
	Of blood, blood-marks, crowns hacked and coveted,
	Before the scouring fires of trial-day
	Alight on men; before sleeked groin, gored head,
	Budge through the clay and gravel, and the sea
	Across daubed rock evacuates its dead.



4. SEPTEMBER SONG

	_born 19.6.32 deported 24.9.42_
	
	Undesirable you may have been, untouchable
	you were not. Not forgotten
	or passed over at the proper time.
	
	As estimated, you died. Things marched,
	sufficient, to that end.
	Just so much Zyklon and leather, patented
	terror, so many routine cries.
	
	(I have made
	an elegy for myself it
	is true)
	
	September fattens on vines. Roses
	flake from the wall. The smoke
	of harmless fires drifts to my eyes.
	
	This is plenty. This is more than enough.
