*** Daniel Hoffmann (1923 - 2013)


1. APHRODITE

	How could she come to us inviolate
	From that uncomplicated country
	Of pure feeling? History

	Alters all it touches,
	And if her image now is such
	That we cannot know

	Which sacred objects her slim hands
	Held, still, her glance,
	Resting a moment on our eyes,

	Stays, then quickens with clamorous beat
	The bursting heart abandoned to desire . . .
	If some goatherd with his rude

	Mattock, or pillager’s keen blade
	Gash the cover of her mound
	To seize her, as though mortal,

	From memory’s chamber underground,
	The imperfections of her image
	Are not her imperfections, the scarred

	Seam, the limb sheared
	By avid diggers or the gnaw
	Of vandal centuries. Her face

	Requites the tribute of our awe,
	Her body’s lithe, incomparable grace
	Drives imagination wild

	Should it please her to appear
	As the one in whose embrace
	The love that is engendered is beguiled.



2. AT THE ROMAN WALL

	After my classes at the Faculté
	I join the lonely Fulbrights. Their café
	Across Rue Chabot-Charny’s an oasis
	In a desert of impassive faces,
	An island echoing in a heedless sea.
	They huddle, and their tabled ground rejoices
	To the flat yammer of their American voices.
	They make each other homesick, and make me.

	Here in this foreign one-horse town we’re far
	From convivial comforts of the familiar;
	It’s strange, missing the reassurance latent
	In mere recognition, even the blatant
	Blandness of a hometown storefront street.
	Here, change in the pocket’s no assurance.
	Taste of the bread may seem an exile’s durance
	And dripping beeves make one mistrust one’s meat.

	Here in the café wall a plaque of bronze
	Announces that these very stones were once
	The Castrum Romanum’s perimeter,
	Marking civilization’s limit, or
	Were plinths for Caesar’s routs beyond Dijon
	(Divio, then), when this carafe’s deep vintage
	Was guzzled here and paid for in a mintage
	Judas might have clapped his palm upon.

	Here, when howling helmed Burgundians swept
	Against Castrum Divionense and leapt
	These battlements, the stupored Roman legions
	Hightailed south toward less anarchic regions
	But left their temples, stocked with gods, behind.
	Here, in the shade of ruined colonial splendor
	Venus charms were hawked by the one-eyed vendor
	Whose amulets for Apollo cured the blind.



3. BLOOD

	At a wolf’s wild dugs
	When the world was young
	With eager tongue
	Twin brothers tugged,

	From foster mother
	Drew their nurture.
	Her harsh milk ran
	Thence in the blood of man,

	In the blood of kings
	Who contrived the State.
	What wolvish lust to head the pack
	The memory of that taste brings back.



4. BURNING BUSH

	If a bush were to speak with a tongue of fire
	To me, it would be a briar:
	The barberry, bearing unreachable droplets of blood,
	Or, bristling in winter, rugosas with their red hoard

	Of rosehips and a caucus of birds singing.
	Come Spring, in a burst at the road’s turning,
	A snowblossom bank of the prickly hawthorn;
	Or drooping in June on their spiny, forbidding stem,

	Blackberries ripe with the freight of dark juice in them.
	If I should listen to a bush in fame
	Announce the Unpronounceable Name
	And demand requital by a doom

	On my seed, compelling more
	Than I’d answer for--what no one else would ask--
	That voice of fire would blaze in a briar
	I cannot grasp.



5. THE CENTER OF ATTENTION

	As grit swirls in the wind the word spreads.
	On pavements approaching the bridge a crowd
	Springs up like mushrooms.
	They are hushed at first, intently

	Looking. At the top of the pylon
	The target of their gaze leans toward them.
	The sky sobs
	With the sirens of disaster crews

	Careening toward the crowd with nets,
	Ladders, resuscitation gear, their First
	Aid attendants antiseptic in white duck.
	The police, strapped into their holsters,

	Exert themselves in crowd-control.They can’t
	Control the situation.
	Atop the pylon there’s a man who threatens
	Violence. He shouts, I’m gonna jump--

	And from the river of upturned faces
	--Construction workers pausing in their construction work,
	Shoppers diverted from their shopping,
	The idlers relishing this diversion

	In the vacuity of their day--arises
	A chorus of cries--Jump!
	Jump! and No--
	Come down! Come down! Maybe, if he can hear them,

	They seem to be saying Jump down! The truth is,
	The crowd cannot make up its mind.
	This is a tough decision. The man beside me
	Reaches into his lunchbox and lets him have it.

	Jump! before he bites his sandwich,
	While next to him a young blonde clutches
	Her handbag to her breasts and moans
	Don’t Don’t Don’t so very softly

	You’d think she was afraid of being heard.
	The will of the people is divided.
	Up there he hasn’t made his mind up either.
	He has climbed and climbed on spikes imbedded in the pylon

	To get where he has arrived at.
	Is he sure now that this is where he was going?
	He looks down one way into the river.
	He looks down the other way into the people.

	He seems to be looking for something
	Or for somebody in particular.
	Is there anyone here who is that person
	Or can give him what it is that he needs?

	From the back of a firetruck a ladder teeters.
	Inching along, up up up up up, a policeman
	Holds on with one hand, sliding it on ahead of him.
	In the other, outstretched, a pack of cigarettes.

	Soon the man will decide between
	The creature comfort of one more smoke
	And surcease from being a creature.
	Meanwhile the crowd calls Jump! and calls Come down!

	Now, his cassock billowing in the bulges of Death’s black flag,
	A priest creeps up the ladder too
	What will the priest and the policeman together
	Persuade the man to do?

	He has turned his back to them.
	He has turned away from everyone.
	His solitariness is nearly complete.
	He is alone with his decision.

	No one on the ground or halfway into the sky can know
	The hugeness of the emptiness that surrounds him.
	All of his senses are orphans.
	His ribs are cold andirons.

	Does he regret his rejection of furtive pills,
	Of closet noose or engine idling in closed garage?
	A body will plummet through shrieking air,
	The audience dumb with horror, the spattered street . . .

	The world he has left is as small as toys at his feet.
	Where he stands, though nearer the sun, the wind is chill.
	He clutches his arms--a caress, or is he trying
	Merely to warm himself with his arms?

	The people below, their necks are beginning to ache.
	They are getting impatient for this diversion
	To come to some conclusion. The priest
	Inches further narrowly up the ladder.

	The center of everybody’s attention
	For some reason has lit up a butt. He sits down.
	He looks down on the people gathered, and sprinkles
	Some of his ashes upon them.

	Before he is halfway down
	The crowd is half-dispersed.
	It was his aloneness that clutched them together.
	They were spellbound by his despair

	And now each rung brings him nearer,
	Nearer to their condition
	Which is not sufficiently interesting
	To detain them from business or idleness either,

	Or is too close to a despair
	They do not dare
	Exhibit before a crowd
	Or admit to themselves they share.

	Now the police are taking notes
	On clipboards, filling the forms.
	He looks round as though searching for what he came down for.
	Traffic flows over the bridge.



6. COMANCHES

	I read this once: how the Comanche,
	Weak after long fasting, felt a slow
	Trembling shake the earth--the buffalo!--

	And raced his pony barebacked toward the herd.
	That morning not a brave in camp could gird
	Himself with strength to bend the stout bowstem,

	Yet with bursting arms he twangs his arrow
	Deep in the bison’s heart. Comanches know
	The Great Spirit, when it possesses them.

	And now the poet, half a savage bound
	By the hungers of his tribe, paces his swift
	Foray across a desolate hunting-ground

	In hopes to run to earth a fleeting creature
	And, with the unpremeditated gift
	Of spirit, seize imagination’s meat.



7. COWHEAD

	_Mrs. Smith: I seed that woman with a cowhead on, sure.
	Mrs. Richardson: A mighty bad head to carry to Jesus, in my estimation._
	--Transcribed by R. M. Dorson, _Negro Folktales in Michigan_


	I dared this. But love’s a power
	Makes one risk mockery, lose fear of shame
	Or sheer incomprehension . . . One forgets
	The unleavened burden of the flesh
	Caged in fivewits, and the five chimaeras
	Those senses take for tangibles. I came,
	I stood before you,--you still garbed in flesh
	Loomed within my once-quick womb,--and you,
	Your eyes bright beetles in two spoons of ice,
	Your hair aspine like daddylonglegs’ legs,
	Didn’t stay to hear me.
	You, among those herds in Michigan
	Where seed and stalk and flower stretch toward the sun
	In sorrowful gestures marking time’s demesne,
	Could only feel, beneath your breasts, fear’s thrill
	Like the wind-rung tingle of an icicle,
	And never sensed that love that brought me here.
	I came,
	The new moon’s crescent my corona, falling
	Through the twilight toward your trysting-place
	Where pasture joins the cornfield. There in shadows
	Your first impatient lover waited, tearing
	Tassels from a ripe ear till you came.
	I tried to tell you--spoke to the heedless cows--
	Daughter,
	Couldn’t you feel the moonshorn in your temples
	Throbbing, and the rising in your breasts,
	The fecund blood weft in your swelling womb?
	--I would have told you what his name is,
	What his fate. But let the cornfields reach
	Toward heaven. In ruts beneath their tasseled roofs
	Of green hair, rumpled by the starry wind,
	Predestined seed falls in the waiting warmth.
	You will not hear me bless the sprouting issue
	Nor know my tongue among the rustling voices;
	To one another now we cannot speak,
	But in the life that leaps forth fierce to suckle,
	Exult and sow seed gaily before its fall
	Be power of our communion, and our grace.



8. A DELIVERANCE

	Striving over tortuous trails, we come to
	A clapboard oldtime Opera House
	Past ticket-taker down a wooden corridor
	Toward the opening of the light from two high windows,
	It’s a room with benches. A door clicks behind.
	Trapped in the room now, and the windows giving
	On a steep drop down.
	Far below a stream unfurls in silver tumbling.
	From here there’s no way out, and we’ve our mission
	Still to do, rattling the locked doorjamb . . .

	I’ve come to redress wrongs. You will agree
	It is disgraceful that the Library Staff
	Of Aeronautical Sciences should dress
	In eyepatches and pantaloons
	To waylay travellers with promises
	And keep men from their business in locked rooms?
	With awed apologies he led me on inspection.
	His staff leapt to attention as we came.
	I saw the ones: That white-faced man, myopic,
	With the pimples, and the other
	Barrel-chested with a smirk around the eyes.
	This one sneered and that one quailed to see me
	State my charges to the colonel.
	The staff was singing now, festive chorale
	In Saturday night at the Yacht Club burst and gusto
	As we stalked past their tables down a hall
	That opened to a room with two high windows.
	Behind the click of doors their singing ceased.

	The windows gave out on a sheer drop down.
	Below, a littering stream unpurled in silver light.
	‘Why not come in my car?’ said the colonel.
	In the dark I placed my newspaper
	Beneath the rear wheel on the snow--
	‘For better traction.’ I turned the front door handle.
	‘You’ll sit in back,’ he said. The doors, I noticed
	Were hinged to open forward, as in old cars.
	When I went round to get into the rear seat
	The car was rolling and I saw
	My Grandfather slide in beside him stiffly
	Wearing a Panama. He said no word.
	We swerved in silence through the darkness,
	No headlights down this road.



9. DOOR

	Why should I care
	Which way you go through me?

	I am responsible only
	For dividing the furniture

	From the changeful weather,
	The past from the future,

	The dream from the waker.
	Inside, outside,

	It’s all one to me.
	Who passes through one way

	May come back the other way.
	If what’s promised on one side

	Is denied on the other,
	You work it out then.

	Being neutral,
	I choose to stay just here.



10. ENTERING DOORWAYS

	Entering doorways
	Exchanging rooms
	The last room leaving
	Lost words ringing
	In the head clinging
	Seeking silence
	The silence clanging
	This side the threshhold
	Snatches of old talk
	Entering doorways.
	Exchanging rooms
	A room once entered
	Invades the new space
	These doors where the doors were
	Old chests in their place
	Chairs where the chairs were
	Wind in the fireplace
	Bed in the bed place
	Voices and faces
	Recurrent in strangeness
	And in this new room
	Enmeshed in these traces
	Strain toward the doorway
	To the next room
	Entering doorways
	Exchanging rooms.



11. HAUNTED HOUSES

	Junior Johnson mocked and Fu Bigonzi dared me,
	Waiting at the gate-end of the weedy walk
	For me to prove they lied. So at each further step
	Through burrs and reeking goldenrod, retreat became
	Unlikelier. I climbed the trellis up the porch
	Where one board was split. I pulled that board ajar
	And leaning upward, pried the window open. Then,
	With a clear way awaiting me, the slanting sun
	Throbbed on the porch roof heat that pulsed as my head pulsed.
	I turned, to turn back down the tindery splintered shingles,
	Shimmy down the raingutter and fall in a shower
	Of rust on blistered hands to the crushed cool grass
	--Taunted a quitter?--Iron-breath’d, I climbed in
	One leg, both legs, dropped then into the murky coolness
	On the landing of the stairs: Below, in half-light
	Needles of light, their eyes knotholes in the boarded windows,
	Sewed light-seams slantwise toward the shadowed floor.
	I gripped the bannister, dislodged a shower of dust
	That fell and rose and swirled along the five sunbeams.
	I took a slow step down. A mahogony table still
	Held two majolica paperweights upon a pile
	Of letters someone had received and had not answered.
	A look of life half-lived, a table setting still
	Awaiting two, two chairs by the ashen log on the firedogs.
	Two glasses on the sideboard next the staircase stood,
	A dust-stoppered decanter by them, dust and dead
	Flies in the glasses. Who had lived together here
	Beneath a mica shade where wrought-iron Nina, Pinta,
	And Santa Maria sail their circles round and round
	An unlit globe of glass on dark and dusty seas?
	Who left and never have returned to claim their own?
	Why don’t they come to claim their own,
	To live companionable lives out at this hearth
	For two, table for two, decanter set for two
	--Or do they still move here among these mouse-gnawed letters,
	Caress familiar furniture with touch that can’t
	Dislodge one grain of dust in the half-light? As I turned
	At the bottom of the stair some silent thing turned toward me.
	Raised its arms and shrieked my shriek--pure terror
	Slit its frogwhite face with voice I knew and know.
	No doubt that bulging china closet’s glass bow front
	Had caught grotesque reflections from these stairs before--
	But I was skinning down the rainspout when that thought
	Found chink to clutch to in the riptide of my fear.
	Yet I’d been, and not on dares, in eerier houses
	Where one among one of a pair of candelbra,
	Six of a dozen goblets, half a set of silver
	Kept house where every swelling spoon’s a mantic mirror
	That makes her huge who sits to table, makes the empty
	Facing chair a thin vein round the mirror’s eyelid;
	And another where another’s half-dozen of a dozen
	Knives, forks, spoons, six of twelve matched goblets
	And half a pair of candelabra makes a setting
	For a half-life where the absent ghost exacts
	A compound interest from this capital, as he
	--Inmate of a present no reflection ends--
	Exacts like interest whose own penury’s the same.
	There’s an oval glass in either’s hallway. I have seen
	My hand on the knobs before those mirrors and behind,
	Almost proof, you’d think, henceforth against all haunting.



12. A HISTORIAN

	The dead again
	Burst from their levelled graves
	They reassemble on the hill
	Ready for disastrous victory
	Where a great empire fell
	On its foe and fell

	Again in the hot wide
	Landscape of his mind
	The captains sit astride
	Their festooned chomping horses send
	Batallions into certain
	Enfillade

	O they can never
	Change the outcome they have fought
	This battle over
	Never knowing
	Why they are there
	Still following

	Tattered pennants ignorant
	Of trade routes or the pride
	Of prince or diplomat whose ruse
	Charges them to ride
	The bloodspecked foaming crest
	Of this riptide

	No more than he can know
	The soldier’s brute obedience to orders
	The captain’s fealty to the general’s plan
	The commanders wrapped in webbed illusion
	That their strategy will follow
	Their will

	Nor know the iron taste of fear
	In throats that do not seem a part
	Of the same contraption as the legs
	Wildly going their own way
	Or the gut that retches at the smell of blood
	Or the heart

	Booming its dark cannonade
	Until the heartbeat or the battle ends.
	The tallying of losses starts again.
	The sky thickens with buzzards’ wings.
	They settle, gorge, and circle, waiting for
	The future



13. A LEGACY

	I walk down Cedar Lane in Swarthmore, Pa.
	I stride beneath the barbarian sun.
	I suck wind that last week steamed in the Congo.
	I believe in 196I.
	I do believe that the whirling seasons
	--Heat after rains, rain after melting snow--
	Will actually come round again as heretofore.
	My legacy from history is right now.
	Reality is what I’m all for. Yes, I’ll take it
	In the air, in the mouth, in the dandle bed,
	In the New York Times, in the constellations,
	In my dancy children’s cockadoo laughter,
	In that dream I dreamed when I was eleven
	In which my legs were icicles because I’m dead.
	Reality is vintage and delicious
	Especially when you taste it while it brews
	Because it comes as love comes, either sudden
	Or gradual lifetime in a once past wishes,
	A gift you could not have the wit to choose.



14. STONE

	Ever since the first fires
	Cooled and colors went out of the air
	And on my fanks water sizzled and seethed
	And collected in warm pools in my pockets
	I have not changed. Cold came,
	Prying its levers of ice in my veins,
	Roots thrust into my pores and split them,
	The sun roared overhead streaming
	Its heat on my hard glazed skin
	Trying each summer all summer
	To roast me to ember. Rain
	Came again, and again and again
	Lacing and creasing my forehead with furrows
	And rivers. Later it came as snow
	Cracking and brittle, as though
	I would turn brittle and crack.
	Well, waves have broken me into pieces,
	Pounded my pieces against one another--
	Some of my flesh is pebbles, sand.
	I have been here since before the arrival
	Of the creatures who have come and are most of them gone now.
	But nothing can change me. Split me apart,
	Test me by fire, grind me down
	--I’m still what I was, with my heart of stone.



15. TODAY

	Today the sun rose, as it used to do
	When its mission was to shine on you.
	Since in unrelenting dark you’re gone,
	What now can be the purpose of the sun?



16. WHEN MY WISER BROTHER

	When my wiser brother
	Who speaks so rarely
	And only in my voice

	(He is too busy matching souls
	To the trees they will resemble, lovers
	With one another,
	The seahorse and the sun,
	Sweet labor,
	There’s little time for speech)--when he

	Finds words
	Acceptable I will declare him,
	For I am ready:
	My phonemes, signs, parentheses
	Await his spell.

	All will be well
	Disposed to consecrate the map
	Of new peninsulas he will bequeath me.
	But just when I’ve stepped out to choose the wine
	For the banquet of our fond reunion
	He will be gone,
	Off to that republic
	Of pure possibility
	Where he plots a _coup d’état_ against my exile.
	Sometime, he may reveal it,

	But I am left meanwhile
	Unbrothered,
	My words all fled from split cicada skins
	Into a busy fraction of the day.



17. YOURS

	I am yours as the summer air at evening is
	Possessed by the scent of linden blossoms,

	As the snowcap gleams with light
	Lent it by the brimming moon.

	Without you I’d be an unleafed tree
	Blasted in a bleakness with no Spring.

	Your love is the weather of my being.
	What is an island without the sea?
