*** Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844 - 1889)


1. ASHBOUGHS

	NOT of all my eyes see, wandering on the world,
	Is anything a milk to the mind so, so sighs deep
	Poetry to it, as a tree whose boughs break in the sky.
	Say it is ashboughs: whether on a December day and
	    furled
	Fast ór they in clammyish lashtender combs creep
	Apart wide and new-nestle at heaven most high.
	They touch heaven, tabour on it; how their talons sweep
	The smouldering enormous winter welkin! May
	Mells blue and snowwhite through them, a fringe and fray
	Of greenery: it is old earth’s groping towards the steep
	         Heaven whom she childs us by.


2. BINSEY POPLARS

	MY aspens dear, whose airy cages quelled,
	Quelled or quenched in leaves the leaping sun,
	All felled, felled, are all felled;
	  Of a fresh and following folded rank
	              Not spared, not one
	              That dandled a sandalled
	         Shadow that swam or sank
	On meadow and river and wind-wandering weed-winding
	  bank.
	
	O if we but knew what we do
	     When we delve or hew--
	Hack and rack the growing green!
	     Since country is so tender
	To touch, her being só slender,
	That, like this sleek and seeing ball
	But a prick will make no eye at all,
	Where we, even where we mean
	         To mend her we end her,
	     When we hew or delve:
	After-comers cannot guess the beauty been.
	  Ten or twelve, only ten or twelve
	     Strokes of havoc únselve
	         The sweet especial scene,
	     Rural scene, a rural scene,
	     Sweet especial rural scene.


3. THE BLESSED VIRGIN COMPARED TO THE AIR WE BREATHE

	WILD air, world-mothering air,
	Nestling me everywhere,
	That each eyelash or hair
	Girdles; goes home betwixt
	The fleeciest, frailest-flixed
	Snowflake; that’s fairly mixed
	With, riddles, and is rife
	In every least thing’s life;
	This needful, never spent,
	And nursing element;             
	My more than meat and drink,
	My meal at every wink;
	This air, which, by life’s law,
	My lung must draw and draw
	Now but to breathe its praise,
	Minds me in many ways
	Of her who not only
	Gave God’s infinity
	Dwindled to infancy
	Welcome in womb and breast,      
	Birth, milk, and all the rest
	But mothers each new grace
	That does now reach our race--
	Mary Immaculate,
	Merely a woman, yet
	Whose presence, power is
	Great as no goddess’s
	Was deemèd, dreamèd; who
	This one work has to do--
	Let all God’s glory through,     
	God’s glory which would go
	Through her and from her flow
	Off, and no way but so.
	
	    I say that we are wound
	With mercy round and round
	As if with air: the same
	Is Mary, more by name.
	She, wild web, wondrous robe,
	Mantles the guilty globe,
	Since God has let dispense       
	Her prayers his providence:
	Nay, more than almoner,
	The sweet alms’ self is her
	And men are meant to share
	Her life as life does air.
	    If I have understood,
	She holds high motherhood
	Towards all our ghostly good
	And plays in grace her part
	About man’s beating heart,       
	Laying, like air’s fine flood,
	The deathdance in his blood;
	Yet no part but what will
	Be Christ our Saviour still.
	Of her flesh he took flesh:
	He does take fresh and fresh,
	Though much the mystery how,
	Not flesh but spirit now
	And makes, O marvellous!
	New Nazareths in us,             
	Where she shall yet conceive
	Him, morning, noon, and eve;
	New Bethlems, and he born
	There, evening, noon, and morn
	Bethlem or Nazareth,
	Men here may draw like breath
	More Christ and baffle death;
	Who, born so, comes to be
	New self and nobler me
	In each one and each one         
	More makes, when all is done,
	Both God’s and Mary’s Son.
	    Again, look overhead
	How air is azurèd;
	O how! nay do but stand
	Where you can lift your hand
	Skywards: rich, rich it laps
	Round the four fingergaps.
	Yet such a sapphire-shot,
	Charged, steepèd sky will not    
	Stain light. Yea, mark you this:
	It does no prejudice.
	The glass-blue days are those
	When every colour glows,
	Each shape and shadow shows.
	Blue be it: this blue heaven
	The seven or seven times seven
	Hued sunbeam will transmit
	Perfect, not alter it.
	Or if there does some soft,      
	On things aloof, aloft,
	Bloom breathe, that one breath more
	Earth is the fairer for.
	Whereas did air not make
	This bath of blue and slake
	His fire, the sun would shake,
	A blear and blinding ball
	With blackness bound, and all
	The thick stars round him roll
	Flashing like flecks of coal,   
	Quartz-fret, or sparks of salt,
	In grimy vasty vault.
	    So God was god of old:
	A mother came to mould
	Those limbs like ours which are
	What must make our daystar
	Much dearer to mankind;
	Whose glory bare would blind
	Or less would win man’s mind.
	Through her we may see him      
	Made sweeter, not made dim,
	And her hand leaves his light
	Sifted to suit our sight.
	    Be thou then, thou dear
	Mother, my atmosphere;
	My happier world, wherein
	To wend and meet no sin;
	Above me, round me lie
	Fronting my froward eye
	With sweet and scarless sky;    
	Stir in my ears, speak there
	Of God’s love, O live air,
	Of patience, penance, prayer:
	World-mothering air, air wild,
	Wound with thee, in thee isled,
	Fold home, fast fold thy child.


4. A BROTHER AND SISTER

	O I admire and sorrow! The heart’s eye grieves
	Discovering you, dark tramplers, tyrant years.
	A juice rides rich through bluebells, in vine leaves,
	And beauty’s dearest veriest vein is tears.
	
	Happy the father, mother of these! Too fast:
	Not that, but thus far, all with frailty, blest
	In one fair fall; but, for time’s aftercast,
	Creatures all heft, hope, hazard, interest.
	
	And are they thus? The fine, the fingering beams
	Their young delightful hour do feature down
	That fleeted else like day-dissolvèd dreams
	Or ringlet-race on burling Barrow brown.
	
	She leans on him with such contentment fond
	As well the sister sits, would well the wife;
	His looks, the soul’s own letters, see beyond,
	Gaze on, and fall directly forth on life.
	
	But ah, bright forelock, cluster that you are
	Of favoured make and mind and health and youth,
	Where lies your landmark, seamark, or soul’s star?
	There’s none but truth can stead you. Christ is truth.
	
	There’s none but good can bé good, both for you
	And what sways with you, maybe this sweet maid;
	None good but God--a warning wavèd to
	One once that was found wanting when Good weighed.
	
	Man lives that list, that leaning in the will
	No wisdom can forecast by gauge or guess,
	The selfless self of self, most strange, most still,
	Fast furled and all foredrawn to No or Yes.
	
	Your feast of; that most in you earnest eye
	May but call on your banes to more carouse.
	Worst will the best. What worm was here, we cry,
	To have havoc-pocked so, see, the hung-heavenward
	    boughs?
	
	Enough: corruption was the world’s first woe.
	What need I strain my heart beyond my ken?
	O but I bear my burning witness though
	Against the wild and wanton work of men.


5. CAGED SKYLARK

	As a dare-gale skylark scanted in a dull cage
	  Man’s mounting spirit in his bone-house, mean house,
	    dwells--
	  That bird beyond the remembering his free fells;
	This in drudgery, day-labouring-out life’s age.
	
	Though aloft on turf or perch or poor low stage,
	  Both sing sometimes the sweetest, sweetest spells,
	  Yet both droop deadly sometimes in their cells
	Or wring their barriers in bursts of fear or rage.
	
	Not that the sweet-fowl, song-fowl, needs no rest--
	Why, hear him, hear him babble and drop down to his nest,
	  But his own nest, wild nest, no prison.
	
	Man’s spirit will be flesh-bound when found at best,
	But uncumbered: meadow-down is not distressed
	  For a rainbow footing it nor he for his bónes rísen.


6. THE CANDLE INDOORS

	SOME candle clear burns somewhere I come by.
	I muse at how its being puts blissful back
	With yellowy moisture mild night’s blear-all black,
	Or to-fro tender trambeams truckle at the eye.
	By that window what task what fingers ply,
	I plod wondering, a-wanting, just for lack
	Of answer the eagerer a-wanting Jessy or Jack
	There   God to aggrándise, God to glorify.--
	
	Come you indoors, come home; your fading fire
	Mend first and vital candle in close heart’s vault:
	You there are master, do your own desire;
	What hinders? Are you beam-blind, yet to a fault
	In a neighbour deft-handed? Are you that liar
	And cast by conscience out, spendsavour salt?


7. CARRION COMFORT

	NOT, I’ll not, carrion comfort, Despair, not feast on thee;
	Not untwist--slack they may be--these last strands of man
	In me ór, most weary, cry _I can no more_. I can;
	Can something, hope, wish day come, not choose not to be.
	But ah, but O thou terrible, why wouldst thou rude on me
	Thy wring-world right foot rock? lay a lionlimb against
	    me? scan
	With darksome devouring eyes my bruisèd bones? and fan,
	O in turns of tempest, me heaped there; me frantic to
	    avoid thee and flee?
	
	Why? That my chaff might fly; my grain lie, sheer
	    and clear.
	Nay in all that toil, that coil, since (seems) I kissed the rod,
	Hand rather, my heart lo! lapped strength, stole joy,
	    would laugh, chéer.
	Cheer whom though? the hero whose heaven-handling
	    flung me, fóot tród
	Me? or me that fought him? O which one? is it each
	    one? That night, that year
	Of now done darkness I wretch lay wrestling with (my
	    God!) my God.


8. EPITHALAMION

	HARK, hearer, hear what I do; lend a thought now, make believe
	We are leafwhelmed somewhere with the hood
	Of some branchy bunchy bushybowered wood,
	Southern dene or Lancashire clough or Devon cleave,
	That leans along the loins of hills, where a candycoloured, where
	    a gluegold-brown
	Marbled river, boisterously beautiful, between
	Roots and rocks is danced and dandled, all in froth and water-
	    blowballs, down.
	We are there, when we hear a shout
	That the hanging honeysuck, the dogeared hazels in the cover
	Makes dither, makes hover
	And the riot of a rout
	Of, it must be, boys from the town
	Bathing: it is summer’s sovereign good.
	
	By there comes a listless stranger: beckoned by the noise
	He drops towards the river: unseen
	Sees the bevy of them, how the boys
	With dare and with downdolphinry and bellbright bodies hud-
	    dling out,
	Are earthworld, airworld, waterworld thorough hurled, all by
	    turn and turn about.
	
	This garland of their gambols flashes in his breast
	Into such a sudden zest
	Of summertime joys
	That he hies to a pool neighbouring; sees it is the best
	There; sweetest, freshest, shadowiest;
	Fairyland; silk-beech, scrolled ash, packed sycamore, wild
	    wychelm, hornbeam fretty overstood
	By. Rafts and rafts of flake-leaves light, dealt so, painted on the air,
	Hang as still as hawk or hawkmoth, as the stars or as the angels
	    there,
	Like the thing that never knew the earth, never off roots
	Rose. Here he feasts: lovely all is! No more: off with--
	    down he dings
	His bleachèd both and woolwoven wear:
	Careless these in coloured wisp
	All lie tumbled-to; then with loop-locks
	Forward falling, forehead frowning, lips crisp
	Over finger-teasing task, his twiny boots
	Fast he opens, last he offwrings
	Till walk the world he can with bare his feet
	And come where lies a coffer, burly all of blocks
	Built of chancequarrièd, selfquainèd rocks
	And the water warbles over into, filleted with glassy grassy
	    quicksilvery shivès and shoots
	And with heavenfallen freshness down from moorland still brims,
	Dark or daylight on and on. Here he will then, here he will
	    the fleet
	Flinty kindcold element let break across his limbs
	Long. Where we leave him, froliclavish while he looks about
	    him, laughs, swims.
	
	Enough now; since the sacred matter that I mean
	I should be wronging longer leaving it to float
	Upon this only gambolling and echoing-of-earth note--
	What is ... the delightful dene?
	Wedlock. What the water? Spousal love.
	
	Father, mother, brothers, sisters, friends
	Into fairy trees, wild flowers, wood ferns
	Rankèd round the bower


9. FOR A PICTURE OF ST. DOROTHEA

	I BEAR a basket lined with grass;
	I am so light, I am so fair,
	That men must wonder as I pass
	And at the basket that I bear,
	Where in a newly-drawn green litter
	Sweet flowers I carry,--sweets for bitter.
	
	Lilies I shew you, lilies none,
	None in Caesar’s gardens blow,--
	And a quince in hand,--not one
	Is set upon your boughs below;
	Not set, because their buds not spring;
	Spring not, ‘cause world is wintering.
	
	But these were found in the East and South
	Where Winter is the clime forgot.--
	The dewdrop on the larkspur’s mouth
	O should it then be quenchèd not?
	In starry water-meads they drew
	These drops: which be they? stars or dew?
	
	Had she a quince in hand? Yet gaze:
	Rather it is the sizing moon.
	Lo, linked heavens with milky ways!
	That was her larkspur row.--So soon?
	Sphered so fast, sweet soul?--We see
	Nor fruit, nor flowers, nor Dorothy.


10. GOD’S GRANDEUR

	THE world is charged with the grandeur of God.
	  It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
	  It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
	Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
	Generations have trod, have trod, have trod;
	  And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with
	    toil;
	  And wears man’s smudge and shares man’s smell:
	    the soil
	Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.
	
	And for all this, nature is never spent;
	  There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
	And though the last lights off the black West went
	  Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs--
	Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
	  World broods with warm breast and with ah!
	    bright wings.


11. THE HABIT OF PERFECTION

	ELECTED Silence, sing to me
	And beat upon my whorlèd ear,
	Pipe me to pastures still and be
	The music that I care to hear.
	
	Shape nothing, lips; be lovely-dumb:
	It is the shut, the curfew sent
	From there where all surrenders come
	Which only makes you eloquent.
	
	Be shellèd, eyes, with double dark
	And find the uncreated light:
	This ruck and reel which you remark
	Coils, keeps, and teases simple sight.
	
	Palate, the hutch of tasty lust,
	Desire not to be rinsed with wine:
	The can must be so sweet, the crust
	So fresh that come in fasts divine!
	
	Nostrils, your careless breath that spend
	Upon the stir and keep of pride,
	What relish shall the censers send
	Along the sanctuary side!
	
	O feel-of-primrose hands, O feet
	That want the yield of plushy sward,
	But you shall walk the golden street
	And you unhouse and house the Lord.
	
	And, Poverty, be thou the bride
	And now the marriage feast begun,
	And lily-coloured clothes provide
	Your spouse not laboured-at nor spun.


12. THE HANDSOME HEART AT A GRACIOUS ANSWER

	‘BUT tell me, child, your choice; what shall I buy
	You?‘--‘Father, what you buy me I like best.’
	With the sweetest air that said, still plied and pressed,
	He swung to his first poised purport of reply.
	
	What the heart is! which, like carriers let fly--
	Doff darkness, homing nature knows the rest--
	To its own fine function, wild and self-instressed,
	Falls light as ten years long taught how to and why.
	
	Mannerly-hearted! more than handsome face--
	Beauty’s bearing or muse of mounting vein,
	All, in this case, bathed in high hallowing grace . . .
	
	Of heaven what boon to buy you, boy, or gain
	Not granted?--Only ... O on that path you pace
	Run all your race, O brace sterner that strain!


13. HURRAHING IN HARVEST

	SUMMER ends now; now, barbarous in beauty, the
	    stooks rise
	  Around; up above, what wind-walks! what lovely
	    behaviour
	  Of silk-sack clouds! has wilder, wilful-wavier
	Meal-drift moulded ever and melted across skies?
	
	I walk, I lift up, I lift up heart, eyes,
	  Down all that glory in the heavens to glean our
	    Saviour;
	  And, éyes, heárt, what looks, what lips yet gave you a
	Rapturous love’s greeting of realer, of rounder replies?
	
	And the azurous hung hills are his world-wielding
	    shoulder
	  Majestic--as a stallion stalwart, very-violet-sweet!--
	These things, these things were here and but the
	    beholder
	  Wanting; which two when they once meet,
	The heart rears wings bold and bolder
	  And hurls for him, O half hurls earth for him off
	    under his feet.


14. IN THE VALLEY OF THE ELWY

	I REMEMBER a house where all were good
	  To me, God knows, deserving no such thing:
	  Comforting smell breathed at very entering,
	Fetched fresh, as I suppose, off some sweet wood.
	That cordial air made those kind people a hood
	  All over, as a bevy of eggs the mothering wing
	  Will, or mild nights the new morsels of spring:
	Why, it seemed of course; seemed of right it should.
	
	Lovely the woods, waters, meadows, combes, vales,
	All the air things wear that build this world of Wales;
	  Only the inmate does not correspond:
	God, lover of souls, swaying considerate scales,
	Complete thy creature dear O where it fails,
	  Being mighty a master, being a father and fond.


15. INVERSNAID

	THIS darksome burn, horseback brown,
	His rollrock highroad roaring down,
	In coop and in comb the fleece of his foam
	Flutes and low to the lake falls home.
	
	A windpuff-bonnet of fáawn-fróth
	Turns and twindles over the broth
	Of a pool so pitchblack, féll-frówning,
	It rounds and rounds Despair to drowning.
	
	Degged with dew, dappled with dew
	Are the groins of the braes that the brook treads through,
	Wiry heathpacks, flitches of fern,
	And the beadbonny ash that sits over the burn.
	
	What would the world be, once bereft
	Of wet and of wildness? Let them be left,
	O let them be left, wildness and wet;
	Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet.


16. THE LANTERN OUT OF DOORS

	SOMETIMES a lantern moves along the night,
	  That interests our eyes. And who goes there?
	  I think; where from and bound, I wonder, where,
	With, all down darkness wide, his wading light?
	
	Men go by me whom either beauty bright
	  In mould or mind or what not else makes rare:
	  They rain against our much-thick and marsh air
	Rich beams, till death or distance buys them quite.
	
	Death or distance soon consumes them: wind
	  What most I may eye after, be in at the end
	I cannot, and out of sight is out of mind.
	
	Christ minds: Christ’s interest, what to avow or amend
	  There, éyes them, heart wánts, care haúnts, foot
	    fóllows kínd,
	Their ránsom, théir rescue, ánd first, fást, last friénd.


17. THE LEADEN ECHO AND THE GOLDEN ECHO

	_The Leaden Echo_
	
	How to keep--is there ány any, is there none such, nowhere
	    known some, bow or brooch or braid or brace, láce, latch
	    or catch or key to keep
	Back beauty, keep it, beauty, beauty, beauty, . . . from vanishing
	    away?
	
	Ó is there no frowning of these wrinkles, rankèd wrinkles deep,
	Dówn? no waving off of these most mournful messengers, still
	    messengers, sad and stealing messengers of grey?
	No there’s none, there’s none, O no there’s none,
	Nor can you long be, what you now are, called fair,
	Do what you may do, what, do what you may,
	And wisdom is early to despair:
	Be beginning; since, no, nothing can be done
	To keep at bay
	Age and age’s evils, hoar hair,
	Ruck and wrinkle, drooping, dying, death’s worst, winding
	    sheets, tombs and worms and tumbling to decay;
	So be beginning, be beginning to despair.
	O there’s none; no no no there’s none:
	Be beginning to despair, to despair,
	Despair, despair, despair, despair.
	
	
	_The Golden Echo_
	
	        Spare!
	There is one, yes I have one (Hush there!);
	Only not within seeing of the sun,
	Not within the singeing of the strong sun,
	Tall sun’s tingeing, or treacherous the tainting of the earth’s air.
	Somewhere elsewhere there is ah well where! one,
	Óne. Yes I can tell such a key, I do know such a place,
	Where whatever’s prized and passes of us, everything that’s
	    fresh and fast flying of us, seems to us sweet of us and
	    swiftly away with, done away with, undone,
	Undone, done with, soon done with, and yet dearly and
	    dangerously sweet
	Of us, the wimpled-water-dimpled, not-by-morning-matchèd face,
	The flower of beauty, fleece of beauty, too too apt to, ah! to fleet,
	Never fleets more, fastened with the tenderest truth
	To its own best being and its loveliness of youth: it is an ever-
	    lastingness of, O it is an all youth!
	Come then, your ways and airs and looks, locks, maiden gear,
	    gallantry and gaiety and grace,
	Winning ways, airs innocent, maiden manners, sweet looks,
	    loose locks, long locks, lovelocks, gaygear, going gallant,
	    girlgrace--
	Resign them, sign them, seal them, send them, motion them
	    with breath,
	And with sighs soaring, soaring síghs deliver
	Them; beauty-in-the-ghost, deliver it, early now, long before
	    death
	Give beauty back, beauty, beauty, beauty, back to God, beauty’s
	    self and beauty’s giver.
	See; not a hair is, not an eyelash, not the least lash lost; every hair
	Is, hair of the head, numbered.
	Nay, what we had lighthanded left in surly the mere mould
	Will have waked and have waxed and have walked with the wind
	    what while we slept,
	This side, that side hurling a heavyheaded hundredfold
	What while we, while we slumbered.
	O then, weary then whý should we tread? O why are we so
	    haggard at the heart, so care-coiled, care-killed, so fagged,
	    so fashed, so cogged, so cumbered,
	When the thing we freely fórfeit is kept with fonder a care,
	Fonder a care kept than we could have kept it, kept
	Far with fonder a care (and we, we should have lost it) finer, fonder
	A care kept. Where kept? Do but tell us where kept, where.--
	Yonder.--What high as that! We follow, now we follow.--
	    Yonder, yes yonder, yonder,
	Yonder.


18. THE MAY MAGNIFICAT

	MAY is Mary’s month, and I
	Muse at that and wonder why:
	    Her feasts follow reason,
	    Dated due to season--
	
	Candlemas, Lady Day;
	But the Lady Month, May,
	    Why fasten that upon her,
	    With a feasting in her honour?
	
	Is it only its being brighter
	Than the most are must delight her?
	    Is it opportunest
	    And flowers finds soonest?
	
	Ask of her, the mighty mother:
	Her reply puts this other
	    Question: What is Spring?--
	    Growth in every thing--
	
	Flesh and fleece, fur and feather,
	Grass and green world all together;
	    Star-eyed strawberry-breasted
	    Throstle above her nested
	
	Cluster of bugle blue eggs thin
	Forms and warms the life within;
	    And bird and blossom swell
	    In sod or sheath or shell.
	
	All things rising, all things sizing
	Mary sees, sympathising
	    With that world of good,
	    Nature’s motherhood.
	
	Their magnifying of each its kind
	With delight calls to mind
	    How she did in her stored
	    Magnify the Lord.
	
	Well but there was more than this:
	Spring’s universal bliss
	    Much, had much to say
	    To offering Mary May.
	
	When drop-of-blood-and-foam-dapple
	Bloom lights the orchard-apple
	    And thicket and thorp are merry
	    With silver-surfèd cherry
	
	And azuring-over greybell makes
	Wood banks and brakes wash wet like lakes
	    And magic cuckoocall
	    Caps, clears, and clinches all--
	
	This ecstacy all through mothering earth
	Tells Mary her mirth till Christ’s birth
	    To remember and exultation
	    In God who was her salvation.


19. MOONRISE

	I AWOKE in the Midsummer not to call night, in the
	    white and the walk of the morning:
	The moon, dwindled and thinned to the fringe of a
	    finger-nail held to the candle,
	Or paring of paradisaïcal fruit, lovely in waning but
	    lustreless,
	Stepped from the stool, drew back from the barrow, of
	    dark Maenefa the mountain;
	A cusp still clasped him, a fluke yet fanged him, en-
	    tangled him, not quit utterly.
	This was the prized, the desirable sight, unsought, pre-
	    sented so easily,
	Parted me leaf and leaf, divided me, eyelid and eyelid of
	    slumber.


20. MORNING MIDDAY AND EVENING SACRIFICE

	THE dappled die-away
	Cheek and wimpled lip,
	The gold-wisp, the airy-grey
	Eye, all in fellowship--
	This, all this beauty blooming,
	This, all this freshness fuming,
	Give God while worth consuming.
	
	Both thought and thew now bolder
	And told by Nature: Tower;
	Head, heart, hand, heel, and shoulder
	That beat and breathe in power--
	This pride of prime’s enjoyment
	Take as for tool, not toy meant
	And hold at Christ’s employment.
	
	The vault and scope and schooling
	And mastery in the mind,
	In silk-ash kept from cooling,
	And ripest under rind--
	What life half lifts the latch of,
	What hell stalks towards the snatch of,
	Your offering, with despatch, of!


21. PEACE

	WHEN will you ever, Peace, wild wooddove, shy wings shut,
	Your round me roaming end, and under be my boughs?
	When, when, Peacè, will you, Peace? I’ll not play
	    hypocrite
	To own my heart: I yield you do come sometimes; but
	That piecemeal peace is poor peace. What pure peace
	    allows
	Alarms of wars, the daunting wars, the death of it?
	
	O surely, reaving Peace, my Lord should leave in lieu
	Some good! And so he does leave Patience exquisite,
	That plumes to Peace thereafter. And when Peace here
	    does house
	He comes with work to do, he does not come to coo,
	He comes to brood and sit.


22. PIED BEAUTY

	GLORY be to God for dappled things--
	  For skies of couple-colour as a brinded cow;
	     For rose-moles all in stipple upon trout that swim:
	Fresh-firecoal chestnut-falls; finches’ wings;
	  Landscape plotted and pieced--fold, fallow, and
	     plough;
	    And àll tràdes, their gear and tackle and trim.
	
	All things counter, original, spare, strange;
	  Whatever is fickle, freckled (who knows how?)
	     With swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim;
	He fathers-forth whose beauty is past change:
	                 Praise him.


23. RIBBLESDALE

	EARTH, sweet Earth, sweet landscape, with leavès throng
	And louchèd low grass, heaven that dost appeal
	To, with no tongue to plead, no heart to feel;
	That canst but only be, but dost that long--
	
	Thou canst but be, but that thou well dost; strong
	Thy plea with him who dealt, nay does now deal,
	Thy lovely dale down thus and thus bids reel
	Thy river, and o’er gives all to rack or wrong.
	
	  And what is Earth’s eye, tongue, or heart else, where
	Else, but in dear and dogged man?--Ah, the heir
	To his own selfbent so bound, so tied to his turn,
	To thriftless reave both our rich round world bare
	And none reck of world after, this bids wear
	Earth brows of such care, care and dear concern.


24. THE SEA AND THE SKYLARK

	ON ear and ear two noises too old to end
	  Trench--right, the tide that ramps against the shore;
	  With a flood or a fall, low lull-off or all roar,
	Frequenting there while moon shall wear and wend.
	
	Left hand, off land, I hear the lark ascend,
	  His rash-fresh re-winded new-skeinèd score
	  In crisps of curl off wild winch whirl, and pour
	And pelt music, till none’s to spill nor spend.
	
	How these two shame this shallow and frail town!
	  How ring right out our sordid turbid time,
	Being pure! We, life’s pride and cared-for crown,
	
	  Have lost that cheer and charm of earth’s past prime:
	Our make and making break, are breaking, down
	   To man’s last dust, drain fast towards man’s first slime.


25. THE SOLDIER

	YES. Whý do we áll, seeing of a soldier, bless him? bless
	Our redcoats, our tars? Both these being, the greater part,
	But frail clay, nay but foul clay. Here it is: the heart,
	Since, proud, it calls the calling manly, gives a guess
	That, hopes that, makesbelieve, the men must be no less;
	It fancies, feigns, deems, dears the artist after his art;
	And fain will find as sterling all as all is smart,
	And scarlet wear the spirit of wár thére express.
	
	Mark Christ our King. He knows war, served this soldiering
	    through;
	He of all can handle a rope best. There he bides in bliss
	Now, and séeing somewhére some mán do all that man can do,
	For love he leans forth, needs his neck must fall on, kiss,
	And cry ‘O Christ-done deed! So God-made-flesh does too:
	Were I come o’er again’ cries Christ ‘it should be this’.


26. SPRING

	NOTHING is so beautiful as spring--
	  When weeds, in wheels, shoot long and lovely and lush;
	  Thrush’s eggs look little low heavens, and thrush
	Through the echoing timber does so rinse and wring
	The ear, it strikes like lightnings to hear him sing;
	  The glassy peartree leaves and blooms, they brush
	  The descending blue; that blue is all in a rush
	With richness; the racing lambs too have fair their fling.
	
	What is all this juice and all this joy?
	  A strain of the earth’s sweet being in the beginning
	In Eden garden. Have, get, before it cloy,
	  Before it cloud, Christ, lord, and sour with sinning,
	Innocent mind and Mayday in girl and boy,
	  Most, O maid’s child, thy choice and worthy the
	    winning.


27. THE STARLIGHT NIGHT

	LOOK at the stars! look, look up at the skies!
	  O look at all the fire-folk sitting in the air!
	  The bright boroughs, the circle-citadels there!
	Down in dim woods the diamond delves! the elves’-eyes!
	The grey lawns cold where gold, where quickgold lies!
	  Wind-beat whitebeam! airy abeles set on a flare!
	  Flake-doves sent floating forth at a farmyard scare!--
	Ah well! it is all a purchase, all is a prize.
	
	Buy then! bid then!--What?--Prayer, patience, alms,
	    vows.
	Look, look: a May-mess, like on orchard boughs!
	  Look! March-bloom, like on mealed-with-yellow
	    sallows!
	These are indeed the barn; withindoors house
	The shocks. This piece-bright paling shuts the spouse
	  Christ home, Christ and his mother and all his hallows.


28. THAT NATURE IS A HERACLITEAN FIRE

	CLOUD-PUFFBALL, torn tufts, tossed pillows flaunt forth, then
	    chevy on an air--
	built thoroughfare: heaven-roysterers, in gay-gangs they throng;
	    they glitter in marches.
	Down roughcast, down dazzling whitewash, wherever an elm
	  arches,
	Shivelights and shadowtackle in long lashes lace, lance, and pair.
	Delightfully the bright wind boisterous ropes, wrestles, beats
	  earth bare
	Of yestertempest’s creases; in pool and rut peel parches
	Squandering ooze to squeezed dough, crust, dust; stanches,
	  starches
	Squadroned masks and manmarks treadmire toil there
	Footfretted in it. Million-fuelèd, nature’s bonfire burns on.
	But quench her bonniest, dearest to her, her clearest-selvèd spark
	Man, how fast his firedint, his mark on mind, is gone!
	Both are in an unfathomable, all is in an enormous dark
	Drowned. O pity and indig nation! Manshape, that shone
	Sheer off, disseveral, a star, death blots black out; nor mark
	         Is any of him at all so stark
	But vastness blurs and time beats level. Enough! the Resur--
	    rection,
	A heart’s-clarion! Away grief’s gasping, joyless days, dejection.
	         Across my foundering deck shone
	A beacon, an eternal beam. Flesh fade, and mortal trash
	Fall to the residuary worm; world’s wildfire, leave but ash:
	         In a flash, at a trumpet crash,
	I am all at once what Christ is, since he was what I am, and
	This Jack, joke, poor potsherd, patch, matchwood, immortal
	    diamond,
	         Is immortal diamond.


29. TO HIS WATCH

	MORTAL my mate, bearing my rock-a-heart
	Warm beat with cold beat company, shall I
	Earlier or you fail at our force, and lie
	The ruins of, rifled, once a world of art?
	The telling time our task is; time’s some part,
	Not all, but we were framed to fail and die--
	One spell and well that one. There, ah thereby
	Is comfort’s carol of all or woe’s worst smart.
	
	Field-flown the departed day no morning brings
	Saying ‘This was yours’ with her, but new one, worse.
	And then that last and shortest . . .


30. TO WHAT SERVES MORTAL BEAUTY?

	To what serves mortal beauty dangerous; does set danc-
	ing blood the O-seal-that-so feature, flung prouder form
	Than Purcell tune lets tread to? See: it does this: keeps warm
	Men’s wits to the things that are; what good means--where a glance
	Master more may than gaze, gaze out of countenance.
	Those lovely lads once, wet-fresh windfalls of war’s storm,
	How then should Gregory, a father, have gleanèd else from swarm-
	ed Rome? But God to a nation dealt that day’s dear chance.
	  To man, that needs would worship block or barren stone,
	Our law says: Love what are love’s worthiest, were all known;
	World’s loveliest--men’s selves. Self flashes off frame and face.
	What do then? how meet beauty? Merely meet it; own,
	Home at heart, heaven’s sweet gift; then leave, let that alone.
	Yea, wish that though, wish all, God’s better beauty, grace.


31. UNTITLED _10_

	THE furl of fresh-leaved dogrose down
	His cheeks the forth-and-flaunting sun
	Had swarthed about with lion-brown
	    Before the Spring was done.
	
	His locks like all a ravel-rope’s-end,
	  With hempen strands in spray--
	Fallow, foam-fallow, hanks--fall’n off their ranks,
	  Swung down at a disarray.
	
	Or like a juicy and jostling shock
	  Of bluebells sheaved in May
	Or wind-long fleeces on the flock
	  A day off shearing day.
	
	Then over his turnèd temples--here--
	  Was a rose, or, failing that,
	Rough-Robin or five-lipped campion clear
	  For a beauty-bow to his hat,
	And the sunlight sidled, like dewdrops, like dandled
	    diamonds
	Through the sieve of the straw of the plait.


32. UNTITLED _1_

	As kingfishers catch fire, dragonflies dráw fláme;
	As tumbled over rim in roundy wells
	Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell’s
	Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;
	Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
	Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
	Selves--goes itself; _myself_ it speaks and spells,
	Crying _Whát I do is me: for that I came._
	
	Í say móre: the just man justices;
	Kéeps grace: thát keeps all his goings graces;
	Acts in God’s eye what in God’s eye he is--
	Chríst--for Christ plays in ten thousand places,
	Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his
	To the Father through the features of men’s faces.


33. UNTITLED _2_

	No worst, there is none. Pitched past pitch of grief,
	More pangs will, schooled at forepangs, wilder wring.
	Comforter, where, where is your comforting?
	Mary, mother of us, where is your relief?
	My cries heave, herds-long; huddle in a main, a chief
	Woe, world-sorrow; on an age-old anvil wince and sing--
	Then lull, then leave off. Fury had shrieked ‘No ling-
	ering! Let me be fell: force I must be brief’.
	
	  O the mind, mind has mountains; cliffs of fall
	Frightful, sheer, no-man-fathomed. Hold them cheap
	May who ne’er hung there. Nor does long our small
	Durance deal with that steep or deep. Here! creep,
	Wretch, under a comfort serves in a whirlwind: all
	Life death does end and each day dies with sleep.


34. UNTITLED _3_

	To seem the stranger lies my lot, my life
	Among strangèrs. Father and mother dear,
	Brothers and sisters are in Christ not near
	And he my peace my parting, sword and strife.
	  England, whose honour O all my heart woos, wife
	To my creating thought, would neither hear
	Me, were I pleading, plead nor do I: I wear-
	y of idle a being but by where wars are rife.
	
	  I am in Ireland now; now I am at a thírd
	Remove. Not but in all removes I can
	Kind love both give and get. Only what word
	Wisest my heart breeds dark heaven’s baffling ban
	Bars or hell’s spell thwarts. This to hoard unheard,
	Heard unheeded, leaves me a lonely began.


35. UNTITLED _4_

	I WAKE and feel the fell of dark, not day.
	What hours, O what black hoürs we have spent
	This night! what sights you, heart, saw; ways you went!
	And more must, in yet longer light’s delay.
	    With witness I speak this. But where I say
	Hours I mean years, mean life. And my lament
	Is cries countless, cries like dead letters sent
	To dearest him that lives alas! away.
	
	I am gall, I am heartburn. God’s most deep decree
	Bitter would have me taste: my taste was me;
	Bones built in me, flesh filled, blood brimmed the curse.
	    Selfyeast of spirit a dull dough sours. I see
	The lost are like this, and their scourge to be
	As I am mine, their sweating selves; but worse.


36. UNTITLED _5_

	PATIENCE, hard thing! the hard thing but to pray,
	But bid for, Patience is! Patience who asks
	Wants war, wants wounds; weary his times, his tasks;
	To do without, take tosses, and obey.
	  Rare patience roots in these, and, these away,
	Nowhere. Natural heart’s ivy, Patience masks
	Our ruins of wrecked past purpose. There she basks
	Purple eyes and seas of liquid leaves all day.
	
	  We hear our hearts grate on themselves: it kills
	To bruise them dearer. Yet the rebellious wills
	Of us we do bid God bend to him even so.
	  And where is he who more and more distils
	Delicious kindness?--He is patient. Patience fills
	His crisp combs, and that comes those ways we know.


37. UNTITLED _6_

	MY own heart let me have more pity on; let
	Me live to my sad self hereafter kind,
	Charitable; not live this tormented mind
	With this tormented mind tormenting yet.
	  I cast for comfort I can no more get
	By groping round my comfortless, than blind
	Eyes in their dark can day or thirst can find
	Thirst’s all-in-all in all a world of wet.
	
	Soul, self; come, poor Jackself, I do advise
	You, jaded, let be; call off thoughts awhile
	Elsewhere; leave comfort root-room; let joy size
	At God knows when to God knows what; whose smile
	‘s not wrung, see you; unforeseen times rather--as skies
	Between pie mountains--lights a lovely mile.


38. UNTITLED _7_

	HOPE holds to Christ the mind’s own mirror out
	To take His lovely likeness more and more.
	It will not well, so she would bring about
	An ever brighter burnish than before
	And turns to wash it from her welling eyes
	And breathes the blots off all with sighs on sighs.
	Her glass is blest but she as good as blind
	Holds till hand aches and wonders what is there;
	Her glass drinks light, she darkles down behind,
	All of her glorious gainings unaware.
	
	I told you that she turned her mirror dim
	Betweenwhiles, but she sees herself not Him.


39. UNTITLED _9_

	THE times are nightfall, look, their light grows less;
	The times are winter, watch, a world undone:
	They waste, they wither worse; they as they run
	Or bring more or more blazon man’s distress.
	And I not help. Nor word now of success:
	All is from wreck, here, there, to rescue one--
	Work which to see scarce so much as begun
	Makes welcome death, does dear forgetfulness.
	
	Or what is else? There is your world within.
	There rid the dragons, root out there the sin.
	Your will is law in that small commonweal . . .


40. THE WINDHOVER

	_To Christ our Lord_
	
	I CAUGHT this morning morning’s minion, king-
	    dom of daylight’s dauphin, dapple-dawn-drawn Fal-
	         con, in his riding
	Of the rolling level underneath him steady air, and
	    striding
	High there, how he rung upon the rein of a wimpling wing
	In his ecstacy! then off, off forth on swing,
	    As a skate’s heel sweeps smooth on a bow-bend:
	         the hurl and gliding
	    Rebuffed the big wind. My heart in hiding
	Stirred for a bird,--the achieve of, the mastery of the
	         thing!
	
	Brute beauty and valour and act, oh, air, pride, plume, here
	   Buckle! AND the fire that breaks from thee then, a
	         billion
	Times told lovelier, more dangerous, O my chevalier!
	
	    No wonder of it: shéer plód makes plough down
	         sillion
	Shine, and blue-bleak embers, ah my dear,
	  Fall, gall themselves, and gash gold-vermillion.


41. THE WOODLARK

	_TEEVO cheetio cheevio chee:_
	O where, what can thát be?
	_Weedio-weedio:_ there again!
	So tiny a trickle of sóng-strain;
	And all round not to be found
	For brier, bough, furrow, or gréen ground
	Before or behind or far or at hand
	Either left either right
	Anywhere in the súnlight.
	Well, after all! Ah but hark--
	‘I am the little woodlark.
	
	To-day the sky is two and two
	With white strokes and strains of the blue
	
	Round a ring, around a ring
	And while I sail (must listen) I sing
	
	The skylark is my cousin and he
	Is known to men more than me
	
	              . . . when the cry within
	Says Go on then I go on
	Till the longing is less and the good gone
	
	But down drop, if it says Stop,
	To the all-a-leaf of the tréetop
	And after that off the bough
	
	I ám so véry, O só very glad
	That I dó thínk there is not to be had . . .
	
	The blue wheat-acre is underneath
	And the braided ear breaks out of the sheath,
	The ear in milk, lush the sash,
	And crush-silk poppies aflash,
	The blood-gush blade-gash
	Flame-rash rudred
	Bud shelling or broad-shed
	Tatter-tassel-tangled and dingle-a-dangled
	Dandy-hung dainty head.
	
	And down ... the furrow dry
	Sunspurge and oxeye
	And laced-leaved lovely
	Foam-tuft fumitory
	
	Through the velvety wind V-winged
	To the nest’s nook I balance and buoy
	With a sweet joy of a sweet joy,
	Sweet, of a sweet, of a sweet joy
	Of a sweet--a sweet--sweet--joy.