*** A. E. Housman (1859 - 1936)


1. ALONG THE FIELD

	ALONG the field as we came by 
	A year ago, my love and I, 
	The aspen over stile and stone 
	Was talking to itself alone. 
	‘Oh who are these that kiss and pass? 
	A country lover and his lass; 
	Two lovers looking to be wed; 
	And time shall put them both to bed, 
	But she shall lie with earth above, 
	And he beside another love.’ 
	
	And sure enough beneath the tree 
	There walks another love with me, 
	And overhead the aspen heaves 
	Its rainy-sounding silver leaves; 
	And I spell nothing in their stir, 
	But now perhaps they speak to her, 
	And plain for her to understand 
	They talk about a time at hand 
	When I shall sleep with clover clad, 
	And she beside another lad.


2. BE STILL, MY SOUL

	Be still, my soul, be still; the arms you bear are brittle, 
	Earth and high heaven are fixt of old and founded strong. 
	Think rather,-- call to thought, if now you grieve a little, 
	The days when we had rest, O soul, for they were long. 
	
	Men loved unkindness then, but lightless in the quarry 
	I slept and saw not; tears fell down, I did not mourn; 
	Sweat ran and blood sprang out and I was never sorry: 
	Then it was well with me, in days ere I was born. 
	
	Now, and I muse for why and never find the reason, 
	I pace the earth, and drink the air, and feel the sun. 
	Be still, be still, my soul; it is but for a season: 
	Let us endure an hour and see injustice done. 
	
	Ay, look: high heaven and earth ail from the prime foundation; 
	All thoughts to rive the heart are here, and all are vain: 
	Horror and scorn and hate and fear and indignation-- 
	Oh why did I awake? when shall I sleep again?


3. HERE DEAD WE LIE

	Here dead we lie 
	Because we did not choose 
	To live and shame the land 
	From which we sprung. 
	
	Life, to be sure, 
	Is nothing much to lose, 
	But young men think it is, 
	And we were young.


4. INTO MY HEART

	Into my heart an air that kills 
	From yon far country blows: 
	What are those blue remembered hills, 
	What spires, what farms are those? 
	
	That is the land of lost content, 
	I see it shining plain, 
	The happy highways where I went 
	And cannot come again.

