*** Victor Hugo (1802 - 1885)


1. AFTER THE BATTLE

	MY father, hero of benignant mien,
	On horseback visited the gory scene,
	After the battle as the evening fell,
	And took with him a trooper loved right well,
	Because of bravery and presence bold.
	The field was covered with the dead, all cold,
	And shades of night were deepening: came a sound,
	Feeble and hoarse, from something on the ground;
	It was a Spaniard of the vanquished force,
	Who dragged himself with pain beside their course.
	Wounded and bleeding, livid and half dead,
	“Give me to drink--in pity, drink!” he said.
	My father, touched, stretched to his follower now
	A flask of rum that from his saddle-bow
	Hung down: “The poor soul--give him drink,” said he
	But while the trooper prompt, obediently
	Stooped towards the other, he of Moorish race
	Pointed a pistol at my father’s face,
	And with a savage oath the trigger drew :
	The hat flew off, a bullet passing through.
	As swerved his charger in a backward stride,
	“Give him to drink the same,” my father cried.



2. THE GRAVE SAID TO THE ROSE

	The grave said to the rose:
	“With the tears that dawn sprinkles upon you
	What do you make, flower of love?”
	The rose said to the tomb:
	“What do you make of those who fall
	In your ever-open abyss?”
	
	The rose said, “sombre tomb,
	From these tears I make in the shade
	A fragrance of amber and of honey.”
	The tomb said, “wistful flower,
	From each soul that arrives to me
	I make an angel in heaven.”



3. JUNE NIGHTS

	In summer, when day has fled, the plain covered with flowers
	Pours out far away an intoxicating scent;
	Eyes shut, ears half open to noises,
	We only half sleep in a transparent slumber.
	
	The stars are purer, the shade seems pleasanter;
	A hazy half-day colours the eternal dome;
	And the sweet pale dawn awaiting her hour
	Seems to wander all night at the bottom of the sky.



4. MORE STRONG THAN TIME

	Since I have set my lips to your full cup, my sweet,
	Since I my pallid face between your hands have laid,
	Since I have known your soul, and all the bloom of it,
	And all the perfume rare, now buried in the shade;
	
	Since it was given to me to hear on happy while,
	The words wherein your heart spoke all its mysteries,
	Since I have seen you weep, and since I have seen you smile,
	Your lips upon my lips, and your eyes upon my eyes;
	
	Since I have known above my forehead glance and gleam,
	A ray, a single ray, of your star, veiled always,
	Since I have felt the fall, upon my lifetime’s stream,
	Of one rose petal plucked from the roses of your days;
	
	I now am bold to say to the swift changing hours,
	Pass, pass upon your way, for I grow never old,
	Fleet to the dark abysm with all your fading flowers,
	One rose that none may pluck, within my heart I hold.
	
	Your flying wings may smite, but they can never spill
	The cup fulfilled of love, from which my lips are wet;
	My heart has far more fire than you can frost to chill,
	My soul more love than you can make my soul forget.



5. A SUNSET

	I love the evenings, passionless and fair, I love the evens,
	Whether old manor-fronts their ray with golden fulgence leavens,
	In numerous leafage bosomed close;
	Whether the mist in reefs of fire extend its reaches sheer,
	Or a hundred sunbeams splinter in an azure atmosphere
	On cloudy archipelagos.
	
	Oh, gaze ye on the firmament! a hundred clouds in motion,
	Up-piled in the immense sublime beneath the winds’ commotion,
	Their unimagined shapes accord:
	Under their waves at intervals flame a pale levin through,
	As if some giant of the air amid the vapors drew
	A sudden elemental sword.
	
	The sun at bay with splendid thrusts still keeps the sullen fold;
	And momently at distance sets, as a cupola of gold,
	The thatched roof of a cot a-glance;
	Or on the blurred horizon joins his battle with the haze;
	Or pools the blooming fields about with inter-isolate blaze,
	Great moveless meres of radiance.
	
	Then mark you how there hangs athwart the firmament’s swept track,
	Yonder a mighty crocodile with vast irradiant back,
	A triple row of pointed teeth?
	Under its burnished belly slips a ray of eventide,
	The flickerings of a hundred glowing clouds in tenebrous side
	With scales of golden mail ensheathe.
	
	Then mounts a palace, then the air vibrates--the vision flees.
	Confounded to its base, the fearful cloudy edifice
	Ruins immense in mounded wrack;
	Afar the fragments strew the sky, and each envermeiled cone
	Hangeth, peak downward, overhead, like mountains overthrown
	When the earthquake heaves its hugy back.
	
	These vapors, with their leaden, golden, iron, bronzèd glows,
	Where the hurricane, the waterspout, thunder, and hell repose,
	Muttering hoarse dreams of destined harms,--
	‘Tis God who hangs their multitude amid the skiey deep,
	As a warrior that suspendeth from the roof-tree of his keep
	His dreadful and resounding arms!
	
	All vanishes! The Sun, from topmost heaven precipitated,
	Like a globe of iron which is tossed back fiery red
	Into the furnace stirred to fume,
	Shocking the cloudy surges, plashed from its impetuous ire,
	Even to the zenith spattereth in a flecking scud of fire
	The vaporous and inflamèd spaume.
	
	O contemplate the heavens! Whenas the vein-drawn day dies pale,
	In every season, every place, gaze through their every veil?
	With love that has not speech for need!
	Beneath their solemn beauty is a mystery infinite:
	If winter hue them like a pall, or if the summer night
	Fantasy them starre brede.



6. TOMORROW

	Tomorrow, at dawn, when the countryside turns white,
	I leave. You see, I know you are waiting for me.
	I will go through the forest, I will go across the mountains.
	I cannot stay away from you any longer.
	
	I will walk with my eyes fixed on my thoughts,
	Without seeing anything outside, without hearing any noise,
	Alone, unknown, back bent, hands crossed,
	Sad, and the day for me will be like night.
	
	I will not watch the gold of the falling evening,
	Nor the sails in the distance descending towards Harfleur,
	And when I arrive, I’ll put on your grave
	A bouquet of green holly and flowering heather.
