*** Randall Jarrell (1914 - 1965)


1. 90 NORTH

	At home, in my flannel gown, like a bear to its floe,
	I clambered to bed; up the globe’s impossible sides
	I sailed all night—till at last, with my black beard,
	My furs and my dogs, I stood at the northern pole.
	
	There in the childish night my companions lay frozen,
	The stiff furs knocked at my starveling throat,
	And I gave my great sigh: the flakes came huddling,
	Were they really my end? In the darkness I turned to my rest.
	
	--Here, the flag snaps in the glare and silence
	Of the unbroken ice. I stand here,
	The dogs bark, my beard is black, and I stare
	At the North Pole . . .
	                                       And now what? Why, go back.
	
	Turn as I please, my step is to the south.
	The world--my world spins on this final point
	Of cold and wretchedness: all lines, all winds
	End in this whirlpool I at last discover.
	
	And it is meaningless. In the child’s bed
	After the night’s voyage, in that warm world
	Where people work and suffer for the end
	That crowns the pain--in that Cloud-Cuckoo-Land
	
	I reached my North and it had meaning.
	Here at the actual pole of my existence,
	Where all that I have done is meaningless,
	Where I die or live by accident alone--
	
	Where, living or dying, I am still alone;
	Here where North, the night, the berg of death
	Crowd me out of the ignorant darkness,
	I see at last that all the knowledge
	
	I wrung from the darkness--that the darkness flung me--
	Is worthless as ignorance: nothing comes from nothing,
	The darkness from the darkness. Pain comes from the darkness 
	And we call it wisdom. It is pain.



2. THE DEATH OF THE BALL TURRETT GUNNER

	From my mother’s sleep I fell into the State,
	And I hunched in its belly till my wet fur froze.
	Six miles from earth, loosed from its dream of life,
	I woke to black flak and the nightmare fighters.
	When I died they washed me out of the turret with a hose.



3. THE LOST WORLD

	I. _Children’s Arms_
	
	On my way home I pass a cameraman
	On a platform on the bumper of a car
	Inside which, rolling and plunging, a comedian
	Is working; on one white lot I see a star
	Stumble to her igloo through the howling gale
	Of the wind machines. On Melrose a dinosaur
	And pterodactyl, with their immense pale
	Papier-mâché smiles, look over the fence
	Of The Lost World.
	                                  Whispering to myself the tale
	These shout--done with my schoolwork, I commence
	My real life: my arsenal, my workshop
	Opens, and in impotent omnipotence
	I put on the helmet and the breastplate Pop
	Cut out and soldered for me. Here is the shield
	I sawed from beaver board and painted; here on top
	The bow that only Odysseus can wield
	And eleven vermilion-ringed, goose-feathered arrows.
	(The twelfth was broken on the battlefield
	When, searching among snap beans and potatoes,
	I stepped on it.) Some dry weeds, a dead cane
	Are my spears. The knife on the bureau’s
	My throwing-knife; the small unpainted biplane
	Without wheels--that so often, helped by human hands,
	Has taken off from, landed on, the counterpane--
	Is my Spad.
	                     O dead list, that misunderstands
	And laughs at and lies about the new live wild
	Loves it lists! that sets upright, in the sands
	Of age in which nothing grows, where all our friends are old,
	A few dried leaves marked THIS IS THE GREENWOOD--
	O arms that arm, for a child’s wars, the child!
	
	And yet they are good, if anything is good,
	Against his enemies . . . Across the seas
	At the bottom of the world, where Childhood
	Sits on its desert island with Achilles
	And Pitamakan, the White Blackfoot:
	In the black auditorium, my heart at ease,
	I watch the furred castaways (the seniors put
	A play on every spring) tame their wild beasts,
	Erect their tree house. Chatting over their fruit,
	Their coconuts, they relish their stately feasts.
	The family’s servant, their magnanimous
	Master now, rules them by right. Nature’s priests,
	They worship at Nature’s altar; when with decorous
	Affection the Admirable Crichton
	Kisses a girl like a big Wendy, all of us
	Squirm or sit up in our seats . . . Undone
	When an English sail is sighted, the prisoners
	Escape from their Eden to the world: the real one
	Where servants are servants, masters masters,
	And no one’s magnanimous. The lights go on
	And we go off, robbed of our fruit, our furs--
	The island that the children ran is gone.
	
	The island sang to me: Believe! Believe!
	And didn’t I know a lady with a lion?
	Each evening, as the sun sank, didn’t I grieve
	To leave my tree house for reality?
	There was nothing there for me to disbelieve.
	At peace among my weapons, I sit in my tree
	And feel: Friday night, then Saturday, then Sunday!
	
	I’m dreaming of a wolf, as Mama wakes me,
	And a tall girl who is–outside it’s gray,    
	I can’t remember, I jump up and dress.
	We eat in the lighted kitchen. And what is play
	For me, for them is habit. Happiness
	Is a quiet presence, breathless and familiar:
	My grandfather and I sit there in oneness
	As the Sunset bus, lit by the lavender
	And rose of sunrise, takes us to the dark
	Echoing cavern where Pop, a worker,
	Works for our living. As he rules a mark,
	A short square pencil in his short square hand,
	On a great sheet of copper, I make some remark
	He doesn’t hear. In that hard maze--in that land
	That grown men live in--in the world of work,
	He measures, shears, solders; and I stand
	Empty-handed, watching him. I wander into the murk
	The naked light bulbs pierce: the workmen, making something,
	Say something to the boy in his white shirt. I jerk
	As the sparks fly at me. The man hammering
	As acid hisses, and the solder turns to silver,
	Seems to me a dwarf hammering out the Ring
	In the world under the world. The hours blur;
	Bored and not bored, I bend things out of lead.
	I wash my smudged hands, as my grandfather
	Washes his black ones, with their gritty soap: ahead,
	Past their time clock, their pay window, is the blue
	And gold and white of noon. The sooty thread
	Up which the laborers feel their way into
	Their wives and houses, is money; the fact of life,
	The secret the grown-ups share, is what to do
	To make money. The husband Adam, Eve his wife
	Have learned how not to have to do without
	Till Santa Claus brings them their Boy Scout knife--
	Nor do they find things in dreams, carry a paper route,
	Sell Christmas seals . . .
	                                         Starting his Saturday, his Sunday,
	Pop tells me what I love to hear about,
	His boyhood in Shelbyville. I play
	What he plays, hunt what he hunts, remember
	What he remembers: it seems to me I could stay
	In that dark forest, lit by one fading ember
	Of his campfire, forever . . . But we’re home.
	I run in love to each familiar member
	Of this little state, clustered about the Dome
	Of St. Nicholas--this city in which my rabbit
	Depends on me, and I on everyone--this first Rome
	Of childhood, so absolute in every habit
	That when we hear the world our jailor say:
	“Tell me, art thou a Roman ?” the time we inhabit
	Drops from our shoulders, and we answer: “Yea.
	I stand at Caesar’s judgment seat, I appeal
	Unto Caesar.”
	                         I wash my hands, Pop gives his pay
	Envelope to Mama; we sit down to our meal.
	The phone rings: Mrs. Mercer wonders if I’d care
	To go to the library. That would be ideal,
	I say when Mama lets me. I comb my hair
	And find the four books I have out: The Food
	Of the Gods was best. Liking that world where
	The children eat, and grow giant and good,
	I swear as I’ve often sworn: “I’ll never forget
	What it’s like, when I’ve grown up.” A prelude
	By Chopin, hammered note by note, like alphabet
	Blocks, comes from next door. It’s played with real feeling,
	The feeling of being indoors practicing. “And yet
	It’s not as if--” a gray electric, stealing
	To the curb on silent wheels, has come; and I
	See on the back seat (sight more appealing
	Than any human sight!) my own friend Lucky,
	Half wolf, half police-dog. And he can play the piano--
	Play that he does, that is--and jump so high
	For a ball that he turns a somersault. “Hello,”
	I say to the lady, and hug Lucky . . . In my
	Talk with the world, in which it tells me what I know
	And I tell it, “I know--” how strange that I
	Know nothing, and yet it tells me what I know!--
	I appreciate the animals, who stand by
	Purring. Or else they sit and pant. It’s so--
	So agreeable. If only people purred and panted!
	So, now, Lucky and I sit in our row,
	Mrs. Mercer in hers. I take for granted
	The tiller by which she steers, the yellow roses
	In the bud vases, the whole enchanted
	Drawing room of our progress. The glass encloses
	As glass does, a womanish and childish
	And doggish universe. We press our noses
	To the glass and wish: the angel- and devilfish
	Floating by on Vine, on Sunset, shut their eyes
	And press their noses to their glass and wish.
	
	
	II. _A Night with Lions_
	
	When I was twelve we’d visit my aunt’s friend
	Who owned a lion, the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
	Lion. I’d play with him, and he’d pretend
	To play with me. I was the real player
	But he’d trot back and forth inside his cage
	Till he got bored. I put Tawny in the prayer
	I didn’t believe in, not at my age,
	But said still; just as I did everything in fours
	And gave to Something, on the average,
	One cookie out of three. And by my quartz, my ores,
	My wood with the bark on it, from the Petrified
	Forest, I put his dewclaw . . .
	                                                   Now the lion roars
	His slow comfortable roars; I lie beside
	My young, tall, brown aunt, out there in the past
	Or future, and I sleepily confide
	My dream-discovery: my breath comes fast
	Whenever I see someone with your skin,
	Hear someone with your voice. The lion’s steadfast
	Roar goes on in the darkness. I have been
	Asleep a while when I remember: you
	Are--you, and Tawny was the lion in--
	In Tarzan. In Tarzan! Just as we used to,
	I talk to you, you talk to me or pretend
	To talk to me as grown-up people do,
	Of Jurgen and Rupert Hughes, till in the end
	I think as a child thinks: “You’re my real friend.”
	
	
	III. _A Street off Sunset_
	
	Sometimes as I drive by the factory
	That manufactures, after so long, Vicks
	VapoRub Ointment, there rises over me
	A eucalyptus tree. I feel its stair-sticks
	Impressed on my palms, my insteps, as I climb
	To my tree house. The gray leaves make me mix
	My coughing chest, anointed at bedtime,
	With the smell of the sap trickling from the tan
	Trunk, where the nails go in.
	                                                   My lifetime
	Got rid of, I sit in a dark blue sedan
	Beside my great-grandmother, in Hollywood.
	We pass a windmill, a pink sphinx, an Allbran
	Billboard; thinking of Salâmmbo, Robin Hood,
	The old prospector with his flapjack in the air,
	I sit with my hands folded: I am good.
	
	That night as I lie crossways in an armchair
	Reading Amazing Stories (just as, long before,
	I’d lie by my rich uncle’s polar bear
	On his domed library’s reflecting floor
	In the last year of the first World War, and see
	A poor two-seater being attacked by four
	Triplanes, on the cover of the Literary
	Digest, and a Camel coming to its aid;
	I’d feel the bear’s fur warm and rough against me,
	The colors of the afternoon would fade,
	I’d reach into the bear’s mouth and hold tight
	To its front tooth and think, “I’m not afraid”)
	
	There off Sunset, in the lamplit starlight,
	A scientist is getting ready to destroy
	The world. “It’s time for you to say good night,”
	Mama tells me; I go on in breathless joy.
	“Remember, tomorrow is a school day,”
	Mama tells me; I go on in breathless joy.
	
	At last I go to Mama in her gray
	Silk, to Pop, to Dandeen in her black
	Silk. I put my arms around them, they
	Put their arms around me. Then I go back
	To my bedroom; I read as I undress.
	The scientist is ready to attack.
	Mama calls, “Is your light out?” I call back, “Yes,”
	And turn the light out. Forced out of life into
	Bed, for a moment I lie comfortless
	In the blank darkness; then as I always do,
	I put on the earphones of the crystal set--
	Each bed has its earphones--and the uneasy tissue
	Of their far-off star-sound, of the blue-violet
	Of space, surrounds the sweet voice from the Tabernacle
	Of the Four-Square Gospel. A vague marionette,
	Tall, auburn, holds her arms out, to unshackle
	The bonds of sin, of sleep--as, next instant, the sun
	Holds its arms out through the fig, the lemon tree,
	In the back yard the clucking hens all cackle
	As Mama brings their chicken feed. I see
	My magazine. My magazine! Dressing for school,
	I read how the good world wins its victory
	Over that bad man. Books; book strap; jump the footstool
	You made in Manual Training . . . Then we three
	Sit down, and one says grace; and then, by rule,
	By that habit that moves the stars, some coffee--
	One spoonful--is poured out into my milk
	And the milk, transubstantiated, is coffee.
	And Mama’s weekday wash-dress, Dandeen’s soft black silk
	Are ways that habit itself makes holy
	Just as, on Sunday mornings, Wednesday nights, His will
	Comes in their ways--of Church, of Prayer Meeting--to set free
	The spirit from the flesh it questions.
	                                                                   So,
	So unquestioned, my own habit moves me
	To and through and from school, like a domino,
	Till, home, I wake to find that I am playing
	Dominoes with Dandeen. Her old face is slow
	In pleasure, slow in doubt, as she sits weighing
	Strategies: patient, equable, and humble,
	She hears what this last child of hers is saying
	In pride or bewilderment; and she will grumble
	Like a child or animal when, indifferent
	To the reasons of my better self, I mumble:
	“I’d better stop now--the rabbit . . .”
	                                                                 I relent
	And play her one more game. It is miraculous
	To have a great-grandmother: I feel different
	From others as, between moves, we discuss
	The War Between the States. The cheerful troops
	Ride up to our farmhouse, steal from us
	The spoons, the horses--when their captain stoops
	To Dandeen and puts Dandeen on his horse,
	She cries . . . As I run by the chicken coops
	With lettuce for my rabbit, real remorse
	Hurts me, here, now: the little girl is crying
	Because I didn’t write. Because--
	                                                            of course,
	I was a child, I missed them so. But justifying
	Hurts too: if only I could play you one more game,
	See you all one more time! I think of you dying
	Forgiving me--or not, it is all the same
	To the forgiven . . . My rabbit’s glad to see me;
	He scrambles to me, gives me little tame
	Bites before he eats the lettuce. His furry
	Long warm soft floppy ears, his crinkling nose
	Are reassuring to a child. They guarantee,
	As so much here does, that the child knows
	Who takes care of him, whom he takes care of.
	
	Mama comes out and takes in the clothes
	From the clothesline. She looks with righteous love
	At all of us, her spare face half a girl’s.
	She enters a chicken coop, and the hens shove
	And flap and squawk, in fear; the whole flock whirls
	Into the farthest corner. She chooses one,
	Comes out, and wrings its neck. The body hurls
	Itself out--lunging, reeling, it begins to run
	Away from Something, to fly away from Something
	In great flopping circles. Mama stands like a nun
	In the center of each awful, anguished ring.
	The thudding and scrambling go on, go on--then they fade,
	I open my eyes, it’s over . . . Could such a thing
	Happen to anything ? It could to a rabbit, I’m afraid;
	It could to--
	                     “Mama, you won’t kill Reddy ever,
	You won’t ever, will you?” The farm woman tries to persuade
	The little boy, her grandson, that she’d never
	Kill the boy’s rabbit, never even think of it.
	He would like to believe her . . . And whenever
	I see her, there in that dark infinite,
	Standing like Judith, with the hen’s head in her hand,
	I explain it away, in vain--a hypocrite,
	Like all who love.
	                               Into the blue wonderland
	Of Hollywood, the sun sinks, past the eucalyptus,
	The sphinx, the windmill, and I watch and read and
	Hold my story tight. And when the bus
	Stops at the corner and Pop--Pop!--steps down
	And I run out to meet him, a blurred nimbus,
	Half-red, half-gold, enchants his sober brown
	Face, his stooped shoulders, into the All-Father’s.
	He tells me about the work he’s done downtown,
	We sit there on the steps. My universe
	Mended almost, I tell him about the scientist. I say,
	“He couldn’t really, could he, Pop ?” My comforter’s
	Eyes light up, and he laughs. “No, that’s just play,
	Just make-believe,” he says. The sky is gray,
	We sit there, at the end of our good day.



4. A MAN MEETS A WOMAN IN THE STREET

	Under the separated leaves of shade
	Of the gingko, that old tree
	That has existed essentially unchanged
	Longer than any other living tree,
	I walk behind a woman. Her hair’s coarse gold
	Is spun from the sunlight that it rides upon.
	Women were paid to knit from sweet champagne
	Her second skin: it winds and unwinds, winds
	Up her long legs, delectable haunches,
	As she sways, in sunlight, up the gazing aisle.
	The shade of the tree that is called maidenhair,
	That is not positively known
	To exist in a wild state, spots her fair or almost fair
	Hair twisted in a French twist; tall or almost tall,
	She walks through the air the rain has washed, a clear thing
	Moving easily on its high heels, seeming to men
	Miraculous . . . Since I can call her, as Swann couldn’t
	A woman who is my type, I follow with the warmth
	Of familiarity, of novelty, this new
	Example of the type,
	Reminded of how Lorenz’s just-hatched goslings
	Shook off the last remnants of the egg
	And, looking at Lorenz, realized that Lorenz
	Was their mother. Quaking, his little family
	Followed him everywhere; and when they met a goose,
	Their mother, they ran to him afraid.
	
	Imprinted upon me
	Is the shape I run to, the sweet strange
	Breath-taking contours that breathe to me: “I am yours,   
	Be mine!”
	            Following this new
	Body, somehow familiar, this young shape, somehow old,
	For a moment I’m younger, the century is younger.
	The living Strauss, his moustache just getting gray,
	Is shouting to the players: “Louder!
	Louder! I can still hear Madame Schumann-Heink--”
	Or else, white, bald, the old man’s joyfully
	Telling conductors they must play _Elektra_
	Like _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_--like a fairy music;
	Proust, dying, is swallowing his iced beer
	And changing in proof the death of Bergotte
	According to his own experience; Garbo,
	A commissar in Paris, is listening attentively
	To the voice telling how McGillicuddy me McGillivray,
	And McGillivray said to McGillicuddy--no, McGillicuddy
	Said to McGillivray-that is, McGillivray . . . Garbo
	Says seriously: “I vish dey’d never met.”
	
	As I walk behind this woman I remember
	That before I flew here--waked in the forest
	At dawn, by the piece called _Birds Beginning Day_
	That, each day, birds play to begin the day--
	I wished as men wish: “May this day be different!”
	The birds were wishing, as birds wish-over and over,
	With a last firmness, intensity, reality--
	“May this day be the same!”
	                                       Ah, turn to me
	And look into my eyes, say: “I am yours,
	Be mine!”
	            My wish will have come true. And yet
	When your eyes meet my eyes, they’ll bring into
	The weightlessness of my pure wish the weight
	Of a human being: someone to help or hurt,
	Someone to be good to me, to be good to,
	Someone to cry when I am angry
	that she doesn’t like _Elektra_, someone to start on Proust with.
	A wish, come true, is life. I have my life.
	When you turn just slide your eyes across my eyes
	And show in a look flickering across your face
	As lightly as a leaf’s shade, a bird’s wing,
	That there is no one in the world quite like me,
	That if only . . . If only . . .
	                                   That will be enough.
	
	But I’ve pretended long enough: I walk faster
	And come close, touch with the tip of my finger
	The nape of her neck, just where the gold
	Hair stops, and the champagne-colored dress begins.
	My finger touches her as the gingko’s shadow
	Touches her.   
	               Because, after all, it is my wife
	In a new dress from Bergdorf’s, walking toward the park.
	She cries out, we kiss each other, and walk arm in arm
	Through the sunlight that’s much too good for New York,
	The sunlight of our own house in the forest.
	Still, though, the poor things need it . . . We’ve no need
	To start out on Proust, to ask each other about Strauss.
	We first helped each other, hurt each other, years ago.
	After so many changes made and joys repeated,
	Our first bewildered, transcending recognition
	Is pure acceptance.   We can’t tell our life
	From our wish. Really I began the day
	Not with a man’s wish: “May this day be different,”
	But with the birds’ wish: “May this day
	Be the same day, the day of my life.”



5. NEXT DAY

	Moving from Cheer to Joy, from Joy to All,
	I take a box
	And add it to my wild rice, my Cornish game hens.
	The slacked or shorted, basketed, identical
	Food-gathering flocks
	Are selves I overlook. Wisdom, said William James,
	
	Is learning what to overlook. And I am wise
	If that is wisdom.
	Yet somehow, as I buy All from these shelves
	And the boy takes it to my station wagon,
	What I’ve become
	Troubles me even if I shut my eyes.
	
	When I was young and miserable and pretty
	And poor, I’d wish
	What all girls wish: to have a husband,
	A house and children. Now that I’m old, my wish
	Is womanish:
	That the boy putting groceries in my car
	
	See me. It bewilders me he doesn’t see me.
	For so many years
	I was good enough to eat: the world looked at me
	And its mouth watered. How often they have undressed me,
	The eyes of strangers!
	And, holding their flesh within my flesh, their vile
	
	Imaginings within my imagining,
	I too have taken
	The chance of life. Now the boy pats my dog
	And we start home. Now I am good.
	The last mistaken,
	Ecstatic, accidental bliss, the blind
	
	Happiness that, bursting, leaves upon the palm
	Some soap and water--
	It was so long ago, back in some Gay
	Twenties, Nineties, I don’t know . . . Today I miss
	My lovely daughter
	Away at school, my sons away at school,
	
	My husband away at work--I wish for them.
	The dog, the maid,
	And I go through the sure unvarying days
	At home in them. As I look at my life,
	I am afraid
	Only that it will change, as I am changing:
	
	I am afraid, this morning, of my face.
	It looks at me
	From the rear-view mirror, with the eyes I hate,
	The smile I hate. Its plain, lined look
	Of gray discovery
	Repeats to me: “You’re old.” That’s all, I’m old.
	
	And yet I’m afraid, as I was at the funeral
	I went to yesterday.
	My friend’s cold made-up face, granite among its flowers,
	Her undressed, operated-on, dressed body
	Were my face and body.
	As I think of her and I hear her telling me
	
	How young I seem; I am exceptional;
	I think of all I have.
	But really no one is exceptional,
	No one has anything, I’m anybody,
	I stand beside my grave
	Confused with my life, that is commonplace and solitary.



6. THE WOMAN AT WASHINGTON ZOO

	The saris go by me from the embassies.
	
	Cloth from the moon. Cloth from another planet.   
	They look back at the leopard like the leopard.
	
	And I....
	              this print of mine, that has kept its color   
	Alive through so many cleanings; this dull null   
	Navy I wear to work, and wear from work, and so   
	To my bed, so to my grave, with no
	Complaints, no comment: neither from my chief,   
	The Deputy Chief Assistant, nor his chief--
	Only I complain.... this serviceable
	Body that no sunlight dyes, no hand suffuses
	But, dome-shadowed, withering among columns,   
	Wavy beneath fountains--small, far-off, shining   
	In the eyes of animals, these beings trapped   
	As I am trapped but not, themselves, the trap,   
	Aging, but without knowledge of their age,
	Kept safe here, knowing not of death, for death--
	Oh, bars of my own body, open, open!
	
	The world goes by my cage and never sees me.   
	And there come not to me, as come to these,
	The wild beasts, sparrows pecking the llamas’ grain,   
	Pigeons settling on the bears’ bread, buzzards   
	Tearing the meat the flies have clouded....
	                                                               Vulture,   
	When you come for the white rat that the foxes left,
	Take off the red helmet of your head, the black
	Wings that have shadowed me, and step to me as man:
	The wild brother at whose feet the white wolves fawn,
	To whose hand of power the great lioness
	Stalks, purring....
	                             You know what I was,
	You see what I am: change me, change me!
