*** Elizabeth Jennings (1926 - 2001)


1. ABSENCE

	I visited the place where we last met.
	Nothing was changed, the gardens were well-tended,
	The fountains sprayed their usual steady jet;
	There was no sign that anything had ended
	And nothing to instruct me to forget.

	The thoughtless birds that shook out of the trees,
	Singing an ecstasy I could not share,
	Played cunning in my thoughts. Surely in these
	Pleasures there could not be a pain to bear
	Or any discord shake the level breeze.

	It was because the place was just the same
	That made your absence seem a savage force,
	For under all the gentleness there came
	An earthquake tremor: Fountain, birds and grass
	Were shaken by my thinking of your name.



2. ACCEPTED

	You are no longer young,
	Nor are you very old.
	There are homes where those belong.
	You know you do not fit
	When you observe the cold
	Stares of those who sit

	In bath-chairs or the park
	(A stick, then, at their side)
	Or find yourself in the dark
	And see the lovers who,
	In love and in their stride,
	Don’t even notice you.

	This is a time to begin
	Your life. It could be new.
	The sheer not fitting in
	With the old who envy you
	And the young who want to win,
	Not knowing false from true,

	Means you have liberty
	Denied to their extremes.
	At last now you can be
	What the old cannot recall
	And the young long for in dreams,
	Yet still include them all.



3. ANSWERS

	I keep my answers small and keep them near;
	Big questions bruised my mind but still I let
	Small answers be a bulwark to my fear.

	The huge abstractions I keep from the light;
	Small things I handled and caressed and loved.
	I let the stars assume the whole of night.

	But the big answers clamoured to be moved
	Into my life. Their great audacity
	Shouted to be acknowledged and believed.

	Even when all small answers build up to
	Protection of my spirit, I still hear
	Big answers striving for their overthrow

	And all the great conclusions coming near.



4. A CHORUS

	Over the surging tides and the mountain kingdoms,
	Over the pastoral valleys and the meadows,
	Over the cities with their factory darkness,
	Over the lands where peace is still a power,
	Over all these and all this planet carries
	A power broods, invisible monarch, a stranger
	To some, but by many trusted. Man’s a believer
	Until corrupted. This huge trusted power
	Is spirit. He moves in the muscle of the world,
	In continual creation. He burns the tides, he shines
	From the matchless skies. He is the day’s surrender.
	Recognize him in the eye of the angry tiger,
	In the sign of a child stepping at last into sleep,
	In whatever touches, graces and confesses,
	In hopes fulfilled or forgotten, in promises

	Kept, in the resignation of old men--
	This spirit, this power, this holder together of space
	Is about, is aware, is working in your breathing.
	But most he is the need that shows in hunger
	And in the tears shed in the lonely fastness.
	And in sorrow after anger.



5. DELAY

	The radiance of the star that leans on me
	Was shining years ago. The light that now
	Glitters up there my eyes may never see,
	And so the time lag teases me with how

	Love that loves now may not reach me until
	Its first desire is spent. The star’s impulse
	Must wait for eyes to claim it beautiful
	And love arrived may find us somewhere else.



6. THE ENEMIES

	Last night they came across the river and
	Entered the city. Women were awake
	With lights and food. They entertained the band,
	Not asking what the men had come to take
	Or what strange tongue they spoke
	Or why they came so suddenly through the land.

	Now in the morning all the town is filled
	With stories of the swift and dark invasion;
	The women say that not one stranger told
	A reason for his coming. The intrusion
	Was not for devastation:
	Peace is apparent still on hearth and field.

	Yet all the city is a haunted place.
	Man meeting man speaks cautiously. Old friends
	Close up the candid looks upon their face.
	There is no warmth in hands accepting hands;
	Each ponders, ‘Better hide myself in case
	Those strangers have set up their homes in minds
	I used to walk in. Better draw the blinds
	Even if the strangers haunt in my own house.’



7. FRIDAY

	We nailed the hands long ago,
	Wove the thorns, took up the scourge and shouted
	For excitement’s sake, we stood at the dusty edge
	Of the pebbled path and watched the extreme of pain.

	But one or two prayed, one or two
	Were silent, shocked, stood back
	And remembered remnants of words, a new vision,
	The cross is up with its crying victim, the clouds
	Cover the sun, we learn a new way to lose
	What we did not know we had
	Until this bleak and sacrificial day,
	Until we turned from our bad
	Past and knelt and cried out our dismay,
	The dice still clicking, the voices dying away.



8. FRIENDS

	I fear it’s very wrong of me,
	And yet I must admit,
	When someone offers friendship
	I want the whole of it.
	I don’t want everybody else
	To share my friends with me.
	At least, I want one special one,
	Who indisputably,

	Likes me much more than all the rest,
	Who’s always on my side,
	Who never cares what others say,
	Who lets me come and hide
	Within his shadow, in his house--
	It doesn’t matter where--
	Who lets me simply be myself,
	Who’s always, always there.



9. IN A GARDEN

	When the gardener has gone this garden
	Looks wistful and seems waiting an event.
	It is so spruce, a metaphor of Eden
	And even more so since the gardener went,

	Quietly godlike, but of course, he had
	Not made me promise anything and I
	Had no one tempting me to make the bad
	Choice. Yet I still felt lost and wonder why.

	Even the beech tree from next door which shares
	Its shadow with me, seemed a kind of threat.
	Everything was too neat, and someone cares

	In the wrong way. I need not have stood long
	Mocked by the smell of a mown lawn, and yet
	I did. Sickness for Eden was so strong.



10. IN MEMORY OF ANYONE UNKNOWN TO ME

	At this particular time I have no one
	Particular person to grieve for, though there must
	Be many, many unknown ones going to dust
	Slowly, not remembered for what they have done
	Or left undone. For these, then, I will grieve
	Being impartial, unable to deceive.

	How they lived, or died, is quite unknown,
	And, by that fact gives my grief purity--
	An important person quite apart from me
	Or one obscure who drifted down alone.
	Both or all I remember, have a place.
	For these I never encountered face to face.

	Sentiment will creep in. I cast it out
	Wishing to give these classical repose,
	No epitaph, no poppy and no rose
	From me, and certainly no wish to learn about
	The way they lived or died. In earth or fire
	They are gone. Simply because they were human, I admire.



11. A PERFORMANCE OF HENRY V AT STRATFORD-UPON-AVON

	Nature teaches us our tongue again
	And the swift sentences came pat. I came
	Into cool night rescued from rainy dawn.
	And I seethed with language; Henry at
	Harfleur and Agincourt came apt for war
	In Ireland and the Middle East. Here was
	The riddling and right tongue, the feeling words
	Solid and dutiful. Aspiring hope
	Met purpose in “advantages” and “He
	That fights with me today shall be my brother.”
	Say this is patriotic, out of date.
	But you are wrong. It never is too late

	For nights of stars and feet that move to an
	Iambic measure; all who clapped were linked,
	The theatre is our treasury and too,
	Our study, school-room, house where mercy is

	Dispensed with justice. Shakespeare has the mood
	And draws the music from the dullest heart.
	This is our birthright, speeches for the dumb
	And unaccomplished. Henry has the words
	For grief and we learn how to tell of death
	With dignity. “All was as cold” she said
	“As any stone” and so, we who lacked scope
	For big or little deaths, increase, grow up
	To purposes and means to face events
	Of cruelty, stupidity. I walked
	Fast under stars. The Avon wandered on
	“Tomorrow and tomorrow.” Words aren’t worn
	Out in this place but can renew our tongue,
	Flesh out our feeling, make us apt for life.



12. REMBRANDT’S LATE SELF-PORTRAITS

	You are confronted with yourself. Each year
	The pouches fill, the skin is uglier.
	You give it all unflinchingly. You stare
	Into yourself, beyond. Your brush’s care
	Runs with self-knowledge. Here

	Is a humility at one with craft.
	There is no arrogance. Pride is apart
	From this self-scrutiny. You make light drift
	The way you want. Your face is bruised and hurt
	But there is still love left.

	Love of the art and others. To the last
	Experiment went on. You stared beyond
	Your age, the times. You also plucked the past
	And tempered it. Self-portraits understand,
	And old age can divest,

	With truthful changes, us of fear of death.
	Look, a new anguish. There, the bloated nose,
	The sadness and the joy. To paint’s to breathe,
	And all the darknesses are dared. You chose
	What each must reckon with.
