*** Juan Ramón Jiménez (1881 - 1958)


1. DAWN OUTSIDE THE CITY WALLS

	  You can see the face of everything, and it is white--
	plaster, nightmare, adobe, anemia, cold--
	turned to the east. Oh closeness to life!
	Hardness of life! Like something
	in the body that is animal—root, slag-ends--
	with the soul still not set well there--
	and mineral and vegetable!
	Sun standing stiffly against man,
	against the sow, the cabbages, the mud wall!
	--False joy, because you are merely
	in time, as they say, and not in the soul!
	
	  The entire sky taken up   
	by moist and steaming heaps,
	a horizon of dung piles.   
	Sour remains, here and ther e,   
	of the night. Slices
	of the green moon, half-eaten,
	crystal bits from false stars,
	plaster, the paper ripped off, still faintly
	sky-blue. The birds
	not really awake yet, in the raw moon,
	streetlight nearly out.   
	Mob of beings and things!
	--A true sadness, because you are really deep
	in the soul, as they say, not in time at all!



2. I AM NOT I

	I am not I.
	                  I am this one
	walking beside me whom I do not see,
	whom at times I manage to visit,
	and whom at other times I forget;
	who remains calm and silent while I talk,
	and forgives, gently, when I hate,
	who walks where I am not,
	who will remain standing when I die.



3. I SHALL NOT RETURN

	I shall not return. And night, mildly warm, serene and silent, 
	will lull the world, under beams of its solitary moon. 
	My body will not be there, and through the wide-open window, 
	a refreshing breeze will come inquiring for my soul. 
	I don’t know if any await the end of my double absence, 
	or who will kiss my memory amidst caresses and weeping. 
	But, there will be stars and flowers, there will be sighs and hopes, 
	and love in the avenues in the shadows of the trees. 
	And that piano will be playing as in this untroubled night, 
	and no one there to listen, pensive, by my window frame.



4. RETURN FOR AN INSTANT

	What was it like, God of mine, what was it like?
	--Oh unfaithful heart, indecisive intelligence!
	Was it like the going by of the wind?
	Like the disappearance of the spring?
	
	As nimble, as changeable, as weightless
	as milkweed seeds in summer . . . Yes! Indefinite
	as a smile which is lost forever in a laugh . . .
	Arrogant in the air, just like a flag!
	
	  Flag, smile, milkweed pod, swift
	spring in June, clear wind! . . .
	Your celebration was so wild, so sad!
	
	  All of your changes ended up in nothing--
	remembrance, a blind bee of bitter things!--
	I don’t know what you were like, but you were!
