*** Samuel Johnson (1709 - 1784)


1. AUTUMN

	Alas! with swift and silent pace,
	Impatient time rolls on the year;
	The Seasons change, and Nature’s face
	Now sweetly smiles, now frowns severe.
	
	‘Twas Spring, ‘twas Summer, all was gay,
	Now Autumn bends a cloudy brow; 
	The flowers of Spring are swept away, 
	And Summer fruits desert the bough.
	
	The verdant leaves that play’d on high,
	And wanton’d on the western breeze,
	Now trod in dust neglected lie,
	As Boreas strips the bending trees.
	
	The fields that waved with golden grain,
	As russet heaths are wild and bare;
	Not moist with dew, but drench’d in rain,
	Nor health nor pleasure wanders there.
	
	No more, while through the midnight shade
	Beneath the moon’s pale orb I stray,
	Soft pleasing woes my heart invade,
	As Progne pours the melting lay.
	
	From this capricious clime she soars,
	O! would some god but wings supply!
	To where each morn the Spring restores,
	Companion of her flight I’d try.
	
	Vain wish! me fate compels to bear
	The downward season’s iron reign,
	Compels to breathe the polluted air,
	And shiver on a blasted plain.
	
	What bliss to life can Autumn yield,
	If glooms, and showers,and storms prevail;
	And Ceres flies the naked field,
	And flowers and fruits, and Phoebus fail.
	
	Oh! what remains, what lingers yet, 
	To cheer me in the darkening hour!
	The grape remains! the friend of wit,
	In love, and mirth, of mighty power.
	
	Haste--press the clusters, fill the bowl; 
	Apollo! shoot thy parting ray:
	This gives the sunshine of the soul,
	This god of health, and verse, and day.
	
	Still--still the jocund train shall flow,
	The pulse with vigorous rapture beat;
	My Stella with new charms shall glow,
	And every bliss in wine shall meet.



2. THE CITY OF GOD

	CITY of God, how broad and far 
	 Outspread thy walls sublime! 
	The true thy chartered freemen are, 
	 Of every age and clime. 
	
	One holy Church, one army strong,         
	 One steadfast high intent, 
	One working band, one harvest-song, 
	 One King Omnipotent. 
	
	How purely hath thy speech come down 
	 From man’s primeval youth;         
	How grandly hath thine empire grown 
	 Of Freedom, Love, and Truth! 
	
	How gleam thy watchfires through the night, 
	 With never fainting ray; 
	How rise thy towers, serene and bright,         
	 To meet the dawning day! 
	
	In vain the surge’s angry shock, 
	 In vain the drifting sands; 
	Unharmed, upon the Eternal Rock, 
	 The Eternal City stands.



3. EVENING ODE

	Evening now from purple wings
	Sheds the grateful gifts she brings;
	Brilliant drops bedeck the mead,
	Cooling breezes shake the reed;
	Shake the reed, and curl the stream
	Silver’d o’er with Cynthia’s beam;
	Near the chequer’d, lonely grove,
	Hears, and keeps thy secrets, love!
	Stella, thither let us stray,
	Lightly o’er the dewy way.
	Phoebus drives his burning car,
	Hence, my lovely Stella, far;
	In his stead, the queen of night
	Round us pours a lambent light:
	Light that seems but just to show
	Breasts that beat, and cheeks that glow;
	Let us now, in whisper’d joy,
	Evening’s silent hours employ,
	Silent best, and conscious shades,
	Please the hearts that love invades,
	Other pleasures give them pain,
	Lovers all but love disdain.



4. FRIENDSHIP

	Friendship! peculiar boon of Heaven,
	The noble mind’s delight and pride,
	To men and angels only given,
	To all the lower world denied.
	
	While love, unknown among the bless’d,
	Parent of thousand wild desires,
	The savage and the human breast
	Torments alike with raging fires.
	
	With bright, but oft destructive gleam, 
	Alike o’er all his lightnings fly, 
	Thy lambent glories only beam
	Around the favourites of the sky. 
	
	Thy gentle flows of guiltless joys
	On fools and villains ne’er descend;
	In vain for thee the tyrant sighs,
	And hugs a flatterer for a friend.
	
	Directness of the brave and just,
	Oh guide us through life’s darksome way!
	And let the tortures of mistrust
	On selfish bosoms only prey.
	
	Nor shall thine ardours cease to glow,
	When souls to peaceful climes remove.
	What raised our virtue here below
	Shall aid our happiness above.



5. FROM BOETHIUS

	O Thou! whose power o’er moving worlds presides,
	Whose voice created, and whose wisdom guides,
	On darkling man in pure effulgence shine,
	And cheer the clouded mind with light divine.
	‘Tis thine alone to calm the pious breast
	With silent confidence and holy rest;
	From thee, great God! we spring; to thee we bend;
	Path, motive, guide, original, and end.



6. SPRING

	Stern Winter now, by Spring repress’d
	Forbears the long-continued strife;
	And Nature, on her naked breast,
	Delights to catch the gales of life.
	
	Now o’er the rural kingdom roves,
	Soft pleasures with her laughing train,
	Love warbles in the vocal groves,
	And vegetation plants the plain. 
	
	Unhappy! whom to beds of pain
	Arthritic tyranny consigns;
	Whom smiling Nature courts in vain,
	Though rapture sings and beauty shines.
	
	Yet though my limbs disease invades,
	Her wings imagination tries,
	And bears me to the peaceful shades,
	Where ----‘s humble turrets rise.
	
	Here let me through the vales pursue,
	A guide--a father--and a friend,
	Once more great Nature’s works renew,
	Once more on Wisdom’s voice attend.
	
	From false caresses, causeless strife,
	Wild hope, vain fear, alike removed;
	Here let me learn the use of life,
	When best enjoy’d--when most improved.
	
	Teach me, thou venerable bower,
	Cool meditation’s quiet seat,
	The generous scorn of venal power,
	The silent grandeur of retreat.
	
	When pride by guilt to greatness climbs,
	Or raging factions rush to war,
	Here let me learn to shun the crimes
	I can’t prevent and will not share.
	
	But lest I fall by subtler foes,
	Bright wisdom teach me Curio’s art,
	The swelling passions to compose,
	And quell the rebels of the heart.



7. THE WINTER’S WALK

	Behold, my fair, where’er we rove,
	What dreary prospects round us rise,
	The naked hill, the leafless grove,
	The hoary ground, the frowning skies.
	
	Nor only through the wasted plain,
	Stern Winter is thy force confess’d;
	Still wider spreads thy horrid reign,
	I feel thy power usurp my breast.
	
	Enlivening hope, and fond desire,
	Resign the heart to spleen and care; 
	Scarce frighted love maintains her fire,
	And rapture saddens to despair.
	
	In groundless hope, and causeless fear,
	Unhappy man! behold thy doom;
	Still changing with the changeful year
	The slave of sunshine and of gloom.
	
	Tired with vain joys, the false alarms,
	With mental and corporeal strife,
	Snatch me, my Stella, to thy arms,
	And screen me from the ills of life.
