*** Donald Justice (1925 - 2004)


1. ABSENCE

	It’s snowing this afternoon and there are no flowers.
	There is only this sound of falling, quiet and remote,
	Like the memory of scales descending the white keys
	Of a childhood piano--outside the window, palms!
	And the heavy head of the cereus, inclining,
	Soon to let down its white or yellow-white.
	
	Now, only these poor snow-flowers in a heap,
	Like the memory of a white dress cast down . . . 
	So much has fallen.
	              
	              And I, who have listened for a step
	All afternoon, hear it now, but already falling away,
	Already in memory.  And the terrible scales descending
	On the silent piano; the snow; and the absent flowers abounding.


2. THE EVENING OF THE MIND

	Now comes the evening of the mind. 
	Here are the fireflies twitching in the blood; 
	Here is the shadow moving down the page 
	Where you sit reading by the garden wall. 
	Now the dwarf peach trees, nailed to their trellises, 
	Shudder and droop. Your know their voices now, 
	Faintly the martyred peaches crying out 
	Your name, the name nobody knows but you. 
	It is the aura and the coming on. 
	It is the thing descending, circling, here. 
	And now it puts a claw out and you take it. 
	Thankfully in your lap you take it, so. 
	
	You said you would not go away again, 
	You did not want to go away--and yet, 
	It is as if you stood out on the dock 
	Watching a little boat drift out 
	Beyond the sawgrass shallows, the dead fish . . .
	And you were in it, skimming past old snags, 
	Beyond, beyond, under a brazen sky 
	As soundless as a gong before it’s struck-- 
	Suspended how?--and now they strike it, now 
	The ether dream of five-years-old repeats, repeats, 
	And you must wake again to your own blood 
	And empty spaces in the throat.


3. IN BERTRAM’S GARDEN

	Jane looks down at her organdy skirt
	As if it somehow were the thing disgraced,
	For being there, on the floor, in the dirt,
	And she catches it up about her waist,
	Smooths it out along one hip,
	And pulls it over the crumpled slip.
	
	On the porch, green-shuttered, cool,
	Asleep is Bertram that bronze boy,
	Who, having wound her around a spool,
	Sends her spinning like a toy
	Out to the garden, all alone,
	To sit and weep on a bench of stone.
	
	Soon the purple dark must bruise
	Lily and bleeding-heart and rose,
	And the little cupid lose
	Eyes and ears and chin and nose,
	And Jane lie down with others soon,
	Naked to the naked moon.


4. SADNESS

	1 
	
	Dear ghosts, dear presences, O my dear parents, 
	Why were you so sad on porches, whispering? 
	What great melancholies were loosed among our swings! 
	As before a storm one hears the leaves whispering 
	And marks each small change in the atmosphere, 
	So was it then to overhear and to fear. 
	
	
	2
	
	But all things then were oracle and secret. 
	Remember the night when, lost, returning, we turned back 
	Confused, and our headlights singled out the fox? 
	Our thoughts went with it then, turning and turning back 
	With the same terror, into the deep thicket 
	Beside the highway, at home in the dark thicket. 
	
	
	3 
	
	I say the wood within is the dark wood, 
	Or wound no torn shirt can entirely bandage, 
	But the sad hand returns to it in secret 
	Repeatedly, encouraging the bandage 
	To speak of that other world we might have borne, 
	The lost world buried before it could be born. 
	
	
	4 
	
	Burchfield describes the pinched white souls of violets 
	Frothing the mouth of a derelict old mine 
	Just as an evil August night comes down, 
	All umber, but for one smudge of dusky carmine. 
	It is the sky of a peculiar sadness--
	The other side perhaps of some rare gladness. 
	
	
	5 
	
	What is it to be happy, after all? Think 
	Of the first small joys. Think of how our parents 
	Would whistle as they packed for the long summers, 
	Or, busy about the usual tasks of parents, 
	Smile down at us suddenly for some secret reason, 
	Or simply smile, not needing any reason. 
	
	
	6 
	
	But even in the summers we remember 
	The forest had its eyes, the sea its voices, 
	And there were roads no map would ever master, 
	Lost roads and moonless nights and ancient voices-- 
	And night crept down with an awful slowness toward the water; 
	And there were lanterns once, doubled in the water. 
	
	
	7 
	
	Sadness has its own beauty, of course. Toward dusk, 
	Let us say, the river darkens and look bruised, 
	And we stand looking out at it through rain. 
	It is as if life itself were somehow bruised 
	And tender at this hour; and a few tears commence. 
	Not that they are but that they feel immense.


5. VILLANELLE AT SUNDOWN

	Turn your head. Look. The light is turning yellow. 
	The river seems enriched thereby, not to say deepened. 
	Why this is, I’ll never be able to tell you. 
	
	Or are Americans half in love with failure? 
	One used to say so, reading Fitzgerald, as it happened. 
	(That Viking Portable, all water spotted and yellow-- 
	
	remember?) Or does mere distance lend a value 
	to things? --false, it may be, but the view is hardly cheapened. 
	Why this is, I’ll never be able to tell you. 
	
	The smoke, those tiny cars, the whole urban milieu-- 
	One can like anything diminishment has sharpened. 
	Our painter friend, Lang, might show the whole thing yellow 
	
	and not be much off. It’s nuance that counts, not color-- 
	As in some late James novel, saved up for the long weekend 
	and vivid with all the Master simply won’t tell you. 
	
	How frail our generation has got, how sallow 
	and pinched with just surviving! We all go off the deep end 
	finally, gold beaten thinly out to yellow. 
	And why this is, I’ll never be able to tell you.

