*** Erik Axel Karlfeldt (1864 - 1931)


1. NOTHING IS LIKE WAITING TIMES

	Nothing is like waiting times,
	spring flood weeks, budding times,
	no may a days spread
	as the clarifying April.
	Get on the last slip of the trail,
	the forest gives its dull coolness
	and his deep whisper to it.
	I want to donate the lust of summer
	for the first straws, which glitter
	in a dark pine sink,
	and the drill of the first thrush.
	
	Nothing is like times of longing,
	waiting years, engagement times.
	No spring a shimmer spreads
	as a secret heartbeat.
	Rarely meet, divorce soon,
	dream of everything sweet and dangerous
	life in its womb bears!
	Golden fruit may shake others;
	I want to linger and give up,
	in my garden I want to watch,
	while the trees are budding there.


2. VIRGIN MARY

	She comes down the meadows at Sjugareby.
	She’s a little hill with almond flower skin,
	yes, like almond blossoms and rose hips far away from the road and the village,
	where it never dusts and hikes.
	Which paths have you walked so that the sun did not burn you?
	What have you dreamed, Maria, in your young breast and felt,
	that your blood does not burn like the others?
	It shines so wonderfully from your bare hair,
	and thy forehead is as the bow of the moon,
	when over Bergsängsbackar he walks white and sloping
	and shines through the spring beats.
	
	Now the evening wind is cooling in the columbine’s trust,
	and yellow lily bells ring holiday and peace;
	barely gnaws the hem of the pasture, barely breaks the kid of the hem,
	it barely beeps in swallow nests and groves.
	Now Dalarna’s boys and girls go pair by pair:
	you are chosen above others, you are desired by one where,
	what do you go so alone and ponder?
	You are like a virgin, coming from her first communion table,
	who wants to stay awake on the quiet night of Pentecost
	with all the trembling of his heart and think of those words
	she felt and those under her got to taste.
	
	Turn around, turn around, Maria, now the evening is late.
	Your mother may mourn that you are wandering so alone.
	You are small and fragile like the crotch arrow branch,
	and in the forest goes the striking bear.
	Alas, the rose you hold is your sign and your care,
	it is brought by an angel from a blessed herb garden:
	you can step on snakes and thorns.
	Yes, that ray, which is so shining and long
	from the stronghold of the evening root over Lake Siljan--
	you could go to paradise tonight your wedding
	on the narrow and trembling tiljan.


3. WINTER GREETING

	Do you meet the north wind, man,
	then you meet song and dizziness.
	Nordens Apoll among the pines father
	with snow on his lyre.
	
	Do you meet the north wind, man,
	then you encounter fire and flame.
	Nordic Cupid among the spruce father
	with lingonberry-wrapped bow.
	
	The weather blows without calm
	from the sixteen gates of heaven.
	Who can you trust and believe
	of all the wild winds?
	
	Do you meet the north wind, man,
	then you meet man and glory,
	funny and bold, with his eyes clear
	as the New Year’s moon.
	
	Glad I heard his cheerful appeal,
	when he drummed on the box.
	Sounded his signal through cracks and dampers,
	then I hid the hard-hearted conclusion.
	
	Glad I have followed so many miles
	his creaking, white roads,
	drank from the mountains’ freezing il
	his abundant health beaks.
	
	Come on, do you agree for the sake of the old man?
	The chilly evening is low,
	the sky is full of glistening strings
	to lyres and to arches.
	
	Chief, jerk on; I’m your husband,
	your husband under rare stars.
	Bitter fighters follow your team
	and smiling winter terns.
	
	Come and join for the sake of the boy,
	anyone who can smile and sing!
	The clouds go like flags of gold:
	forward, you combatively young!