*** John Keats (1795 - 1821)


1. FANCY

	Ever let the Fancy roam, 
	Pleasure never is at home: 
	At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth, 
	Like to bubbles when rain pelteth; 
	Then let winged Fancy wander 
	Through the thought still spread beyond her: 
	Open wide the mind’s cage-door, 
	She’ll dart forth, and cloudward soar. 
	O sweet Fancy! let her loose; 
	Summer’s joys are spoilt by use, 
	And the enjoying of the Spring 
	Fades as does its blossoming; 
	Autumn’s red-lipp’d fruitage too, 
	Blushing through the mist and dew, 
	Cloys with tasting: What do then? 
	Sit thee by the ingle, when 
	The sear faggot blazes bright, 
	Spirit of a winter’s night; 
	When the soundless earth is muffled, 
	And the caked snow is shuffled 
	From the ploughboy’s heavy shoon; 
	When the Night doth meet the Noon 
	In a dark conspiracy 
	To banish Even from her sky. 
	Sit thee there, and send abroad, 
	With a mind self-overaw’d, 
	Fancy, high-commission’d:--send her! 
	She has vassals to attend her: 
	She will bring, in spite of frost, 
	Beauties that the earth hath lost; 
	She will bring thee, all together, 
	All delights of summer weather; 
	All the buds and bells of May, 
	From dewy sward or thorny spray; 
	All the heaped Autumn’s wealth, 
	With a still, mysterious stealth: 
	She will mix these pleasures up 
	Like three fit wines in a cup, 
	And thou shalt quaff it:--thou shalt hear 
	Distant harvest-carols clear; 
	Rustle of the reaped corn; 
	Sweet birds antheming the morn: 
	And, in the same moment, hark! 
	‘Tis the early April lark, 
	Or the rooks, with busy caw, 
	Foraging for sticks and straw. 
	Thou shalt, at one glance, behold 
	The daisy and the marigold; 
	White-plum’d lillies, and the first 
	Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst; 
	Shaded hyacinth, alway 
	Sapphire queen of the mid-May; 
	And every leaf, and every flower 
	Pearled with the self-same shower. 
	Thou shalt see the field-mouse peep 
	Meagre from its celled sleep; 
	And the snake all winter-thin 
	Cast on sunny bank its skin; 
	Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see 
	Hatching in the hawthorn-tree, 
	When the hen-bird’s wing doth rest 
	Quiet on her mossy nest; 
	Then the hurry and alarm 
	When the bee-hive casts its swarm; 
	Acorns ripe down-pattering, 
	While the autumn breezes sing. 
	
	Oh, sweet Fancy! let her loose; 
	Every thing is spoilt by use: 
	Where’s the cheek that doth not fade, 
	Too much gaz’d at? Where’s the maid 
	Whose lip mature is ever new? 
	Where’s the eye, however blue, 
	Doth not weary? Where’s the face 
	One would meet in every place? 
	Where’s the voice, however soft, 
	One would hear so very oft? 
	At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth 
	Like to bubbles when rain pelteth. 
	Let, then, winged Fancy find 
	Thee a mistress to thy mind: 
	Dulcet-ey’d as Ceres’ daughter, 
	Ere the God of Torment taught her 
	How to frown and how to chide; 
	With a waist and with a side 
	White as Hebe’s, when her zone 
	Slipt its golden clasp, and down 
	Fell her kirtle to her feet, 
	While she held the goblet sweet 
	And Jove grew languid.--Break the mesh 
	Of the Fancy’s silken leash; 
	Quickly break her prison-string 
	And such joys as these she’ll bring.--
	Let the winged Fancy roam, 
	Pleasure never is at home. 


2. ODE ON A GRECIAN URN

	Thou still unravish’d bride of quietness,
	      Thou foster-child of silence and slow time,
	Sylvan historian, who canst thus express
	      A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:
	What leaf-fring’d legend haunts about thy shape
	      Of deities or mortals, or of both,
	              In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?
	      What men or gods are these? What maidens loth?
	What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?
	              What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstasy?
	
	Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
	      Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;
	Not to the sensual ear, but, more endear’d,
	      Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:
	Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave
	      Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;
	              Bold Lover, never, never canst thou kiss,
	Though winning near the goal yet, do not grieve;
	      She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,
	              For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!
	
	Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed
	        Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu;
	And, happy melodist, unwearied,
	        For ever piping songs for ever new;
	More happy love! more happy, happy love!
	        For ever warm and still to be enjoy’d,
	               For ever panting, and for ever young;
	All breathing human passion far above,
	        That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloy’d,
	               A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.
	
	Who are these coming to the sacrifice?
	        To what green altar, O mysterious priest,
	Lead’st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,
	        And all her silken flanks with garlands drest?
	What little town by river or sea shore,
	        Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,
	               Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?
	And, little town, thy streets for evermore
	        Will silent be; and not a soul to tell
	               Why thou art desolate, can e’er return.
	
	O Attic shape! Fair attitude! with brede
	        Of marble men and maidens overwrought,
	With forest branches and the trodden weed;
	        Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought
	As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!
	        When old age shall this generation waste,
	               Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe
	Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say’st,
	        “Beauty is truth, truth beauty,--that is all
	               Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.”


3. TO AUTUMN

	Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness, 
	  Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun; 
	Conspiring with him how to load and bless 
	  With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eves run; 
	To bend with apples the moss’d cottage-trees, 
	  And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core; 
	     To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells 
	  With a sweet kernel; to set budding more, 
	And still more, later flowers for the bees, 
	Until they think warm days will never cease, 
	     For summer has o’er-brimm’d their clammy cells. 
	
	Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store? 
	  Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find 
	Thee sitting careless on a granary floor, 
	  Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind; 
	Or on a half-reap’d furrow sound asleep, 
	  Drows’d with the fume of poppies, while thy hook 
	     Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers: 
	And sometimes like a gleaner thou dost keep 
	  Steady thy laden head across a brook; 
	  Or by a cyder-press, with patient look, 
	     Thou watchest the last oozings hours by hours. 
	
	Where are the songs of spring? Ay, Where are they? 
	  Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,-- 
	While barred clouds bloom the soft-dying day, 
	  And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue; 
	Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn 
	  Among the river sallows, borne aloft 
	     Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies; 
	And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn; 
	  Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft 
	  The red-breast whistles from a garden-croft; 
	     And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.