*** Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy (1883 - 1929)


1. EASTER

	There was rapture of spring in the morning
	When we told our love in the wood,
	For you were the spring in my heart, dear lad.
	And I vowed that my life was good.
	But there’s winter of war in the evening,
	And lowering clouds overhead,
	There’s wailing of wind in the chimney nook,
	And I vow that my life lies dead.
	For the sun may shine on the meadow lands
	And the dog rose bloom in the lanes,
	But I’ve only weeds in my garden, lad,
	Wild weeds that are rank with the rains.
	One solace there is for me, sweet but faint,
	As it floats on the wind of the years,
	A whisper that spring is the last true thing
	And that triumph is born of tears.
	It comes from a garden of other days,
	And an echoing voice that cries,
	Behold I am alive for evermore,
	And in Me shall the dead arise.


2. INDIFFERENCE

	_Mt. 25:31-46_
	
	When Jesus came to Golgotha
	They hanged Him on a tree,
	They drove great nails through hands and feet,
	And made a Calvary.
	They crowned Him with a crown of thorns;
	Red were His wounds and deep,
	For those were crude and cruel days,
	And human flesh was cheap.
	
	When Jesus came to Birmingham,
	They simply passed Him by;
	They never hurt a hair of Him,
	They only let Him die.
	For men had grown more tender,
	And they would not give Him pain;
	They only just passed down the street,
	And left Him in the rain.
	
	Still Jesus cried, “Forgive them,
	For they know not what they do.”
	And still it rained the winter rain
	That drenched Him through and through.
	The crowds went home and left the streets
	Without a soul to see;
	And Jesus crouched against a wall
	And cried for Calvary.


3. IT IS NOT FINISHED

	IT is not finished, Lord.
	There is not one thing done,
	There is no battle of my life,
	That I have really won.
	And now I come to tell Thee
	How I fought to fail,
	My human, all too human, tale
	Of weakness and futility.
	And yet there is a faith in me,
	That Thou wilt find in it
	One word that Thou canst take
	And make
	The centre of a sentence
	In Thy book of poetry.
	I cannot read this writing of the years,
	My eyes are full of tears,
	It gets all blurred, and won’t make sense
	It’s full of contradictions
	Like the scribblings of a child,
	Such wild, wild
	Hopes, and longing as intense
	As pain, which trivial deeds
	Make folly of--or worse:
	I can but hand it in, and hope
	That Thy great mind, which reads
	The writings of so many lives,
	Will understand this scrawl
	And what it strives
	To say--but leaves unsaid.
	
	I cannot write it over,
	The stars are coming out,
	My body needs its bed.
	I have no strength for more,
	So it must stand or fall--Dear Lord--
	     That’s all.


4. JUDGMENT

	_There is mercy with Thee, therefore shalt Thou be feared._
	
	I SAW no thronged angelic court, I saw no great white throne,
	I saw no open judgment books, I seemed to stand alone.
	I seemed to stand alone beside a solemn sounding sea,
	While, at my feet upon the shore, broke waves of memory.
	Their murmuring music sobbed and sought a way into my soul,
	The perfect past was present there, and I could see it whole,
	Its beauty and its ugliness, its sorrow and its sin,
	Its splendour and its sordidness, as wave on wave rolled in.
	And ever deeper pierced the pain of all that I had lost,
	My dear dead dreams of perfect things, I saw them tempest-tossed.
	They fell like wreckage at my feet, and, as I turned them o’er,
	The solemn waves, in Memory’s caves, kept booming “Nevermore!”
	There came one dream, more dear than all, a corpse without a head,
	The flying spray hissed cowardice, and it was dead, cold dead.
	Then suddenly a shadow fell, and I was not alone,
	He stood with me beside the sea, and listened to its moan.
	I did not dare to raise my eyes, I feared what I might see,
	A cold sweat broke and bathed my brow, I longed to turn and flee,
	But could not; rooted there I stood, in shiv’ring shame and fear,
	The subtle shadow substance took, and nearer came, and near.
	O was it days or was it years, we stood beside that sea,
	Or was it aeons, timeless times? It seemed eternity.
	At last, compelled, I raised my eyes. Two eyes looked into mine,
	And shattered all my soul with shame, so sad and so divine.
	It palsied all my pride with pain, the terror of those tears,
	And wrought into my soul the woe of all my wasted years.
	“Depart from me,” I cried, “depart, I cannot stand with Thee
	And face the sorrow of those eyes, beside this cruel sea.
	Depart from me, I dare not tread the sands those feet have trod,
	Nor look into those eyes that tell the agony of God.
	Depart,” I cried, and He was gone. I stood there all alone,
	In silence save that Memory’s sea still made perpetual moan.
	Night shadowed all, and wandering winds came wailing from afar,
	But out across the darkening sea shone forth one single star.


5. MAN’S SOUL

	THE Great God stooped to save my soul
	     And lift it up to Paradise;
	But something bound it still to earth,
	     A careless woman’s eyes.
	
	Then Satan came to damn my soul,
	     And drag it down to his own place;
	But something bound it still to earth,
	     Another woman’s face.


6. MY PEACE I LEAVE WITH YOU

	THY Peace! Thou pale, despisèd Christ!
	     What Peace is there in Thee,
	Nailed to the Cross that crowns the world,
	           In agony?
	
	No Peace of home was Thine; no rest
	     When Thy day’s work was done.
	When darkness called the world to sleep
	           And veiled the sun,
	
	No children gathered round Thy knee,
	     No hand soothed care away
	Thou hadst not where to lay Thy head
	           At close of day.
	
	What Peace was Thine? Misunderstood,
	     Rejected by Thine own,
	Pacing Thy grim Gethsemane,
	           Outcast and lone.
	
	What Peace hast Thou to give the world?
	     There is enough of pain;
	Always upon my window beats
	           The sound of rain.
	
	The source of sorrow is not dried,
	     Nor stays the stream of tears,
	But winds on weeping to the sea,
	           All down the years.
	
	For millions come to Golgotha
	     To suffer and to die,
	Forsaken in their hour of need,
	           And asking, Why?
	
	Man’s Via Crucis never ends,
	     Earth’s Calvaries increase,
	The world is full of spears and nails,
	           But where is Peace?
	
	“Take up Thy Cross and follow Me,
	     I am the Way, my son,
	Via Crucis, Via Pacis,
	           Meet and are one.”


7. NON ANGLI SED ANGELI

	“NOT Angles merely but of angel stock,
	These boys blue-eyed and shining from the sea,
	Which like a silver girdle belts their home.
	Not slaves, but souls, not tools to use for gain,
	But men to love and lead and save for God
	Who made them and for that great King who died
	The death of shame and glory on the Cross.”
	So spake the master Christian of the world
	Long years ago when, in the streets of Rome
	Imperial, he met the ancestors
	Of that yet greater Rome which was to be.
	So spake he, taught by Him to whose great soul
	There were no slaves, nor chattels in the world
	But only men and brothers, Sons of God,
	The last and greatest works of wondrous Love,
	From whose eternal, energy pain
	The greatest and the least of things is sprung.
	So spoke he, taught by Him who mirrored forth
	To men’s blind eyes that Love divine of God,
	Who, like a father, mourns, the one lost son,
	And, like a faithful shepherd, wanders wide
	Across the hills and calls through dawnless dark
	The one lost sheep that strays forth from the fold,
	Christ lived in him, and he had learned full well
	The first and chiefest lesson of His life,
	The value of a man to God, the price
	God puts, on human, souls, the price of blood
	And pain paid out in coin of Calvary.
	And in that blazing light of Love he saw
	The sin of slavery, the sin supreme,
	That slays, the world because it values life
	As death, and dares to use as mere machines,
	For pleasure, or for profit, living men.
	This blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
	Which, neither in this world nor in the next,
	Can find forgiveness in the heart of God,
	Who only knows the value of a man,
	He saw it with the eyes of Christ, and spoke
	In all unconscious prophecy, the doom
	Of slavery, which these same blue-eyed boys
	Would one day die to banish from the world.
	And I have seen them die in these last days:
	Yes, I have seen their bright blue eyes grow dim
	With agony, yet never lose their smile,
	The dauntless smile of Angles that reveals
	Their angel souls, and crowns them Kings by right,
	The destined saviours of the world from sin,
	And from the curse of tyranny which kills
	The souls of men, and turns them into slaves.
	Yes, I have seen them smile at death, and known,
	By instinct of sure prophecy, the Truth
	That seas of dead tyrannic force would break
	In vain against the rock of British hearts,
	Whereon the love of freedom sits enthroned.
	This have I known, and have with tears rejoiced,
	Until there shivered through me like the chill
	Of death, the fear lest gold be strong where steel
	Is weak; lest men whose pride no sword can slay
	May yet be bought and sold to slavery.
	The day of tyrant kings is dead, and thrones
	Shall nevermore dethrone men’s souls.
	But now A dull inhuman monster takes their place.
	The minotaur of Mammon tears the wings
	From new-fledged souls and flings them bleeding down
	To dogs of greed and lust. To him they are
	Dead hands, machines that make machines, and grind
	Out gold to swell the coffers of the rich.
	They have no right to fly, their wings are best
	Cut short, that so their hands may be more strong
	To work, make wealth, build up the State, and set
	The Commonwealth on sure foundations, made
	Of gold and silver and of precious stones.
	To him a man is of less value than
	A beast of burden, for the beast must needs
	Be bought for gold, and if he dies be bought
	Again, but men need not be bought; they are
	Machines for hire that can be scrapped at will,
	And new ones hired with no fresh cost at all,
	Because they die or weaken in their work.
	Supply is plentiful, and men are drugs
	Upon the crowded markets of the world.
	So Satan takes new forms, and when he finds
	The sword is weak, too weak to win brave hearts
	As slaves, creeps snakelike in, in time of Peace,
	To fetter free-born men with golden chains
	And lead them helpless captives down to hell.
	O England, when this wave of war is spent,
	And rolls back baffled from thy rocky breast,
	Wilt thou be strong to slay the Minotaur,
	And strangle that great golden snake that crept
	In time of Peace about thy home to kill,
	With venom of low greed and lust of wealth,
	The soul of Freedom and the heart of Love?
	Shall wealth still grow, and woe increase to breed
	In filthy slums the slaves of poverty?
	Shall senseless pride and vulgar luxury
	By gilding over evil make it good?
	Shall souls be only hands again, dead hands,
	That toil for wealth that makes none rich save those
	Who need it not? Shall men still seek in drink
	A refuge from the burden of their strife,
	And from that dull monotony of grey
	That shadows half our cities from the sun?
	Shall women still be bought and sold, like dogs
	Upon the streets, because the wage they earn
	By work will not keep bodies for their souls?
	Shall children come to birth, too weak to live,
	Not even hands of strength, but feeble hands,
	That clutch at life and die--just born to die
	And cry--cry shame upon the grimy world
	That murdered them? If this be what must come,
	Then blessed are the dead who die in war,
	Their bodies shattered, but their souls untouched
	By slime of sin, unpoisoned by the snake,
	For war is kinder than a Godless peace.
	O England, let this message from the past
	Ring down the ages like a trumpet call,
	Not Angles these but Angels, souls not slaves,
	Let not thy wealth be counted in base coin
	But in chaste mothers, comely maids, strong men
	With kindly eyes, in sound of children’s play,
	And in those happy aged ones who stand
	Between the seas of life, and, looking back
	And forwards, vow that human life is good.
	So must our land be reckoned rich or poor.


8. PATIENCE

	SOMETIMES I wish that I might do
	     Just one grand deed and die,
	And by that one grand deed reach up
	     To meet God in the sky.
	But such is not Thy way, O God,
	     Not such is Thy decree,
	But deed by deed, and tear by tear,
	     Our souls must climb to Thee,
	As climbed the only Son of God
	     From manger unto Cross,
	Who learned, through tears and bloody sweat,
	     To count this world but loss;
	Who left the Virgin Mother’s Arms
	     To seek those arms of shame,
	Outstretched upon the lonely hill
	     To which the darkness came.
	As deed by deed, and tear by tear,
	     He climbed up to the height,
	Each deed a splendid deed, each tear
	     A jewel shining bright,
	So grant us, Lord, the patient heart,
	     To climb the upward way,
	Until we stand upon the height,
	     And see the perfect day.


9. THE SOUL OF DOUBT

	THAT’S it. Doubt’s very soul of doubt
	Lies here. Is God just faith in God,
	Or can God work His will without
	Our human faith? Is flesh and blood
	Made by, or maker of, the mind
	That works upon the mass of things
	Inanimate? Has this wild wind
	A master, riding on its wings
	His chosen way, or is it free
	Of any but its own mad will
	To sweep in wanton liberty
	Over the patient earth, and spill
	Destruction, breaking hearts and homes,
	A drunken thing without a plan
	Or purpose anywhere? It comes
	To that at last. Is mortal man
	Fated to fight a senseless world
	Of blind material force alone,
	By its haphazard powers hurled
	This way and that, until his own
	Small wit in desperation finds
	A way to short uncertain Peace?
	Around this core of doubt thought winds
	Its endless coil, seeking release,
	And, finding none, for ever binds
	Its meshes tighter round the soul. 	 
	
	The preachers blame our. lack of faith
	For all our human ills, but why?
	Does God depend on man? “Thus saith
	The Lord omnipotent,” they cry.
	Aye, God for ever says, but we
	Must do, and how? We lack the power,
	And from the task’s immensity
	Reel back in fear, as hour by hour
	It grows, and frowning peak on peak
	The evil mountains rise ahead.
	We stumble on bewildered, weak,
	Half blind, trusting what we have read
	Of God, that legendary Love
	Urgent to help us, and redeem
	Our souls, a Love we cannot prove,
	But shut out aching eyes and dream
	It true. Could any God endure
	The sight unmoved and silent still?
	Would not a real God assure
	Our doubts, and work His mighty
	Will Without our faith? So many wrecks;
	Wrecked faith, wrecked hope, wrecked love, wrecked dreams;
	And still we bow our helpless necks
	To meet the storm. God’s silence seems
	Decisive. God is only faith
	In God, and when Faith dies, God dies,
	And Hope, a homeless weeping wraith,
	Beats on her shrivelled breasts, and cries,
	Refusing to be comforted,
	Because her little ones are dead,
	All dead.
	And yet--and yet--doubt may deceive,
	Joy may give truer thought than grief.
	It may be so, Lord, I believe,
	In mercy help mine unbelief.


10. TEMPTATION

	PRAY! Have I prayed! When I’m worn with all my praying
	     When I’ve bored the blessed angels with my battery of prayer!
	It’s the proper thing to say--but it’s only saying, saying,
	     And I cannot get to Jesus for the glory of her hair.


11. TREES

	ONCE glistering green,
	             With dewy sheen,
	And summer glory round them cast
	             Now black and bare,
	             The trees stand there,
	And mourn their beauty that is past.
	
	             Look, leaf by leaf,
	             Each leaf a grief,
	The hand of Autumn strips them bare.
	             No sound nor cry,
	             As they fall and die,
	Because they know that Life is there.
	
	             So stiff and strong,
	             The winter long,
	All uncomplaining stand the trees.
	             God make my life,
	             Through all its strife,
	As true to Spring as one of these.
	
	             So would I stand,
	             Serene and grand,
	While age strips off the joys of youth;
	             Because I know
	             That, as they go,
	My soul draws nearer to the Truth.
	
	             He is the Truth,
	             In very sooth,
	The Word made flesh, who dwelt with men,
	             And the world shall ring
	             With the song of Spring,
	When thy soul turns to its Lord again.
	
	             When God’s soft breath,
	             That men call death,
	Falls gently on thy closing eyes,
	             Thy youth, that goes
	             Like the red June rose,
	Shall burst to bloom in Paradise.