*** Joyce Kilmer (1886 - 1918)


1. ALARM CLOCKS

	When Dawn strides out to wake a dewy farm
	Across green fields and yellow hills of hay
	The little twittering birds laugh in his way
	And poise triumphant on his shining arm.
	He bears a sword of flame but not to harm
	The wakened life that feels his quickening sway
	And barnyard voices shrilling “It is day!”
	Take by his grace a new and alien charm.
	
	But in the city, like a wounded thing
	That limps to cover from the angry chase,
	He steals down streets where sickly arc-lights sing,
	And wanly mock his young and shameful face;
	And tiny gongs with cruel fervor ring
	In many a high and dreary sleeping place.


2. AS WINDS THAT BLOW AGAINST A STAR

	Now by what whim of wanton chance
	Do radiant eyes know sombre days?
	And feet that shod in light should dance
	Walk weary and laborious ways?
	
	But rays from Heaven, white and whole,
	May penetrate the gloom of earth;
	And tears but nourish, in your soul,
	The glory of celestial mirth.
	
	The darts of toil and sorrow, sent
	Against your peaceful beauty, are
	As foolish and as impotent
	As winds that blow against a star.


3. CITIZEN OF THE WORLD

	No longer of Him be it said
	“He hath no place to lay His head.”
	
	In every land a constant lamp
	Flames by His small and mighty camp.
	
	There is no strange and distant place
	That is not gladdened by His face.
	
	And every nation kneels to hail
	The Splendour shining through Its veil.
	
	Cloistered beside the shouting street,
	Silent, He calls me to His feet.
	
	Imprisoned for His love of me
	He makes my spirit greatly free.
	
	And through my lips that uttered sin
	The King of Glory enters in.


4. DELICATESSEN

	Why is that wanton gossip Fame
	So dumb about this man’s affairs?
	Why do we titter at his name
	Who come to buy his curious wares?
	
	Here is a shop of wonderment.
	From every land has come a prize;
	Rich spices from the Orient,
	And fruit that knew Italian skies,
	
	And figs that ripened by the sea
	In Smyrna, nuts from hot Brazil,
	Strange pungent meats from Germany,
	And currants from a Grecian hill.
	
	He is the lord of goodly things
	That make the poor man’s table gay,
	Yet of his worth no minstrel sings
	And on his tomb there is no bay.
	
	Perhaps he lives and dies unpraised,
	This trafficker in humble sweets,
	Because his little shops are raised
	By thousands in the city streets.
	
	Yet stars in greater numbers shine,
	And violets in millions grow,
	And they in many a golden line
	Are sung, as every child must know.
	
	Perhaps Fame thinks his worried eyes,
	His wrinkled, shrewd, pathetic face,
	His shop, and all he sells and buys
	Are desperately commonplace.
	
	Well, it is true he has no sword
	To dangle at his booted knees.
	He leans across a slab of board,
	And draws his knife and slices cheese.
	
	He never heard of chivalry,
	He longs for no heroic times;
	He thinks of pickles, olives, tea,
	And dollars, nickles, cents and dimes.
	
	His world has narrow walls, it seems;
	By counters is his soul confined;
	His wares are all his hopes and dreams,
	They are the fabric of his mind.
	
	Yet--in a room above the store
	There is a woman--and a child
	Pattered just now across the floor;
	The shopman looked at him and smiled.
	
	For, once he thrilled with high romance
	And tuned to love his eager voice.
	Like any cavalier of France
	He wooed the maiden of his choice.
	
	And now deep in his weary heart
	Are sacred flames that whitely burn.
	He has of Heaven’s grace a part
	Who loves, who is beloved in turn.
	
	And when the long day’s work is done,
	(How slow the leaden minutes ran!)
	Home, with his wife and little son,
	He is no huckster, but a man!
	
	And there are those who grasp his hand,
	Who drink with him and wish him well.
	O in no drear and lonely land
	Shall he who honors friendship dwell.
	
	And in his little shop, who knows
	What bitter games of war are played?
	Why, daily on each corner grows
	A foe to rob him of his trade.
	
	He fights, and for his fireside’s sake;
	He fights for clothing and for bread:
	The lances of his foemen make
	A steely halo round his head.
	
	He decks his window artfully,
	He haggles over paltry sums.
	In this strange field his war must be
	And by such blows his triumph comes.
	
	What if no trumpet sounds to call
	His armed legions to his side?
	What if, to no ancestral hall
	He comes in all a victor’s pride?
	
	The scene shall never fit the deed.
	Grotesquely wonders come to pass.
	The fool shall mount an Arab steed
	And Jesus ride upon an ass.
	
	This man has home and child and wife
	And battle set for every day.
	This man has God and love and life;
	These stand, all else shall pass away.
	
	O Carpenter of Nazareth,
	Whose mother was a village maid,
	Shall we, Thy children, blow our breath
	In scorn on any humble trade?
	
	Have pity on our foolishness
	And give us eyes, that we may see
	Beneath the shopman’s clumsy dress
	The splendor of humanity!


5. THE FOURTH SHEPHERD

	 I.
	
	On nights like this the huddled sheep
	Are like white clouds upon the grass,
	And merry herdsmen guard their sleep
	And chat and watch the big stars pass.
	
	It is a pleasant thing to lie
	Upon the meadow on the hill
	With kindly fellowship near by
	Of sheep and men of gentle will.
	
	I lean upon my broken crook
	And dream of sheep and grass and men--
	O shameful eyes that cannot look
	On any honest thing again!
	
	On bloody feet I clambered down
	And fled the wages of my sin,
	I am the leavings of the town,
	And meanly serve its meanest inn.
	
	I tramp the courtyard stones in grief,
	While sleep takes man and beast to her.
	And every cloud is calling “Thief!”
	And every star calls “Murderer!”
	
	
	 II.
	
	The hand of God is sure and strong,
	Nor shall a man forever flee
	The bitter punishment of wrong.
	The wrath of God is over me!
	
	With ashen bread and wine of tears
	Shall I be solaced in my pain.
	I wear through black and endless years
	Upon my brow the mark of Cain.
	
	
	 III.
	
	Poor vagabond, so old and mild,
	Will they not keep him for a night?
	And She, a woman great with child,
	So frail and pitiful and white.
	
	Good people, since the tavern door
	Is shut to you, come here instead.
	See, I have cleansed my stable floor
	And piled fresh hay to make a bed.
	
	Here is some milk and oaten cake.
	Lie down and sleep and rest you fair,
	Nor fear, O simple folk, to take
	The bounty of a child of care.
	
	
	 IV.
	
	On nights like this the huddled sheep--
	I never saw a night so fair.
	How huge the sky is, and how deep!
	And how the planets flash and glare!
	
	At dawn beside my drowsy flock
	What winged music I have heard!
	But now the clouds with singing rock
	As if the sky were turning bird.
	
	O blinding Light, O blinding Light!
	Burn through my heart with sweetest pain.
	O flaming Song, most loudly bright,
	Consume away my deadly stain!
	
	
	 V.
	
	The stable glows against the sky,
	And who are these that throng the way?
	My three old comrades hasten by
	And shining angels kneel and pray.
	
	The door swings wide--I cannot go--
	I must and yet I dare not see.
	Lord, who am I that I should know--
	Lord, God, be merciful to me!
	
	
	 VI.
	
	O Whiteness, whiter than the fleece
	Of new-washed sheep on April sod!
	O Breath of Life, O Prince of Peace,
	O Lamb of God, O Lamb of God!


6. THE HOUSE WITH NOBODY IN IT

	Whenever I walk to Suffern along the Erie track
	I go by a poor old farmhouse with its shingles broken and black.
	I suppose I’ve passed it a hundred times, but I always stop for a minute
	And look at the house, the tragic house, the house with nobody in it.
	
	I never have seen a haunted house, but I hear there are such things;
	That they hold the talk of spirits, their mirth and sorrowings.
	I know this house isn’t haunted, and I wish it were, I do;
	For it wouldn’t be so lonely if it had a ghost or two.
	
	This house on the road to Suffern needs a dozen panes of glass,
	And somebody ought to weed the walk and take a scythe to the grass.
	It needs new paint and shingles, and the vines should be trimmed and tied;
	But what it needs the most of all is some people living inside.
	
	If I had a lot of money and all my debts were paid
	I’d put a gang of men to work with brush and saw and spade.
	I’d buy that place and fix it up the way it used to be
	And I’d find some people who wanted a home and give it to them free.
	
	Now, a new house standing empty, with staring window and door,
	Looks idle, perhaps, and foolish, like a hat on its block in the store.
	But there’s nothing mournful about it; it cannot be sad and lone
	For the lack of something within it that it has never known.
	
	But a house that has done what a house should do,
	 a house that has sheltered life,
	That has put its loving wooden arms around a man and his wife,
	A house that has echoed a baby’s laugh and held up his stumbling feet,
	Is the saddest sight, when it’s left alone, that ever your eyes could meet.
	
	So whenever I go to Suffern along the Erie track
	I never go by the empty house without stopping and looking back,
	Yet it hurts me to look at the crumbling roof and the shutters fallen apart,
	For I can’t help thinking the poor old house is a house with a broken heart.


7. MOUNT HOUVENKOPF

	Serene he stands, with mist serenely crowned,
	And draws a cloak of trees about his breast.
	The thunder roars but cannot break his rest
	And from his rugged face the tempests bound.
	He does not heed the angry lightning’s wound,
	The raging blizzard is his harmless guest,
	And human life is but a passing jest
	To him who sees Time spin the years around.
	
	But fragile souls, in skyey reaches find
	High vantage-points and view him from afar.
	How low he seems to the ascended mind,
	How brief he seems where all things endless are;
	This little playmate of the mighty wind
	This young companion of an ancient star.


8. PENNIES

	A few long-hoarded pennies in his hand
	Behold him stand;
	A kilted Hedonist, perplexed and sad.
	The joy that once he had,
	The first delight of ownership is fled.
	He bows his little head.
	Ah, cruel Time, to kill
	That splendid thrill!
	
	Then in his tear-dimmed eyes
	New lights arise.
	He drops his treasured pennies on the ground,
	They roll and bound
	And scattered, rest.
	Now with what zest
	He runs to find his errant wealth again!
	
	So unto men
	Doth God, depriving that He may bestow.
	Fame, health and money go,
	But that they may, new found, be newly sweet.
	Yea, at His feet
	Sit, waiting us, to their concealment bid,
	All they, our lovers, whom His Love hath hid.
	
	Lo, comfort blooms on pain, and peace on strife,
	And gain on loss.
	What is the key to Everlasting Life?
	A blood-stained Cross.


9. THE ROSARY

	Not on the lute, nor harp of many strings
	Shall all men praise the Master of all song.
	Our life is brief, one saith, and art is long;
	And skilled must be the laureates of kings.
	Silent, O lips that utter foolish things!
	Rest, awkward fingers striking all notes wrong!
	How from your toil shall issue, white and strong,
	Music like that God’s chosen poet sings?
	
	There is one harp that any hand can play,
	And from its strings what harmonies arise!
	There is one song that any mouth can say,--
	A song that lingers when all singing dies.
	When on their beads our Mother’s children pray
	Immortal music charms the grateful skies.


10. SERVANT GIRL AND GROCER’S BOY

	Her lips’ remark was:  “Oh, you kid!”
	Her soul spoke thus (I know it did):
	
	“O king of realms of endless joy,
	My own, my golden grocer’s boy,
	
	I am a princess forced to dwell
	Within a lonely kitchen cell,
	
	While you go dashing through the land
	With loveliness on every hand.
	
	Your whistle strikes my eager ears
	Like music of the choiring spheres.
	
	The mighty earth grows faint and reels
	Beneath your thundering wagon wheels.
	
	How keenly, perilously sweet
	To cling upon that swaying seat!
	
	How happy she who by your side
	May share the splendors of that ride!
	
	Ah, if you will not take my hand
	And bear me off across the land,
	
	Then, traveller from Arcady,
	Remain awhile and comfort me.
	
	What other maiden can you find
	So young and delicate and kind?”
	
	Her lips’ remark was:  “Oh, you kid!”
	Her soul spoke thus (I know it did).


11. ST. LAURENCE

	Within the broken Vatican
	The murdered Pope is lying dead.
	The soldiers of Valerian
	Their evil hands are wet and red.
	
	Unarmed, unmoved, St. Laurence waits,
	His cassock is his only mail.
	The troops of Hell have burst the gates,
	But Christ is Lord, He shall prevail.
	
	They have encompassed him with steel,
	They spit upon his gentle face,
	He smiles and bleeds, nor will reveal
	The Church’s hidden treasure-place.
	
	Ah, faithful steward, worthy knight,
	Well hast thou done.  Behold thy fee!
	Since thou hast fought the goodly fight
	A martyr’s death is fixed for thee.
	
	St. Laurence, pray for us to bear
	The faith which glorifies thy name.
	St. Laurence, pray for us to share
	The wounds of Love’s consuming flame.


12. STARS

	Bright stars, yellow stars, flashing through the air,
	Are you errant strands of Lady Mary’s hair?
	As she slits the cloudy veil and bends down through,
	Do you fall across her cheeks and over heaven too?
	
	Gay stars, little stars, you are little eyes,
	Eyes of baby angels playing in the skies.
	Now and then a winged child turns his merry face
	Down toward the spinning world--what a funny place!
	
	Jesus Christ came from the Cross (Christ receive my soul!)
	In each perfect hand and foot there was a bloody hole.
	Four great iron spikes there were, red and never dry,
	Michael plucked them from the Cross and set them in the sky.
	
	Christ’s Troop, Mary’s Guard, God’s own men,
	Draw your swords and strike at Hell and strike again.
	Every steel-born spark that flies where God’s battles are,
	Flashes past the face of God, and is a star.


13. TO A BLACKBIRD AND HIS MATE WHO DIED IN THE SPRING

	An iron hand has stilled the throats
	That throbbed with loud and rhythmic glee
	And dammed the flood of silver notes
	That drenched the world in melody.
	The blosmy apple boughs are yearning
	For their wild choristers’ returning,
	But no swift wings flash through the tree.
	
	Ye that were glad and fleet and strong,
	Shall Silence take you in her net?
	And shall Death quell that radiant song
	Whose echo thrills the meadow yet?
	Burst the frail web about you clinging
	And charm Death’s cruel heart with singing
	Till with strange tears his eyes are wet.
	
	The scented morning of the year
	Is old and stale now ye are gone.
	No friendly songs the children hear
	Among the bushes on the lawn.
	When babies wander out a-Maying
	Will ye, their bards, afar be straying?
	Unhymned by you, what is the dawn?
	
	Nay, since ye loved ye cannot die.
	Above the stars is set your nest.
	Through Heaven’s fields ye sing and fly
	And in the trees of Heaven rest.
	And little children in their dreaming
	Shall see your soft black plumage gleaming
	And smile, by your clear music blest.


14. TO A YOUNG POET WHO KILLED HIMSELF

	When you had played with life a space
	And made it drink and lust and sing,
	You flung it back into God’s face
	And thought you did a noble thing.
	“Lo, I have lived and loved,“ you said,
	“And sung to fools too dull to hear me.
	Now for a cool and grassy bed
	With violets in blossom near me.”
	
	Well, rest is good for weary feet,
	Although they ran for no great prize;
	And violets are very sweet,
	Although their roots are in your eyes.
	But hark to what the earthworms say
	Who share with you your muddy haven:
	“The fight was on--you ran away.
	You are a coward and a craven.
	
	“The rug is ruined where you bled;
	It was a dirty way to die!
	To put a bullet through your head
	And make a silly woman cry!
	You could not vex the merry stars
	Nor make them heed you, dead or living.
	Not all your puny anger mars
	God’s irresistible forgiving.
	
	“Yes, God forgives and men forget,
	And you’re forgiven and forgotten.
	You might be gaily sinning yet
	And quick and fresh instead of rotten.
	And when you think of love and fame
	And all that might have come to pass,
	Then don’t you feel a little shame?
	And don’t you think you were an ass?”


15. TREES

	I think that I shall never see
	A poem lovely as a tree.
	
	A tree whose hungry mouth is prest
	Against the earth’s sweet flowing breast;
	
	A tree that looks at God all day,
	And lifts her leafy arms to pray;
	
	A tree that may in Summer wear
	A nest of robins in her hair;
	
	Upon whose bosom snow has lain;
	Who intimately lives with rain.
	
	Poems are made by fools like me,
	But only God can make a tree.


16. THE TWELVE-FORTY-FIVE

	Within the Jersey City shed
	The engine coughs and shakes its head,
	The smoke, a plume of red and white,
	Waves madly in the face of night.
	And now the grave incurious stars
	Gleam on the groaning hurrying cars.
	Against the kind and awful reign
	Of darkness, this our angry train,
	A noisy little rebel, pouts
	Its brief defiance, flames and shouts--
	And passes on, and leaves no trace.
	For darkness holds its ancient place,
	Serene and absolute, the king
	Unchanged, of every living thing.
	The houses lie obscure and still
	In Rutherford and Carlton Hill.
	Our lamps intensify the dark
	Of slumbering Passaic Park.
	And quiet holds the weary feet
	That daily tramp through Prospect Street.
	What though we clang and clank and roar
	Through all Passaic’s streets?  No door
	Will open, not an eye will see
	Who this loud vagabond may be.
	Upon my crimson cushioned seat,
	In manufactured light and heat,
	I feel unnatural and mean.
	Outside the towns are cool and clean;
	Curtained awhile from sound and sight
	They take God’s gracious gift of night.
	The stars are watchful over them.
	On Clifton as on Bethlehem
	The angels, leaning down the sky,
	Shed peace and gentle dreams.  And I--
	I ride, I blasphemously ride
	Through all the silent countryside.
	The engine’s shriek, the headlight’s glare,
	Pollute the still nocturnal air.
	The cottages of Lake View sigh
	And sleeping, frown as we pass by.
	Why, even strident Paterson
	Rests quietly as any nun.
	Her foolish warring children keep
	The grateful armistice of sleep.
	For what tremendous errand’s sake
	Are we so blatantly awake?
	What precious secret is our freight?
	What king must be abroad so late?
	Perhaps Death roams the hills to-night
	And we rush forth to give him fight.
	Or else, perhaps, we speed his way
	To some remote unthinking prey.
	Perhaps a woman writhes in pain
	And listens--listens for the train!
	The train, that like an angel sings,
	The train, with healing on its wings.
	Now “Hawthorne!“ the conductor cries.
	My neighbor starts and rubs his eyes.
	He hurries yawning through the car
	And steps out where the houses are.
	This is the reason of our quest!
	Not wantonly we break the rest
	Of town and village, nor do we
	Lightly profane night’s sanctity.
	What Love commands the train fulfills,
	And beautiful upon the hills
	Are these our feet of burnished steel.
	Subtly and certainly I feel
	That Glen Rock welcomes us to her
	And silent Ridgewood seems to stir
	And smile, because she knows the train
	Has brought her children back again.
	We carry people home--and so
	God speeds us, wheresoe’er we go.
	Hohokus, Waldwick, Allendale
	Lift sleepy heads to give us hail.
	In Ramsey, Mahwah, Suffern stand
	Houses that wistfully demand
	A father--son--some human thing
	That this, the midnight train, may bring.
	The trains that travel in the day
	They hurry folks to work or play.
	The midnight train is slow and old
	But of it let this thing be told,
	To its high honor be it said
	It carries people home to bed.
	My cottage lamp shines white and clear.
	God bless the train that brought me here.


17. VISION

	Homer, they tell us, was blind and could not see the beautiful faces
	Looking up into his own and reflecting the joy of his dream,
	Yet did he seem
	Gifted with eyes that could follow the gods to their holiest places.
	
	I have no vision of gods, not of Eros with love-arrows laden,
	Jupiter thundering death or of Juno his white-breasted queen,
	Yet have I seen
	All of the joy of the world in the innocent heart of a maiden.


18. WARTIME CHRISTMAS

	Led by a star, a golden star,
	The youngest star, an olden star,
	Here the kings and the shepherds are,
	Akneeling on the ground.
	What did they come to the inn to see?
	God in the Highest, and this is He,
	A baby asleep on His mother’s knee
	And with her kisses crowned.
	
	Now is the earth a dreary place,
	A troubled place, a weary place.
	Peace has hidden her lovely face
	And turned in tears away.
	Yet the sun, through the war-cloud, sees
	Babies asleep on their mother’s knees.
	While there are love and home--and these--
	There shall be Christmas Day.

