*** Rudyard Kipling (1865 - 1936)


1. A DEATH-BED

	“This is the State above the Law. 
	The State exists for the State alone.” 
	(This is a gland at the back of the jaw, 
	And an answering lump by the collar-bone.) 
	
	Some die shouting in gas or fire; 
	Some die silent, by shell and shot. 
	Some die desperate, caught on the wire; 
	Some die suddenly. This will not. 
	
	“Regis suprema voluntas Lex” 
	(It will follow the regular course of--throats.) 
	Some die pinned by the broken decks, 
	Some die sobbing between the boats. 
	
	Some die eloquent, pressed to death 
	By the sliding trench as their friends can hear. 
	Some die wholly in half a breath. 
	Some--give trouble for half a year. 
	
	“There is neither Evil nor Good in life. 
	Except as the needs of the State ordain.” 
	(Since it is rather too late for the knife, 
	All we can do is mask the pain.) 
	
	Some die saintly in faith and hope-- 
	Some die thus in a prison-yard-- 
	Some die broken by rape or the rope; 
	Some die easily. This dies hard. 
	
	“I will dash to pieces who bar my way. 
	Woe to the traitor! Woe to the weak!” 
	(Let him write what he wishes to say. 
	It tires him out if he tries to speak.) 
	
	Some die quietly. Some abound 
	In loud self-pity. Others spread 
	Bad morale through the cots around . . . 
	This is a type that is better dead. 
	
	“The war was forced on me by my foes. 
	All that I sought was the right to live.” 
	(Don't be afraid of a triple dose; 
	The pain will neutralize half we give. 
	
	Here are the needles. See that he dies 
	While the effects of the drug endure . . . 
	What is the question he asks with his eyes?-- 
	Yes, All-Highest, to God, be sure.)


2. THE GLORY OF THE GARDEN

	Our England is a garden that is full of stately views,
	Of borders, beds and shrubberies and lawns and avenues,
	With statues on the terraces and peacocks strutting by;
	But the Glory of the Garden lies in more than meets the eye.
	
	For where the old thick laurels grow, along the thin red wall,
	You’ll find the tool- and potting-sheds which are the heart of all
	The cold-frames and the hot-houses, the dung-pits and the tanks,
	The rollers, carts, and drain-pipes, with the barrows and the planks.
	
	And there you’ll see the gardeners, the men and ‘prentice boys
	Told off to do as they are bid and do it without noise ;
	For, except when seeds are planted and we shout to scare the birds,
	The Glory of the Garden it abideth not in words.
	
	And some can pot begonias and some can bud a rose,
	And some are hardly fit to trust with anything that grows ;
	But they can roll and trim the lawns and sift the sand and loam,
	For the Glory of the Garden occupieth all who come.
	
	Our England is a garden, and such gardens are not made
	By singing:--‘Oh, how beautiful,’ and sitting in the shade
	While better men than we go out and start their working lives
	At grubbing weeds from gravel-paths with broken dinner-knives.
	
	There’s not a pair of legs so thin, there’s not a head so thick,
	There’s not a hand so weak and white, nor yet a heart so sick
	But it can find some needful job that’s crying to be done,
	For the Glory of the Garden glorifieth every one.
	
	Then seek your job with thankfulness and work till further orders,
	If it’s only netting strawberries or killing slugs on borders;
	And when your back stops aching and your hands begin to harden,
	You will find yourself a partner In the Glory of the Garden.
	
	Oh, Adam was a gardener, and God who made him sees
	That half a proper gardener’s work is done upon his knees,
	So when your work is finished, you can wash your hands and pray
	For the Glory of the Garden that it may not pass away!
	And the Glory of the Garden it shall never pass away!


3. GUNGA DIN

	You may talk o’ gin and beer   
	When you’re quartered safe out ’ere,   
	An’ you’re sent to penny-fights an’ Aldershot it;
	But when it comes to slaughter   
	You will do your work on water,
	An’ you’ll lick the bloomin’ boots of ’im that’s got it.   
	Now in Injia’s sunny clime,   
	Where I used to spend my time   
	A-servin’ of ’Er Majesty the Queen,   
	Of all them blackfaced crew   
	The finest man I knew
	Was our regimental bhisti, Gunga Din,   
	     He was ‘Din! Din! Din!
	  ‘You limpin’ lump o’ brick-dust, Gunga Din!
	     ‘Hi! Slippy hitherao
	     ‘Water, get it! Panee lao,
	  ‘You squidgy-nosed old idol, Gunga Din.’
	
	The uniform ’e wore
	Was nothin’ much before,
	An’ rather less than ’arf o’ that be’ind,
	For a piece o’ twisty rag   
	An’ a goatskin water-bag
	Was all the field-equipment ’e could find.
	When the sweatin’ troop-train lay
	In a sidin’ through the day,
	Where the ’eat would make your bloomin’ eyebrows crawl,
	We shouted ‘Harry By!’
	Till our throats were bricky-dry,
	Then we wopped ’im ’cause ’e couldn’t serve us all.
	     It was ‘Din! Din! Din!
	  ‘You ’eathen, where the mischief ’ave you been?   
	     ‘You put some juldee in it
	     ‘Or I’ll marrow you this minute
	  ‘If you don’t fill up my helmet, Gunga Din!’
	
	’E would dot an’ carry one
	Till the longest day was done;
	An’ ’e didn’t seem to know the use o’ fear.
	If we charged or broke or cut,
	You could bet your bloomin’ nut,
	’E’d be waitin’ fifty paces right flank rear.   
	With ’is mussick on ’is back,
	’E would skip with our attack,
	An’ watch us till the bugles made ‘Retire,’   
	An’ for all ’is dirty ’ide
	’E was white, clear white, inside
	When ’e went to tend the wounded under fire!   
	     It was ‘Din! Din! Din!’
	  With the bullets kickin’ dust-spots on the green.   
	     When the cartridges ran out,
	     You could hear the front-ranks shout,   
	  ‘Hi! ammunition-mules an’ Gunga Din!’
	
	I shan’t forgit the night
	When I dropped be’ind the fight
	With a bullet where my belt-plate should ’a’ been.   
	I was chokin’ mad with thirst,
	An’ the man that spied me first
	Was our good old grinnin’, gruntin’ Gunga Din.   
	’E lifted up my ’ead,
	An’ he plugged me where I bled,
	An’ ’e guv me ’arf-a-pint o’ water green.
	It was crawlin’ and it stunk,
	But of all the drinks I’ve drunk,
	I’m gratefullest to one from Gunga Din.
	     It was ‘Din! Din! Din!
	  ‘’Ere’s a beggar with a bullet through ’is spleen;   
	  ‘’E’s chawin’ up the ground,
	     ‘An’ ’e’s kickin’ all around:
	  ‘For Gawd’s sake git the water, Gunga Din!’
	
	’E carried me away
	To where a dooli lay,
	An’ a bullet come an’ drilled the beggar clean.   
	’E put me safe inside,
	An’ just before ’e died,
	‘I ’ope you liked your drink,’ sez Gunga Din.   
	So I’ll meet ’im later on
	At the place where ’e is gone--
	Where it’s always double drill and no canteen.   
	’E’ll be squattin’ on the coals
	Givin’ drink to poor damned souls,
	An’ I’ll get a swig in hell from Gunga Din!   
	     Yes, Din! Din! Din!
	  You Lazarushian-leather Gunga Din!   
	  Though I’ve belted you and flayed you,   
	     By the livin’ Gawd that made you,
	  You’re a better man than I am, Gunga Din!


4. IF

	If you can keep your head when all about you   
	   Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,   
	If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
	   But make allowance for their doubting too;   
	If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
	   Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
	Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
	   And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise:
	
	If you can dream--and not make dreams your master;   
	   If you can think--and not make thoughts your aim;   
	If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
	   And treat those two impostors just the same;   
	If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken
	   Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
	Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
	   And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools:
	
	If you can make one heap of all your winnings
	   And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
	And lose, and start again at your beginnings
	   And never breathe a word about your loss;
	If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
	   To serve your turn long after they are gone,   
	And so hold on when there is nothing in you
	   Except the Will which says to them: ‘Hold on!’
	
	If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,   
	   Or walk with Kings--nor lose the common touch,
	If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you,
	   If all men count with you, but none too much;
	If you can fill the unforgiving minute
	   With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,   
	Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,   
	   And--which is more--you’ll be a Man, my son!


5. THE LONG TRAIL

	There’s a whisper down the field where the year has shot her yield,   
	  And the ricks stand grey to the sun,
	Singing: ‘Over then, come over, for the bee has quit the clover,
	  ‘And your English summer’s done.’   
	     You have heard the beat of the off-shore wind,   
	     And the thresh of the deep-sea rain;
	     You have heard the song--how long? how long?   
	     Pull out on the trail again!
	Ha’ done with the Tents of Shem, dear lass,   
	We’ve seen the seasons through,
	And it’s time to turn on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	Pull out, pull out, on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new!
	
	It’s North you may run to the rime-ringed sun
	  Or South to the blind Horn’s hate;
	Or East all the way into Mississippi Bay,
	  Or West to the Golden Gate--
	     Where the blindest bluffs hold good, dear lass,   
	     And the wildest tales are true,
	     And the men bulk big on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	     And life runs large on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
	
	The days are sick and cold, and the skies are grey and old,   
	  And the twice-breathed airs blow damp;
	And I’d sell my tired soul for the bucking beam-sea roll   
	  Of a black Bilbao tramp,
	     With her load-line over her hatch, dear lass,   
	     And a drunken Dago crew,
	     And her nose held down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail
	     From Cadiz south on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
	
	There be triple ways to take, of the eagle or the snake,   
	  Or the way of a man with a maid;
	But the sweetest way to me is a ship’s upon the sea   
	  In the heel of the North-East Trade.
	     Can you hear the crash on her bows, dear lass,   
	     And the drum of the racing screw,
	     As she ships it green on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	     As she lifts and ’scends on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new?
	
	See the shaking funnels roar, with the Peter at the fore,
	  And the fenders grind and heave,
	And the derricks clack and grate, as the tackle hooks the crate,
	  And the fall-rope whines through the sheave;
	     It’s ‘Gang-plank up and in,’ dear lass,
	     It’s ‘Hawsers warp her through!’
	     And it’s ‘All clear aft’ on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	     We’re backing down on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
	
	O the mutter overside, when the port-fog holds us tied,
	  And the sirens hoot their dread,
	When foot by foot we creep o’er the hueless, viewless deep
	  To the sob of the questing lead!
	     It’s down by the Lower Hope, dear lass,
	     With the Gunfleet Sands in view,
	     Till the Mouse swings green on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	     And the Gull Light lifts on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
	
	O the blazing tropic night, when the wake’s a welt of light
	  That holds the hot sky tame,
	And the steady fore-foot snores through the planet-powdered floors
	  Where the scared whale flukes in flame!
	     Her plates are flaked by the sun, dear lass,   
	     And her ropes are taut with the dew,
	     For we’re booming down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	     We’re sagging south on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
	
	Then home, get her home, where the drunken rollers comb,   
	  And the shouting seas drive by,
	And the engines stamp and ring, and the wet bows reel and swing,
	  And the Southern Cross rides high!
	     Yes, the old lost stars wheel back, dear lass,   
	     That blaze in the velvet blue.
	     They’re all old friends on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	     They’re God’s own guides on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new.
	
	Fly forward, O my heart, from the Foreland to the Start--
	  We’re steaming all too slow,
	And it’s twenty thousand mile to our little lazy isle   
	  Where the trumpet-orchids blow!
	     You have heard the call of the off-shore wind   
	     And the voice of the deep-sea rain;
	     You have heard the song--how long? how long?   
	     Pull out on the trail again!
	
	The Lord knows what we may find, dear lass,
	  And The Deuce knows what we may do--
	But we’re back once more on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
	  We’re down, hull-down, on the Long Trail--the trail that is always new!


6. THE WAY THROUGH THE WOODS

	They shut the road through the woods
	Seventy years ago.
	Weather and rain have undone it again,
	And now you would never know
	There was once a road through the woods
	Before they planted the trees. 
	It is underneath the coppice and heath,
	And the thin anemones.
	Only the keeper sees
	That, where the ring-dove broods,
	And the badgers roll at ease,
	There was once a road through the woods.
	
	Yet, if you enter the woods
	Of a summer evening late,
	When the night-air cools on the trout-ringed pools
	Where the otter whistles his mate,
	(They fear not men in the woods,
	Because they see so few.)
	You will hear the beat of a horse’s feet, 
	And the swish of a skirt in the dew,
	Steadily cantering through
	The misty solitudes,
	As though they perfectly knew
	The old lost road through the woods.
	But there is no road through the woods.