*** Kenneth Koch (1925 - 2002)


1. THE BOILING WATER

	A serious moment for the water is
	when it boils
	And though one usually regards it
	merely as a convenience
	To have the boiling water
	available for bath or table
	Occasionally there is someone
	around who understands
	The importance of this moment
	for the water--maybe a saint,
	Maybe a poet, maybe a crazy
	man, or just someone
	temporarily disturbed
	With his mind “floating"in a
	sense, away from his deepest
	Personal concerns to more
	“unreal” things . . .
	
	A serious moment for the island
	is when its trees
	Begin to give it shade, and
	another is when the ocean
	washes
	Big heavy things against its side.
	One walks around and looks at
	the island
	But not really at it, at what is on
	it, and one thinks,
	It must be serious, even, to be this
	island, at all, here.
	Since it is lying here exposed to
	the whole sea. All its
	Moments might be serious. It is
	serious, in such windy weather,
	to be a sail
	Or an open window, or a feather
	flying in the street . . .
	
	Seriousness, how often I have
	thought of seriousness
	And how little I have understood
	it, except this: serious is urgent
	And it has to do with change. You
	say to the water,
	It’s not necessary to boil now,
	and you turn it off. It stops
	Fidgeting. And starts to cool. You
	put your hand in it
	And say, The water isn’t serious
	any more. It has the potential,
	However—that urgency to give
	off bubbles, to
	Change itself to steam. And the
	wind,
	When it becomes part of a
	hurricane, blowing up the
	beach
	And the sand dunes can’t keep it
	away.
	Fainting is one sign of
	seriousness, crying is another.
	Shuddering all over is another
	one.
	
	A serious moment for the
	telephone is when it rings.
	And a person answers, it is
	Angelica, or is it you.
	
	A serious moment for the fly is
	when its wings
	Are moving, and a serious
	moment for the duck
	Is when it swims, when it first
	touches water, then spreads
	Its smile upon the water . . .
	
	A serious moment for the match
	is when it burst into flame . . .
	
	Serious for me that I met you, and
	serious for you
	That you met me, and that we do
	not know
	If we will ever be close to anyone
	again. Serious the recognition
	of the probability
	That we will, although time
	stretches terribly in
	between . . .


2. MOUNTAIN

	Nothing’s moving I don’t see anybody
	And I know that it’s not a trick
	There really is nothing moving there
	And there aren’t any people. It is the very utmost top
	Where, as is not unusual,
	There is snow, lying like the hair on a white-haired person’s head
	Combed sideways and backward and forward to cover as much of the top
	As possible, for the snow is thinning, it’s September
	Although a few months from now there will be a new crop
	Probably, though this no one KNOWS (so neither do we)
	But every other year it has happened by November
	Except for one year that’s known about, nineteen twenty-three
	When the top was more and more uncovered until December fifteenth
	When finally it snowed and snowed
	I love seeing this mountain like a mouse
	Attached to the tail of another mouse, and to another and to another
	In total mountain silence
	There is no way to get up there, and no means to stay.
	It is uninhabitable. No roads and no possibility
	Of roads. You don’t have a history
	Do you, mountain top? This doesn’t make you either a mystery
	Or a dull person and you’re certainly not a truck stop.
	No industry can exploit you
	No developer can divide you into estates or lots
	No dazzling disquieting woman can tie your heart in knots.
	I could never lead my life on one of those spots
	You leave uncovered up there. No way to be there
	But I’m moved.


3. PREGNANCY

	Inside the pomegranate is the blue sky.
	
	We have been living out the year in Wisconsin.
	Sometimes it rains there--tremendous green drops!
	
	We smiled up at the snow--how tremulously! Still . . .
	
	Death is better . . .
	
	The hog leafed through the almanac.
	
	If there is a difference between fortune and misfortune
	Which you do not catch immediately, just remember
	The house of the orange and yellow squirrels, or the
	   three pigs,
	Any house which has easily distinguishable animals
	   in it,
	And remember that all animals are unfortunate.
	“Yet every animal is fortunate,” spoffed the mineral
	   water
	From its light green bottle on the Western tea leaves
	store shelf,
	A bossy cow came and stood in the door;
	Her hide was mangy. And then we saw the fire ex-
	   tinguisher. Man is unhappy!
	A Western boy came and took the bossy cow away.
	The Western boy was dressed in leather knickers, and
	   his lean face was brown;
	A smile played there as he looked at the sissy flowers
	And led the bossy cow away to the range. In the
	cow’s mind, pastures of green
	Were replacing the brown architecture of the store.
	
	
	Under the archways I could see the yellow pulverization
	Of all you had meant to put into Paris--
	--but they were
	   a failure,
	Your statues! your stores! and your triumphal arches!
	You should have put in mere little shops selling dry
	   goods and trumpets,
	With here and there a tree and a necktie, the arch of
	    someone’s foot
	Who turns out not to be beautiful, but extremely
	    civilized, and a showerbath, which turns red
	On certain nights, showering the green busses of my
	    favorite city with cold blood! Oh ask me again
	What you should do, and I will tell you differently!
	    Ask me!
	
	Shall any laundry be put out to dry
	With so many yellow and orange sequins falling
	   through the air?
	
	Yes, the donkey has become very corpulent.
	
	Will the blue carpet be sufficiently big to cover the
	   tennis court?
	
	Down the street walked a midget. “She’s a good looker,
	   hey?”
	
	
	He said to a passerby. O tremulous stomach!
	
	We’ve been spending the winter in Paris . . .
	
	It rains on the sweater . . .
	
	I’ve a dog in my stomach!
	
	
	The dogs moved delicately
	On the yellow squares,
	And if they sat down to play cards
	Weren’t they happier than we are?
	
	I am at present owner
	Of a great chain of dog-supply stores,
	So naturally I hope that your child is a dog . . .
	
	O son! or daughter!
	Will you ever forgive
	Your maddened daddy
	For imagining a doggie
	In place of a baby?
	
	Out on the range
	The blue sky is changing
	To black, and the baby
	Cows are rehearsing
	Their lives by eating.
	
	Near a blaze of straw
	Sit the drooping cowhands;
	One has on a red hat,
	The other has a blue one.
	They look at the babies and mothers.
	
	Do you not think they are thinking
	Thoughts like mine? O Paris,
	France! with the coffee of your
	Cafés, I feel life has arrived
	For me! Where are you, city?
	
	It rains on the dachshund
	And the collie;
	On the beach the red, green, and orange
	Crustaceans are moved . . .
	Tell me, sons of Atlantis, what will happen next?


4. TO TESTOSTERONE

	You took me to the Spanish Steps
	Then we walked up to the top of them and looked
	down.
	Having looked down from there, we walked down
	To about the middle of the curving Spanish Steps
	And, for a moment, sat down.
	But there was nothing doing.
	Some cigarette packages lay on the nearby steptops.
	The sides were a beige white, running up and down.
	No woman in sight
	And no one getting in our way, either
	To rouse you from your sleep
	Of twenty centuries, the one you always fall into,
	And nothing to wake me up, either,
	Although I was completely awake in the banal sense
	Of knowing where the postoffice was and the Piazza di
	Spagna
	That was just below. Not far, the Piazza del Popolo
	Held the possibility of people, but, I thought,
	Less promisingly than where we were might do.
	We stayed on the Spanish Steps till almost ten--
	I talked to a few people, you slept--and then went
	sadly home.
	The next day however you were very lively
	You got up before I did and bought the railroad tickets
	That would take us to Naples.
	“Come on, let’s go!”
	you said
	But I was barely awake.
	Be calm! But only to act or to sleep is my nature, you
	say. Let’s
	Use the tickets, take the train, forget
	This random tune, and get something done!
	Now leading me to the station--a ravishing Roman
	girl! “Let’s stay here,”
	You murmur when my foot is already on the first step
	Of the entrance to the stazione centrale. All right, I
	agree
	But my hand is full of tickets and my mind of dismay,
	Confusion and dismay. You have started to make me angry
	By the way you’re making me anxious, which is another
	thing you do.
	Stop it, I say. You stop. You appreciate travel the way I
	appreciate eating lunch.
	I do remember Barbara, in Parma.
	Exhilaration, riding on your horns, is never far away.


5. TO YOU

	I love you as a sheriff searches for a walnut
	That will solve a murder case unsolved for years
	Because the murderer left it in the snow beside a window
	Through which he saw her head, connecting with
	Her shoulders by a neck, and laid a red
	Roof in her heart. For this we live a thousand years;
	For this we love, and we live because we love, we are not
	Inside a bottle, thank goodness! I love you as a
	Kid searches for a goat; I am crazier than shirttails
	In the wind, when you’re near, a wind that blows from
	The big blue sea, so shiny so deep and so unlike us;
	I think I am bicycling across an Africa of green and white fields
	Always, to be near you, even in my heart
	When I’m awake, which swims, and also I believe that you
	Are trustworthy as the sidewalk which leads me to
	The place where I again think of you, a new
	Harmony of thoughts! I love you as the sunlight leads the prow
	Of a ship which sails
	From Hartford to Miami, and I love you
	Best at dawn, when even before I am awake the sun
	Receives me in the questions which you always pose.

