*** Philip Larkin (1922 - 1985)


1. AUBADE

	I work all day, and get half-drunk at night.   
	Waking at four to soundless dark, I stare.   
	In time the curtain-edges will grow light.   
	Till then I see what’s really always there:   
	Unresting death, a whole day nearer now,   
	Making all thought impossible but how   
	And where and when I shall myself die.   
	Arid interrogation: yet the dread
	Of dying, and being dead,
	Flashes afresh to hold and horrify.
	
	The mind blanks at the glare. Not in remorse   
	--The good not done, the love not given, time   
	Torn off unused--nor wretchedly because   
	An only life can take so long to climb
	Clear of its wrong beginnings, and may never;   
	But at the total emptiness for ever,
	The sure extinction that we travel to
	And shall be lost in always. Not to be here,   
	Not to be anywhere,
	And soon; nothing more terrible, nothing more true.
	
	This is a special way of being afraid
	No trick dispels. Religion used to try,
	That vast moth-eaten musical brocade
	Created to pretend we never die,
	And specious stuff that says No rational being
	Can fear a thing it will not feel, not seeing
	That this is what we fear--no sight, no sound,   
	No touch or taste or smell, nothing to think with,   
	Nothing to love or link with,
	The anaesthetic from which none come round.
	
	And so it stays just on the edge of vision,   
	A small unfocused blur, a standing chill   
	That slows each impulse down to indecision.   
	Most things may never happen: this one will,   
	And realisation of it rages out
	In furnace-fear when we are caught without   
	People or drink. Courage is no good:
	It means not scaring others. Being brave   
	Lets no one off the grave.
	Death is no different whined at than withstood.
	
	Slowly light strengthens, and the room takes shape.   
	It stands plain as a wardrobe, what we know,   
	Have always known, know that we can’t escape,   
	Yet can’t accept. One side will have to go.
	Meanwhile telephones crouch, getting ready to ring   
	In locked-up offices, and all the uncaring
	Intricate rented world begins to rouse.
	The sky is white as clay, with no sun.
	Work has to be done.
	Postmen like doctors go from house to house.


2. FAITH HEALING

	Slowly the women file to where he stands   
	Upright in rimless glasses, silver hair,
	Dark suit, white collar. Stewards tirelessly   
	Persuade them onwards to his voice and hands,   
	Within whose warm spring rain of loving care   
	Each dwells some twenty seconds. _Now, dear child,
	What’s wrong,_ the deep American voice demands,   
	And, scarcely pausing, goes into a prayer   
	Directing God about this eye, that knee.   
	Their heads are clasped abruptly; then, exiled
	
	Like losing thoughts, they go in silence; some   
	Sheepishly stray, not back into their lives
	Just yet; but some stay stiff, twitching and loud   
	With deep hoarse tears, as if a kind of dumb   
	And idiot child within them still survives   
	To re-awake at kindness, thinking a voice   
	At last calls them alone, that hands have come   
	To lift and lighten; and such joy arrives
	Their thick tongues blort, their eyes squeeze grief, a crowd   
	Of huge unheard answers jam and rejoice--
	
	What’s wrong! Moustached in flowered frocks they shake:   
	By now, all’s wrong. In everyone there sleeps   
	A sense of life lived according to love.
	To some it means the difference they could make   
	By loving others, but across most it sweeps
	As all they might have done had they been loved.   
	That nothing cures. An immense slackening ache,   
	As when, thawing, the rigid landscape weeps,
	Spreads slowly through them--that, and the voice above   
	Saying _Dear child,_ and all time has disproved.


3. MCMXIV

	Those long uneven lines
	Standing as patiently
	As if they were stretched outside
	The Oval or Villa Park,
	The crowns of hats, the sun
	On moustached archaic faces
	Grinning as if it were all
	An August Bank Holiday lark;
	And the shut shops, the bleached
	Established names on the sunblinds,
	The farthings and sovereigns,
	And dark-clothed children at play
	Called after kings and queens,
	The tin advertisements
	For cocoa and twist, and the pubs
	Wide open all day;
	And the countryside not caring
	The place-names all hazed over
	With flowering grasses, and fields
	Shadowing Domesday lines
	Under wheats’ restless silence;
	The differently-dressed servants
	With tiny rooms in huge houses,
	The dust behind limousines;
	Never such innocence,
	Never before or since,
	As changed itself to past
	Without a word--the men
	Leaving the gardens tidy,
	The thousands of marriages
	Lasting a little while longer:
	Never such innocence again.


4. MONEY

	Quarterly, is it, money reproaches me:
	   ‘Why do you let me lie here wastefully?
	I am all you never had of goods and sex.
	   You could get them still by writing a few cheques.’
	
	So I look at others, what they do with theirs:   
	   They certainly don’t keep it upstairs.
	By now they’ve a second house and car and wife:
	   Clearly money has something to do with life
	
	--In fact, they’ve a lot in common, if you enquire:
	   You can’t put off being young until you retire,
	And however you bank your screw, the money you save
	   Won’t in the end buy you more than a shave.
	
	I listen to money singing. It’s like looking down
	   From long french windows at a provincial town,   
	The slums, the canal, the churches ornate and mad
	   In the evening sun. It is intensely sad.


5. SAD STEPS

	Groping back to bed after a piss
	I part thick curtains, and am startled by   
	The rapid clouds, the moon’s cleanliness.
	
	Four o’clock: wedge-shadowed gardens lie   
	Under a cavernous, a wind-picked sky.   
	There’s something laughable about this,
	
	The way the moon dashes through clouds that blow   
	Loosely as cannon-smoke to stand apart   
	(Stone-coloured light sharpening the roofs below)
	
	High and preposterous and separate--   
	Lozenge of love! Medallion of art!
	O wolves of memory! Immensements! No,
	
	One shivers slightly, looking up there.
	The hardness and the brightness and the plain   
	Far-reaching singleness of that wide stare
	
	Is a reminder of the strength and pain   
	Of being young; that it can’t come again,   
	But is for others undiminished somewhere.


6. SUNNY PRESTATYN

	_Come To Sunny Prestatyn_
	Laughed the girl on the poster,
	Kneeling up on the sand   
	In tautened white satin.   
	Behind her, a hunk of coast, a
	Hotel with palms
	Seemed to expand from her thighs and   
	Spread breast-lifting arms.
	
	She was slapped up one day in March.   
	A couple of weeks, and her face
	Was snaggle-toothed and boss-eyed;   
	Huge tits and a fissured crotch
	Were scored well in, and the space   
	Between her legs held scrawls
	That set her fairly astride
	A tuberous cock and balls.
	
	Autographed _Titch Thomas,_ while   
	Someone had used a knife
	Or something to stab right through   
	The moustached lips of her smile.   
	She was too good for this life.   
	Very soon, a great transverse tear   
	Left only a hand and some blue.   
	Now _Fight Cancer_ is there.


7. WILD OATS

	About twenty years ago
	Two girls came in where I worked--
	A bosomy English rose
	And her friend in specs I could talk to.   
	Faces in those days sparked
	The whole shooting-match off, and I doubt   
	If ever one had like hers:
	But it was the friend I took out,
	
	And in seven years after that   
	Wrote over four hundred letters,   
	Gave a ten-guinea ring
	I got back in the end, and met   
	At numerous cathedral cities   
	Unknown to the clergy. I believe
	I met beautiful twice. She was trying   
	Both times (so I thought) not to laugh.
	
	Parting, after about five
	Rehearsals, was an agreement   
	That I was too selfish, withdrawn,   
	And easily bored to love.
	Well, useful to get that learnt.   
	In my wallet are still two snaps
	Of bosomy rose with fur gloves on.   
	Unlucky charms, perhaps.