*** D. H. Lawrence (1885 - 1930)


1. ON A GREY EVENING IN MARCH

	THE clouds are pushing in grey reluctance slowly northward to you
	While north of them all at the farthest ends stands one bright-bosomed aglance
	With fire as it guards the wild north cloud-coasts red-fire seas running through
	The rocks where ravens flying to windward melt as a well-shot lance.
	
	You should be out by the orchard where violets secretly darken the earth
	Or there in the woods of the twilight with northern wind-flowers shaken astir.
	Think of me here in the library trying and trying a song that is worth
	Tears and swords to my heart arrows no armour will turn or deter.
	
	You tell me the lambs have come they lie like daisies white in the grass
	Of the dark-green hills; new calves in shed; peewits turn after the plough--
	It is well for you. For me the navvies work in the road where I pass
	And I want to smite in anger the barren rock of each waterless brow.
	
	Like the sough of a wind that is caught up high in the mesh of the budding trees
	A sudden car goes sweeping past and I strain my soul to hear
	The voice of the furtive triumphant engine as it rushes past like a breeze
	To hear on its mocking triumphance unwitting the after-echo of fear.



2. ALL OF ROSES

	I
	
	By the Isar, in the twilight
	We were wandering and singing;
	By the Isar, in the evening
	We climbed the huntsman’s ladder and sat swinging
	In the fir-tree overlooking the marshes;
	While river met with river, and the ringing
	Of their pale-green glacier-water filled the evening.
	
	By the Isar, in the twilight
	We found our warm wild roses
	Hanging red at the river; and simmering
	Frogs were singing, and over the river closes
	Was scent of roses, and glimmering
	In the twilight, our kisses across the roses
	Met, and her face, and my face, were roses.
	
	
	II
	
	When she rises in the morning
	I linger to watch her.
	She stands in silhouette against the window,
	And the sunbeams catch her
	Glistening white on the shoulders;
	   While down her sides, the mellow
	   Golden shadow glows, and her breasts
	   Swing like full-blown yellow
	   _Gloire de Dijon_ roses.
	
	She drips herself with water,
	And her shoulders
	Glisten as silver, they crumple up
	Like wet and shaken roses, and I listen
	For the rustling of their white, unfolding petals.
	   In the window full of sunlight
	   She stirs her golden shadow,
	   And flashes all herself as sun-bright
	   As if roses fought with roses.
	
	
	III
	
	Just a few of the roses we gathered from the Isar
	Are fallen, and their mauve-red petals on the cloth
	Float like boats on a river, waiting
	For a fairy-wind to wake them from their sloth.
	
	She laughs at me across the table, saying
	She loves me; and I blow a little boat
	Rocking down the shoals between the tea-cups
	And so kiss-beladen that it scarce can float.
	
	
	IV
	
	Now like a rose come tip-toe out of bud
	I see the woman’s soul steal in her eyes,
	And wide in ecstasy I sit and watch
	The unknown flower issued magic-wise.
	
	And day by day out of the envious bud
	My treasure softly slips uncurled,
	And day by day my happiness vibrates
	In wide and wider circles round the world.



3. ALMOND BLOSSOM

	Even iron can put forth,
	Even iron.
	
	This is the iron age,
	But let us take heart
	Seeing iron break and bud,
	Seeing rusty iron puff with clouds of blossom.
	
	The almond-tree,
	December’s bare iron hooks sticking out of earth.
	
	The almond-tree,
	That knows the deadliest poison, like a snake
	In supreme bitterness.
	
	Upon the iron, and upon the steel,
	Odd flakes as if of snow, odd bits of snow,
	Odd crumbs of melting snow.
	
	But you mistake, it is not from the sky;
	From out the iron, and from out the steel,
	Flying not down from heaven, but storming up,
	Strange storming up from the dense under-earth
	Along the iron, to the living steel
	In rose-hot tips, and flakes of rose-pale snow
	Setting supreme annunciation to the world.
	
	Nay, what a heart of delicate super-faith,
	Iron-breaking,
	The rusty swords of almond-trees.
	
	Trees suffer, like races, down the long ages.
	They wander and are exiled, they live in exile through long ages
	Like drawn blades never sheathed, hacked and gone black,
	The alien trees in alien lands: and yet
	The heart of blossom,
	The unquenchable heart of blossom!
	
	Look at the many-cicatrised frail vine, none more scarred and frail,
	Yet see him fling himself abroad in fresh abandon
	From the small wound-stump.
	
	Even the wilful, obstinate, gummy fig-tree
	Can be kept down, but he’ll burst like a polyp into prolixity.
	
	And the almond-tree, in exile, in the iron age!
	
	This is the ancient southern earth whence the vases were baked, amphoras, craters, cantharus, oenochoe, and open-hearted cylix,
	Bristling now with the iron of almond-trees
	
	Iron, but unforgotten,
	Iron, dawn-hearted,
	Ever-beating dawn-heart, enveloped in iron against the exile, against the ages.
	
	See it come forth in blossom
	From the snow-remembering heart
	In long-nighted January,
	In the long dark nights of the evening star, and Sirius, and the Etna snow-wind through the long night.
	
	Sweating his drops of blood through the long-nighted Gethsemane
	Into blossom, into pride, into honey-triumph, into most exquisite splendour.
	Oh, give me the tree of life in blossom
	And the Cross sprouting its superb and fearless flowers!
	
	Something must be reassuring to the almond, in the evening star, and the snow-wind, and the long, long, nights,
	Some memory of far, sun-gentler lands,
	So that the faith in his heart smiles again
	And his blood ripples with that untenable delight of once-more-vindicated faith,
	And the Gethsemane blood at the iron pores unfolds, unfolds,
	Pearls itself into tenderness of bud
	And in a great and sacred forthcoming steps forth, steps out in one stride
	A naked tree of blossom, like a bridegroom bathing in dew, divested of cover,
	Frail-naked, utterly uncovered
	To the green night-baying of the dog-star, Etna’s snow-edged wind
	And January’s loud-seeming sun.
	
	Think of it, from the iron fastness
	Suddenly to dare to come out naked, in perfection of blossom, beyond the sword-rust.
	Think, to stand there in full-unfolded nudity, smiling,
	With all the snow-wind, and the sun-glare, and the dog-star baying epithalamion.
	
	Oh, honey-bodied beautiful one,
	Come forth from iron,
	Red your heart is.
	Fragile-tender, fragile-tender life-body,
	More fearless than iron all the time,
	And so much prouder, so disdainful of reluctances.
	
	In the distance like hoar-frost, like silvery ghosts communing on a green hill,
	Hoar-frost-like and mysterious.
	
	In the garden raying out
	With a body like spray, dawn-tender, and looking about
	With such insuperable, subtly-smiling assurance,
	Sword-blade-born.
	
	Unpromised,
	No bounds being set.
	Flaked out and come unpromised,
	The tree being life-divine,
	Fearing nothing, life-blissful at the core
	Within iron and earth.
	
	Knots of pink, fish-silvery
	In heaven, in blue, blue heaven,
	Soundless, bliss-full, wide-rayed, honey-bodied,
	Red at the core,
	Red at the core,
	Knotted in heaven upon the fine light.
	
	Open,
	Open,
	Five times wide open,
	Six times wide open,
	And given, and perfect;
	And red at the core with the last sore-heartedness,
	Sore-hearted-looking.



4. THE ALMOND TREE

	YOU promised to send me some violets. Did you forget?
	 White ones and blue ones from under the orchard hedge?
	 Sweet dark purple and white ones mixed for a pledge
	Of our early love that hardly has opened yet.
	
	Here there’s an almond tree--you have never seen
	 Such a one in the north--it flowers on the street and I stand
	 Every day by the fence to look up for the flowers that expand
	At rest in the blue and wonder at what they mean.
	
	Under the almond tree the happy lands
	 Provence Japan and Italy repose
	 And passing feet are chatter and clapping of those
	Who play around us country girls clapping their hands.
	
	You my love the foremost in a flowered gown
	 All your unbearable tenderness you with the laughter
	 Startled upon your eyes now so wide with here-after
	You with loose hands of abandonment hanging down.



5. AUTUMN SUNSHINE

	THE sun sets out the autumn crocuses
	 And fills them up a pouring measure
	 Of death-producing wine till treasure
	Runs waste down their chalices.
	
	All all Persephone’s pale cups of mould
	 Are on the board are over-filled;
	 The portion to the gods is spilled;
	Now mortals all take hold!
	
	The time is now the wine-cup full and full
	 Of lambent heaven a pledging-cup;
	 Let now all mortal men take up
	The drink and a long strong pull.
	
	Out of the hell-queen’s cup the heaven’s pale wine--
	 Drink then invisible heroes drink.
	 Lips to the vessels never shrink
	Throats to the heavens incline.
	
	And take within the wine the god’s great oath
	 By heaven and earth and hellish stream
	 To break this sick and nauseous dream
	We writhe and lust in both.
	
	Swear in the pale wine poured from the cups of the queen
	 Of hell to wake and be free
	 From this nightmare we writhe in
	Break out of this foul has-been.



6. BATS

	At evening, sitting on this terrace,
	When the sun from the west, beyond Pisa, beyond the mountains of Carrara
	Departs, and the world is taken by surprise . . .
	
	When the tired flower of Florence is in gloom beneath the glowing
	Brown hills surrounding . . .
	
	When under the arches of the Ponte Vecchio
	A green light enters against stream, flush from the west,
	Against the current of obscure Arno . . .
	
	Look up, and you see things flying
	Between the day and the night;
	Swallows with spools of dark thread sewing the shadows together.
	
	A circle swoop, and a quick parabola under the bridge arches
	Where light pushes through;
	A sudden turning upon itself of a thing in the air.
	A dip to the water.
	
	And you think:
	“The swallows are flying so late!”
	
	Swallows?
	
	Dark air-life looping
	Yet missing the pure loop . . .
	A twitch, a twitter, an elastic shudder in flight
	And serrated wings against the sky,
	Like a glove, a black glove thrown up at the light,
	And falling back.
	
	Never swallows!
	Bats!
	The swallows are gone.
	
	At a wavering instant the swallows gave way to bats
	By the Ponte Vecchio . . .
	Changing guard.
	
	Bats, and an uneasy creeping in one’s scalp
	As the bats swoop overhead!
	Flying madly.
	
	Pipistrello!
	Black piper on an infinitesimal pipe.
	Little lumps that fly in air and have voices indefinite, wildly vindictive;
	
	Wings like bits of umbrella.
	
	Bats!
	
	Creatures that hang themselves up like an old rag, to sleep;
	And disgustingly upside down.
	
	Hanging upside down like rows of disgusting old rags
	And grinning in their sleep.
	Bats!
	
	In China the bat is symbol for happiness.
	
	Not for me!



7. BIRTHDAY

	   If I were well-to-do
	I would put roses on roses, and cover your grave
	With multitude of white roses, and just a few
	   Red ones, a bloody-white flag over you.
	
	   So people passing under
	The ash-trees of the valley road, should raise
	Their eyes to your bright place, and then in wonder
	   Should climb the hill, and put the flowers asunder.
	
	   And seeing it is your birthday,
	They would say, seeing each mouth of white rose praise
	You highly, every blood-red rose display
	   Your triumph of anguish above you, they would say:
	
	   “’Tis strange, we never knew
	While she was here and walking in our ways
	That she was as the wine-jar whence we drew
	   Our draught of faith that sent us on anew.”
	
	   And so I’d raise
	A rose-bush unto you in all their hearts
	A rose of memory with a scent of praise
	   Wafting like solace down their length of days.



8. BITTERNESS OF DEATH

	I
	
	AH stern cold man
	How can you lie so relentless hard
	While I wash you with weeping water!
	Do you set your face against the daughter
	Of life? Can you never discard
	Your curt pride’s ban?
	
	You masquerader!
	How can you shame to act this part
	Of unswerving indifference to me?
	You want at last ah me!
	To break my heart
	Evader!
	
	You know your mouth
	Was always sooner to soften
	Even than your eyes.
	Now shut it lies
	Relentless however often
	I kiss it in drouth.
	
	It has no breath
	Nor any relaxing. Where
	Where are you what have you done?
	What is this mouth of stone?
	How did you dare
	Take cover in death!
	
	II
	
	Once you could see
	The white moon show like a breast revealed
	By the slipping shawl of stars.
	Could see the small stars tremble
	As the heart beneath did wield
	Systole diastole.
	
	All the lovely macrocosm
	Was woman once to you
	Bride to your groom.
	No tree in bloom
	But it leaned you a new
	White bosom.
	
	And always and ever
	Soft as a summering tree
	Unfolds from the sky for your good
	Unfolded womanhood;
	Shedding you down as a tree
	Sheds its flowers on a river.
	
	I saw your brows
	Set like rocks beside a sea of gloom
	And I shed my very soul down into your thought;
	Like flowers I fell to be caught
	On the comforted pool like bloom
	That leaves the boughs.
	
	III
	
	Oh masquerader
	With a hard face white-enamelled
	What are you now?
	Do you care no longer how
	My heart is trammelled
	Evader?
	
	Is this you after all
	Metallic obdurate
	With bowels of steel?
	Did you _never_ feel?--
	Cold insensate
	Mechanical!
	
	Ah no!--you multiform
	You that I loved you wonderful
	You who darkened and shone
	You were many men in one;
	But never this null
	This never-warm!
	
	Is this the sum of you?
	Is it all nought?
	Cold metal-cold?
	Are you all told
	Here iron-wrought?
	Is _this_ what’s become of you?



9. BREAD UPON THE WATERS

	So, you are lost to me.
	
	Ah you, you ear of corn straight lying,
	What food is here for the darkly flying
	Fowls of the Afterwards?
	
	White bread afloat on the waters,
	Cast out by the hand that scatters
	Food untowards,
	
	Will you come back when the tide turns?
	After many days? My heart burns
	To know.
	
	Will you come back after many days
	To say your say as a traveller says
	More marvel than woe?
	
	Drift then, for the soundless birds,
	As fish, in their shadow-waved herds,
	To approach you.
	
	Drift then, bread cast out;
	Drift, lest I fall in doubt
	And reproach you.
	
	For you are lost to me!



10. THE BRIDE

	My love looks like a girl to-night, 
	      But she is old. 
	The plaits that lie along her pillow 
	      Are not gold, 
	But threaded with filigree silver, 
	      And uncanny cold. 
	
	She looks like a young maiden, since her brow 
	      Is smooth and fair, 
	Her cheeks are very smooth, her eyes are closed. 
	      She sleeps a rare 
	Still winsome sleep, so still, and so composed. 
	
	Nay, but she sleeps like a bride, and dreams her dreams 
	      Of perfect things. 
	She lies at last, the darling, in the shape of her dream, 
	      And her dead mouth sings 
	By its shape, like the thrushes in clear evenings. 



11. CASUALTY

	As I went down the street in my rose-red pelerine
	Some one stopped me and said, “Your lover is hurt.”
	“Oh, bring him to me,” I said. “Oh, lay him between
	My arms, let me cover him up in my skirt.”
	
	And you--oh, see the myriad doves that walk
	Beneath the steps of St. Paul’s! Catch several
	And kill for Aphrodite. Don’t speak, do not talk!--
	One of you kindle a fire to consume them withal.



12. THE CHILD AND THE SOLDIER

	   O brother, put me in your pouch
	   As you would a fresh, sweet locust-pod.
	   For I am frail as a flask of glass,
	   As a fine grey egg, or a slender rod,
	   O brother; and I am the golden ring
	   You wear on your finger so gladly. For God
	Takes everything from you tomorrow, and gives me everything.



13. CRUELTY AND LOVE

	What large, dark hands are those at the window
	Lifted, grasping the golden light
	Which weaves its way through the creeper leaves
	       To my heart’s delight?
	
	Ah, only the leaves! But in the west,
	In the west I see a redness come
	Over the evening’s burning breast--
	      --’Tis the wound of love goes home!
	
	The woodbine creeps abroad
	Calling low to her lover:
	The sun-lit flirt who all the day
	Has poised above her lips in play
	And stolen kisses, shallow and gay
	Of pollen, now has gone away
	--She woos the moth with her sweet, low word,
	And when above her his broad wings hover
	Then her bright breast she will uncover
	And yield her honey-drop to her lover.
	
	Into the yellow, evening glow
	Saunters a man from the farm below,
	Leans, and looks in at the low-built shed
	Where hangs the swallow’s marriage bed.
	The bird lies warm against the wall.
	She glances quick her startled eyes
	Towards him, then she turns away
	Her small head, making warm display
	Of red upon the throat. His terrors sway
	Her out of the nest’s warm, busy ball,
	Whose plaintive cry is heard as she flies
	In one blue stoop from out the sties
	Into the evening’s empty hall.
	
	Oh, water-hen, beside the rushes
	Hide your quaint, unfading blushes,
	Still your quick tail, and lie as dead,
	Till the distance folds over his ominous tread.
	
	The rabbit presses back her ears,
	Turns back her liquid, anguished eyes
	And crouches low: then with wild spring
	Spurts from the terror of his oncoming
	To be choked back, the wire ring
	Her frantic effort throttling:
	Piteous brown ball of quivering fears!
	
	Ah soon in his large, hard hands she dies,
	And swings all loose to the swing of his walk.
	Yet calm and kindly are his eyes
	And ready to open in brown surprise
	Should I not answer to his talk
	Or should he my tears surmise.
	
	I hear his hand on the latch, and rise from my chair
	Watching the door open: he flashes bare
	His strong teeth in a smile, and flashes his eyes
	In a smile like triumph upon me; then careless-wise
	He flings the rabbit soft on the table board
	And comes towards me: ah, the uplifted sword
	Of his hand against my bosom, and oh, the broad
	Blade of his hand that raises my face to applaud
	His coming: he raises up my face to him
	And caresses my mouth with his fingers, which still smell grim
	Of the rabbit’s fur! God, I am caught in a snare!
	I know not what fine wire is round my throat,
	I only know I let him finger there
	My pulse of life, letting him nose like a stoat
	Who sniffs with joy before he drinks the blood:
	And down his mouth comes to my mouth, and down
	His dark bright eyes descend like a fiery hood
	Upon my mind: his mouth meets mine, and a flood
	Of sweet fire sweeps across me, so I drown
	Within him, die, and find death good.



14. DAUGHTER OF THE GREAT MAN

	The daughter of the great man rolls her khaki wool,
	   And in her hands the sparkling needles fly
	Swiftly. I wish I might kiss her fingers; but full
	   Of danger I find her, even worse than the fields where we die.



15. DEBACLE

	THE trees in trouble because of autumn
	 And scarlet berries falling from the bush
	And all the myriad houseless seeds
	 Loosing hold in the wind’s insistent push
	
	Moan softly with autumnal parturition
	 Poor obscure fruits extruded out of light
	Into the world of shadow carried down
	 Between the bitter knees of the after-night.
	
	Bushed in an uncouth ardour coiled at core
	 With a knot of life that only bliss can unravel
	Fall all the fruits most bitterly into earth
	 Bitterly into corrosion bitterly travel.
	
	What is it internecine that is locked
	 By very fierceness into a quiescence
	Within the rage? We shall not know till it burst
	 Out of corrosion into new florescence.
	
	Nay but how tortured is the frightful seed
	 The spark intense within it all without
	Mordant corrosion gnashing and champing hard
	 For ruin on the naked small redoubt.
	
	Bitter to fold the issue and make no sally;
	 To have the mystery but not go forth;
	To bear but retaliate nothing given to save
	 The spark in storms of corrosion as seeds from the north.
	
	The sharper more horrid the pressure the harder the heart
	 That saves the blue grain of eternal fire
	Within its quick committed to hold and wait
	 And suffer unheeding only forbidden to expire.



16. DON JUAN

	It is Isis the mystery
	Must be in love with me.
	
	Here this round ball of earth,
	Where all the mountains sit
	Solemn in groups,
	And the bright rivers flit
	Round them for girth:
	
	Here the trees and troops
	Darken the shining grass;
	And many bright people pass
	Like plunder from heaven:
	Many bright people pass
	Plundered from heaven.
	
	But what of the mistresses,
	What the beloved seven?
	--They were but witnesses,
	I was just driven.
	
	Where is there peace for me?
	It is Isis the mystery
	Must be in love with me.



17. THE ENKINDLED SPRING

	This spring as it comes bursts up in bonfires green, 
	Wild puffing of emerald trees, and flame-filled bushes, 
	Thorn-blossom lifting in wreaths of smoke between 
	Where the wood fumes up and the watery, flickering rushes. 
	
	I am amazed at this spring, this conflagration 
	Of green fires lit on the soil of the earth, this blaze 
	Of growing, and sparks that puff in wild gyration, 
	Faces of people streaming across my gaze. 
	
	And I, what fountain of fire am I among 
	This leaping combustion of spring? My spirit is tossed 
	About like a shadow buffeted in the throng 
	Of flames, a shadow that’s gone astray, and is lost.



18. FIREFLIES IN THE CORN

	_A woman taunts her lover._
	
	Look at the little darlings in the corn!
	The rye is taller than you, who think yourself
	So high and mighty: look how its heads are borne
	Dark and proud on the sky, like a number of knights
	Passing with spears and pennants and manly scorn.
	
	And always likely!-Oh, if I could ride
	With my head held high-serene. against the sky
	Do you think I’d have a creature like you at my side
	With your gloom and your doubt that you love me?
	   O darling rye,
	How I adore you for your simple pride!
	
	And those bright fireflies wafting in between
	And over the swaying cornstalks, just above
	All their dark-feathered helmets, like little green
	Stars come low and wandering here for love
	Of this dark earth, and wandering all serene.
	
	How I adore you, you happy things, you dears
	Riding the air and carrying all the time
	Your little lanterns behind you: it cheers
	My heart to see you settling and trying to climb
	The corn-stalks, tipping with fire their spears.
	
	All over the corn’s dim motion, against the blue
	Dark sky of night, the wandering glitter, the swarm
	Of questing brilliant things:-you joy, you true
	Spirit of careless joy: ah, how I warm
	My poor and perished soul at the joy of you!
	
	
	_The man answers and she mocks._
	
	You’re a fool, woman. I love you, and you know I do!
	-Lord, take his love away, it makes him whine.
	And I give you everything that you want me to.
	-Lord, dear Lord, do you think he ever _can_ shine?



19. FLAPPER

	LOVE has crept out of her sealéd heart
	 As a field-bee black and amber
	 Breaks from the winter-cell to clamber
	Up the warm grass where the sunbeams start.
	
	Mischief has come in her dawning eyes
	 And a glint of coloured iris brings
	 Such as lies along the folded wings
	Of the bee before he flies.
	
	Who with a ruffling careful breath
	 Has opened the wings of the wild young sprite?
	 Has fluttered her spirit to stumbling flight
	In her eyes as a young bee stumbleth?
	
	Love makes the burden of her voice.
	 The hum of his heavy staggering wings
	 Sets quivering with wisdom the common things
	That she says and her words rejoice.



20. FROM A COLLEGE WINDOW

	THE glimmer of the limes sun-heavy sleeping
	  Goes trembling past me up the College wall.
	Below the lawn in soft blue shade is keeping
	  The daisy-froth quiescent softly in thrall.
	
	Beyond the leaves that overhang the street
	 Along the flagged clean pavement summer-white
	Passes the world with shadows at their feet
	  Going left and right.
	
	Remote although I hear the beggar’s cough
	  See the woman’s twinkling fingers tend him a coin
	I sit absolved assured I am better off
	  Beyond a world I never want to join.



21. GREEN

	THE dawn was apple-green,
	The sky was green wine held up in the sun,
	The moon was a golden petal between.
	
	She opened her eyes, and green
	They shone, clear like flowers undone,
	For the first time, now for the first time seen.



22. THE GREY NURSE

	The grey nurse entered a rose garden
	Where roses’ shadows dappled her.
	Her apron was brown with blood. She prayed,
	And roses wondered at her prayer.



23. GRIEF

	The darkness steals the forms of all the queens.
	But oh, the palms of her two black hands are red!
	-It is Death I fear so much, it is not the dead-
	Not this gray book, but the red and bloody scenes.
	
	The lamps are white like snowdrops in the grass;
	The town is like a churchyard, all so still
	And gray, now night is here: nor will
	Another torn red sunset come to pass.
	
	And so I sit and turn the book of gray,
	Feeling the shadows like a blind man reading,
	All fearful lest I find some next word bleeding.
	-Nay, take my painted missal book away.



24. HEIMWEH

	FAR-OFF the lily-statues stand white-ranked in the garden at home.
	Would God they were shattered quickly the cattle would tread them out in the loam.
	I wish the elder trees in flower could suddenly heave and burst
	The walls of the house and nettles puff out from the hearth at which I was nursed.
	
	It stands so still in the hush composed of trees and inviolate peace
	The home of my fathers the place that is mine my fate and my old increase.
	And now that the skies are falling the world is spouting in fountains of dirt
	I would give my soul for the homestead to fall with me go with me both in one hurt.



25. INTIME

	RETURNING I find her just the same
	At just the same old delicate game.
	
	Still she says: “Nay loose no flame
	To lick me up and do me harm!
	Be all yourself!--for oh the charm
	Of your heart of fire in which I look!
	Oh better there than in any book
	Glow and enact the dramas and dreams
	I love for ever!--there it seems
	You are lovelier than life itself till desire
	Comes licking through the bars of your lips
	And over my face the stray fire slips
	Leaving a burn and an ugly smart
	That will have the oil of illusion. Oh heart
	Of fire and beauty loose no more
	Your reptile flames of lust; ah store
	Your passion in the basket of your soul
	Be all yourself one bonny burning coal
	That stays with steady joy of its own fire.
	But do not seek to take me by desire.
	Oh do not seek to thrust on me your fire!
	For in the firing all my porcelain
	Of flesh does crackle and shiver and break in pain
	My ivory and marble black with stain
	My veil of sensitive mystery rent in twain
	My altars sullied I bereft remain
	A priestess execrable taken in vain--”
	
	                        So the refrain
	Sings itself over and so the game
	Re-starts itself wherein I am kept
	Like a glowing brazier faintly blue of flame
	So that the delicate love-adept
	Can warm her hands and invite her soul
	Sprinkling incense and salt of words
	And kisses pale and sipping the toll
	Of incense-smoke that rises like birds.
	
	Yet I’ve forgotten in playing this game
	Things I have known that shall have no name;
	Forgetting the place from which I came
	I watch her ward away the flame
	Yet warm herself at the fire--then blame
	Me that I flicker in the basket;
	Me that I glow not with content
	To have my substance so subtly spent;
	Me that I interrupt her game.
	I ought to be proud that she should ask it
	Of me to be her fire-opal--.
	
	                        It is well
	Since I am here for so short a spell
	Not to interrupt her?--Why should I
	Break in by making any reply!



26. LAST WORDS TO MIRIAM

	Yours is the shame and sorrow, 
	But the disgrace is mine; 
	Your love was dark and thorough, 
	Mine was the love of the sun for a flower 
	He creates with his shine. 
	
	I was diligent to explore you, 
	Blossom you stalk by stalk, 
	Till my fire of creation bore you 
	Shrivelling down in the final dour 
	Anguish--then I suffered a balk. 
	
	I knew your pain, and it broke 
	My fine, craftsman’s nerve; 
	Your body quailed at my stroke, 
	And my courage failed to give you the last 
	Fine torture you did deserve. 
	
	You are shapely, you are adorned, 
	But opaque and dull in the flesh, 
	Who, had I but pierced with the thorned 
	Fire-threshing anguish, were fused and cast 
	In a lovely illumined mesh. 
	
	Like a painted window: the best 
	Suffering burnt through your flesh, 
	Undrossed it and left it blest 
	With a quivering sweet wisdom of grace: but now 
	Who shall take you afresh? 
	
	Now who will burn you free 
	From your body’s terrors and dross, 
	Since the fire has failed in me? 
	What man will stoop in your flesh to plough 
	The shrieking cross? 
	
	A mute, nearly beautiful thing 
	Is your face, that fills me with shame 
	As I see it hardening, 
	Warping the perfect image of God, 
	And darkening my eternal fame. 



27. LOVE STORM

	MANY roses in the wind
	Are tapping at the window-sash.
	A hawk is in the sky; his wings
	Slowly begin to plash.
	
	The roses with the west wind rapping
	Are torn away and a splash
	Of red goes down the billowing air.
	
	Still hangs the hawk with the whole sky moving
	Past him--only a wing-beat proving
	The will that holds him there.
	
	The daisies in the grass are bending
	The hawk has dropped the wind is spending
	All the roses and unending
	Rustle of leaves washes out the rending
	Cry of a bird.
	
	A red rose goes on the wind.--Ascending
	The hawk his wind-swept way is wending
	Easily down the sky. The daisies sending
	Strange white signals seem intending
	To show the place whence the scream was heard.
	
	But oh my heart what birds are piping!
	A silver wind is hastily wiping
	The face of the youngest rose.
	
	And oh my heart cease apprehending!
	The hawk is gone a rose is tapping
	The window-sash as the west-wind blows.
	
	Knock knock ‘tis no more than a red rose rapping
	And fear is a plash of wings.
	What then if a scarlet rose goes flapping
	Down the bright-grey ruin of things!



28. LUI ET ELLE

	She is large and matronly 
	And rather dirty, 
	A little sardonic-looking, as if domesticity had driven her to it. 
	
	Though what she does, except lay four eggs at random in the garden once a year 
	And put up with her husband, 
	I don’t know. 
	
	She likes to eat. 
	She hurries up, striding reared on long uncanny legs, 
	When food is going. 
	Oh yes, she can make haste when she likes. 
	
	She snaps the soft bread from my hand in great mouthfuls, 
	Opening her rather pretty wedge of an iron, pristine face 
	Into an enormously wide-beaked mouth 
	Like sudden curved scissors, 
	And gulping at more than she can swallow, and working her thick, soft tongue, 
	And having the bread hanging over her chin. 
	
	O Mistress, Mistress, 
	Reptile Mistress, 
	Your eye is very dark, very bright, 
	And it never softens 
	Although you watch. 
	
	She knows, 
	She knows well enough to come for food, 
	Yet she sees me not; 
	Her bright eye sees, but not me, not anything, 
	Sightful, sightless, seeing and visionless, 
	Reptile mistress. 
	
	Taking bread in her curved, gaping, toothless mouth, 
	She has no qualm when she catches my finger in her steel overlapping gums, 
	But she hangs on, and my shout and my shrinking are nothing to her, 
	She does not even know she is nipping me with her curved beak. 
	Snake-like she draws at my finger, while I drag it in horror away. 
	
	Mistress, reptile mistress, 
	You are almost too large, I am almost frightened. 
	
	He is much smaller, 
	Dapper beside her, 
	And ridiculously small. 
	
	Her laconic eye has an earthy, materialistic look, 
	His, poor darling, is almost fiery. 
	
	His wimple, his blunt-prowed face, 
	His low forehead, his skinny neck, his long, scaled, striving legs, 
	So striving, striving, 
	Are all more delicate than she, 
	And he has a cruel scar on his shell. 
	
	Poor darling, biting at her feet, 
	Running beside her like a dog, biting her earthy, splay feet, 
	Nipping her ankles, 
	Which she drags apathetic away, though without retreating into her shell. 
	
	Agelessly silent, 
	And with a grim, reptile determination, 
	Cold, voiceless age-after-age behind him, serpents’ long obstinacy 
	Of horizontal persistence. 
	
	Little old man 
	Scuffling beside her, bending down, catching his opportunity, 
	Parting his steel-trap face, so suddenly, and seizing her scaly ankle, 
	And hanging grimly on, 
	Letting go at last as she drags away, 
	And closing his steel-trap face. 
	
	His steel-trap, stoic, ageless, handsome face. 
	Alas, what a fool he looks in this scuffle. 
	
	And how he feels it! 
	The lonely rambler, the stoic, dignified stalker through chaos, 
	The immune, the animate, 
	Enveloped in isolation, 
	Forerunner. 
	Now look at him! 
	
	Alas, the spear is through the side of his isolation. 
	His adolescence saw him crucified into sex, 
	Doomed, in the long crucifixion of desire, to seek his consummation beyond himself. 
	Divided into passionate duality, 
	He, so finished and immune, now broken into desirous fragmentariness, 
	Doomed to make an intolerable fool of himself 
	In his effort toward completion again. 
	
	Poor little earthy house-inhabiting Osiris, 
	The mysterious bull tore him at adolescence into pieces, 
	And he must struggle after reconstruction, ignominiously. 
	
	And so behold him following the tail 
	Of that mud-hovel of his slowly-rambling spouse, 
	Like some unhappy bull at the tail of a cow, 
	But with more than bovine, grim, earth-dank persistence, 
	Suddenly seizing the ugly ankle as she stretches out to walk, 
	Roaming over the sods, 
	Or, if it happen to show, at her pointed, heavy tail 
	Beneath the low-dropping back-board of her shell. 
	
	Their two shells like domed boats bumping, 
	Hers huge, his small; 
	Their splay feet rambling and rowing like paddles, 
	And stumbling mixed up in one another, 
	In the race of love--
	Two tortoises, 
	She huge, he small. 
	
	She seems earthily apathetic, 
	And he has a reptile’s awful persistence. 
	
	I heard a woman pitying her, pitying the Mère Tortue. 
	While I, I pity Monsieur. 
	“He pesters her and torments her,” said the woman. 
	How much more is he pestered and tormented, say I. 
	
	What can he do? 
	He is dumb, he is visionless, 
	Conceptionless. 
	His black, sad-lidded eye sees but beholds not 
	As her earthen mound moves on, 
	But he catches the folds of vulnerable, leathery skin, 
	Nail-studded, that shake beneath her shell, 
	And drags at these with his beak, 
	Drags and drags and bites, 
	While she pulls herself free, and rows her dull mound along. 



29. MOONRISE

	And who has seen the moon, who has not seen
	Her rise from out the chamber of the deep
	Flushed and grand and naked, as from the chamber
	Of finished bridegroom, seen her rise and throw
	Confession of delight upon the wave,
	Littering the waves with her own superscription
	Of bliss, till all her lambent beauty shakes towards us
	Spread out and known at last: and we are sure
	That beauty is a thing beyond the grave,
	That perfect, bright experience never falls
	To nothingness, and time will dim the moon
	Sooner than our full consummation here
	In this odd life will tarnish or pass away.



30. MOSQUITO

	When did you start your tricks
	Monsieur?
	
	What do you stand on such high legs for?
	Why this length of shredded shank
	You exaltation?
	
	Is it so that you shall lift your centre of gravity upwards
	And weigh no more than air as you alight upon me,
	Stand upon me weightless, you phantom?
	
	I heard a woman call you the Winged Victory
	In sluggish Venice.
	You turn your head towards your tail, and smile.
	
	How can you put so much devilry
	Into that translucent phantom shred
	Of a frail corpus?
	
	Queer, with your thin wings and your streaming legs
	How you sail like a heron, or a dull clot of air,
	A nothingness.
	
	Yet what an aura surrounds you;
	Your evil little aura, prowling, and casting a numbness on my mind.
	
	That is your trick, your bit of filthy magic:
	Invisibility, and the anæsthetic power
	To deaden my attention in your direction.
	
	But I know your game now, streaky sorcerer.
	
	Queer, how you stalk and prowl the air
	In circles and evasions, enveloping me,
	Ghoul on wings
	Winged Victory.
	
	Settle, and stand on long thin shanks
	Eyeing me sideways, and cunningly conscious that I am aware,
	You speck.
	
	I hate the way you lurch off sideways into air
	Having read my thoughts against you.
	
	Come then, let us play at unawares,
	And see who wins in this sly game of bluff.
	Man or mosquito.
	
	You don’t know that I exist, and I don’t know that you exist.
	Now then!
	
	It is your trump
	It is your hateful little trump
	You pointed fiend,
	Which shakes my sudden blood to hatred of you:
	It is your small, high, hateful bugle in my ear.
	
	Why do you do it?
	Surely it is bad policy.
	
	They say you can’t help it.
	
	If that is so, then I believe a little in Providence protecting the innocent.
	But it sounds so amazingly like a slogan
	A yell of triumph as you snatch my scalp.
	
	Blood, red blood
	Super-magical
	Forbidden liquor.
	
	I behold you stand
	For a second enspasmed in oblivion,
	Obscenely ecstasied
	Sucking live blood
	My blood.
	
	Such silence, such suspended transport,
	Such gorging,
	Such obscenity of trespass.
	
	You stagger
	As well as you may.
	Only your accursed hairy frailty
	Your own imponderable weightlessness
	Saves you, wafts you away on the very draught my anger makes in its snatching.
	
	Away with a pæan of derision
	You winged blood-drop.
	Can I not overtake you?
	Are you one too many for me
	Winged Victory?
	Am I not mosquito enough to out-mosquito you?
	
	Queer, what a big stain my sucked blood makes
	Beside the infinitesimal faint smear of you!
	Queer, what a dim dark smudge you have disappeared into!



31. MOTHER’S SON IN SALONIKA

	The midnight shadow sinking down has slung
	Over your tent the one tent of us all, my love;
	In whose close folds above you, near above,
	The flame of my soul like a trembling star is hung.
	
	That is my spirit hovering close above
	You now as you turn your face towards the sky.
	Oh, as you stand looking up, do you know it is I?
	Do you lift your lips to kiss me good-night, my love?



32. MOURNING

	Why do you go about looking for me, mother?
	I and my betrothed are together in the shed--
	Sitting there together for a little while.
	Why are you so anxious? Leave me peaceful with my dead.



33. NARCISSUS

	WHERE the minnows trace
	A glinting web quick hid in the gloom of the brook
	When I think of the place
	And remember the small lad lying intent to look
	Through the shadowy face
	At the little fish thread-threading the watery nook--
	
	It seems to me
	The woman you are should be nixie there is a pool
	Where we ought to be.
	You undine-clear and pearly soullessly cool
	And waterly
	The pool for my limbs to fathom my soul’s last school.
	
	Narcissus
	Ventured so long ago in the deeps of reflection.
	Illyssus
	Broke the bounds and beyond!--Dim recollection
	Of fishes
	Soundlessly moving in heaven’s other direction!
	
	Be
	Undine towards the waters moving back;
	For me
	A pool! Put off the soul you’ve got oh lack
	Your human self immortal; take the watery track.



34. NEITHER MOTH NOR RUST

	God, only God, is eternally.
	God is forever, and only He.
	Where, white maid, are the men you have loved?-
	They are dead, so God was between you, you see.



35. THE NORTH COUNTRY

	IN another country black poplars shake themselves over a pond
	And rooks and the rising smoke-waves scatter and wheel from the works beyond;
	The air is dark with north and with sulphur the grass is a darker green
	And people darkly invested with purple move palpable through the scene.
	
	Soundlessly down across the counties out of the resonant gloom
	That wraps the north in stupor and purple travels the deep slow boom
	Of the man-life north-imprisoned shut in the hum of the purpled steel
	As it spins to sleep on its motion drugged dense in the sleep of the wheel.
	
	Out of the sleep from the gloom of motion soundlessly somnambule
	Moans and booms the soul of a people imprisoned asleep in the rule
	Of the strong machine that runs mesmeric booming the spell of its word
	Upon them and moving them helpless mechanic their will to its will deferred.
	
	Yet all the while comes the droning inaudible out of the violet air
	The moaning of sleep-bound beings in travail that toil and are will-less there
	In the spell-bound north convulsive now with a dream near morning strong
	With violent achings heaving to burst the sleep that is now not long.



36. NOSTALGIA

	The waning moon looks upward, this grey night
	Sheers round the heavens in one smooth curve
	Of easy sailing. Odd red wicks serve
	To show where the ships at sea move out of sight.
	
	This place is palpable me, for here I was born
	Of this self-same darkness. Yet the shadowy house belor
	Is out of bounds, and only the old ghosts know
	I have come--they whimper about me, welcome and mourn.
	
	My father suddenly died in the harvesting corn,
	And the place is no longer ours. Watching, I hear
	No sound from the strangers; the place is dark, and fear
	Opens my eyes till the roots of my vision seem torn.
	
	Can I go nearer, never towards the door?
	The ghosts and I, we mourn together, and shrink
	In the shadow of the cart-shed-hovering on the brink
	For ever, to enter the homestead no more.
	
	Is it irrevocable? Can I really not go
	Through the open yard-way? Can I not pass the sheds
	And through to the mowie? Only the dead in their beds
	Can know the fearful anguish that this is so.
	
	I kiss the stones. I kiss the moss on the wall,
	And wish I could pass impregnate into the place.
	I wish I could take it all in a last embrace.
	I wish with my breast I could crush it, perish it all.



37. PEACH

	Would you like to throw a stone at me?
	Here, take all that’s left of my peach.
	 
	Blood-red, deep:
	Heaven knows how it came to pass.
	Somebody’s pound of flesh rendered up.
	 
	Wrinkled with secrets
	And hard with the intention to keep them.
	 
	Why, from silvery peach-bloom,
	From that shallow-silvery wine-glass on a short stem
	This rolling, dropping, heavy globule?
	 
	I am thinking, of course, of the peach before I ate it.
	 
	Why so velvety, why so voluptuous heavy?
	Why hanging with such inordinate weight?
	Why so indented?
	 
	Why the groove?
	Why the lovely, bivalve roundnesses?
	Why the ripple down the sphere?
	Why the suggestion of incision?
	 
	Why was not my peach round and finished like a billiard ball?
	It would have been if man had made it.
	Though I’ve eaten it now.
	 
	But it wasn’t round and finished like a billiard ball;
	And because I say so, you would like to throw something at me.
	 
	Here, you can have my peach stone.



38. PENTACOSTAL

	Shall I tell you then how it is?
	
	There came a cloven gleam
	Like a tongue of darkened flame
	To burn in me.
	
	And so I seem
	To have you still the same
	In one world with me.
	
	In the flicker of a flower
	In a worm that is blind yet strives
	In the mouse that pauses to listen
	
	Glimmers our
	Shadow as well and deprives
	Them none of their glisten.
	
	In each shaken morsel
	Our shadow trembles
	As if it rippled from out of us hand in hand.
	
	We are part and parcel
	In shadow nothing dissembles
	Our darkened universe. You understand?
	
	For I have told you plainly how it is.



39. PEOPLE

	The great gold apples of night 
	Hang from the street’s long bough 
	Dripping their light 
	On the faces that drift below, 
	On the faces that drift and blow 
	Down the night-time, out of sight 
	In the wind’s sad sough. 
	
	The ripeness of these apples of night 
	Distilling over me 
	Makes sickening the white 
	Ghost-flux of faces that hie 
	Them endlessly, endlessly by 
	Without meaning or reason why 
	They ever should be.



40. PIANO

	Softly, in the dusk, a woman is singing to me; 
	Taking me back down the vista of years, till I see 
	A child sitting under the piano, in the boom of the tingling strings 
	And pressing the small, poised feet of a mother who smiles as she sings. 
	
	In spite of myself, the insidious mastery of song 
	Betrays me back, till the heart of me weeps to belong 
	To the old Sunday evenings at home, with winter outside 
	And hymns in the cosy parlour, the tinkling piano our guide. 
	
	So now it is vain for the singer to burst into clamour 
	With the great black piano appassionato. The glamour 
	Of childish days is upon me, my manhood is cast 
	Down in the flood of remembrance, I weep like a child for the past. 



41. POEMGRANATE

	You tell me I am wrong.
	Who are you, who is anybody to tell me I am wrong?
	I am not wrong.
	 
	In Syracuse, rock left bare by the viciousness of Greek women,
	No doubt you have forgotten the pomegranate trees in flower,
	Oh so red, and such a lot of them.
	 
	Whereas at Venice,
	Abhorrent, green, slippery city
	Whose Doges were old, and had ancient eyes,
	In the dense foliage of the inner garden
	Pomegranates like bright green stone,
	And barbed, barbed with a crown.
	Oh, crown of spiked green metal
	Actually growing!
	 
	Now, in Tuscany,
	Pomegranates to warm your hands at;
	And crowns, kingly, generous, tilting crowns
	Over the left eyebrow.
	 
	And, if you dare, the fissure!
	 
	Do you mean to tell me you will see no fissure?
	Do you prefer to look on the plain side?
	 
	For all that, the setting suns are open.
	The end cracks open with the beginning:
	Rosy, tender, glittering within the fissure.
	 
	Do you mean to tell me there should be no fissure?
	No glittering, compact drops of dawn?
	Do you mean it is wrong, the gold-filmed skin, integument,
	            shown ruptured?
	 
	For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken.
	It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack.



42. READING A LETTER

	SHE sits on the recreation ground
	 Under an oak whose yellow buds dot the pale blue sky.
	The young grass twinkles in the wind and the sound
	 Of the wind in the knotted buds in a canopy.
	
	So sitting under the knotted canopy
	 Of the wind she is lifted and carried away as in a balloon
	Across the insensible void till she stoops to see
	 The sandy desert beneath her the dreary platoon.
	
	She knows the waste all dry beneath her in one place
	 Stirring with earth-coloured life ever turning and stirring.
	But never the motion has a human face
	 Nor sound save intermittent machinery whirring.
	
	And so again on the recreation ground
	 She alights a stranger wondering unused to the scene;
	Suffering at sight of the children playing around
	 Hurt at the chalk-coloured tulips and the evening-green.



43. SERVICE OF ALL THE SOULS

	Between the avenue of cypresses,
	All in their scarlet capes and surplices
	Of linen, go the chaunting choristers,
	The priests in gold and black, the villagers.
	
	And all along the path to the cemetery
	The round dark heads of men crowd silently;
	And black-scarfed faces of women-folk wistfully
	Watch at the banner of death, and the mystery.
	
	And at the foot of a grave a father stands
	With sunken head and forgotten, folded hands;
	And at the foot of a grave a mother kneels
	With pale shut face, nor neither hears nor feels
	
	The coming of the chaunting choristers
	Between the avenue of cypresses,
	The silence of the many villagers,
	The candle-flames beside the surplices.



44. SEVEN SEALS

	SINCE this is the last night I keep you home
	Come I will consecrate you for the journey.
	
	Rather I had you would not go. Nay come
	I will not again reproach you. Lie back
	And let me love you a long time ere you go.
	For you are sullen-hearted still and lack
	The will to love me. But even so
	I will set a seal upon you from my lip
	Will set a guard of honour at each door
	Seal up each channel out of which might slip
	Your love for me.
	
	                I kiss your mouth. Ah love
	Could I but seal its ruddy shining spring
	Of passion parch it up destroy remove
	Its softly-stirring crimson welling-up
	Of kisses! Oh help me God! Here at the source
	I’d lie for ever drinking and drawing in
	Your fountains as heaven drinks from out their
	   course
	The floods.
	
	                I close your ears with kisses
	And seal your nostrils; and round your neck you’ll
	   wear--
	Nay let me work--a delicate chain of kisses.
	Like beads they go around and not one misses
	To touch its fellow on either side.
	
	                And there
	Full mid-between the champaign of your breast
	I place a great and burning seal of love
	Like a dark rose a mystery of rest
	On the slow bubbling of your rhythmic heart.
	
	Nay I persist and very faith shall keep
	You integral to me. Each door each mystic port
	Of egress from you I will seal and steep
	In perfect chrism.
	         Now it is done. The mort
	Will sound in heaven before it is undone.
	
	But let me finish what I have begun
	And shirt you now invulnerable in the mail
	Of iron kisses kisses linked like steel.
	Put greaves upon your thighs and knees and frail
	Webbing of steel on your feet. So you shall feel
	Ensheathed invulnerable with me with seven
	Great seals upon your outgoings and woven
	Chain of my mystic will wrapped perfectly
	Upon you wrapped in indomitable me.



45. SIGH NO MORE

	THE cuckoo and the coo-dove’s ceaseless calling
	              Calling
	Of a meaningless monotony is palling
	All my morning’s pleasure in the sun-fleck-scattered wood.
	May-blossom and blue bird’s-eye flowers falling
	              Falling
	In a litter through the elm-tree shade are scrawling
	Messages of true-love down the dust of the high-road.
	I do not like to hear the gentle grieving
	              Grieving
	Of the she-dove in the blossom still believing
	Love will yet again return to her and make all good.
	
	When I know that there must ever be deceiving
	              Deceiving
	Of the mournful constant heart that while she’s weaving
	Her woes her lover woos and sings within another wood.
	
	Oh boisterous the cuckoo shouts forestalling
	              Stalling
	A progress down the intricate enthralling
	By-paths where the wanton-headed flowers doff their hood.
	
	And like a laughter leads me onward heaving
	              Heaving
	A sigh among the shadows thus retrieving
	A decent short regret for that which once was very good.



46. ON THAT DAY

	  ON that day
	I shall put roses on roses and cover your grave
	With multitude of white roses: and since you were brave
	  One bright red ray.
	
	  So people passing under
	The ash-trees of the valley-road will raise
	Their eyes and look at the grave on the hill in wonder
	  Wondering mount and put the flowers asunder
	
	  To see whose praise
	Is blazoned here so white and so bloodily red.
	Then they will say: “‘Tis long since she is dead
	  Who has remembered her after many days?”
	
	  And standing there
	They will consider how you went your ways
	Unnoticed among them a still queen lost in the maze
	  Of this earthly affair.
	
	  A queen they’ll say
	Has slept unnoticed on a forgotten hill.
	Sleeps on unknown unnoticed there until
	  Dawns my insurgent day.



47. TWENTY YEARS AGO

	ROUND the house were lilacs and strawberries
	 And foal-foots spangling the paths
	And far away on the sand-hills dewberries
	 Caught dust from the sea’s long swaths.
	
	Up the wolds the woods were walking
	 And nuts fell out of their hair.
	At the gate the nets hung balking
	 The star-lit rush of a hare.
	
	In the autumn fields the stubble
	 Tinkled the music of gleaning.
	At a mother’s knees the trouble
	 Lost all its meaning.
	
	Yea what good beginnings
	 To this sad end!
	Have we had our innings?
	 God forfend!



48. UNDER THE OAK

	You if you were sensible
	When I tell you the stars flash signals each one dreadful
	You would not turn and answer me
	“The night is wonderful.”
	
	Even you if you knew
	How this darkness soaks me through and through and infuses
	Unholy fear in my vapour you would pause to distinguish
	What hurts from what amuses.
	
	For I tell you
	Beneath this powerful tree my whole soul’s fluid
	Oozes away from me as a sacrifice steam
	At the knife of a Druid.
	
	Again I tell you I bleed I am bound with withies
	My life runs out.
	I tell you my blood runs out on the floor of this oak
	Gout upon gout.
	
	Above me springs the blood-born mistletoe
	In the shady smoke.
	But who are you twittering to and fro
	Beneath the oak?
	
	What thing better are you what worse?
	What have you to do with the mysteries
	Of this ancient place of my ancient curse?
	What place have you in my histories?



49. THE WILD COMMON

	The quick sparks on the gorse bushes are leaping, 
	Little jets of sunlight-texture imitating flame; 
	Above them, exultant, the peewits are sweeping: 
	They are lords of the desolate wastes of sadness their screamings proclaim. 
	
	Rabbits, handfuls of brown earth, lie 
	Low-rounded on the mournful grass they have bitten down to the quick. 
	Are they asleep?--Are they alive?--Now see, when I 
	Move my arms the hill bursts and heaves under their spurting kick. 
	
	The common flaunts bravely; but below, from the rushes 
	Crowds of glittering king-cups surge to challenge the blossoming bushes; 
	There the lazy streamlet pushes 
	Its curious course mildly; here it wakes again, leaps, laughs, and gushes. 
	
	Into a deep pond, an old sheep-dip, 
	Dark, overgrown with willows, cool, with the brook ebbing through so slow, 
	Naked on the steep, soft lip 
	Of the bank I stand watching my own white shadow quivering to and fro. 
	
	What if the gorse flowers shrivelled and kissing were lost? 
	Without the pulsing waters, where were the marigolds and the songs of the brook! 
	If my veins and my breasts with love embossed 
	Withered, my insolent soul would be gone like flowers that the hot wind took. 
	
	So my soul like a passionate woman turns, 
	Filled with remorseful terror to the man she scorned, and her love 
	For myself in my own eyes’ laughter burns, 
	Runs ecstatic over the pliant folds rippling down to my belly from the breast-lights above. 
	
	Over my sunlit skin the warm, clinging air, 
	Rich with the songs of seven larks singing at once, goes kissing me glad. 
	And the soul of the wind and my blood compare 
	Their wandering happiness, and the wind, wasted in liberty, drifts on and is sad. 
	
	Oh but the water loves me and folds me, 
	Plays with me, sways me, lifts me and sinks me as though it were living blood, 
	Blood of a heaving woman who holds me, 
	Owning my supple body a rare glad thing, supremely good. 



50. THE WIND, THE RASCAL

	The wind, the rascal, knocked at my door, and I said:
	   My love is come!
	But oh, wind, what a knave thou art
	To make sport of me when the days of my heart
	   Are drearisome,
	   And wearisome.



51. WINTER IN THE BOULEVARD

	THE frost has settled down upon the trees
	And ruthlessly strangled off the fantasies
	Of leaves that have gone unnoticed swept like old
	Romantic stories now no more to be told.
	
	The trees down the boulevard stand naked in thought
	Their abundant summery wordage silenced caught
	In the grim undertow; naked the trees confront
	Implacable winter’s long cross-questioning brunt.
	
	Has some hand balanced more leaves in the depths of the twigs?
	Some dim little efforts placed in the threads of the birch?--
	It is only the sparrows like dead black leaves on the sprigs
	Sitting huddled against the cerulean one flesh with their perch.
	
	The clear cold sky coldly bethinks itself.
	Like vivid thought the air spins bright and all
	Trees birds and earth arrested in the after-thought
	Awaiting the sentence out from the welkin brought.
