*** Emma Lazarus (1849 - 1887)


1. LONG ISLAND SOUND

	I see it as it looked one afternoon 
	In August,--by a fresh soft breeze o’erblown. 
	The swiftness of the tide, the light thereon, 
	A far-off sail, white as a crescent moon. 
	The shining waters with pale currents strewn, 
	The quiet fishing-smacks, the Eastern cove, 
	The semi-circle of its dark, green grove. 
	The luminous grasses, and the merry sun 
	In the grave sky; the sparkle far and wide, 
	Laughter of unseen children, cheerful chirp 
	Of crickets, and low lisp of rippling tide, 
	Light summer clouds fantastical as sleep 
	Changing unnoted while I gazed thereon. 
	All these fair sounds and sights I made my own.


2. THE NEW COLOSSUS

	Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame,
	With conquering limbs astride from land to land;
	Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand
	A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame
	Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name
	Mother of Exiles. From her beacon-hand
	Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command
	The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame.
	“Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!” cries she
	With silent lips. “Give me your tired, your poor,
	Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
	The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
	Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
	I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”


3. THE SOUTH

	Night, and beneath star-blazoned summer skies 
	Behold the Spirit of the musky South, 
	A creole with still-burning, languid eyes, 
	Voluptuous limbs and incense-breathing mouth: 
	Swathed in spun gauze is she, 
	From fibres of her own anana tree. 
	
	Within these sumptuous woods she lies at ease, 
	By rich night-breezes, dewy cool, caressed: 
	’Twixt cypresses and slim palmetto trees, 
	Like to the golden oriole’s hanging nest, 
	Her airy hammock swings, 
	And through the dark her mocking-bird yet sings. 
	
	How beautiful she is! A tulip-wreath 
	Twines round her shadowy, free-floating hair: 
	Young, weary, passionate, and sad as death, 
	Dark visions haunt for her the vacant air, 
	While noiselessly she lies 
	With lithe, lax, folded hands and heavy eyes. 
	
	Full well knows she how wide and fair extend 
	Her groves bright flowered, her tangled everglades, 
	Majestic streams that indolently wend 
	Through lush savanna or dense forest shades, 
	Where the brown buzzard flies 
	To broad bayous ’neath hazy-golden skies. 
	
	Hers is the savage splendor of the swamp, 
	With pomp of scarlet and of purple bloom, 
	Where blow warm, furtive breezes faint and damp, 
	Strange insects whir, and stalking bitterns boom--
	Where from stale waters dead 
	Oft looms the great jawed alligator’s head. 
	
	Her wealth, her beauty, and the blight on these,--
	Of all she is aware: luxuriant woods, 
	Fresh, living, sunlit, in her dream she sees; 
	And ever midst those verdant solitudes 
	The soldier’s wooden cross, 
	O’ergrown by creeping tendrils and rank moss. 
	
	Was hers a dream of empire? was it sin? 
	And is it well that all was borne in vain? 
	She knows no more than one who slow doth win, 
	After fierce fever, conscious life again, 
	Too tired, too weak, too sad, 
	By the new light to be or stirred or glad. 
	
	From rich sea-islands fringing her green shore, 
	From broad plantations where swart freemen bend 
	Bronzed backs in willing labor, from her store 
	Of golden fruit, from stream, from town, ascend 
	Life-currents of pure health: 
	Her aims shall be subserved with boundless wealth. 
	
	Yet now how listless and how still she lies, 
	Like some half-savage, dusky Indian queen, 
	Rocked in her hammock ’neath her native skies, 
	With the pathetic, passive, broken mien 
	Of one who, sorely proved, 
	Great-souled, hath suffered much and much hath loved! 
	
	But look! along the wide-branched, dewy glade 
	Glimmers the dawn: the light palmetto trees 
	And cypresses reissue from the shade, 
	And she hath wakened. Through clear air she sees 
	The pledge, the brightening ray, 
	And leaps from dreams to hail the coming day.