*** Giacomo Leopardi (1798 - 1837)


1. CALM AFTER STORM

	The storm hath passed;
	I hear the birds rejoice; the hen,
	Returned into the road again,
	Her cheerful notes repeats. The sky serene
	Is, in the west, upon the mountain seen:
	The country smiles; bright runs the silver stream.
	Each heart is cheered; on every side revive
	The sounds, the labors of the busy hive.
	The workman gazes at the watery sky,
	As standing at the door he sings,
	His work in hand; the little wife goes forth,
	And in her pail the gathered rain-drops brings;
	The vendor of his wares, from lane to lane,
	Begins his daily cry again.
	The sun returns, and with his smile illumes
	The villas on the neighboring hills;
	Through open terraces and balconies,
	The genial light pervades the cheerful rooms;
	And, on the highway, from afar are heard
	The tinkling of the bells, the creaking wheels
	Of waggoner, his journey who resumes.
	
	Cheered is each heart.
	Whene’er, as now, doth life appear
	A thing so pleasant and so dear?
	When, with such love,
	Does man unto his books or work return?
	Or on himself new tasks impose?
	When is he less regardful of his woes?
	O pleasure, born of pain!
	O idle joy, and vain,
	Fruit of the fear just passed, which shook
	The wretch who life abhorred, yet dreaded death!
	With which each neighbor held his breath,
	Silent, and cold, and wan,
	Affrighted sore to see
	The lightnings, clouds, and winds arrayed,
	To do us injury!
	
	O Nature courteous!
	These are thy boons to us,
	These the delights to mortals given!
	Escape from pain, best gift of heaven!
	Thou scatterest sorrows with a bounteous hand;
	Grief springs spontaneous;
	If, by some monstrous growth, miraculous,
	Pleasure at times is born of pain,
	It is a precious gain!
	O human race, unto the gods so dear!
	Too happy, in a respite brief
	From any grief!
	Then only blessed,
	When Death releases thee unto thy rest!



2. THE DREAM

	It was the morning; through the shutters closed,
	Along the balcony, the earliest rays
	Of sunlight my dark room were entering;
	When, at the time that sleep upon our eyes
	Its softest and most grateful shadows casts,
	There stood beside me, looking in my face,
	The image dear of her, who taught me first
	To love, then left me to lament her loss.
	To me she seemed not dead, but sad, with such
	A countenance as the unhappy wear.
	Her right hand near my head she sighing placed;
	“Dost thou still live,” she said to me, “and dost
	Thou still remember what we _were_ and are?”
	And I replied: “Whence comest thou, and how,
	Beloved and beautiful? Oh how, how I
	Have grieved, still grieve for thee! Nor did I think
	Thou e’er couldst know it more; and oh, that thought
	My sorrow rendered more disconsolate!
	But art thou now again to leave me?
	I fear so. Say, what hath befallen thee?
	Art thou the same? What preys upon thee thus?”
	“Oblivion weighs upon thy thoughts, and sleep
	Envelops them,” she answered; “I am dead,
	And many months have passed, since last we met.”
	What grief oppressed me, as these words I heard!
	And she continued: “In the flower of youth
	Cut off, when life is sweetest, and before
	The heart that lesson sad and sure hath learnt,
	The utter vanity of human hope!
	The sick man may e’en covet, as a boon,
	That which withdraws him from all suffering;
	But to the young, Death comes, disconsolate;
	And hard the fate of hope, that in the grave
	Is quenched! And yet, how vain that knowledge is,
	That Nature from the inexperienced hides!
	And a blind sorrow is to be preferred
	To wisdom premature!”--“Hush, hush!” I cried,
	“Unhappy one, and dear! My heart is crushed
	With these thy words! And art thou dead, indeed,
	O my beloved? and am I still alive?
	And was it, then, in heaven decreed, that this,
	Thy tender body the last damps of death
	Should feel, and my poor, wretched frame remain
	Unharmed? Oh, often, often as I think
	That thou no longer livest, and that I
	Shall never see thee on the earth again,
	Incredible it seems! Alas, alas!
	What _is_ this thing, that they call death? Oh, would
	That I, this day, the mystery could solve,
	And my defenceless head withdraw from Fate’s
	Relentless hate! I still am young, and still
	Feel all the blight and misery of age,
	Which I so dread; and distant far it seems;
	But, ah, how little different from age,
	The flower of my years!”--“We both were born,”
	She said, “to weep; unhappy were our lives,
	And heaven took pleasure in our sufferings.”
	“Oh if my eyes with tears,” I added, “then,
	My face with pallor veiled thou seest, for loss
	Of thee, and anguish weighing on my heart;
	Tell me, was any spark of pity or of love
	For the poor lover kindled in thy heart,
	While thou didst live? I, then, between my hope
	And my despair, passed weary nights and days;
	And now, my mind is with vain doubts oppressed.
	Oh if but once compassion smote thee for
	My darkened life, conceal it not from me,
	I pray thee; let the memory console me,
	Since of their future our young days were robbed!”
	And she: “Be comforted, unhappy one!
	I was not churlish of my pity whilst
	I lived, and am not now, myself so wretched!
	Oh, do not chide this most unhappy child!”
	“By all our sufferings, and by the love
	Which preys upon me,” I exclaimed, “and by
	Our youth, and by the hope that faded from
	Our lives, O let me, dearest, touch thy hand!”
	And sweetly, sadly, she extended it.
	And while I covered it with kisses, while
	With sorrow and with rapture quivering,
	I to my panting bosom fondly pressed it,
	With fervent passion glowed my face and breast,
	My trembling voice refused its utterance,
	And all things swam before my sight; when she,
	Her eyes fixed tenderly on mine, replied:
	“And dost thou, then, forget, dear friend, that I
	Am of my beauty utterly deprived?
	And vainly thou, unhappy one, dost yield
	To passion’s transports. Now, a last farewell!
	Our wretched minds, our feeble bodies, too,
	Eternally are parted. Thou to me
	No longer livest, nevermore shall live.
	Fate hath annulled the faith that thou hast sworn.”
	Then, in my anguish as I seemed to cry
	Aloud, convulsed, my eyes o’erflowing with
	The tears of utter, helpless misery,
	I started from my sleep. The image still
	Was seen, and in the sun’s uncertain light
	Above my couch she seemed to linger still.



3. THE EVENING OF THE HOLIDAY

	The night is mild and clear, and without wind, 
	And o’er the roofs, and o’er the gardens round 
	The moon shines soft, and from afar reveals 
	Each mountain-peak serene. O lady, mine, 
	Hushed now is every path, and few and dim 
	The lamps that glimmer through the balconies. 
	Thou sleepest! in thy quiet rooms, how light 
	And easy is thy sleep! No care thy heart 
	Consumes; and little dost thou know or think, 
	How deep a wound thou in my heart hast made. 
	Thou sleepest; I to yonder heaven turn, 
	That seems to greet me with a loving smile, 
	And to that Nature old, omnipotent, 
	That doomed me still to suffer. ‘I to thee 
	All hope deny,’ she said, ‘e’en hope; nor may 
	Those eyes of thine e’er shine, save through their tears.’ 
	
	This was a holiday; its pleasures o’er, 
	Thou seek’st repose; and happy in thy dreams 
	Recallest those whom thou hast pleased to-day, 
	And those who have pleased thee: not I, indeed,-- 
	I hoped it not,--unto thy thoughts occur. 
	Meanwhile, I ask, how much of life remains 
	To me; and on the earth I cast myself, 
	And cry, and groan. How wretched are my days, 
	And still so young! Hark, on the road I hear, 
	Not far away, the solitary song 
	Of workman, who returns at this late hour, 
	In merry mood, unto his humble home; 
	And in my heart a cruel pang I feel, 
	At thought, how all things earthly pass away, 
	And leave no trace behind. This festal day 
	Hath fled; a working-day now follows it, 
	And all, alike, are swept away by Time. 
	Where is the glory of the antique nations now? 
	Where now the fame of our great ancestors? 
	The empire vast of Rome, the clash of arms? 
	Now all is peace and silence, all the world 
	At rest; their very names are heard no more. 
	E’en from my earliest years, when we 
	Expect so eagerly a holiday, 
	The moment it was past, I sought my couch, 
	Wakeful and sad; and at the midnight hour, 
	When I the song heard of some passer-by, 
	That slowly in the distance died away, 
	The same deep anguish felt I in my heart.



4. FIRST LOVE

	Ah, well can I the day recall, when first
	The conflict fierce of love I felt, and said:
	If _this_ be love, how hard it is to bear!
	
	With eyes still fixed intent upon the ground,
	I saw but _her_, whose artless innocence,
	Triumphant took possession of this heart.
	
	Ah, Love, how badly hast thou governed me!
	Why should affection so sincere and pure,
	Bring with it such desire, such suffering?
	
	Why not serene, and full, and free from guile
	But sorrow-laden, and lamenting sore,
	Should joy so great into my heart descend?
	
	O tell me, tender heart, that sufferest so,
	Why with that thought such anguish should be blent,
	Compared with which, all other thoughts were naught?
	
	That thought, that ever present in the day,
	That in the night more vivid still appeared,
	When all things round in sweet sleep seemed to rest:
	
	Thou, restless, both with joy and misery
	Didst with thy constant throbbings weary so
	My breast, as panting in my bed I lay.
	
	And when worn out with grief and weariness,
	In sleep my eyes I closed, ah, no relief
	It gave, so broken and so feverish!
	
	How brightly from the depths of darkness, then,
	The lovely image rose, and my closed eyes,
	Beneath their lids, their gaze upon it fed!
	
	O what delicious impulses, diffused,
	My weary frame with sweet emotion filled!
	What myriad thoughts, unstable and confused,
	
	Were floating in my mind! As through the leaves
	Of some old grove, the west wind, wandering,
	A long, mysterious murmur leaves behind.
	
	And as I, silent, to their influence yield,
	What saidst thou, heart, when she departed, who
	Had caused thee all thy throbs, and suffering?
	
	No sooner had I felt within, the heat
	Of love’s first flame, than with it flew away
	The gentle breeze, that fanned it into life.
	
	Sleepless I lay, until the dawn of day;
	The steeds, that were to leave me desolate,
	Their hoofs were beating at my father’s gate.
	
	And I, in mute suspense, poor timid fool,
	With eye that vainly would the darkness pierce,
	And eager ear intent, lay, listening,
	
	That voice to hear, if, for the last time, I
	Might catch the accents from those lovely lips;
	The voice alone; all else forever lost!
	
	How many vulgar tones my doubtful ear
	Would smite, with deep disgust inspiring me,
	With doubt tormented, holding hard my breath!
	
	And when, at last, that voice into my heart
	Descended, passing sweet, and when the sound
	Of horses and of wheels had died away;
	
	In utter desolation, then, my head
	I in my pillow buried, closed my eyes,
	And pressed my hand against my heart, and sighed.
	
	Then, listlessly, my trembling knees across
	The silent chamber dragging, I exclaimed,
	“Nothing on earth can interest me more!”
	
	The bitter recollection cherishing
	Within my breast, to every voice my heart,
	To every face, insensible remained.
	
	Long I remained in hopeless sorrow drowned;
	As when the heavens far and wide their showers
	Incessant pour upon the fields around.
	
	Nor had I, Love, thy cruel power known,
	A boy of eighteen summers flown, until
	That day, when I thy bitter lesson learned;
	
	When I each pleasure held in scorn, nor cared
	The shining stars to see, or meadows green,
	Or felt the charm of holy morning light;
	
	The love of glory, too, no longer found
	An echo in my irresponsive breast,
	That, once, the love of beauty with it shared.
	
	My favorite studies I neglected quite;
	And those things vain appeared, compared with which,
	I used to think all other pleasures vain.
	
	Ah! how could I have changed so utterly?
	How could one passion all the rest destroy?
	Indeed, what helpless mortals are we all!
	
	My heart my only comfort was, and with
	That heart, in conference perpetual,
	A constant watch upon my grief to keep.
	
	My eye still sought the ground, or in itself
	Absorbed, shrank from encountering the glance
	Of lovely or unlovely countenance;
	
	The stainless image fearing to disturb,
	So faithfully reflected in my breast;
	As winds disturb the mirror of the lake.
	
	And that regret, that I could not enjoy
	Such happiness, which weighs upon the mind,
	And turns to poison pleasure that has passed,
	
	Did still its thorn within my bosom lodge,
	As I the past recalled; but shame, indeed,
	Left not its cruel sting within this heart.
	
	To heaven, to you, ye gentle souls, I swear,
	No base desire intruded on my thought;
	But with a pure and sacred flame I burned.
	
	That flame still lives, and that affection pure;
	Still in my thought that lovely image breathes,
	From which, save heavenly, I no other joy,
	
	Have ever known; my only comfort, now!



5. THE INFINITE

	This solitary hill has always been dear to me 
	And this hedge, which prevents me from seeing most of 
	The endless horizon. 
	But when I sit and gaze, I imagine, in my thoughts 
	Endless spaces beyond the hedge, 
	An all encompassing silence and a deeply profound quiet, 
	To the point that my heart is almost overwhelmed. 
	And when I hear the wind rustling through the trees 
	I compare its voice to the infinite silence. 
	And eternity occurs to me, and all the ages past, 
	And the present time, and its sound. 
	Amidst this immensity my thought drowns: 
	And to founder in this sea is sweet to me. 



6. THE LONELY LIFE

	The morning rain, when, from her coop released,
	The hen, exulting, flaps her wings, when from
	The balcony the husbandman looks forth,
	And when the rising sun his trembling rays
	Darts through the falling drops, against my roof
	And windows gently beating, wakens me.
	I rise, and grateful, bless the flying clouds,
	The cheerful twitter of the early birds,
	The smiling fields, and the refreshing air.
	For I of you, unhappy city walls,
	Enough have seen and known; where hatred still
	Companion is to grief; and grieving still
	I live, and so shall die, and that, how soon!
	But here some pity Nature shows, though small,
	Once in this spot to me so courteous!
	Thou, too, O Nature, turn’st away thy gaze
	From misery; thou, too, thy sympathy
	Withholding from the suffering and the sad,
	Dost homage pay to royal happiness.
	No friend in heaven, on earth, the wretched hath,
	No refuge, save his trusty dagger’s edge.
	Sometimes I sit in perfect solitude,
	Upon a hill, that overlooks a lake,
	That is encircled quite with silent trees.
	There, when the sun his mid-day course hath reached,
	His tranquil face he in a mirror sees:
	Nor grass nor leaf is shaken by the wind;
	There is no ripple on the wave, no chirp
	Of cricket, rustling wing of bird in bush,
	Nor hum of butterfly; no motion, voice,
	Or far or near, is either seen or heard.
	Its shores are locked in quiet most profound;
	So that myself, the world I quite forget,
	As motionless I sit; my limbs appear
	To lie dissolved, of breath and sense deprived;
	As if, in immemorial rest, they seemed
	Confounded with the silent scene around.
	
	O love, O love, long since, thou from this breast
	Hast flown, that was so warm, so ardent, once.
	Misfortune in her cold and cruel grasp
	Has held it fast, and it to ice has turned,
	E’en in the flower of my youth. The time
	I well recall, when thou this heart didst fill;
	That sweet, irrevocable time it was,
	When this unhappy scene of life unto
	The ardent gaze of youth reveals itself,
	Expands, and wears the smile of Paradise.
	How throbs the heart within the boyish breast,
	By virgin hope and fond desire impelled!
	The wretched dupe for life’s hard work prepares,
	As if it were a dance, or merry game.
	But when _I_ first, O love, thy presence felt,
	Misfortune had already crushed my life,
	And these poor eyes with constant tears were filled.
	Yet if, at times, upon the sun-lit slopes,
	At silent dawn, or when, in broad noonday,
	The roofs and hills and fields are shining bright,
	I of some lonely maiden meet the gaze;
	Or when, in silence of the summer night,
	My wandering steps arresting, I before
	The houses of the village pause, to gaze
	Upon the lonely scene, and hear the voice,
	So clear and cheerful, of the maiden, who,
	Her ditty chanting, in her quiet room,
	Her daily task protracts into the night,
	Ah, then this stony heart will throb once more;
	But soon, alas, its lethargy returns,
	For all things sweet are strangers to this breast!
	
	Belovèd moon, beneath whose tranquil rays
	The hares dance in the groves, and at the dawn
	The huntsman, vexed at heart, beholds the tracks
	Confused and intricate, that from their forms
	His steps mislead; hail, thou benignant Queen
	Of Night! How unpropitious fall thy rays,
	Among the cliffs and thickets, or within
	Deserted buildings, on the gleaming steel
	Of robber pale, who with attentive ear
	Unto the distant noise of horses and
	Of wheels, is listening, or the tramp of feet
	Upon the silent road; then, suddenly,
	With sound of arms, and hoarse, harsh voice, and look
	Of death, the traveller’s heart doth chill,
	Whom he half-dead, and naked, shortly leaves
	Among the rocks. How unpropitious, too,
	Is thy bright light along the city streets,
	Unto the worthless paramour, who picks
	His way, close to the walls, in anxious search
	Of friendly shade, and halts, and dreads the sight
	Of blazing lamps, and open balconies.
	To evil spirits unpropitious still,
	To _me_ thy face will ever seem benign,
	Along these heights, where nought save smiling hills,
	And spacious fields, thou offer’st to my view.
	And yet it was my wayward custom once,
	Though I was innocent, thy gracious ray
	To chide, amid the haunts of men, whene’er
	It would my face to them betray, and when
	It would their faces unto me reveal.
	Now will I, grateful, sing its constant praise,
	When I behold thee, sailing through the clouds,
	Or when, mild sovereign of the realms of air,
	Thou lookest down on this, our vale of tears.
	Me wilt thou oft behold, mute wanderer
	Among the groves, along the verdant banks,
	Or seated on the grass, content enough,
	If heart and breath are left me, for a sigh!



7. THE LONELY SPARROW

	Thou from the top of yonder antique tower,
	O lonely sparrow, wandering, hast gone,
	Thy song repeating till the day is done,
	And through this valley strays the harmony.
	How Spring rejoices in the fields around,
	And fills the air with light,
	So that the heart is melted at the sight!
	Hark to the bleating flocks, the lowing herds!
	In sweet content, the other birds
	Through the free sky in emulous circles wheel,
	In pure enjoyment of their happy time:
	Thou, pensive, gazest on the scene apart,
	Nor wilt thou join them in the merry round;
	Shy playmate, thou for mirth hast little heart;
	And with thy plaintive music, dost consume
	Both of the year, and of thy life, the bloom.
	
	Alas, how much my ways
	Resemble thine! The laughter and the sport,
	That fill with glee our youthful days,
	And thee, O love, who art youth’s brother still,
	Too oft the bitter sigh of later years,
	I care not for; I know not why,
	But from them ever distant fly:
	Here in my native place,
	As if of alien race,
	My spring of life I like a hermit pass.
	This day, that to the evening now gives way,
	Is in our town an ancient holiday.
	Hark, through the air, that voice of festal bell,
	While rustic guns in frequent thunders sound,
	Reverberated from the hills around.
	In festal robes arrayed,
	The neighboring youth,
	Their houses leaving, o’er the roads are spread;
	They pleasant looks exchange, and in their hearts
	Rejoice. I, lonely, in this distant spot,
	Along the country wandering,
	Postpone all pleasure and delight
	To some more genial time: meanwhile,
	As through the sunny air around I gaze,
	My brow is smitten by his rays,
	As after such a day serene,
	Dropping behind yon distant hills,
	He vanishes, and seems to say,
	That thus all happy youth must pass away.
	
	Thou, lonely little bird, when thou
	Hast reached the evening of the days
	Thy stars assign to thee,
	Wilt surely not regret thy ways;
	For all thy wishes are
	Obedient to Nature’s law. But ah!
	If I, in spite of all my prayers,
	Am doomed the hateful threshold of old age
	To cross, when these dull eyes will give
	No response to another’s heart,
	The world to them a void will be,
	Each day become more full of misery,
	How then, will this, my wish appear
	In those dark hours, that dungeon drear?
	My blighted youth, my sore distress,
	Alas, will _then_ seem happiness!



8. NIGHT SONG OF A WANDERING SHEPHERD IN ASIA

	What doest thou in heaven, O moon?
	Say, silent moon, what doest thou?
	Thou risest in the evening; thoughtfully
	Thou wanderest o’er the plain,
	Then sinkest to thy rest again.
	And art thou never satisfied
	With going o’er and o’er the selfsame ways?
	Art never wearied? Dost thou still
	Upon these valleys love to gaze?
	How much thy life is like
	The shepherd’s life, forlorn!
	He rises in the early dawn,
	He moves his flock along the plain;
	The selfsame flocks, and streams, and herbs
	He sees again;
	Then drops to rest, the day’s work o’er;
	And hopes for nothing more.
	Tell me, O moon, what signifies his life
	To him, thy life to thee? Say, whither tend
	My weary, short-lived pilgrimage,
	Thy course, that knows no end?
	
	And old man, gray, infirm,
	Half-clad, and barefoot, he,
	Beneath his burden bending wearily,
	O’er mountain and o’er vale,
	Sharp rocks, and briars, and burning sand,
	In wind, and storm, alike in sultry heat
	And in the winter’s cold,
	His constant course doth hold;
	On, on, he, panting, goes,
	Nor pause, nor rest he knows;
	Through rushing torrents, over watery wastes;
	He falls, gets up again,
	And ever more and more he hastes,
	Torn, bleeding, and arrives at last
	Where ends the path,
	Where all his troubles end;
	A vast abyss and horrible,
	Where plunging headlong, he forgets them all.
	Such scene of suffering, and of strife,
	O moon, is this our mortal life.
	In travail man is born;
	His birth too oft the cause of death,
	And with his earliest breath
	He pain and torment feels: e’en from the first,
	His parents fondly strive
	To comfort him in his distress;
	And if he lives and grows,
	They struggle hard, as best they may,
	With pleasant words and deeds to cheer him up,
	And seek with kindly care,
	To strengthen him his cruel lot to bear.
	This is the best that they can do
	For the poor child, however fond and true.
	But wherefore give him life?
	Why bring him up at all,
	If _this_ be all?
	If life is nought but pain and care,
	Why, why should we the burden bear?
	O spotless moon, such _is_
	Our mortal life, indeed;
	But thou immortal art,
	Nor wilt, perhaps, unto my words give heed.
	
	Yet thou, eternal, lonely wanderer,
	Who, thoughtful, lookest on this earthly scene,
	Must surely understand
	What all our sighs and sufferings mean;
	What means this death,
	This color from our cheeks that fades,
	This passing from the earth, and losing sight
	Of every dear, familiar scene.
	Well must thou comprehend
	The reason of these things; must see
	The good the morning and the evening bring:
	Thou knowest, thou, what love it is
	That brings sweet smiles unto the face of spring;
	The meaning of the Summer’s glow,
	And of the Winter’s frost and snow,
	And of the silent, endless flight of Time.
	A thousand things to thee their secrets yield,
	That from the simple shepherd are concealed.
	Oft as I gaze at thee,
	In silence resting o’er the desert plain,
	Which in the distance borders on the sky,
	Or following me, as I, by slow degrees,
	My flocks before me drive;
	And when I gaze upon the stars at night,
	In thought I ask myself,
	“Why all these torches bright?
	What mean these depths of air,
	This vast, this silent sky,
	This nightly solitude? And what am I?”
	Thus to myself I talk; and of this grand,
	Magnificent expanse,
	And its untold inhabitants,
	And all this mighty motion, and this stir
	Of things above, and things below,
	No rest that ever know,
	But as they still revolve, must still return
	Unto the place from which they came,--
	Of this, alas, I find nor end nor aim!
	But thou, immortal, surely knowest all.
	_This_ I well know, and feel;
	From these eternal rounds,
	And from my being frail,
	Others, perchance, may pleasure, profit gain;
	To _me_ life is but pain.
	
	My flock, now resting there, how happy thou,
	That knowest not, I think, thy misery!
	O how I envy thee!
	Not only that from suffering
	Thou seemingly art free;
	That every trouble, every loss,
	Each sudden fear, thou canst so soon forget;
	But more because thou sufferest
	No weariness of mind.
	When in the shade, upon the grass reclined,
	Thou seemest happy and content,
	And great part of the year by thee
	In sweet release from care is spent.
	But when _I_ sit upon the grass
	And in the friendly shade, upon my mind
	A weight I feel, a sense of weariness,
	That, as I sit, doth still increase
	And rob me of all rest and peace.
	And yet I wish for nought,
	And have, till now, no reason to complain.
	What joy, how much I cannot say;
	But thou _some_ pleasure dost obtain.
	My joys are few enough;
	But not for that do I lament.
	Ah, couldst thou speak, I would inquire:
	Tell me, dear flock, the reason why
	Each weary breast can rest at ease,
	While all things round him seem to please;
	And yet, if _I_ lie down to rest,
	I am by anxious thoughts oppressed?
	
	Perhaps, if I had wings
	Above the clouds to fly,
	And could the stars all number, one by one,
	Or like the lightning leap from rock to rock,
	I might be happier, my dear flock,
	I might be happier, gentle moon!
	Perhaps my thought still wanders from the truth,
	When I at others’ fortunes look:
	Perhaps in every state beneath the sun,
	Or high, or low, in cradle or in stall,
	The day of birth is fatal to us all.



9. TO HIS LADY

	Beloved beauty who inspires
	love in me from afar, your face obscured   
	except when your celestial image   
	stirs my heart in sleep, or in the fields
	where light and nature’s laughter shine more lovely--
	was it maybe you who blessed
	the innocent age called golden,
	and do you now, blithe spirit,   
	fly among men? Or does that miser fate
	who hides you from us save you for the future?
	
	No hope of seeing you alive   
	remains for me now,
	except when, naked and alone,
	my soul will go down a new street   
	to its unknown home. Already at the dawn
	of my dark, uncertain day
	I imagined you a fellow traveler
	on this arid ground. But there’s no thing
	that resembles you on earth. And if someone
	had a face like yours, in act and word she’d be,
	though something like you, far less beautiful.
	
	In spite of all the suffering
	fate decreed for human time,
	if there were anyone on earth
	who truly loved you as my thought depicts you,
	this life for him would be a blessing.
	And I see clearly how your love
	would lead me still to strive for praise and virtue,
	as I used to in my early years.
	Though heaven gave no comfort for our troubles,
	yet with you mortal life would be
	like what in heaven leads to divinity.
	
	In the valleys, where the song
	of the weary farmer sounds,
	and when I sit and mourn   
	the illusions of youth fading,
	and on the hills where I recall   
	and grieve for my lost desires   
	and my life’s lost hope, I think of you
	and start to shake. If only I, in this   
	sad age and unhealthy atmosphere,
	could keep hold of your noble look; for since the real thing’s
	missing I must make do with the image.
	
	Whether you are the only one   
	of the eternal ideas eternal wisdom
	refuses to see arrayed in sensible form
	to know the pains of mortal life
	in transitory spoils,
	or if in the supernal spheres another earth
	from among unnumbered worlds receives you
	and a near star lovelier than the Sun
	warms you and you breathe benigner ether,
	from here, where years are both ill-starred and brief,
	accept this hymn from your unnoticed lover.



10. TO SYLVIA

	O Sylvia, dost thou remember still 
	That period of thy mortal life, 
	When beauty so bewildering 
	Shone in thy laughing, glancing eyes, 
	As thou, so merry, yet so wise, 
	Youth’s threshold then wast entering? 
	
	How did the quiet rooms, 
	And all the paths around, 
	With thy perpetual song resound, 
	As thou didst sit, on woman’s work intent, 
	Abundantly content 
	With the vague future, floating on thy mind! 
	Thy custom thus to spend the day 
	In that sweet time of youth and May! 
	
	How could I, then, at times, 
	In those fair days of youth, 
	The only happy days I ever knew, 
	My hard tasks dropping, or my careless rhymes, 
	My station take, on father’s balcony, 
	And listen to thy voice’s melody, 
	And watch thy hands, as they would deftly fly 
	O’er thy embroidery! 
	I gazed upon the heaven serene, 
	The sun-lit paths, the orchards green, 
	The distant mountain here, 
	And there, the far-off sea. 
	Ah, mortal tongue cannot express 
	What then I felt of happiness! 
	
	What gentle thoughts, what hopes divine, 
	What loving hearts, O Sylvia mine! 
	In what bright colors then portrayed 
	Were human life and fate! 
	Oh, when I think of such fond hopes betrayed, 
	A feeling seizes me 
	Of bitterness and misery, 
	And tenfold is my grief renewed! 
	O Nature, why this treachery? 
	Why thus, with broken promises, 
	Thy children’s hearts delude? 
	
	Thou, ere the grass was touched with winter’s frost, 
	By fell disease attacked and overcome, 
	O tender plant, didst die! 
	The flower of thy days thou ne’er didst see; 
	Nor did thy soft heart move 
	Now of thy raven locks the tender praise, 
	Now of thy eyes, so loving and so shy; 
	Nor with thee, on the holidays, 
	Did thy companions talk of love. 
	
	So perished, too, erelong, 
	My own sweet hope; 
	So too, unto my years 
	Did Fate their youth deny. 
	Alas, alas the day, 
	Lamented hope, companion dear, 
	How hast thou passed away! 
	Is _this_ that world? These the delights, 
	The love, the labors, the events, 
	Of which we once so fondly spoke? 
	And must _all_ mortals wear this weary yoke? 
	Ah, when the truth appeared, 
	It better seemed to die! 
	Cold death, the barren tomb, didst thou prefer 
	To harsh reality.



11. THE VILLAGE SATURDAY NIGHT

	The damsel from the field returns, 
	The sun is sinking in the west; 
	Her bundle on her head she sets, 
	And in her hand she bears 
	A bunch of roses and of violets. 
	To-morrow is a holiday, 
	And she, as usual, must them wear 
	Upon her bodice, in her hair. 
	The old crone sits among her mates, 
	Upon the stairs, and spins; 
	And, looking at the fading light, 
	Of good old-fashioned times she prates, 
	When she, too, dressed for holidays, 
	And with light heart, and limb as light, 
	Would dance at night 
	With the companions of her merry days. 
	The twilight shades around us close, 
	The sky to deepest blue is turned; 
	From hills and roofs the shadows fall, 
	And the new moon her face of silver shows. 
	And now the cheerful bell 
	Proclaims the coming festival. 
	By its familiar voice 
	How every heart is cheered! 
	The children all in troops, 
	Around the little square 
	Go, leaping here and there, 
	And make a joyful sound. 
	Meanwhile the ploughman, whistling, returns 
	Unto his humble nest, 
	And thinks with pleasure of his day of rest. 
	
	Then, when all other lights are out, 
	And all is silent round, 
	The hammer’s stroke we hear, 
	We hear the saw of carpenter, 
	Who with closed doors his vigil keeps, 
	Toils o’er his lamp and strives so hard, 
	His work to finish ere the dawn appear. 
	
	The dearest day of all the week 
	Is this, of hope and joy so full; 
	To-morrow, sad and dull, 
	The hours will bring, for each must in his thought 
	His customary task-work seek. 
	
	Thou little, sportive boy, 
	This blooming age of thine 
	Is like to-day, so full of joy; 
	And is the day, indeed, 
	That must the sabbath of thy life precede. 
	
	Enjoy, it, then, my darling child, 
	Nor speed the flying hours! 
	I say to thee no more: 
	Alas, in this sad world of ours, 
	How far exceeds the holiday, 
	The day that goes before!
