*** Mikhail Lermontov (1814 - 1841)


1. ALONE I SET OUT ON THE ROAD

	Alone I set out on the road;
	The flinty path is sparkling in the mist;
	The night is still. The desert harks to God,
	And star with star converses.

	The vault is overwhelmed with solemn wonder
	The earth in cobalt aura sleeps . . .
	Why do I feel so pained and troubled?
	What do I harbor: hope, regrets?

	I see no hope in years to come,
	Have no regrets for things gone by.
	All that I seek is peace and freedom!
	To lose myself and sleep!

	But not the frozen slumber of the grave . . .
	I’d like eternal sleep to leave
	My life force dozing in my breast
	Gently with my breath to rise and fall;

	By night and day, my hearing would be soothed
	By voices sweet, singing to me of love.
	And over me, forever green,
	A dark oak tree would bend and rustle.



2. THE ANGEL

	At midnight an angel was crossing the sky,
	And quietly he sang;
	The moon and the stars and the concourse of clouds
	Paid heed to his heavenly song.

	He sang of the bliss of the innocent souls
	In heavenly gardens above;
	Of almighty God he sang out, and his praise
	Was pure and sincere.

	He bore in his arms a young soul
	To our valley of sorrow and tears;
	The young soul remembered the heavenly song
	So vivid and yet without words.

	And long did it struggle on earth,
	With wondrous desire imbued;
	But none of the tedious songs of our earth
	Could rival celestial song.



3. BORED AND SAD

	And boring and sad, and none to be given a hand
	When a minute of suffering comes
	Desires! . . . what’s the use of desiring vainly without a stand? . . .
	While the years slip by--the best ones!

	To love . . . whom again? . . . for a while--it is worth no pains,
	But to love for eternity no one could.
	Shall you look in yourself?--of the past no vestige remains:
	There all has been nothing, every joy, every wound . . .

	What passions?--After all sooner or later their pleasant disease
	Shall vanish, if you reason it out at rest
	And life, if you look it all over with icy attention--it is
	Such an empty and foolish jest . . .



4. MEDITATION

	With sadness I survey our present generation!
	Their future seems so empty, dark, and cold,
	Weighed down beneath a load of knowing hesitation,
	In idleness stagnating, growing old.
	We have received, when barely finished weaning,
	The errors of our sires, their tardiness of mind,
	And life oppresses us, a flat road without meaning,
	An alien feast where we have dined.
	Toward good and evil shamefully uncaring
	We wilt without a fight when starting on life’s race;
	When danger threatens us--ignoble want of daring,
	Before those set on high--despicable and base.
	A wizened fruit grown ripe before its hour,
	No pleasure to the eye and no delight to taste,
	An orphan stranger there, he hangs beside the flower--
	The time of its full bloom is his to fall and waste.

	For we have dried our brains with fruitless speculations,
	Withholding enviously from friends and those about
	The ringing voice of lofty aspirations
	And noble passions, undermined by doubt.
	Our lips have barely brushed the cup of delectation,
	But youthful strength we did not thus retain;
	From every joy we found, in fear of saturation,
	We took the best and never came again.
	The dreams of poesy, pure art, and its creation
	With its sweet ecstasy our senses never move;
	We greedily retain the remnants of sensation--
	Dug deep and miserly, a useless treasure trove.
	And we both love and hate by chance, without conviction,
	We make no sacrifice for malice, or for good,
	There reigns within our souls a kind of chill constriction,
	Whenever the flame ignites the blood.
	The pastimes of our sires we think a boring story,
	Their guileless, boyish dissipations unrefined;
	We hurry to our graves, unhappy, without glory,
	With one last sneering glance behind.

	A gloomy throng are we, condemned and soon forgotten,
	We pass across the world in silence, without trace,
	No thoughts that might bear fruit for ages unbegotten,
	No work of genius to inspire the race.
	Our ashes will receive a harsh and just portrayal,
	Posterity will sneer with skilled and scornful verse,
	A curse of bitterness from sons at their betrayal
	By their own father’s spendthrift purse.



5. SAIL

	A lonely sail is flashing white
	Amdist the blue mist of the sea!
	What does it seek in foreign lands?
	What did it leave behind at home?

	Waves heave, wind whistles,
	The mast, it bends and creaks . . .
	Alas, it seeks not happiness
	Nor happiness does it escape!

	Below, a current azure bright,
	Above, a golden ray of sun . . .
	Rebellious, it seeks out a storm
	As if in storms it could find peace!
