*** Philip Levine (1928 - 2015)


1. AN ABANDONED FACTORY, DETROIT

	The gates are chained, the barbed-wire fencing stands,
	An iron authority against the snow,
	And this grey monument to common sense
	Resists the weather. Fears of idle hands,
	Of protest, men in league, and of the slow
	Corrosion of their minds, still charge this fence.

	Beyond, through broken windows one can see
	Where the great presses paused between their strokes
	And thus remain, in air suspended, caught
	In the sure margin of eternity.
	The cast-iron wheels have stopped; one counts the spokes
	Which movement blurred, the struts inertia fought,

	And estimates the loss of human power,
	Experienced and slow, the loss of years,
	The gradual decay of dignity.
	Men lived within these foundries, hour by hour;
	Nothing they forged outlived the rusted gears
	Which might have served to grind their eulogy.



2. BELLE ISLE

	We stripped in the first warm spring night
	and ran down into the Detroit River
	to baptize ourselves in the brine
	of car parts, dead fish, stolen bicycles,
	melted snow. I remember going under
	hand in hand with a Polish highschool girl
	I’d never seen before, and the cries
	our breath made caught at the same time
	on the cold, and rising through the layers
	of darkness into the final moonless atmosphere
	that was this world, the girl breaking
	the surface after me and swimming out
	on the starless waters towards the lights
	of Jefferson Ave. and the stacks
	of the old stove factory unwinking.
	Turning at last to see no island at all
	but a perfect calm dark as far
	as there was sight, and then a light
	and another riding low out ahead
	to bring us home, ore boats maybe, or smokers
	walking alone. Back panting
	to the gray coarse beach we didn’t dare
	fall on, the damp piles of clothes,
	and dressing side by side in silence
	to go back where we came from.



3. BITTERNESS

	Here in February, the fine
	dark branches of the almond
	begin to sprout tiny clusters
	of leaves, sticky to the touch.
	Not far off, about the length
	of my morning shadow, the grass
	is littered with the petals
	of the plum that less than
	a week ago blazed, a living
	candle in the hand of earth.
	I was living far off two years
	ago, fifteen floors above
	119th Street when I heard
	a love of my young manhood
	had died mysteriously in
	a public ward. I did not
	go out into the streets to
	walk among the cold, sullen
	poor of Harlem, I did not
	turn toward the filthy window
	to question a distant pale sky.
	I did not do anything.
	The grass is coming back, some
	patches already bright, though
	at this hour still silvered
	with dew. By noon I can stand
	sweating in the free air, spading
	the difficult clay for the bare
	roots of a pear or apple that
	will give flower and fruit longer
	than I care to think about.



4. DURING THE WAR

	When my brother came home from war
	he carried his left arm in a black sling
	but assured us most of it was still there.
	Spring was late, the trees forgot to leaf out.

	I stood in a long line waiting for bread.
	The woman behind me said it was shameless,
	someone as strong as I still home, still intact
	while her Michael was burning to death.

	Yes, she could feel the fire, could smell
	his pain all the way from Tarawa--
	or was it Midway?--and he so young,
	younger than I, who was only fourteen,

	taller, more handsome in his white uniform
	turning slowly gray the way unprimed wood
	grays slowly in the grate when the flames
	sputter and die. “I think I’m going mad,”

	she said when I turned to face her. She placed
	both hands on my shoulders, kissed each eyelid,
	hugged me to her breasts and whispered wetly
	in my bad ear words I’d never heard before.

	When I got home my brother ate the bread
	carefully one slice at a time until
	nothing was left but a blank plate. “Did you see her,”
	he asked, “the woman in hell, Michael’s wife?”

	That afternoon I walked the crowded streets
	looking for something I couldn’t name,
	something familiar, a face or a voice or less,
	but not these shards of ash that fell from heaven.



5. AN ENDING

	Early March.
	The cold beach deserted. My kids
	home in a bare house, bundled up
	and listening to rock music
	pirated from England. My wife
	waiting for me in a bar, alone
	for an hour over her sherry, and none
	of us knows why I have to pace
	back and forth on this flat
	and birdless stretch of gleaming sand
	while the violent air shouts
	out its rags of speech. I recall
	the calm warm sea of Florida
	30 years ago, and my brother
	and I staring out in the hope
	that someone known and loved
	would return out of air and water
	and no more, a miracle a kid
	could half-believe, could see
	as something everyday and possible.
	Later I slept alone and dreamed
	of the home I never had and wakened
	in the dark. A silver light sprayed
	across the bed, and the little
	rented room ticked toward dawn.
	I did not rise. I did not go
	to the window and address
	the moon. I did not cry
	or cry out against the hour
	or the loneliness that still
	was mine, for I had grown
	into the man I am, and I
	knew better. A sudden voice
	calls out my name or a name
	I think is mine. I turn.
	The waves have darkened; the sky’s
	descending all around me. I read
	once that the sea would come
	to be the color of heaven.
	They would be two seas tied
	together, and between the two
	a third, the sea of my own heart.
	I read and believed nothing.
	This little beach at the end
	of the world is anywhere, and I
	stand in a stillness that will last
	forever or until the first light
	breaks beyond these waters. Don’t
	be scared, the book said, don’t flee
	as wave after wave the breakers rise
	in darkness toward their ghostly crests,
	for he has set a limit to the sea
	and he is at your side. The sea
	and I breathe in and out as one.
	Maybe this is done at last
	or for now, this search for what
	is never here. Maybe all that
	ancient namesake sang is true.
	The voice I hear now is
	my own night voice, going out
	and coming back in an old chant
	that calms me, that calms
	--for all I know--the waves
	still lost out there.



6. THE GARDEN

	Wherever she turns her garden
	is alive and growing. The thin
	spears of wild asparagus, shaft
	of tulip and flag, green stain
	of berry buds along the vines,
	even in the eaten leaf of
	pepper plants and clipped stalk
	of snap bean. Mid-afternoon
	and already the grass is dry
	under the low sun. Bluejay
	and dark capped juncos hidden
	in dense foliage waiting
	the sun’s early fall, when she
	returns alone to hear them
	call and call back, and finally
	in the long shadows settle
	down to rest and to silence
	in the sudden rising chill.



7. SUMMER

	At Ox Bow beach, the August sun a rake
	That ground the skull. Fouled in the mud and reeds
	I dug oars for the center of the lake,
	Whipping away the strangling spawn of weeds.
	I found a ten foot hole and dove to where
	The squashed-in beer cans played with fire. The sun
	Was hunting even here. Heavy for air,
	I saw the trumpet yellow lily run
	Between the junk and rocks, too soft for hands.
	Surfaced. The old man in the prow awake.
	Beneath his parasol he growled commands
	And damned me and that hot and rotten lake.

	Toward dusk, out from the gray and falling dock
	I cast without a hook, scribbling the scum
	That jelled above my line. As mute as rock
	The sky was closing round the reel’s thin scream.
	Behind the cottage back and forth he swung
	As back and forth I pushed the infant’s swing
	Hung many years ago with his own care
	From what was now an old and broken oak
	Back and then forth. I thought the tree would tear.
	It moaned so loud that even he awoke.

	Later beneath a bare electric light
	We were contenders circled by defeat--
	With beer and rummy quarreling toward the night.
	In order not to win I had to cheat
	And still I won and it was he who paid,
	Fingering through the wallet stuffed and frayed
	With trust, to name and separate the bills
	And slap them on the table with a curse
	For all they cost. After the yellow pills
	The red--then sleep, a more than patient nurse.

	And it was I who couldn’t sleep, who heard
	The sound of something sucking up the lake,
	A human laugh that couldn’t be a bird
	But was, and had to see if I could wake
	Him from his sleep and did and lost my head
	From fear of what he nuzzled toward in bed.
	I could have pushed the rowboat from the dock
	And pulled away and left him there awake.
	I stayed, though not because I had some share
	In what I knew would come. Out on the lake
	Whatever had been stirring settled back
	And waited for the sun to fix its stare.



8. THEY FEED THEY LION

	Out of burlap sacks, out of bearing butter,
	Out of black bean and wet slate bread,
	Out of the acids of rage, the candor of tar,
	Out of creosote, gasoline, drive shafts, wooden dollies,
	They Lion grow.
	Out of the gray hills
	Of industrial barns, out of rain, out of bus ride,
	West Virginia to Kiss My Ass, out of buried aunties,
	Mothers hardening like pounded stumps, out of stumps,
	Out of the bones’ need to sharpen and the muscles’ to stretch,
	They Lion grow.
	Earth is eating trees, fence posts,
	Gutted cars, earth is calling in her little ones,
	“Come home, Come home!” From pig balls,
	From the ferocity of pig driven to holiness,
	From the furred ear and the full jowl come
	The repose of the hung belly, from the purpose
	They Lion grow.
	From the sweet glues of the trotters
	Come the sweet kinks of the fist, from the full flower
	Of the hams the thorax of caves,
	From “Bow Down” come “Rise Up,”
	Come they Lion from the reeds of shovels,
	The grained arm that pulls the hands,
	They Lion grow.
	From my five arms and all my hands,
	From all my white sins forgiven, they feed,
	From my car passing under the stars,
	They Lion, from my children inherit,
	From the oak turned to a wall, they Lion,
	From they sack and they belly opened
	And all that was hidden burning on the oil-stained earth
	They feed they Lion and he comes.



9. WHAT WORK IS

	We stand in the rain in a long line
	waiting at Ford Highland Park. For work.
	You know what work is--if you’re
	old enough to read this you know what
	work is, although you may not do it.
	Forget you. This is about waiting,
	shifting from one foot to another.
	Feeling the light rain falling like mist
	into your hair, blurring your vision
	until you think you see your own brother
	ahead of you, maybe ten places.
	You rub your glasses with your fingers,
	and of course it’s someone else’s brother,
	narrower across the shoulders than
	yours but with the same sad slouch, the grin
	that does not hide the stubbornness,
	the sad refusal to give in to
	rain, to the hours of wasted waiting,
	to the knowledge that somewhere ahead
	a man is waiting who will say, “No,
	we’re not hiring today,” for any
	reason he wants. You love your brother,
	now suddenly you can hardly stand
	the love flooding you for your brother,
	who’s not beside you or behind or
	ahead because he’s home trying to
	sleep off a miserable night shift
	at Cadillac so he can get up
	before noon to study his German.
	Works eight hours a night so he can sing
	Wagner, the opera you hate most,
	the worst music ever invented.
	How long has it been since you told him
	you loved him, held his wide shoulders,
	opened your eyes wide and said those words,
	and maybe kissed his cheek? You’ve never
	done something so simple, so obvious,
	not because you’re too young or too dumb,
	not because you’re jealous or even mean
	or incapable of crying in
	the presence of another man, no,
	just because you don’t know what work is.
