*** C. S. Lewis (1898 - 1963)


1. AFTER PRAYERS

	Arise my body, my small body, we have striven
	Enough, and He is merciful; we are forgiven.
	Arise small body, puppet-like and pale, and go,
	White as the bed-clothes into bed, and cold as snow,
	Undress with small, cold fingers and put out the light,
	And be alone, hush’d mortal, in the sacred night,
	--A meadow whipt flat with the rain, a cup
	Emptied and clean, a garment washed and folded up,
	Faded in colour, thinned almost to raggedness
	By dirt and by the washing of that dirtiness.
	Be not too quickly warm again. Lie cold; consent
	To weariness’ and pardon’s watery element.
	Drink up the bitter water, breathe the chilly death;
	Soon enough comes the riot of our blood and breath.


2. ALEXANDRINES

	There is a house that most of all on earth I hate.
	Though I have passed through many sorrows and have been
	In bloody fields, sad seas, and countries desolate,
	Yet most I fear that empty house where the grasses green
	Grow in the silent court the gaping flags between,
	And down the moss-grown paths and terrace no man treads
	Where the old, old weeds rise deep on the waste garden beds.
	Like eyes of one long dead the empty windows stare
	And I fear to cross the garden, I fear to linger there,
	For in that house I know a little, silent room
	Where Someone’s always waiting, waiting in the gloom
	To draw me with an evil eye, and hold me fast--
	Yet thither doom will drive me and He will win at last.


3. APOLOGY

	If men should ask, Despoina, why I tell
	Of nothing glad nor noble in my verse
	To lighten hearts beneath this present curse
	And build a heaven of dreams in real hell,
	Go you to them and speak among them thus:
	“There were no greater grief than to recall,
	Down in the rotting grave where the lithe worms crawl,
	Green fields above that smiled so sweet to us.”
	Is it good to tell old tales of Troynovant
	Or praises of dead heroes, tried and sage,
	Or sing the queens of unforgotten age,
	Brynhild and Maeve and virgin Bradamant?
	How should I sing of them? Can it be good
	To think of glory now, when all is done,
	And all our labour underneath the sun
	Has brought us this-and not the thing we would?
	All these were rosy visions of the night,
	The loveliness and wisdom feigned of old.
	But now we wake. The East is pale and cold,
	No hope is in the dawn, and no delight.


4. AS THE RUIN FALLS

	All this is flashy rhetoric about loving you.
	I never had a selfless thought since I was born.
	I am mercenary and self-seeking through and through:
	I want God, you, all friends, merely to serve my turn.
	
	Peace, re-assurance, pleasure, are the goals I seek,
	I cannot crawl one inch outside my proper skin:
	I talk of love—a scholar’s parrot may talk Greek—
	But, self-imprisoned, always end where I begin.
	
	Only that now you have taught me (but how late) my lack.
	I see the chasm. And everything you are was making
	My heart into a bridge by which I might get back
	From exile, and grow man. And now the bridge is breaking.
	
	For this I bless you as the ruin falls. The pains
	You give me are more precious than all other gains.


5. THE ASS

	I woke and rose and slipt away
	To the heathery hills in the morning grey.
	In a field where the dew lay cold and deep
	I met an ass, new-roused from sleep.
	I stroked his nose and I tickled his ears,
	And spoke soft words to quiet his fears.
	His eyes stared into the eyes of me
	And he kissed my hands of his courtesy.
	“O big, brown brother out of the waste,
	How do thistles for breakfast taste?
	“And do you rejoice in the dawn divine
	With a heart that is glad no less than mine?
	“For, brother, the depth of your gentle eyes
	Is strange and mystic as the skies:
	“What are the thoughts that grope behind,
	Down in the mist of a donkey mind?
	“Can it be true, as the wise men tell,
	That you are a mask of God as well,
	“And, as in us, so in you no less
	Speaks the eternal Loveliness,
	“And words of the lips that all things know
	Among the thoughts of a donkey go?
	“However it be, O four-foot brother,
	Fair to-day is the earth, our mother.
	“God send you peace and delight thereof,
	And all green meat of the waste you love,
	“And guard you well from violent men
	Who'd put you back in the shafts again.”
	But the ass had far too wise a head
	To answer one of the things I said,
	So he twitched his fair ears up and down
	And turned to nuzzle his shoulder brown.


6. AN AUTUMN MORNING

	See! the pale autumn dawn
	Is faint, upon the lawn
	 That lies in powdered white
	     Of hoar-frost dight
	
	And now from tree to tree
	The ghostly mist we see
	 Hung like a silver pall
	     To hallow all.
	
	It wreathes the burdened air
	So strangely everywhere
	 That I could almost fear
	     This silence drear
	
	Where no one song-bird sings
	And dream that wizard things
	 Mighty for hate or love
	     Were close above.
	
	White as the fog and fair
	Drifting through the middle air
	 In magic dances dread
	     Over my head.
	
	Yet these should know me too
	Lover and bondman true,
	 One that has honoured well
	     The mystic spell
	
	Of earth’s most solemn hours
	Wherein the ancient powers
	 Of dryad, elf, or faun
	     Or leprechaun
	
	Oft have their faces shown
	To me that walked alone
	 Seashore or haunted fen
	     Or mountain glen
	
	Wherefore I will not fear
	To walk the woodlands sere
	 Into this autumn day
	     Far, far away.


7. CLICHE CAME OUT OF ITS CAGE

	I
	
	You said ‘The world is going back to Paganism’.
	Oh bright Vision! I saw our dynasty in the bar of the House
	Spill from their tumblers a libation to the Erinyes,
	And Leavis with Lord Russell wreathed in flowers, heralded with flutes,
	Leading white bulls to the cathedral of the solemn Muses
	To pay where due the glory of their latest theorem.
	Hestia’s fire in every flat, rekindled, burned before
	The Lardergods. Unmarried daughters with obedient hands
	Tended it By the hearth the white-armd venerable mother
	Domum servabat, lanam faciebat. at the hour
	Of sacrifice their brothers came, silent, corrected, grave
	Before their elders; on their downy cheeks easily the blush
	Arose (it is the mark of freemen’s children) as they trooped,
	Gleaming with oil, demurely home from the palaestra or the dance.
	Walk carefully, do not wake the envy of the happy gods,
	Shun Hubris. The middle of the road, the middle sort of men,
	Are best. Aidos surpasses gold. Reverence for the aged
	Is wholesome as seasonable rain, and for a man to die
	Defending the city in battle is a harmonious thing.
	Thus with magistral hand the Puritan Sophrosune
	Cooled and schooled and tempered our uneasy motions;
	Heathendom came again, the circumspection and the holy fears . . .
	You said it. Did you mean it? Oh inordinate liar, stop.
	
	
	II
	
	Or did you mean another kind of heathenry?
	Think, then, that under heaven-roof the little disc of the earth,
	Fortified Midgard, lies encircled by the ravening Worm.
	Over its icy bastions faces of giant and troll
	Look in, ready to invade it. The Wolf, admittedly, is bound;
	But the bond wil1 break, the Beast run free. The weary gods,
	Scarred with old wounds the one-eyed Odin, Tyr who has lost a hand,
	Will limp to their stations for the Last defence. Make it your hope
	To be counted worthy on that day to stand beside them;
	For the end of man is to partake of their defeat and die
	His second, final death in good company. The stupid, strong
	Unteachable monsters are certain to be victorious at last,
	And every man of decent blood is on the losing side.
	Take as your model the tall women with yellow hair in plaits
	Who walked back into burning houses to die with men,
	Or him who as the death spear entered into his vitals
	Made critical comments on its workmanship and aim.
	Are these the Pagans you spoke of? Know your betters and crouch, dogs;
	You that have Vichy water in your veins and worship the event
	Your goddess History (whom your fathers called the strumpet Fortune).


8. THE COUNTRY OF THE BLIND

	Hard light bathed them-a whole nation of eyeless men,
	Dark bipeds not aware how they were maimed. A long
	Process, clearly, a slow curse,
	Drained through centuries, left them thus.
	
	At some transitional stage, then, a luckless few,
	No doubt, must have had eyes after the up-to-date,
	Normal type had achieved snug
	Darkness, safe from the guns of heaven;
	
	Whose blind mouths would abuse words that belonged to their
	Great-grandsires, unabashed, talking of light in some
	Eunuch’d, etiolated,
	Fungoid sense, as a symbol of
	
	Abstract thoughts. If a man, one that had eyes, a poor
	Misfit, spoke of the grey dawn or the stars or green--
	Sloped sea waves, or admired how
	Warm tints change in a lady’s cheek,
	
	None complained he had used words from an alien tongue,
	None question’d. It was worse. All would agree ‘Of course,’
	Came their answer. “We’ve all felt
	Just like that.“ They were wrong. And he
	
	Knew too much to be clear, could not explain. The words--
	Sold, raped flung to the dogs--now could avail no more;
	Hence silence. But the mouldwarps,
	With glib confidence, easily
	
	Showed how tricks of the phrase, sheer metaphors could set
	Fools concocting a myth, taking the worlds for things.
	Do you think this a far-fetched
	Picture? Go then about among
	
	Men now famous; attempt speech on the truths that once,
	Opaque, carved in divine forms, irremovable,
	Dear but dear as a mountain--
	Mass, stood plain to the inward eye.


9. DE PROFUNDIS

	Come let us curse our Master ere we die,
	For all our hopes in endless ruin lie.
	The good is dead. Let us curse God most High.
	
	Four thousand years of toil and hope and thought
	Wherein man laboured upward and still wrought
	New worlds and better, Thou hast made as naught.
	
	We built us joyful cities, strong and fair,
	Knowledge we sought and gathered wisdom rare.
	And all this time you laughed upon our care,
	
	And suddenly the earth grew black with wrong,
	Our hope was crushed and silenced was our song,
	The heaven grew loud with weeping. Thou art strong.
	
	Come then and curse the Lord. Over the earth
	Gross darkness falls, and evil was our birth
	And our few happy days of little worth.
	
	Even if it be not all a dream in vain
	—The ancient hope that still will rise again—
	Of a just God that cares for earthly pain,
	
	Yet far away beyond our labouring night,
	He wanders in the depths of endless light,
	Singing alone his musics of delight;
	
	Only the far, spent echo of his song
	Our dungeons and deep cells can smite along,
	And Thou art nearer. Thou art very strong.
	
	O universal strength, I know it well,
	It is but froth of folly to rebel;
	For thou art Lord and hast the keys of Hell.
	
	Yet I will not bow down to thee nor love thee,
	For looking in my own heart I can prove thee,
	And know this frail, bruised being is above thee.
	
	Our love, our hope, our thirsting for the right,
	Our mercy and long seeking of the light,
	Shall we change these for thy relentless might?
	
	Laugh then and slay. Shatter all things of worth,
	Heap torment still on torment for thy mirth—
	Thou art not Lord while there are Men on earth.


10. DEATH IN BATTLE

	Open the gates for me,
	Open the gates of the peaceful castle, rosy in the West,
	In the sweet dim Isle of Apples over the wide sea’s breast,
	Open the gates for me!
	Sorely pressed have I been
	And driven and hurt beyond bearing this summer day,
	But the heat and the pain together suddenly fall away,
	All’s cool and green.
	But a moment agone,
	Among men cursing in fight and toiling, blinded I fought,
	But the labour passed on a sudden even as a passing thought,
	And now-alone!
	Ah, to be ever alone,
	In flowery valleys among the mountains and silent wastes untrod,
	In the dewy upland places, in the garden of God,
	This would atone!
	I shall not see
	The brutal, crowded faces around me, that in their toil have grown
	Into the faces of devils--yea, even as my own--
	When I find thee,
	O Country of Dreams!
	Beyond the tide of the ocean, hidden and sunk away,
	Out of the sound of battles, near to the end of day,
	Full of dim woods and streams.


11. DUNGEON GRATES

	So piteously the lonely soul of man
	Shudders before this universal plan,
	So grievous is the burden and the pain,
	So heavy weighs the long, material chain
	From cause to cause, too merciless for hate,
	The nightmare march of unrelenting fate,
	I think that he must die thereof unless
	Ever and again across the dreariness
	There came a sudden glimpse of spirit faces,
	A fragrant breath to tell of flowery places
	And wider oceans, breaking on the shore
	From which the hearts of men are always sore.
	It lies beyond endeavour; neither prayer
	Nor fasting, nor much wisdom winneth there,
	Seeing how many prophets and wise men
	Have sought for it and still returned again
	With hope undone. But only the strange power
	Of unsought Beauty in some casual hour
	Can build a bridge of light or sound or form
	To lead you out of all this strife and storm;
	When of some beauty we are grown a part
	Till from its very glory’s midmost heart
	Out leaps a sudden beam of larger light
	Into our souls. All things are seen aright
	Amid the blinding pillar of its gold,
	Seven times more true than what for truth we hold
	In vulgar hours. The miracle is done
	And for one little moment we are one
	With the eternal stream of loveliness
	That flows so calm, aloft from all distress
	Yet leaps and lives around us as a fire
	Making us faint with overstrong desire
	To sport and swim for ever in its deep--
	Only a moment.
	
	O! but we shall keep
	Our vision still. One moment was enough,
	We know we are not made of mortal stuff.
	And we can bear all trials that come after,
	The hate of men and the fool’s loud bestial laughter
	And Nature’s rule and cruelties unclean,
	For we have seen the Glory--we have seen.


12. EVOLUTIONARY HYMN

	Lead us, Evolution, lead us
	Up the future’s endless stair;
	Chop us, change us, prod us, weed us.
	For stagnation is despair:
	Groping, guessing, yet progressing,
	Lead us nobody knows where.
	
	Wrong or justice, joy or sorrow,
	In the present what are they
	while there’s always jam-tomorrow,
	While we tread the onward way?
	Never knowing where we’re going,
	We can never go astray.
	
	To whatever variation
	Our posterity may turn
	Hairy, squashy, or crustacean,
	Bulbous-eyed or square of stern,
	Tusked or toothless, mild or ruthless,
	Towards that unknown god we yearn.
	
	Ask not if it’s god or devil,
	Brethren, lest your words imply
	Static norms of good and evil
	(As in Plato) throned on high;
	Such scholastic, inelastic,
	Abstract yardsticks we deny.
	
	Far too long have sages vainly
	Glossed great Nature’s simple text;
	He who runs can read it plainly,
	‘Goodness = what comes next.’
	By evolving, Life is solving
	All the questions we perplexed.
	
	Oh then! Value means survival--
	Value. If our progeny
	Spreads and spawns and licks each rival,
	That will prove its deity
	(Far from pleasant, by our present,
	Standards, though it may well be).


13. HESPERUS

	Through the starry hollow
	Of the summer night
	I would follow, follow
	Hesperus the bright,
	To seek beyond the western wave
	His garden of delight.
	Hesperus the fairest
	Of all gods that are,
	Peace and dreams thou bearest
	In thy shadowy car,
	And often in my evening walks
	I’ve blessed thee from afar.
	Stars without number,
	Dust the noon of night,
	Thou the early slumber
	And the still delight
	Of the gentle twilit hours
	Rulest in thy right.
	When the pale skies shiver,
	Seeing night is done,
	Past the ocean-river,
	Lightly thou dost run,
	To look for pleasant, sleepy lands,
	That never fear the sun.
	Where, beyond the waters
	Of the outer sea,
	Thy triple crown of daughters
	That guards the golden tree
	Sing out across the lonely tide
	A welcome home to thee.
	And while the old, old dragon
	For joy lifts up his head,
	They bring thee forth a flagon
	Of nectar foaming red,
	And underneath the drowsy trees
	Of poppies strew thy bed.
	Ah! that I could follow
	In thy footsteps bright,
	Through the starry hollow
	Of the summer night,
	Sloping down the western ways
	To find my heart’s delight!


14. HOW HE SAW ANGUS THE GOD

	I heard the swallow sing in the eaves and rose
	All in a strange delight while others slept,
	And down the creaking stair, alone, tip-toes,
	 So carefully I crept.
	
	The house was dark with silly blinds yet drawn,
	But outside the clean air was filled with light,
	And underneath my feet the cold, wet lawn
	 With dew was twinkling bright.
	
	The cobwebs hung from every branch and spray
	Gleaming with pearly strands of laden thread,
	And long and still the morning shadows lay
	 Across the meadows spread.
	
	At that pure hour when yet no sound of man,
	Stirs in the whiteness of the wakening earth,
	Alone through innocent solitudes I ran
	 Singing aloud for mirth.
	
	Till I had found the open mountain heath
	Yellow with gorse, and rested there and stood
	To gaze upon the misty sea beneath,
	 Or on the neighbouring wood,
	
	—That little wood of hazel and tall pine
	And youngling fir, where oft we have loved to see
	The level beams of early morning shine
	 Freshly from tree to tree.
	
	Through the denser wood there’s many a pool
	Of deep and night-born shadow lingers yet
	Where the new-wakened flowers are damp and cool
	 And the long grass is wet.
	
	In the sweet heather long I rested there
	Looking upon the dappled, early sky,
	When suddenly, from out the shining air
	 A god came flashing by.
	
	Swift, naked, eager, pitilessly fair,
	With a live crown of birds about his head,
	Singing and fluttering, and his fiery hair,
	 Far out behind him spread,
	
	Streamed like a rippling torch upon the breeze
	Of his own glorious swiftness: in the grass
	He bruised no feathery stalk, and through the trees
	 I saw his whiteness pass.
	
	But when I followed him beyond the wood,
	Lo! He was changed into a solemn bull
	That there upon the open pasture stood
	 And browsed his lazy full.


15. IN PRAISE OF SOLID PEOPLE

	Thank God that there are solid folk
	Who water flowers and roll the lawn,
	And sit and sew and talk and smoke,
	And snore all through the summer dawn.
	
	Who pass untroubled nights and days
	Full-fed and sleepily content,
	Rejoicing in each other’s praise,
	Respectable and innocent.
	
	Who feel the things that all men feel,
	And think in well-worn grooves of thought,
	Whose honest spirits never reel
	Before man’s mystery, overwrought.
	
	Yet not unfaithful nor unkind,
	With work-day virtues surely staid,
	Theirs is the sane and humble mind,
	And dull affections undismayed.
	
	O happy people! I have seen
	No verse yet written in your praise,
	And, truth to tell, the time has been
	I would have scorned your easy ways.
	
	But now thro’ weariness and strife
	I learn your worthiness indeed,
	The world is better for such life
	As stout suburban people lead.
	
	Too often have I sat alone
	When the wet night falls heavily,
	And fretting winds around me moan,
	And homeless longing vexes me
	
	For lore that I shall never know,
	And visions none can hope to see,
	Till brooding works upon me so
	A childish fear steals over me.
	
	I look around the empty room,
	The clock still ticking in its place,
	And all else silent as the tomb,
	Till suddenly, I think, a face
	
	Grows from the darkness just beside.
	I turn, and lo! it fades away,
	And soon another phantom tide
	Of shifting dreams begins to play,
	
	And dusky galleys past me sail,
	Full freighted on a faerie sea;
	I hear the silken merchants hail
	Across the ringing waves to me
	
	—Then suddenly, again, the room,
	Familiar books about me piled,
	And I alone amid the gloom,
	By one more mocking dream beguiled.
	
	And still no nearer to the Light,
	And still no further from myself,
	Alone and lost in clinging night
	—(The clock’s still ticking on the shelf).
	
	Then do I envy solid folk
	Who sit of evenings by the fire,
	After their work and doze and smoke,
	And are not fretted by desire.


16. IN PRISON

	I cried out for the pain of man,
	I cried out for my bitter wrath
	Against the hopeless life that ran
	For ever in a circling path
	From death to death since all began;
	Till on a summer night
	I lost my way in the pale starlight
	And saw our planet, far and small,
	Through endless depths of nothing fall
	A lonely pin-prick spark of light,
	Upon the wide, enfolding night,
	With leagues on leagues of stars above it,
	And powdered dust of stars below--
	Dead things that neither hate nor love it
	Not even their own loveliness can know,
	Being but cosmic dust and dead.
	And if some tears be shed,
	Some evil God have power,
	Some crown of sorrow sit
	Upon a little world for a little hour--
	Who shall remember? Who shall care for it?


17. THE METEORITE

	Among the hills a meteorite
	Lies huge; and moss has overgrown,
	And wind and rain with touches light
	Made soft, the contours of the stone.
	
	Thus easily can Earth digest
	A cinder of sidereal fire,
	And make her translunary guest
	The native of an English shire.
	
	Nor is it strange these wanderers
	Find in her lap their fitting place,
	For every particle that’s hers
	Came at the first from outer space.
	
	All that is Earth has once been sky;
	Down from the sun of old she came,
	Or from some star that travelled by
	Too close to his entangling flame.
	
	Hence, if belated drops yet fall
	From heaven, on these her plastic power
	Still works as once it worked on all
	The glad rush of the golden shower.


18. MILTON READ AGAIN

	Three golden months while summer on us stole
	I have read your joyful tale another time,
	Breathing more freely in that larger clime
	And learning wiselier to deserve the whole.
	
	Your Spirit, Master, has been close at hand
	And guided me, still pointing treasures rare,
	Thick-sown where I before saw nothing fair
	And finding waters in the barren land,
	
	Barren once thought because my eyes were dim.
	Like one I am grown to whom the common field
	And often-wandered copse one morning yield
	New pleasures suddenly; for over him
	
	Falls the weird spirit of unexplained delight,
	New mystery in every shady place,
	In every whispering tree a nameless grace,
	New rapture on the windy seaward height.
	
	So may she come to me, teaching me well
	To savour all these sweets that lie to hand
	In wood and lane about this pleasant land
	Though it be not the land where I would dwell.


19. NIGHT

	After the fret and failure of this day,
	And weariness of thought, O Mother Night,
	Come with soft kiss to soothe our care away
	And all our little tumults set to right;
	Most pitiful of all death's kindred fair,
	Riding above us through the curtained air
	On thy dusk car, thou scatterest to the earth
	Sweet dreams and drowsy charms of tender might
	And lovers' dear delight before to-morrow's birth.
	Thus art thou wont thy quiet lands to leave
	And pillared courts beyond the Milky Way,
	Wherein thou tarriest all our solar day
	While unsubstantial dreams before thee weave
	A foamy dance, and fluttering fancies play
	About thy palace in the silver ray
	Of some far, moony globe. But when the hour,
	The long-expected comes, the ivory gates
	Open on noiseless hinge before thy bower
	Unbidden, and the jewelled chariot waits
	With magic steeds. Thou from the fronting rim
	Bending to urge them, whilst thy sea-dark hair
	Falls in ambrosial ripples o'er each limb,
	With beautiful pale arms, untrammelled, bare
	For horsemanship, to those twin chargers fleet
	Dost give full rein across the fires that glow
	In the wide floor of heaven, from off their feet
	Scattering the powdery star-dust as they go.
	Come swiftly down the sky, O Lady Night,
	Fall through the shadow-country, O most kind,
	Shake out thy strands of gentle dreams and light
	For chains, wherewith thou still art used to bind
	With tenderest love of careful leeches' art
	The bruised and weary heart
	In slumber blind.


20. NOON

	Noon! and in the garden bower
	The hot air quivers o’er the grass,
	The little lake is smooth as glass
	And still so heavily the hour
	Drags, that scarce the proudest flower
	Pressed upon its burning bed
	Has strength to lift a languid head:
	--Rose and fainting violet
	By the water’s margin set
	Swoon and sink as they were dead
	Though their weary leaves be fed
	With the foam-drops of the pool
	Where it trembles dark and cool
	Wrinkled by the fountain spraying
	O’er it. And the honey-bee
	Hums his drowsy melody
	And wanders in his course a-straying
	Through the sweet and tangled glade
	With his golden mead o’erladen,
	Where beneath the pleasant shade
	Of the darkling boughs a maiden
	--Milky limb and fiery tress,
	All at sweetest random laid--
	Slumbers, drunken with the excess
	Of the noontide’s loveliness.


21. THE OCEAN STRAND

	O leave the labouring roadways of the town,
	The shifting faces and the changeful hue
	Of markets, and broad echoing streets that drown
	The heart’s own silent music. Though they too
	Sing in their proper rhythm, and still delight
	The friendly ear that loves warm human kind,
	Yet it is good to leave them all behind,
	Now when from lily dawn to purple night
	Summer is queen,
	Summer is queen in all the happy land.
	Far, far away among the valleys green
	Let us go forth and wander hand in hand
	Beyond those solemn hills that we have seen
	So often welcome home the falling sun
	Into their cloudy peaks when day was done—
	Beyond them till we find the ocean strand
	And hear the great waves run,
	With the waste song whose melodies I’d follow
	And weary not for many a summer day,
	Born of the vaulted breakers arching hollow
	Before they flash and scatter into spray,
	On, if we should be weary of their play
	Then I would lead you further into land
	Where, with their ragged walls, the stately rocks
	Shunt in smooth courts and paved with quiet sand
	To silence dedicate. The sea-god’s flocks
	Have rested here, and mortal eyes have seen
	By great adventure at the dead of noon
	A lonely nereid drowsing half a-swoon
	Buried beneath her dark and dripping locks.


22. ODE FOR NEW YEAR’S DAY

	Woe unto you, ye sons of pain that are this day in earth,
	Now cry for all your torment: now curse your hour of birth
	And the fathers who begat you to a portion nothing worth.
	And Thou, my own beloved, for as brave as ere thou art,
	Bow down thine head, Despoina, clasp thy pale arms over it,
	Lie low with fast-closed eyelids, clenched teeth, enduring heart,
	For sorrow on sorrow is coming wherein all flesh has part.
	The sky above is sickening, the clouds of God’s hate cover it,
	Body and soul shall suffer beyond all word or thought,
	Till the pain and noisy terror that these first years have wrought
	Seem but the soft arising and prelude of the storm
	That fiercer still and heavier with sharper lightnings fraught
	Shall pour red wrath upon us over a world deform.
	Thrice happy, O Despoina, were the men who were alive
	In the great age and the golden age when still the cycle ran
	On upward curve and easily, for them both maid and man
	And beast and tree and spirit in the green earth could thrive.
	But now one age is ending, and God calls home the stars
	And looses the wheel of the ages and sends it spinning back
	Amid the death of nations, and points a downward track,
	And madness is come over us and great and little wars.
	He has not left one valley, one isle of fresh and green
	Where old friends could forgather amid the howling wreck.
	It’s vainly we are praying. We cannot, cannot check
	The Power who slays and puts aside the beauty that has been.
	It’s truth they tell, Despoina, none hears the heart’s complaining
	For Nature will not pity, nor the red God lend an ear,
	Yet I too have been mad in the hour of bitter paining
	And lifted up my voice to God, thinking that he could hear
	The curse wherewith I cursed Him because the Good was dead.
	But lo! I am grown wiser, knowing that our own hearts
	Have made a phantom called the Good, while a few years have sped
	Over a little planet. And what should the great Lord know of it
	Who tosses the dust of chaos and gives the suns their parts?
	Hither and thither he moves them; for an hour we see the show of it:
	Only a little hour, and the life of the race is done.
	And here he builds a nebula, and there he slays a sun
	And works his own fierce pleasure. All things he shall fulfill,
	And O, my poor Despoina, do you think he ever hears
	The wail of hearts he has broken, the sound of human ill?
	He cares not for our virtues, our little hopes and fears,
	And how could it all go on, love, if he knew of laughter and tears?
	Ah, sweet, if a man could cheat him! If you could flee away
	Into some other country beyond the rosy West,
	To hide in the deep forests and be for ever at rest
	From the rankling hate of God and the outworn world’s decay!


23. ON A VULGAR ERROR

	No. It’s an impudent falsehood. Men did not
	Invariably think the newer way Prosaic
	mad, inelegant, or what not.
	
	Was the first pointed arch esteemed a blot
	Upon the church? Did anybody say How
	modern and how ugly? They did not.
	
	Plate-armour, or windows glazed, or verse fire-hot
	With rhymes from France, or spices from Cathay,
	Were these at first a horror? They were not.
	
	If, then, our present arts, laws, houses, food
	All set us hankering after yesterday,
	Need this be only an archaising mood?
	
	Why, any man whose purse has been let blood
	By sharpers, when he finds all drained away
	Must compare how he stands with how he stood.
	
	If a quack doctor’s breezy ineptitude
	Has cost me a leg, must I forget straightway
	All that I can’t do now, all that I could?
	
	So, when our guides unanimously decry
	The backward glance, I think we can guess why.


24. ON BEING HUMAN

	Angelic minds, they say, by simple intelligence
	Behold the Forms of nature. They discern
	Unerringly the Archtypes, all the verities
	Which mortals lack or indirectly learn.
	Transparent in primordial truth, unvarying,
	Pure Earthness and right Stonehood from their clear,
	High eminence are seen; unveiled, the seminal
	Huge Principles appear.
	
	The Tree-ness of the tree they know-the meaning of
	Arboreal life, how from earth’s salty lap
	The solar beam uplifts it; all the holiness
	Enacted by leaves’ fall and rising sap;
	
	But never an angel knows the knife-edged severance
	Of sun from shadow where the trees begin,
	The blessed cool at every pore caressing us
	--An angel has no skin.
	
	They see the Form of Air; but mortals breathing it
	Drink the whole summer down into the breast.
	The lavish pinks, the field new-mown, the ravishing
	Sea-smells, the wood-fire smoke that whispers Rest.
	The tremor on the rippled pool of memory
	That from each smell in widening circles goes,
	The pleasure and the pang--can angels measure it?
	--An angel has no nose.
	
	The nourishing of life, and how it flourishes
	On death, and why, they utterly know; but not
	The hill-born, earthy spring, the dark cold bilberries.
	The ripe peach from the southern wall still hot
	Full-bellied tankards foamy-topped, the delicate
	Half-lyric lamb, a new loaf’s billowy curves,
	Nor porridge, nor the tingling taste of oranges.
	--An angel has no nerves.
	
	Far richer they! I know the senses’ witchery
	Guards us like air, from heavens too big to see;
	Imminent death to man that barb’d sublimity
	And dazzling edge of beauty unsheathed would be.
	Yet here, within this tiny, charmed interior,
	This parlour of the brain, their Maker shares
	With living men some secrets in a privacy
	Forever ours, not theirs.


25. OUR DAILY BREAD

	We need no barbarous words nor solemn spell
	To raise the unknown. It lies before our feet;
	There have been men who sank down into Hell
	 In some suburban street,
	
	And some there are that in their daily walks
	Have met archangels fresh from sight of God,
	Or watched how in their beans and cabbage-stalks
	 Long files of faerie trod.
	
	Often me too the Living voices call
	In many a vulgar and habitual place,
	I catch a sight of lands beyond the wall,
	 I see a strange god’s face.
	
	And some day this work will work upon me so
	I shall arise and leave both friends and home
	And over many lands a pilgrim go
	 Through alien woods and foam,
	
	Seeking the last steep edges of the earth
	Whence I may leap into that gulf of light
	Wherein, before my narrowing Self had birth,
	 Part of me lived aright.


26. A PRELUDE TO SPACE

	_An Epithaliamium_
	
	So Man, grown vigorous now,
	Holds himself ripe to breed,
	Daily devises how
	To ejaculate his seed
	And boldly fertilize
	The black womb of the unconsenting skies.
	
	Some now alive expect
	(I am told) to see the large,
	Steel member grow erect,
	Turgid with the fierce charge
	Of our whole planet’s skill,
	Courage, wealth, knowledge, concentrated will,
	
	Straining with lust to stamp
	Our likeness on the abyss--
	Bombs, gallows, Belsen camp,
	Pox, polio, Thais’ kiss
	Or Judas, Moloch’s fires
	And Torquemada’s (sons resemble sires).
	
	Shall we, when the grim shape
	Roars upward, dance and sing?
	Yes: if we honour rape,
	If we take pride to Ring
	So bountifully on space
	The sperm of our long woes, our large disgrace.


27. THE ROADS

	I stand on the windy uplands among the hills of Down
	With all the world spread out beneath, meadow and sea and town,
	And ploughlands on the far-off hills that glow with friendly brown.
	
	And ever across the rolling land to the far horizon line,
	Where the blue hills border the misty west, I see the white roads twine,
	The rare roads and the fair roads that call this heart of mine.
	
	I see them dip in the valleys and vanish and rise and bend
	From shadowy dell to windswept fell, and still to the West they wend,
	And over the cold blue ridge at last to the great world’s uttermost end.
	
	And the call of the roads is upon me, a desire in my spirit has grown
	To wander forth in the highways, ‘twixt earth and sky alone,
	And seek for the lands no foot has trod and the seas no sail has known:
	
	For the lands to the west of the evening and east of the morning’s birth,
	Where the gods unseen in their valleys green are glad at the ends of the earth
	And fear no morrow to bring them sorrow, nor night to quench their mirth.


28. SATAN SPEAKS

	I am the Lord your God: even he that made
	Material things, and all these signs arrayed
	Above you and have set beneath the race
	Of mankind, who forget their Father’s face
	And even while they drink my light of day
	Dream of some other gods and disobey
	My warnings, and despise my holy laws,
	Even tho’ their sin shall slay them. For which cause,
	Dreams dreamed in vain, a never-filled desire
	And in close flesh a spiritual fire,
	A thirst for good their kind shall not attain,
	A backward cleaving to the beast again.
	A loathing for the life that I have given,
	A haunted, twisted soul for ever riven
	Between their will and mine—such lot I give
	White still in my despite the vermin live.
	They hate my world! Then let that other God
	Come from the outer spaces glory-shod,
	And from this castle I have built on Night
	Steal forth my own thought’s children into light,
	If such an one there be. But far away
	He walks the airy fields of endless day,
	And my rebellious sons have called Him long
	And vainly called. My order still is strong
	And like to me nor second none I know.
	Whither the mammoth went this creature too shall go.


29. THE SATYR

	When the flowery hands of spring
	Forth their woodland riches fling,
	 Through the meadows, through the valleys
	Goes the satyr carolling.
	
	From the mountain and the moor,
	Forest green and ocean shore
	 All the faerie kin he rallies
	Making music evermore.
	
	See! the shaggy pelt doth grow
	On his twisted shanks below,
	 And his dreadful feet are cloven
	Though his brow be white as snow--
	
	Though his brow be clear and white
	And beneath it fancies bright,
	 Wisdom and high thoughts are woven
	And the musics of delight,
	
	Though his temples too be fair
	Yet two horns are growing there
	 Bursting forth to part asunder
	All the riches of his hair.
	
	Faerie maidens he may meet
	Fly the horns and cloven feet,
	 But, his sad brown eyes with wonder
	Seeing-stay from their retreat.


30. SONNET

	The stars come out; the fragrant shadows fall
	About a dreaming garden still and sweet,
	I hear the unseen bats above me bleat
	Among the ghostly moths their hunting call,
	And twinkling glow-worms all about me crawl.
	Now for a chamber dim, a pillow meet
	For slumbers deep as death, a faultless sheet,
	Cool, white and smooth. So may I reach the hall
	With poppies strewn where sleep that is so dear
	With magic sponge can wipe away an hour
	Or twelve and make them naught. Why not a year,
	Why could a man not loiter in that bower
	Until a thousand painless cycles wore,
	And then—what if it held him evermore?


31. SPOOKS

	Last night I dreamed that I was come again
	Unto the house where my beloved dwells
	After long years of wandering and pain.
	And I stood out beneath the drenching rain
	And all the street was bare, and black with night,
	But in my true love's house was warmth and light.
	Yet I could not draw near nor enter in,
	And long I wondered if some secret sin
	Or old, unhappy anger held me fast;
	Till suddenly it came into my head
	That I was killed long since and lying dead--
	Only a homeless wraith that way had passed.
	So thus I found my true love's house again
	And stood unseen amid the winter night
	And the lamp burned within, a rosy light,
	And the wet street was shining in the rain.


32. THE STAR BATH

	A place uplifted towards the midnight sky
	Far, far away among the mountains old,
	A treeless waste of rocks and freezing cold,
	Where the dead, cheerless moon rode neighbouring by--
	And in the midst a silent tarn there lay,
	A narrow pool, cold as the tide that flows
	Where monstrous bergs beyond Varanger stray,
	Rising from sunless depths that no man knows;
	Thither as clustering fireflies have I seen
	At fixed seasons all the stars come down
	To wash in that cold wave their brightness clean
	And win the special fire wherewith they crown
	The wintry heavens in frost. Even as a flock
	Of falling birds, down to the pool they came.
	I saw them and I heard the icy shock
	Of stars engulfed with hissing of faint flame
	--Ages ago before the birth of men
	Or earliest beast. Yet I was still the same
	That now remember, knowing not where or when.


33. WORLD’S DESIRE

	Love, there is a castle built in a country desolate,
	On a rock above a forest where the trees are grim and great,
	Blasted with the lightning sharp—giant boulders strewn between,
	And the mountains rise above, and the cold ravine
	Echoes to the crushing roar and thunder of a mighty river
	Raging down a cataract. Very tower and forest quiver
	And the grey wolves are afraid and the call of birds is drowned,
	And the thought and speech of man in the boiling water’s sound.
	But upon the further side of the barren, sharp ravine
	With the sunlight on its turrets is the castle seen,
	Calm and very wonderful, white above the green
	Of the wet and waving forest, slanted all away,
	Because the driving Northern wind will not rest by night or day.
	Yet the towers are sure above, very mighty is the stead,
	The gates are made of ivory, the roofs of copper red.
	
	Round and round the warders grave walk upon the walls for ever
	And the wakeful dragons couch in the ports of ivory,
	Nothing is can trouble it, hate of the gods nor man’s endeavour,
	And it shall be a resting-place, dear heart, for you and me.
	
	Through the wet and waving forest with an age-old sorrow laden
	Singing of the world’s regret wanders wild the faerie maiden,
	Through the thistle and the brier, through the tangles of the thorn,
	Till her eyes be dim with weeping and her homeless feet are torn.
	
	Often to the castle gate up she looks with vain endeavour,
	For her soulless loveliness to the castle winneth never.
	
	But within the sacred court, hidden high upon the mountain,
	Wandering in the castle gardens lovely folk enough there be,
	Breathing in another air, drinking of a purer fountain
	And among that folk, beloved, there’s a place for you and me.