*** Vachel Lindsay (1879 - 1931)


1. AN INDIAN SUMMER DAY

	_In the Beginning_
	
	The sun is a huntress young, 
	The sun is a red, red joy, 
	The sun is an indian girl, 
	Of the tribe of the Illinois.
	
	
	_Mid-Morning_
	
	The sun is a smouldering fire, 
	That creeps through the high gray plain, 
	And leaves not a bush of cloud 
	To blossom with flowers of rain.
	
	
	_Noon_
	
	The sun is a wounded deer, 
	That treads pale grass in the skies, 
	Shaking his golden horns, 
	Flashing his baleful eyes.
	
	
	_Sunset_
	
	The sun is an eagle old, 
	There in the windless west. 
	Atop of the spirit-cliffs 
	He builds him a crimson nest.



2. THE LEADEN-EYED

	Let not young souls be smothered out before
	They do quaint deeds and fully flaunt their pride.
	It is the world’s one crime its babes grow dull,
	Its poor are ox-like, limp and leaden-eyed.
	Not that they starve; but starve so dreamlessly,
	Not that they sow, but that they seldom reap,
	Not that they serve, but have no gods to serve,
	Not that they die, but that they die like sheep.



3. LINCOLN WALKS AT MIDNIGHT

	It is portentous, and a thing of state
	That here at midnight, in our little town
	A mourning figure walks, and will not rest,
	Near the old court-house pacing up and down.
	
	Or by his homestead, or in shadowed yards
	He lingers where his children used to play,
	Or through the market, on the well-worn stones
	He stalks until the dawn-stars burn away.
	
	A bronzed, lank man! His suit of ancient black,
	A famous high top-hat and plain worn shawl
	Make him the quaint great figure that men love,
	The prairie-lawyer, master of us all.
	
	He cannot sleep upon his hillside now.
	He is among us:--as in times before!
	And we who toss and lie awake for long
	Breathe deep, and start, to see him pass the door.
	
	His head is bowed. He thinks on men and kings.
	Yea, when the sick world cries, how can he sleep?
	Too many peasants fight, they know not why,
	Too many homesteads in black terror weep.
	
	The sins of all the war-lords burn his heart.
	He sees the dreadnaughts scouring every main.
	He carries on his shawl-wrapped shoulders now
	The bitterness, the folly and the pain.
	
	He cannot rest until a spirit-dawn
	Shall come;--the shining hope of Europe free;
	The league of sober folk, the Workers’ Earth,
	Bringing long peace to Cornwall, Alp and Sea.
	
	It breaks his heart that kings must murder still,
	That all his hours of travail here for men
	Seem yet in vain.  And who will bring white peace
	That he may sleep upon his hill again?
