*** Robert Lowell (1917 - 1977)


1. AFTER THE SURPRISING CONVERSIONS

	September twenty-second, Sir: today 
	I answer. In the latter part of May, 
	Hard on our Lord’s Ascension, it began 
	To be more sensible. A gentleman 
	Of more than common understanding, strict 
	In morals, pious in behavior, kicked 
	Against our goad. A man of some renown, 
	An useful, honored person in the town, 
	He came of melancholy parents; prone 
	To secret spells, for years they kept alone-- 
	His uncle, I believe, was killed of it: 
	Good people, but of too much or little wit. 
	I preached one Sabbath on a text from Kings; 
	He showed concernment for his soul. Some things 
	In his experience were hopeful. He 
	Would sit and watch the wind knocking a tree 
	And praise this countryside our Lord has made. 
	Once when a poor man’s heifer died, he laid 
	A shilling on the doorsill; though a thirst 
	For loving shook him like a snake, he durst 
	Not entertain much hope of his estate 
	In heaven. Once we saw him sitting late 
	Behind his attic window by a light 
	That guttered on his Bible; through that night 
	He meditated terror, and he seemed 
	Beyond advice or reason, for he dreamed 
	That he was called to trumpet Judgment Day 
	To Concord. In the latter part of May 
	He cut his throat. And though the coroner 
	Judged him delirious, soon a noisome stir 
	Palsied our village. At Jehovah’s nod 
	Satan seemed more let loose amongst us: God 
	Abandoned us to Satan, and he pressed 
	Us hard, until we thought we could not rest 
	Till we had done with life. Content was gone. 
	All the good work was quashed. We were undone. 
	The breath of God had carried out a planned 
	And sensible withdrawal from this land; 
	The multitude, once unconcerned with doubt, 
	Once neither callous, curious nor devout, 
	Jumped at broad noon, as though some peddler groaned 
	At it in its familiar twang: “My friend, 
	Cut your own throat. Cut your own throat. Now! Now!” 
	September twenty-second, Sir, the bough 
	Cracks with the unpicked apples, and at dawn 
	The small-mouth bass breaks water, gorged with spawn.


2. CHILDREN OF LIGHT

	Our fathers wrung their bread from stocks and stones
	And fenced their gardens with the Redmen’s bones;
	Embarking from the Nether Land of Holland,
	Pilgrims unhouseled by Geneva’s night,
	They planted here the Serpent’s seeds of light;
	And here the pivoting searchlights probe to shock
	The riotous glass houses built on rock,
	And candles gutter by an empty altar,
	And light is where the landless blood of Cain
	Is burning, burning the unburied grain.


3. THE DRUNKEN FISHERMAN

	Wallowing in this bloody sty,
	I cast for fish that pleased my eye
	(Truly Jehovah’s bow suspends
	No pots of gold to weight its ends);
	Only the blood-mouthed rainbow trout
	Rose to my bait.  They flopped about
	My canvas creel until the moth
	Corrupted its unstable cloth.
	
	A calendar to tell the day;
	A handkerchief to wave away
	The gnats; a couch unstuffed with storm
	Pouching a bottle in one arm;
	A whiskey bottle full of worms;
	And bedroom slacks: are these fit terms
	To mete the worm whose molten rage
	Boils in the belly of old age?
	
	Once fishing was a rabbit’s foot--
	O wind blow cold, O wind blow hot,
	Let suns stay in or suns step out:
	Life danced a jig on the sperm-whale’s spout--
	The fisher’s fluent and obscene
	Catches kept his conscience clean.
	Children, the raging memory drools
	Over the glory of past pools.
	
	Now the hot river, ebbing, hauls
	Its bloody waters into holes;
	A grain of sand inside my shoe
	Mimics the moon that might undo
	Man and Creation too; remorse,
	Stinking, has puddled up its source;
	Here tantrums thrash to a whale’s rage.
	This is the pot-hole of old age.
	
	Is there no way to cast my hook
	Out of this dynamited brook?
	The Fisher’s sons must cast about
	When shallow waters peter out.
	I will catch Christ with a greased worm,
	And when the Prince of Darkness stalks
	My bloodstream to its Stygian term...
	On water the Man-Fisher walks.


4. EPILOGUE

	Those blessèd structures, plot and rhyme--
	why are they no help to me now
	I want to make
	something imagined, not recalled?
	I hear the noise of my own voice:
	_The painter’s vision is not a lens,
	it trembles to caress the light._
	But sometimes everything I write   
	with the threadbare art of my eye
	seems a snapshot,
	lurid, rapid, garish, grouped,
	heightened from life,
	yet paralyzed by fact.
	All’s misalliance.
	Yet why not say what happened?
	Pray for the grace of accuracy
	Vermeer gave to the sun’s illumination
	stealing like the tide across a map
	to his girl solid with yearning.
	We are poor passing facts,
	warned by that to give
	each figure in the photograph
	his living name.


5. HISTORY

	History has to live with what was here, 
	clutching and close to fumbling all we had-- 
	it is so dull and gruesome how we die, 
	unlike writing, life never finishes. 
	Abel was finished; death is not remote, 
	a flash-in-the-pan electrifies the skeptic, 
	his cows crowding like skulls against high-voltage wire, 
	his baby crying all night like a new machine. 
	As in our Bibles, white-faced, predatory, 
	the beautiful, mist-drunken hunter’s moon ascends-- 
	a child could give it a face: two holes, two holes, 
	my eyes, my mouth, between them a skull’s no-nose-- 
	O there’s a terrifying innocence in my face 
	drenched with the silver salvage of the mornfrost.


6. HOMECOMING

	What was is . . . since 1930;
	the boys in my old gang
	are senior partners.  They start up
	bald like baby birds
	to embrace retirement.
	
	At the altar of surrender,
	I met you
	in the hour of credulity.
	How your misfortune came out clearly
	to us at twenty.
	
	At the gingerbread casino,
	how innocent the nights we made it
	on our Vesuvio martinis
	with no vermouth but vodka
	to sweeten the dry gin--
	
	the lash across my face
	that night we adored . . .
	soon every night and all,
	when your sweet, amorous 
	repetition changed.


7. SKUNK HOUR

	Nautilus Island’s hermit
	heiress still lives through winter in her Spartan cottage;
	her sheep still graze above the sea.
	Her son’s a bishop. Her farmer
	is first selectman in our village;
	she’s in her dotage.
	
	Thirsting for
	the hierarchic privacy
	of Queen Victoria’s century,
	she buys up all
	the eyesores facing her shore,
	and lets them fall.
	
	The season’s ill--
	we’ve lost our summer millionaire,
	who seemed to leap from an L. L. Bean
	catalogue. His nine-knot yawl
	was auctioned off to lobstermen.
	A red fox stain covers Blue Hill.
	
	And now our fairy
	decorator brightens his shop for fall;
	his fishnet’s filled with orange cork,
	orange, his cobbler’s bench and awl;
	there is no money in his work,
	he’d rather marry.
	
	One dark night,
	my Tudor Ford climbed the hill’s skull;
	I watched for love-cars. Lights turned down,
	they lay together, hull to hull,
	where the graveyard shelves on the town . . .
	My mind’s not right.
	
	A car radio bleats,
	“Love, O careless Love . . .” I hear
	my ill-spirit sob in each blood cell,
	as if my hand were at its throat . . .
	I myself am hell;
	nobody’s here--
	
	only skunks, that search
	in the moonlight for a bite to eat.
	They march on their soles up Main Street:
	white stripes, moonstruck eyes’ red fire
	under the chalk-dry and spar spire
	of the Trinitarian Church.
	
	I stand on top
	of our back steps and breathe the rich air--
	a mother skunk with her column of kittens swills the garbage pail
	She jabs her wedge-head in a cup
	of sour cream, drops her ostrich tail,
	and will not scare.


8. TO SPEAK OF WOE THAT IS IN MARRIAGE

	_“It is the future generation that presses into being by means of
	these exuberant feelings and supersensible soap bubbles of ours.”_
		--Schopenhauer
	
	The hot night makes us keep our bedroom windows open.
	Our magnolia blossoms.  Life begins to happen.
	My hopped up husband drops his home disputes,
	and hits the streets to cruise for prostitutes,
	free-lancing out along the razor’s edge.
	This screwball might kill his wife, then take the pledge.
	Oh the monotonous meanness of his lust . . .
	It’s the injustice . . . he is so unjust--
	whiskey-blind, swaggering home at five.
	My only thought is how to keep alive.
	What makes him tick?  Each night now I tie
	ten dollars and his car key to my thigh . . .
	Gored by the climacteric of his want,
	he stalls above me like an elephant.


9. WAKING IN THE BLUE

	The night attendant, a B.U. sophomore,
	rouses from the mare’s-nest of his drowsy head
	propped on The Meaning of Meaning.
	He catwalks down our corridor.
	Azure day
	makes my agonized blue window bleaker.
	Crows maunder on the petrified fairway.
	Absence! My hearts grows tense
	as though a harpoon were sparring for the kill.
	(This is the house for the “mentally ill.“)
	
	What use is my sense of humour?
	I grin at Stanley, now sunk in his sixties,
	once a Harvard all-American fullback,
	(if such were possible!)
	still hoarding the build of a boy in his twenties,
	as he soaks, a ramrod
	with a muscle of a seal
	in his long tub,
	vaguely urinous from the Victorian plumbing.
	A kingly granite profile in a crimson gold-cap,
	worn all day, all night, 
	he thinks only of his figure,
	of slimming on sherbert and ginger ale--
	more cut off from words than a seal.
	This is the way day breaks in Bowditch Hall at McLean’s;
	the hooded night lights bring out “Bobbie,”
	Porcellian ‘29,
	a replica of Louis XVI
	without the wig--
	redolent and roly-poly as a sperm whale,
	as he swashbuckles about in his birthday suit
	and horses at chairs.
	
	These victorious figures of bravado ossified young.
	
	In between the limits of day,
	hours and hours go by under the crew haircuts
	and slightly too little nonsensical bachelor twinkle
	of the Roman Catholic attendants.
	(There are no Mayflower
	screwballs in the Catholic Church.)
	
	After a hearty New England breakfast,
	I weigh two hundred pounds
	this morning. Cock of the walk,
	I strut in my turtle-necked French sailor’s jersey
	before the metal shaving mirrors,
	and see the shaky future grow familiar
	in the pinched, indigenous faces
	of these thoroughbred mental cases,
	twice my age and half my weight.
	We are all old-timers,
	each of us holds a locked razor.


10. WATER

	It was a Maine lobster town--
	each morning boatloads of hands
	pushed off for granite
	quarries on the islands,
	
	and left dozens of bleak 
	white frame houses stuck
	like oyster shells
	on a hill of rock,
	
	and below us, the sea lapped
	the raw little match-stick 
	mazes of a weir,
	where the fish for bait were trapped.
	
	Remember? We sat on a slab of rock.
	From this distance in time
	it seems the color
	of iris, rotting and turning purpler,
	
	but it was only 
	the usual gray rock
	turning the usual green
	when drenched by the sea.
	
	The sea drenched the rock
	at our feet all day,
	and kept tearing away 
	flake after flake.
	
	One night you dreamed
	you were a mermaid clinging to a wharf-pile,
	and trying to pull
	off the barnacles with your hands.
	
	We wished our two souls 
	might return like gulls
	to the rock. In the end, 
	the water was too cold for us.