*** Malcolm Lowry (1909 - 1957)


1. QUARTERMASTER AT THE WHEEL

	The Harkness light! Another hour spelled out, 
	Struck by myself with unction but with doubt. 
	A man is killed but does not hear the shot 
	Which kills him; four bells kills me.
	Lucky to hear it if I killed myself,--
	Whose age haunts calendars upon the screen;
	The heroine horn in nineteen eighteen,
	Who yesterday was born in nineteen eight.
	A pile of magazines assess dead love
	On shore, where one light burns no love will wait. 
	--Past years are volcanoes beyond the wake,
	Tomorrow is the sea and then the sea,
	To both least faithless when we most forsake,
	The one unsealed, the other vomitless
	Of Jonah to his gourd or Nineveh . . .
	It is a straw to tickle bloodshot eyes
	Of quartermasters soldered to darkness,
	The stiff wheel and the remembrance of the drowned, 
	For sinking men to suck at or to claw,
	The thought that what we saw we often hear
	Too late or not at all, or cannot bear
	To know resounding eardrums register . . .
	Our siren now! What ugliest ship has not
	Borne heart from heart with that deep plangency, 
	Sadder than masthead’s light, a soul
	In mourning whose voice is grief gone by.
	Roll on, you witless, dark brown ocean, roll,
	And light light years and grey ones let us live 
	Within that gracious nexus of reprieve
	Between the fated sight and fatal sound
	--Now leave the world to Harkness and to me.


2. THIS BITTEREST COAST

	This is the end but since it is the end,
	You are happy at least in this one certainty,
	As you were in the eternity
	Of childhood’s blue summer with seagull and yacht for friend,
	When God was good; love, true; sea, sea; land, land. 
	Yet dare not to base immunity
	From baseness on this triviality!
	The murdered once gathered sea poppies with a hand 
	To be scarleter, to be pressed to the blacker
	And less amorous heart of death . . . Oh, Christ,
	Wash up some bone-clear memory on this bitterest coast
	Where is no wreck, dead beak nor feather
	Though none venture here without disaster. Give at the last
	One half-passionate tryst with the past;
	Some little joy to gather to my salt grey breast
	Though children were betrayed, and money was kissed first.


3. THIS DEAD LETTER

	When I am in the purgatory of the unread,
	Of the backward, of those with wandering attention, 
	What survives must go back to Pier Head
	To mingle with the bereaved, with those who weep 
	As freighters bear their hearts out with the tide.
	It will not be a spirit worthy of mention,
	Not one to recommend the down-and-out sailor:
	Nor will it be a ghost to help my father
	Struggling in the gale with his poor newspaper
	Or flying behind his bowler hat to work,
	As once before to race his new school cap.
	I shall not be looking for anyone to help; 
	The salt grey prop looks after itself.
	I shall not stir a metaphor in a poet’s head 
	Grown greyer than my book on his top shelf: 
	I spoke too much of wounds that never mend, 
	Of ships sailing in rain that never come back. 
	Still I shall watch them sail, but turn my back 
	To Saigon, the equator or Port Said.
	I lived with sadness: I shall be stern
	As this dead letter, I shall never send.


4. WHIRLPOOL

	Resurgent sorrow is a sea in the cave
	Of the mind--just as in the poem
	It gluts it--though no nymphs will quire a hymn; 
	Abandon it! . . . Take a trip to the upper shore. 
	Lave Yourself in sand; gather poppies; brave
	The fringe of things, denying that inner chasm.
	Why, the hush of the sea’s in the seashell; in the limb
	Of the smashed ship, its tempest; and your grave
	The sand itself if you’d have it so. Yet glare
	Through a sky of love all day, still must you receive
	In that cave the special anguish of your life;
	With the skull of the seagull and the wreck you may fare 
	Well enough, but will not escape that other surf, 
	Remorse, your host, who haunts the whirlpool where
	The past’s not washed up dead and black and dry
	But whirls in its gulf forever, to no relief.

