*** Archibald MacLeish (1892 - 1982)


1. BEFORE MARCH

	THE gull’s image and the gull
	Meet upon the water
	All day I have thought of her
	There is nothing left of that year
	(There is sere-grass
	Salt colored)
	We have annulled it with
	Salt
	We have galled it clean to the clay with that one autumn
	The hedge-rows keep the rubbish and the leaves
	There is nothing left of that year in our lives but the leaves of it
	As though it had not been at all
	As though the love the love and the life altered
	Even ourselves are as strangers in these thoughts
	Why should I weep for this?
	What have I brought her?
	Of sorrow of sorrow of sorrow her heart full
	The gull
	Meets with his image on the winter water.



2. THE END OF THE WORLD

	Quite unexpectedly as Vasserot
	The armless ambidextrian was lighting
	A match between his great and second toe,
	And Ralph the lion was engaged in biting
	The neck of Madame Sossman while the drum
	Pointed, and Teeny was about to cough
	In waltz-time swinging Jocko by the thumb--
	Quite unexpectedly the top blew off:
	
	And there, there overhead, there, there hung over
	Those thousands of white faces, those dazed eyes,
	There in the starless dark the poise, the hover,
	There with vast wings across the canceled skies,
	There in the sudden blackness the black pall
	Of nothing, nothing, nothing--nothing at all.



3. EPISTLE TO BE LEFT IN THE EARTH

	. . . It is colder now
	there are many stars
	we are drifting
	North by the Great Bear
	the leaves are falling
	The water is stone in the scooped rock
	to southward
	Red sun grey air
	the crows are
	Slow on their crooked wings
	the jays have left us
	Long since we passed the flares of Orion
	Each man believes in his heart he will die
	Many have written last thoughts and last letters
	None know if our deaths are now or forever
	None know if this wandering earth will be found
	
	We lie down and the snow covers our garments
	I pray you
	you (if any open this writing)
	Make in your mouths the words that were our names
	I will tell you all we have learned
	I will tell you everything
	The earth is round
	there are springs under the orchards
	The loam cuts with a blunt knife
	beware of
	Elms in thunder
	the lights in the sky are stars
	We think they do not see
	we think also
	The trees do not know nor the leaves of the grasses hear us
	The birds too are ignorant
	do not listen
	Do not stand at dark in the open windows
	We before you have heard this
	they are voices
	They are not words at all but the wind rising
	Also no one among us has seen God
	(. . . We have thought often
	the flaws of sun in the late and driving weather
	pointed to one tree but it was not so.)
	As for the nights I warn you the nights are dangerous
	The wind changes at night and the dreams come
	
	It is very cold
	there are strange stars near Arcturus
	Voices are crying an unknown name in the sky



4. AN ETERNITY

	There is no dusk to be,
	There is no dawn that was,
	Only there’s now, and now,
	And the wind in the grass.
	
	Days I remember of
	Now in my heart, are now;
	Days that I dream will bloom
	White the peach bough.
	
	Dying shall never be
	Now in the windy grass;
	Now under shooken leaves
	Death never was.



5. IMMORTAL AUTUMN

	I speak this poem now with grave and level voice
	In praise of autumn, of the far-horn-winding fall.
	
	I praise the flower-barren fields, the clouds, the tall
	Unanswering branches where the wind makes sullen noise.
	
	I praise the fall: it is the human season.
	Now
	No more the foreign sun does meddle at our earth,
	Enforce the green and bring the fallow land to birth,
	Nor winter yet weigh all with silence the pine bough,
	
	But now in autumn with the black and outcast crows
	Share we the spacious world: the whispering year is gone:
	There is more room to live now: the once secret dawn
	Comes late by daylight and the dark unguarded goes.
	
	Between the mutinous brave burning of the leaves
	And winter’s covering of our hearts with his deep snow
	We are alone: there are no evening birds: we know
	The naked moon: the tame stars circle at our eaves.
	
	It is the human season. On this sterile air
	Do words outcarry breath: the sound goes on and on.
	I hear a dead man’s cry from autumn long since gone.
	I cry to you beyond upon this bitter air.



6. TWO POEMS FROM THE WAR

	Oh, not the loss of the accomplished thing!
	Not dumb farewells, nor long relinquishment
	Of beauty had, and golden summer spent,
	And savage glory of the fluttering
	Torn banners of the rain, and frosty ring
	Of moon-white winters, and the imminent
	Long-lunging seas, and glowing students bent
	To race on some smooth beach the gull’s wing:
	
	Not these, nor all we’ve been, nor all we’ve loved,
	The pitiful familiar names, had moved
	Our hearts to weep for them; but oh, the star
	The future is! Eternity’s too wan
	To give again that undefeated, far,
	All-possible irradiance of dawn.
	
	Like moon-dark, like brown water you escape,
	O laughing mouth, O sweet uplifted lips.
	Within the peering brain old ghosts take shape;
	You flame and wither as the white foam slips
	Back from the broken wave: sometimes a start,
	A gesture of the hands, a way you own
	Of bending that smooth head above your heart,--
	Then these are varied, then the dream is gone.
	
	Oh, you are too much mine and flesh of me
	To seal upon the brain, who in the blood
	Are so intense a pulse, so swift a flood
	Of beauty, such unceasing instancy.
	Dear unimagined brow, unvisioned face,
	All beauty has become your dwelling place.
