*** Louis MacNeice (1907 - 1963)


1. HOUSE ON A CLIFF

	Indoors the tang of a tiny oil lamp. Outdoors
	The winking signal on the waste of sea.
	Indoors the sound of the wind. Outdoors the wind.
	Indoors the locked heart and the lost key.
	
	Outdoors the chill, the void, the siren. Indoors
	The strong man pained to find his red blood cools,
	While the blind clock grows louder, faster. Outdoors
	The silent moon, the garrulous tides she rules.
	
	Indoors ancestral curse-cum-blessing. Outdoors
	The empty bowl of heaven, the empty deep.
	Indoors a purposeful man who talks at cross
	Purposes, to himself, in a broken sleep.



2. LONDON RAIN

	The rain of London pimples 
	The ebony street with white 
	And the neon lamps of London 
	Stain the canals of night 
	And the park becomes a jungle 
	In the alchemy of night. 
	
	My wishes turn to violent 
	Horses black as coal--
	The randy mares of fancy, 
	The stallions of the soul--
	Eager to take the fences 
	That fence about my soul. 
	
	Across the countless chimneys 
	The horses ride and across 
	The country to the channel 
	Where warning beacons toss, 
	To a place where God and No-God 
	Play at pitch and toss. 
	
	Whichever wins I am happy 
	For God will give me bliss 
	But No-God will absolve me 
	From all I do amiss 
	And I need not suffer conscience 
	If the world was made amiss. 
	
	Under God we can reckon 
	On pardon when we fall 
	But if we are under No-God 
	Nothing will matter at all, 
	Adultery and murder 
	Will count for nothing at all. 
	
	So reinforced by logic 
	As having nothing to lose 
	My lust goes riding horseback 
	To ravish where I choose, 
	To burgle all the turrets 
	Of beauty as I choose. 
	
	But now the rain gives over 
	Its dance upon the town, 
	Logic and lust together 
	Come dimly tumbling down, 
	And neither God nor No-God 
	Is either up or down. 
	
	The argument was wilful, 
	The alternatives untrue, 
	We need no metaphysics 
	To sanction what we do 
	Or to muffle us in comfort 
	From what we did not do. 
	
	Whether the living river 
	Began in bog or lake, 
	The world is what was given, 
	The world is what we make. 
	And we only can discover 
	Life in the life we make. 
	
	So let the water sizzle 
	Upon the gleaming slates, 
	There will be sunshine after 
	When the rain abates 
	And rain returning duly 
	When the sun abates. 
	
	My wishes now come homeward, 
	Their gallopings in vain, 
	Logic and lust are quiet, 
	And again it starts to rain; 
	Falling asleep I listen 
	To the falling London rain. 



3. PRAYER BEFORE BIRTH

	I am not yet born; O hear me. 
	Let not the bloodsucking bat or the rat or the stoat or the 
	club-footed ghoul come near me. 
	
	I am not yet born, console me. 
	I fear that the human race may with tall walls wall me, 
	with strong drugs dope me, with wise lies lure me, 
	on black racks rack me, in blood-baths roll me. 
	
	I am not yet born; provide me 
	With water to dandle me, grass to grow for me, trees to talk 
	to me, sky to sing to me, birds and a white light 
	in the back of my mind to guide me. 
	
	I am not yet born; forgive me 
	For the sins that in me the world shall commit, my words 
	when they speak me, my thoughts when they think me, 
	my treason engendered by traitors beyond me, 
	my life when they murder by means of my 
	hands, my death when they live me. 
	
	I am not yet born; rehearse me 
	In the parts I must play and the cues I must take when 
	old men lecture me, bureaucrats hector me, mountains 
	frown at me, lovers laugh at me, the white 
	waves call me to folly and the desert calls 
	me to doom and the beggar refuses 
	my gift and my children curse me. 
	
	I am not yet born; O hear me, 
	Let not the man who is beast or who thinks he is God 
	come near me. 
	
	I am not yet born; O fill me 
	With strength against those who would freeze my 
	humanity, would dragoon me into a lethal automaton, 
	would make me a cog in a machine, a thing with 
	one face, a thing, and against all those 
	who would dissipate my entirety, would 
	blow me like thistledown hither and 
	thither or hither and thither 
	like water held in the 
	hands would spill me. 
	
	Let them not make me a stone and let them not spill me. 
	Otherwise kill me.



4. SNOW

	The room was suddenly rich and the great bay-window was
	Spawning snow and pink roses against it
	Soundlessly collateral and incompatible:
	World is suddener than we fancy it.
	
	World is crazier and more of it than we think,
	Incorrigibly plural. I peel and portion
	A tangerine and spit the pips and feel
	The drunkenness of things being various.
	
	And the fire flames with a bubbling sound for world
	Is more spiteful and gay than one supposes--
	On the tongue on the eyes on the ears in the palms of one’s hands--
	There is more than glass between the snow and the huge roses.



5. SOAP SUDS

	This brand of soap has the same smell as once in the big
	House he visited when he was eight: the walls of the bathroom open
	To reveal a lawn where a great yellow ball rolls back through a hoop
	To rest at the head of a mallet held in the hands of a child.
	And these were the joys of that house: a tower with a telescope;
	Two great faded globes, one of the earth, one of the stars;
	A stuffed black dog in the hall; a walled garden with bees;
	A rabbit warren; a rockery; a vine under glass; the sea.
	To which he has now returned. The day of course is fine
	And a grown-up voice cries Play! The mallet slowly swings,
	Then crack, a great gong booms from the dog-dark hall and the ball
	Skims forward through the hoop and then through the next and then
	Through hoops where no hoops were and each dissolves in turn
	And the grass has grown head-high and an angry voice cries Play!
	But the ball is lost and the mallet slipped long since from the hands
	Under the running tap that are not the hands of a child.



6. SUNDAY MORNING

	Down the road someone is practising scales, 
	The notes like little fishes vanish with a wink of tails, 
	Man’s heart expands to tinker with his car 
	For this is Sunday morning, Fate’s great bazaar; 
	Regard these means as ends, concentrate on this Now, 
	
	And you may grow to music or drive beyond Hindhead anyhow, 
	Take corners on two wheels until you go so fast 
	That you can clutch a fringe or two of the windy past, 
	That you can abstract this day and make it to the week of time 
	A small eternity, a sonnet self-contained in rhyme. 
	
	But listen, up the road, something gulps, the church spire 
	Open its eight bells out, skulls’ mouths which will not tire 
	To tell how there is no music or movement which secures 
	Escape from the weekday time. Which deadens and endures.



7. THE SUNLIGHT ON THE GARDEN

	The sunlight on the garden 
	Hardens and grows cold, 
	We cannot cage the minute 
	Within its nets of gold, 
	When all is told 
	We cannot beg for pardon.
	
	Our freedom as free lances 
	Advances towards its end; 
	The earth compels, upon it 
	Sonnets and birds descend; 
	And soon, my friend, 
	We shall have no time for dances.
