*** Paul Mariani (1940 - )


1. GHOST

	After so much time you think 
	you’d have it netted 
	in the mesh of language. But again 
	it reconfigures, slick as Proteus.
	
	You’re in the kitchen talking 
	with your ex-Navy brother, his two kids
	snaking over his tattooed arms, as he goes on 
	& on about being out of work again.
	
	For an hour now you’ve listened, 
	his face growing dimmer in the lamplight 
	as you keep glancing at your watch 
	until it’s there again: the ghost rising
	
	as it did that first time when you, 
	the oldest, left home to marry. 
	You’re in the boat again, alone, and staring 
	at the six of them, your sisters
	
	& your brothers, their faces bobbing 
	in the water, as their fingers grapple 
	for the gunwales. The ship is going down, 
	your mother with it. One oar’s locked
	
	and feathered, and one oar’s lost, 
	there’s a slop of gurry pooling 
	in the bottom, and your tiny boat 
	keeps drifting further from them.
	
	Between each bitter wave you can count 
	their upturned faces--white roses 
	scattered on a mash of sea, eyes fixed 
	to see what you will do. And you?
	
	You their old protector, you their guardian 
	and go-between? _Each man for himself_, 
	you remember thinking, their faces 
	growing dimmer with each oarstroke.


2. THE GODS WHO COME AMONG US IN THE GUISE OF STRANGERS

	Late nights, with summer moths clinging 
	to the screens & the shadows of the Old Great 
	flickering across the tv screen, suddenly, 
	there would be Charlie’s inquisitorial head 
	peering in the window, the shock of white hair, 
	followed by the heart-stopping shock 
	of greeting. Just passing through, he’d say, 
	and--seeing as the light was on-- 
	thought we might have ourselves a talk.
	
	Did I ever have time enough for Charlie? 
	Usually not. The story of my life, 
	of the one, as Chaucer says of someone, 
	who seems always busier than he is. 
	Then, abruptly, & discourteously, 
	death put a stop to Charlie’s visits. 
	Summer moths collect still at the windows. 
	Then leaves & winter ice. Then summer moths 
	again. Each year, old ghost, I seem 
	to miss you more and more, your youth spent 
	with Auden & the Big Ones, words-- 
	theirs, yours--helping you survive 
	a brutal youth. Too late I see now 
	how you honored me like those hidden 
	gods of old who walk among us like 
	the dispossessed, and who, if you are 
	among the lucky ones, tap at your window 
	when you least expect to ask you for a cup 
	of water and a little of your time.


3. QUID PRO QUO

	Just after my wife’s miscarriage (her second 
	in four months), I was sitting in an empty 
	classroom exchanging notes with my friend, 
	a budding Joyce scholar with steelrimmed 
	glasses, when, lapsed Irish Catholic that he was, 
	he surprised me by asking what I thought now 
	of God’s ways toward man. It was spring,
	
	such spring as came to the flintbacked Chenango 
	Valley thirty years ago, the full force of Siberia 
	behind each blast of wind. Once more my poor wife 
	was in the local four-room hospital, recovering. 
	The sun was going down, the room’s pinewood panels 
	all but swallowing the gelid light, when, suddenly, 
	I surprised not only myself but my colleague
	
	by raising my middle finger up to heaven, _quid 
	pro quo_, the hardly grand defiant gesture a variant 
	on Vanni Fucci’s figs, shocking not only my friend 
	but in truth the gesture’s perpetrator too. I was 24, 
	and, in spite of having pored over the _Confessions_ 
	& that Catholic Tractate called the _Summa_, was sure 
	I’d seen enough of God’s erstwhile ways toward man.
	
	That summer, under a pulsing midnight sky 
	shimmering with Van Gogh stars, in a creaking, 
	cedarscented cabin off Lake George, having lied 
	to the gentrified owner of the boys’ camp 
	that indeed I knew wilderness & lakes and could, 
	if need be, lead a whole fleet of canoes down 
	the turbulent whitewater passages of the Fulton Chain
	
	(I who had last been in a rowboat with my parents 
	at the age of six), my wife and I made love, trying 
	not to disturb whosever headboard & waterglass 
	lie just beyond the paperthin partition at our feet. 
	In the great black Adirondack stillness, as we lay 
	there on our sagging mattress, my wife & I gazed out 
	through the broken roof into a sky that seemed
	
	somehow to look back down on us, and in that place, 
	that holy place, she must have conceived again, 
	for nine months later in a New York hospital she 
	brought forth a son, a little buddha-bellied 
	rumplestiltskin runt of a man who burned 
	to face the sun, the fact of his being there 
	both terrifying & lifting me at once, this son,
	
	this gift, whom I still look upon with joy & awe. Worst, 
	best, just last year, this same son, grown
	to manhood now, knelt before a marble altar to vow 
	everything he had to the same God I had had my own 
	erstwhile dealings with. How does one bargain
	with a God like this, who, _quid pro quo_, ups 
	the ante each time He answers one sign with another?


4. REPUBLIC

	Midnight. For the past three hours 
	I’ve raked over Plato’s _Republic_ 
	with my students, all of them John 
	Jay cops, and now some of us 
	have come to Rooney’s to unwind. 
	Boilermakers. Double shots and triples. 
	Fitzgerald’s still in his undercover 
	clothes and giveaway white socks, and two 
	lieutenants--Seluzzi in the sharkskin suit 
	& D’Ambruzzo in the leather--have just 
	invited me to catch their fancy (and illegal) 
	digs somewhere up in Harlem, when 
	this cop begins to tell his story:
	
	how he and his partner trailed 
	this pusher for six weeks before 
	they trapped him in a burnt-out 
	tenement somewhere down in SoHo, 
	one coming at him up the stairwell, 
	the other up the fire escape 
	and through a busted window. But by 
	the time they’ve grabbed him 
	he’s standing over an open window 
	and he’s clean. The partner races down 
	into the courtyard and begins going 
	through the garbage until he finds 
	what it is he’s after: a white bag 
	hanging from a junk mimosa like 
	the Christmas gift it is, and which now 
	he plants back on the suspect.
	Cross-examined by a lawyer who does his best 
	to rattle them, he and his partner 
	stick by their story, and the charges stick.
	Fitzgerald shrugs. Business as usual. 
	But the cop goes on. Better to let 
	the guy go free than under oath 
	to have to lie like that.
	And suddenly you can hear the heavy 
	suck of air before Seluzzi, who 
	half an hour before was boasting 
	about being on the take, staggers 
	to his feet, outraged at what he’s heard, 
	and insists on taking the bastard 
	downtown so they can book him.
	
	Which naturally brings to an end 
	the discussion we’ve been having, 
	and soon each of us is heading 
	for an exit, embarrassed by the awkward 
	light the cop has thrown on things. 
	Which makes it clearer now to me why 
	the State would offer someone like Socrates 
	a shot of hemlock. And even clearer 
	why Socrates would want to drink it.