*** John Masefield (1878 - 1967)


1. THE BALLAD OF JOHN SILVER

	We were schooner-rigged and rakish, with a long and lissome hull,
	And we flew the pretty colours of the cross-bones and the skull;
	We’d a big black Jolly Roger flapping grimly at the fore,
	And we sailed the Spanish Water in the happy days of yore.

	We’d a long brass gun amidships, like a well-conducted ship,
	We had each a brace of pistols and a cutlass at the hip;
	It’s a point which tells against us, and a fact to be deplored,
	But we chased the goodly merchant-men and laid their ships aboard.

	Then the dead men fouled the scuppers and the wounded filled the chains,
	And the paint-work all was spatter-dashed with other people’s brains,
	She was boarded, she was looted, she was scuttled till she sank,
	And the pale survivors left us by the medium of the plank.

	O! then it was (while standing by the taffrail on the poop)
	We could hear the drowning folk lament the absent chicken-coop;
	Then, having washed the blood away, we’d little else to do
	Than to dance a quiet hornpipe as the old salts taught us to.

	O! the fiddle on the fo’c’s’le, and the slapping naked soles,
	And the genial “Down the middle, Jake, and curtsey when she rolls!”
	With the silver seas around us and the pale moon overhead,
	And the look-out not a-looking and his pipe-bowl glowing red.

	Ah! the pig-tailed, quidding pirates and the pretty pranks we played,
	All have since been put a stop-to by the naughty Board of Trade;
	The schooners and the merry crews are laid away to rest,
	A little south the sunset in the Islands of the Blest.



2. BEAUTY

	I have seen dawn and sunset on moors and windy hills
	Coming in solemn beauty like slow old tunes of Spain:
	I have seen the lady April bringing the daffodils,
	Bringing the springing grass and the soft warm April rain.

	I have heard the song of the blossoms and the old chant of the sea,
	And seen strange lands from under the arched white sails of ships;
	But the loveliest thing of beauty God ever has shown to me,
	Are her voice, and her hair, and eyes, and the dear red curve of her lips.



3. BIOGRAPHY

	When I am buried, all my thoughts and acts
	Will be reduced to lists of dates and facts,
	And long before this wandering flesh is rotten
	The dates which made me will be all forgotten;
	And none will know the gleam there used to be
	About the feast days freshly kept by me,
	But men will call the golden hour of bliss
	‘About this time,’ or ‘shortly after this.’

	Men do not heed the rungs by which men climb
	Those glittering steps, those milestones upon time,
	Those tombstones of dead selves, those hours of birth,
	Those moments of the soul in years of earth.
	They mark the height achieved, the main result,
	The power of freedom in the perished cult,
	The power of boredom in the dead man’s deeds
	Not the bright moments of the sprinkled seeds.

	By many waters and on many ways
	I have known golden instants and bright days;
	The day on which, beneath an arching sail,
	I saw the Cordilleras and gave hail;
	The summer day on which in heart’s delight
	I saw the Swansea Mumbles bursting white,
	The glittering day when all the waves wore flags
	And the ship Wanderer came with sails in rags;
	That curlew-calling time in Irish dusk
	When life became more splendid than its husk,
	When the rent chapel on the brae at Slains
	Shone with a doorway opening beyond brains;
	The dawn when, with a brace-block’s creaking cry,
	Out of the mist a little barque slipped by,
	Spilling the mist with changing gleams of red,
	Then gone, with one raised hand and one turned head;
	The howling evening when the spindrift’s mists
	Broke to display the four Evangelists,
	Snow-capped, divinely granite, lashed by breakers,
	Wind-beaten bones of long-since-buried acres;
	The night alone near water when I heard
	All the sea’s spirit spoken by a bird;
	The English dusk when I beheld once more
	(With eyes so changed) the ship, the citied shore,
	The lines of masts, the streets so cheerly trod
	In happier seasons, and gave thanks to God.
	All had their beauty, their bright moments’ gift,
	Their something caught from Time, the ever-swift.

	All of those gleams were golden; but life’s hands
	Have given more constant gifts in changing lands;
	And when I count those gifts, I think them such
	As no man’s bounty could have bettered much:
	The gift of country life, near hills and woods
	Where happy waters sing in solitudes,
	The gift of being near ships, of seeing each day
	A city of ships with great ships under weigh,
	The great street paved with water, filled with shipping,
	And all the world’s flags flying and seagulls dipping.

	Yet when I am dust my penman may not know
	Those water-trampling ships which made me glow,
	But think my wonder mad and fail to find,
	Their glory, even dimly, from my mind,
	And yet they made me:

	not alone the ships
	But men hard-palmed from tallying-on to whips,
	The two close friends of nearly twenty years
	Sea-followers both, sea-wrestlers and sea-peers,
	Whose feet with mine wore many a bolthead bright
	Treading the decks beneath the riding light.
	Yet death will make that warmth of friendship cold,
	And who’ll know what one said and what one told,
	Our hearts’ communion, and the broken spells
	When the loud call blew at the strike of bells?
	No one, I know, yet let me be believed--
	A soul entirely known is life achieved.

	Years blank with hardship never speak a word
	Live in the soul to make the being stirred;
	Towns can be prisons where the spirit dulls
	Away from mates and ocean-wandering hulls,
	Away from all bright water and great hills
	And sheep-walks where the curlews cry their fills;
	Away in towns, where eyes have nought to see
	But dead museums and miles of misery
	And floating life un-rooted from man’s need
	And miles of fish-hooks baited to catch greed
	And life made wretched out of human ken
	And miles of shopping women served by men.
	So, if the penman sums my London days,
	Let him but say that there were holy ways,
	Dull Bloomsbury streets of dull brick mansions old
	With stinking doors where women stood to scold
	And drunken waits at Christmas with their horn
	Droning the news, in snow, that Christ was born;
	And windy gas lamps and the wet roads shining
	And that old carol of the midnight whining,
	And that old room above the noisy slum
	Where there was wine and fire and talk with some
	Under strange pictures of the wakened soul
	To whom this earth was but a burnt-out coal.

	O Time, bring back those midnights and those friends,
	Those glittering moments that a spirit lends,
	That all may be imagined from the flash,
	The cloud-hid god-game through the lightning gash;
	Those hours of stricken sparks from which men took
	Light to send out to men in song or book;
	Those friends who heard St. Pancras’ bells strike two,
	Yet stayed until the barber’s cockerel crew,
	Talking of noble styles, the Frenchman’s best,
	The thought beyond great poets not expressed,
	The glory of mood where human frailty failed,
	The forts of human light not yet assailed,
	Till the dim room had mind and seemed to brood,
	Binding our wills to mental brotherhood;
	Till we became a college, and each night
	Was discipline and manhood and delight;
	Till our farewells and winding down the stairs
	At each gray dawn had meaning that Time spares
	That we, so linked, should roam the whole world round
	Teaching the ways our brooding minds had found,
	Making that room our Chapter, our one mind
	Where all that this world soiled should be refined.

	Often at night I tread those streets again
	And see the alleys glimmering in the rain,
	Yet now I miss that sign of earlier tramps,
	A house with shadows of plane-boughs under lamps,
	The secret house where once a beggar stood,
	Trembling and blind, to show his woe for food.
	And now I miss that friend who used to walk
	Home to my lodgings with me, deep in talk,
	Wearing the last of night out in still streets
	Trodden by us and policemen on their beats
	And cats, but else deserted; now I miss
	That lively mind and guttural laugh of his
	And that strange way he had of making gleam,
	Like something real, the art we used to dream.
	London has been my prison; but my books
	Hills and great waters, labouring men and brooks,
	Ships and deep friendships and remembered days
	Which even now set all my mind ablaze--
	As that June day when, in the red bricks’ chinks
	I saw the old Roman ruins white with pinks
	And felt the hillside haunted even then
	By not dead memory of the Roman men;
	And felt the hillside thronged by souls unseen
	Who knew the interest in me, and were keen
	That man alive should understand man dead
	So many centuries since the blood was shed,
	And quickened with strange hush because this comer
	Sensed a strange soul alive behind the summer.
	That other day on Ercall when the stones
	Were sunbleached white, like long unburied bones,
	While the bees droned and all the air was sweet
	From honey buried underneath my feet,
	Honey of purple heather and white clover
	Sealed in its gummy bags till summer’s over.
	Then other days by water, by bright sea,
	Clear as clean glass, and my bright friend with me;
	The cove clean bottomed where we saw the brown
	Red spotted plaice go skimming six feet down,
	And saw the long fronds waving, white with shells,
	Waving, unfolding, drooping, to the swells;
	That sadder day when we beheld the great
	And terrible beauty of a Lammas spate
	Roaring white-mouthed in all the great cliff’s gaps,
	Headlong, tree-tumbling fury of collapse,
	While drenching clouds drove by and every sense
	Was water roaring or rushing or in offence,
	And mountain sheep stood huddled and blown gaps gleamed
	Where torn white hair of torrents shook and streamed.
	That sadder day when we beheld again
	A spate going down in sunshine after rain
	When the blue reach of water leaping bright
	Was one long ripple and clatter, flecked with white.
	And that far day, that never blotted page
	When youth was bright like flowers about old age,
	Fair generations bringing thanks for life
	To that old kindly man and trembling wife
	After their sixty years: Time never made
	A better beauty since the Earth was laid,
	Than that thanksgiving given to grey hair
	For the great gift of life which brought them there.

	Days of endeavour have been good: the days
	Racing in cutters for the comrade’s praise.
	The day they led my cutter at the turn,
	Yet could not keep the lead, and dropped astern;
	The moment in the spurt when both boats’ oars
	Dipped in each other’s wash, and throats grew hoarse,
	And teeth ground into teeth, and both strokes quickened
	Lashing the sea, and gasps came, and hearts sickened,
	And coxswains damned us, dancing, banking stroke,
	To put our weights on, though our hearts were broke,
	And both boats seemed to stick and sea seemed glue,
	The tide a mill race we were struggling through;
	And every quick recover gave us squints
	Of them still there, and oar-tossed water-glints,
	And cheering came, our friends, our foemen cheering,
	A long, wild, rallying murmur on the hearing,
	‘Port Fore!’ and ‘Starboard Fore!’ ‘Port Fore’ ‘Port Fore,’
	‘Up with her,’ ‘Starboard’; and at that each oar
	Lightened, though arms were bursting, and eyes shut,
	And the oak stretchers grunted in the strut,
	And the curse quickened from the cox, our bows
	Crashed, and drove talking water, we made vows,
	Chastity vows and temperance; in our pain
	We numbered things we’d never eat again
	If we could only win; then came the yell
	‘Starboard,’ ‘Port Fore,’ and then a beaten bell
	Rung as for fire to cheer us. ‘Now.’ Oars bent,
	Soul took the looms now body’s bolt was spent,
	‘Damn it, come on now.’ ‘On now,’ ‘On now,’ ‘Starboard.’
	‘Port Fore,’ ‘Up with her, Port’; each cutter harboured
	Ten eye-shut painsick strugglers, ‘Heave, oh heave,’
	Catcalls waked echoes like a shrieking sheave.
	‘Heave,’ and I saw a back, then two. ‘Port Fore,’
	‘Starboard,’ ‘Come on’; I saw the midship oar,
	And knew we had done them. ‘Port Fore,’ ‘Starboard,’ ‘Now.’
	I saw bright water spurting at their bow,
	Their cox’ full face an instant. They were done.
	The watchers’ cheering almost drowned the gun.
	We had hardly strength to toss our oars; our cry
	Cheering the losing cutter was a sigh.

	Other bright days of action have seemed great:
	Wild days in a pampero off the Plate;
	Good swimming days, at Hog Back or the Coves
	Which the young gannet and the corbie loves;
	Surf-swimming between rollers, catching breath
	Between the advancing grave and breaking death,
	Then shooting up into the sunbright smooth
	To watch the advancing roller bare her tooth;
	And days of labour also, loading, hauling;
	Long days at winch or capstan, heaving, pawling;
	The days with oxen, dragging stone from blasting,
	And dusty days in mills, and hot days masting.
	Trucking on dust-dry deckings smooth like ice,
	And hunts in mighty wool-racks after mice;
	Mornings with buckwheat when the fields did blanch
	With White Leghorns come from the chicken ranch;
	Days near the spring upon the sunburnt hill,
	Plying the maul or gripping tight the drill;
	Delights of work most real, delights that change
	The headache life of towns to rapture strange
	Not known by townsmen, nor imagined; health
	That puts new glory upon mental wealth
	And makes the poor man rich.

	But that ends, too.
	Health, with its thoughts of life; and that bright view,
	That sunny landscape from life’s peak, that glory,
	And all a glad man’s comments on life’s story,
	And thoughts of marvellous towns and living men,
	And what pens tell, and all beyond the pen,
	End, and are summed in words so truly dead
	They raise no image of the heart and head,
	The life, the man alive, the friend we knew,
	The minds ours argued with or listened to,
	None; but are dead, and all life’s keenness, all,
	Is dead as print before the funeral;
	Even deader after, when the dates are sought,
	And cold minds disagree with what we thought.

	This many-pictured world of many passions
	Wears out the nations as a woman fashions,
	And what life is is much to very few;
	Men being so strange, so mad, and what men do
	So good to watch or share; but when men count
	Those hours of life that were a bursting fount
	Sparkling the dusty heart with living springs,
	There seems a world, beyond our earthly things,
	Gated by golden moments, each bright time
	Opening to show the city white like lime,
	High-towered and many-peopled. This made sure,
	Work that obscures those moments seems impure,
	Making our not-returning time of breath
	Dull with the ritual and records of death,
	That frost of fact by which our wisdom gives
	Correctly stated death to all that lives.

	Best trust the happy moments. What they gave
	Makes man less fearful of the certain grave,
	And gives his work compassion and new eyes.
	The days that make us happy make us wise.



4. THE BUILDERS

	Before the unseen cock had called the time,
	Those workers left their beds and stumbled out
	Into the street, where dust lay white as lime
	Under the last star that keeps bats about.
	Then blinking still from bed, they trod the street,
	The doors closed up and down; the traveller heard
	Doors opened, closed, then silence, then men’s feet
	Moving to toil, the men too drowsed for word.
	The bean-field was a greyness as they passed,
	The darkness of the hedge was starred with flowers,
	The moth, with wings like dead leaves, sucked his last,
	The triumphing cock cried out with all his powers;
	His fire of crying made the twilight quick,
	Then clink, clink, clink, men’s trowels tapped the brick.

	I saw the delicate man who built the tower
	Look from the turret at the ground below,
	The granite column wavered like a flower,
	But stood in air whatever winds might blow.
	Its roots were in the rock, its head stood proud,
	No earthly forest reared a head so high;
	Sometimes the eagle came there, sometimes cloud,
	It was man’s ultimate footstep to the sky.
	And in that peak the builder kept his treasure,
	Books with the symbols of his art, the signs
	Of knowledge in excitement, skill in pleasure,
	The edge that cut, the rule that kept the lines.
	He who had seen his tower beneath the grass,
	Rock in the earth, now smiled, because it was.

	How many thousand men had done his will,
	Men who had hands, or arms, or strength to spend,
	Or cunning with machines, or art, or skill !
	All had obeyed him, working to this end.
	Hundreds in distant lands had given their share
	Of power, to deck it; on its every stone
	Their oddity of pleasure was laid bare,
	Yet was the tower his offspring, his alone.
	His inner eye had seen, his will had made it,
	All the opposing army of men’s minds
	Had bowed, had turned, had striven as he bade it,
	Each to his purpose in their myriad kinds.
	Now it was done, and in the peak he stood
	Seeing his work, and smiled to find it good.

	It had been stone, earth’s body, hidden deep,
	Lightless and shapeless, where it cooled and hardened.
	Now it was as the banner on man’s keep
	Or as the Apple in Eden where God gardened.
	Lilies of stone ran round it, and like fires
	The tongues of crockets shot from it and paused,
	Horsemen who raced were carven on’t, the spires
	Were bright with gold ; all this the builder caused.
	And standing there, it seemed that all the hive
	Of human skill which now it had become,
	Was stone no more, nor building, but alive,
	Trying to speak, this tower that was dumb,
	Trying to speak, nay, speaking, soul to soul
	With powers who are, to raven or control.



5. BY A BIER-SIDE

	This is a sacred city built of marvellous earth.
	Life was lived nobly here to give such beauty birth.

	Beauty was in this brain and in this eager hand:
	Death is so blind and dumb Death does not understand.
	Death drifts the brain with dust and soils the young limbs’ glory,
	Death makes justice a dream, and strength a traveller’s story.
	Death drives the lovely soul to wander under the sky.
	Death opens unknown doors. It is most grand to die.



6. A CREED

	I hold that when a person dies
	His soul returns again to earth;
	Arrayed in some new flesh-disguise
	Another mother gives him birth.
	With sturdier limbs and brighter brain
	The old soul takes the road again.

	Such is my own belief and trust;
	This hand, this hand that holds the pen,
	Has many a hundred times been dust
	And turned, as dust, to dust again;
	These eyes of mine have blinked and shown
	In Thebes, in Troy, in Babylon.

	All that I rightly think or do,
	Or make, or spoil, or bless, or blast,
	Is curse or blessing justly due
	For sloth or effort in the past.
	My life’s a statement of the sum
	Of vice indulged, or overcome.

	I know that in my lives to be
	My sorry heart will ache and burn,
	And worship, unavailingly,
	The woman whom I used to spurn,
	And shake to see another have
	The love I spurned, the love she gave.

	And I shall know, in angry words,
	In gibes, and mocks, and many a tear,
	A carrion flock of homing-birds,
	The gibes and scorns I uttered here.
	The brave word that I failed to speak
	Will brand me dastard on the cheek.

	And as I wander on the roads
	I shall be helped and healed and blessed;
	Dear words shall cheer and be as goads
	To urge to heights before unguessed.
	My road shall be the road I made;
	All that I gave shall be repaid.

	So shall I fight, so shall I tread,
	In this long war beneath the stars;
	So shall a glory wreathe my head,
	So shall I faint and show the scars,
	Until this case, this clogging mould,
	Be smithied all to kingly gold.



7. DEATH LIES IN WAIT FOR YOU

	Death lies in wait for you, you wild thing in the wood,
	Shy-footed, beauty dear, half-seen, half-understood,
	Glimpsed in the beech-wood dim and in the dropping fir,
	Shy like a fawn and sweet and beauty’s minister.
	Glimpsed as in flying clouds by night the little moon,
	A wonder, a delight, a paleness passing soon.

	Only a moment held, only an hour seen,
	Only an instant known in all that life has been,
	One instant in the sand to drink that gush of grace,
	The beauty of your way, the marvel of your face.

	Death lies in wait for you, but few short hours he gives;
	I perish even as you by whom all spirit lives.
	Come to me, spirit, come, and fill my hour of breath
	With hours of life in life that pay no toll to death.



8. AN EPILOGUE

	I have seen flowers come in stony places
	And kind things done by men with ugly faces,
	And the gold cup won by the worst horse at the races,
	So I trust, too.



9. THE EVERLASTING MERCY

	_Thy place is biggyd above the sterrys cleer,
	Noon erthely paleys wrouhte in so statly wyse,
	Com on my freend, my brothir moost enteer,
	For the I offryd my blood in sacrifise._
	--John Lydgate


	From ‘41 to ‘51
	I was folk’s contrary son;
	I bit my father’s hand right through
	And broke my mother’s heart in two.
	I sometimes go without my dinner
	Now that I know the times I’ve gi’n her.

	From ‘51 to ‘61
	I cut my teeth and took to fun.
	I learned what not to be afraid of
	And what stuff women’s lips are made of;
	I learned with what a rosy feeling
	Good ale makes floors seem like the ceiling,
	And how the moon give shiny light
	To lads as roll home singing by’t.
	My blood did leap, my flesh did revel,
	Saul Kane was tokened to the devil.

	From ‘61 to’71
	I lived in disbelief of Heaven.
	I drunk, I fought, I poached, I whored,
	I did despite unto the Lord.
	I cursed, ‘would make a man look pale,
	And nineteen times I went to gaol

	Now, friends, observe and look upon me,
	Mark how the Lord took pity on me.
	By Dead Man’s Thorn, while setting wires,
	Who should come up but Billy Myers,
	A friend of mine, who used to be
	As black a sprig of hell as me,
	With whom I’d planned, to save encroachin’,
	Which fields and coverts each should poach in.
	Now when he saw me set my snare,
	He tells me “Get to hell from there.
	This field is mine,” he says, “by right;
	If you poach here, there’ll be a fight.
	Out now,” he says, “and leave your wire;
	It’s mine.”
	“It ain’t.”
	“You put.”
	“You liar.”
	“You closhy put.”
	“You bloody liar.”
	“This is my field.”
	“This is my wire.”
	“I’m ruler here.”
	“You ain’t.”
	“I am.”
	“I’ll fight you for it.”
	“Right, by damn.
	Not now, though, I’ve a-sprained my thumb,
	We’ll fight after the harvest hum.
	And Silas Jones, that bookie wide,
	Will make a purse five pounds a side.”
	Those were the words, that was the place
	By which God brought me into grace.

	On Wood Top Field the peewits go
	Mewing and wheeling ever so;
	And like the shaking of a timbrel
	Cackles the laughter of the whimbrel..

	In the old quarry-pit they say
	Head-keeper Pike was made away.
	He walks, head-keeper Pike, for harm,
	He taps the windows of the farm;
	The blood drips from his broken chin,
	He taps and begs to be let in.
	On Wood Top, nights, I’ve shaked to hark
	The peewits wambling in the dark
	Lest in the dark the old man might
	Creep up to me to beg a light.

	But Wood Top grass is short and sweet
	And springy to a boxer’s feet;
	At harvest hum the moon so bright
	Did shine on Wood Top for the fight.

	When Bill was stripped down to his bends
	I thought how long we two’d been friends,
	And in my mind, about that wire,
	I thought “He’s right, I am a liar.
	As sure as skilly’s made in prison
	The right to poach that copse is his’n.
	I’ll have no luck tonight,” thinks I.
	“I’m fighting to defend a lie.
	And this moonshiny evening’s fun
	Is worse than aught I’ve ever done.”
	And thinking that way my heart bled so
	I almost stept to Bill and said so.
	And now Bill’s dead I would be glad
	If I could only think I had.
	But no. I put the thought away
	For fear of what my friends would say.
	They’d backed me, see? O Lord, the sin
	Done for things there’s money in.

	The stakes were drove, the ropes were hitched,
	Into the ring my hat I pitched.
	My corner faced the Squire’s park
	Just where the fir trees make it dark;
	The place where I begun poor Nell
	Upon the woman’s road to hell.
	I thought of’t, sitting in my corner
	After the time-keep struck his warner
	(Two brandy flasks, for fear of noise,
	Clinked out the time to us two boys).
	And while the seconds chafed and gloved me
	I thought of Nell’s eyes when she loved me,
	And wondered how my tot would end,
	First Nell cast off and now my friend;
	And in the moonlight dim and wan
	I knew quite well my luck was gone;
	And looking round I felt a spite
	At all who’d come to see me fight;
	The five and forty human faces
	Inflamed by drink and going to races,
	Faces of men who’d never been
	Merry or true or live or clean;
	Who’d never felt the boxer’s trim
	Of brain divinely knit to limb,
	Nor felt the whole live body go
	One tingling health from top to toe;
	Nor took a punch nor given a swing,
	But just soaked dead round the ring
	Until their brains and bloods were foul
	Enough to make their throttles howl,
	While we whom Jesus died to teach
	Fought round on round, three minutes each.

	And think that, you’ll understand
	I thought, “I’ll go and take Bill’s hand.
	I’ll up and say the fault was mine,
	He shan’t make play for these here swine.”
	And then I thought that that was silly,
	They’d think I was afraid of Billy;
	They’d think (I thought it, God forgive me)
	I funked the hiding Bill could give me.
	And that thought made me mad and hot.
	“Think that, will they? Well, they shall not.
	They shan’t think that. I will not. I’m
	Damned if I will. I will not.”
	Time!

	From the beginning of the bout
	My luck was gone, my hand was out.
	Right from the start Bill called the play,
	But I was quick and kept away
	Till the fourth round, when work got mixed,
	And then I knew Bill had me fixed.
	My hand was out, why, Heaven knows;
	Bill punched me when and where he chose.
	Through two more rounds we quartered wide,
	And all the time my hands seemed tied;
	Bill punched me when and where he pleased.
	The cheering from my backers eased,
	But every punch I heard a yell
	Of “That’s the style, Bill, give him hell.”
	No one for me, but Jimmy’s light
	“Straight left! Straight left!” and “Watch his right.”

	I don’t know how a boxer goes
	When all his body hums from blows;
	I know I seemed to rock and spin,
	I don’t know how I saved my chin;
	I know I thought my only friend
	Was that clinked flash at each round’s end
	When my two seconds, Ed and Jimmy,
	Had sixty seconds help to gimme.
	But in the ninth, with pain and knocks
	I stopped: I couldn’t fight nor box.
	Bill missed his swing, the light was tricky,
	But I went down, and stayed down, dicky.
	“Get up,” cried Jim. I said, “I will.”
	Then all the gang yelled, “Out him, bill.
	Out him.” Bill rushed . . . and Clink, Clink, Clink.
	Time! And Jim’s knee, and rum to drink.
	And round the ring there ran a titter:
	“Saved by the call, the bloody quitter.”

	They drove (a dodge that never fails)
	A pin beneath my finger nails.
	They poured what seemed a running beck
	Of cold spring water down my neck;
	Jim with a lancet quick as flies
	Lowered the swelling round my eyes.
	They sluiced my legs and fanned my face
	Through all that blessed minute’s grace;
	They gave my calves a thorough kneading,
	They salved my cuts and stopped the bleeding.
	A gulp of liquor dulled the pain,
	And then the flasks clinked again.
	Time!

	There was Bill as grim as death,
	He rushed, I clinched, to get more breath,
	And breath I got, though Billy bats
	Some stinging short-arms in my slats.
	And when we broke, as I foresaw,
	He swung his right in for the jaw.
	I stopped it on my shoulder bone,
	And at the shock I heard Bill groan
	A little groan or moan or grunt
	As though I’d hit his wind a bunt.
	At that, I clinched, and while we clinched,
	His old time right arm dig was flinched,
	And when we broke he hit me light
	As though he didn’t trust his right,
	He flapped me somehow with his wrist
	As though he couldn’t use his fist,
	And when he hit he winced with pain.
	I thought, “Your sprained thumb’s crocked again.”
	So I got strength and Bill gave ground,
	And that round was an easy round.

	During the wait my Jimmy said,

	What’s making Billy fight so dead?
	He’s all to pieces. Is he blown?”
	“His thumb’s out.”
	“No? Then it’s your own.
	It’s all your own, but don’t be rash
	He’s got the goods if you’ve got the cash,
	And what one hand can do he’ll do.
	Be careful this next round or two.”

	Time. There was Bill, and I felt sick
	That luck should play so mean a trick
	And give me leave to knock him out
	After he’d plainly won the bout.
	But by the way the man came at me
	He made it plain he meant to bat me;
	If you’d a seen the way he come
	You wouldn’t think he’d crocked a thumb.
	With all his skill and all his might
	He clipped me dizzy left and right;
	The Lord knows what the effort cost,
	but he was mad to think he’d lost,
	And knowing nothing else could save him
	He didn’t care what pain it gave him.
	He called the music and the dance
	For five rounds more and gave no chance.

	Try to imagine if you can
	The kind of manhood in the man,
	And if you’d like to feel his pain
	You sprain your thumb and hit the sprain.
	And hit it hard with all your power
	On something hard for half-an-hour,
	While someone thumps you black and blue,
	And then you’ll know what Billy knew.
	Bill took that pain without a sound
	Till halfway through the eighteenth round,
	And then I sent him down and out,
	And Silas said, “Kane wins the bout.”

	When Bill came to, you understand,
	I ripped the mitten from my hand
	And across to ask Bill shake,
	My limbs were all one pain and ache,
	I was so weary and so sore
	I don’t think I’d a stood much more.
	Bill in his corner bathed his thumb,
	Buttoned his shirt and glowered glum.
	“I’ll never shake your hand” he said.
	“I’d rather see my children dead.
	I’ve been about had some fun with you,
	But you’re a liar and I’ve done with you.
	You’ve knocked me out, you didn’t beat me;
	Look out the next time that you meet me,
	There’ll be no friend to watch the clock for you
	And no convenient thumb to crock for you,
	And I’ll take care, with much delight,
	You’ll get what you’d a got tonight;
	That puts my meaning clear, I guess,
	Now get to hell; I want to dress.”



	I dressed. My backers one and all
	Said, “Well done you” or “Good old Saul.”
	“Saul is a wonder and a fly ‘un,
	What’ll you have, Saul, at the Lion?”
	With merry oaths they helped me down
	The stony wood path to the town.

	The moonlight shone on Cabbage Walk,
	It made the limestone look like chalk.
	It was too late for any people,
	Twelve struck as we went by the steeple.
	A dog barked, and an owl was calling,
	The squire’s brook was still a-falling,
	The carved heads on the church looked down
	On “Russell, Blacksmith of this Town,”
	And all the graves of all the ghosts
	Who rise on Christmas Eve in hosts
	To dance and carol in festivity
	For joy of Jesus Christ’s Nativity
	(Bell-ringer Dawe and his two sons
	Beheld ‘em from the bell-tower once},
	To and two about about
	Singing the end of Advent out,
	Dwindling down to windlestraws
	When the glittering peacock craws,
	As craw the glittering peacock should
	When Christ’s own star come over the wood.
	Lamb of the sky comes out of fold
	Wandering windy heavens cold.
	So they shone and sang till twelve
	When all the bells ring out of theirselve.
	Rang a peal for Christmas morn,
	Glory, men, for Christ is born.

	All the old monks’ singing places

	Glimmered quick with flitting faces,
	Singing anthems, singing hymns
	Under carven cherubims.
	Ringer Dave aloft could mark
	Faces at the window dark
	Crowding, crowding, row on row,
	Till all the church began to glow.
	The chapel glowed, the nave, the choir,
	All he faces became fire
	Below the eastern window high
	To see Christ’s star come up the sky.
	Then they lifted hands and turned,
	And all their lifted fingers burned,
	Burned like the golden altar tallows,
	Burned like a troop of God’s own Hallows,
	Bringing to mind the burning time
	When all the bells will rock and chime
	And burning saints on burning horses
	Will sweep the planets from their courses
	And loose the stars to burn up night.
	Lord, give us eyes to bear the light.

	We all went quiet down the Scallenge
	Lest Police Inspector Drew should challenge.
	But ‘Spector Drew was sleeping sweet,
	His head upon a charges sheet,
	Under the gas jet flaring full,
	Snorting and snoring like a bull,
	His bull cheeks puffed, his bull lips plowing,
	His ugly yellow front teeth showing.
	Just as we peeped we saw him fumble
	And scratch his head, and shift, and mumble.
	Down in the lane so thick and dark
	The tan-yards stank of bitter bark,
	The curate’s pigeons gave a flutter,
	A cart went courting down the gutter,
	And none else stirred a foot or feather.
	The houses put their heads together,
	Talking, perhaps, so dark and sly,
	Of all the folk they’d seen go by,
	Children, and men and women, merry all,
	Who’d some day pass that way to burial.
	It was all dark, but at the turning
	The Lion had a window burning.
	So in we went and up the stairs,
	Treading as still as cats and hares.
	The way the stairs creaked made you wonder
	If dead men’s bones were hidden under.
	At head of stairs upon the landing
	A woman with a lamp was standing;
	she greet each gent at head of stairs,
	With “Step in, gents, and take your chairs.
	The punch’ll come when kettle bubble,
	But don’t make noise or there’ll be trouble.”
	‘Twas Doxy Jane, a bouncing girl
	With eyes all sparks and hair all curl,
	And cheeks all red and lips all coal,
	And thirst for men instead of soul.
	She’s trod her pathway to the fire.
	Old Rivers had his nephew by her.

	I step aside from Tom and Jimmy
	To find if she’d a kiss to gimme.
	I blew out lamp ‘fore she could speak.
	She said, “If you ain’t got a cheek,”
	And then beside me in the dim,
	“Did he beat you or you beat him?”
	“Why, I beat him” (though that was wrong).
	She said, “You must be turble strong,
	I’d be afraid you’d beat me, too.”
	“You’d not,” I said, “I wouldn’t do.”
	“Never?”
	“No, never.”
	“Never?”
	“No.”
	“O Saul. Here’s missus. Let me go.”
	It wasn’t missus, so I didn’t,
	Whether I mid do or I midn’t,
	Until she’d promised we should meet
	Next evening, six, at top of street,
	When we could have a quiet talk
	On that low wall up Worcester Walk.
	And while we whispered there together
	I give her silver for a feather
	And felt a drunkenness like wine
	And shut out Christ in husks and swine.
	I felt the dart strike through my liver.
	God punish me for’t and forgive her.

	Each one could be a Jesus mild,
	Each one has been a little child,
	A little child with laughing look,
	A lovely white unwritten book;
	A book that God will take, my friend,
	As each goes out a journey’s end.
	The Lord Who gave us Earth and Heaven
	Takes that as thanks for all He’s given.
	The book He lent is given back
	All blotted red and smutted black.

	“Open the door,” said Jim, “and call.”
	Jane gasped “They’ll see me. Loose me, Saul.”
	She pushed me by, and ducked downstair
	With half the pins out of her hair.
	I went inside the lit room rollen
	Her scented handkerchief I’d stolen.
	“What would you fancy, Saul?” they said.
	“A gin punch hot and then to bed.”
	“Jane, fetch the punch bowl to the gemmen;
	And mind you don’t put too much lemon.
	Our good friend Saul has had a fight of it,
	Now smoke up, boys, and make a night of it.”

	The room was full of men and stink
	Of bad cigars and heavy drink.
	Riley was nodding to the floor
	And gurgling as he wanted more.
	His mouth was wide, his face was pale,
	His swollen face was sweating ale;
	And one of those assembled Greeks
	Had corked black crosses on his cheeks.
	Thomas was having words with Goss,
	He “wouldn’t pay, the fight was cross.”
	And Goss told Tom that “cross or no,
	The bets go as the verdicts go,
	By all I’ve ever heard or read of.
	So pay, or else I’ll knock your head off.”
	Jim Gurvil said his smutty say
	About a girl down Bye Street way,
	And how the girl from Froggatt’s circus
	Died giving birth in Newent work’us.
	And Dick told how the Dymock wench
	Bore twins, poor things, on Dog Hill bench;
	And how he’d owned to one Court
	And how Judge made him sorry for’t.
	Jack set a jew’s harp twanging drily;
	“gimme another cup,” said Riley.
	A dozen more were in their glories
	With laughs and smokes and smutty stories;
	And Jimmy joked and took his sup
	And sang his song of “Up, come up.”
	Jane brought the bowl of stewing gin
	And poured the egg and lemon in,
	And whisked it up and served it out
	While bawdy questions went about.
	Jack chucked her chin, and Jim accost her
	With bits out of the “Maid of Gloster.”
	And fifteen arms went round her waist.
	(And then men ask, Are Barmaids chaste?}

	O young men, pray to be kept whole
	from bringing down a weaker soul.
	Your minute’s joy so meet in doin’
	May be the woman’s door to ruin;
	The door to wandering up and down,
	A painted whore with half a crown.
	The bright mind fouled, the beauty gay
	All eaten out and fallen away,
	By drunken days and weary tramps
	From pub to pub by city lamps
	Till men despise the game they started
	Till health and beauty are departed,
	and in a slum the reeking hag
	Mumbles a crust with toothy jag,
	Or gets the river’s help to end
	The life too wrecked for man to mend.
	We spat and smoked and took our swipe
	Till Silas up and tap his pipe,
	And begged us all to pay attention
	Because he’d several things to mention.
	We’d seen the fight (Hear, hear. That’s you);
	But still one task remained to do.
	That task was his, he didn’t shun it,
	To give the purse to him as won it.
	With this remark, from start to out
	He’d never seen a brisker bout.
	There was the purse. At that he’d leave it.
	Let Kane come forward to receive it.

	I took the purse and hemmed and bowed,
	And called for gin punch for the crowd;
	And when the second bowl was done,
	I called, “Let’s have another one.”
	Si’s wife come in and sipped and sipped
	(As women will) till she was pipped.
	And Si hit Dicky Twot a clouter
	Because he put his arms about her;
	But after Si got overtasked
	She sat and kissed whoever asked.
	My Doxy Jane was splashed by this,
	I took her on my knee to kiss.
	And Tom cried out, “O damn the gin;
	Why can’t we all have women in?
	Bess Evans now, or Sister Polly,
	Or those two housemaids at the Folly?
	Let someone nip to Biddy Price’s,
	They’d all come in a brace of trices.
	Rose Davies, Sue, and Betsy Perks;
	One man, one girl, and damn all Turks.”
	But, no. “More gin,” they cried; “Come on.
	We’ll have the girls in when it’s gone.”
	So round the g in went, hot and heady,
	Hot Hollands punch on top of deady.

	Hot Hollands punch on top of stout
	Puts madness in and wisdom out.
	From drunken man to drunken man
	The drunken madness raged and ran.
	“I’m climber Joe who climbed the spire.”
	“You’re climber Joe the bloody liar.”
	“Who says I lie?” “I do.”
	“You lie,
	I climbed the spire and had a fly.”
	“I’m French Suzanne, the Circus Dancer,
	I’m going to dance a bloody Lancer.”
	“If I’d my rights I’m Squire’s heir.”
	“By rights I’d be a millionaire.”
	“By rights I’d be the lord of you,
	But Farmer Scriggins had his do,
	He done me, so I’ve had to hoove it,
	I’ve got it all wrote down to prove it.
	And one of these dark winter nights
	He’ll learn I mean to have my rights;
	I’ll bloody him a bloody fix,
	I’ll bloody burn his bloody ricks.”

	From three long hours of gin and smokes,
	And two girls’ breath and fifteen blokes,
	A warmish night, and windows shut,
	The room stank like a fox’s gut.
	The heat and smell and drinking deep
	Began to stun the gang to sleep.
	Some fell downstairs to sleep on mat,
	Some snored it sodden where they sat.
	Dick Twot had lost a tooth and wept;
	But all the drunken others slept.
	Jane slept beside me in the chair,
	And I got up; I wanted air.

	I opened window wide and leaned
	Out of that pigstye of the fiend
	And felt a cool wind go like grace
	About the sleeping market-place.
	The clock struck three, and sweetly, slowly,
	The bells chimed Holy, Holy, Holy;
	And in a second’s pause there fell
	The cold note of the chapel bell.
	And then a cock crew, flapping wings,
	And summat made me think of things.
	How long those ticking clocks had gone
	From church to chapel, on and on,
	Ticking the time out, ticking slow
	To men and girls who’d come and go,
	And how they ticked in belfry dark
	When half the town was bishop’s park,
	And how they’d run a chime full tilt
	The night after the church was built,
	And that night was Lambert’s Feast,
	The night I’d fought and been a beast.
	And how a change had come. And then
	I thought, “You tick to different men.”
	What with the fight and what with drinking
	And being awake alone there thinking,
	My mind began to carp and tetter,
	“If this life’s all, the beasts are better.”
	And then I thought, “I wish I’d seen
	The many towns this town has been;
	I wish I knew if they’d a got
	A kind of summat we’ve a-not,
	If them as built the church so fair
	Were half the chaps folk say they were;
	For they’d the skill to draw their plan,
	And skill’s a joy to any man;
	And they’d the strength, not skill alone,
	To build it beautiful in stone;
	And strength and skill together thus
	O, they were happier men than us.
	But if they were, they had to die
	The same as every one and I.
	And no one lives again, but dies,
	And all the bright goes out of eyes,
	and all the skill goes out of hands,
	And all the wise brain understands,
	And all the beauty, all the power
	Is cut down like a withered flower.
	In all the show from birth to rest
	I give the poor dumb cattle best.”

	I wondered, then, why life should be,
	And what would be the end of me
	When youth and health and strength were gone
	And cold old age came creeping on?
	A keeper’s gun? The Union ward?
	Or that new quod at Hereford?
	And looking round I felt disgust
	At all the nights of drink and lust,
	And all the looks of all the swine
	Who’d said that they were friends of mine;
	And yet I knew, when morning came,
	The morning would be just the same,
	for I’d have drinks and Jane would meet me
	And drunken Silas Jones would greet me,
	And I’d risk quod and keeper’s gun
	Till all the silly game was done.
	“For parson chaps are mad, supposin’
	A chap can change the road he’s chosen.”
	And then the Devil whispered, “Saul,
	Why should you want to live at all?
	Why fret and sweat and try to mend?
	It’s all the same thing in the end.
	But when it’s done,” he said, “it’s ended.
	Why stand it , since it can’t be mended?”
	And in my heart I heard him plain,
	“Throw yourself down and end it, Kane.”

	“Why not?” said I. “Why not? But no.
	I won’t. I’ve never had my go.
	I’ve not had all the world can give.
	Death by and by, but first I’ll live.
	The world owes me my time of times,
	And that time’s coming now, by crimes.”

	A madness took me then. I felt
	I’d like to hit the world a belt.
	I felt that I could fly through air,
	A screaming star with blazing hair,
	A rushing comet, crackling, numbing
	The folk with fear of judgment coming,
	A ‘Lijah in a fiery car,
	Coming to tell folk what they are.
	“That’s what I’ll do,” I shouted loud.
	“I’ll tell this sanctimonious crowd
	This town of window peeping, prying,
	Maligning, peering, hinting, lying,
	Male and female human blots
	Who would, but daren’t be, whores and sots,
	That they’re so steeped in petty vice
	That they’re less excellent than lice,
	That touching one of them will dirt you,
	Dirt you with the stain of mean
	Cheating trade and going between,
	Pinching, starving, scraping, hoarding
	To see if Sue, the prentice lean,
	Dares to touch the margarine.
	Fawning, cringing, oiling boots,
	Raging in the crowd’s pursuits,
	Flinging stones at all the Stephens,
	Standing firm with all the evens
	Making hell for all the odd,
	All the lonely ones of God,
	Those poor lonely ones who find
	Dogs more mild than human kind.
	For dogs,” I said, “are nobles born
	To most of you, you cockled corn.
	I’ve known dogs to leave their dinner,
	Nosing a kind heart in a sinner.
	Poor old Crafty wagged his tail
	The day I first came home from jail.
	When all my folk, so primly clad,
	Glowered black and thought me mad,.
	And muttered how they’d all expected.
	(I’ve thought of that old dog for years,
	And of how near I come to tears.)

	But you, you minds of bread and cheese,
	Are less divine tha[n] that dog’s fleas,
	You suck blood from kindly friends,
	And kill them when it serves your ends.,
	Double traitors, double black,
	Stabbing only in the back,
	Stabbing with the knives you borrow
	From the friends you bring to sorrow.
	You stab all that’s true and strong,
	Truth and strength you say are wrong,
	Meek and mild, and sweet and creeping,
	Repeating, canting cadging, peeping,
	That’s the art and that’s the life
	To win a man his neighbour’s wife.
	All that’s good and all that’s true,
	You kill that, so I’ll kill you.”
	At that I tore my clothes in shreds
	And hurled them on the window leads;
	I flung my boots through both the winders
	And knocked the glass to little flinders;
	The punch bowl and the tumblers followed,
	and then I seized the lamps and holloed,
	And down the stairs, and tore back bolts,
	As mad as twenty blooded colts;
	And out into the street I pass,
	As mad as two-year-olds at grass
	A naked madman saving grand
	A blazing lamp in either hand.
	I yelled like twenty drunken sailors,
	:The devil’s come among the tailors.”
	A blaze of flame behind me streamed,
	And then I clashed the lamps and screamed
	“I’m Satan, newly come from hell.”
	And then I spied the fire bell.

	I’ve been a ringer, so I know
	How best to make a big bell go.
	So on to bell-rope swift swoop,
	And stick my one foot in the loop
	And heave a down-swig till I groan
	“Awake, you swine, you devil’s own.”
	I made the fire-bell awake,
	I felt the bell-rope throb and shake;
	I felt the air mingle and clang
	And beat the walls a muffled bang,
	And stifle back and boom and bay
	Like muffled peals on Boxing Day,
	And then surge up and gather shape,
	And spread great pinions and escape;
	And each great bird of clanging shrieks
	O Fire! Fire, from iron beaks.
	My shoulders cracked to send around
	Those shrieking birds made out of sound
	With news of fire in their bills.
	(They heard ‘em plain beyond Wall Hills.).

	Up go the winders, out come heads,
	I heard the springs go creak in beds;
	But still I heave and sweat and tire,
	And still the clang goes “Fire, Fire!”
	“Where is it, then? Who is it, there?
	You ringer, stop, and tell us where.”
	“Run round and let the Captain know.”
	“It must be bad, he’s ringing so,”
	“It’s in the town, I see the flame;
	Look there! Look there, how red it came.”
	“Where is it, then? O stop the bell.”
	I stopped and called: “It’s fire of hell;
	And this is Sodom and Gomorrah,
	And now I’ll burn you up, begorra.”

	By this time firemen were mustering,
	The half-dressed stable men were flustering,
	Backing the horses out of stalls
	While this man swears and that man bawls,
	“Don’t take th’old mare. Back, Toby, back.
	Back, Lincoln. Where’s the fire, Jack?”
	“Damned if I know. Out Preston way.”
	“No. It’s at Chancey’s Pitch, they say.”
	“It’s sixteen ricks at Pauntley burnt.”
	“You back old Darby out, I durn’t.”
	They ran the big red engine out,
	And put ‘em to with damn and shout.
	And then they start to raise the shire,
	“Who brought the news, and where’s the fire?”
	They’s moonlight, lamps, and gas to light ‘em.
	I give a screech-owl’s screech to fright ‘em,
	And snatch from underneath their noses
	The nozzles of the fire hoses.
	“I am the fire. Back, stand back,
	Or else I’ll fetch your skulls a crack;
	D’you see these copper nozzles here?
	They weigh ten pounds a piece, my dear;
	I’m fire of hell come up this minute
	To burn this town and burn you clean,
	You cogwheels in a stopped machine,
	You hearts of snakes, and brains of pigeons,
	You dead devout of dead religions,
	You offspring of the hen and ass,
	By Pilate ruled, and Caiaphas.
	Now your account is totted. Learn
	Hell’s flames are loose and you shall burn.”

	At that I leaped and screamed and ran,
	I heard their cries go, “Catch him, man.”
	“Who was it?” “Down him.” “Out him, Em.”
	“Duck him at pump, we’ll see who’ll burn.”
	A policeman clutched, a fireman clutched,
	A dozen others snatched and touched.
	“By God, he’s stripped down to his buff.”
	“By God, we’ll make him warm enough.”
	“After him,” “Catch him,” “Out him,” ” Scrob him.”
	“We’ll give him hell.” “By God, we’ll mob him.”
	“We’ll duck him, scrout him, flog him, fratch him.”
	“All right,” I said. “But first you’ll catch him.”

	The men who don’t know to the root
	The joy of being swift of foot,
	Have never known divine and fresh
	The glory of the gift of flesh,
	Nor felt the feet exult, not gone
	Along a dim road, on and on,
	Knowing again the bursting glows,
	the mating hare in April knows,
	Who tingles to the pads with mirth
	At being the swiftest thing on earth.
	O, if you want to know delight,
	Run naked in an autumn night,
	And laugh, as I laughed then, to find
	A running rabble drop behind,
	and whang, on ever door you pass,
	Two copper nozzles, tipped with brass,
	And double whang at every turning,
	And yell, “All hell’s loose, and burning.”

	I beat my brass and shouted fire
	At doors of parson, lawyer, squire,
	at all three doors I threshed and slammed
	And yelled aloud that they were damned.
	I clodded squire’s glass with turves
	Because he spring-gunned his preserves.
	Through parson’s glass my nozzle swishes
	Because he stood for loaves and fishes,
	but parson’s glass I spared a tittle.
	He give me a orange once when little,
	And he who gives a child a treat
	Makes joy-bells ring in Heaven’s street,
	And he who gives a child a home
	Build palaces in Kingdom come
	and she who gives a baby birth
	Brings Saviour Christ again to Earth,
	For life is joy, and mind is fruit,
	And body’s precious earth and root.
	But lawyer’s glass-well, never mind,
	Th’ old Adam’s strong in me, I find.
	God pardon man, and may God’s son
	Forgive the evil things I’ve done.

	What more? By Dirty Lane I crept
	Back to the Lion, where I slept.
	The raging madness hot and floodin’
	Boiled itself out and left me sudden,
	Left me worn out and sick and cold,
	Aching as though I’d all grown old;
	So there I lay, and there they found me
	On door-mat, with a curtain round me.
	Si took my heels and Jane my head
	And laughed, and carried me to bed.
	And from the neighbouring street they reskied
	My boots and trousers, coat and weskit;
	They bath-bricked both the nozzles bright
	To be mementoes of the night,
	And knowing what I should awake with,
	They flanelled me a quart to slake with
	And sat and shook till half past two
	Expecting Police Inspector Drew.
	I woke and drank, nd went to meat
	In clothes still dirty from the street.
	Down in the bar I hear ‘em tell
	How someone rang the fire bell,
	And how th’inspector’s search had thriven,
	And how five pounds reward was given.
	And shepherd Boyce, of Marley, glad us
	By saying was blokes from mad’us.
	Or two young rips lodged at the Prince
	Whom none had seen nor heard of since,
	Or that young blade from Worcester Walk
	(You know how country people talk).
	Young Joe the ostler come in sad,
	He said th’old mare had bit his dad.
	He said there’d come a blazing screeching
	Daft Bible-prophet chap a-preaching,
	Had put th’old mare in such a taking
	she’d thought the bloody earth was quaking.
	And others come and spread a tale
	Of cut-throats out of Gloucester jail,
	And how we needed extra cops
	With all them Welsh come picking hops:
	With drunken Welsh in all our sheds
	We might be murdered in our beds.

	By all accounts, both men and wives
	Had had the scare up of their lives.

	I ate and drank and gathered strength,
	And stretched along the bench full length,
	Or crossed to window seat to pat
	Black Silas Jones’s little cat.
	At four I called, “You devil’s own,
	The second trumpet shall be blown.
	The second trump, the second blast;
	Hell’s flames are loosed, and judgment’s passed.
	Too late for mercy now. Take warning.
	I’m death and hell and Judgment morning.”
	I hurled the bench into the settle,
	I banged the table on the kettle,
	I sent Joe’s quart of cider spinning.
	“Lo, here begins my second inning.”
	Each bottle, mug, and jug and pot
	I smashed to crocks in half a tot;
	And Joe, and Si, and Nick, and Percy
	I rolled together topsy versy.
	And as I ran I heard ‘em call,
	“Now damn to hell, what’s gone with Saul?”
	Out into street I ran uproarious
	The devil dancing in me glorious.
	And as I ran I yell and shriek
	“Come on, now, turn the other cheek.”
	Across the way by almshouse pump
	I see old puffing parson stump.
	Old parson, red-eyed as a ferret
	From nightly wrestlings with the spirit;
	I ran acrosss, and barred his path.
	His turkey gills went red as wrath
	And then he froze as parsons can.
	“The police will deal with you, my man.”
	“Not yet, “said I, “not yet they won’t;
	And now you’ll hear me, like or don’t.
	The English Church both is and was
	A subsidy of Caiaphas.
	I don’t believe in Prayer or Bible,
	They’re lies all through, and you’re a libel,
	A libel on the Devil’s plan
	When first he miscreated man.
	You mumble through a formal code
	To get which martyrs burned and blowed.

	I look on martyrs as mistakes,
	But still they burned for it at stakes;
	Your only fire’s the jolly fire
	Where you can guzzle port with Squire,
	And back and praise his damned opinions
	About his temporal dominions.
	You let him give the man who digs,
	A filthy hut unfit for pigs,
	Without a well, without a drain,
	With mossy thatch that lets in rain,
	Without a ‘lotment, ‘less he rent it,
	And never meat, unless he scent it,
	But weekly doles of ‘leven shilling
	To make a grown man strong and willing,
	To do the hardest work on earth
	And feed his wife when she gives birth,
	And feed his little children’s bones.
	I tell you, man, the Devil groans.
	With all your main and all your might
	You back what is against what’s right;
	You let the Squire do things like these,
	You back him in’t and give him ease,
	You take his hand and drink his wine,
	And he’s a hog, but you’re a swine.
	For you take gold to teach God’s ways
	And teach man how to sing God’s praise.
	And now I’ll tell you what you teach
	In downright honest English speech.

	“You teach the ground-down starving man
	That Squire’s greed’s Jehovah’s plan.
	You get his learning circumvented
	Lest it should make him discontented
	(Better a brutal, starving nation
	Than men with thoughts above their station),
	You let him neither read nor think,
	You goad his wretched soul to drink
	And then to jail, the drunken boor;
	O sad intemperance of the poor.
	You starve his soul till it’s rapscallion,
	Then blame his flesh for being stallion.
	You send your wife around to paint
	The golden glories of “restraint.”
	How moral exercise bewild’rin’
	Would soon result in fewer children.
	You work a day in Squire’s fields
	And see what sweet restraint it yields,
	A woman’s day at turnip picking,
	Your hearts too fat for plough or ricking.

	“And you whom luck taught French and Greek
	Have purple flaps on either cheek,
	A stately house, and time for knowledge,
	And gold to send your sons to college,
	That pleasant place, where getting learning
	Is also key to money earning.
	But quite your damndest want of grace
	Is what you do to save your face;
	The way you sit astride the gates
	By padding wages out of rates;
	Your Christmas gifts of shoddy blankets
	That every working soul may thank its
	Loving parson, loving squire
	Through whom he can’t afford a fire.
	Your well-packed bench, your prison pen,
	To keep them something less than men;
	Your friendly clubs to help ‘em bury.
	Your charities of midwifery.
	Your bidding children duck and cap
	To them who give them workhouse pap.
	O, what you are, and what you preach,
	And what you do, and what you teach
	Is not God’s Word, nor honest schism,
	But Devil’s scant and pauperism.”

	By this time many folk had gathered
	To listen to me while I blathered;
	I said my piece, and when I’d said it,
	I’ll do the purple parson credit,
	He sunk (as sometimes parsons can)
	His coat’s excuses in the man.
	“You’d think the Squire and I are kings
	Who made the existing state of things,
	And made it ill. I answer, No,
	States are not made, nor patched; they grow,
	Grow slow through centuries of pain
	And grow correctly in the main,
	But only grow by certain laws
	Of certain bits in certain jaws.
	You want to doctor that. Let be.
	You cannot patch a growing tree.
	Put these two words beneath your hat,
	These two: securus judicat.
	The social states of human kinds
	Are made by multitudes of minds,
	And after multitudes of years
	A little human growth appears
	Worth having, even to the soul
	Who sees most plain it’s not the whole.

	This state is dull and evil, both,
	I keep it in the path of growth;
	You think the Church an outworn fetter;
	Kane, keep it, till you’ve built a better.
	And keep the existing social state;
	I quite agree it’s out of date,
	One does too much, another shirks,
	Unjust, I grant; but still. . . it works.
	To get the whole world out of bed
	And washed, and dressed, and warmed, and fed,
	To work, and back to bed again,
	Believe me, Saul, costs worlds of pain.
	Then, as to whether true or sham
	That book of Christ, Whose priest I am;
	The Bible is a lie, say you,
	where do you stand, suppose it true?
	Goodbye. But if you’ve more to say
	My doors are open night and day.
	Meanwhile, my friend, ‘twould be no sin
	To mix more water in your gin.
	We’re neither saints nor Philip Sidneys,
	But mortal men with mortal kidneys.”



	He took his snuff, and wheezed a greeting,
	And waddled off to mother’s meeting;
	I hung my head upon my chest,
	I give old purple parson best.
	For while the Plough tips round the Pole
	The trained mind outs the upright soul,
	As Jesus said the trained mind might,
	Being wiser than the sons of light,
	But trained men’s minds are spread so thin
	They let all sorts of darkness in;
	Whatever light man finds they doubt it
	They love, not light, but talk about it.

	But parson’d proved to people’s eyes
	That I was drunk, and he was wise;
	And people grinned and women tittered,
	And little children mocked and twittered.
	So, blazing mad, I stalked to bar
	To show how noble drunkards are,
	And guzzled spirits like a beast,
	To show contempt for Church and priest,
	Until, by six, my wits went round
	Like hungry pigs in parish pound.
	At half past six, rememb’ring Jane,
	I staggered into street again
	With mind made up (or primed for gin)
	To bash the coop who’d run me in;
	For well I knew I’d have to cock up
	My legs that night inside the lock-up,
	And it was my most fixed intent
	To have a fight before I went.
	Our Fates are strange, and no one now his;
	Our lovely Saviour Christ disposes.

	Jane wasn’t where we’d planned, the jade.
	She’d thought me drunk and hadn’t stayed.
	So I went up the Walk to look for her
	And lingered by the little brook for her,
	And dowsed my face, and drank at spring,
	And watched two wild ducks on the wing,
	The moon come pale, the wind come cool,
	A big pike leapt in Lower Pool,
	The Peacock screamed, the clouds were straking,
	My cut cheek felt the weather breaking;
	An orange sunset waned and thinned
	Foretelling rain and western wind,
	And while I watched I heard distinct
	The metals on the railway clinked.
	The blood-edged clouds were all in tatters,
	The sky and earth seemed mad as hatters;
	they had a death look, wild and odd,
	Of something dark foretold by God.
	And seeing it so, I felt so shaken
	I wouldn’t keep the road I’d taken,
	But wandered back towards the inn
	Resolved to brace myself with gin.
	And as I walked, I said, “It’s strange,
	There’s Death let loose to-night, and Change.”

	In Cabbage Walk, I made a haul
	Of two big pears from lawyer’s wall,
	And, munching one, I took the lane
	Back into Market-place again.
	Lamp-lighter Dick had passed the turning.
	And all the Homend lamps were burning,
	The windows shone, the shops were busy,
	But that strange Heaven made me dizzy.
	The sky had all God’s warning writ
	In bloody marks all over it,
	And over all I thought there was
	A ghastly light besides the gas.
	The Devil’s tasks and Devil’s rages
	Were giving me the Devil’s wages.

	In Market-place it’s always light,
	The big shop windows make it bright;
	And in the press of people buying
	I spied a little fellow crying
	Because his mother’d gone inside
	And left him there, and so he cried.
	And mother’d beat him when she found him,
	And mother’s whip would curl right round him,
	And mother’d say h’ed done to crost her,
	Though there being crowds about he’d lost her.

	Lord, give to men who are old and rougher
	The things that little children suffer,
	And let keep bright and undefiled
	The young years of the little child.
	I pat his head at edge of street
	And gi’m my second pear to eat.
	Right under lamp I pat his head,
	“I’ll stay till mother come,” I said,
	And stay I did, and joked and talked,
	And shoppers wondered as they walked,
	“There’s that Saul Kane, the drunken blaggard,
	Talking to little Jimmy Jaggard.
	The drunken blaggard reeks of drink.”
	“Whatever will his mother think?”
	“Wherever has his mother gone?
	Nip round to Mrs. Jaggard’s, John,
	And say her Jimmy’s out again,
	In Market-place with boozer Kane.”
	“When he come out to-day he staggered.
	O, Jimmy Jaggard, Jimmy Jaggard.”
	“His mother’s gone inside to bargain,
	Run in and tell her , Polly Margin,
	And tell her poacher Kane is tipsy
	And selling Jimmy to a gipsy.”
	“Run in to Mrs. Jaggard, Ellen,
	Or else, dear knows, there’ll be no tellin’,
	And don’t dare leave yer till you’ve fount her,
	You’ll find her at the linen counter.”
	I told a tale, to Jim’s delight
	Of where the tom-cats go by night,
	And how when moonlight came they went
	Among the chimneys black and bent,
	From roof to roof, from house to house,
	With little baskets full of mouse
	All red and white, both joint and chnop
	Like meat out of a butcher’s shop;
	Then all along the wall they creep
	And everyone is fast asleep,
	And honey-hunting moths go by,
	And by the bread-batch crickets cry;
	Then on they hurry, never waiting
	To lawyer’s backyard cellar grating
	where Jaggard’s cat, with clever paw,’
	Unhooks a broke-brick’s secret door;
	Then down into the cellar black,
	Across the wood slug’s slimy track,
	Into an old cask’s quiet hollow,
	Where they’ve got seats for what’s to follow;
	Then each tom-cats light little candles,
	And O, the stories and the scandals,
	And O, the songs and Christmas carols,
	And O, the milk from little barrels.
	They light a fire fit for roasting
	(And how good mouse-meat smells when toasting),
	Then down they sit to merry feast
	While moon goes west and sun comes east.

	Sometimes they make so merry there
	Old lawyer comes to head of stair
	To ‘fend with fist and poker took firm
	His parchments channeled by the bookworm,
	And all his deeds, and all his packs
	Of withered ink and sealing wax;
	And there he stands, with candle raised,
	And listens like a man amazed,
	Or like ghost a man stands dumb at,
	He says, “Hush! Hush! I’m sure there’s summat.”
	He hears outside the brown owl call,
	He hears the death-tick tap the wall,
	the gnawing of the wainscot mouse,
	The creaking ujp and down the house,
	The unhooked window’s hinges ranging,
	The sounds that say the wind is changing.
	At last he turns and shakes his head,
	“It’s nothing. I’ll go back to bed.”

	And just then Mrs. Jaggard came
	To view and end her Jimmy’s shame.

	She made on rush and gi’m a bat
	And shook him like a dog a rat.
	“I can’t turn round but what you’re straying.
	I’ll give you tales and gipsy playing.
	I’ll give you wand’ring off like this
	And listening to whatever ‘tis,
	You’ll laugh the little side of the can,
	You’ll have the whip for his, my man;
	And not a bite of meat nor bread
	You’ll touch before you go to bed.
	Some day you’ll break your mother’s heart,
	After God knows she done her part,
	Working her arms off day and night
	Trying to keep your collars white.
	Look at your face, too, in the street.
	What dirty filth’ve you found to eat?
	Now don’t you blubber here, boy, or
	I’ll give you sum’t to blubber for.”
	She snatched him off from where we stand
	And knocked the pear-core from his hand,
	and looked at me, “You Devil’s limb,
	How dare you talk to Jaggard’s Jim;
	You drunken, poaching, boozing brute, you,
	If Jaggard was a man, he’d shoot you.”
	She glared all this, but didn’t speak,
	she gasped, white hollows in her cheek;
	Jimmy was writhing, screaming wild,
	The shoppers thought I’d killed the child.

	I had to speak, so I begun.
	“You oughtn’t beat your little son;
	He did no harm, but seeing him there
	I talked to him and gi’m a pear;
	I’m sure the poor child meant no wrong,
	It’s all my fault he stayed so long,
	He’d not have stayed, mum, I’ll be bound
	If I’d not chanced to come around.
	It’s all my fault he stayed, not his.
	I kept him here, that’s how it is.”
	“Oh!” And how dare you, then?” says she,
	How dare yo tempt my boy from me?
	How dare you do’t, you drunken swine,
	Is he your child or is he mine?
	A drunken sot they’ve had the beak to,
	Has got his dirty whores to speak to,
	His dirty mates with home he drink,
	Not little children, one would think.
	“Look on him, there,” she says, “Look on him
	And smell the stinking gin upon him,
	The lowest sot, the drunknest liar,
	The dirtiest dog in all the shire:
	Nice friends for any woman’s son
	After ten years, and all she’s done.

	“For I’ve had eight, and buried five,
	And only three are left alive.
	I’ve given them all we could afford.
	I’ve taught them all to fear the Lord.
	They’ve had the best we had to give,
	The only three the Lord let live.

	“For Minnie whom I love the worst
	Died mad in childbirth with her first.
	And John and Mary died of measles,
	And Rob was drowned at the Teasels.
	And little Nan, dear little sweet,
	A cart run over in the street;
	Her little shift was all one stain,
	I prayed God put her out of pain.
	And all the rest are gone or going
	The road to hell, and there’s no knowing
	For all I’ve done and all I’ve made them
	I’d better not have overlaid them.
	For Susan went the ways of shame
	The time the ‘till’ry regiment came,
	And t’have her child without a father
	I think I’d have her buried father.
	And Dicky boozes, God forgimme,
	And now’t’s to be the same with Jimmy.
	And all I’ve done and all I’ve bore
	Has made a drunkard and a whore,,
	A bastard boy who wasn’t meant,
	And Jimmy gwine where Dicky went;
	For Dick began the self-same way
	And my old hairs are going gray,
	And my poor man’s a withered knee,
	And all the burden falls on me.
	“I’ve washed eight little children’s limbs,
	I’ve taught eight little souls their hymns,
	I’ve risen sick and lain down pinched
	And borne it all and never flinched;
	But to see him, the town’s disgrace,
	With God’s commandments broke in’s face,
	Who never worked, not he, nor earned,
	Nor will do till the seas are burned,
	Who never did since he was whole
	A hand’s turn for a human soul,
	But poached and stole and gone with women,
	And swilled down gin enough to swim in,
	To see him only lift a finger
	To make my little Jimmy linger.
	In spite of all his mother’s prayers,
	And all her ten long years of cares,
	and all her broken spirit’s cry
	That drunkard’s finger puts them by,
	And Jimmy turns. And now I see
	That just as Dick was, Jim will be,
	And all my life will have been in vain.
	I might have spared myself the pain,
	And done the world a blessed riddance
	If I’d a drowned ‘em all like kittens.
	And he the sot, so strong and proud,
	Who’d make white shirts of a mother’s shroud,
	He laughs now, it’s a joke to him,
	Though it’s the gates of hell for Jim.

	“I’ve had my heart burnt out like coal,
	And drops of blood wrung from my soul
	Day in, day out, in pain and tears,
	For five and twenty wretched years;
	And he, he’s ate the fat and sweet,
	And loafed and spat at top of street,
	And drunk and leched from day till morrow,
	And never known a moment’s sorrow.
	He come out drunk from th’inn to look
	the day my little Nan was took;
	He sat there drinking, glad and gay,
	The night my girl was led astray;
	He praised my Dick for singing well,
	The night Dick took the road to hell;
	And when my corpse goes stiff and blind,
	Leaving four helpless souls behind,
	He will be there still, drunk and strong.
	It do seem hard. It do seem wring.
	But “Woe to him by whom the offense,”
	Says our Lord Jesus’ Testaments.
	Whatever seems, God doth not slumber
	Though he lets pass times without number.
	He’ll come with trump to call his own,
	And t his world’s way’ll be overthrown.
	He’ll come with glory and with fire
	To cast great darkness on the liar,
	To burn the drunkard and the treacher,
	And do his judgment on the lecher,
	To glorify the spirit’s faces
	Of those whose ways were stony places
	Who chose with Ruth the better part;
	O Lord, i see Thee as Thou are,
	O God, the fiery, four-edged sword,
	The thunder of the wrath outpoured,
	The fiery four-faced creatures burning,
	And all the four-faced wheels all turning,
	Coming with trump and fiery saint.
	Jim, take me home, I’m turning faint.”
	They went, and some cried, “Good old sod.”
	“She put it to him straight, by God.”

	Summat, whe was, or looked, or said,
	Went home and made me hang my head.
	I slunk away into the night
	Knowing deep down that she was right.
	I’d often hear[d] religious ranters,
	And put them down as windy canters,
	But this old mother made me see
	the harm I done by being me.
	Being both strong and given to sin
	I ‘stracted weaker vessels in.
	So back to bar to get more drink,
	I didn’t dare begin to think,
	And there were drinks and drunken singing,
	As though this life were dice for flinging;
	Dice to be flung, and nothing furder,
	And Christ’s blood just another murder.
	“Come on, drinks round, salue, drink hearty,
	Now, Jane, the punch-bowl for the party.
	If any here won’t drink with me
	I’ll knock his bloody eyes out. See?
	Come on, cigars round, rum for mine,
	Sing us a smutty song, some swine.”
	But though the drinks and songs went round
	That thought remained, it was not drowned.
	And when I’d rise to get a light
	I’d think, “What’s come to me tonight?”

	There’s always crowds when drinks are standing.
	The house doors slammed along the landing,
	The rising wind was gusty yet,
	And those who cam in late were wet;
	And all my body’s nerves were snappin’
	With sense of summat ‘bout to happen,
	And music seemed to come and go
	And seven lights danced in a row.
	There used be a custom then,
	Miss Bourne, the Friend, went round at ten
	To all the pubs in all the place,
	To bring the drunkards’ souls to grace;
	Some sulked, of course, and some were stirred,
	But none give her a dirty word.
	A tall pale woman, grey and bent,
	Folk said of her that she was sent
	She wore Friend’s clothes, and women smiled,
	But she’d a heart just like a child.
	She come to us near closing time
	when we were at some smutty rhyme,
	And I was mad, and ripe for fun;
	I wouldn’t a minded what I done.
	So when she come so prim and grey
	I pound the bar and sing, “Hooray,
	Here’s Quaker come to bless and kiss us,
	Come, have a gin and bitters, missus,
	Or may be Quaker girls so prim
	Would rather start a bloody hymn.
	Now Dick, oblige. A hymn, you swine,
	Pipe up the ‘Officer of the Line,’
	A song to make one’s belly ache,
	Or ‘Nell and Roger at the Wake,’
	Or that sweet song, the talk in town,
	‘The lady fair and Abel Brown.’
	‘O, who’s that knocking at the door,’
	Miss Bourne’ll play the music score.”
	The men stood dumb as cattle are,
	They grinned, but thought I’d gone too far,
	There come a hush and no one break it,
	They wondered how Miss Bourne would take it.
	She up to me with black eyes wide,
	She looked as though her spirit cried;
	She took my tumbler from the bar
	Beside where all the matches are
	And poured it out upon the floor dust,
	Among the fag-ends, spit and saw-dust.

	“Saul Kane,” she said, “when next you drink,
	Do me the gentleness to think
	That every drop of drink accursed
	Makes Christ within you die of thirst,
	That every dirty word you say
	Is one more flint upon his way,
	Another thorn about His head,
	Another mock by where He tread,
	Another nail, another cross.
	All that you are is that Christ’s loss.”
	The clock run down and struck a chime
	And Mrs. Si said, “Closing time.”

	The wet was pelting on the pane
	And something broke inside my brain,
	I heard the rain drip from the gutters
	And Silas putting up the shutters,
	While one by one the drinkers went;
	I got a glimpse of what it meant,
	How she and I had stood before
	In some old town by some old door
	Waiting intent while someone knocked
	Before the door for ever locked;
	She was so white that I was scared,
	A gas jet, turned the wrong way, flared,
	And Silas snapped the bars in place.
	Miss Bourne stood white and searched my face.
	When Silas done, with ends of tunes
	He ‘gan a gathering the spittoons,
	His wife primmed lips and took the till.
	Miss Bourne stood still and I stood still.
	Miss Bourne stood still and I stood still,
	And “Tick. Slow. Tick. Slow” went the clock.
	She said, “He waits until you knock.”
	She turned at that and went out swift,
	Si grinned and winked, his missus sniffed.

	I heard her clang the Lion door,
	I marked a drink-drop roll to floor;
	It took up scraps of sawdust, furry,
	And crinkled on, a half inch, blurry;
	A drop from my last glass of gin;
	And someone waiting to come in,
	A hand upon the door latch gropen
	Knocking the man inside to open.
	I know the very words I said,
	They bayed like bloodhounds in my head.
	“The water’s going out to sea
	And there’s a great moon calling me;
	But there’s a great sun calls the moon,
	And all God’s bells will carol soon
	For joy and glory and delight
	Of someone coming home to-night.”
	Out into darkness, out to night,
	My flaring heart gave plenty light,
	So wild it was there was no knowing
	Whether the clouds or stars were blowing;
	Blown chimney pots and folk blown blind,
	And puddles glimmering in my mind,
	And chinking glass from windows banging,
	And inn signs swung like people hanging,
	And in my heart the drink unpriced,
	The burning cataracts of Christ.

	I did not think, I did not strive,
	The deep peace burnt my me alive;
	The bolted door had broken in,
	I knew that I had done with sin.
	I knew that Christ had given me birth
	To brother all the souls on earth,
	And every bird and every beast
	Should share the crumbs broke at the feast.



	O glory of the lighted mind.
	How dead I’d been, how dumb, how blind.
	The station brook, to my new eyes,
	Was babbling out of Paradise,
	The waters rushing from the rain
	Were singing Christ has risen again.
	I thought all earthly creatures knelt
	From rapture of the joy I felt.
	The narrow station-wall’s brick ledge,
	The wild hop withering in the hedge,
	The lights in huntsmans’ upper storey
	Were parts of an eternal glory,
	Were God’s eternal garden flowers.
	I stood in bliss at this for hours.

	O glory of the lighted soul.
	The dawn came up on Bradlow Knoll,
	The dawn with glittering on the grasses,
	The dawn which pass and never passes.

	“It’s dawn,” I said, “And chimney’s smoking,
	And all the blessed fields are soaking.’
	It’s dawn, and there’s an engine shunting;
	And hounds, for huntsman’s going hunting.
	It’s dawn, and I must wander north
	Along the road Christ led me forth.”

	So up the road I wander slow
	Past where the snowdrops used to grow
	With celandines in early springs,
	When rainbows were triumphant things
	And dew so bright and flowers so glad,
	Eternal joy to lass and lad.
	And past the lovely brook I paced,
	The brook whose source I never traced,
	The brook, the one of two which rise
	In my green dream in Paradise,
	In wells where heavenly buckets clink
	To give God’s wandering thirsty drink
	By those clean cots of carven stone
	Where the clear water sings alone.
	Then down, past that white-blossomed pond,
	And past the chestnut trees beyond,
	And past the bridge the fishers knew,
	Where yellow flag flowers once grew,
	Where we’d go gathering cops of clover,
	In sunny June times long since over.
	O clover-cops half white, half red,
	O beauty from beyond the dead.
	O blossom, key to earth and heaven,
	O souls that Christ has new forgiven.
	Then down the hill to gipsies’ pitch
	By where the brook clucks in the ditch.
	A gipsy’s camp was in the copse,
	Three felted tents, with beehive tops,
	And round black marks where fires had been,
	And one old waggon painted green,
	And three ribbed horses wrenching grass,
	And three wild boys to watch me pass,
	And one old woman by the fire
	Hulking a rabbit warm from wire.
	I loved to see the horses bait,
	I felt I walked at Heaven’s gate,
	That Heaven’s gate was opened wide
	Yet still the gipsies camped outside.
	The waste souls will prefer the wild,
	Long after life is meek and mild.
	Perhaps when man has entered in’
	His perfect city free from sin,
	The campers will come past the walls
	With old lame horses full of galls,
	And waggons hung about with withies,
	And burning coke in tinker’s stithies,
	And see the golden town, and choose,
	And think the wild to good to lose.
	And camp outside, as these camped then
	With wonder at the entering men.
	So past, and past the stone heap white
	That dewberry trailers hid from sight,
	And down the field so full of springs,
	Where mewing peewits clap their wings,
	And past the trap made for the mill
	Into the field below the hill.
	There was a mist along the stream,
	A wet mist, dim, like in a dream;
	I heard the heavy breath of cows
	And waterdrops from th’alder boughs;
	And eels, or snakes, in dripping grass,
	Whipping aside to let me pass.
	The gate was backed against the ryme
	To pass the cows at milking time.
	And by the gate as I went out
	A moldwarp rooted earth wi’s snout.
	A few steps up the Callow’s Lane
	Brought me above the mist again,
	The two great fields arose like death
	Above the mists of human breath.

	All earthly things that blessиd morning
	Were everlasting joy and warning,
	The gate was Jesus’way made plain,
	the mole was Satan foiled again,
	black blinded Satan snouting way
	Along the red of Adam’s clay;
	The mist was error and damnatiion,
	The lane the road unto salvation.
	Out of the mist into the light,
	O blessиd gift of inner sight.
	The past was faded like a dream;
	There come the jingling of a team,
	A ploughman’s voice, a clink of chain,
	Slow hoofs, and harness under strain.
	Up the slow slope a team came bowing,
	Old Callow at his autumn ploughing,
	Old Callow, stooped above the hales,
	Ploughing the stubble into wales.
	His grave eyes looking straight ahead,
	Shearing a long straight furrow red;
	His plough-foot high to give it earth
	To bring new food for men to birth.
	O wet red swathe of earth laid bare,
	O truth, O strength, O gleaming share,
	O patient eyes that watch the goal,
	O ploughman of the sinner’s soul.
	O Jesus, drive the coulter deep
	To plough my living man from sleep.

	Slow up the hill the plough team plod,
	Old Callow at the task of God,
	Helped by man’s wit, helped by the brute,
	Turning a stubborn clay to fruit,
	His eyes forever on some sign
	To help him plough a perfect line.
	At top of rise the plough team stopped,
	The fore-horse bent his head and cropped.
	Then the chains chack, the brasses jingle,
	The lean reins gather through the cringle,
	The figures move against the sky,
	The clay wave breaks as they go by.
	I kneeled there in the muddy fallow,
	I knew that Christ was there with Callow,
	That Christ was standing there with me,
	That Christ had taught me what to be,
	That I should plough, and as I ploughed
	My Saviour Christ would sing aloud,
	And as I drove the clods apart
	Christ would be ploughing in my heart,
	Through rest-harrow and bitter roots,
	Through all my bad life’s rotten fruits.

	O Christ who holds the open gate,
	O Christ who drives the furrow straight,
	O Christ, the plough, O Christ, the laughter
	Of holy white birds flying after,
	Lo, all my heart’s field red and torn,
	And Thou wilt bring the young green corn,
	The young green corn divinely springing,
	The young green corn forever singing;
	And when the field is fresh and fair
	Thy blessиd feet shall glitter there,
	And we will walk the weeded field,
	And tell the holden harvests’s yield,
	The corn that makes the holy bread
	By which the soul of man is fed,
	The holy bread, the food unpriced,
	Thy everlasting mercy, Christ.

	The share will jar on many a stone,
	Thou wilt not let me stand alone;
	And I shall feel (thou wilt not fail),
	Thy hand on mine upon the hale.
	Near Bullen Bank, on Gloucester Road,
	Thy everlasting mercy showed
	The ploughman patient on the hill
	Forever there, forever still,
	Ploughing the hill with steady yoke
	Of pine-trees lightning-struck and broke.
	I’ve marked the May Hill ploughman stay
	There on his hill, day after day
	Driving his team against the sky,
	While men and women live and die.
	And now and then he seems to stoop
	To clear the coulter with the scoop,
	Or touch an ox to haw or gee
	While Severn stream goes out to sea.
	The sea with all her ships and sails,
	And that great smoky port in Wales,
	And Gloucester tower bright i’ the sun,
	All know that patient wandering one.
	And sometimes when they burn the leaves
	The bonfires’ smoking trails and heaves,
	And girt red flamлs twink and twire
	As though he ploughed the hill afire.
	And in men’s hearts in many lands
	A spiritual ploughman stands
	Forever waiting, waiting now,
	The heart’s “Put in, man, zook the plough.”

	By this the sun was all one glitter,
	The little birds were all atwitter;
	Out of a tuft a little lark
	Went higher up than I could mark,
	His little throat was all one thirst
	To sing until his heart should burst
	To sing aloft in golden light
	His song from blue air out of sight.
	The mist drove by, and now the cows
	Came plodding up to milking house.
	Followed by Frank, the Callow’s cowman,
	Who whistled, “Adam was a ploughman.”
	There came such cawing from the rooks,
	Such running chuck from little brooks,
	One thought it March, just budding green,
	With hedgerows full of celandine.
	An otter’ out of stream and played,
	Two hares come loping up and stayed;
	Wide-eyed and tender-eared but bold.
	Sheep bleated up from Penny’s fold.
	I heard a partridge covey call,
	The morning sun was bright on all.
	Down the long slope the plough team drove
	The tossing rooks arose and hove.
	A stone struck on the share. A word
	Came to the team. The red earth stirred.

	I crossed the hedge by shooter’s gap,
	I hitched my boxer’s belt a strap,
	I jumped the ditch and crossed the fallow:
	I took the hales from framer Callow.

	How swift the summer goes,
	Forget-me-not, pink, rose.
	The young grass when I started
	And now the hay is carted,
	And now my song is ended,
	And all the summer splended;
	The blackbirds’ second brood
	Routs beech leaves in the wood;
	The pink and rose have speeded,
	Forget-me-not has seeded.
	Only the winds that blew,
	The rain that makes things new,
	The earth that hides things old,
	And blessings manifold.

	O lovely lily clean,
	O lily springing green,
	O lily bursting white,
	Dear lily of delight,
	Spring my heart agen
	That I may flower to men.



10. FRAGMENTS

	Troy Town is covered up with weeds,
	The rabbits and the pismires brood
	On broken gold, and shards, and beads
	Where Priam’s ancient palace stood.

	The floors of many a gallant house
	Are matted with the roots of grass;
	The glow-worm and the nimble mouse
	Among her ruins flit and pass.

	And there, in orts of blackened bone,
	The widowed Trojan beauties lie,
	And Simois babbles over stone
	And waps and gurgles to the sky.

	Once there were merry days in Troy,
	Her chimneys smoked with cooking meals,
	The passing chariots did annoy
	The sunning housewives at their wheels.

	And many a lovely Trojan maid
	Set Trojan lads to lovely things;
	The game of life was nobly played,
	They played the game like Queens and Kings.

	So that, when Troy had greatly passed
	In one red roaring fiery coal,
	The courts the Grecians overcast
	Became a city in the soul.

	In some green island of the sea,
	Where now the shadowy coral grows
	In pride and pomp and empery
	The courts of old Atlantis rose.

	In many a glittering house of glass
	The Atlanteans wandered there;
	The paleness of their faces was
	Like ivory, so pale they were.

	And hushed they were, no noise of words
	In those bright cities ever rang;
	Only their thoughts, like golden birds,
	About their chambers thrilled and sang.

	They knew all wisdom, for they knew
	The souls of those Egyptian Kings
	Who learned, in ancient Babilu,
	The beauty of immortal things.

	They knew all beauty--when they thought
	The air chimed like a stricken lyre,
	The elemental birds were wrought,
	The golden birds became a fire.

	And straight to busy camps and marts
	The singing flames were swiftly gone;
	The trembling leaves of human hearts
	Hid boughs for them to perch upon.

	And men in desert places, men
	Abandoned, broken, sick with fears,
	Rose singing, swung their swords agen,
	And laughed and died among the spears.

	The green and greedy seas have drowned
	That city’s glittering walls and towers,
	Her sunken minarets are crowned
	With red and russet water-flowers.

	In towers and rooms and golden courts
	The shadowy coral lifts her sprays;
	The scrawl hath gorged her broken orts,
	The shark doth haunt her hidden ways.

	But, at the falling of the tide,
	The golden birds still sing and gleam,
	The Atlanteans have not died,
	Immortal things still give us dream.

	The dream that fires man’s heart to make,
	To build, to do, to sing or say
	A beauty Death can never take,
	An Adam from the crumbled clay.



11. ON GROWING OLD

	Be with me, Beauty, for the fire is dying;
	My dog and I are old, too old for roving.
	Man, whose young passion sets the spindrift flying,
	Is soon too lame to march, too cold for loving.
	I take the book and gather to the fire,
	Turning old yellow leaves; minute by minute
	The clock ticks to my heart. A withered wire,
	Moves a thin ghost of music in the spinet.
	I cannot sail your seas, I cannot wander
	Your cornland, nor your hill-land, nor your valleys
	Ever again, nor share the battle yonder
	Where the young knight the broken squadron rallies.
	Only stay quiet while my mind remembers
	The beauty of fire from the beauty of embers.

	Beauty, have pity! for the strong have power,
	The rich their wealth, the beautiful their grace,
	Summer of man its sunlight and its flower.
	Spring-time of man, all April in a face.
	Only, as in the jostling in the Strand,
	Where the mob thrusts, or loiters, or is loud,
	The beggar with the saucer in his hand
	Asks only a penny from the passing crowd,
	So, from this glittering world with all its fashion,
	Its fire, and play of men, its stir, its march,
	Let me have wisdom, Beauty, wisdom and passion,
	Bread to the soul, rain when the summers parch.
	Give me but these, and though the darkness close
	Even the night will blossom as the rose.



12. THE HAUNTED

	Here, in this darkened room of this old house,
	I sit beside the fire. I hear again,
	Within, the scutter where the mice carouse,
	Without, the gutter dropping with the rain.
	Opposite, are black shelves of wormy books,
	To left, glazed cases, dusty with the same,
	Behind, a wall, with rusty guns on hooks,
	To right, the fire, that chokes one panting flame.
	Over the mantel, black as funeral cloth,
	A portrait hangs, a man, whose flesh the worm
	Has mawed this hundred years, whose clothes the moth
	A century since, has channelled to a term.
	I cannot see his face : I only know
	He stares at me, that man of long ago.

	I light the candles in the long brass sticks,
	I see him now, a pale-eyed, simpering man,
	Framed in carved wood, wherein the death-watch ticks,
	A most dead face : yet when the work began
	That face, the pale puce coat, the simpering smile,
	The hands that hold a book, the eyes that gaze,
	Moved to the touch of mind a little while.
	The painter sat in judgment on his ways :
	The painter turned him to and from the light,
	Talked about art, or bade him lift his head.
	Judged the lips’ paleness and the temples’ white,
	And now his work abides ; the man is dead.
	But is he dead ? This dusty study drear
	Creaks in its panels that the man is here.

	Here, beyond doubt, he lived, in that old day.
	“He was a Doctor here,” the student thought.
	Here, when the puce was new, that now is grey,
	That simpering man his daily practice wrought.
	Here he let blood, prescribed the pill and drop,
	The leech, the diet ; here his verdict given
	Brought agonies of hoping to a stop,
	Here his condemned confessioners were shriven.
	What is that book he holds, the key, too dim
	To read, to know ; some little book he wrote,
	Forgotten now, but still the key to him.
	He sacrificed his vision for his coat.
	I see the man ; a simpering mask that hid
	A seeing mind that simpering men forbid.

	Those are his books no doubt, untoucht, undusted,
	Unread, since last he left them on the shelves,
	Octavo sermons that the fox has rusted,
	Sides splitting off from brown decaying twelves.
	This was his room, this darkness of old death,
	This coffin-room with lights like embrasures,
	The place is poisonous with him ; like a breath
	On glass, he stains the spirit ; he endures.
	Here is his name within the sermon book,
	And verse, “When hungry Worms my Body eat” ;
	He leans across my shoulder as I look,
	He who is God or pasture to the wheat.
	He who is Dead is still upon the soul
	A check, an inhibition, a control.

	I draw the bolts. I am alone within.
	The moonlight through the coloured glass comes faint,
	Mottling the passage wall like human skin,
	Pale with the breathings left of withered paint.
	But others walk the empty house with me,
	There is no loneliness within these walls
	No more than there is stillness in the sea
	Or silence in the eternal waterfalls.
	There in the room, to right, they sit at feast ;
	The dropping grey-beard with the cold blue eye,
	The lad, his son, that should have been a priest,
	And he, the rake, who made his mother die.
	And he, the gambling man, who staked the throw,
	They look me through, they follow when I go.

	They follow with still footing down the hall,
	I know their souls, those fellow-tenants mine,
	Their shadows dim those colours on the wall,
	They point my every gesture with a sign.
	That grey-beard cast his aged servant forth
	After his forty years of service done,
	The gambler supped up riches as the north
	Sups with his death the glories of the sun.
	The lad betrayed his trust ; the rake was he
	Who broke two women’s hearts to ease his own :
	They nudge each other as they look at me,
	Shadows, all our, and yet as hard as stone.
	And there, he comes, that simpering man, who sold
	His mind for coat of puce and penny gold.

	O ruinous house, within whose corridors
	None but the wicked and the mad go free.
	(On the dark stairs they wait, behind the doors
	They crouch, they watch, or creep to follow me.)
	Deep in old blood your ominous bricks are red,
	Firm in old bones your walls’ foundations stand,
	With dead men’s passions built upon the dead,
	With broken hearts for lime and oaths for sand.
	Terrible house, whose horror I have built,
	Sin after sin, unseen, as sand that slips
	Telling the time, till now the heaped guilt
	Cries, and the planets circle to eclipse.
	You only are the Daunter, you alone
	Clutch, till I feel your ivy on the bone.



13. HELL’S PAVEMENT

	“When I’m discharged at Liverpool ‘n’ draws my bit o’ pay,
	I won’t come to sea no more;
	I’ll court a pretty little lass ‘n’ have a weddin’ day,
	‘N’ settle somewhere down shore;
	I’ll never fare to sea again a-temptin’ Davy Jones,
	A-hearkening to the cruel sharks a-hungerin’ for my bones;
	I’ll run a blushin’ dairy-farm or go a-crackin’ stones,
	Or buy ‘n’ keep a little liquor-store” &mdash
	So he said.

	They towed her in to Liverpool, we made the hooker fast,
	And the copper-bound official paid the crew,
	And Billy drew his money, but the money didn’t last,
	For he painted the alongshore blue, &mdash
	It was rum for Poll, and rum for Nan, and gin for Jolly Jack;
	He shipped a week later in the clothes upon his back;
	He had to pinch a little straw, he had to beg a sack
	To sleep on, when his watch was through, &mdash
	So he did.



14. HERE IN THE SELF

	Here in the self is all that man can know
	Of Beauty, all the wonder, all the power,
	All the unearthly colour, all the glow,
	Here in the self which withers like a flower;
	Here in the self which fades as hours pass,
	And droops and dies and rots and is forgotten
	Sooner, by ages, than the mirroring glass
	In which it sees its glory still unrotten.
	Here in the flesh, within the flesh, behind,
	Swift in the blood and throbbing on the bone,
	Beauty herself, the universal mind,
	Eternal April wandering alone;
	The God, the holy Ghost, the atoning Lord,
	Here in the flesh, the never yet explored.



15. I WENT INTO THE FIELDS

	I went into the fields, but you were there
	Waiting for me, so all the summer flowers
	Were only glimpses of your starry powers;
	Beautiful and inspired dust they were.

	I went down by the waters, and a bird
	Sang with your voice in all the unknown tones
	Of all that self of you I have not heard,
	So that my being felt you to the bones.

	I went into the house, and shut the door
	To be alone, but you were there with me;
	All beauty in a little room may be,
	Though the roof lean and muddy be the floor.

	Then in my bed I bound my tired eyes
	To make a darkness for my weary brain;
	But like a presence you were there again,
	Being and real, beautiful and wise,

	So that I could not sleep, and cried aloud,
	‘You strange grave thing, what is it you would say?’
	The redness of your dear lips dimmed to grey,
	The waters ebbed, the moon hid in a cloud.



16. IF I COULD GET WITHIN THIS CHANGING I

	If I could get within this changing I,
	This ever altering thing which yet persists,
	Keeping the features it is reckoned by,
	While each component atom breaks or twists;
	If, wandering past strange groups of shifting forms,
	Cells at their hidden marvels hard at work,
	Pale from much toil, or red from sudden storms,
	I might attain to where the Rulers lurk;
	If, pressing past the guards in those grey gates,
	The brain’s most folded, intertwisted shell,
	I might attain to that which alters fates,
	The King, the supreme self, the Master Cell;
	Then, on Man’s earthly peak, I might behold
	The unearthly self beyond, unguessed, untold.



17. THE ISLAND OF SKYROS

	Here, where we stood together, we three men,
	Before the war had swept us to the East
	Three thousand miles away, I stand again
	And hear the bells, and breathe, and go to feast.
	We trod the same path, to the selfsame place,
	Yet here I stand, having beheld their graves,
	Skyros whose shadows the great seas erase,
	And Seddul Bahr that ever more blood craves.
	So, since we communed here, our bones have been
	Nearer, perhaps, than they again will be,
	Earth and the worldwide battle lie between,
	Death lies between, and friend-destroying sea.
	Yet here, a year ago, we talked and stood
	As I stnad now, with pulses beating blood.

	I saw her like a shadow on the sky
	In the last light, a blur upon the sea,
	Then the gale’s darkness put the shadow by,
	But from one grave that island talked to me;
	And, in the midnight, in the breaking storm,
	I saw its blackness and a blinking light,
	And thought, “So death obscures your gentle form,
	So memory strives to make the darkness bright;
	And, in that heap of rocks, your body lies,
	Part of the island till the planet ends,
	My gentle comrade, beautiful and wise,
	Part of this crag this bitter surge offends,
	While I, who pass, a little obscure thing,
	War with this force, and breathe, and am its king.”



18. LAUGH AND BE MERRY

	Laugh and be merry, remember, better the world with a song,
	Better the world with a blow in the teeth of a wrong.
	Laugh, for the time is brief, a thread the length of a span.
	Laugh and be proud to belong to the old proud pageant of man.

	Laugh and be merry: remember, in olden time.
	God made Heaven and Earth for joy He took in a rhyme,
	Made them, and filled them full with the strong red wine of His mirth
	The splendid joy of the stars: the joy of the earth.

	So we must laugh and drink from the deep blue cup of the sky,
	Join the jubilant song of the great stars sweeping by,
	Laugh, and battle, and work, and drink of the wine outpoured
	In the dear green earth, the sign of the joy of the Lord.

	Laugh and be merry together, like brothers akin,
	Guesting awhile in the rooms of a beautiful inn,
	Glad till the dancing stops, and the lilt of the music ends.
	Laugh till the game is played; and be you merry, my friends.



19. THE LEMMINGS

	Once in a hundred years the Lemmings come
	Westward, in search of food, over the snow;
	Westward until the salt sea drowns them dumb;
	Westward, till all are drowned, those Lemmings go.
	Once, it is thought, there was a westward land
	Now drowned where there was food for those starved things,
	And memory of the place has burnt its brand
	In the little brains of all the Lemming Kings.
	Perhaps, long since, there was a land beyond
	Westward from death, some city, some calm place
	Where one could taste God’s quiet and be fond
	With the little beauty of a human face;
	But now the land is drowned. Yet we still press
	Westward, in search, to death, to nothingness.



20. THE PASSING STRANGE

	Out of the earth to rest or range
	Perpetual in perpetual change,
	The unknown passing through the strange.

	Water and saltness held together
	To tread the dust and stand the weather,
	And plough the field and stretch the tether,

	To pass the wine-cup and be witty,
	Water the sands and build the city,
	Slaughter like devils and have pity,

	Be red with rage and pale with lust,
	Make beauty come, make peace, make trust,
	Water and saltness mixed with dust;

	Drive over earth, swim under sea,
	Fly in the eagle’s secrecy,
	Guess where the hidden comets be;

	Know all the deathy seeds that still
	Queen Helen’s beauty, Caesar’s will,
	And slay them even as they kill;

	Fashion an altar for a rood,
	Defile a continent with blood,
	And watch a brother starve for food:

	Love like a madman, shaking, blind,
	Till self is burnt into a kind
	Possession of another mind;

	Brood upon beauty, till the grace
	Of beauty with the holy face
	Brings peace into the bitter place;

	Prove in the lifeless granites, scan
	The stars for hope, for guide, for plan;
	Live as a woman or a man;

	Fasten to lover or to friend,
	Until the heart break at the end:
	The break of death that cannot mend;

	Then to lie useless, helpless, still,
	Down in the earth, in dark, to fill
	The roots of grass or daffodil.

	Down in the earth, in dark, alone,
	A mockery of the ghost in bone,
	The strangeness, passing the unknown.

	Time will go by, that outlasts clocks,
	Dawn in the thorps will rouse the cocks,
	Sunset be glory on the rocks:

	But it, the thing, will never heed
	Even the rootling from the seed
	Thrusting to suck it for its need.

	Since moons decay and suns decline,
	How else should end this life of mine?
	Water and saltness are not wine.

	But in the darkest hour of night,
	When even the foxes peer for sight,
	The byre-cock crows; he feels the light.

	So, in this water mixed with dust,
	The byre-cock spirit crows from trust
	That death will change because it must;

	For all things change, the darkness changes,
	The wandering spirits change their ranges,
	The corn is gathered to the granges.

	The corn is sown again, it grows;
	The stars burn out, the darkness goes;
	The rhythms change, they do not close.

	They change, and we, who pass like foam,
	Like dust blown through the streets of Rome,
	Change ever, too; we have no home,

	Only a beauty, only a power,
	Sad in the fruit, bright in the flower,
	Endlessly erring for its hour,

	But gathering, as we stray, a sense
	Of Life, so lovely and intense,
	It lingers when we wander hence,

	That those who follow feel behind
	Their backs, when all before is blind,
	Our joy, a rampart to the mind.



21. THE RACER

	I saw the racer coming to the jump,
	Staring with fiery eyeballs as he rusht,
	I heard the blood within his body thump,
	I saw him launch, I heard the toppings crusht.
	And as he landed I beheld his soul
	Kindle, because, in front, he saw the Straight
	With all its thousands roaring at the goal,
	He laughed, he took the moment for his mate.
	Would that the passionate moods on which we ride
	Might kindle thus to oneness with the will;
	Would we might see the end to which we stride,
	And feel, not strain in struggle, only thrill,
	And laugh like him and know in all our nerves
	Beauty, the spirit, scattering dust and turves.



22. ROADWAYS

	One road leads to London,
	One road leads to Wales,
	My road leads me seawards
	To the white dipping sails.

	One road leads to the river,
	As it goes singing slow;
	My road leads to shipping,
	Where the bronzed sailors go.

	Leads me, lures me, calls me
	To salt green tossing sea;
	A road without earth’s road-dust
	Is the right road for me.

	A wet road heaving, shining,
	And wild with segulls’ cries,
	A mad salt sea-wind blowing
	The salt spray in my eyes.

	My road calls me, lures me
	West, east, south, and north;
	Most roads lead men homewards,
	My road leads me forth

	To add more miles to the tally
	Of grey miles left behind,
	In quest of that one beauty
	God put me here to find.



23. ROSES ARE BEAUTY

	Roses are beauty, but I never see
	Those blood drops from the burning heart of June
	Glowing like thought upon the living tree
	Without a pity that they die so soon,
	Die into petals, like those roses old,
	Those women, who were summer in men’s hearts
	Before the smile upon the Sphinx was cold
	Or sand had hid the Syrian and his arts.
	O myriad dust of beauty that lies thick
	Under our feet that not a single grain
	But stirred and moved in beauty and was quick
	For one brief moon and died nor lived again;
	But when the moon rose lay upon the grass
	Pasture to living beauty, life that was.



24. SEA FEVER

	I must go down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky,
	And all I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by,
	And the wheel’s kick and the wind’s song and the white sail’s shaking,
	And a gray mist on the sea’s face, and a gray dawn breaking.

	I must go down to the seas again, for the call of the running tide
	Is a wild call and a clear call that may not be denied;
	And all I ask is a windy day with the white clouds flying,
	And the flung spray and the blown spume, and the sea-gulls crying.

	I must go down to the seas again, to the vagrant gypsy life,
	To the gull’s way and the whale’s way, where the wind’s like a whetted knife;
	And all I ask is a merry yarn from a laughing fellow-rover,
	And quiet sleep and a sweet dream when the long trick’s over.



25. THE SEEKERS

	Friends and loves we have none, nor wealth nor blessed abode,
	But the hope of the City of God at the other end of the road.

	Not for us are content, and quiet, and peace of mind,
	For we go seeking a city that we shall never find.

	There is no solace on earth for us--for such as we--
	Who search for a hidden city that we shall never see.

	Only the road and the dawn, the sun, the wind, and the rain,
	And the watch fire under stars, and sleep, and the road again.

	We seek the City of God, and the haunt where beauty dwells,
	And we find the noisy mart and the sound of burial bells.

	Never the golden city, where radiant people meet,
	But the dolorous town where mourners are going about the street.

	We travel the dusty road till the light of the day is dim,
	And sunset shows us spires away on the world’s rim.

	We travel from dawn to dusk, till the day is past and by,
	Seeking the Holy City beyond the rim of the sky.

	Friends and loves we have none, nor wealth nor blest abode,
	But the hope of the City of God at the other end of the road.



26. THE SHIP AND HER MAKERS

	_The Ore_

	Before Man’s labouring wisdom gave me birth
	I had not even seen the light of day;
	Down in the central darkness of the earth,
	Crushed by the weight of continents I lay,
	Ground by the weight to heat, not knowing then
	The air, the light, the noise, the world of men.


	_The Trees_

	We grew on mountains where the glaciers cry,
	Infinite sombre armies of us stood
	Below the snow-peaks which defy the sky;
	A song like the gods moaning filled our wood;
	We knew no men--our life was to stand staunch,
	Singing our song, against the avalanche.


	_THe Hemp and Flax_

	We were a million grasses on the hill,
	A million herbs which bowed as the wind blew,
	Trembling in every fibre, never still;
	Out of the summer earth sweet life we drew.
	Little blue-flowered grasses up the glen,
	Glad of the sun, what did we know of men?


	_The Workers_

	We tore the iron from the mountain’s hold,
	By blasting fires we smithied it to steel;
	Out of the shapeless stone we learned to mould
	The sweeping bow, the rectilinear keel;
	We hewed the pine to plank, we split the fir,
	We pulled the myriad flax to fashion her.

	Out of a million lives our knowledge came,
	A million subtle craftsmen forged the means;
	Steam was our handmaid and our servant flame,
	Water our strength, all bowed to our machines.
	Out of the rock, the tree, the springing herb
	We built this wandering beauty so superb.


	_The Sailors_

	We, who were born on earth and live by air,
	Make this thing pass across the fatal floor,
	The speechless sea; alone we commune there
	Jesting with death, that ever open door.
	Sun, moon and stars are signs by which we drive
	This wind-blown iron like a thing alive.


	_The Ship_

	I march across great waters like a queen,
	I whom so many wisdoms helped to make;
	Over the uncruddled billows of seas green
	I blanch the bubbled highway of my wake.
	By me my wandering tenants clasp the hands,
	And know the thoughts of men in other lands.



27. SONNET

	Flesh, I have knocked at many a dusty door,
	Gone down full many a midnight lane,
	Probed in old walls and felt along the floor,
	Pressed in blind hope the lighted window-pane,
	But useless all, though sometimes when the moon
	Was full in heaven and the sea was full,
	Along my body’s alleys came a tune
	Played in the tavern by the Beautiful.
	Then for an instant I have felt at point
	To find and seize her, whosoe’er she be,
	Whether some saint whose glory doth anoint
	Those whom she loves, or but a part of me,
	Or something that the things not understood
	Make for their uses out of flesh and blood.



28. THE TEWKESBURY ROAD

	It is good to be out on the road, and going one knows not where,
	Going through meadow and village, one knows not whither or why;
	Through the grey light drift of the dust, in the keen cool rush of the air,
	Under the flying white clouds, and the broad blue lift of the sky.

	And to halt at the chattering brook, in a tall green fern at the brink
	Where the harebell grows, and the gorse, and the foxgloves purple and white;
	Where the shy-eyed delicate deer troop down to the brook to drink
	When the stars are mellow and large at the coming on of the night.

	O, to feel the beat of the rain, and the homely smell of the earth,
	Is a tune for the blood to jig to, and joy past power of words;
	And the blessed green comely meadows are all a-ripple with mirth
	At the noise of the lambs at play and the dear wild cry of the birds.



29. TWILIGHT

	Twilight it is, and the far woods are dim, and the rooks cry and call.
	Down in the valley the lamps, and the mist, and a star over all,
	There by the rick, where they thresh, is the drone at an end,
	Twilight it is, and I travel the road with my friend.

	I think of the friends who are dead, who were dear long ago in the past,
	Beautiful friends who are dead, though I know that death cannot last;

	Friends with the beautiful eyes that the dust has defiled,
	Beautiful souls who were gentle when I was a child.



30. A WANDERER’S SONG

	A wind’s in the heart of me, a fire’s in my heels,
	I am tired of brick and stone and rumbling wagon-wheels;
	I hunger for the sea’s edge, the limit of the land,
	Where the wild old Atlantic is shouting on the sand.

	Oh I’ll be going, leaving the noises of the street,
	To where a lifting foresail-foot is yanking at the sheet;
	To a windy, tossing anchorage where yawls and ketches ride,
	Oh I’ll be going, going, until I meet the tide.

	And first I’ll hear the sea-wind, the mewing of the gulls,
	The clucking, sucking of the sea about the rusty hulls,
	The songs at the capstan at the hooker warping out,
	And then the heart of me’ll know I’m there or thereabout.

	Oh I am sick of brick and stone, the heart of me is sick,
	For windy green, unquiet sea, the realm of Moby Dick;
	And I’ll be going, going, from the roaring of the wheels,
	For a wind’s in the heart of me, a fire’s in my heels.



31. WE ARE NEITHER HEAVEN NOR EARTH

	Ah, we are neither heaven nor earth, but men;
	Something that uses and despises both,
	That takes its earth’s contentment in the pen,
	Then sees the world’s injustice and is wroth,
	And flinging off youth’s happy promise, flies
	Up to some breach, despising earthly things,
	And, in contempt of hell and heaven, dies
	Rather than bear some yoke of priests or kings.
	Our joys are not of heaven nor earth, but man’s,
	A woman’s beauty, or a child’s delight,
	The trembling blood when the discoverer scans
	The sought-for world, the gussed-at satellite;
	The ringing scene, the stone at point to blush
	For unborn men to look at and say ‘Hush.’



32. THE WEST WIND

	It’s a warm wind, the west wind, full of birds’ cries;
	I never hear the west wind but tears are in my eyes.
	For it comes from the west lands, the old brown hills.
	And April’s in the west wind, and daffodils.

	It’s a fine land, the west land, for hearts as tired as mine,
	Apple orchards blossom there, and the air’s like wine.
	There is cool green grass there, where men may lie at rest,
	And the thrushes are in song there, fluting from the nest.

	“Will ye not come home, brother? Ye have been long away,
	It’s April, and blossom time, and white is the May;
	And bright is the sun brother, and warm is the rain,--
	Will ye not come home, brother, home to us again?

	“The young corn is green, brother, where the rabbits run.
	It’s blue sky, and white clouds, and warm rain and sun.
	It’s song to a man’s soul, brother, fire to a man’s brain,
	To hear the wild bees and see the merry spring again.

	“Larks are singing in the west, brother, above the green wheat,
	So will ye not come home, brother, and rest your tired feet?
	I’ve a balm for bruised hearts, brother, sleep for aching eyes,”
	Says the warm wind, the west wind, full of birds’ cries.

	It’s the white road westwards is the road I must tread
	To the green grass, the cool grass, and rest for heart and head,
	To the violets, and the warm hearts, and the thrushes’ song,
	In the fine land, the west land, the land where I belong.



33. WHAT AM I, LIFE?

	What am I, Life? A thing of watery salt
	Held in cohesion by unresting cells
	Which work they know not why, which never halt,
	Myself unwitting where their master dwells.
	I do not bid them, yet they toil, they spin;
	A world which uses me as I use them,
	Nor do I know which end or which begin,
	Nor which to praise, which pamper, which condemn.
	So, like a marvel in a marvel set,
	I answer to the vast, as wave by wave
	The sea of air goes over, dry or wet,
	Or the full moon comes swimming from her cave,
	Or the great sun comes north, this myriad I
	Tingles, not knowing how, yet wondering why.



34. THE WILD DUCK

	Twilight. Red in the West.
	Dimness. A glow on the wood.
	The teams plod home to rest.
	The wild duck come to glean.
	O souls not understood,
	What a wild cry in the pool;
	What things have the farm ducks seen
	That they cry so--huddle and cry?
	Only the soul that goes.
	Eager. Eager. Flying.
	Over the globe of the moon,
	Over the wood that glows.
	Wings linked. Necks a-strain,
	A rush and a wild crying.

	A cry of the long pain
	In the reeds of a steel lagoon,
	In a land that no man knows.
