*** James McAuley (1917 - 1976)


1. AUTUMN

	Lord, it is time. The fruitful summer yields;
	The shadows fall across the figured dial,
	The winds are loosed upon the harvest fields.
	See that these last fruits swell upon the vine;
	Grant them as yet a southern day or two
	Then press them to fulfilment, and pursue
	The last of sweetness in the heavy wine.
	Who now is homeless shall not build this year.
	He shall be solitary and long alone;
	Shall wake, and read, and write long letters home,
	And on deserted pavements here and there
	Shall wander restless, as the leaves are blown.



2. IN A LATE HOUR

	Though all men should desert you
	My faith shall not grow less,
	But keep that single virtue
	Of simple thankfulness.
	Pursuit had closed around me,
	Terrors had pressed me low;
	You sought me, and you found me,
	And I will not let you go.
	The hearts of men grow colder,
	The final things draw near,
	Forms vanish, kingdoms moulder,
	The Antirealm is here;
	Whose order is derangement:
	Close-driven, yet alone,
	Men reach the last estrangement--
	The sense of nature gone.
	Though the stars run distracted,
	And from wounds deep rancours flow,
	While the mystery is enacted
	I will not let you go.



3. ONE TUESDAY IN SUMMER

	That sultry afternoon the world went strange.
	Under a violet and leaden bruise
	The air was filled with sinister yellow light;
	Trees, houses, grass took on unnatural hues.
	Thunder rolled near. The intensity grew and grew
	Like doom itself with lightnings on its face.
	And Mr Pitt, the grocer’s order-man,
	Who made his call on Tuesdays at our place,
	Said to my mother, looking at the sky,
	“You’d think the ending of the world had come.”
	A leathern little man, with bicycle-clips
	Around his ankles, doing our weekly sum,
	He too looked strange in that uncanny light;
	As in the Bible ordinary men
	Turn out to be angelic messengers,
	Pronouncing the Lord’s judgments why and when.
	I watched the scurry of the small black ants
	That sensed the storm. What Mr Pitt had said
	I didn’t quite believe, or disbelieve;
	But still the words had got into my head,
	For nothing less seemed worthy of the scene.
	The darkening imminence hung on and on,
	Till suddenly, with lightning-stroke and rain,
	Apocalypse exploded, and was gone.
	By nightfall things had their familiar look.
	But I had seen the world stand in dismay
	Under the aspect of another meaning
	That rain or time would hardly wash away.



4. WINTER NIGHTFALL

	Snow falls on the darkening boughs,
	Evening bell rings through the shade;
	For many guests the table’s laid,
	Well-appointed is the house.
	Travellers come from field and fold
	By dark pathways to the gate;
	The Tree of Grace has blossomed late,
	Turning earth’s cool sap to gold.
	Hard with pain the stony sill;
	Indoors on the table shine
	With pure brightness bread and wine;
	Enter, wanderer, take your fill.



5. WISTARIA

	Does that wistaria vine still break in flower
	Like grape-clusters transformed to lilac light
	For bees to hover in? It had a power,
	Then, to absorb all feelings into sight.
	And the mute aching sweetness of its scent
	Stored up the quotient of long afternoons
	Where time stretched forward, empty of event,
	Drifting-with bells, pagodas, pale balloons--
	Shapes that changed back to flowers at a touch.
	The soul must feed on something for its dreams
	In those brick suburbs, and there wasn’t much:
	It can make do with little, so it seems.
	Its formal home had crossed flags at the back
	And reverent doubt up front. In equipoise
	Between the brass cross and the Union Jack,
	It could still quiver to the cheerful noise
	That called upon all things to render praise.
	Of all things, I liked best that tough old vine
	Roping our side fence, offering my days
	Clusters of hope that stirred the sense like wine.
