*** John McCrae (1872 - 1918)


1. ANARCHY

	I saw a city filled with lust and shame
	Where men like wolves slunk through the grim half-light;
	And sudden in the midst of it there came
	One who spoke boldly for the cause of Right.
	
	And speaking fell before that brutish race
	Like some poor wren that shrieking eagles tear
	While brute Dishonour with her bloodless face
	Stood by and smote his lips that moved in prayer.
	
	“Speak not of God! In centuries that word
	Hath not been uttered! Our own king are we.”
	And God stretched forth his finger as He heard
	And o’er it cast a thousand leagues of sea.


2. EVENTIDE

	The day is past and the toilers cease;
	The land grows dim ‘mid the shadows grey
	And hearts are glad for the dark brings peace
	           At the close of day.
	
	Each weary toiler with lingering pace
	As he homeward turns with the long day done
	Looks out to the west with the light on his face
	           Of the setting sun.
	
	Yet some see not (with their sin-dimmed eyes)
	The promise of rest in the fading light;
	But the clouds loom dark in the angry skies
	           At the fall of night.
	
	And some see only a golden sky
	Where the elms their welcoming arms stretch wide
	To the calling rooks as they homeward fly
	           At the eventide.
	
	It speaks of peace that comes after strife
	Of the rest He sends to the hearts He tried
	Of the calm that follows the stormiest life--
	           God’s eventide.


3. THE HOPE OF MY HEART

	_“Delicta juventutis et ignorantius ejus
	       quoesumus ne memineris Domine.”_
	
	I left to earth a little maiden fair
	With locks of gold and eyes that shamed the light;
	I prayed that God might have her in His care
	           And sight.
	
	Earth’s love was false; her voice a siren’s song;
	(Sweet mother-earth was but a lying name)
	The path she showed was but the path of wrong
	           And shame.
	
	“Cast her not out!“ I cry. God’s kind words come--
	“Her future is with Me as was her past;
	It shall be My good will to bring her home
	           At last.”


4. IN FLANDERS FIELDS

	In Flanders fields the poppies blow
	Between the crosses row on row
	That mark our place; and in the sky
	The larks still bravely singing fly
	Scarce heard amid the guns below.
	
	We are the Dead. Short days ago
	We lived felt dawn saw sunset glow
	Loved and were loved and now we lie
	           In Flanders fields.
	
	Take up our quarrel with the foe:
	To you from failing hands we throw
	The torch; be yours to hold it high.
	If ye break faith with us who die
	We shall not sleep though poppies grow
	           In Flanders fields.


5. THE NIGHT COMETH

	Cometh the night. The wind falls low
	The trees swing slowly to and fro:
	Around the church the headstones grey
	Cluster like children strayed away
	But found again and folded so.
	
	No chiding look doth she bestow:
	If she is glad they cannot know;
	If ill or well they spend their day
	           Cometh the night.
	
	Singing or sad intent they go;
	They do not see the shadows grow;
	“There yet is time“ they lightly say
	“Before our work aside we lay“;
	Their task is but half-done and lo!
	           Cometh the night.


6. PENANCE

	My lover died a century ago
	Her dear heart stricken by my sland’rous breath
	Wherefore the Gods forbade that I should know
	           The peace of death.
	
	Men pass my grave and say “‘Twere well to sleep
	Like such an one amid the uncaring dead!”
	How should they know the vigils that I keep
	           The tears I shed?
	
	Upon the grave I count with lifeless breath
	Each night each year the flowers that bloom and die
	Deeming the leaves that fall to dreamless death
	           More blest than I.
	
	‘Twas just last year--I heard two lovers pass
	So near I caught the tender words he said:
	To-night the rain-drenched breezes sway the grass
	           Above his head.
	
	That night full envious of his life was I
	That youth and love should stand at his behest;
	To-night I envy him that he should lie
	           At utter rest.


7. RECOMPENSE

	I saw two sowers in Life’s field at morn
	To whom came one in angel guise and said
	“Is it for labour that a man is born?
	Lo: I am Ease. Come ye and eat my bread!”
	Then gladly one forsook his task undone
	And with the Tempter went his slothful way
	The other toiled until the setting sun
	With stealing shadows blurred the dusty day.
	
	Ere harvest time upon earth’s peaceful breast
	Each laid him down among the unreaping dead.
	“Labour hath other recompense than rest
	Else were the toiler like the fool“ I said;
	“God meeteth him not less but rather more
	Because he sowed and others reaped his store.”


8. THE SHADOW OF THE CROSS

	At the drowsy dusk when the shadows creep
	From the golden west where the sunbeams sleep
	
	An angel mused: “Is there good or ill
	In the mad world’s heart since on Calvary’s hill
	
	‘Round the cross a mid-day twilight fell
	That darkened earth and o’ershadowed hell?”
	
	Through the streets of a city the angel sped;
	Like an open scroll men’s hearts he read.
	
	In a monarch’s ear his courtiers lied
	And humble faces hid hearts of pride.
	
	Men’s hate waxed hot and their hearts grew cold
	As they haggled and fought for the lust of gold.
	
	Despairing he cried “After all these years
	Is there naught but hatred and strife and tears?”
	
	He found two waifs in an attic bare;
	--A single crust was their meagre fare--
	
	One strove to quiet the other’s cries
	And the love-light dawned in her famished eyes
	
	As she kissed the child with a motherly air:
	“I don’t need mine you can have my share.”
	
	Then the angel knew that the earthly cross
	And the sorrow and shame were not wholly loss.
	
	At dawn when hushed was earth’s busy hum
	And men looked not for their Christ to come
	
	From the attic poor to the palace grand
	The King and the beggar went hand in hand.


9. A SONG OF COMFORT

	    _“Sleep weary ones while ye may--
	        Sleep oh sleep!“_
	                             --Eugene Field.
	
	Thro’ May time blossoms with whisper low
	The soft wind sang to the dead below:
	“Think not with regret on the Springtime’s song
	And the task ye left while your hands were strong.
	The song would have ceased when the Spring was past
	And the task that was joyous be weary at last.”
	
	To the winter sky when the nights were long
	The tree-tops tossed with a ceaseless song:
	“Do ye think with regret on the sunny days
	And the path ye left with its untrod ways?
	The sun might sink in a storm cloud’s frown
	And the path grow rough when the night came down.”
	
	In the grey twilight of the autumn eves
	It sighed as it sang through the dying leaves:
	“Ye think with regret that the world was bright
	That your path was short and your task was light;
	The path though short was perhaps the best
	And the toil was sweet that it led to rest.”


10. THE UNCONQUERED DEAD

	    “. . . defeated with great loss.”
	
	Not we the conquered! Not to us the blame
	Of them that flee of them that basely yield;
	Nor ours the shout of victory the fame
	Of them that vanquish in a stricken field.
	
	That day of battle in the dusty heat
	We lay and heard the bullets swish and sing
	Like scythes amid the over-ripened wheat
	And we the harvest of their garnering.
	
	Some yielded No not we! Not we we swear
	By these our wounds; this trench upon the hill
	Where all the shell-strewn earth is seamed and bare
	Was ours to keep; and lo! we have it still.
	
	We might have yielded even we but death
	Came for our helper; like a sudden flood
	The crashing darkness fell; our painful breath
	We drew with gasps amid the choking blood.
	
	The roar fell faint and farther off and soon
	Sank to a foolish humming in our ears
	Like crickets in the long hot afternoon
	Among the wheat fields of the olden years.
	
	Before our eyes a boundless wall of red
	Shot through by sudden streaks of jagged pain!
	Then a slow-gathering darkness overhead
	And rest came on us like a quiet rain.
	
	Not we the conquered! Not to us the shame
	Who hold our earthen ramparts nor shall cease
	To hold them ever; victors we who came
	In that fierce moment to our honoured peace.

