*** Thomas Merton (1915 - 1968)


1. ADVICE TO A YOUNG PROPHET

	Keep away, son, these lakes are salt. These flowers   
	Eat insects. Here private lunatics   
	Yell and skip in a very dry country.
	
	Or where some haywire monument   
	Some badfaced daddy of fear   
	Commands an unintelligent rite.
	
	To dance on the unlucky mountain,   
	To dance they go, and shake the sin   
	Out of their feet and hands,
	
	Frenzied until the sudden night   
	Falls very quiet, and magic sin   
	Creeps, secret, back again.
	
	Badlands echo with omens of ruin:
	Seven are very satisfied, regaining possession:   
	(Bring a little mescaline, you’ll get along!)
	
	There’s something in your bones,
	There’s someone dirty in your critical skin,
	There’s a tradition in your cruel misdirected finger   
	Which you must obey, and scribble in the hot sand:
	
	“Let everybody come and attend   
	Where lights and airs are fixed
	To teach and entertain. O watch the sandy people   
	Hopping in the naked bull’s-eye,
	
	Shake the wildness out of their limbs,
	Try to make peace like John in skins
	Elijah in the timid air   
	or Anthony in tombs:
	
	Pluck the imaginary trigger, brothers.   
	Shoot the devil: he’ll be back again!”
	
	America needs these fatal friends
	Of God and country, to grovel in mystical ashes,   
	Pretty big prophets whose words don’t burn,   
	Fighting the strenuous imago all day long.
	
	Only these lunatics, (O happy chance)
	Only these are sent. Only this anaemic thunder   
	Grumbles on the salt flats, in rainless night:
	
	O go home, brother, go home!   
	The devil’s back again,
	And magic Hell is swallowing flies.


2. AT THIS PRECISE MOMENT OF HISTORY

	1. At this precise moment of history   
	   With Goody-two-shoes running for Congress
	   We are testing supersonic engines   
	   To keep God safe in the cherry tree.   
	   When I said so in this space last Thursday   
	   I meant what I said: power struggles.
	
	2. You would never dream of such corn. The colonials in   
	   sandalwood like running wide open and available for   
	   protection. You can throw them away without a refund.
	
	3. Dr. Hanfstaengel who was not called Putzi except by   
	   those who did not know him is taped in the national   
	   archives. J. Edgar Hoover he ought to know
	   And does know.
	
	   But calls Dr. Hanfstaengel Putzi nevertheless   
	   Somewhere on tape in the   
	   Archives.
	
	   He (Dr. H.) is not a silly man.   
	   He left in disgust
	   About the same time Shirley Temple
	   Sat on Roosevelt’s knee   
	   An accomplished pianist
	   A remembered personality.   
	   He (Dr. H.) began to teach   
	   Immortal anecdotes
	   To his mother a Queen Bee   
	   In the American colony.
	
	4. What is your attitude toward historical subjects?   
	   --Perhaps it’s their size!
	
	5. When I said this in space you would never believe   
	   Corn Colonel was so expatriated.
	   --If you think you know,
	   Take this wheel
	   And become standard.
	
	6. She is my only living mother
	   This bee of the bloody arts
	   Bandaging victims of Saturday’s dance   
	   Like a veritable sphinx
	   In a totally new combination.
	
	7. The Queen Mother is an enduring vignette   
	      at an early age.
	   Now she ought to be kept in submersible   
	      decompression chambers
	
	   For a while.
	
	8. What is your attitude toward historical subjects   
	   Like Queen Colonies?
	   --They are permanently fortified
	   For shape retention.
	
	9. Solid shades   
	   Seven zippered pockets   
	   Close to my old place
	   Waiting by the road
	   Big disk brakes
	   Spinoff
	   Zoom
	   Long lights stabbing at the   
	   Two together piggyback   
	   In a stark sports roadster
	
	   Regretting his previous outburst   
	   Al loads his Cadillac   
	   With lovenests.
	
	10. She is my only living investment   
	     She examines the housing industry   
	     Counts 3.5 million postwar children   
	     Turning twenty-one
	     And draws her own conclusion   
	     In the commercial fishing field.
	
	11. Voice of little sexy ventriloquist mignonne:
	     “Well I think all of us are agreed and sincerely I my-
	     self believe that honest people on both sides have got   
	     it all on tape. Governor Reagan thinks that nuclear   
	     wampums are a last resort that ought not to be re-
	     sorted.” (But little mignonne went right to the point   
	     with: “We have a commitment to fulfill and we better   
	     do it quick.” No dupe she!)
	
	     All historians die of the same events at least twice.
	
	13. I feel that I ought to open this case with an apology.   
	     Dr. H. certainly has a beautiful voice. He is not a silly   
	     man. He is misunderstood even by Presidents.
	
	14. You people are criticizing the Church but what are   
	     you going to put in her place? Sometime sit down with   
	     a pencil and paper and ask yourself what you’ve got   
	     that the Church hasn’t.
	
	15. Nothing to add
	     But the big voice of a detective   
	     Using the wrong first names   
	     In national archives.
	
	16. She sat in shocking pink with an industrial zipper spe-
	     cially designed for sitting on the knees of presidents in   
	     broad daylight. She spoke the president’s mind. “We   
	     have a last resort to be resorted and we better do it   
	     quick.” He wondered at what he had just said.
	
	17. It was all like running wideopen in a loose gown   
	     Without slippers   
	     At least someplace.


3. AUBADE-HARLEM

	Across the cages of the keyless aviaries,
	The lines and wires, the gallows of the broken kites,   
	Crucify, against the fearful light,
	The ragged dresses of the little children.
	Soon, in the sterile jungles of the waterpipes and ladders,   
	The bleeding sun, a bird of prey, will terrify the poor,   
	These will forget the unbelievable moon.
	
	But in the cells of whiter buildings,
	Where the glass dawn is brighter than the knives of surgeons,   
	Paler than alcohol or ether, shinier than money,
	The white men’s wives, like Pilate’s,
	Cry in the peril of their frozen dreams:
	
	“Daylight has driven iron spikes,
	Into the flesh of Jesus’ hands and feet:
	Four flowers of blood have nailed Him to the walls of Harlem.”
	
	Along the white halls of the clinics and the hospitals   
	Pilate evaporates with a cry:
	They have cut down two hundred Judases,
	Hanged by the neck in the opera houses and the museum.
	
	Across the cages of the keyless aviaries,
	The lines and wires, the gallows of the broken kites,   
	Crucify, against the fearful light,
	The ragged dresses of the little children.


4. BIRDCAGE WALK

	I
	
	One royal afternoon
	When I was young and easily surprised   
	By uncles coming from the park
	At the command of nurses and of guards,
	
	I wondered, over trees and ponds,   
	At the sorry, rude walls
	And the white windows of the apartments.
	
	“These,” said my uncle, “are the tallest houses.”   
	
	
	II
	
	Yes, in the spring of my joy
	When I was visibly affected by a gaitered bishop,   
	Large and unsteady in the flagged yard,
	Guards, dogs and blackbirds fled on every hand.
	
	“He is an old one,” said uncle,   
	“The gaiters are real.”
	
	
	III
	
	Rippled, fistfed windows of your
	Dun high houses! Then
	Come cages made of pretty willows
	Where they put the palace girls!
	Green ducks wade slowly from the marble water.   
	One swan reproves a saucy daughter.
	
	I consider my own true pond,
	Look for the beginning and the end.
	I lead the bishop down lanes and islands.
	
	
	IV
	
	Yes, in the windows of my first existence   
	Before my yawns became seasons,
	When nurses and uncles were sure,   
	Chinese fowl fought the frosty water   
	Startled by this old pontifex.
	
	“No bridge” (He smiled   
	Between the budding branches),
	“No crossing to the cage   
	Of the paradise bird!”
	
	Astounded by the sermons in the leaves
	I cried, “No! No! The stars have higher houses!”
	
	Kicking the robins and ganders   
	From the floor of his insular world
	The magic bishop leaned his blessing on the children.
	
	
	V
	
	That was the bold day when
	Moved by the unexpected summons   
	I opened all the palace aviaries   
	As by a king’s representative
	I was appointed fowler.


5. THE DARK MORNING

	This is the black day when
	Fog rides the ugly air:
	Water wades among the buildings
	To the prisoner’s curled ear.
	
	Then rain, in thin sentences,
	Slakes him like danger,
	Whose heart is his Germany
	Fevered with anger.
	
	This is the dark day when
	Locks let the enemy in
	Through all the coiling passages of
	(Curled ear) my prison!


6. A DIRGE

	Some one who hears the bugle neigh will know
	How cold it is, when sentries die by starlight.
	
	But none who love to hear the hammering drum
	Will look, when the betrayer
	Laughs in the desert like a broken monument,
	Ringing his tongue in the red bell of his head,
	Gesturing like a flag.
	
	The air that quivered after the earthquake
	(When God died like a thief)
	Still plays the ancient forums like pianos;
	The treacherous wind, lover of the demented,
	Will harp forever in the haunted temples.
	
	What speeches do the birds make
	With their beaks, to the desolate dead?
	And yet we love those carsick amphitheaters,
	
	Nor hear our messenger come home from hell
	With hands shot full of blood.
	
	No one who loves the fleering fife, will feel
	The light of morning stab his flesh,
	
	But some who hear the trumpet’s raving, in the ruined sky,
	Will dread the burnished helmet of the sun
	Whose anger goes before the King.


7. FROM THE LEGEND OF ST. CLEMENT

	I have seen the sun
	Spilling its copper petals on the Black Sea
	By the base of the prisoners’ cliff
	Where, from the acts of martyrs,
	Tall poems grow up like buildings.
	
	Deep in the wall of the wounded mountain
	(Where seas no longer frown)
	The songs of the martyrs come up like cities or buildings.
	Their chains shine with hymns
	And their hands cut down the giant blocks of stone.
	
	Poetry, psalms
	Flower with a huge architecture
	Raising their grandeur on the gashed cape.
	Words of God blaze like a disaster
	In the windows of their prophetic cathedral.
	But the sighs of the deep multitude
	Grow out of the mountain’s heart as clean as vines.
	
	O martyrs! O tremendous prisoners!
	Burying your murder in this marble hill!
	The Lamb shall soon stand
	White as a shout against the sky:
	His feet shall soon strike rainbows from the rock.
	The cliffs give up their buried streams.
	Throw down the chains of your wrists, prisoners!
	Drink, and swim!
	
	The winds have carried your last sentences
	Across Ukraine.
	Your poetry shall grow in distant places.
	Asia, Greece, Egypt, England know your name.
	Your hymns shall stand like vineyards
	And swing with fruit in other worlds, in other centuries.
	
	And your ecstasy shall make shade,
	Foliage for summers unforeseen
	To cover travellers in continents you have not known
	When the temples have fallen,
	The theaters cemented in your blood have long ago fallen.
	
	Your joy echoes across the carved ridge
	Plays across mountains
	Stands like fleets or islands
	Sailing the seas to Greece
	And after twenty times one hundred
	Years of repercussion
	Your waters shatter the land at my feet with seas forever
	young.


8. HOW TO ENTER THE BIG CITY

	I
	
	Swing by starwhite bones and
	Lights tick in the middle.
	Blue and white steel
	Black and white
	People hurrying along the wall.   
	”Here you are, bury my dead bones.“
	
	Curve behind the sun again   
	Towers full of ice. Rich   
	Glass houses, “Here,
	Have a little of my blood,”   
	Rich people!”
	
	Wheat in towers. Meat on ice.
	Cattlecars. Miles of wide-open walls.   
	Baseball between these sudden tracks.   
	Yell past the red street--
	Have you any water to drink, City?   
	Rich glass buildings, give us milk!   
	Give us coffee! Give us rum!
	
	There are huge clouds all over the sky.
	River smells of gasoline.
	Cars after cars after cars, and then
	A little yellow street goes by without a murmur.
	
	There came a man
	(”Those are radios, that were his eyes“)   
	Who offered to sell us his bones.
	
	Swing by starwhite buildings and   
	Lights come to life with a sound   
	Of bugs under the dead rib.
	
	Miles of it. Still the same city.   
	
	
	II
	
	Do you know where you are going?   
	Do you know whom you must meet?
	
	Fortune, perhaps, or good news   
	Or the doctor, or the ladies   
	In the long bookstore,
	The angry man in the milkbar   
	The drunkard under the clock.   
	Fortune, perhaps, or wonder   
	Or, perhaps, death.
	
	In any case, our tracks
	Are aimed at a working horizon.
	The buildings, turning twice about the sun,   
	Settle in their respective positions.
	Centered in its own incurable discontent, the City   
	Consents to be recognized.
	
	
	III
	
	Then people come out into the light of afternoon,   
	Covered all over with black powder,
	And begin to attack one another with statements   
	Or to ignore one another with horror.
	Customs have not changed.
	Young men full of coffee and
	Old women with medicine under their skin
	Are all approaching death at twenty miles an hour.
	
	Everywhere there is optimism without love
	And pessimism without understanding,
	They who have new clothes, and smell of haircuts   
	Cannot agree to be at peace
	With their own images, shadowing them in windows   
	From store to store.
	
	
	IV
	
	Until the lights come on with a swagger of frauds   
	And savage ferns,
	The brown-eyed daughters of ravens,
	Sing in the lucky doors
	While night comes down the street like the millennium   
	Wrapping the houses in dark feathers
	Soothing the town with a sign
	Healing the strong wings of sunstroke.
	Then the wind of an easy river wipes the flies
	Off my Kentucky collarbone.
	
	The claws of the treacherous stars   
	Renegade drums of wood
	Endure the heavenward protest.   
	Their music heaves and hides.   
	Rain and foam and oil
	Make sabbaths for our wounds.   
	(Come, come, let all come home!)
	The summer sighs, and runs.
	My broken bird is under the whole town,   
	My cross is for the gypsies I am leaving   
	And there are real fountains under the floor.
	
	
	V
	
	Branches baptize our faces with silver
	Where the sweet silent avenue escapes into the hills.   
	Winds at last possess our empty country
	There, there under the moon   
	In parabolas of milk and iron   
	The ghosts of historical men   
	(Figures of sorrow and dust)
	Weep along the hills like turpentine.   
	And seas of flowering tobacco
	Surround the drowning sons of Daniel Boone.


9. A HYMN OF NOT MUCH PRAISE FOR NEW YORK

	When the windows of the West Side clash like cymbals in the setting sunlight,
	And when wind wails amid the East Side’s aerials,
	And when, both north and south of thirty-fourth street,   
	In all the dizzy buildings,
	The elevators clack their teeth and rattle the bars of their cages,   
	Then the children of the city,
	Leaving the monkey-houses
	  of their office-buildings and apartments,
	With the greatest difficulty open their mouths, and sing:
	“Queen among the cities of the Earth: New York!   
	Rich as a cake, common as a doughnut,
	Expensive as a fur and crazy as cocaine,
	We love to hear you shake
	Your big face like a shining bank
	Letting the mad world know you’re full of dimes!
	
	”This is your night to make maraccas out of all that metal money
	Paris is in the prison-house, and London dies of cancer.   
	This is the time for you to whirl,
	Queen of our hopped-up peace,
	And let the excitement of your somewhat crippled congas   
	Supersede the waltzes of more shining
	Capitals that have been bombed.
	
	“Meanwhile we, your children,
	Weeping in our seasick zoo of windows while you dance,   
	Will gobble aspirins,
	And try to keep our cage from caving in.
	All the while our minds will fill with these petitions,   
	Flowering quietly in between our gongs of pulse.   
	These will have to serve as prayers:
	
	“ ‘O lock us in the safe jails of thy movies!
	Confine us to the semiprivate wards and white asylums   
	Of the unbearable cocktail parties, O New York!   
	Sentence us for life to the penitentiaries of thy bars and nightclubs,
	And leave us stupefied forever by the blue, objective lights   
	That fill the pale infirmaries of thy restaurants,
	And the clinics of thy schools and offices,
	And the operating-rooms of thy dance-halls.
	
	“ ‘But never give us any explanations, even when we ask,   
	Why all our food tastes of iodoform,
	And even the freshest flowers smell of funerals.
	No, never let us look about us long enough to wonder   
	Which of the rich men, shivering in the overheated office,   
	And which of the poor men, sleeping face-down on the Daily Mirror,
	Are still alive, and which are dead.’ ”


10. KINGFISHER

	As king fishers catch fire, dragonflies draw flame;
	As tumbled over rim in roundy wells
	Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell’s
	Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;
	Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
	Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
	Selves--goes itself; myself it speaks and spells,
	Crying What I do is me: for that I came.
	I say more: the just man justices;
	Keeps grace: that keeps all his goings graces;
	Acts in God’s eye what in God’s eye he is--
	Christ. For Christ plays in ten thousand places,
	Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his
	To the Father through the features of men’s faces. 


11. NOTES FOR A NEW LITURGY

	There’s a big Zulu runs our congregation
	A woe doctor cherubim chaser
	Puts his finger on the chief witch
	Has a mind to deter foes
	Is by the Star Archangel shown a surprise
	Writes his letters in vision mentions his B.A.
	From many a college
	Has a fan to scatter flies
	Receives a penetrating look
	From an imaginary visitant in white
	Knows all the meanings at once
	Knows he is in heaven in rectangles
	Of invented saints
	Flaming with new degrees and orders every day
	
	“I dreamt this Church I dreamt
	Seven precious mitres over my head
	My word is final.
	
	“I now General Overseer Concession Registrar
	Of rains and weather Committeeman
	For Pepsi-Cola all over the islands
	Flail of incontinent clergy
	Wave my highstrung certificate in times of change
	Don’t you need a Defender with a medical guarantee?
	
	“You think that I am only a clown-healer from the out-district?
	Hold this black bag while I lay hands on children
	Steady my followers with magic curios
	
	When I sleep I watch you with eyes in my feet
	Last night I dreamt of four beds
	I must marry again must go get
	Another angel-nun
	Come holy deaconess we’ll ride
	Barefoot in yellow busses to Jordan River
	Wearing emblems of the common vow
	
	“Subleaders keep telling the message
	Like it was new
	Confirming my charism as Prime-Mover in Management
	I shall continue in office as President
	For all time until the earth melt
	As all Full-Leaders stand over you wearing their watches
	Moulding you by government of thought
	And I return a while to the Origin
	Ruling through a female medium from an obscure place:
	
	“HOLD THIS MITRE WHILE I STRANGLE CHICKENS
	AND THROW THEM IN THE AIR
	COVERING THE SACRED STONE WITH BLOODY FEATHERS
	(And surround the altar
	With lie detectors.”)


12. NOW YOU ARE ALL HERE

	1. Now you are all here you might as well know this is America we do what we like. 
	2. Be spontaneous it is the right way. 
	3. Mothers you have met before still defy comprehension. 
	4. Our scene is foggy we are asking you to clarify. 
	5. Explains geomoetry of life. Where? At Catholic Worker. 
	6. Very glad you came. With our mouths full of cornflakes we were expecting an emergency. 
	7. Cynics declare you are in Greece. 
	8. Better get back quick before the place is all used up. 
	9. The night court: the mumbling judge: confused. 
	10. Well-wishers are there to meet you head on. 
	11. For the journal: soldiers, harbingers of change. 
	12. You came just in time, the score is even. 
	13. None of the machines has yet been broken. 
	14. Come on we know you have seen Popes. 
	15. People have been a little self-conscious around here in the emergency. 
	16. Who cares what the cynics declare. But you have been in Greece.


13. PROVERBS

	1. I will tell you what you can do ask me if you do not understand what I just said 
	
	2. One thing you can do be a manufacturer make appliances 
	
	3. Be a Man-u-fac-tu-rer 
	
	4. Make appliances sell them for a high price 
	
	5. I will tell you about industry make appliances 
	
	6. Make appliances that move 
	
	7. Ask me if you do not understand what is move 
	
	8. First get the facts 
	
	9. Where to apply? Ask industry 
	
	10. Do not expect to get by without Mr. and Mrs. Consumer 
	
	11. Man-u-fic-tion 
	
	12. I am wondering if you got the idea be a manu 
	
	13. MAKE FALSE GODS 
	
	14. Apply mind energy they will move 
	
	15. Mention one of the others see what happens 
	
	16. Now apply that to our problem 
	
	17. Try not to understand 
	
	18. Be a mounte-fictioner 
	
	19. Surpass all others in price and profit 
	
	20. Assail the public with lies 
	
	21. Home-spun-facts-are-more-fun repeat this 
	
	22. Prevent spreading on garments 
	
	23. Breathe more than others 
	
	24. Supply movement and traction 
	
	25. Our epidemix will exceed 
	
	26. A homemade appliance: no honorable mention 
	
	27. Now you can refer to garments and spread out 
	
	28. But there are still more facts 
	
	29. For excitement: say whose epidemic may be next 
	
	30. Apply this to the facts and see what happens 
	
	31. Wear dermal gloves in bed 
	
	32. Here is an appliance that will terrorize mothers 
	
	33. And fight the impossible 
	
	34. Man-u-fac-ture: wear it on your head 
	
	35. Beat it here come the mothers


14. SINCERITY

		_Omnis homo mendax_
	
	As for the liar, fear him less
	Than one who thinks himself sincere
	Who, having deceived himself,
	Can deceive you with a good conscience.
	
	One who doubts his own truth
	May mistrust another less:
	
	Knowing, in his own heart,
	That all men are liars
	He will be less outraged
	When he is deceived by another.
	
	So, too, will he sooner believe
	In the sincerity of God.
	
	The sincerity of God! Who never justifies
	His actions to men! Who makes no bargains
	With any other sincerity, because He knows
	There is no other! Who does what He pleases
	And never protests His innocence!
	
	Which of us can stand the sincerity of God?
	
	Which of us can bear a Lord
	Who is neither guilty nor innocent
	(Who cannot be innocent because He cannot
	be guilty)?
	
	What has our sincerity to do with His
	Whose truth is no approval of our truth
	And is not judged by anyone,
	Even by Himself?
	
	(Yet if I think myself sincere
	I will approve the purity of God
	Convinced that my own purity
	Is approved by Him)
	
	So, when the Lord speaks, we go to sleep
	Or turn quickly to some congenial business
	Since, as every liar knows,
	No man can bear such sincerity.


15. ST. MALACHY

	In November, in the days to remember the dead
	When air smells cold as earth,
	St. Malachy, who is very old, gets up,
	Parts the thin curtain of trees and dawns upon our land.
	
	His coat is filled with drops of rain, and he is bearded
	With all the seas of Poseidon.
	(Is it a crozier, or a trident in his hand?)
	He weeps against the gothic window, and the empty
	cloister
	Mourns like an ocean shell.
	
	Two bells in the steeple
	Talk faintly to the old stranger
	And the tower considers his waters.
	“I have been sent to see my festival,” (his cavern speaksl)
	“For I am the saint of the day.
	Shall I shake the drops from my locks and stand in your
	transept,
	Or, leaving you, rest in the silence of my history?”
	
	So the bells rang and we opened the antiphoners
	And the wrens and larks flew up out of the pages.
	Our thoughts became lambs. Our hearts swam like seas.
	One monk believed that we should sing to him
	Some stone-age hymn
	Or something in the giant language.
	So we played to him in the plainsong of the giant Gregory
	And oceans of Scripture sang upon bony Eire.
	
	Then the last salvage of flowers
	(Fostered under glass after the gardens foundered)
	Held up their little lanterns on Malachy’s altar
	To peer into his wooden eyes before the Mass began.
	
	Rain sighed down the sides of the stone church.
	Storms sailed by all day in battle fleets.
	At five o’clock, when we tried to see the sun, the speechless
	visitor
	Sighed and arose and shook the humus from his feet
	And with his trident stirred our trees
	And left down-wood, shaking some drops upon the ground.
	
	Thus copper flames fall, tongues of fire fall
	The leaves in hundreds fall upon his passing
	While night sends down her dreadnought darkness
	Upon this spurious Pentecost.
	
	And the Melchisedec of our year’s end
	Who came without a parent, leaves without a trace,
	And rain comes rattling down upon our forest
	Like the doors of a country jail.


16. WITH THE WORLD IN MY BLOODSTREAM

	I lie on my hospital bed
	Water runs inside the walls
	And the musical machinery
	All around overhead
	Plays upon my metal system
	My invented back bone
	Lends to the universal tone
	A flat impersonal song
	All the planes in my mind
	Sing to my worried blood
	To my jet streams
	I swim in the world’s genius
	The spring’s plasm
	I wonder who the hell I am.
	
	The world’s machinery
	Expands in the walls
	Of the hot musical building
	Made in maybe twenty-four
	And my lost childhood remains
	One of the city’s living cells
	Thanks to this city
	I am still living
	But whose life lies here
	And whose invented music sings?
	
	All the freights in the night
	Swing my dark technical bed
	All around overhead
	And wake the questions in my blood
	My jet streams fly far above
	But my low gash is no good
	Here below earth and bone
	Bleeding in a numbered bed
	Though all my veins run
	With Christ and with the stars’ plasm.
	
	Ancestors and Indians
	Zen Masters and Saints
	Parade in the incredible hotel
	And dark-eyed Negro mercy bends
	And uncertain fibers of the will
	Toward recovery and home.
	What recovery and what Home?
	I have no more sweet home
	I doubt the bed here and the road there
	And WKLO I most abhor
	My head is rotten with the town’s song.
	
	Here below stars and light
	And the Chicago plane
	Slides up the rainy straits of night
	While in my maze I walk and sweat
	Wandering in the low bone system
	Or searching the impossible ceiling
	For the question and the meaning
	Till the machine rolls in again
	I grow hungry for invented air
	And for the technical community of men
	For my lost Zen breathing
	For the unmarried fancy
	And the wild gift I made in those days
	For all the compromising answers
	All the gambles and blue rhythms
	Of individual despair.
	
	So the world’s logic runs
	Up and down the doubting walls
	While the frights and the planes
	Swing my sleep out the window
	All around, overhead
	In doubt and technical heat
	In oxygen and jet streams
	In the world’s enormous space
	And in man’s enormous want
	Until the want itself is gone
	Nameless bloodless and alone
	The Cross comes and Eckhart’s scandal
	The Holy Supper and the precise wrong
	And the accurate little spark
	In emptiness in the jet stream
	Only the spark can understand
	All that burns flies upward
	Where the rainy jets have gone
	A sign of needs and possible homes
	An invented back bone
	A dull song of oxygen
	A lost spark in Eckhart’s Castle.
	World’s plasm and world’s cell
	I bleed myself awake and well
	
	Only the spark is now true
	Dancing in the empty room
	All around overhead
	While the frail body of Christ
	Sweats in a technical bed
	I am Christ’s lost cell
	His childhood and desert age
	His descent into hell.
	Love without need and without name
	Bleeds in the empty problem
	And the spark without identity
	Circles the empty ceiling.