*** W. S. Merwin (1927 - 2019)


1. AFTER THE ALPHABETS

	I am trying to decipher the language of insects
	they are the tongues of the future
	their vocabularies describe buildings as food
	they can instruct of dark water and the veins of trees
	they can convey what they do not know
	and what is known at a distance
	and what nobody knows
	they have terms for making music with the legs
	they can recount changing in a sleep like death
	they can sing with wings
	the speakers are their own meaning in a grammar without
	   horizons
	they are wholly articulate
	they are never important they are everything



2. AFTER THE SPRING

	The first hay is in and all at once
	in the silent evening summer has come
	knowing the place wholly the green skin
	of its hidden slopes where the shadows will
	never reach so far again and a few
	gray hairs motionless high in the late
	sunlight tell of rain before morning
	and of finding the daybreak under green
	water with no shadows but all still the same
	still known still the known faces of summer
	faces of water turning into themselves
	changing without a word into themselves



3. AIR

	Naturally it is night.
	Under the overturned lute with its
	One string I am going my way
	Which has a strange sound.
	
	This way the dust, that way the dust.
	I listen to both sides
	But I keep right on.
	I remember the leaves sitting in judgment
	And then winter.
	
	I remember the rain with its bundle of roads.
	The rain taking all its roads.
	Nowhere.



4. AMONG THE EYES

	The blind guides have come for us
	We summoned them thinking to save ourselves
	
	These are the terms
	Nothing is forgiven nothing is remembered
	
	And order they tell us was never ours



5. ANIMALS FROM MOUNTAINS

	When I was small and stayed quiet
	some animals came
	new ones each time
	and waited there near me
	and all night they were eating the black
	
	they knew me they knew me
	nobody saw them
	I watched how they watched me
	they waited right there
	nobody heard them talking laughing
	laughing
	Laugh they told me nobody will hear
	
	and we went out one time
	onto one mountain
	all the way and nobody knew we went
	we went together we sounded like chewing
	the next day the mountain was gone
	
	we went out onto two mountains
	we made no noise
	no more noise than smoke
	nobody saw us far away
	the next day those mountains were almost gone
	
	we went out
	onto my dead grandmother’s mountain
	there an old wind lives
	that’s never been away
	it lives on and on there alone
	but the mountain’s gone
	and some of us
	never came back all the way



6. ANOTHER DREAM OF BURIAL

	Sometimes it is a walled garden
	with the stone over the entrance
	broken and inside it a few
	silent dried-up weeds or it may
	be a long pool perfectly still
	with the clear water revealing
	no color but that of the gray
	stone around it and once there was
	in a painting of a landscape
	one torn place imperfectly mended
	that showed the darkness under it
	but still I have set nothing down
	and turned and walked away from it
	into the whole world the whole world



7. ANY TIME

	How long ago the day is
	when at last I look at it
	with the time it has taken
	to be there still in it
	now in the transparent light
	with the flight in the voices
	the beginning in the leaves
	everything I remember
	and before it before me
	present at the speed of light
	in the distance that I am
	who keep reaching out to it
	seeing all the time faster
	where it has never stirred from
	before there is anything
	the darkness thinking the light



8. APRIL

	When we have gone the stone will stop singing
	
	April April
	Sinks through the sand of names
	
	Days to come
	With no stars hidden in them
	
	You that can wait being there
	
	You that lose nothing
	Know nothing



9. THE ASIANS DYING

	When the forests have been destroyed their darkness remains
	The ash the great walker follows the possessors
	Forever
	Nothing they will come to is real
	Nor for long
	Over the watercourses
	Like ducks in the time of the ducks
	The ghosts of the villages trail in the sky
	Making a new twilight
	
	Rain falls into the open eyes of the dead
	Again again with its pointless sound
	When the moon finds them they are the color of everything
	
	The nights disappear like bruises but nothing is healed
	The dead go away like bruises
	The blood vanishes into the poisoned farmlands
	Pain the horizon
	Remains
	Overhead the seasons rock
	They are paper bells
	Calling to nothing living
	
	The possessors move everywhere under Death their star
	Like columns of smoke they advance into the shadows
	Like thin flames with no light
	They with no past
	And fire their only future



10. BALLAD OF JOHN CABLE AND THREE GENTLEMEN

	He that had come that morning,   
	One after the other,
	Over seven hills,
	Each of a new color,
	
	Came now by the last tree,   
	By the red-colored valley,   
	To a gray river
	Wide as the sea.
	
	There at the shingle
	A listing wherry
	Awash with dark water;   
	What should it carry?
	
	There on the shelving,   
	Three dark gentlemen.   
	Might they direct him?   
	Three gentlemen.
	
	“Cable, friend John, John Cable,”   
	When they saw him they said,   
	“Come and be company
	As far as the far side.”
	
	“Come follow the feet,” they said,   
	“Of your family,
	Of your old father
	That came already this way.”
	
	But Cable said, “First I must go   
	Once to my sister again;
	What will she do come spring   
	And no man on her garden?
	
	She will say ‘Weeds are alive   
	From here to the Stream of Friday;   
	I grieve for my brother’s plowing,’
	Then break and cry.”
	
	“Lose no sleep,” they said, “for that fallow:   
	She will say before summer,
	‘I can get me a daylong man,
	Do better than a brother.’ ”
	
	Cable said, “I think of my wife:   
	Dearly she needs consoling;   
	I must go back for a little
	For fear she die of grieving.”
	
	“Cable,” they said, “John Cable,   
	Ask no such wild favor;
	Still, if you fear she die soon,   
	The boat might wait for her.”
	
	But Cable said, “I remember:   
	Out of charity let me
	Go shore up my poorly mother,   
	Cries all afternoon.”
	
	They said, “She is old and far,   
	Far and rheumy with years,   
	And, if you like, we shall take   
	No note of her tears.”
	
	But Cable said, “I am neither   
	Your hired man nor maid,   
	Your dog nor shadow
	Nor your ape to be led.”
	
	He said, “I must go back:
	Once I heard someone say
	That the hollow Stream of Friday   
	Is a rank place to lie;
	
	And this word, now I remember,   
	Makes me sorry: have you   
	Thought of my own body   
	I was always good to?
	
	The frame that was my devotion   
	And my blessing was,
	The straight bole whose limbs   
	Were long as stories--
	
	Now, poor thing, left in the dirt   
	By the Stream of Friday
	Might not remember me
	Half tenderly.”
	
	They let him nurse no worry;
	They said, “We give you our word:   
	Poor thing is made of patience;   
	Will not say a word.”
	
	“Cable, friend John, John Cable,”   
	After this they said,
	“Come with no company
	To the far side.
	
	To a populous place,
	A dense city
	That shall not be changed   
	Before much sorrow dry.”
	
	Over shaking water
	Toward the feet of his father,   
	Leaving the hills’ color
	And his poorly mother
	
	And his wife at grieving   
	And his sister’s fallow   
	And his body lying   
	In the rank hollow,
	
	Now Cable is carried   
	On the dark river;   
	Nor even a shadow   
	Followed him over.
	
	On the wide river   
	Gray as the sea
	Flags of white water   
	Are his company.



11. BEAR

	And in the northmost of the world’s whiteness, pacing slowly
	Far and small in those spaces, white like a shadow
	Of white, over that blank plain of silence without
	End, those plateaus of solitude, he moves : further
	In the secret of whiteness than ever the high-honking faint
	Black ravels of wild geese fly wavering at the end
	Of winter; further in silence than the last
	Black tracery of unvisited forests that stand bleak
	And tall like white-bound navies, hulls sunk in the virgin
	Hush, where the sky is the sheen of a wide shell, and the creaking
	Of their empty rigging gives weight to the stillness; and further
	In solitude than all charactery of shadows
	The figured world casts in its turning, the pads of his white
	Feet, wandering, fill their own shadows. Below him, far
	On the grilled globe of the middle earth the furrowed
	Fields of men know husbandry and harvest; and there
	Are the stern gods on their gray hills, the audacious
	Prows of vessels tempting the goddess-natured sea,
	And the falling of rain, air’s softnesses, and there is company there,
	Variety and houses, coupling and colours; and
	The fires are warm there, the water flows, and the other
	Beasts and their seasons revolve their patient
	Caravan; but that is in a different dream. And beyond
	the green-altering
	Tundra and the stiff sea, indeed before these, he slouches
	Beyond maps, before maps, in a region
	With not so much conformation, no: on the dim
	Comb of the world, that place
	That the maps make white for that they have not found it,
	And white it is, in the yellowish green whiteness
	Of its long dusk: the flatness vanishing
	Under the bursts and whirls of its misted horizon; even
	The years have not yet come to pass, but all
	Drifts lost where yet no finding is. Yet all
	Conjunction is bloodless, thin as the still air: the abstract
	Meeting of lines projected from elsewhere, degrees
	Of the rank world’s longitude, rhumbs of stars; but though they join
	Always under his shifting feet, there is
	No narrowness engendered there, but only
	The beginnings of distance; and all directions join,
	Are lost in his shadow beneath him, and direction
	Becomes merely the way he walks, shambling: he the one
	Hill on this level pallor, the single floe



12. BEFORE A DEPARTURE IN SPRING

	Once more it is April with the first light sifting
	through the young leaves heavy with dew making the colors
	remember who they are the new pink of the cinnamon tree
	the gilded lichens of the bamboo the shadowed bronze
	of the kamani and the blue day opening
	as the sunlight descends through it all like the return
	of a spirit touching without touch and unable
	to believe it is here and here again and awake
	reaching out in silence into the cool breath
	of the garden just risen from darkness and days of rain
	it is only a moment the birds fly through it calling
	to each other and are gone with their few notes and the flash
	of their flight that had vanished before ever we knew it
	we watch without touching any of it and we
	can tell ourselves only that this is April this is the morning
	this never happened before and we both remember it



13. BEFORE THAT

	It was never there and already it’s vanishing
	
	City unhealthy pale with pictures of
	Cemeteries sifting on its windows
	Its planets with wind in their eyes searching among
	The crosses again
	At night
	In dark clothes
	
	It was never there
	
	Papers news from the desert
	Moving on or
	Kip in go their
	Voices
	
	The river flowing past its other shore
	Past the No Names the windows washed at night
	And who is my
	Name for
	
	In my pocket
	Slowly the photographs becoming saints
	Never there
	
	I put out my hand and the dark falls through it
	Following a fag
	
	Gutters made in my time rounded with
	The wounded in mind
	The streets roped off for the affectionate
	
	Will do for the
	Mutilated
	
	If I
	Lie down in the street and that smoke comes out of me
	
	Who
	Was it
	
	It was a night like this that the ashes were made
	
	Before that
	Was always the fire



14. THE BIRD

	Might it be like this then to come back descending
	through the gray sheeted hour when it is said that dreams
	are to be believed the moment when the ghosts go home
	with the last stars still on far below in a silence
	that deepens like water a sinking softly toward them
	to find a once-familiar capital half dissolved
	like a winter its faces piled in their own wreckage
	and over them unfinished towers of empty
	mirrors risen framed in air then beside pewter rivers
	under black nests in the naked poplars arriving
	at the first hesitations of spring the thin leaves
	shivering and the lights in them and at cold April with trees
	all in white its mullein wool opening on thawed banks
	cowslips and mustard in the morning russet cows on green slope
	running clouds behind hands of willows the song of the wren
	and both recognizing and being recognized with doubting
	belief neither stranger nor true inhabitant
	neither knowing nor not knowing coming at last
	to the door in sunlight and seeing as through glasses far
	away the old claims the longings to stay and to leave
	the new heights of the trees the children grown tall and polite
	the animal absences and scarcely touching anything
	holding it after all as uncertainly
	as the white blossoms were held that have been blown down
	most of them in one night or this empty half
	of a bird’s egg flung out of the bare flailing branches



15. BREAD

	Each face in the street is a slice of bread
	wandering on
	searching
	
	somewhere in the light the true hunger
	appears to be passing them by
	they clutch
	
	have they forgotten the pale caves
	they dreamed of hiding in
	their own caves
	full of the waiting of their footprints
	hung with the hollow marks of their groping
	full of their sleep and their hiding
	
	have they forgotten the ragged tunnels
	they dreamed of following in out of the light
	to hear step after step
	
	the heart of bread
	to be sustained by its dark breath
	and emerge
	
	to find themselves alone
	before a wheat field
	raising its radiance to the moon



16. BREAD AND BUTTER

	I keep finding this letter
	To the gods of abandon,
	Tearing it up: Sirs,
	Having lived in your shrines
	I know what I owe you--
	
	I don’t, did I ever? With both hands
	I’ve forgotten, I keep
	Having forgotten. I’ll have no such shrines here.
	I will not bow in the middle of the room
	To the statue of nothing
	With the flies turning around it.
	On these four walls I am the writing.
	
	Why would I start such a letter?
	Think of today, think of tomorrow.
	Today on the tip of my tongue,
	Today with my eyes,
	Tomorrow the vision,
	Tomorrow
	
	In the broken window
	The broken boats will come in,
	The life boats
	Waving their severed hands,
	
	And I will love as I ought to
	Since the beginning.



17. BREAD AT MIDNIGHT

	The judges have chains in their sleeves
	To get where they are they have
	Studied many flies
	They drag their voices up a long hill
	Announcing It is over
	
	Well now that it is over
	I remember my homeland the mountains of chaff
	
	And hands hands deaf as starfish fetching
	The bread still frozen
	To the tables



18. THE BURNT CHILD

	Matches among other things that were not allowed
	never would be
	lying high in a cool blue box
	that opened in other hands and there they all were
	bodies clean and smooth blue heads white crowns
	white sandpaper on the sides of the box scoring
	fire after fire gone before
	
	I could hear the scratch and flare
	when they were over
	and catch the smell of the striking
	I knew what the match would feel like
	lighting
	when I was very young
	
	a fire engine came and parked
	in the shadow of the big poplar tree
	on Fourth Street one night
	keeping its engine running
	pumping oxygen to the old woman
	in the basement
	when she died the red lights went on burning



19. BY DARK

	When it is time I follow the black dog
	into the darkness that is the mind of day
	
	I can see nothing there but the black dog
	the dog I know going ahead of me
	
	not looking back oh it is the black dog
	I trust now in my turn after the years
	
	when I had all the trust of the black dog
	through an age of brightness and through shadow
	
	on into the blindness of the black dog
	where the rooms of the dark were already known
	
	and had no fear in them for the black dog
	leading me carefully up the blind stairs



20. BY DAY AND BY NIGHT

	Shadow, index of the sun,
	Who knows him as you know him,
	Who have never turned to look at him since the beginning?
	
	In the court of his brilliance
	You set up his absence like a camp.
	And his fire only confirms you. And his death is your freedom.



21. CALLING LATE

	Oh white lemurs who invented the dance
	this is the time afterward
	can you hear me
	who invented the story
	
	part of the story
	
	oh blind lemurs who invented the morning
	who touched the day
	who held it aloft when it was early
	who taught it to fly
	can you hear the story
	
	can you see now
	
	oh shining lemurs who invented the beginning
	who brought it along with you all the way
	throwing it high up catching it never letting it fall
	throwing it ahead throwing it far overhead
	leaping up to it climbing into it
	
	going to sleep in it shutting your eyes
	with it safe inside them
	are you listening
	
	to the story
	it has no beginning



22. CAMEL

	Remember that we are dust. It is said
	That this place of our passage is prone to mirages:
	That the waves of the drifting desert, the heat-daft
	Air playing like water-light, the horizon
	Swirling slow as a shadow and laying up
	To itself all their unearthly shiftings,
	Or simply the salt tides working
	Of need or desire, out of some fold
	Of their flowing raise often visions
	As of white cities like walled clouds, agleam
	On their hills, so clear that you can see the tiered
	Buildings glint still in the rocking daylight,
	Or again of trees even whose shadows
	Seem green and to breathe, or merely of pools
	Of simple water on that same dry surge borne,
	That will ride nearer, nearer, like elusive
	Aphrodite; and these are nothing
	But the playing of the heated light teasing
	Like pain over this dust. In truth, it may
	Be nothing but ourselves, this that is
	All about us for our eves to see: this dust
	That we cannot see beyond. Remember
	That we are dust, dust and a little breath,
	As the sand dervishes the wind lifts
	Whirling and sends over the sea-shaped dunes;
	As does their dancing, we wind between breathless
	Dust and breathless dust, and our passage
	Even as theirs, may be no more
	Than a casual sport of the air gliding
	To no depth over the delusive surface
	Of our breathless selves. But speaking of virtues
	We think of water; moving, we think
	Of arrival as of water, of virtue
	As the means of arrival. And we have named
	For water him who is visibly
	Our practice of virtue, beast of our motion,
	Calling him “Ship of the Desert.” Who rolls
	When he walks; whose going also
	Has strangely the gait of a cradle. He too is dust,
	Yet not as we, save as that figure
	Of what our faring is, for his breath is speechless,
	His back that bears us has a wave’s shape
	Drawn by a child; or hill’s lurching
	As he strides; when he runs, his shadow
	Over the rippling dust is a wind’s
	Shudder across modelled bay-water,
	Curved gust across grain-field, or storm silvering
	Fast as some hastening angel over
	Hillsides of olive trees, darkness
	Of rain-cloud chasing the sunlight
	On carved hills, or wave-crest over
	Far reef flung, its main strength still racing
	For shore. Even as these
	It would seem our progress is, in itself bearing
	Its own sustenance for long waste-wending;
	A power that may be, in event of all
	Arrival failing, other resources
	Parched, our water of desperation; that is not
	Ourselves; whose capacities may not be
	Arrived at even by prayer, patient study
	And deprivation, yet whose presence we have known
	To affect us so that even in places of water,
	Of pleasure, repose, abode, when we had thought
	To escape the sense of it, it will sometimes break
	From where it was tethered and find us out,
	Intruding its ungainly ill-smelling head
	Over our shoulders. A creature that can shut
	Both eyes and nostrils against the lash
	Of dust risen suddenly savage. That if not
	Drained at last dry as a white bone,
	Exhausted beyond sense, or buried
	In the capricious cruelty of
	Its own condition, can sense more surely than we
	Over the dust-driven horizon the green
	Places where the roots grope trusting
	Down into the dark breathlessness, the trees
	Sway and give shade, dew falls early,
	Stones drip in the mossed shadow, and the motes
	Seem to dance to a falling cadence
	That mortal ears might apprehend. Catching, as we,
	At phantoms, breaking into a dangerous
	Rocking-horse sprint at false visions, nevertheless
	When we are despairing, drawn it would seem
	By deceptions only, working to wean
	Our minds from arrival, staring vacantly
	At the tormented air, while the enraged sun
	Careens in white circles about a sky
	The blood-orange of an eyelid, he can with no warning
	Lift the furred neck swinging there
	Like a winter serpent, flare divining nostrils,
	Even from far off smell the true water.



23. THE CAUSEWAY

	This is the bridge where at dusk they hear voices
	far out in the meres and marshes or they say they hear voices
	
	the bridge shakes and no one else is crossing at this hour
	somewhere along here is where they hear voices
	
	this is the only bridge though it keeps changing
	from which some always say they hear voices
	
	the sounds pronounce an older utterance out of the shadows
	sometimes stifled sometimes carried from clear voices
	
	what can be recognized in the archaic syllables
	frightens many and tells others not to fear voices
	
	travellers crossing the bridge have forgotten where they were going
	in a passage between the remote and the near voices
	
	there is a tale by now of a bridge a long time before this one
	already old before the speech of our day and the mere voices
	
	when the Goths were leaving their last kingdom in Scythia
	they could feel the bridge shaking under their voices
	
	the bank and the first spans are soon lost to sight
	there seemed no end to the horses carts people and all their voices
	
	in the mists at dusk the whole bridge sank under them
	into the meres and marshes leaving nothing but their voices
	
	they are still speaking the language of their last kingdom
	that no one remembers who now hears their voices
	
	whatever translates from those rags of sound
	persuades some who hear them that they are familiar voices
	
	grandparents never seen ancestors in their childhoods
	now along the present bridge they sound like dear voices
	
	some may have spoken in my own name in an earlier language
	when last they drew breath in the kingdom of their voices



24. CEREMONY AFTER AN AMPUTATION

	Spirits of the place who were here before I saw it
	to whom I have made such offerings as I have known how to make
	wanting from the first to approach you with recognition
	bringing for your swept ridge trees lining the wind with seedlings
	that have grown now to become these long wings in chorus
	where the birds assemble and settle their flying lives
	you have taught me without meaning and have lifted me up
	without talk or promise and again and again reappeared to me
	unmistakable and changing and unpronounceable as a face
	
	dust of the time a day in late spring after the silk of rain
	had fallen softly through the night and after the green morning
	the afternoon floating brushed with gold and then the sounds
	of machines erupting across the valley and elbowing up the slopes
	pushing themselves forward to occupy you to be more of you
	who remain the untouched silence through which they are passing
	I try to hear you remembering that we are not separate
	to find you who cannot be lost or elsewhere or incomplete
	
	nature of the solitary machine coming into the story
	from the minds that conceived you and the hands that first conjured up
	the phantom of you in fine lines on the drawing board
	you for whom function is all the good that exists
	you to whom I have come with nothing but purpose
	a purpose of my own as though it was something we shared
	you that were pried from the earth without anyone
	consulting you and were carried off burned beaten metamorphosed
	according to plans and lives to which you owed nothing
	let us be at peace with each other let peace be what is between us
	and you now single vanished part of my left hand bit of bone finger end index
	
	who began with me in the dark that was already my mother
	you who touched whatever I could touch of the beginning
	and were how I touched and who remembered the sense of it
	when I thought I had forgotten it you in whom it waited
	under your only map of one untrodden mountain
	you who did as well as we could through all the hours at the piano
	and who helped undo the bras and found our way to the treasure
	
	and who held the fruit and the pages and knew how to button
	my right cuff and to wash my left ear and had taken in
	heart beats of birds and beloved faces and hair by day and by night
	fur of dogs ears of horses tongues and the latches of doors
	so that I still feel them clearly long after they are gone
	and water beside the boat one evening of an ancient summer
	and the vibration of a string over which the bow was moving
	as though the sound of the note were still playing
	and the hand of my wife found in the shallows of waking
	
	you who in a flicker of my inattention
	signalled to me once only my error telling me
	of the sudden blow from the side so that I looked down
	to see not you any longer but instead a mouth
	full of blood calling after you who had already gone gone
	gone ahead into what I cannot know or reach or touch
	leaving in your place only the cloud of pain rising
	into the day filling the light possessing every sound
	becoming the single color and taste and direction
	
	yet as the pain recedes and the moment of it
	you remain with me even in the missing of you
	small boat moving before me on the current under the daylight
	whatever you had touched and had known and took with you
	is with me now as you are when you are already there
	unseen part of me reminding me warning me
	pointing to what I cannot see never letting me forget
	you are my own speaking only to me going with me
	all the rest of the way telling me what is still here



25. DECEMBER NIGHT

	The cold slope is standing in darkness
	But the south of the trees is dry to the touch
	
	The heavy limbs climb into the moonlight bearing feathers
	I came to watch these
	White plants older at night
	The oldest
	Come first to the ruins
	
	And I hear magpies kept awake by the moon
	The water flows through its
	Own fingers without end
	
	Tonight once more
	I find a single prayer and it is not for men



26. DESPAIR

	Some lit theirs at both ends.
	Some clutched theirs as a blind man does his cane.
	Some sucked theirs like the only orange.
	Some packed clean shirts and a few socks in theirs.
	Some spent their lives looking for theirs and they were wearing it all the time.
	Some neglected theirs but the roots found a way.
	Some buried theirs. The stones tell when and where.



27. DISTANT MORNING

	We were a time of our own the redstart reappeared
	 on the handle of the fork left alone for that moment
	upright in the damp earth the shriek of the black kite
	 floated high over the river as the day warmed
	the weasel slipped like a trick of light through the ivy
	 there was one wryneck pretending to be a shadow
	on the trunk of a dead plum tree while the far figures
	 of daylight crossed the dark crystal of its eye
	the tawny owl clenched itself in its oak hearing the paper
	 trumpet and rapid knocking that told where the nuthatch
	prospected and the gray adder gathered itself
	 on its gray stone with the ringing of a cricket suspended
	around it the nightwalkers slept curled in their houses
	 the hedgehogs in the deep brush the badgers and foxes
	in their home ground the bats in the high crevices
	 none of it could be held or denied or summoned back
	none of it would be given its meaning later



28. DIVINITIES

	Having crowded once onto the threshold of mortality
	And not been chosen
	There is no freedom such as theirs
	That have no beginning
	
	The air itself is their memory
	A domain they cannot inhabit
	But from which they are never absent
	
	_What are you_ they say _that simply exist_
	And the heavens and the earth bow to them
	Looking up from their choices
	Perishing
	
	All day and all night
	Everything that is mistaken worships them
	Even the dead sing them an unending hymn



29. AN END IN SPRING

	It is carried beyond itself a little way
	And covered with a sky of old bedding
	
	The compatriots stupid as their tables
	Go on eating their packages
	Selling gloves to the clocks
	Doing alright
	
	Ceasing to exist it becomes a deity
	
	It is with the others that are not there
	The centuries are named for them the names
	Do not come down to us
	
	On the way to them the words
	Die



30. ENTRY

	When it seems that the world is made of a single
	 summer as it always has been and that the gray leaves
	will hang that same way without moving over the empty
	 road until the end while the wheat continues to stand
	in its sleep with no dreams shining boundless into
	 the hovering day along the stopped film of the river
	when the doors facing south have turned to stone every one
	 and the parched syllable of cicadas joined with the hum
	of fields hangs still in the light and from shuttered
	 windows voices sift like the settling of dust
	all at once the blank sky will be half dark with the black
	 cloud welling from which a cold wind rolls and the first
	thunder splits all around to build upon its own
	 deafening echoes then suddenly the light will be only
	the weight of rain cascading shot through with lightning
	 at that time if you are away from home and can stumble
	to any house they will let you in to a dark room
	 when it closes behind you at the heart of the roar
	you will see as through water an unknown face but you
	 will hear not a sound it makes and behind it you will see others
	looking up from around a table in that silence
	 knowing nothing about you except why you are there



31. ESTHER

	Tomorrow they will come for you
	old female word from the corner
	lucidity
	motionless in the dark
	they will take you out to be
	bared elsewhere
	opened before it is May
	
	there is no one else here
	the door wide to the blinding
	spring
	the wind one of the family
	like a cold hen
	mute about the kitchen
	the rest away busy the shirts waiting
	for the iron
	the calendar ticking
	
	tomorrow
	the animals will keep away
	we do not believe in
	happening
	the sunlight will always lie there
	even tonight even tomorrow night
	it was always there
	but you go back to another time
	it is said
	as though there is one
	
	If tomorrow is really
	not today
	how can one believe in anything
	as vou say
	hands holding each other in
	paper bags older than they are
	eyes cut out of your dress hung
	to dry
	burst package to be
	carried past the toys out
	in the bright dirt
	past the shadows waving
	ringing their bells raising
	their instruments
	whatever is brought back as you know
	is not all
	
	but if you get
	later to a place with a blackened wall
	and two sticks held together
	by a little smoke
	maybe they would let you sit by it
	in the day
	staring
	and you could announce what he is doing
	the animal their sky



32. FAR COMPANY

	At times now from some margin of the day
	I can hear birds of another country
	not the whole song but a brief phrase of it
	out of a music that I may have heard
	once in a moment I appear to have
	forgotten for the most part that full day
	no sight of which I can remember now
	though it must have been where my eyes were then
	that knew it as the present while I thought
	of somewhere else without noticing that
	singing when it was there and still went on
	whether or not I noticed now it falls
	silent when I listen and leaves the day
	and flies before it to be heard again
	somewhere ahead when I have forgotten



33. FOR THE ANNIVERSARY OF MY DEATH

	Every year without knowing it I have passed the day
	When the last fires will wave to me
	And the silence will set out
	Tireless traveller
	Like the beam of a lightless star
	
	Then I will no longer
	Find myself in life as in a strange garment
	Surprised at the earth
	And the love of one woman
	And the shamelessness of men
	As today writing after three days of rain
	Hearing the wren sing and the falling cease
	And bowing not knowing to what



34. FOX SLEEP

	On a road through the mountains with a friend many years ago 
	I came to a curve on a slope where a clear stream 
	flowed down flashing across dark rocks through its own 
	echoes that could neither be caught nor forgotten 
	it was the turning of autumn and already 
	the mornings were cold with ragged clouds in the hollows 
	long after sunrise but the pasture sagging like a roof 
	the glassy water and flickering yellow leaves 
	in the few poplars and knotted plum trees were held up 
	in a handful of sunlight that made the slates on the silent 
	mill by the stream glisten white above their ruin 
	and a few relics of the life before had been arranged 
	in front of the open mill house to wait 
	pale in the daylight out on the open mountain 
	after whatever they had been made for was over 
	the dew was drying on them and there were few who took that road 
	who might buy one of them and take it away somewhere 
	to be unusual to be the only one 
	to become unknown a wooden bed stood there on rocks 
	a cradle the color of dust a cracked oil jar iron pots 
	wooden wheels iron wheels stone wheels the tall box of a clock 
	and among them a ring of white stone the size of an 
	embrace set into another of the same size 
	an iron spike rising from the ring where the wooden 
	handle had fitted that turned it in its days as a hand mill 
	you could see if you looked closely that the top ring 
	that turned in the other had been carved long before in the form 
	of a fox lying nose in tail seeming to be 
	asleep the features worn almost away where it 
	had gone around and around grinding grain and salt 
	to go into the dark and to go on and remember 
	
	What I thought I had left I kept finding again 
	but when I went looking for what I thought I remembered 
	as anyone could have foretold it was not there 
	when I went away looking for what I had to do 
	I found that I was living where I was a stranger 
	but when I retraced my steps the familiar vision 
	turned opaque and all surface and in the wrong places 
	and the places where I had been a stranger appeared to me 
	to be where I had been at home called by name and answering 
	getting ready to go away and going away 
	
	Every time they assembled and he spoke to them 
	about waking there was an old man who stood listening 
	and left before the others until one day the old man stayed 
	and Who are you he asked the old man 
	and the old man answered I am not a man 
	many lives ago I stood where you are standing 
	and they assembled in front of me and I spoke to them 
	about waking until one day one of them asked me 
	When someone has wakened to what is really there 
	is that person free of the chain of consequences 
	and I answered yes and with that I turned into a fox 
	and I have been a fox for five hundred lives 
	and now I have come to ask you to say what will 
	free me from the body of a fox please tell me 
	when someone has wakened to what is really there 
	is that person free of the chain of consequences 
	and this time the answer was That person sees it as it is 
	then the old man said Thank you for waking me 
	you have set me free of the body of the fox 
	which you will find on the other side of the mountain 
	I ask you to bury it please as one of your own 
	that evening he announced a funeral service 
	for one of them but they said nobody has died 
	then he led them to the other side of the mountain 
	and a cave where they found a fox’s body 
	and he told them the story and they buried the fox 
	as one of them but later one of them asked 
	what if he had given the right answer every time 
	
	Once again I was there and once again I was leaving 
	and again it seemed as though nothing had changed 
	even while it was all changing but this time 
	was a time of ending this time the long marriage was over 
	the orbits were flying apart it was autumn again 
	sunlight tawny in the fields where the shadows 
	each day grew longer and the still afternoons 
	ripened the distance until the sun went down 
	across the valley and the full moon rose out of the trees 
	it was the time of year when I was born and that evening 
	I went to see friends for the last time and I came back 
	after midnight along the road white with the moon 
	I was crossing the bars of shadow and seeing ahead of me 
	the wide silent valley full of silver light 
	and there just at the corner of the land that I had 
	come back to so many times and now was leaving 
	at the foot of the wall built of pale stone I saw the body 
	stretched in the grass and it was a fox a vixen 
	just dead with no sign of how it had come to happen 
	no blood the long fur warm in the dewy grass 
	nothing broken or lost or torn or unfinished 
	I carried her home to bury her in the garden 
	in the morning of the clear autumn that she had left 
	and to stand afterward in the turning daylight 
	
	There are the yellow beads of the stonecrops and the twisted flags 
	of dried irises knuckled into the hollows 
	of moss and rubbly limestone on the waves of the low wall 
	the ivy has climbed along them where the weasel ran 
	the light has kindled to gold the late leaves of the cherry tree 
	over the lane by the house chimney there is the roof 
	and the window looking out over the garden 
	summer and winter there is the field below the house 
	there is the broad valley far below them all with the curves 
	of the river a strand of sky threaded through it 
	and the notes of bells rising out of it faint as smoke 
	and there beyond the valley above the rim of the wall 
	the line of mountains I recognize like a line of writing 
	that has come back when I had thought it was forgotten



35. GOOD PEOPLE

	From the kindness of my parents   
	I suppose it was that I held   
	that belief about suffering   
	
	imagining that if only   
	it could come to the attention   
	of any person with normal   
	feelings certainly anyone   
	literate who might have gone   
	
	to college they would comprehend   
	pain when it went on before them   
	and would do something about it   
	whenever they saw it happen   
	in the time of pain the present   
	they would try to stop the bleeding   
	for example with their own hands   
	
	but it escapes their attention   
	or there may be reasons for it   
	the victims under the blankets   
	the meat counters the maimed children   
	the animals the animals   
	staring from the end of the world



36. GREEN FIELDS

	By this part of the century few are left who believe
	in the animals for they are not there in the carved parts
	of them served on plates and the pleas from the slatted trucks
	are sounds of shadows that possess no future
	there is still game for the pleasure of killing
	and there are pets for the children but the lives that followed
	courses of their own other than ours and older
	have been migrating before us some are already
	far on the way and yet Peter with his gaunt cheeks
	and point of white beard the face of an aged Lawrence
	Peter who had lived on from another time and country
	and who had seen so many things set out and vanish
	still believed in heaven and said he had never once
	doubted it since his childhood on the farm in the days
	of the horses he had not doubted it in the worst
	times of the Great War and afterward and he had come
	to what he took to be a kind of earthly
	model of it as he wandered south in his sixties
	by that time speaking the language well enough
	for them to make him out he took the smallest roads
	into a world he thought was a thing of the past
	with wildflowers he scarcely remembered and neighbors
	working together scything the morning meadows
	turning the hay before the noon meal bringing it in
	by milking time husbandry and abundance
	all the virtues he admired and their reward bounteous
	in the eyes of a foreigner and there he remained
	for the rest of his days seeing what he wanted to see
	until the winter when he could no longer fork
	the earth in his garden and then he gave away
	his house land everything and committed himself
	to a home to die in an old chateau where he lingered
	for some time surrounded by those who had lost
	the use of body or mind and as he lay there he told me
	that the wall by his bed opened almost every day
	and he saw what was really there and it was eternal life
	as he recognized at once when he saw the gardens
	he had made and the green fields where he had been
	a child and his mother was standing there then the wall would close
	and around him again were the last days of the world



37. THE HIGHWAY

	It seems too enormous just for a man to be
	Walking on. As if it and the empty day
	Were all there is. And a little dog trotting
	In time with the heat waves, away down
	Near the horizon, seeming never to get
	Any further. The sun and everything
	Are stuck in the same places, and the ditch
	Is the same all the time, full of every kind
	Of bone, while the empty air keeps humming
	That sound it has memorized of things going
	Past. And the signs with huge heads and starved
	Bodies, dancing suggestive dances in
	The heat without moving from where they stand,
	And the others big as houses, all promise
	But with nothing inside and only one wall,
	Tell of other places where you can eat
	And drink and get a bath and lie on a bed
	Listening to music, and be safe. If you
	Look around you see it is just the same
	The other way, going back. Maybe hope
	Was never anything but feet, and wherever
	It heads for it must get there burning.



38. THE HUMMINGBIRD

	There was a city hidden in the forest
	and there was a house in the city
	and in it a girl who was so beautiful
	that her mother never let her out of sight
	
	one day one of the servant girls went down
	to the fountain to bring back some water
	and when she came there she saw the hummingbird
	and she stood still with a spell holding her
	
	since she stayed away so long the mother
	sent another servant girl who came there
	and saw the hummingbird and she stood still
	the same way with the same spell holding her
	
	then the mother sent another servant girl
	who saw the hummingbird and stayed there
	and at that the mother went too and saw
	the hummingbird and at the sight of its
	
	feathers and its flight the same spell took her
	and she stood still until finally the girl
	herself decided to go to the fountain
	and see what was keeping them and when she
	
	came there the hummingbird flew to her
	and tapped her on the forehead with his beak
	and changed her into a hummingbird
	and they both flew off into the forest



39. THE HYDRA

	No no the dead have no brothers
	
	The Hydra calls me but I am used to it
	It calls me Everybody
	But I know my name and do not answer
	
	And you the dead
	You know your names as I do not
	But at moments you have just finished speaking
	
	The snow stirs in its wrappings
	Every season comes from a new place
	
	Like your voice with its resemblances
	
	A long time ago the lightning was practising
	Something I thought was easy
	
	I was young and the dead were in other
	Ages
	As the grass had its own language
	
	Now I forget where the difference falls
	
	One thing about the living sometimes a piece of us
	Can stop dying for a moment
	But you the dead
	
	Once you go into those names you go on you never
	Hesitate
	You go on



40. I LIVE UP HERE

	I live up here
	And a little bit to the left
	And I go down only
	
	For the accidents and then
	Never a moment too soon
	
	Just the same it’s a life it’s plenty
	
	The stairs the petals she loves me
	Every time
	Nothing has changed
	
	Oh down there down there
	Every time
	The glass knights lie by their gloves of blood
	
	In the pans of the scales the helmets
	Brim over with water
	It’s perfectly fair
	
	The pavements are dealt out the dice
	Every moment arrive somewhere
	
	You can hear the hearses getting lost in lungs
	Their bells stalling
	And then silence comes with the plate and I
	Give what I can
	
	Feeling _It’s worth it_
	
	For I see
	What my votes the mice are accomplishing
	And I know I’m free
	
	This is how I live
	Up here and simply
	
	Others do otherwise
	Maybe



41. AN ISLAND IN THE HARBOR

	My own country my countrymen the exchanges
	Yes this is the place
	
	The flag of the blank wall the birds of money
	
	Prisoners in the watch towers
	And the motto
	       _The hopes of others our
	       Guardians_
	
	Even here
	Spring passes looking for the cradles
	
	The beating on the bars of the cages
	Is caught and parcelled out to the bells
	
	It is twelve the prisoners’ own hour
	
	The mouse bones in the plaster
	Prepare for the resurrection



42. IT IS MARCH

	It is March and black dust falls out of the books
	Soon I will be gone
	The tall spirit who lodged here has
	Left already
	On the avenues the colorless thread lies under
	Old prices
	
	When you look back there is always the past
	Even when it has vanished
	But when you look forward
	With your dirty knuckles and the wingless
	Bird on your shoulder
	What can you write
	
	The bitterness is still rising in the old mines
	The fist is coming out of the egg
	The thermometers out of the mouths of the corpses
	
	At a certain height
	The tails of the kites for a moment are
	Covered with footsteps
	
	Whatever I have to do has not yet begun



43. JANUARY

	So after weeks of rain
	at night the winter stars
	that much farther in heaven
	without our having seen them
	in far light are still forming
	the heavy elements
	that when the stars are gone
	fly up as dust finer
	by many times than a hair
	and recognize each other
	in the dark travelling
	at great speed and becoming
	our bodies in our time
	looking up after rain
	in the cold night together



44. THE LAST ONE

	Well they’d made up their minds to be everywhere because why
	 not.
	Everywhere was theirs because they thought so.
	They with two leaves they whom the birds despise.
	In the middle of stones they made up their minds.
	They started to cut.
	
	Well they cut everything because why not.
	Everything was theirs because they thought so
	It fell into its shadows and they took both away.
	Some to have some for burning.
	
	Well cutting everything they came to the water.
	They came to the end of the day there was one left standing.
	They would cut it tomorrow they went away.
	The night gathered in the last branches.
	The shadow of the night gathered in the shadow on the water.
	The night and the shadow put on the same head
	And it said Now.
	
	Well in the morning they cut the last one.
	Like the others the last one fell into its shadow.
	It fell into its shadow on the water.
	They took it away its shadow stayed on the water.
	
	Well they shrugged they started trying to get the shadow away.
	They cut right to the ground the shadow stayed whole.
	They laid boards on it the shadow came out on top.
	They shone lights on it the shadow got blacker and clearer.
	They exploded the water the shadow rocked.



45. MERCY

	Even the hunters, who smile to cock
	The deadly choice in their minds, and like
	To carry it by loving custom lightly,
	Looking for something to kill, even
	The hunters sometimes it overtakes
	Over the half-killed quarry. Do not look
	In their eyes, they will tell you, there are questions
	That cannot be put out with knives. Sooner
	Or later, just the same, the eyes are there
	Asking out of the bird broken
	On wires, out of the crushed rabbit



46. MOUNTAIN TOWN

	My memory the invisible buffalo
	Lumbers through the vacant street
	Considering the fences their
	
	Sorrows
	
	And the lightning died in its
	Mine ob it must be
	Some time back its name
	Is written everywhere in faded
	Dust
	
	One of its
	Gloves wheels on the sky over
	The blind movie
	And the station where the white train still
	Attends
	
	A bell that I hung onto as long as I could
	Is about to arrive and start ringing



47. A NIGHT FRAGRANCE

	Now I am old enough to remember
	people speaking of immortality
	as though it were something known to exist
	a tangible substance that might be acquired
	to be used perhaps in the kitchen
	every day in whatever was made there
	forever after and they applied the word
	to literature and the names of things
	names of persons and the naming of other
	things for them and no doubt they repeated
	that word with some element of belief
	when they named a genus of somewhat more than
	a hundred species of tropical trees and shrubs
	some with flowers most fragrant at night
	for James Theodore Tabernaemontanus
	of Heidelberg physician and botanist
	highly regarded in his day over
	four centuries ago immortality
	might be like that with the scattered species
	continuing their various evolutions
	the flowers opening by day or night
	with no knowledge of bearing a name
	of anyone and their fragrance if it
	reminds at all not reminding of him



48. OAK TIME

	Storms in absence like the ages before I was anywhere
	 and out in the shred of forest through the seasons
	a few oaks have fallen towering ancients elders
	 the last of elders standing there while the wars drained away
	and slow-dancing with the ice when time had not discovered them
	 in a scrap of what had been their seamless fabric these late ones
	are lying shrouded already in eglantine and brambles
	 bird-cherry nettles and the tangled ivy
	that prophesies disappearance and had already
	 crept into the shadows they made when they held up their lives
	and the nightingales sang here even in the daytime
	 and cowbells echoed through the long twilight of summer
	the ivy knew the way oh the knowing ivy
	 that was never wrong how few now the birds seem to be
	no animals are led out any longer from the barns
	 after the milking to spend the night pastured here
	they are all gone from the village Edouard is gone
	 who walked out before them to the end of his days
	keeping an eye on the walnuts still green along the road
	 when the owl was safe in these oaks and in the night
	I could hear the fox that would bark here bark and be gone



49. THE OTHER TREE

	It seems that the odour that the dark makes
	When the night uncovers its cold, is a green thing.
	I have seen the turning light rustle like leaves
	And at sundown the birds sink like seeds falling.
	
	Like folded seeds falling from no bough we can see
	But out of the veined air and the light’s failing.
	Sometimes I have felt there was, not shadow
	But a dry branch, above my shoulder growing.
	
	All day growing, and not shadow, and with no wind
	 diverted.
	I have not thought of the birds resting there. I think
	 of them circling
	All day in the rocking light, till they are shaken down
	To curl blind like kernels, and cluster, like the fruit of
	 sleeping.
	
	In the same cold sleeping as the night’s foliate
	Tropism. But I think how the dark’s flowering
	Would open to no singing that we know, how its fruit,
	Like the night’s green odour, would taste of nothing.
	
	With that taste of nothing which sometimes at noon
	Which we say resembles a perfect flower, the thirsting
	Tongue will dream of, dry in its dark vault,
	As of a thing forbidden, lusting and leching.



50. RETURNING SEASON

	When the spring sun finds the village now it is empty
	 but from the beginning this was the afterlife
	it was not so apparent a generation gone
	 these were still roofs under which the names were born
	that came home winter evenings before all the wars to sleep
	 through freezing nights when the dogs curled low in the cow barns
	and sheep nudged their rank clouds in the dark as one
	 now only wagons sleep there and stalled plows
	and machine skeletons rusting around stopped notes
	 of far-off bells in a cold longer than winter’s
	they will not be wanted again nor wake into any life
	 when the recesses from a better world begin
	the year goes on turning and the barns remain without breath
	 and now after sundown a city bulb keeps an eye on the village
	until past midnight but the owls sweep by the low eaves
	 and over black gardens in the light of finished stars



51. SIRE

	Here comes the shadow not looking where it is going,
	And the whole night will fall; it is time.
	Here comes the little wind which the hour
	Drags with it everywhere like an empty wagon through leaves.
	Here comes my ignorance shuffling after them
	Asking them what they are doing.
	
	Standing still, I can hear my footsteps
	Come up behind me and go on
	Ahead of me and come up behind me and
	With different keys clinking in the pockets,
	And still I do not move. Here comes
	The white-haired thistle seed stumbling past through the branches
	Like a paper lantern carried by a blind man.
	I believe it is the lost wisdom of my grandfather
	Whose ways were his own and who died before I could ask.
	
	Forerunner, I would like to say, silent pilot,
	Little dry death, future,
	Your indirections are as strange to me
	As my own. I know so little that anything
	You might tell me would be a revelation.
	
	Sir, I would like to say,
	It is hard to think of the good woman
	Presenting you with children, like cakes,
	Granting you the eye of her needle,
	Standing in doorways, flinging after you
	Little endearments, like rocks, or her silence
	Like a whole Sunday of bells. Instead, tell me:
	Which of my many incomprehensions
	Did you bequeath me, and where did they take you? Standing
	In the shoes of indecision, I hear them
	Come up behind me and go on ahead of me
	Wearing boots, on crutches, barefoot, they could never
	Get together on any door-sill or destination--
	The one with the assortment of smiles, the one
	Jailed in himself like a forest, the one who comes
	Back at evening drunk with despair and turns
	Into the wrong night as though he owned it--oh small
	Deaf disappearance in the dusk, in which of their shoes
	Will I find myself tomorrow?



52. SOME LAST QUESTIONS

	What is the head
	                        a. Ash
	
	What are the eyes
	                        a. The wells have fallen in and have
	                             Inhabitants
	
	What are the feet
	                        a. Thumbs left after the auction
	
	No what are the feet
	                        a. Under them the impossible road is moving
	                             Down which the broken necked mice push
	                             Balls of blood with their noses
	
	What is the tongue
	                        a. The black coat that fell off the wall
	                             With sleeves trying to say something
	
	What are the hands
	                        a. Paid
	
	No what are the hands
	                        a. Climbing back down the museum wall
	                             To their ancestors the extinct shrews that will
	                             Have left a message
	
	What is the silence
	                       a. As though it had a right to more
	
	Who are the compatriots
	                       a. They make the stars of bone



53. THE SPEED OF LIGHT

	So gradual in those summers was the going
	of the age it seemed that the long days setting out
	when the stars faded over the mountains were not
	leaving us even as the birds woke in full song and the dew
	glittered in the webs it appeared then that the clear morning
	opening into the sky was something of ours
	to have and keep and that the brightness we could not touch
	and the air we could not hold had come to be there all the time
	for us and would never be gone and that the axle
	we did not hear was not turning when the ancient car
	coughed in the roofer’s barn and rolled out echoing
	first thing into the lane and the only tractor
	in the village rumbled and went into its rusty
	mutterings before heading out of its lean-to
	into the cow pats and the shadow of the lime tree
	we did not see that the swallows flashing and the sparks
	of their cries were fast in the spokes of the hollow
	wheel that was turning and turning us taking us
	all away as one with the tires of the baker’s van
	where the wheels of bread were stacked like days in calendars
	coming and going all at once we did not hear
	the rim of the hour in whatever we were saying
	or touching all day we thought it was there and would stay
	it was only as the afternoon lengthened on its
	dial and the shadows reached out farther and farther
	from everything that we began to listen for what
	might be escaping us and we heard high voices ringing
	the village at sundown calling their animals home
	and then the bats after dark and the silence on its road



54. ST. VINCENT’S

	Thinking of rain clouds that rose over the city
	on the first day of the year
	
	in the same month
	I consider that I have lived daily and with
	
	eyes open and ears to hear
	these years across from St Vincent’s Hospital
	above whose roof those clouds rose
	
	its bricks by day a French red under
	cross facing south
	blown-up neo-classic facades the tall
	dark openings between columns at
	the dawn of history
	exploded into many windows
	in a mortised face
	
	inside it the ambulances have unloaded
	after sirens’ howling nearer through traffic on
	Seventh Avenue long
	ago I learned not to hear them
	even when the sirens stop
	
	they turn to back in
	few passers-by stay to look
	and neither do I
	
	at night two long blue
	windows and one short one on the top floor
	burn all night
	many nights when most of the others are out
	on what floor do they have
	anything
	
	I have seen the building drift moonlit through geraniums
	late at night when trucks were few
	moon just past the full
	upper windows parts of the sky
	as long as I looked
	I watched it at Christmas and New Year
	early in the morning I have seen the nurses ray out through
	arterial streets
	in the evening have noticed internes blocks away
	on doorsteps one foot in the door
	
	I have come upon the men in gloves taking out
	the garbage at all hours
	piling up mountains of
	plastic bags white strata with green intermingled and
	black
	I have seen one pile
	catch fire and studied the cloud
	at the ends of the jets of the hoses
	the fire engines as near as that
	red beacons and
	machine-throb heard by the whole body
	I have noticed molded containers stacked outside
	a delivery entrance on Twelfth Street
	whether meals from a meal factory made up with those
	mummified for long journeys by plane
	or specimens for laboratory
	examination sealed at the prescribed temperatures
	either way closed delivery
	
	and approached faces staring from above
	crutches or tubular clamps
	out for tentative walks
	have paused for turtling wheel-chairs
	heard visitors talking in wind on each corner
	while the lights changed and
	hot dogs were handed over at the curb
	in the middle of afternoon
	mustard ketchup onions and relish
	and police smelling of ether and laundry
	were going back
	
	and I have known them all less than the papers of our days
	smoke rises from the chimneys do they have an incinerator
	what for
	how warm do they believe they have to maintain the air
	in there
	several of the windows appear
	to be made of tin
	but it may be the light reflected
	
	I have imagined bees coming and going
	on those sills though I have never seen them
	
	who was St Vincent



55. STAR

	All the way north on the train the sun
	followed me followed me without moving
	still the sun of that other morning
	when we had gone over Come on over
	men at the screen door said to my father
	You have to see this it’s an ape bring
	the little boy bring the boy along
	
	so he brought me along to the field
	of dry grass hissing behind the houses
	in the heat that morning and there was
	nothing else back there but the empty day
	above the grass waving as far away
	as I could see and the sight burned my eyes
	white birds were flying off beyond us
	
	and a raised floor of boards like a house
	with no house on it part way out there
	was shining by itself a color
	of shadow and the voices of the men
	were smaller in the field as we walked on
	something was standing out there on the floor
	the men kept saying Come on over
	
	it’s on a chain and my father said
	to me Don’t get too close I saw it was
	staring down at each of our faces
	one after the other as though it might
	catch sight of something in one of them
	that it remembered I stood watching its eyes
	as they turned away from each of us



56. THANKS

	Listen
	with the night falling we are saying thank you
	we are stopping on the bridges to bow from the railings
	we are running out of the glass rooms
	with our mouths full of food to look at the sky
	and say thank you
	we are standing by the water thanking it
	standing by the windows looking out
	in our directions
	
	back from a series of hospitals back from a mugging
	after funerals we are saying thank you
	after the news of the dead
	whether or not we knew them we are saying thank you
	
	over telephones we are saying thank you
	in doorways and in the backs of cars and in elevators
	remembering wars and the police at the door
	and the beatings on stairs we are saying thank you
	in the banks we are saying thank you
	in the faces of the officials and the rich
	and of all who will never change
	we go on saying thank you thank you
	
	with the animals dying around us
	taking our feelings we are saying thank you
	with the forests falling faster than the minutes
	of our lives we are saying thank you
	with the words going out like cells of a brain
	with the cities growing over us
	we are saying thank you faster and faster
	with nobody listening we are saying thank you
	thank you we are saying and waving
	dark though it is



57. TO LINGERING REGRETS

	Without wanting to
	I have come slowly
	to admit that I know
	who you are one by one
	oh lovely and mournful
	with downcast eyes
	appearing to me as
	you are turning away
	to stand silent and late
	in a remembered light
	touched with amber
	as the sun is going
	from a day that it brought
	you come to me again
	and again to wait
	as beautiful as ever
	at the edge of the light
	you have not changed at all
	as far as I can tell
	and you learn nothing from me
	who do not talk with you
	but see you waiting there
	without once moving toward you
	oh forever hopeful
	and forever young
	you are the foolish virgins
	with no oil for your lamps
	and no one else to lead you
	where you want to go



58. TO THE ANCIENT ORDER OF LEGS

	Barefoot all the way
	from the embryo
	and the drifting sands
	where the prints washed away
	untold lives ago
	you were born to be
	one of a number
	upholding a larger
	company on one
	side or the other
	always in the infantry
	and singular though
	at first you were many
	balancing alternately
	unable to see
	where you were going
	climbing along yourself
	by the numbers in
	a pace of your own
	and stepping into
	new talents positions
	memberships bringing
	the count down to
	eight and four and two
	coming in turn to be
	less dispensable
	half solitary painful
	surviving ancestor
	heir to the distances
	sustain the limbs of friends
	you that have borne the world
	this far in us all walk on
	light on your feet as
	the days walk through the days



59. TO THE CONSOLATIONS OF PHILOSOPHY

	Thank you but 
	not just at the moment 
	
	I know you will say 
	I have said that before 
	I know you have been 
	there all along somewhere 
	in another time zone 
	
	I studied once 
	those beautiful instructions 
	when I was young and 
	far from here 
	they seemed distant then 
	they seem distant now 
	from everything I remember 
	
	I hope they stayed with you 
	when the noose started to tighten 
	and you could say no more 
	and after wisdom 
	and the days of iron 
	the eyes started from your head 
	
	I know the words 
	must have been set down 
	partly for yourself 
	unjustly condemned after 
	a good life 
	
	I know the design 
	of the world is beyond 
	our comprehension 
	thank you 
	but grief is selfish and in 
	the present when 
	the stars do not seem to move 
	I was not listening 
	
	I know it is not 
	sensible to expect 
	fortune to grant her 
	gifts forever 
	I know



60. TO THE LIGHT OF SEPTEMBER

	When you are already here 
	you appear to be only 
	a name that tells of you 
	whether you are present or not 
	
	and for now it seems as though 
	you are still summer 
	still the high familiar 
	endless summer 
	yet with a glint 
	of bronze in the chill mornings 
	and the late yellow petals 
	of the mullein fluttering 
	on the stalks that lean 
	over their broken 
	shadows across the cracked ground 
	
	but they all know 
	that you have come 
	the seed heads of the sage 
	the whispering birds 
	with nowhere to hide you 
	to keep you for later 
	
	you 
	who fly with them 
	
	you who are neither 
	before nor after 
	you who arrive 
	with blue plums 
	that have fallen through the night 
	
	perfect in the dew



61. TO THE NEW YEAR

	With what stillness at last
	you appear in the valley
	your first sunlight reaching down
	to touch the tips of a few
	high leaves that do not stir
	as though they had not noticed
	and did not know you at all
	then the voice of a dove calls
	from far away in itself
	to the hush of the morning
	
	so this is the sound of you
	here and now whether or not
	anyone hears it this is
	where we have come with our age
	our knowledge such as it is
	and our hopes such as they are
	invisible before us
	untouched and still possible



62. VIXEN

	Comet of stillness princess of what is over
	      high note held without trembling without voice without sound
	aura of complete darkness keeper of the kept secrets
	      of the destroyed stories the escaped dreams the sentences
	never caught in words warden of where the river went
	      touch of its surface sibyl of the extinguished
	window onto the hidden place and the other time
	      at the foot of the wall by the road patient without waiting
	in the full moonlight of autumn at the hour when I was born
	      you no longer go out like a flame at the sight of me
	you are still warmer than the moonlight gleaming on you
	      even now you are unharmed even now perfect
	as you have always been now when your light paws are running
	      on the breathless night on the bridge with one end I remember you
	when I have heard you the soles of my feet have made answer
	      when I have seen you I have waked and slipped from the calendars
	from the creeds of difference and the contradictions
	      that were my life and all the crumbling fabrications
	as long as it lasted until something that we were
	      had ended when you are no longer anything
	let me catch sight of you again going over the wall
	      and before the garden is extinct and the woods are figures
	guttering on a screen let my words find their own
	      places in the silence after the animals



63. THE WAY TO THE RIVER

	The way to the river leads past the names of
	Ash the sleeves the wreaths of hinges
	Through the song of the bandage vendor
	
	I lay your name by my voice
	As I go
	
	The way to the river leads past the late
	Doors and the games of the children born looking backwards
	They play that they are broken glass
	The numbers wait in the halls and the clouds
	Call
	From windows
	They play that they are old they are putting the horizon
	Into baskets they are escaping they are
	Hiding
	
	I step over the sleepers the fires the calendars
	My voice turns to you
	
	I go past the juggler’s condemned building the hollow
	Windows gallery
	Of invisible presidents the same motion in them all
	In a parked cab by the sealed wall the hats are playing
	Sort of poker with somebody’s
	
	Old snapshots game I don’t understand they lose
	The rivers one
	After the other I begin to know where I am
	I am home
	
	Be here the flies from the house of the mapmaker
	Walk on our letters I can tell
	And the days hang medals between us
	I have lit our room with a glove of yours be
	Here I turn
	To your name and the hour remembers
	Its one word
	Now
	
	Be here what can we
	Do for the dead the footsteps full of money
	I offer you what I have my
	Poverty
	
	To the city of wires I have brought home a handful
	Of water I walk slowly
	In front of me they are building the empty
	Ages I see them reflected not for long
	Be here I am no longer ashamed of time it is too brief its hands
	Have no names
	I have passed it I know
	
	        _Oh Necessity you with the face you with
	        All the faces_
	
	This is written on the back of everything
	
	But we
	Will read it together



64. WHEN YOU GO AWAY

	When you go away the wind clicks around to the north
	The painters work all day but at sundown the paint falls
	Showing the black walls
	The clock goes back to striking the same hour
	That has no place in the years
	
	And at night wrapped in the bed of ashes
	In one breath I wake
	It is the time when the beards of the dead get their growth
	I remember that I am falling
	That I am the reason
	And that my words are the garment of what I shall never be
	Like the tucked sleeve of a one-armed boy



65. WHENEVER I GO THERE

	Whenever I go there everything is changed
	
	The stamps on the bandages the titles
	Of the professors of water
	
	The portrait of Glare the reasons for
	The white mourning
	
	In new rocks new insects are sitting
	With the lights off
	And once more I remember that the beginning
	
	Is broken
	
	No wonder the addresses are torn
	
	To which I make my way eating the silence of animals
	Offering snow to the darkness
	
	Today belongs to few and tomorrow to no one



66. YESTERDAY

	My friend says I was not a good son
	you understand
	I say yes I understand
	
	he says I did not go
	to see my parents very often you know
	and I say yes I know
	
	even when I was living in the same city he says
	maybe I would go there once
	a month or maybe even less
	I say oh yes
	
	he says the last time I went to see my father
	I say the last time I saw my father
	
	he says the last time I saw my father
	he was asking me about my life
	how I was making out and he
	went into the next room
	to get something to give me
	
	oh I say
	feeling again the cold
	of my father’s hand the last time
	
	he says and my father turned
	in the doorway and saw me
	look at my wristwatch and he
	said you know I would like you to stay
	and talk with me
	
	oh yes I say
	
	but if you are busy he said
	I don’t want you to feel that you
	have to
	just because I’m here
	
	I say nothing
	
	he says my father
	said maybe
	you have important work you are doing
	or maybe you should be seeing
	somebody I don’t want to keep you
	
	I look out the window
	my friend is older than I am
	he says and I told my father it was so
	and I got up and left him then
	you know
	
	though there was nowhere I had to go
	and nothing I had to do
