*** Adam Mickiewicz (1798 - 1855)


1. THE AKKERMAN STEPPE

	I launch myself across the dry and open narrows,
	My carriage plunging into green as if a ketch,
	Floundering through the meadow flowers in the stretch.
	I pass an archipelago of coral yarrows.

	It’s dusk now, not a road in sight, nor ancient barrows.
	I look up at the sky and look for stars to catch.
	There distant clouds glint--there tomorrow starts to etch;
	The Dnieper glimmers; Akkerman’s lamp shines and harrows.

	I stand in stillness, hear the migratory cranes,
	Their necks and wings beyond the reach of preying hawks;
	Hear where the sooty copper glides across the plains,

	Where on its underside a viper writhes through stalks.
	Amid the hush I lean my ears down grassy lanes
	And listen for a voice from home. Nobody talks.



2. THE GREAT IMPROVISATION

	. . . Listen to me, God, and you, Nature!
	Here is music that is worthy of you, songs that are worthy of you.
	I am master!
	Master, I stretch out my hands!
	I stretch them to the sky, I place my fingers on the stars.
	They are my musical glasses, my armonica.
	Now swiftly, now slowly
	My spirit turns the stars.
	Millions on millions of tones resound,
	It is I who called them forth, I know them all;
	I combine them, I separate them, I reunite them,
	I weave them into rainbows, into chords, into strophes,
	I scatter them in sounds and in ribbons of fire.

	I raised my hands,
	I held them high above the ridge of the world,
	And the wheels of the armonica suddenly ceased to whirl.
	I sing alone, I hear my songs
	Long lingering like the breath of the wind,
	They blow through all mankind,
	They moan like pain,
	They roar like the storm.
	Tonelessly, the centuries accompany them; each sound resounds and burns,
	Is in my ear, is in my eye,
	As when the wind blows over the waves,
	In its whistlings I hear its flight
	And see it in its coat of cloud.

	These songs are worthy of God, of Nature!
	This is a mighty song, a creator-song.
	This song is force and power,
	This song is immortality!
	I feel immortality, I create immortality,
	And you, God, what more could you do?
	See how I draw my thoughts out of myself,
	I incarnate them,
	They scatter across the skies,
	They whirl, they sing, they shine,
	Already far away, I feel them still,
	Still feel their charm,
	I feel their roundness in my hand,
	I sense their movements in my mind:
	I love you, my poetic children!
	My thoughts! My stars!
	My feelings! My storms!
	Among you I am like a father in the midst of his family,
	All of you are mine.

	. . . Not from Eden’s tree have I drawn this power--
	From the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil--
	Not from books or tales that are told,
	Not from the solution of problems,
	Or the practice of magic.
	Creator I was born:
	I have drawn my powers from the source
	From which you drew yours:
	You did not search for your powers--you have them;
	You do not fear to lose them and neither do I!
	Was it you who gave me,
	Or did I, like you, have to seize it,
	This piercing and powerful eye:
	When I raise my eyes toward the track of the clouds,
	And hear the birds flying south on almost invisible wings,
	Suddenly, only by willing, I hold them as in a net with my eyes;
	The flock gives a cry of distress, but, till I release them,
	Your winds cannot move them.
	If I gaze at a comet with all the strength of my soul,
	It cannot stir from the spot while my eyes are upon it



3. THE ROMANTIC

	‘Silly girl, listen!’
	But she doesn’t listen
	While the village roofs glisten,
	Bright in the sun.
	‘Silly girl, what do you do there,
	As if there were someone to view there,
	A face to gaze on and greet there,
	A live form warmly to meet there,
	When there is no one, none, do you hear?’
	But she doesn’t hear.

	Like a dead stone
	She stands there alone,
	Staring ahead of her, peering around
	For something that has to be found
	Till, suddenly spying it,
	She touches it, clutches it,
	Laughing and crying.

	Is it you, my Johnny, my true love, my dear?
	I knew you would never forget me,
	Even in death! Come with me, let me
	Show you the way now!
	Hold your breath, though,
	And tiptoe lest stepmother hear!

	What can she hear? They have made him
	A grave, two years ago laid him
	Away with the dead.
	Save me, Mother of God! I’m afraid.
	But why? Why should I flee you now?
	What do I dread?
	Not Johnny! My Johnny won’t hurt me.
	It is my Johnny! I see you now,
	Your eyes, your white shirt.

	But it’s pale as linen you are,
	Cold as winter you are!
	Let my lips take the cold from you,
	Kiss the chill o f the mould from you.

	Dearest love, let me die with you,
	In the deep earth lie with you,
	For this world is dark and dreary,
	I am lonely and weary!

	Alone among the unkind ones
	Who mock at my vision,
	My tears their derision,
	Seeing nothing, the blind ones!

	Dear God! A cock is crowing,
	Whitely glimmers the dawn.
	Johnny! Where are you going?
	Don’t leave me! I am forlorn!

	So, caressing, talking aloud to her
	Lover, she stumbles and falls,
	And her cry of anguish calls
	A pitying crowd to her.

	‘Cross yourselves! It is, surely,
	Her Johnny come back from the grave:
	While he lived, he loved her entirely.
	May God his soul now save!’

	Hearing what they are saying,
	I, too, start praying.

	‘The girl is out of her senses!’
	Shouts a man with a learned air,
	‘My eye and my lenses
	Know there’s nothing there.

	Ghosts are a myth
	Of ale-wife and blacksmith.
	Clodhoppers! This is treason
	Against King Reason!’

	‘Yet the girl loves,’ I reply diffidently,
	‘And the people believe reverently:
	Faith and love are more discerning
	Than lenses or learning.

	You know the dead truths, not the living,
	The world of things, not the world of loving.
	Where does any miracle start?
	Cold eye, look in your heart!’



4. THE RUINS

	These castles heaped in shattered piles once graced
	And guarded you, Crimea, thankless land!
	Today like giant skulls set high they stand
	And shelter reptiles, or men more debased.
	Upon that tower a coat of arms is traced,
	And letters, some dead hero’s name, whose hand
	Scourged armies. Now he sleeps forgotten and
	The grapevine holds him, like a worm, embraced.
	Here Greeks have chiseled Attic ornament,
	Italians cast the Mongols into chains
	And pilgrims chanted slowly, Mecca bent:
	Today the black-winged vulture only reigns
	As in a city, dead and pestilent,
	Where mourning banners flutter to the plains.



5. THE STORM

	The rudder breaks, the sails are ripped, the roar
	Of waters mingles with the ominous sound
	Of pumps and panic voices; all around
	Torn ropes. The sun sets red, we hope no more--
	The tempest howls in triumph; from the shore
	Where wet cliffs rising tier on tier surround
	The ocean chaos, death advances, bound
	To carry ramparts broken long before,
	One man has swooned, one wrings his hands ,one sinks
	Upon his friends, embracing them. Some say
	a prayer to death that it may pass them by.
	One traveller sits apart and sadly thinks:
	“Happy the man who faints or who can pray
	Or has a friend to whom to say goodbye.”
