*** Czesław Miłosz (1911 - 2004)


1. ACCOUNT

	The history of my stupidity would fill many volumes.
	
	Some would be devoted to acting against consciousness,
	Like the flight of a moth which, had it known,
	Would have tended nevertheless toward the candle’s flame.
	
	Others would deal with ways to silence anxiety,
	The little whisper which, though it is a warning, is ignored.
	
	I would deal separately with satisfaction and pride,
	The time when I was among their adherents
	Who strut victoriously, unsuspecting.
	
	But all of them would have one subject, desire,
	If only my own--but no, not at all; alas,
	I was driven because I wanted to be like others.
	I was afraid of what was wild and indecent in me.
	
	The history of my stupidity will not be written.
	For one thing, it’s late. And the truth is laborious.


2. ARS POETICA?

	I have always aspired to a more spacious form   
	that would be free from the claims of poetry or prose   
	and would let us understand each other without exposing   
	the author or reader to sublime agonies.   
	
	In the very essence of poetry there is something indecent:   
	a thing is brought forth which we didn’t know we had in us,   
	so we blink our eyes, as if a tiger had sprung out   
	and stood in the light, lashing his tail.   
	
	That’s why poetry is rightly said to be dictated by a daimonion,   
	though it’s an exaggeration to maintain that he must be an angel.   
	It’s hard to guess where that pride of poets comes from,   
	when so often they’re put to shame by the disclosure of their frailty.   
	
	What reasonable man would like to be a city of demons,   
	who behave as if they were at home, speak in many tongues,   
	and who, not satisfied with stealing his lips or hand,   
	work at changing his destiny for their convenience?   
	
	It’s true that what is morbid is highly valued today,   
	and so you may think that I am only joking   
	or that I’ve devised just one more means   
	of praising Art with the help of irony.   
	
	There was a time when only wise books were read,   
	helping us to bear our pain and misery.   
	This, after all, is not quite the same   
	as leafing through a thousand works fresh from psychiatric clinics.   
	
	And yet the world is different from what it seems to be   
	and we are other than how we see ourselves in our ravings.
	People therefore preserve silent integrity,   
	thus earning the respect of their relatives and neighbors.   
	
	The purpose of poetry is to remind us   
	how difficult it is to remain just one person,   
	for our house is open, there are no keys in the doors,   
	and invisible guests come in and out at will.
	
	What I’m saying here is not, I agree, poetry,   
	as poems should be written rarely and reluctantly,   
	under unbearable duress and only with the hope   
	that good spirits, not evil ones, choose us for their instrument.


3. ARTIFICER

	Burning, he walks in the stream of flickering letters, clarinets, 
	machines throbbing quicker than the heart, lopped-off heads, silk 
	canvases, and he stops under the sky 
	
	and raises toward it his joined clenched fists. 
	
	Believers fall on their bellies, they suppose it is a monstrance that shines, 
	
	but those are knuckles, sharp knuckles shine that way, my friends. 
	
	He cuts the glowing, yellow buildings in two, breaks the walls into motley halves; 
	pensive, he looks at the honey seeping from those huge honeycombs: 
	throbs of pianos, children’s cries, the thud of a head banging against the floor. 
	This is the only landscape able to make him feel. 
	
	He wonders at his brother’s skill shaped like an egg, 
	every day he shoves back his black hair from his brow, 
	then one day he plants a big load of dynamite 
	and is surprised that afterward everything sprouts up in the explosion. 
	Agape, he observes the clouds and what is hanging in them: 
	globes, penal codes, dead cats floating on their backs, locomotives. 
	They turn in the skeins of white clouds like trash in a puddle. 
	While below on the earth a banner, the color of a romantic rose, flutters, 
	and a long row of military trains crawls on the weed-covered tracks.


4. AT A CERTAIN AGE

	We wanted to confess our sins but there were no takers.
	White clouds refused to accept them, and the wind
	Was too busy visiting sea after sea.
	We did not succeed in interesting the animals.
	Dogs, disappointed, expected an order,
	A cat, as always immoral, was falling asleep.
	A person seemingly very close
	Did not care to hear of things long past.
	Conversations with friends over vodka or coffee
	Ought not be prolonged beyond the first sign of boredom.
	It would be humiliating to pay by the hour
	A man with a diploma, just for listening.
	Churches. Perhaps churches. But to confess there what?
	That we used to see ourselves as handsome and noble
	Yet later in our place an ugly toad
	Half-opens its thick eyelid
	And one sees clearly: “That’s me.”


5. CAMPO DEL FIORI

	In Rome on the Campo del Fiori
	baskets of olives and lemons,
	cobbles spattered with wine
	and the wreckage of flowers.
	Vendors cover the trestles
	with rose-pink fish;
	armfuls of dark grapes
	heaped on peach-down.
	
	On this same square
	they burned Giordano Bruno.
	Henchmen kindled the pyre
	close-pressed by the mob.
	Before the flames had died
	the taverns were full again,
	baskets of olives and lemons
	again on the vendors’ shoulders.
	
	I thought of the Campo dei Fiori
	in Warsaw by the sky-carousel
	one clear spring evening
	to the strains of a carnival tune.
	The bright melody drowned
	the salvos from the ghetto wall,
	and couples were flying
	high in the cloudless sky.
	
	At times wind from the burning
	would drift dark kites along
	and riders on the carousel
	caught petals in midair.
	That same hot wind
	blew open the skirts of the girls
	and the crowds were laughing
	on that beautiful Warsaw Sunday.
	
	Someone will read as moral
	that the people of Rome or Warsaw
	haggle, laugh, make love
	as they pass by the martyrs’ pyres.
	Someone else will read
	of the passing of things human,
	of the oblivion
	born before the flames have died.
	
	But that day I thought only
	of the loneliness of the dying,
	of how, when Giordano
	climbed to his burning
	he could not find
	in any human tongue
	words for mankind,
	mankind who live on.
	
	Already they were back at their wine
	or peddled their white starfish,
	baskets of olives and lemons
	they had shouldered to the fair,
	and he already distanced
	as if centuries had passed
	while they paused just a moment
	for his flying in the fire.
	
	Those dying here, the lonely
	forgotten by the world,
	our tongue becomes for them
	the language of an ancient planet.
	Until, when all is legend
	and many years have passed,
	on a new Campo dei Fiori
	rage will kindle at a poet’s word.


6. CITY WITHOUT A NAME

	1
	
	Who will honor the city without a name
	If so many are dead and others pan gold
	Or sell arms in faraway countries?
	
	What shepherd’s horn swathed in the bark of birch
	Will sound in the Ponary Hills the memory of the absent--
	Vagabonds, Pathfinders, brethren of a dissolved lodge?
	
	This spring, in a desert, beyond a campsite flagpole,
	--In silence that stretched to the solid rock of yellow and red mountains--
	I heard in a gray bush the buzzing of wild bees.
	
	The current carried an echo and the timber of rafts.
	A man in a visored cap and a woman in a kerchief
	Pushed hard with their four hands at a heavy steering oar.
	
	In the library, below a tower painted with the signs of the zodiac,
	Kontrym would take a whiff from his snuffbox and smile
	For despite Metternich all was not yet lost.
	
	And on crooked lanes down the middle of a sandy highway
	Jewish carts went their way while a black grouse hooted
	Standing on a cuirassier’s helmet, a relict of La Grande Armée.
	
	
	2
	
	In Death Valley I thought about styles of hairdo,
	About a hand that shifted spotlights at the Student’s Ball
	In the city from which no voice could reach me.
	Minerals did not sound the last trumpet.
	There was only the rustle of a loosened grain of lava.
	
	In Death Valley salt gleams from a dried-up lake bed.
	Defend, defend yourself, says the tick-tock of the blood.
	From the futility of solid rock, no wisdom.
	
	In Death Valley no hawk or eagle against the sky.
	The prediction of a Gypsy woman has come true.
	In a lane under an arcade, then, I was reading a poem
	Of someone who had lived next door, entitled “An Hour of Thought.”
	
	I looked long at the rearview mirror: there, the one man
	Within three miles, an Indian, was walking a bicycle uphill.
	
	
	3
	
	With flutes, with torches
	And a drum, boom, boom,
	Look, the one who died in Istanbul, there, in the first row.
	He walks arm in arm with his young lady,
	And over them swallows fly.
	
	They carry oars or staffs garlanded with leaves
	And bunches of flowers from the shores of the Green Lakes,
	As they came closer and closer, down Castle Street.
	And then suddenly nothing, only a white puff of cloud
	Over the Humanities Student Club,
	Division of Creative Writing.
	
	
	4
	
	Books, we have written a whole library of them.
	Lands, we have visited a great many of them.
	Battles, we have lost a number of them.
	Till we are no more, we and our Maryla.
	
	
	5
	
	Understanding and pity,
	We value them highly.
	What else?
	
	Beauty and kisses,
	Fame and its prizes,
	Who cares?
	
	Doctors and lawyers,
	Well-turned-out majors,
	Six feet of earth.
	
	Rings, furs, and lashes,
	Glances at Masses,
	Rest in peace.
	
	Sweet twin breasts, good night.
	Sleep through to the light,
	Without spiders.
	
	
	6
	
	The sun goes down above the Zealous Lithuanian Lodge
	And kindles fire on landscapes “made from nature”:
	The Wilia winding among pines; black honey of the Żejmiana;
	The Mereczanka washes berries near the Żegaryno village.
	The valets had already brought in Theban candelabra
	And pulled curtains, one after the other, slowly,
	While, thinking I entered first, taking off my gloves,
	I saw that all the eyes were fixed on me.
	
	
	7
	
	When I got rid of grieving
	And the glory I was seeking,
	Which I had no business doing,
	
	I was carried by dragons
	Over countries, bays, and mountains,
	By fate, or by what happens.
	
	Oh yes, I wanted to be me.
	I toasted mirrors weepily
	And learned my own stupidity.
	
	From nails, mucous membrane,
	Lungs, liver, bowels, and spleen
	Whose house is made? Mine.
	
	So what else is new?
	I am not my own friend.
	Time cuts me in two.
	
	Monuments covered with snow,
	Accept my gift. I wandered;
	And where, I don’t know.
	
	
	8
	
	Absent, burning, acrid, salty, sharp.
	Thus the feast of Insubstantiality.
	Under a gathering of clouds anywhere.
	In a bay, on a plateau, in a dry arroyo.
	No density. No harness of stone.
	Even the _Summa_ thins into straw and smoke.
	And the angelic choirs fly over in a pomegranate seed
	Sounding every few instants, not for us, their trumpets.
	
	
	9
	
	Light, universal, and yet it keeps changing.
	For I love the light too, perhaps the light only.
	Yet what is too dazzling and too high is not for me.
	So when the clouds turn rosy, I think of light that is level
	In the lands of birch and pine coated with crispy lichen,
	Late in autumn, under the hoarfrost when the last milk caps
	Rot under the firs and the hounds’ barking echoes,
	And jackdaws wheel over the tower of a Basilian church.
	
	
	10
	
	Unexpressed, untold.
	But how?
	The shortness of life,
	the years quicker and quicker,
	not remembering whether it happened in this or that autumn.
	Retinues of homespun velveteen skirts,
	giggles above a railing, pigtails askew,
	sittings on chamberpots upstairs
	when the sledge jingles under the columns of the porch
	just before the moustachioed ones in wolf fur enter.
	Female humanity,
	children’s snots, legs spread apart,
	snarled hair, the milk boiling over,
	stench, shit frozen into clods.
	And those centuries,
	conceiving in the herring smell of the middle of the night
	instead of playing something like a game of chess
	or dancing an intellectual ballet.
	And palisades,
	and pregnant sheep,
	and   pigs, fast eaters and poor eaters,
	and cows cured by incantations.
	
	
	11
	
	Not the Last Judgment, just a kermess by a river.
	Small whistles, clay chickens, candied hearts.
	So we trudged through the slush of melting snow
	To buy bagels from the district of Smorgonie.
	
	A fortune-teller hawking: “Your destiny, your planets.”
	And a toy devil bobbing in a tube of crimson brine.
	Another, a rubber one, expired in the air squeaking,
	By the stand where you bought stories of King Otto and Melusine.
	
	
	12
	
	Why should that city, defenseless and pure as the wedding necklace of
	a forgotten tribe, keep offering itself to me?
	Like blue and red-brown seeds beaded in Tuzigoot in the copper desert
	seven centuries ago.
	
	Where ocher rubbed into stone still waits for the brow and cheekbone
	it would adorn, though for all that time there has been no one.
	
	What evil in me, what pity has made me deserve this offering?
	
	It stands before me, ready, not even the smoke from one chimney is
	lacking, not one echo, when I step across the rivers that separate us.
	
	Perhaps Anna and Dora Drużyno have called to me, three hundred miles
	inside Arizona, because except fo me no one else knows that they ever
	lived.
	
	They trot before me on Embankment Street, two hently born parakeets
	from Samogitia, and at night they unravel their spinster tresses of gray
	hair.
	
	Here there is no earlier and no later; the seasons of the year and of the
	day are simultaneous.
	
	At dawn shit-wagons leave town in long rows and municipal employees
	at the gate collect the turnpike toll in leather bags.
	
	Rattling their wheels, “Courier” and “Speedy” move against the current
	to Werki, and an oarsman shot down over England skiffs past, spread-
	eagled by his oars.
	
	At St. Peter and Paul’s the angels lower their thick eyelids in a smile
	over a nun who has indecent thoughts.
	
	Bearded, in a wig, Mrs. Sora Klok sits at the counter, instructing her
	twelve shopgirls.
	
	And all of German Street tosses into the air unfurled bolts of fabric,
	preparing itself for death and the conquest of Jerusalem.
	
	Black and princely, an underground river knocks at cellars of the
	cathedral under the tomb of St. Casimir the Young and under the
	half-charred oak logs in the hearth.
	
	Carrying her servant’s-basket on her shoulder, Barbara, dressed in
	mourning, returns from the Lithuanian Mass at St. Nicholas to the
	Romers’ house in Bakszta Street.
	
	How it glitters! the snow on Three Crosses Hill and Bekiesz Hill, not
	to be melted by the breath of these brief lives.
	
	And what do I know now, when I turn into Arsenal Street and open
	my eyes once more on a useless end of the world?
	
	I was running, as the silks rustled, through room after room without
	stopping, for I believed in the existence of a last door.
	
	But the shape of lips and an apple and a flower pinned to a dress were
	all that one was permitted to know and take away.
	
	The Earth, neither compassionate nor evil, neither beautiful nor atro-
	cious, persisted, innocent, open to pain and desire.
	
	And the gift was useless, if, later on, in the flarings of distant nights,
	there was not less bitterness but more.
	
	If I cannot so exhaust my life and their life that the bygone crying is
	transformed, at last, into harmony.
	
	Like a _Noble Jan Dęboróg_ in the Straszun’s secondhand-book shop, I am
	put to rest forever between two familiar names.
	
	The castle tower above the leafy tumulus grows small and there is still
	a hardly audible--is it Mozart’s _Requiem_?--music.
	
	In the immobile light I move my lips and perhaps I am even glad not
	to find the desired word.


7. CONVERSATION WITH JEANNE

	Let us not talk philosophy, drop it, Jeanne. 
	So many words, so much paper, who can stand it. 
	I told you the truth about my distancing myself. 
	I’ve stopped worrying about my misshapen life. 
	It was no better and no worse than the usual human tragedies. 
	
	For over thirty years we have been waging our dispute 
	As we do now, on the island under the skies of the tropics. 
	We flee a downpour, in an instant the bright sun again, 
	And I grow dumb, dazzled by the emerald essence of the leaves. 
	
	We submerge in foam at the line of the surf, 
	We swim far, to where the horizon is a tangle of banana bush, 
	With little windmills of palms. 
	And I am under accusation: That I am not up to my oeuvre, 
	That I do not demand enough from myself, 
	As I could have learned from Karl Jaspers, 
	That my scorn for the opinions of this age grows slack. 
	
	I roll on a wave and look at white clouds. 
	
	You are right, Jeanne, I don’t know how to care about the salvation of my soul. 
	Some are called, others manage as well as they can. 
	I accept it, what has befallen me is just. 
	I don’t pretend to the dignity of a wise old age. 
	Untranslatable into words, I chose my home in what is now, 
	In things of this world, which exist and, for that reason, delight us: 
	Nakedness of women on the beach, coppery cones of their breasts, 
	Hibiscus, alamanda, a red lily, devouring 
	With my eyes, lips, tongue, the guava juice, the juice of la prune de Cythère,
	Rum with ice and syrup, lianas-orchids 
	In a rain forest, where trees stand on the stilts of their roots. 
	
	Death, you say, mine and yours, closer and closer, 
	We suffered and this poor earth was not enough. 
	The purple-black earth of vegetable gardens 
	Will be here, either looked at or not. 
	The sea, as today, will breathe from its depths. 
	Growing small, I disappear in the immense, more and more free.


8. DEDICATION

	You whom I could not save
	Listen to me.   
	Try to understand this simple speech as I would be ashamed of another.   
	I swear, there is in me no wizardry of words.   
	I speak to you with silence like a cloud or a tree.
	
	What strengthened me, for you was lethal.   
	You mixed up farewell to an epoch with the beginning of a new one,   
	Inspiration of hatred with lyrical beauty;   
	Blind force with accomplished shape.
	
	Here is a valley of shallow Polish rivers. And an immense bridge   
	Going into white fog. Here is a broken city;   
	And the wind throws the screams of gulls on your grave   
	When I am talking with you.
	
	What is poetry which does not save   
	Nations or people?   
	A connivance with official lies,   
	A song of drunkards whose throats will be cut in a moment,   
	Readings for sophomore girls.
	That I wanted good poetry without knowing it,   
	That I discovered, late, its salutary aim,   
	In this and only this I find salvation.
	
	They used to pour millet on graves or poppy seeds   
	To feed the dead who would come disguised as birds.   
	I put this book here for you, who once lived   
	So that you should visit us no more.


9. THE DINING ROOM

	A room with low windows, with brown shades,
	Where a Danzig clock keeps silent in the corner;
	A low leather sofa; and right above it
	The sculpted heads of two smiling devils;
	And a copper pan shows its gleaming paunch.
	
	On the wall a painting that depicts winter.
	A crowd of people skate on ice
	Between the trees, smoke comes from a chimney,
	And crows fly in an overcast sky.
	
	Nearby a second clock. A bird sits inside.
	It pops out squawking and calls three times.
	And it has barely finished its third and last call
	When mother ladles out soup from a hot tureen.


10. ENCOUNTER

	We were riding through frozen fields in a wagon at dawn.
	A red wing rose in the darkness.
	
	And suddenly a hare ran across the road.
	One of us pointed to it with his hand.
	
	That was long ago. Today neither of them is alive,
	Not the hare, nor the man who made the gesture.
	
	O my love, where are they, where are they going
	The flash of a hand, streak of movement, rustle of pebbles.
	I ask not out of sorrow, but in wonder.


11. FATHER EXPLAINS

	“There where that ray touches the plain
	And the shadows escape as if they really ran,
	Warsaw stands, open from all sides,
	A city not very old but quite famous.
	
	“Farther, where strings of rain hang from a little cloud,
	Under the hills with an acacia grove
	Is Prague. Above it, a marvelous castle
	Shored against a slope in accordance with old rules.
	
	“What divides this land with white foam
	Is the Alps. The black means fir forests.
	Beyond them, bathing in the yellow sun
	Italy lies, like a deep-blue dish.
	
	“Among the many fine cities that are there
	You will recognize Rome, Christendom’s capital,
	By those round roofs on the church
	Called the Basilica of Saint Peter.
	
	“And there, to the north, beyond a bay,
	Where a level bluish mist moves in waves,
	Paris tries to keep pace with its tower
	And reins in its herd of bridges.
	
	“Also other cities accompany Paris,
	They are adorned with glass, arrayed in iron,
	But for today that would be too much,
	I’ll tell the rest another time


12. A FELICITOUS LIFE

	His old age fell on years of abundant harvest. 
	There were no earthquakes, droughts or floods. 
	It seemed as if the turning of the seasons gained in constancy, 
	Stars waxed strong and the sun increased its might. 
	Even in remote provinces no war was waged. 
	Generations grew up friendly to fellow men. 
	The rational nature of man was not a subject of derision. 
	
	It was bitter to say farewell to the earth so renewed. 
	He was envious and ashamed of his doubt, 
	Content that his lacerated memory would vanish with him. 
	
	Two days after his death a hurricane razed the coasts. 
	Smoke came from volcanoes inactive for a hundred years. 
	Lava sprawled over forests, vineyards, and towns. 
	And war began with a battle on the islands.


13. FORGET

	Forget the suffering
	You caused others.
	Forget the suffering
	Others caused you.
	The waters run and run,
	Springs sparkle and are done,
	You walk the earth you are forgetting.
	
	Sometimes you hear a distant refrain.
	What does it mean, you ask, who is singing?
	A childlike sun grows warm.
	A grandson and a great-grandson are born.
	You are led by the hand once again.
	
	The names of the rivers remain with you.
	How endless those rivers seem!
	Your fields lie fallow,
	The city towers are not as they were.
	You stand at the threshold mute.


14. GIFT

	A day so happy.
	Fog lifted early I worked in the garden.
	Hummingbirds were stopping over honeysuckle flowers.
	There was no thing on earth I wanted to possess.
	I knew no man worth my envying him.
	Whatever evil I had suffered, I forgot.
	To think that once I was the same man didn’t embarrass me.
	In my body I felt no pain.
	On straightening up, I saw the blue sea and sails.


15. HOW IT WAS

	Stalking a deer I wandered deep into the mountains and from there I saw. 
	
	Or perhaps it was for some other reason that I rose above the setting sun. 
	
	Above the hills of blackwood and a slab of ocean and the steps of a glacier, carmine-colored in the dusk. 
	
	I saw absence; the mighty power of counter-fulfillment; the penalty of a promise lost forever. 
	
	If, in tepees of plywood, tire shreds, and grimy sheet iron, ancient inhabitants of this land shook their rattles, it was all in vain. 
	
	No eagle-creator circled in the air from which the thunderbolt of its glory had been cast out. 
	
	Protective spirits hid themselves in subterranean beds of bubbling ore, jolting the surface from time to time so that the fabric of freeways was bursting asunder. 
	
	God the Father didn’t walk about any longer tending the new shoots of a cedar, no longer did man hear his rushing spirit. 
	
	His son did not know his sonship and turned his eyes away when passing by a neon cross flat as a movie screen showing a striptease. 
	
	This time it was really the end of the Old and the New Testament. 
	
	No one implored, everyone picked up a nodule of agate or diorite to whisper in loneliness: I cannot live any longer. 
	
	Bearded messengers in bead necklaces founded clandestine communes in imperial cities and in ports overseas. 
	
	But none of them announced the birth of a child-savior. 
	
	Soldiers from expeditions sent to punish nations would go disguised and masked to take part in forbidden rites, not looking for any hope. 
	
	They inhaled smoke soothing all memory and, rocking from side to side, shared with each other a word of nameless union. 
	
	Carved in black wood the Wheel of Eternal Return stood before the tents of wandering monastic orders. 
	
	And those who longed for the Kingdom took refuge like me in the mountains to become the last heirs of a dishonored myth.


16. I SLEEP A LOT

	I sleep a lot and read St. Thomas Aquinas
	Or The Death of God (that’s a Protestant book).
	To the right the bay as if molten tin,
	Beyond the bay, city, beyond the city, ocean,
	Beyond the ocean, ocean, till Japan.
	To the left dry hills with white grass,
	Beyond the hills an irrigated valley where rice is grown,
	Beyond the valley, mountains and Ponderosa pines,
	Beyond the mountains, desert and sheep.
	
	When I couldn’t do without alcohol, I drove myself on alcohol,
	When I couldn’t do without cigarettes and coffee, I drove myself
	On cigarettes and coffee.
	I was courageous. Industrious. Nearly a model of virtue.
	But that is good for nothing.
	
	I feel a pain.
	not here. Even I don’t know.
	many islands and continents,
	words, bazaars, wooden flutes,
	Or too much drinking to the mirror, without beauty,
	Though one was to be a kind of archangel
	Or a Saint George, over there, on St. George Street.
	Please, Doctor,
	Not here. No,
	Maybe it’s too
	Unpronounced
	
	Please, Medicine Man, I feel a pain.
	I always believed in spells and incantations.
	Sure, women have only one, Catholic, soul,
	But we have two. When you start to dance
	You visit remote pueblos in your sleep
	And even lands you have never seen.
	Put on, I beg you, charms made of feathers,
	Now it’s time to help one of your own.
	I have read many books but I don’t believe them.
	When it hurts we return to the banks of certain rivers.
	
	I remember those crosses with chiseled suns and moons
	And wizards, how they worked during an outbreak of typhus.
	Send your second soul beyond the mountains, beyond time.
	Tell me what you saw, I will wait.


17. IN BLACK DESPAIR

	In grayish doubt and black despair,
	I drafted hymns to the earth and the air,
	pretending to joy, although I lacked it.
	The age had made lament redundant.
	
	So here’s the question--who can answer it--
	Was he a brave man or a hypocrite?


18. INCANTATION

	Human reason is beautiful and invincible.
	No bars, no barbed wire, no pulping of books,
	No sentence of banishment can prevail against it.
	It establishes the universal ideas in language,
	And guides our hand so we write Truth and Justice
	With capital letters, lie and oppression with small.
	It puts what should be above things as they are,
	Is an enemy of despair and a friend of hope.
	It does not know Jew from Greek or slave from master,
	Giving us the estate of the world to manage.
	It saves austere and transparent phrases
	From the filthy discord of tortured words.
	It says that everything is new under the sun,
	Opens the congealed fist of the past.
	Beautiful and very young are Philo-Sophia
	And poetry, her ally in the service of the good.
	As late as yesterday Nature celebrated their birth,
	The news was brought to the mountains by a unicorn and an echo.
	Their friendship will be glorious, their time has no limit.
	Their enemies have delivered themselves to destruction.


19. IT WAS WINTER

	Winter came as it does in this valley. 
	After eight dry months rain fell 
	And the mountains, straw-colored, turned green for a while. 
	In the canyons where gray laurels 
	Graft their stony roots to granite, 
	Streams must have filled the dried-up creek beds. 
	Ocean winds churned the eucalyptus trees, 
	And under clouds torn by a crystal of towers 
	Prickly lights were glowing on the docks. 
	
	This is not a place where you sit under a café awning 
	On a marble piazza, watching the crowd, 
	Or play the flute at a window over a narrow street 
	While children’s sandals clatter in the vaulted entryway. 
	
	They heard of a land, empty and vast, 
	Bordered by mountains. So they went, leaving behind crosses 
	Of thorny wood and traces of campfires. 
	As it happened, they spent winter in the snow of a mountain pass, 
	And drew lots and boiled the bones of their companions; 
	And so afterward a hot valley where indigo could be grown 
	Seemed beautiful to them. And beyond, where fog 
	Heaved into shoreline coves, the ocean labored. 
	
	Sleep: rocks and capes will lie down inside you, 
	War councils of motionless animals in a barren place, 
	Basilicas of reptiles, a frothy whiteness. 
	Sleep on your coat, while your horse nibbles grass 
	And an eagle gauges a precipice. 
	
	When you wake up, you will have the parts of the world. 
	West, an empty conch of water and air. 
	East, always behind you, the voided memory of snow-covered fir. 
	And extending from your outspread arms 
	Nothing but bronze grasses, north and south. 
	
	We are poor people, much afflicted. 
	We camped under various stars, 
	Where you dip water with a cup from a muddy river 
	And slice your bread with a pocketknife. 
	This is the place; accepted, not chosen. 
	We remembered that there were streets and houses where we came from, 
	So there had to be houses here, a saddler’s signboard, 
	A small veranda with a chair. But empty, a country where 
	The thunder beneath the rippled skin of the earth, 
	The breaking waves, a patrol of pelicans, nullified us. 
	As if our vases, brought here from another shore, 
	Were the dug-up spearheads of some lost tribe 
	Who fed on lizards and acorn flour. 
	
	And here I am walking the eternal earth. 
	Tiny, leaning on a stick. 
	I pass a volcanic park, lie down at a spring, 
	Not knowing how to express what is always and everywhere: 
	The earth I cling to is so solid 
	Under my breast and belly that I feel grateful 
	For every pebble, and I don’t know whether 
	It is my pulse or the earth’s that I hear, 
	When the hems of invisible silk vestments pass over me, 
	Hands, wherever they have been, touch my arm, 
	Or small laughter, once, long ago over wine, 
	With lanterns in the magnolias, for my house is huge.


20. LAKE

	Maidenly lake, fathomless lake,
	Stay as you were once, overgrown with rushes,
	Idling with a reflected cloud, for my sake
	Whom your shore no longer touches.
	
	Your girl was always real to me.
	Her bones lie in a city by the sea.
	Everything occurs too normally.
	A unique love simply wears away.
	
	Girl, hey, girl, we repose in an abyss.
	The base of a skull, a rib, a pelvis,
	Is it you? me? We are more than this.
	No clock counts hours and years for us.
	
	How could a creature, ephemeral, eternal,
	Measure for me necessity and fate?
	You are locked with me in a letter-crystal.
	No matter that you’re not a living maid.


21. LATE RIPENESS

	Not soon, as late as the approach of my ninetieth year,   
	I felt a door opening in me and I entered   
	the clarity of early morning.   
	
	One after another my former lives were departing,   
	like ships, together with their sorrow.   
	
	And the countries, cities, gardens, the bays of seas   
	assigned to my brush came closer,   
	ready now to be described better than they were before.   
	
	I was not separated from people,   
	grief and pity joined us.   
	We forget--I kept saying--that we are all children of the King.   
	
	For where we come from there is no division   
	into Yes and No, into is, was, and will be.   
	
	We were miserable, we used no more than a hundredth part   
	of the gift we received for our long journey.   
	
	Moments from yesterday and from centuries ago--   
	a sword blow, the painting of eyelashes before a mirror   
	of polished metal, a lethal musket shot, a caravel   
	staving its hull against a reef--they dwell in us,   
	waiting for a fulfillment.   
	
	I knew, always, that I would be a worker in the vineyard,   
	as are all men and women living at the same time,   
	whether they are aware of it or not. 


22. LOVE

	Love means to learn to look at yourself
	The way one looks at distant things
	For you are only one thing among many. 
	And whoever sees that way heals his heart, 
	Without knowing it, from various ills--
	A bird and a tree say to him: Friend. 
	
	Then he wants to use himself and things
	So that they stand in the glow of ripeness. 
	It doesn’t matter whether he knows what he serves: 
	Who serves best doesn’t always understand.


23. A MAGIC MOUNTAIN

	I don’t remember exactly when Budberg died, it was either two years ago or three.   
	The same with Chen. Whether last year or the one before.   
	Soon after our arrival, Budberg, gently pensive,   
	Said that in the beginning it is hard to get accustomed,   
	For here there is no spring or summer, no winter or fall.   
	
	“I kept dreaming of snow and birch forests.   
	Where so little changes you hardly notice how time goes by.   
	This is, you will see, a magic mountain.”   
	
	Budberg: a familiar name in my childhood.   
	They were prominent in our region,   
	This Russian family, descendants of German Balts.   
	I read none of his works, too specialized.   
	And Chen, I have heard, was an exquisite poet,   
	Which I must take on faith, for he wrote in Chinese.
	
	Sultry Octobers, cool Julys, trees blossom in February.   
	Here the nuptial flight of hummingbirds does not forecast spring.   
	Only the faithful maple sheds its leaves every year.   
	For no reason, its ancestors simply learned it that way.   
	
	I sensed Budberg was right and I rebelled.   
	So I won’t have power, won’t save the world?   
	Fame will pass me by, no tiara, no crown?   
	Did I then train myself, myself the Unique,   
	To compose stanzas for gulls and sea haze,   
	To listen to the foghorns blaring down below?
	
	Until it passed. What passed? Life.   
	Now I am not ashamed of my defeat.   
	One murky island with its barking seals   
	Or a parched desert is enough   
	To make us say: yes, _oui, si._
	“Even asleep we partake in the becoming of the world.”   
	Endurance comes only from enduring.   
	With a flick of the wrist I fashioned an invisible rope,   
	And climbed it and it held me.   
	
	What a procession! _Quelles délices!_
	What caps and hooded gowns!
	Most respected Professor Budberg,   
	Most distinguished Professor Chen,   
	Wrong Honorable Professor Milosz   
	Who wrote poems in some unheard-of tongue.   
	Who will count them anyway. And here sunlight.   
	So that the flames of their tall candles fade.   
	And how many generations of hummingbirds keep them company   
	As they walk on. Across the magic mountain.   
	And the fog from the ocean is cool, for once again it is July.   


24. MAGPIETY

	The same and not quite the same, I walked through oak forests
	Amazed that my Muse, Mnemosyne,
	Has in no way diminished my amazement.
	A magpie was screeching and I said: Magpiety?
	What is magpiety? I shall never achieve
	A magpie heart, a hairy nostril over the beak, a flight
	That always renews just when coming down,
	And so I shall never comprehend magpiety.
	If however magpiety does not exist
	My nature does not exist either.
	Who would have guessed that, centuries later,
	I would invent the question of universals?


25. NATURA

	The garden of Nature opens. 
	The grass at the threshold is green. 
	And an almond tree begins to bloom. 
	
	Sunt mihi Dei Acherontis propitii! 
	Valeat numen triplex Jehovae! 
	Ignis, aeris, aquae, terrae spiritus, 
	Salvete!--says the entering guest. 
	
	Ariel lives in the palace of an apple tree, 
	But will not appear, vibrating like a wasp’s wing, 
	And Mephistopheles, disguised as an abbot 
	Of the Dominicans or the Franciscans, 
	Will not descend from a mulberry bush 
	Onto a pentagram drawn in the black loam of the path. 
	
	But a rhododendron walks among the rocks 
	Shod in leathery leaves and ringing a pink bell. 
	A hummingbird, a child’s top in the air, 
	Hovers in one spot, the beating heart of motion. 
	Impaled on the nail of a black thorn, a grasshopper 
	Leaks brown fluid from its twitching snout. 
	And what can he do, the phantom-in-chief, 
	As he’s been called, more than a magician, 
	The Socrates of snails, as he’s been called, 
	Musician of pears, arbiter of orioles, man? 
	In sculptures and canvases our individuality 
	Manages to survive. In Nature it perishes. 
	Let him accompany the coffin of the woodsman 
	Pushed from a cliff by a mountain demon, 
	The he-goat with its jutting curl of horn. 
	Let him visit the graveyard of the whalers 
	Who drove spears into the flesh of leviathan 
	And looked for the secret in guts and blubber. 
	The thrashing subsided, quieted to waves. 
	Let him unroll the textbooks of alchemists 
	Who almost found the cipher, thus the scepter. 
	Then passed away without hands, eyes, or elixir. 
	
	Here there is sun. And whoever, as a child, 
	Believed he could break the repeatable pattern 
	Of things, if only he understood the pattern, 
	Is cast down, rots in the skin of others, 
	Looks with wonder at the colors of the butterfly, 
	Inexpressible wonder, formless, hostile to art. 
	
	To keep the oars from squeaking in their locks, 
	He binds them with a handkerchief. The dark 
	Had rushed east from the Rocky Mountains 
	And settled in the forests of the continent: 
	Sky full of embers reflected in a cloud, 
	Flight of herons, trees above a marsh, 
	The dry stalks in water, livid, black. My boat 
	Divides the aerial utopias of the mosquitoes 
	Which rebuild their glowing castles instantly. 
	A water lily sinks, fizzing, under the boat’s bow. 
	
	Now it is night only. The water is ash-gray. 
	Play, music, but inaudibly! I wait an hour 
	In the silence, senses tuned to a beaver’s lodge. 
	Then suddenly, a crease in the water, a beast’s 
	black moon, rounded, ploughing up quickly 
	from the pond-dark, from the bubbling methanes. 
	I am not immaterial and never will be. 
	My scent in the air, my animal smell, 
	Spreads, rainbow-like, scares the beaver: 
	A sudden splat. 
	
	I remained where I was 
	In the high, soft coffer of the night’s velvet, 
	Mastering what had come to my senses: 
	How the four-toed paws worked, how the hair 
	Shook off water in the muddy tunnel. 
	It does not know time, hasn’t heard of death, 
	Is submitted to me because I know I’ll die. 
	
	I remember everything. That wedding in Basel, 
	A touch to the strings of a viola and fruit 
	In silver bowls. As was the custom in Savoy, 
	An overturned cup for three pairs of lips, 
	And the wine spilled. The flames of the candles 
	Wavery and frail in a breeze from the Rhine. 
	Her fingers, bones shining through the skin, 
	Felt out the hooks and clasps of the silk 
	And the dress opened like a nutshell, 
	Fell from the turned graininess of the belly. 
	A chain for the neck rustled without epoch, 
	In pits where the arms of various creeds 
	Mingle with bird cries and the red hair of caesars. 
	
	Perhaps this is only my own love speaking 
	Beyond the seventh river. Grit of subjectivity, 
	Obsession, bar the way to it. 
	Until a window shutter, dogs in the cold garden, 
	The whistle of a train, an owl in the firs 
	Are spared the distortions of memory. 
	And the grass says: how it was I don’t know. 
	
	Splash of a beaver in the American night. 
	The memory grows larger than my life. 
	A tin plate, dropped on the irregular red bricks 
	Of a floor, rattles tinnily forever. 
	Belinda of the big foot, Julia, Thaïs, 
	The tufts of their sex shadowed by ribbon. 
	
	Peace to the princesses under the tamarisks. 
	Desert winds beat against their painted eyelids. 
	Before the body was wrapped in bandelettes, 
	Before wheat fell asleep in the tomb, 
	Before stone fell silent, and there was only pity. 
	
	Yesterday a snake crossed the road at dusk. 
	Crushed by a tire, it writhed on the asphalt. 
	We are both the snake and the wheel. 
	There are two dimensions. Here is the unattainable 
	Truth of being, here, at the edge of lasting 
	and not lasting. Where the parallel lines intersect, 
	Time lifted above time by time. 
	
	Before the butterfly and its color, he, numb, 
	Formless, feels his fear, he, unattainable. 
	For what is a butterfly without Julia and Thaïs? 
	And what is Julia without a butterfly’s down 
	In her eyes, her hair, the smooth grain of her belly? 
	The kingdom, you say. We do not belong to it, 
	And still, in the same instant, we belong. 
	For how long will a nonsensical Poland 
	Where poets write of their emotions as if 
	They had a contract of limited liability 
	Suffice? I want not poetry, but a new diction, 
	Because only it might allow us to express 
	A new tenderness and save us from a law 
	That is not our law, from necessity 
	Which is not ours, even if we take its name. 
	
	From broken armor, from eyes stricken 
	By the command of time and taken back 
	Into the jurisdiction of mold and fermentation, 
	We draw our hope. Yes, to gather in an image 
	The furriness of the beaver, the smell of rushes, 
	And the wrinkles of a hand holding a pitcher 
	From which wine trickles. Why cry out 
	That a sense of history destroys our substance 
	If it, precisely, is offered to our powers, 
	A muse of our gray-haired father, Herodotus, 
	As our arm and our instrument, though 
	It is not easy to use it, to strengthen it 
	So that, like a plumb with a pure gold center, 
	It will serve again to rescue human beings. 
	
	With such reflections I pushed a rowboat, 
	In the middle of the continent, through tangled stalks, 
	In my mind an image of the waves of two oceans 
	And the slow rocking of a guard-ship’s lantern. 
	Aware that at this moment I--and not only I-- 
	Keep, as in a seed, the unnamed future. 
	And then a rhythmic appeal composed itself, 
	Alien to the moth with its whirring of silk: 
	
	O City, O Society, O Capital, 
	We have seen your steaming entrails. 
	You will no longer be what you have been. 
	Your songs no longer gratify our hearts. 
	
	Steel, cement, lime, law, ordinance, 
	We have worshipped you too long, 
	You were for us a goal and a defense, 
	Ours was your glory and your shame. 
	
	And where was the covenant broken? 
	Was it in the fires of war, the incandescent sky? 
	Or at twilight, as the towers fly past, when one looked 
	From the train across a desert of tracks
	
	To a window out past the maneuvering locomotives 
	Where a girl examines her narrow, moody face 
	In a mirror and ties a ribbon to her hair 
	Pierced by the sparks of curling papers? 
	
	Those walls of yours are shadows of walls, 
	And your light disappeared forever. 
	Not the world’s monument anymore, an oeuvre of your own 
	Stands beneath the sun in an altered space. 
	
	From stucco and mirrors, glass and paintings, 
	Tearing aside curtains of silver and cotton, 
	Comes man, naked and mortal, 
	Ready for truth, for speech, for wings. 
	
	Lament, Republic! Fall to your knees! 
	The loudspeaker’s spell is discontinued. 
	Listen! You can hear the clocks ticking. 
	Your death approaches by his hand. 
	
	An oar over my shoulder, I walked from the woods. 
	A porcupine scolded from the fork of a tree, 
	A horned owl, not changed by the century, 
	Not changed by place or time, looked down. 
	Bubo maximus, from the work of Linnaeus. 
	
	America for me has the pelt of a raccoon, 
	Its eyes are a raccoon’s black binoculars. 
	A chipmunk flickers in a litter of dry bark 
	Where ivy and vines tangle in the red soil 
	At the roots of an arcade of tulip trees. 
	America’s wings are the color of a cardinal, 
	Its beak is half-open and a mockingbird trills 
	From a leafy bush in the sweat-bath of the air. 
	Its line is the wavy body of a water moccasin 
	Crossing a river with a grass-like motion, 
	A rattlesnake, a rubble of dots and speckles, 
	Coiling under the bloom of a yucca plant. 
	
	America is for me the illustrated version 
	Of childhood tales about the heart of tanglewood, 
	Told in the evening to the spinning wheel’s hum. 
	And a violin, shivvying up a square dance, 
	Plays the fiddles of Lithuania or Flanders. 
	My dancing partner’s name is Birute Swenson. 
	She married a Swede, but was born in Kaunas. 
	Then from the night window a moth flies in 
	As big as the joined palms of the hands, 
	With a hue like the transparency of emeralds. 
	
	Why not establish a home in the neon heat 
	Of Nature? Is it not enough, the labor of autumn, 
	Of winter and spring and withering summer? 
	You will hear not one word spoken of the court 
	of Sigismund Augustus on the banks of the Delaware River. 
	The Dismissal of the Greek Envoys is not needed. 
	Herodotus will repose on his shelf, uncut. 
	And the rose only, a sexual symbol, 
	Symbol of love and superterrestrial beauty, 
	Will open a chasm deeper than your knowledge. 
	About it we find a song in a dream: 
	
	Inside the rose 
	Are houses of gold, 
	black isobars, streams of cold. 
	Dawn touches her finger to the edge of the Alps 
	And evening streams down to the bays of the sea. 
	
	If anyone dies inside the rose, 
	They carry him down the purple-red road 
	In a procession of clocks all wrapped in folds. 
	They light up the petals of grottoes with torches. 
	They bury him there where color begins, 
	At the source of the sighing, 
	Inside the rose. 
	
	Let names of months mean only what they mean. 
	Let the Aurora’s cannons be heard in none 
	Of them, or the tread of young rebels marching. 
	We might, at best, keep some kind of souvenir, 
	Preserved like a fan in a garret. Why not 
	Sit down at a rough country table and compose 
	An ode in the old manner, as in the old times 
	Chasing a beetle with the nib of our pen?


26. NORMALIZATION

	This happened long ago, before the onset 
	of universal genetic correctness. 
	
	Boys and girls would stand naked before mirrors 
	studying the defects of their structure. 
	
	Nose too long, ears like burdocks, 
	sunken chin just like a mongoloid. 
	
	Breasts too small, too large, lopsided shoulders, 
	penis too short, hips too broad or else too narrow. 
	
	And just an inch or two taller! 
	
	Such was the house they inhabited for life. 
	
	Hiding, feigning, concealing defects. 
	
	But somehow they still had to find a partner. 
	
	Following incomprehensible tastes--airy creatures 
	paired with potbellies, skin and bones enamored of salt pork. 
	
	They had a saying then: “Even monsters 
	have their mates.” So perhaps they learned to tolerate their partners’ 
	flaws, trusting that theirs would be forgiven in turn. 
	
	Now every genetic error meets with such 
	disgust that crowds might spit on them and stone them. 
	
	As happened in the city of K., where the town council 
	voted to exile a girl 
	
	So thickset and squat 
	that no stylish dress could ever suit her, 
	
	But let’s not yearn for the days of prenormalization. 
	Just think of the torments, the anxieties, the sweat, 
	the wiles needed to entice, in spite of all. 


27. ON ANGELS

	All was taken away from you: white dresses,
	wings, even existence.
	Yet I believe you,
	messengers.
	
	There, where the world is turned inside out,
	a heavy fabric embroidered with stars and beasts,
	you stroll, inspecting the trustworthy seems.
	
	Shorts is your stay here:
	now and then at a matinal hour, if the sky is clear,
	in a melody repeated by a bird,
	or in the smell of apples at close of day
	when the light makes the orchards magic.
	
	They say somebody has invented you
	but to me this does not sound convincing
	for the humans invented themselves as well.
	
	The voice--no doubt it is a valid proof,
	as it can belong only to radiant creatures,
	weightless and winged (after all, why not?),
	girdled with the lightening.
	
	I have heard that voice many a time when asleep
	and, what is strange, I understood more or less
	an order or an appeal in an unearthly tongue:
	
	day draw near
	another one
	do what you can.


28. ON PILGRIMAGE

	May the smell of thyme and lavender accompany us on our journey
	To a province that does not know how lucky it is
	For it was, among all the hidden corners of the earth,
	The only one chosen and visited.
	
	We tended toward the Place but no signs led there.
	Till it revealed itself in a pastoral valley
	Between mountains that look older than memory,
	By a narrow river humming at the grotto.
	
	May the taste of wine and roast meat stay with us
	As it did when we used to feast in the clearings,
	Searching, not finding, gathering rumors,
	Always comforted by the brightness of the day.
	
	May the gentle mountains and the bells of the flocks
	Remind us of everything we have lost,
	For we have seen on our way and fallen in love
	With the world that will pass in a twinkling.


29. ON PRAYER

	You ask me how to pray to someone who is not.
	All I know is that prayer constructs a velvet bridge
	And walking it we are aloft, as on a springboard,
	Above landscapes the color of ripe gold
	Transformed by a magic stopping of the sun.
	That bridge leads to the shore of Reversal
	Where everything is just the opposite and the word ‘is’
	Unveils a meaning we hardly envisioned.
	Notice: I say we; there, every one, separately,
	Feels compassion for others entangled in the flesh
	And knows that if there is no other shore
	We will walk that aerial bridge all the same.


30. A POEM FOR THE END OF THE CENTURY

	When everything was fine
	And the notion of sin had vanished
	And the earth was ready
	In universal peace
	To consume and rejoice
	Without creeds and utopias,
	
	I, for unknown reasons,
	Surrounded by the books
	Of prophets and theologians,
	Of philosophers, poets,
	Searched for an answer,
	Scowling, grimacing,
	Waking up at night, muttering at dawn.
	
	What oppressed me so much
	Was a bit shameful.
	Talking of it aloud
	Would show neither tact nor prudence.
	It might even seem an outrage
	Against the health of mankind.
	
	Alas, my memory
	Does not want to leave me
	And in it, live beings
	Each with its own pain,
	Each with its own dying,
	Its own trepidation.
	
	Why then innocence
	On paradisal beaches,
	An impeccable sky
	Over the church of hygiene?
	Is it because that
	Was long ago?
	
	To a saintly man
	--So goes an Arab tale--
	God said somewhat maliciously:
	“Had I revealed to people
	How great a sinner you are,
	They could not praise you.”
	
	“And I,” answered the pious one,
	“Had I unveiled to them
	How merciful you are,
	They would not care for you.”
	
	To whom should I turn
	With that affair so dark
	Of pain and also guilt
	In the structure of the world,
	If either here below
	Or over there on high
	No power can abolish
	The cause and the effect?
	
	Don’t think, don’t remember
	The death on the cross,
	Though everyday He dies,
	The only one, all-loving,
	Who without any need
	Consented and allowed
	To exist all that is,
	Including nails of torture.
	
	Totally enigmatic.
	Impossibly intricate.
	Better to stop speech here.
	This language is not for people.
	Blessed be jubilation.
	Vintages and harvests.
	Even if not everyone
	Is granted serenity.


31. A POOR CHRISTIAN LOOKS AT THE GHETTO

	Bees build around red liver, 
	Ants build around black bone. 
	It has begun: the tearing, the trampling on silks, 
	It has begun: the breaking of glass, wood, copper, nickel, silver, foam 
	Of gypsum, iron sheets, violin strings, trumpets, leaves, balls, crystals. 
	Poof! Phosphorescent fire from yellow walls 
	Engulfs animal and human hair. 
	
	Bees build around the honeycomb of lungs, 
	Ants build around white bone. 
	Torn is paper, rubber, linen, leather, flax, 
	Fiber, fabrics, cellulose, snakeskin, wire. 
	The roof and the wall collapse in flame and heat seizes the foundations. 
	Now there is only the earth, sandy, trodden down, 
	With one leafless tree. 
	
	Slowly, boring a tunnel, a guardian mole makes his way, 
	With a small red lamp fastened to his forehead. 
	He touches buried bodies, counts them, pushes on, 
	He distinguishes human ashes by their luminous vapor, 
	The ashes of each man by a different part of the spectrum. 
	Bees build around a red trace. 
	Ants build around the place left by my body. 
	
	I am afraid, so afraid of the guardian mole. 
	He has swollen eyelids, like a Patriarch 
	Who has sat much in the light of candles 
	Reading the great book of the species. 
	
	What will I tell him, I, a Jew of the New Testament, 
	Waiting two thousand years for the second coming of Jesus? 
	My broken body will deliver me to his sight 
	And he will count me among the helpers of death: 
	The uncircumcised.


32. THE ROAD

	Here where you see a green valley
	And a road half-covered with grass,
	Through an oak wood beginning to bloom
	Children are returning home from school.
	
	In a pencil case that opens sideways
	Crayons rattle among crumbs of a roll
	And a copper penny saved by every child
	To greet the first spring cuckoo.
	
	Sister’s beret and brother’s cap
	Bob in the bushy underbrush,
	A screeching jay hops in the branches
	And long clouds float over the trees.
	
	A red roof is already visible at the bend.
	In front of the house father, leaning on a hoe,
	Bows down, touches the unfolded leaves,
	And from his flower bed inspects the whole region.


33. A SONG ON THE END OF THE WORLD

	On the day the world ends
	A bee circles a clover,
	A fisherman mends a glimmering net.
	Happy porpoises jump in the sea,
	By the rainspout young sparrows are playing
	And the snake is gold-skinned as it should always be.
	        
	On the day the world ends
	Women walk through the fields under their umbrellas,
	A drunkard grows sleepy at the edge of a lawn,
	Vegetable peddlers shout in the street
	And a yellow-sailed boat comes nearer the island,
	The voice of a violin lasts in the air
	And leads into a starry night.
	
	And those who expected lightning and thunder
	Are disappointed.
	And those who expected signs and archangels’ trumps
	Do not believe it is happening now.
	As long as the sun and the moon are above,
	As long as the bumblebee visits a rose,
	As long as rosy infants are born
	No one believes it is happening now.
	
	Only a white-haired old man, who would be a prophet
	Yet is not a prophet, for he’s much too busy,
	Repeats while he binds his tomatoes:
	There will be no other end of the world,
	There will be no other end of the world.


34. STATE OF A COUPLE

	Your hand, my wonder, is now icy cold.
	The purest light of the celestial dome
	has burned me through. And now we are
	as two still plams lying in darlmess,
	as two black banks of a frozen stream
	in the chasm of the world.
	
	Our hair combed back is carved in wood,
	the moon walks over our ebony shoulders.
	A distant cockcrow, the night goes by, silent.
	Rich is the rime of love, withered the dowry.
	
	Where are you, living in what depths of time,
	love, stepping down into what waters,
	now, when the frost of our voiceless lips
	does not fend off the divine fires?
	
	In a forest of clouds, of fcam, and of silver
	we live, caressing lands under our
	And we are wielding the might of a dark scepter
	to earn oblivion.
	
	My love, your breast cut through by a clinel
	knows nothing anymore of what it was.
	Of clouds at dawn, of angers at daybreak,
	of shallows in springtime it has no remembrance.
	
	And you have led me, as once an angel led
	Tobias, onto the rusty mashes of Lombardy.
	But a day came when a sign frightened you,
	a stinma of golden measure.
	
	With a scream, with inunobile fear in your thin hands
	you fell into a pit that ashes lie over,
	where neither northern firs nor Italian yews
	could protect our andent bed of lovers.
	
	What was it. what is it, what will it be
	we filled the world with our cry and calling.
	The dawn is back, the red moon set,
	do we know now? In a heavy ship
	
	A helmman comes, throws a silken rope
	and binds w tightly to eaah other,
	then he pours on friends, once enemies,
	a handful of snow.


35. A STUDY OF LONELINESS

	A guardian of long-distance conduits in the desert? 
	A one-man crew of a fortress in the sand? 
	Whoever he was. At dawn he saw furrowed mountains 
	The color of ashes, above the melting darkness, 
	Saturated with violet, breaking into fluid rouge, 
	Till they stood, immense, in the orange light. 
	Day after day. And, before he noticed, year after year. 
	For whom, he thought, that splendor? For me alone? 
	Yet it will be here long after I perish. 
	What is it in the eye of a lizard? Or when seen by a migrant bird? 
	If I am all mankind, are they themselves without me? 
	And he knew there was no use crying out, for none of them would save him.


36. A TASK

	In fear and trembling, I think I would fulfill my life
	Only if I brought myself to make a public confession
	Revealing a sham, my own and of my epoch:
	We were permitted to shriek in the tongue of dwarfs and demons
	But pure and generous words were forbidden
	Under so stiff a penalty that whoever dared to pronounce one
	Considered himself as a lost man.


37. THEODICY

	No, it won’t do, my sweet theologians.
	Desire will not save the morality of God.
	If he created beings able to choose between good and evil,
	And they chose, and the world lies in iniquity,
	Nevertheless, there is pain, and the undeserved torture of creatures,
	Which would find its explanation only by assuming
	The existence of an archetypal Paradise
	And a pre-human downfall so grave
	That the world of matter received its shape from diabolic power.


38. THIS ONLY

	A valley and above it forests in autumn colors.
	A voyager arrives, a map leads him there.
	Or perhaps memory. Once long ago in the sun,
	When snow first fell, riding this way
	He felt joy, strong, without reason,
	Joy of the eyes. Everything was the rhythm
	Of shifting trees, of a bird in flight,
	Of a train on the viaduct, a feast in motion.
	He returns years later, has no demands.
	He wants only one, most precious thing:
	To see, purely and simply, without name,
	Without expectations, fears, or hopes,
	At the edge where there is no I or not-I.


39. TO MRS. PROFESSOR IN DEFENSE OF MY CAT’S HONOR

	My valiant helper, a small-sized tiger
	Sleeps sweetly on my desk, by the computer,
	Unaware that you insult his tribe.
	
	Cats play with a mouse or with a half-dead mole.
	You are wrong, though: it’s not out of cruelty.
	They simply like a thing that moves.
	
	For, after all, we know that only consciousness
	Can for a moment move into the Other,
	Empathize with the pain and panic of a mouse.
	
	And such as cats are, all of Nature is.
	Indifferent, alas, to the good and the evil.
	Quite a problem for us, I am afraid.
	
	Natural history has its museums,
	But why should our children learn about monsters,
	An earth of snakes and reptiles for millions of years?
	
	Nature devouring, nature devoured,
	Butchery day and night smoking with blood.
	and who created it? Was it the good Lord?
	
	Yes, undoubtedly, they are innocent,
	Spiders, mantises, sharks, pythons.
	We are the only ones who say: cruelty.
	
	Our consciousness and our conscience
	Alone in the pale anthill of galaxies
	Put their hope in a humane God.
	
	Who cannot but feel and think,
	Who is kindred to us by his warmth and movement,
	For we are, as he told us, similar to Him.
	
	Yet if it is so, the He takes pity
	On every mauled mouse, every wounded bird.
	Then the universe ofr him is like a Crucifixion.
	
	Such is the outcome of your attack on the cat:
	A theological, Augustinian grimace,
	Which makes difficult our walking on this earth.


40. VENI CREATOR

	Come, Holy Spirit,   
	bending or not bending the grasses,   
	appearing or not above our heads in a tongue of flame,   
	at hay harvest or when they plough in the orchards or when snow   
	covers crippled firs in the Sierra Nevada.   
	I am only a man: I need visible signs.   
	I tire easily, building the stairway of abstraction.   
	Many a time I asked, you know it well, that the statue in church   
	lifts its hand, only once, just once, for me.   
	But I understand that signs must be human,   
	therefore call one man, anywhere on earth,   
	not me--after all I have some decency--   
	and allow me, when I look at him, to marvel at you.   


41. WHAT DOES IT MEAN

	It does not know it glitters
	It does not know it flies
	It does not know it is this not that.
	
	And, more and more often, agape,
	With my Gauloise dying out,
	Over a glass of red wine,
	I muse on the meaning of being this not that.
	
	Just as long ago, when I was twenty,
	But then there was a hope I would be everything,
	Perhaps even a butterfly or a thrush, by magic.
	Now I see dusty district roads
	And a town where the postmaster gets drunk every day
	Melancholy with remaining identical to himself.
	
	If only the stars contained me.
	If only everything kept happening in such a way
	That the so-called world opposed the so-called flesh.
	Were I at least not contradictory. Alas.


42. WHERE THE SUN RISES AND WHERE IT SETS

	Once, when returning from far Transylvania
	Through mountain forests, rocks, and Carpathian ridges,
	Halting by a ford at the close of day
	(My companions had sent me ahead to look
	For passage), I let my horse graze
	And out of the saddlebag took the Holy Scripture;
	The light was so gracious, murmur of streams so sweet,
	That reading Paul’s epistles, and seeing the first star,
	I was soon lulled into a profound sleep.
	
	A young man in ornate Greek raiment
	Touched my arm and I heard his voice:
	‘Your time, O mortals, hastens by like water,
	I have descended and known its absyss.
	It was I, whom cruel Paul chastised in Corinth
	For having stolen my father’s wife,
	And by his order I was to be excluded
	From the table at which we shared our meals.
	Since then I have not been in gatherings of the saints,
	And for many years I was led by the sinful love
	Of a poor plaything given to temptation,
	And so we doomed ourselves to eternal ruin.
	But my Lord and my God, whom I knew not,
	Tore me from the ashes with his lightning,
	In his eyes your truths count for nothing,
	His mercy saves all living flesh.’
	
	Awake under a huge starry sky,
	Having received help unhoped for,
	Absolved of care about our platry life,
	I wiped my eyes wet with tears.
	
	No, I have never been to Transylvania.
	I have never brought messages from there to my church.
	But I could have.
	This is an exercise in style.
	The pluperfect tense
	Of countries imperfective.


43. WINDOW

	I looked out the window at dawn and saw a young apple tree translucent in brightness. 
	
	And when I looked out at dawn once again, an apple tree laden with fruit stood there. 
	
	Many years had probably gone by but I remember nothing of what happened in my sleep.


44. WINTER

	The pungent smells of a California winter, 
	Grayness and rosiness, an almost transparent full moon. 
	I add logs to the fire, I drink and I ponder. 
	
	“In Ilawa,” the news item said, “at age 70 
	Died Aleksander Rymkiewicz, poet.” 
	
	He was the youngest in our group. I patronized him slightly, 
	Just as I patronized others for their inferior minds 
	Though they had many virtues I couldn’t touch. 
	
	And so I am here, approaching the end 
	Of the century and of my life. Proud of my strength 
	Yet embarrassed by the clearness of the view. 
	
	Avant-gardes mixed with blood. 
	The ashes of inconceivable arts. 
	An omnium-gatherum of chaos. 
	
	I passed judgment on that. Though marked myself. 
	This hasn’t been the age for the righteous and the decent. 
	I know what it means to beget monsters 
	And to recognize in them myself. 
	
	You, moon, You, Aleksander, fire of cedar logs. 
	Waters close over us, a name lasts but an instant. 
	Not important whether the generations hold us in memory. 
	Great was that chase with the hounds for the unattainable meaning of the world. 
	
	And now I am ready to keep running 
	When the sun rises beyond the borderlands of death. 
	I already see mountain ridges in the heavenly forest 
	Where, beyond every essence, a new essence waits. 
	
	You, music of my late years, I am called 
	By a sound and a color which are more and more perfect. 
	
	Do not die out, fire. Enter my dreams, love. 
	Be young forever, seasons of the earth.


45. YOU WHO WRONGED

	You who wronged a simple man 
	Bursting into laughter at the crime, 
	And kept a pack of fools around you 
	To mix good and evil, to blur the line, 
	
	Though everyone bowed down before you, 
	Saying virtue and wisdom lit your way, 
	Striking gold medals in your honor, 
	Glad to have survived another day, 
	
	Do not feel safe. The poet remembers. 
	You can kill one, but another is born. 
	The words are written down, the deed, the date. 
	
	And you’d have done better with a winter dawn, 
	A rope, and a branch bowed beneath your weight.


46. YOU WHOSE NAME

	You whose name is aggressor and devourer. 
	Putrid and sultry, in fermentation. 
	You mash into pulp sages and prophets, 
	Criminals and heroes, indifferently. 
	My vocativus is useless. 
	You do not hear me, though I address you, 
	Yet I want to speak, for I am against you. 
	So what if you gulp me, I am not yours. 
	You overcome me with exhaustion and fever. 
	You blur my thought, which protests, 
	You roll over me, dull unconscious power. 
	The one who will overcome you is swift, armed: 
	Mind, spirit, maker, renewer. 
	He jousts with you in depths and on high, 
	Equestrian, winged, lofty, silver-scaled. 
	I have served him in the investiture of forms. 
	It’s not my concern what he will do with me.
	
	A retinue advances in the sunlight by the lakes. 
	From white villages Easter bells resound.

