*** John Milton (1608 - 1674)


1. AT A SOLEMN MUSIC

	Blest pair of Sirens, pledges of Heav’ns joy, 
	Sphear-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Vers, 
	Wed your divine sounds, and mixt power employ 
	Dead things with inbreath’d sense able to pierce, 
	And to our high-rais’d phantasie present,
	That undisturbèd Song of pure content, 
	Ay sung before the saphire-colour’d throne 
	To him that sits theron
	  With Saintly shout, and solemn Jubily, 
	Where the bright Seraphim in burning row
	Their loud up-lifted Angel trumpets blow, 
	And the Cherubick host in thousand quires 
	Touch their immortal Harps of golden wires, 
	With those just Spirits that wear victorious Palms, 
	Hymns devout and holy Psalms
	Singing everlastingly; 
	That we on Earth with undiscording voice 
	May rightly answer that melodious noise; 
	As once we did, till disproportion’d sin 
	Jarr’d against natures chime, and with harsh din
	Broke the fair musick that all creatures made 
	To their great Lord, whose love their motion sway’d 
	In perfect Diapason, whilst they stood 
	In first obedience, and their state of good. 
	O may we soon again renew that Song
	And keep in tune with Heav’n, till God ere long 
	To his celestial consort us unite, 
	To live with him, and sing in endles morn of light.  


2. HOW SOON HATH TIME

	How soon hath Time, the subtle thief of youth,
	      Stol’n on his wing my three-and-twentieth year!
	      My hasting days fly on with full career,
	      But my late spring no bud or blossom shew’th.
	Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth
	      That I to manhood am arriv’d so near;
	      And inward ripeness doth much less appear,
	      That some more timely-happy spirits endu’th.
	Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow,
	      It shall be still in strictest measure ev’n
	      To that same lot, however mean or high,
	Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heav’n:
	      All is, if I have grace to use it so
	      As ever in my great Task-Master’s eye.


3. THE HYMN

	I
	
	     It was the winter wild,
	     While the heaven-born child
	 All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies;
	     Nature in awe to him
	     Had doffed her gaudy trim,
	 With her great Master so to sympathize.
	   It was no season then for her
	To wanton with the Sun her lusty paramour.
	
	
	II
	
	     Only with speeches fair
	     She woos the gentle air
	 To hide her guilty front with innocent snow,
	     And on her naked shame,
	     Pollute with sinful blame,
	 The saintly veil of maiden-white to throw,
	   Confounded, that her Maker’s eyes
	Should look so near upon her foul deformities.
	
	
	III
	
	     But he, her fears to cease,
	     Sent down the meek-eyed Peace;
	 She, crowned with olive-green, came softly sliding
	     Down through the turning sphere,
	     His ready harbinger,
	 With turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing;
	   And, waving wide her myrtle wand,
	She strikes an universal peace through sea and land.
	
	
	IV
	
	     No war or battle’s sound
	     Was heard the world around;
	 The idle spear and shield were high up hung;
	     The hooked chariot stood,
	     Unstained with hostile blood;
	 The trumpet spake not to the armed throng;
	   And kings sat still with awful eye,
	As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by.
	
	
	V
	
	     But peaceful was the night,
	     Wherein the Prince of Light
	 His reign of peace upon the earth began.
	     The winds, with wonder whist,
	     Smoothly the waters kissed,
	 Whispering new joys to the mild ocean,
	   Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
	While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.
	
	
	VI
	
	     The stars, with deep amaze,
	     Stand fixed in steadfast gaze,
	 Bending one way their precious influence,
	     And will not take their flight,
	     For all the morning-light,
	 Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;
	   But in their glimmering orbs did glow,
	Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.
	
	
	VII
	
	     And, though the shady gloom
	     Had given day her room,
	 The sun himself withheld his wonted speed;
	     And hid his head for shame,
	     As his inferior flame
	 The new-enlightened world no more should need;
	   He saw a greater sun appear
	Than his bright throne or burning axletree could bear.
	
	
	VIII
	
	     The shepherds on the lawn,
	     Or ere the point of dawn,
	 Sat simply chatting in a rustic row;
	     Full little thought they than
	     That the mighty Pan
	 Was kindly come to live with them below.
	   Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep,
	Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.
	
	
	IX
	
	     When such music sweet
	     Their hearts and ears did greet,
	 As never was by mortal finger strook;
	     Divinely-warbled voice
	     Answering the stringed noise,
	 As all their souls in blissful rapture took.
	   The air, such pleasure loth to lose,
	With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.
	
	
	X
	
	     Nature, that heard such sound,
	     Beneath the hollow round
	 Of Cynthia’s seat, the airy region thrilling,
	     Now was almost won
	     To think her part was done,
	 And that her reign had here its last fulfilling.
	   She knew such harmony alone
	Could hold all Heaven and Earth in happier union.
	
	
	XI
	
	     At last surrounds their sight
	     A globe of circular light,
	 That with long beams the shame-faced Night arrayed.
	     The helmed Cherubim,
	     And sworded Seraphim,
	 Are seen, in glittering ranks with wings displayed,
	   Harping, in loud and solemn quire,
	With unexpressive notes to Heaven’s new-born Heir.
	
	
	XII
	
	     Such music--as ‘tis said--
	     Before was never made,
	 But when of old the Sons of Morning sung;
	     While the Creator great
	     His constellations set,
	 And the well-balanced World on hinges hung,
	   And cast the dark foundations deep,
	And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep.
	
	
	XIII
	
	     Ring out, ye crystal spheres!
	     Once bless our human ears,
	 --If ye have power to touch our senses so--
	     And let your silver-chime
	     Move in melodious time,
	 And let the base of heaven’s deep organ blow;
	   And with your ninefold harmony
	Make up full consort to the angelic symphony.
	
	
	XIV
	
	     For if such holy song
	     Enwrap our fancy long,
	 Time will run back, and fetch the Age of Gold;
	     And speckled Vanity
	     Will sicken soon and die,
	 And leprous Sin will melt from earthly mould;
	   And Hell itself will pass away,
	And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day.
	
	
	XV
	
	     Yea Truth and Justice then
	     Will down return to men,
	 Orbed in a rainbow, and like glories wearing;
	     Mercy will sit between,
	     Throned in celestial sheen,
	 With radiant feet the tissued clouds down steering;
	   And Heaven, as at some festival,
	Will open wide the gates of her high palace-hall.
	
	
	XVI
	
	     But wisest Fate says No,
	     This must not yet be so,
	 The Babe lies yet in smiling infancy,
	     That, on the bitter cross,
	     Must redeem our loss;
	 So both himself and us to glorify:
	   Yet first, to those ychained in sleep,
	The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep.
	
	
	XVII
	
	     With such a horrid clang
	     As on Mount Sinai rang,
	 While the red fire and smouldering clouds outbrake,
	     The aged earth aghast,
	     With terror of that blast,
	 Shall from the surface to the centre shake;
	   When, at the world’s last session,
	The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread his throne.
	
	
	XVIII
	
	     And then at last our bliss
	     Full and perfect is,
	 But now begins; for from this happy day
	     The Old Dragon under ground,
	     In straiter limits bound,
	 Not half so far casts his usurped sway,
	   And, wroth to see his kingdom fail,
	Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail.
	
	
	XIX
	
	     The oracles are dumb,
	     No voice or hideous hum
	 Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving.
	     Apollo from his shrine
	     Can no more divine,
	 With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving.
	   No nightly trance, or breathed spell,
	Inspires the pale-eyed priest from the prophetic cell.
	
	
	XX
	
	     The lonely mountains o’er,
	     And the resounding shore,
	 A voice of weeping heard and loud lament;
	     From haunted spring, and dale
	     Edged with poplar pale,
	 The parting Genius is with sighing sent;
	   With flower-inwoven tresses torn
	The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.
	
	
	XXI
	
	     In consecrated earth,
	     And on the holy hearth,
	 The Lars and Lemures moan with midnight plaint;
	     In urns and altars round,
	     A drear and dying sound
	 Affrights the Flamens at their service quaint;
	   And the chill marble seems to sweat,
	While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.
	
	
	XXII
	
	     Peor and Baälim
	     Forsake their temples dim,
	 With that twice battered god of Palestine;
	     And mooned Ashtaroth,
	     Heaven’s queen and mother both,
	 Now sits not girt with tapers’ holy shine;
	   The Lybic Hammon shrinks his horn;
	In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn.
	
	
	XXIII
	
	     And sullen Moloch, fled,
	     Hath left in shadows dread
	 His burning idol all of blackest hue;
	     In vain with cymbals’ ring
	     They call the grisly king,
	 In dismal dance about the furnace blue;
	   The brutish gods of Nile as fast,
	Isis, and Orus, and the dog Anubis haste.
	
	
	XXIV
	
	     Nor is Osiris seen
	     In Memphian grove or green,
	 Trampling the unshowered grass with lowings loud;
	     Nor can he be at rest
	     Within his sacred chest,
	 Nought but profoundest hell can be his shroud;
	   In vain, with timbrelled anthems dark,
	The sable-stoled sorcerers bear his worshipped ark.
	
	
	XXV
	
	     He feels, from Juda’s land,
	     The dreaded Infant’s hand,
	 The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;
	     Nor all the gods beside
	     Longer dare abide,
	 Nor Typhon huge ending in snaky twine.
	   Our Babe, to shew his Godhead true,
	Can in his swaddling-bands control the damned crew.
	
	
	XXVI
	
	     So when the sun in bed,
	     Curtained with cloudy red,
	 Pillows his chin upon an orient wave,
	     The flocking shadows pale
	     Troop to the infernal jail,
	 Each fettered ghost slips to his several grave,
	   And the yellow-skirted fayes
	Fly after the Night steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze.
	
	
	XXVII
	
	     But see! the Virgin blest
	     Hath laid her Babe to rest,
	 Time is our tedious song should here have ending;
	     Heaven’s youngest-teemed star
	     Hath fixed her polished car,
	 Her sleeping Lord with handmaid-lamp attending;
	   And all about the courtly stable
	Bright-harnessed angels sit in order serviceable.


4. LYCIDAS

	     Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more
	Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
	I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude,
	And with forc’d fingers rude
	Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.
	Bitter constraint and sad occasion dear
	Compels me to disturb your season due;
	For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
	Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer.
	Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew
	Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
	He must not float upon his wat’ry bier
	Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
	Without the meed of some melodious tear.
	
	     Begin then, Sisters of the sacred well
	That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring;
	Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string.
	Hence with denial vain and coy excuse!
	So may some gentle muse
	With lucky words favour my destin’d urn,
	And as he passes turn
	And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud!
	
	     For we were nurs’d upon the self-same hill,
	Fed the same flock, by fountain, shade, and rill;
	Together both, ere the high lawns appear’d
	Under the opening eyelids of the morn,
	We drove afield, and both together heard
	What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
	Batt’ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
	Oft till the star that rose at ev’ning bright
	Toward heav’n's descent had slop’d his westering wheel.
	Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute,
	Temper’d to th’oaten flute;
	Rough Satyrs danc’d, and Fauns with clov’n heel,
	From the glad sound would not be absent long;
	And old Damætas lov’d to hear our song.
	
	     But O the heavy change now thou art gone,
	Now thou art gone, and never must return!
	Thee, Shepherd, thee the woods and desert caves,
	With wild thyme and the gadding vine o’ergrown,
	And all their echoes mourn.
	The willows and the hazel copses green
	Shall now no more be seen
	Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays.
	As killing as the canker to the rose,
	Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze,
	Or frost to flowers that their gay wardrobe wear
	When first the white thorn blows:
	Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd’s ear.
	
	     Where were ye, Nymphs, when the remorseless deep
	Clos’d o’er the head of your lov’d Lycidas?
	For neither were ye playing on the steep
	Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie,
	Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
	Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream.
	Ay me! I fondly dream
	Had ye bin there’—for what could that have done?
	What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore,
	The Muse herself, for her enchanting son,
	Whom universal nature did lament,
	When by the rout that made the hideous roar
	His gory visage down the stream was sent,
	Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore?
	
	     Alas! what boots it with incessant care
	To tend the homely, slighted shepherd’s trade,
	And strictly meditate the thankless Muse?
	Were it not better done, as others use,
	To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
	Or with the tangles of Neæra’s hair?
	Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
	(That last infirmity of noble mind)
	To scorn delights and live laborious days;
	But the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
	And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
	Comes the blind Fury with th’abhorred shears,
	And slits the thin-spun life. “But not the praise,”
	Phoebus replied, and touch’d my trembling ears;
	“Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
	Nor in the glistering foil
	Set off to th’world, nor in broad rumour lies,
	But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes
	And perfect witness of all-judging Jove;
	As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
	Of so much fame in Heav’n expect thy meed.”
	
	     O fountain Arethuse, and thou honour’d flood,
	Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown’d with vocal reeds,
	That strain I heard was of a higher mood.
	But now my oat proceeds,
	And listens to the Herald of the Sea,
	That came in Neptune’s plea.
	He ask’d the waves, and ask’d the felon winds,
	“What hard mishap hath doom’d this gentle swain?”
	And question’d every gust of rugged wings
	That blows from off each beaked promontory.
	They knew not of his story;
	And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
	That not a blast was from his dungeon stray’d;
	The air was calm, and on the level brine
	Sleek Panope with all her sisters play’d.
	It was that fatal and perfidious bark,
	Built in th’eclipse, and rigg’d with curses dark,
	That sunk so low that sacred head of thine.
	
	     Next Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow,
	His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge,
	Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge
	Like to that sanguine flower inscrib’d with woe.
	“Ah! who hath reft,“ quoth he, “my dearest pledge?”
	Last came, and last did go,
	The Pilot of the Galilean lake;
	Two massy keys he bore of metals twain
	(The golden opes, the iron shuts amain).
	He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake:
	“How well could I have spar’d for thee, young swain,
	Enow of such as for their bellies’ sake
	Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold?
	Of other care they little reck’ning make
	Than how to scramble at the shearers’ feast
	And shove away the worthy bidden guest.
	Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold
	A sheep-hook, or have learn’d aught else the least
	That to the faithful herdman’s art belongs!
	What recks it them? What need they? They are sped;
	And when they list their lean and flashy songs
	Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw,
	The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed,
	But, swoll’n with wind and the rank mist they draw,
	Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread;
	Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw
	Daily devours apace, and nothing said,
	But that two-handed engine at the door
	Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more“.
	
	     Return, Alpheus: the dread voice is past
	That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian Muse,
	And call the vales and bid them hither cast
	Their bells and flow’rets of a thousand hues.
	Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use
	Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
	On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks,
	Throw hither all your quaint enamel’d eyes,
	That on the green turf suck the honied showers
	And purple all the ground with vernal flowers.
	Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
	The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,
	The white pink, and the pansy freak’d with jet,
	The glowing violet,
	The musk-rose, and the well attir’d woodbine,
	With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
	And every flower that sad embroidery wears;
	Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed,
	And daffadillies fill their cups with tears,
	To strew the laureate hearse where Lycid lies.
	For so to interpose a little ease,
	Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
	Ay me! Whilst thee the shores and sounding seas
	Wash far away, where’er thy bones are hurl’d;
	Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides,
	Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
	Visit’st the bottom of the monstrous world,
	Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied,
	Sleep’st by the fable of Bellerus old,
	Where the great vision of the guarded mount
	Looks toward Namancos and Bayona’s hold:
	Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth;
	And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth.
	
	     Weep no more, woeful shepherds, weep no more,
	For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead,
	Sunk though he be beneath the wat’ry floor;
	So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed,
	And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
	And tricks his beams, and with new spangled ore
	Flames in the forehead of the morning sky:
	So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high
	Through the dear might of him that walk’d the waves;
	Where, other groves and other streams along,
	With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves,
	And hears the unexpressive nuptial song,
	In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love.
	There entertain him all the Saints above,
	In solemn troops, and sweet societies,
	That sing, and singing in their glory move,
	And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes.
	Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more:
	Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore,
	In thy large recompense, and shalt be good
	To all that wander in that perilous flood.
	
	     Thus sang the uncouth swain to th’oaks and rills,
	While the still morn went out with sandals gray;
	He touch’d the tender stops of various quills,
	With eager thought warbling his Doric lay;
	And now the sun had stretch’d out all the hills,
	And now was dropp’d into the western bay;
	At last he rose, and twitch’d his mantle blue:
	To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new.


5. L’ALLEGRO

	Hence, loathed Melancholy!
	Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born,
	     In Stygian cave forlorn,
	‘Mongst horrid shapes, and shrieks, and sights unholy.
	     Find out some uncouth cell,
	Where brooding Darkness spreads his jealous wings,
	     And the night-raven sings;
	There, under ebon shades and low-browed rocks
	     As ragged as thy locks,
	In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.
	   But come, thou Goddess fair and free,
	 In Heaven yclept Euphrosynè,
	 And by men, heart-easing Mirth;
	 Whom lovely Venus, at a birth
	 With two sister Graces more,
	 To ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
	 Or whether, as some sager sing,
	 The frolic wind that breathes the spring,
	 Zephyr, with Aurora playing,
	 As he met her once a-maying,
	 There, on beds of violets blue,
	 And fresh-blown roses washed in dew,
	 Filled her with thee, a daughter fair,
	 So buxom, blithe, and debonair.
	   Haste thee, Nymph, and bring with thee
	 Jest, and youthful Jollity,
	 Quips, and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
	 Nods and Becks, and wreathed Smiles--
	 Such as hang on Hebe’s cheek,
	 And love to live in dimple sleek;
	 Sport, that wrinkled Care derides,
	 And Laughter, holding both his sides:
	 Come, and trip it as you go
	 On the light fantastic toe;
	 And in thy right hand lead with thee
	 The mountain-nymph, sweet Liberty;
	 And, if I give thee honour due,
	 Mirth, admit me of thy crew
	 To live with her and live with thee,
	 In unreproved pleasures free;
	 To hear the lark begin his flight,
	 And singing startle the dull night
	 From his watch-tower in the skies,
	 Till the dappled dawn doth rise;
	 Then to come, in spite of sorrow,
	 And at my window bid good-morrow,
	 Through the sweet-briar, or the vine,
	 Or the twisted eglantine;
	 While the cock, with lively din,
	 Scatters the rear of darkness thin,
	 And, to the stack or the barn-door,
	 Stoutly struts his dames before:
	 Oft listening how the hounds and horn
	 Cheerly rouse the slumbering Morn,
	 From the side of some hoar hill,
	 Through the high wood echoing shrill.
	 Sometime walking, not unseen,
	 By hedgerow elms, on hillocks green,
	 Right against the eastern gate,
	 Where the great Sun begins his state,
	 Robed in flames and amber light,
	 The clouds in thousand liveries dight;
	 While the ploughman, near at hand,
	 Whistles o’er the furrowed land,
	 And the milkmaid singeth blithe,
	 And the mower whets his scythe,
	 And every shepherd tells his tale,
	 Under the hawthorn in the dale.
	 Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures,
	 Whilst the landscape round it measures;
	 Russet lawns, and fallows gray,
	 Where the nibbling flocks do stray,
	 Mountains on whose barren breast
	 The labouring clouds do often rest,
	 Meadows trim with daisies pied,
	 Shallow brooks, and rivers wide,
	 Towers and battlements it sees,
	 Bosomed high in tufted trees,
	 Where perhaps some Beauty lies,
	 The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes.
	 Hard by a cottage-chimney smokes
	 From betwixt two aged oaks,
	 Where Corydon and Thyrsis, met,
	 Are at their savoury dinner set
	 Of herbs and other country messes,
	 Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses;
	 And then in haste her bower she leaves,
	 With Thestylis to bind the sheaves;
	 Or, if the earlier season lead,
	 To the tanned haycock in the mead.
	   Sometimes, with secure delight,
	 The upland hamlets will invite,
	 When the merry bells ring round,
	 And the jocund rebecks sound,
	 To many a youth and many a maid,
	 Dancing in the chequered shade,
	 And young and old come forth to play
	 On a sunshine holiday,
	 Till the live-long daylight fail;
	 Then to the spicy nut-brown ale,
	 With stories told of many a feat,
	 How faery Mab the junkets eat;
	 She was pinched and pulled, she said;
	 And he, by Friar’s lantern led,
	 Tells how the drudging goblin sweat,
	 To earn his cream-bowl duly set,
	 When in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
	 His shadowy flail hath threshed the corn
	 That ten day-labourers could not end;
	 Then lies him down, the lubber-fiend,
	 And, stretched out all the chimney’s length,
	 Basks at the fire his hairy strength,
	 And crop-full out of doors he flings,
	 Ere the first cock his matin rings.
	 Thus done the tales, to bed they creep,
	 By whispering winds soon lulled asleep.
	   Towered cities please us then,
	 And the busy hum of men,
	 Where throngs of knights and barons bold,
	 In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold,
	 With store of ladies, whose bright eyes
	 Rain influence, and judge the prize
	 Of wit or arms, while both contend
	 To win her grace, whom all commend.
	 There let Hymen oft appear
	 In saffron robe, with taper clear,
	 And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
	 With mask and antique pageantry;
	 Such sights as youthful poets dream,
	 On summer-eves by haunted stream.
	 Then to the well-trod stage anon,
	 If Jonson’s learned sock be on,
	 Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy’s child,
	 Warble his native wood-notes wild.
	   And ever, against eating cares,
	 Lap me in soft Lydian airs,
	 Married to immortal verse,
	 Such as the meeting soul may pierce,
	 In notes with many a winding bout
	 Of linked sweetness long drawn out,
	 With wanton heed and giddy cunning
	 The melting voice through mazes running
	 Untwisting all the chains that tie
	 The hidden soul of harmony;
	 That Orpheus’ self may heave his head,
	 From golden slumber on a bed
	 Of heaped Elysian flowers, and hear
	 Such strains as would have won the ear
	 Of Pluto, to have quite set free
	 His half-regained Eurydicè.
	   These delights if thou canst give,
	 Mirth, with thee I mean to live.


6. ON HIS BLINDNESS

	When I consider how my light is spent
	 Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
	 And that one talent, which is death to hide,
	 Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent
	To serve therewith my Maker, and present
	 My true account, lest He, returning, chide;
	 ‘Doth God exact day-labour, light denied?’
	 I fondly ask. But Patience, to prevent
	That murmur, soon replies: ‘God doth not need
	 Either man’s work or his own gifts. Who best
	 Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state
	Is kingly. Thousands, at his bidding, speed
	 And post o’er land and ocean, without rest;
	 They also serve who only stand and wait.’


7. ON THE LATE MASSACRE IN PIEDMONT

	Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughter’d saints, whose bones
	      Lie scatter’d on the Alpine mountains cold,
	      Ev’n them who kept thy truth so pure of old,
	      When all our fathers worshipp’d stocks and stones;
	Forget not: in thy book record their groans
	      Who were thy sheep and in their ancient fold
	      Slain by the bloody Piemontese that roll’d
	      Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans
	The vales redoubl’d to the hills, and they
	      To Heav’n. Their martyr’d blood and ashes sow
	      O’er all th’ Italian fields where still doth sway
	The triple tyrant; that from these may grow
	      A hundred-fold, who having learnt thy way
	Early may fly the Babylonian woe.


8. ON THE MORNING OF CHRIST’S NATIVITY

	I
	
	 This is the month, and this the happy morn,
	   Wherein the Son of Heaven’s eternal King,
	 Of wedded Maid and Virgin-Mother born,
	   Our great redemption from above did bring;
	   For so the holy sages once did sing,
	 That he our deadly forfeit should release,
	And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.
	
	
	II
	
	 That glorious form, that light unsufferable,
	   And that far-beaming blaze of majesty,
	 Wherewith he wont at Heaven’s high council-table
	   To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
	   He laid aside; and, here with us to be,
	 Forsook the courts of everlasting day,
	And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay.
	
	
	III
	
	 Say, heavenly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein
	   Afford a present to the Infant God?
	 Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain,
	   To welcome him to this his new abode,
	   Now, while the heaven, by the Sun’s team untrod,
	 Hath took no print of the approaching light,
	And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?
	
	
	IV
	
	 See how from far upon the eastern road
	   The star-led wizards haste with odours sweet!
	 Oh! run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
	   And lay it lowly at his blessed feet;
	   Have thou the honour first thy Lord to greet,
	 And join thy voice unto the angel quire,
	From out his secret altar touched with hallowed fire.


9. WHEN I CONSIDER HOW MY LIGHT IS SPENT

	When I consider how my light is spent,
	  Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
	  And that one Talent which is death to hide
	  Lodged with me useless, though my Soul more bent
	To serve therewith my Maker, and present
	  My true account, lest he returning chide;
	  “Doth God exact day-labour, light denied?”
	  I fondly ask. But patience, to prevent
	That murmur, soon replies, “God doth not need
	  Either man’s work or his own gifts; who best
	  Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state
	Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed
	  And post o’er Land and Ocean without rest:
	  They also serve who only stand and wait.”