*** Edwin Muir (1887 - 1959)


1. ABRAHAM

	The rivulet-loving wanderer Abraham
	Through waterless wastes tracing his fields of pasture
	Led his Chaldean herds and fattening flocks
	With the meandering art of wavering water
	That seeks and finds, yet does not know its way.
	He came, rested and prospered, and went on,
	Scattering behind him little pastoral kingdoms,
	And over each one its own particular sky,
	Not the great rounded sky through which he journeyed,
	That went with him but when he rested changed.
	His mind was full of names
	Learned from strange peoples speaking alien tongues,
	And all that was theirs one day he would inherit.
	He died content and full of years, though still
	The Promise had not come, and left his bones,
	Far from his father’s house, in alien Canaan.



2. THE CASTLE

	All through that summer at ease we lay,
	And daily from the turret wall
	We watched the mowers in the hay
	And the enemy half a mile away
	They seemed no threat to us at all.

	For what, we thought, had we to fear
	With our arms and provender, load on load,
	Our towering battlements, tier on tier,
	And friendly allies drawing near
	On every leafy summer road.

	Our gates were strong, our walls were thick,
	So smooth and high, no man could win
	A foothold there, no clever trick
	Could take us, have us dead or quick.
	Only a bird could have got in.

	What could they offer us for bait?
	Our captain was brave and we were true . . .
	There was a little private gate,
	A little wicked wicket gate.
	The wizened warder let them through.

	Oh then our maze of tunneled stone
	Grew thin and treacherous as air.
	The cause was lost without a groan,
	The famous citadel overthrown,
	And all its secret galleries bare.

	How can this shameful tale be told?
	I will maintain until my death
	We could do nothing, being sold;
	Our only enemy was gold,
	And we had no arms to fight it with.



3. THE COMBAT

	It was not meant for human eyes,
	That combat on the shabby patch
	Of clods and trampled turf that lies
	Somewhere beneath the sodden skies
	For eye of toad or adder to catch.

	And having seen it I accuse
	The crested animal in his pride,
	Arrayed in all the royal hues
	Which hide the claws he well can use
	To tear the heart out of the side.

	Body of leopard, eagle’s head
	And whetted beak, and lion’s mane,
	And frost-grey hedge of feathers spread
	Behind--he seemed of all things bred.
	I shall not see his like again.

	As for his enemy there came in
	A soft round beast as brown as clay;
	All rent and patched his wretched skin;
	A battered bag he might have been,
	Some old used thing to throw away.

	Yet he awaited face to face
	The furious beast and the swift attack.
	Soon over and done. That was no place
	Or time for chivalry or for grace.
	The fury had him on his back.

	And two small paws like hands flew out
	To right and left as the trees stood by.
	One would have said beyond a doubt
	That was the very end of the bout,
	But that the creature would not die.

	For ere the death-stroke he was gone,
	Writhed, whirled, into his den,
	Safe somehow there. The fight was done,
	And he had lost who had all but won.
	But oh his deadly fury then.

	A while the place lay blank, forlorn,
	Drowsing as in relief from pain.
	The cricket chirped, the grating thorn
	Stirred, and a little sound was born.
	The champions took their posts again.

	And all began. The stealthy paw
	Slashed out and in. Could nothing save
	These rags and tatters from the claw?
	Nothing. And yet I never saw
	A beast so helpless and so brave.

	And now, while the trees stand watching, still
	The unequal battle rages there.
	The killing beast that cannot kill
	Swells and swells in his fury till
	You’d almost think it was despair.



4. THE DYING CHILD

	Unfriendly friendly universe,
	I pack your stars into my purse,
	And bid you so farewell.
	That I can leave you, quite go out,
	Go out, go out beyond all doubt,
	My father says, is the miracle.

	You are so great, and I so small:
	I am nothing, you are all:
	Being nothing, I can take this way.
	Oh I need neither rise nor fall,
	For when I do not move at all
	I shall be out of all your day.

	It’s said some memory will remain
	In the other place, grass in the rain,
	Light on the land, sun on the sea,
	A flitting grace, a phantom face,
	But the world is out. There is not place
	Where it and its ghost can ever be.

	Father, father, I dread this air
	Blown from the far side of despair
	The cold cold corner. What house, what hold,
	What hand is there? I look and see
	Nothing-filled eternity,
	And the great round world grows weak and old.

	Hold my hand, oh hold it fast--
	I am changing!--until at last
	My hand in yours no more will change,
	Though yours change on. You here, I there,
	So hand in hand, twin-leafed despair--
	I did not know death was so strange.



5. THE FATHERS

	Our fathers all were poor,
	Poorer our fathers’ fathers;
	Beyond, we dare not look.
	We, the sons, keep store
	Of tarnished gold that gathers
	Around us from the night,
	Record it in this book
	That, when the line is drawn,
	Credit and creditor gone,
	Column and figure flown,
	Will open into light.

	Archaic fevers shake
	Our healthy flesh and blood
	Plumped in the passing day
	And fed with pleasant food.
	The fathers’ anger and ache
	Will not, will not away
	And leave the living alone,
	But on our careless brows
	Faintly their furrows engrave
	Like veinings in a stone,
	Breathe in the sunny house
	Nightmare of blackened bone,
	Cellar and choking cave.

	Panics and furies fly
	Through our unhurried veins,
	Heavenly lights and rains
	Purify heart and eye,
	Past agonies purify
	And lay the sullen dust.
	The angers will not away.
	We hold our fathers’ trust,
	Wrong, riches, sorrow and all
	Until they topple and fall,
	And fallen let in the day.



6. THE FINDER FOUND

	Will you, sometime, who have sought so long, and seek
	Still in the slowly darkening searching-ground,
	Catch sight some ordinary month or week
	Of that rare prize you hardly thought you sought--
	The gatherer gathered and the finder found,
	The buyer who would buy all himself well bought--
	And perch in pride in the buyer’s hand, at home,
	And there, the prize, in freedom rest and roam?



7. THE GOOD MAN IN HELL

	If a good man were ever housed in Hell
	By needful error of the qualities,
	Perhaps to prove the rule or shame the devil,
	Or speak the truth only a stranger sees,

	Would he, surrendering quick to obvious hate,
	Fill half eternity with cries and tears,
	Or watch beside Hell’s little wicket gate
	In patience for the first ten thousand years,

	Feeling the curse climb slowly to his throat
	That, uttered, dooms him to rescindless ill,
	Forcing his praying tongue to run by rote,
	Eternity entire before him still?

	Would he at last, grown faithful in his station,
	Kindle a little hope in hopeless Hell,
	And sow among the damned doubts of damnation,
	Since here someone could live, and live well?

	One doubt of evil would bring down such a grace,
	Open such a gate, and Eden could enter in,
	Hell be a place like any other place,
	And love and hate and life and death begin.



8. THE GROVE

	There was no road at all to that high place
	But through the smothering grove,
	Where as we went the shadows wove
	Adulterous shapes of animal hate and love,
	The idol crowded nightmare Space,
	Wood beyond wood, tree behind tree,
	And every tree an empty face
	Gashed by the zigzag lightning mark
	The first great Luciferian animal
	Scored on clay and leaf and bark.
	This was, we knew, the heraldic ground,
	And therefore now we heard our footsteps fall
	With the true legendary sound,
	Like secret trampling behind a wall,
	As if they were saying: To be, to be.

	And oh, the silence, the drugged thicket dozing
	Deep in its dream of fear,
	The ring closing
	And coming near,
	The well-bred self-sufficient animals
	With clean rank pelts and proud and fetid breath,
	Screaming their arrogant calls,
	Their moonstone eyes set straight at life and death.
	Did we see or dream it? And the jungle cities--
	For there were cities there and civilizations,
	Deep in the forest; powers and dominations
	Like shapes created by dreaming animals,
	Proud animal’s dreams uplifted high,
	Booted and saddled on the animal’s back
	And staring with the arrogant animal’s eye:
	The golden dukes, the silver earls, and gleaming black
	The curetting knights sitting their curetting steeds,
	The sweet silk-tunicked eunuchs singing ditties,
	Swaying like wandering weeds,
	The scarlet cardinals,
	And lions high in the air on the banner’s field,
	Crowns, sceptres, spears and stars and moons of blood,
	And sylvan wars in bronze within the shield,
	All quartered in the wide world’s wood.
	The smothering grove where there was place for pities.

	We trod the maze like horses in a mill
	And then passed through it
	As in a dream of the will.
	How could it be? There was the stifling grove,
	Yet here was light; what wonder led us to it?
	How could the blind road go
	To climb the crag and top the towering hill
	And all that splendor spread? We only know
	There was no road except the smothering grove.



9. THE HORSES

	Barely a twelvemonth after
	The seven days war that put the world to sleep,
	Late in the evening the strange horses came.
	By then we had made our covenant with silence,
	But in the first few days it was so still
	We listened to our breathing and were afraid.
	On the second day
	The radios failed; we turned the knobs; no answer.
	On the third day a warship passed us, heading north,
	Dead bodies piled on the deck. On the sixth day
	A plane plunged over us into the sea. Thereafter
	Nothing. The radios dumb;
	And still they stand in corners of our kitchens,
	And stand, perhaps, turned on, in a million rooms
	All over the world. But now if they should speak,
	If on a sudden they should speak again,
	If on the stroke of noon a voice should speak,
	We would not listen, we would not let it bring
	That old bad world that swallowed its children quick
	At one great gulp. We would not have it again.
	Sometimes we think of the nations lying asleep,
	Curled blindly in impenetrable sorrow,
	And then the thought confounds us with its strangeness.
	The tractors lie about our fields; at evening
	They look like dank sea-monsters couched and waiting.
	We leave them where they are and let them rust:
	“They’ll molder away and be like other loam.”
	We make our oxen drag our rusty plows,
	Long laid aside. We have gone back
	Far past our fathers’ land.
	And then, that evening
	Late in the summer the strange horses came.
	We heard a distant tapping on the road,
	A deepening drumming; it stopped, went on again
	And at the corner changed to hollow thunder.
	We saw the heads
	Like a wild wave charging and were afraid.
	We had sold our horses in our fathers’ time
	To buy new tractors. Now they were strange to us
	As fabulous steeds set on an ancient shield.
	Or illustrations in a book of knights.
	We did not dare go near them. Yet they waited,
	Stubborn and shy, as if they had been sent
	By an old command to find our whereabouts
	And that long-lost archaic companionship.
	In the first moment we had never a thought
	That they were creatures to be owned and used.
	Among them were some half a dozen colts
	Dropped in some wilderness of the broken world,
	Yet new as if they had come from their own Eden.
	Since then they have pulled our plows and borne our loads,
	But that free servitude still can pierce our hearts.
	Our life is changed; their coming our beginning.



10. IN LOVE FOR LONG

	I’ve been in love for long
	With what I cannot tell
	And will contrive a song
	For the intangible
	That has no mould or shape,
	From which there’s no escape.

	It is not even a name,
	Yet is all constancy;
	Tried or untried, the same,
	It cannot part from me;
	A breath, yet as still
	As the established hill.

	It is not any thing,
	And yet all being is;
	Being, being, being,
	Its burden and its bliss.
	How can I ever prove
	What it is I love?

	This happy happy love
	Is sieged with crying sorrows,
	Crushed beneath and above
	Between todays and morrows;
	A little paradise
	Held in the world’s vice.

	And there it is content
	And careless as a child,
	And in imprisonment
	Flourishes sweet and wild;
	In wrong, beyond wrong,
	All the world’s day long.

	This love a moment known
	For what I do not know
	And in a moment gone
	Is like the happy doe
	That keeps its perfect laws
	Between the tiger’s paws
	And vindicates its cause.



11. THE INCARNATE ONE

	The windless northern surge, the sea-gull’s scream,
	And Calvin’s kirk crowning the barren brae.
	I think of Giotto the Tuscan shepherd’s dream,
	Christ, man and creature in their inner day.
	How could our race betray
	The Image, and the Incarnate One unmake
	Who chose this form and fashion for our sake?

	The Word made flesh here is made word again
	A word made word in flourish and arrogant crook.
	See there King Calvin with his iron pen,
	And God three angry letters in a book,
	And there the logical hook
	On which the Mystery is impaled and bent
	Into an ideological argument.

	There’s better gospel in man’s natural tongue,
	And truer sight was theirs outside the Law
	Who saw the far side of the Cross among
	The archaic peoples in their ancient awe,
	In ignorant wonder saw
	The wooden cross-tree on the bare hillside,
	Not knowing that there a God suffered and died.

	The fleshless word, growing, will bring us down,
	Pagan and Christian man alike will fall,
	The auguries say, the white and black and brown,
	The merry and the sad, theorist, lover, all
	Invisibly will fall:
	Abstract calamity, save for those who can
	Build their cold empire on the abstract man.

	A soft breeze stirs and all my thoughts are blown
	Far out to sea and lost. Yet I know well
	The bloodless word will battle for its own
	Invisibly in brain and nerve and cell.
	The generations tell
	Their personal tale: the One has far to go
	Past the mirages and the murdering snow.



12. POEM

	O I have seen the heaven of good deeds spread
	With its own sky above it
	A length away
	My whole day,
	Yet have not crossed from the ungathered dead.
	I could have leapt straight from the womb to bliss
	And never lost it after,
	Been cradled, baptized, bred in that which is
	And never known this frontier laughter,
	But that I hate this place so much,
	And hating love it,
	And that my weakness is such
	That it must clutch
	All weakness to it and can never release
	The bound and battling hands,
	The one hand bound, the other smiting
	The fellow-foe it’s tied to, fighting
	Weakness with weakness, rending, righting
	The torn and incorruptible bands
	That bind all these united and disunited lands
	While there lies my predestined power and ease,
	There, in those natural fields, life-fostering seas.

	If I could be more weak
	Than weakness’ self, if I could break
	This static clinch with a mere blank, with nothing,
	If I could take
	Memory and longing
	Up by the roots and cast them behind my back,
	If I could stop this endless ringing and singing
	That keeps my fingers flying in hate and love,
	If I could cut off,
	If I could unmake
	What I was made to make:

	But that I then should lose
	My loss,
	My kingdom’s crown,
	And to great Nothing toss
	My last left jewel down,
	The light that long before me was,
	The land I did not own,
	The choice I could not choose.
	For once I played upon that other hill,
	And from that house I come.
	There is a line around it still,
	And all inside is home.
	Once there I pored on every stone and tree
	In a long dream through the unsetting day,
	And looking up could nothing see
	But the right way on every way.
	And lost it after,
	No foot knows where,
	To find this mourning air,
	Commemorative laughter,
	The mask, the doom
	Written backwards,
	The illegible tomb
	Pointing backwards,
	The reverse side
	Where strength is weakness,
	The body, pride,
	The soul, a sickness.
	Yet from that missing heaven outspread,
	Forgotten and unforgotten,
	Begotten and unbegotten,
	Here all I read.



13. THE RECURRENCE

	All things return, Nietzsche said,
	The ancient wheel revolves again,
	Rise, take up your numbered fate;
	The cradle and the bridal bed,
	Life and the coffin wait.
	All has been that ever can be
	And this sole eternity
	Cannot alter, cannot add
	One to your delights and tears,
	Or a million million years
	Tear the nightmare from the mad.

	Have no fear then. You will miss
	Achievement by the selfsame inch,
	When the great occasion comes
	And they watch you you will finch,
	Lose the moment, be for bliss
	A footlength short. All done before.
	Love’s agonies, victory’s drums
	Will not huddle the Cross away,
	Planted on its future hill
	The secret on the appointed day
	Will be made known, the ship once more
	Hit against the waiting rock
	Or come safely to the shore,
	Careless under the deadly tree
	The victim drowse, the urgent warning
	Come too late, the dagger strike,
	Strike and strike through eternity,
	And world’s hence the prison clock
	Will toll on execution morning,
	What is ill be always ill,
	Wretches die behind a dike,
	And the happy be happy still.

	But the heart makes reply:
	This is only what the eye
	From its tower on the turning field
	Sees and sees and cannot tell why,
	Quarterings on the turning shield,
	The great non-stop heraldic show.
	And the heart and the mind know,
	What has been can never return,
	What is not will surely be
	In the changed unchanging reign,
	Else the Actor on the Tree
	Would loll at ease, miming pain,
	And counterfeit mortality.



14. SCOTLAND’S WINTER

	Now the ice lays its smooth claws on the sill,
	The sun looks from the hill
	Helmed in his winter casket,
	And sweeps his arctic sword across the sky.
	The water at the mill
	Sounds more hoarse and dull.
	The miller’s daughter walking by
	With frozen fingers soldered to her basket
	Seems to be knocking
	Upon a hundred leagues of floor
	With her light heels, and mocking
	Percy and Douglas dead,
	And Bruce on his burial bed,
	Where he lies white as may
	With wars and leprosy,
	And all the kings before
	This land was kingless,
	And all the singers before
	This land was songless,
	This land that with its dead and living waits the Judgement Day.
	But they, the powerless dead,
	Listening can hear no more
	Than a hard tapping on the floor
	A little overhead
	Of common heels that do not know
	Whence they come or where they go
	And are content
	With their poor frozen life and shallow banishment.



15. THEN

	There were no men and women then at all
	But the flesh lying alone,
	And angry shadows fighting on a wall
	Which now and then sent out a groan
	Stifled in lime and stone,
	And sweated now and then like tortured wood
	Big drops that looked yet did not look like blood.

	And yet as each drop came a shadow faded
	And left the wall
	There was a lull
	Until another in its shadow arrayed it,
	Came, fought and left a blood-mark on the wall.
	And that was all; the blood was all.

	If women had been there they might have wept
	For the poor blood, unowned, unwanted,
	Blank as forgotten script.
	The wall was haunted
	By mute maternal presences whose sighing
	Fluttered the fighting shadows and shook the wall
	As if that fury of death itself were dying.



16. TO THE OLD GODS

	Old gods and goddesses who have lived so long
	Through time and never found eternity,
	Fettered by wasting wood and hollowing hill,

	You should have fled our ever-dying song,
	The mound, the well, and the green trysting tree.
	They have forgotten, yet you linger still.

	Goddess of caverned breast and channeled brow,
	And cheeks slow hollowed by millennial tears,
	Forests of autumns fading in your eyes,

	Eternity marvels at your counted years
	And kingdoms lost in time, and wonders how
	There could be thoughts so bountiful and wise

	As yours beneath the ever-breaking bough,
	And vast compassion curving like the skies.



17. THE TROPHY

	The wise king dowered with blessings on his throne,
	The rebel raising the flag in the market place,
	Haunt me like figures on an ancient stone
	The ponderous light of history beats upon,
	Or the enigma of a single face
	Handed unguessed, unread, from father to son,
	As if it dreamt within itself alone.

	Regent and rebel clash in horror and blood
	Here on the blindfold battlefield. But there,
	Motionless in the grove of evil and good,
	They grow together and their roots are twined
	In deep confederacy far from the air,
	Sharing the secret trophy each with other;
	And king and rebel are like brother and brother,
	Or father and son, co-princes of one mind,
	Irreconcilables, their treaty signed.
