*** Les Murray (1938 - 2019)


1. AURORA PRONE

	The lemon sunlight poured out far between things
	inhabits a coolness. Mosquitoes have subsided,
	flies are for later heat.
	Every tree’s an auburn giant with a dazzled face
	and the back of its head to an infinite dusk road.
	Twilights broaden away from our feet too
	as rabbits bounce home up defiles in the grass.
	Everything widens with distance, in this perspective.
	The dog’s paws, trotting, rotate his end of infinity
	and dam water feels a shiver few willow drapes share.
	Bright leaks through their wigwam re-purple the skinny beans
	then rapidly the light tops treetops and is shortened
	into a day. Everywhere stands pat beside its shadow
	for the great bald radiance never seen in dreams.


2. THE DREAM OF WEARING SHORTS FOREVER

	To go home and wear shorts forever
	in the enormous paddocks, in that warm climate,
	adding a sweater when winter soaks the grass,
	
	to camp out along the river bends
	for good, wearing shorts, with a pocketknife,
	a fishing line and matches,
	
	or there where the hills are all down, below the plain,
	to sit around in shorts at evening
	on the plank verandah;
	
	If the cardinal points of costume
	are Robes, Tat, Rig and Scunge,
	where are shorts in this compass?
	
	They are never Robes
	as other bareleg outfits have been:
	the toga, the kilt, the lava-lava
	the Mahatma’s cotton dhoti;
	
	archbishops and field marshals
	at their ceremonies never wear shorts.
	The very word
	means underpants in North America.
	
	Shorts can be Tat,
	Land-Rovering bush-environmental tat,
	socio-political ripped-and-metal-stapled tat,
	solidarity-with-the-Third World tat tvam asi,
	
	likewise track-and-field shorts worn to parties
	and the further humid, modelling negligee
	of the Kingdom of Flaunt,
	that unchallenged aristocracy.
	
	More plainly climatic, shorts
	are farmers’ rig, leathery with salt and bonemeal;
	are sailors’ and branch bankers’ rig,
	the crisp golfing style
	of our youngest male National Costume.
	
	Most loosely, they are Scunge,
	ancient Bengal bloomers or moth-eaten hot pants
	worn with a former shirt,
	feet, beach sand, hair
	and a paucity of signals.
	
	Scunge, which is real negligee
	housework in a swimsuit, pyjamas worn all day,
	is holiday, is freedom from ambition.
	Scunge makes you invisible
	to the world and yourself.
	
	The entropy of costume,
	scunge can get you conquered by more vigorous cultures
	and help you notice it less.
	
	To be or to become
	is a serious question posed by a work-shorts counter
	with its pressed stack, bulk khaki and blue,
	reading Yakka or King Gee, crisp with steely warehouse odour.
	
	Satisfied ambition, defeat, true unconcern,
	the wish and the knack of self-forgetfulness
	all fall within the scunge ambit
	wearing board shorts of similar;
	it is a kind of weightlessness.
	
	Unlike public nakedness, which in Westerners
	is deeply circumstantial, relaxed as exam time,
	artless and equal as the corsetry of a hussar regiment,
	
	shorts and their plain like
	are an angelic nudity,
	spirituality with pockets!
	A double updraft as you drop from branch to pool!
	
	Ideal for getting served last
	in shops of the temperate zone
	they are also ideal for going home, into space,
	into time, to farm the mind’s Sabine acres
	for product and subsistence.
	
	Now that everyone who yearned to wear long pants
	has essentially achieved them,
	long pants, which have themselves been underwear
	repeatedly, and underground more than once,
	it is time perhaps to cherish the culture of shorts,
	
	to moderate grim vigour
	with the knobble of bare knees,
	to cool bareknuckle feet in inland water,
	slapping flies with a book on solar wind
	or a patient bare hand, beneath the cadjiput trees,
	
	to be walking meditatively
	among green timber, through the grassy forest
	towards a calm sea
	and looking across to more of that great island
	and the further tropics.


3. FLOWERING EUCALYPT IN AUTUMN

	That slim creek out of the sky
	the dried-blood western gum tree
	is all stir in its high reaches:
	
	its strung haze-blue foliage is dancing
	points down in breezy mobs, swapping
	pace and place in an all-over sway
	
	retarded en masse by crimson blossom.
	Bees still at work up there tack
	around their exploded furry likeness
	
	and the lawn underneath’s a napped rug
	of eyelash drift, of blooms flared
	like a sneeze in a redhaired nostril,
	
	minute urns, pinch-sized rockets
	knocked down by winds, by night-creaking
	fig-squirting bats, or the daily
	
	parrot gang with green pocketknife wings.
	Bristling food tough delicate
	raucous life, each flower comes
	
	as a spray in its own turned vase,
	a taut starbust, honeyed model
	of the tree’s fragrance crisping in your head.
	
	When the japanese plum tree
	was shedding in spring, we speculated
	there among the drizzling petals
	
	what kind of exquisitely precious
	artistic bloom might be gendered
	in a pure ethereal compost
	
	of petals potted as they fell.
	From unpetalled gun-debris
	we know what is grown continually,
	
	a tower of fabulous swish tatters,
	a map hoisted upright, a crusted
	riverbed with up-country show towns.


4. THE MEANING OF EXISTENCE

	Everything except language
	knows the meaning of existence.
	Trees, planets, rivers, time
	know nothing else. They express it
	moment by moment as the universe.
	Even this fool of a body
	lives it in part, and would
	have full dignity within it
	but for the ignorant freedom
	of my talking mind.


5. ON THE BORDERS

	We’re driving across tableland
	somewhere in the world;
	it is almost bare of trees.
	
	Upland near void of features
	always moves me, but not to thought;
	it lets me rest from thinking.
	
	I feel no need to interpret it
	as if it were art. Too much
	of poetry is criticism now.
	
	That hawk, clinging to
	the eaves of the wind, beating
	its third wing, its tail
	
	isn’t mine to sell. And here is
	more like the space that needs
	to exist around an image.
	
	This cloud-roof country reminds me
	of the character of people
	who first encountered roses in soap.


6. PERFORMANCE

	I starred that night, I shone:
	I was footwork and firework in one,
	
	a rocket that wriggled up and shot
	darkness with a parasol of brilliants
	and a peewee descant on a flung bit;
	I was blusters of glitter-bombs expanding
	to mantle and aurora from a crown,
	I was fouéttes, falls of blazing paint,
	para-flares spot-welding cloudy heaven,
	loose gold off fierce toeholds of white,
	a finale red-tongued as a haka leap:
	that too was a butt of all right!
	
	As usual after any triumph, I was
	of course, inconsolable.


7. PREDAWN IN HEALTH

	The stars are filtering through a tree
	outside in the moon’s silent era.
	
	Reality is moving layer over layer
	like crystal spheres now called laws.
	
	The future is right behind your head;
	just over all horizons is the past.
	
	The soul sits looking at its offer.


8. THE QUALITY OF SPRAWL

	Sprawl is the quality
	of the man who cut down his Rolls-Royce
	into a farm utility truck, and sprawl
	is what the company lacked when it made repeated efforts
	to buy the vehicle back and repair its image.
	
	Sprawl is doing your farm work by aeroplane, roughly,
	or driving a hitchhiker that extra hundred miles home.
	It is the rococo of being your own still centre.
	It is never lighting cigars with ten dollar notes:
	that’s idiot ostentation and murder of starving people.
	Nor can it be bought with the ash of million dollar deeds.
	
	Sprawl lengthens the legs; it trains greyhounds on liver and beer.
	Sprawl almost never says, Why not?, with palms comically raised
	nor can it be dressed for, not even in running shoes worn
	with mink and a nose ring. That is Society. That’s Style.
	Sprawl is more like the thirteenth banana in a dozen
	or anyway the fourteenth.
	
	Sprawl is Hank Stamper in Never Give an Inch
	bisecting an obstructive official’s desk with a chain saw.
	Not harming the official. Sprawl is never brutal,
	though it’s often intransigent. Sprawl is never Simon de Montfort
	at a town-storming: Kill them all! God will know His own.
	Knowing the man’s name this was said to might be sprawl.
	
	Sprawl occurs in art. The fifteenth to twenty-first
	lines in a sonnet, for example. And in certain paintings.
	I have sprawl enough to have forgotten which paintings.
	Turner’s glorious Burning of the Houses of Parliament
	comes to mind, a doubling bannered triumph of sprawl -
	except he didn’t fire them.
	
	Sprawl gets up the noses of many kinds of people
	(every kind that comes in kinds) whose futures don’t include it.
	Some decry it as criminal presumption, silken-robed Pope Alexander
	dividing the new world between Spain and Portugal.
	If he smiled in petto afterwards, perhaps the thing did have sprawl.
	
	Sprawl is really classless, though. It is John Christopher Frederick Murray
	asleep in his neighbours’ best bed in spurs and oilskins,
	but not having thrown up:
	sprawl is never Calum, who, in the loud hallway of our house
	reinvented the Festoon. Rather
	it’s Beatrice Miles going twelve hundred ditto in a taxi,
	No Lewd Advances, no Hitting Animals, no Speeding,
	on the proceeds of her two-bob-a-sonnet Shakespeare readings.
	An image of my country. And would thatit were more so.
	
	No, sprawl is full gloss murals on a council-house wall.
	Sprawl leans on things. It is loose-limbed in its mind.
	Reprimanded and dismissed,
	it listens with a grin and one boot up on the rail
	of possibility. It may have to leave the Earth.
	Being roughly Christian, it scratches the other cheek
	And thinks it unlikely. Though people have been shot for sprawl.