*** Alfred Noyes (1880 - 1958)


1. ART

	I
	
	Yes! Beauty still rebels!
	Our dreams like clouds disperse:
	 She dwells
	In agate, marble, verse.
	
	No false constraint be thine!
	But, for right walking, choose
	 The fine,
	The strict cothurnus, Muse.
	
	Vainly ye seek to escape
	The toil! The yielding phrase
	 Ye shape
	Is clay, not chrysoprase.
	
	And all in vain ye scorn
	That seeming ease which ne’er
	 Was born
	Of aught but love and care.
	
	Take up the sculptor’s tool!
	Recall the gods that die
	 To rule
	In Parian o’er the sky.
	
	For Beauty still rebels!
	Our dreams like clouds disperse:
	 She dwells
	In agate, marble, verse.
	
	
	II
	
	When Beauty from the sea,
	With breasts of whiter rose
	 Than we
	Behold on earth, arose.
	
	Naked thro’ Time returned
	The Bliss of Heaven that day,
	 And burned
	The dross of earth away.
	
	Kings at her splendour quailed.
	For all his triple steel
	 She haled
	War at her chariot-wheel.
	
	The rose and lily bowed
	To cast, of odour sweet
	 A cloud
	Before her wandering feet.
	
	And from her radiant eyes
	There shone on soul and sense
	 The skies’
	Divine indifference.
	
	O, mortal memory fond!
	Slowly she passed away
	 Beyond
	The curling clouds of day.
	
	_Return_, we cry, _return_,
	Till in the sadder light
	 We learn
	That she was infinite.
	
	The Dream that from the sea
	With breasts of whiter rose
	 Than we
	Behold on earth, arose.
	
	
	III
	
	Take up the sculptor’s tool!
	Becall the dreams that die
	 To rule
	In Parian o’er the sky;
	And kings that not endure
	In bronze to re-ascend
	 Secure
	Until the world shall end.
	
	Poet, let passion sleep
	Till with the cosmic rhyme
	 You keep
	Eternal tone and time,
	
	By rule of hour and flower,
	By strength of stern restraint
	 And power
	To fail and not to faint.
	
	The task is hard to learn
	While all the songs of Spring
	 Return
	Along the blood and sing.
	
	Yet hear--from her deep skies,
	How Art, for all your pain,
	 Still cries
	_Ye must be born again!_
	
	Reject the wreath of rose,
	Take up the crown of thorn
	 That shows
	To-night a child is born.
	
	The far immortal face
	In chosen onyx fine
	 Enchase,
	Delicate line by line.
	
	Strive with Carrara, fight
	With Parian, till there steal
	 To light
	Apollo’s pure profile.
	
	Set the great lucid form
	Free from its marble tomb
	 To storm
	The heights of death and doom.
	
	Take up the sculptor’s tool!
	Recall the gods that die
	 To rule
	In Parian o’er the sky,



2. ART, THE HERALD

	_“The voice of one crying in the wilderness”_
	
	
	I
	
	Beyond; beyond; and yet again beyond!
	What went ye out to seek, oh foolish-fond?
	 Is not the heart of all things here and now?
	Is not the circle infinite, and the centre
	Everywhere, if ye would but hear and enter?
	 Come; the porch bends and the great pillars bow.
	
	
	II
	
	Come; come and see the secret of the sun;
	The sorrow that holds the warring worlds in one;
	 The pain that holds Eternity in an hour;
	One God in every seed self-sacrificed,
	One star-eyed, star-crowned universal Christ,
	 Re-crucified in every wayside flower.



3. AT DAWN

	O Hesper-Phosphor, far away
	    Shining, the first, the last white star,
	Hear’st thou the strange, the ghostly cry,
	That moan of an ancient agony
	From purple forest to golden sky
	    Shivering over the breathless bay?
	It is not the wind that wakes with the day;
	    For see, the gulls that wheel and call,
	    Beyond the tumbling white-topped bar,
	Catching the sun-dawn on their wings,
	    Like snow-flakes or like rose-leaves fall,
	Flutter and fall in airy rings;
	    And drift, like lilies ruffling into blossom
	   Upon a golden lake’s unwrinkled bosom.
	
	Are not the forest’s deep-lashed fringes wet
	With tears? Is not the voice of all regret
	    Breaking out of the dark earth’s heart?
	She too, she too, has loved and lost; and we--
	We that remember our lost Arcady,
	Have we not known, we too,
	The primal greenwood’s arch of blue,
	The radiant clouds at sunrise curled
	Around the brows of the golden world;
	The marble temples, washed with dew,
	To which with rosy limbs aflame
	The violet-eyed Thalassian came,
	Came pitiless, only to display
	How soon the youthful splendour dies away;
	    Came, only to depart
	Laughing across the gray-grown bitter sea?
	For each man’s life is earth’s epitome,
	And though the years bring more than aught they take,
	Yet might his heart and hers well break
	Remembering how one prayer must still be vain,
	    How one fair hope is dead,
	    One passion quenched, one glory fled,
	With those first loves that never come again.
	
	How many, how many generations,
	    Have heard that sigh in the dawn,
	When the dark earth yearns to the unforgotten nations
	    And the old loves withdrawn,
	Old loves, old lovers, wonderful and unnumbered
	    As waves on the wine-dark sea,
	’Neath the tall white towers of Troy and the temples that slumbered;
	    In Thessaly?
	
	From the beautiful palaces, from the miraculous portals,
	    The swift white feet are flown!
	They were taintless of dust, the proud, the peerless Immortals
	    As they sped to their loftier throne!
	Perchance they are there, earth dreams, on the shores of Hesper,
	    Her rosy-bosomed Hours,
	Listening the wild fresh forest’s enchanted whisper,
	    Crowned with its new strange flowers;
	Listening the great new ocean’s triumphant thunder
	    On the stainless unknown shore,
	While that perilous queen of the world’s delight and wonder
	    Comes white from the foam once more.
	
	When the mists divide with the dawn o’er those glittering waters,
	    Do they gaze over unoared seas--
	Naiad and nymph and the woodland’s rose-crowned daughters
	    And the Oceanides?
	Do they sing together, perchance, in that diamond splendour,
	    That world of dawn and dew,
	With eyelids twitching to tears and with eyes grown tender,
	    The sweet old songs they knew,
	The songs of Greece? Ah, with harp-strings mute do they falter
	    As the earth like a small star pales?
	When the heroes launch their ship by the smoking altar
	    Does a memory lure their sails?
	Far, far away, do their hearts resume the story
	    That never on earth was told,
	When all those urgent oars on the waste of glory
	    Cast up its gold?
	
	    _Are not the forest fringes wet
	    With tears? Is not the voice of all regret
	    Breaking out of the dark earth’s heart?
	    She too, she too, has loved and lost; and though
	    She turned last night in disdain
	         Away from the sunset-embers,
	    From her soul she can never depart;
	    She can never depart from her pain.
	    Vainly she strives to forget;
	    Beautiful in her woe,
	         She awakes in the dawn and remembers._



4. THE BARREL-ORGAN

	There’s a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	And the music’s not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
	    And fulfilled it with the sunset glow;
	And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
	    That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light;
	And they’ve given it a glory and a part to play again
	    In the Symphony that rules the day and night.
	
	And now it’s marching onward through the realms of old romance
	    And trolling out a fond familiar tune,
	And now it’s roaring cannon down to fight the King of France,
	    And now it’s prattling softly to the moon,
	And all around the organ there’s a sea without a shore
	    Of human joys and wonders and regrets;
	To remember and to recompense the music evermore
	    For what the cold machinery forgets. . . .
	
	                  Yes; as the music changes,
	                      Like a prismatic glass,
	                  It takes the light and ranges
	                      Through all the moods that pass;
	                  Dissects the common carnival
	                      Of passions and regrets,
	                  And gives the world a glimpse of all
	                      The colours it forgets.
	
	                  And there _La Traviata_ sighs
	                      Another sadder song;
	                  And there _Il Trovatore_ cries
	                      A tale of deeper wrong;
	                  And bolder knights to battle go
	                      With sword and shield and lance,
	                  Than ever here on earth below
	                      Have whirled into--a dance!--
	
	Go down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
	   Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn’t far from London!)
	And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer’s wonderland;
	   Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn’t far from London!)
	
	The cherry-trees are seas of bloom and soft perfume and sweet perfume,
	    The cherry-trees are seas of bloom (and oh, so near to London!)
	And there they say, when dawn is high and all the world’s a blaze of sky      
	    The cuckoo, though he’s very shy, will sing a song for London.
	
	The Dorian nightingale is rare and yet they say you’ll hear him there
	    At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
	The linnet and the throstle, too, and after dark the long halloo
	    And golden-eyed _tu-whit, tu-whoo_, of owls that ogle London.
	
	For Noah hardly knew a bird of any kind that isn’t heard
	    At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
	And when the rose begins to pout and all the chestnut spires are out
	    You’ll hear the rest without a doubt, all chorussing for London:--
	
	_Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
	    Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn’t far from London!)
	And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer’s wonderland;
	    Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn’t far from London!)_
	
	And then the troubadour begins to thrill the golden street,   
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	And in all the gaudy busses there are scores of weary feet
	Making time, sweet time, with a dull mechanic beat,
	And a thousand hearts are plunging to a love they’ll never meet,
	Through the meadows of the sunset, through the poppies and the wheat,      
	    In the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	Verdi, Verdi, when you wrote _Il Trovatore_ did you dream
	    Of the city when the sun sinks low,
	Of the organ and the monkey and the many-coloured stream
	On the Picadilly pavement, of the myriad eyes that seem
	To be litten for a moment with a wild Italian gleam
	As _A che la morte_ parodies the world’s eternal theme
	    And pulses with the sunset-glow.
	
	There’s a thief, perhaps, that listens with a face of frozen stone
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	There’s a portly man of business with a balance of his own,
	There’s a clerk and there’s a butcher of a soft reposeful tone.
	And they’re all of them returning to the heavens they have known:
	They are crammed and jammed in busses and--they’re each of them alone
	    In the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	There’s a very modish woman and her smile is very bland
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	And her hansom jingles onward, but her little jewelled hand
	Is clenched a little tighter and she cannot understand
	What she wants or why she wanders to that undiscovered land,
	For the parties there are not at all the sort of thing she planned,
	    In the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	There’s a rowing man that listens, and his heart is crying out
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	For the barge, the eight, the Isis, and the coach’s whoop and shout,
	For the minute-gun, the counting and the long dishevelled rout,
	For the howl along the tow-path and a fate that’s still in doubt,
	For a roughened oar to handle and a race to think about
	    In the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	There’s a labourer that listens to the voices of the dead
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	And his hand begins to tremble and his face to smoulder red,
	As he sees a loafer watching him and--there he turns his head
	And stares into the sunset where his April love is fled,
	For he hears her softly singing, and his lonely soul is led
	    Through the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	There’s an old and haggard demi-rep, it’s ringing in her ears,
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	With the wild and empty sorrow of the love that blights and sears,
	Oh, and if she hurries onward, then be sure, be sure she hears,
	Hears and bears the bitter burden of the unforgotten years,
	And her laugh’s a little harsher and her eyes are brimmed with tears
	    For the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	There’s a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
	    In the City as the sun sinks low;
	Though the music’s only Verdi there’s a world to make it sweet
	Just as yonder yellow sunset where the earth and heaven meet
	Mellows all the sooty City! Hark, a hundred thousand feet
	Are marching on to glory through the poppies and the wheat
	    In the land where the dead dreams go.
	
	             So it’s Jeremiah, Jeremiah,
	                  What have you to say
	             When you meet the garland girls      
	                  Tripping on their way?
	
	             All around my gala hat
	                  I wear a wreath of roses
	             (A long and lonely year it is
	                  I’ve waited for the May!)
	             If any one should ask you,
	                  The reason why I wear it is--
	             My own love, my true love,
	                   Is coming home to-day.
	
	   And it’s buy a bunch of violets for the lady
	       _(It’s lilac-time in London; It’s lilac-time in London!)_
	   Buy a bunch of violets for the lady
	       While the sky burns blue above:
	
	   On the other side the street you’ll find it shady
	       _(It’s lilac-time in London! It’s lilac-time in London!)_
	   But buy a bunch of violets for the lady,
	       And tell her she’s your own true love.
	
	There’s a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
	    In the City as the sun sinks glittering and slow;
	And the music’s not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
	And enriched it with the harmonies that make a song complete
	In the deeper heavens of music where the night and morning meet,
	    As it dies into the sunset-glow;
	And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
	    That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light,
	And they’ve given it a glory and a part to play again
	    In the Symphony that rules the day and night.
	
	             And there, as the music changes,
	                  The song runs round again.
	             Once more it turns and ranges
	                  Through all its joy and pain,
	             Dissects the common carnival
	                  Of passions and regrets;
	             And the wheeling world remembers all
	                  The wheeling song forgets.
	
	             Once more _La Traviata_ sighs
	                  Another sadder song:
	             Once more _Il Trovatore_ cries
	                  A tale of deeper wrong;
	             Once more the knights to battle go
	                  With sword and shield and lance      
	             Till once, once more, the shattered foe
	                  Has whirled into--_a dance!_
	
	_Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac time;
	    Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn’t far from London!)
	And you shall wander hand and hand with love in summer’s wonderland;
	    Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn’t far from London!)_



5. THE EMPIRE BUILDERS

	Who are the Empire-builders? They
	 Whose desperate arrogance demands
	A self-reflecting power to sway
	 A hundred little selfless lands?
	Lord God of battles, ere we bow
	 To these and to their soulless lust,
	Let fall Thy thunders on us now
	 And strike us equal to the dust.
	
	Before the stars in heaven were made
	 Our great Commander led us forth;
	And now the embattled lines are laid
	 To East, to West, to South, to North;
	According as of old He planned
	 We take our station in the field,
	Nor dare to dream we understand
	 The splendour of the swords we wield.
	
	We know not what the Soul intends
	 That lives and moves behind our deeds;
	We wheel and march to glorious ends
	 Beyond the common soldier’s needs:
	And some are raised to high rewards,
	 And some by regiments are hurled
	To die upon the opposing swords
	 And sleep--forgotten by the world.
	
	And not where navies churn the foam,
	 Nor called to fields of fierce emprize,
	In many a country cottage-home
	 The Empire-builder lives and dies:
	Or through the roaring streets he goes
	 A lean and weary City slave,
	The conqueror of a thousand foes
	 Who walks, unheeded, to his grave.
	
	Leaders unknown of hopes forlorn
	 Go past us in the daily mart,
	With many a shadowy crown of thorn
	 And many a kingly broken heart:
	Though England’s banner overhead
	 Ever the secret signal flew,
	We only see its Cross is red
	 As children see the skies are blue.
	
	For all are Empire-builders here,
	 Whose hearts are true to heaven and home
	And, year by slow revolving year,
	 Fulfil the duties as they come;
	So simple seems the task, and yet
	 Many for this are crucified;
	Ay, and their brother-men forget
	 The simple wounds in palm and side.
	
	But he that to his home is true,
	 Where’er the tides of power may flow,
	Has built a kingdom great and new
	 Which Time nor Fate shall overthrow
	These are the Empire-builders, these
	 Annex where none shall say them nay
	Beyond the world’s uncharted seas
	 Realms that can never pass away.



6. THE HIGHWAYMAN

	I
	
	The wind was a torrent of darkness among the gusty trees.   
	The moon was a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas.   
	The road was a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,   
	And the highwayman came riding--
	         Riding--riding--
	The highwayman came riding, up to the old inn-door.
	
	He’d a French cocked-hat on his forehead, a bunch of lace at his chin,   
	A coat of the claret velvet, and breeches of brown doe-skin.
	They fitted with never a wrinkle. His boots were up to the thigh.   
	And he rode with a jewelled twinkle,
	         His pistol butts a-twinkle,
	His rapier hilt a-twinkle, under the jewelled sky.
	
	Over the cobbles he clattered and clashed in the dark inn-yard.
	He tapped with his whip on the shutters, but all was locked and barred.   
	He whistled a tune to the window, and who should be waiting there   
	But the landlord’s black-eyed daughter,
	         Bess, the landlord’s daughter,
	Plaiting a dark red love-knot into her long black hair.
	
	And dark in the dark old inn-yard a stable-wicket creaked
	Where Tim the ostler listened. His face was white and peaked.   
	His eyes were hollows of madness, his hair like mouldy hay,   
	But he loved the landlord’s daughter,
	         The landlord’s red-lipped daughter.
	Dumb as a dog he listened, and he heard the robber say--
	
	“One kiss, my bonny sweetheart, I’m after a prize to-night,
	But I shall be back with the yellow gold before the morning light;
	Yet, if they press me sharply, and harry me through the day,   
	Then look for me by moonlight,
	         Watch for me by moonlight,
	I’ll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way.”
	
	He rose upright in the stirrups. He scarce could reach her hand,
	But she loosened her hair in the casement. His face burnt like a brand
	As the black cascade of perfume came tumbling over his breast;   
	And he kissed its waves in the moonlight,
	         (O, sweet black waves in the moonlight!)
	Then he tugged at his rein in the moonlight, and galloped away to the west.
	
	
	II
	
	He did not come in the dawning. He did not come at noon;   
	And out of the tawny sunset, before the rise of the moon,   
	When the road was a gypsy’s ribbon, looping the purple moor,   
	A red-coat troop came marching--
	         Marching--marching--
	King George’s men came marching, up to the old inn-door.
	
	They said no word to the landlord. They drank his ale instead.   
	But they gagged his daughter, and bound her, to the foot of her narrow bed.
	Two of them knelt at her casement, with muskets at their side!   
	There was death at every window;
	         And hell at one dark window;
	For Bess could see, through her casement, the road that he would ride.
	
	They had tied her up to attention, with many a sniggering jest.
	They had bound a musket beside her, with the muzzle beneath her breast!
	“Now, keep good watch!” and they kissed her. She heard the doomed man say--
	_Look for me by moonlight;
	         Watch for me by moonlight;
	I’ll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way!_
	
	She twisted her hands behind her; but all the knots held good!
	She writhed her hands till her fingers were wet with sweat or blood!   
	They stretched and strained in the darkness, and the hours crawled by like years
	Till, now, on the stroke of midnight,
	         Cold, on the stroke of midnight,
	The tip of one finger touched it! The trigger at least was hers!
	
	The tip of one finger touched it. She strove no more for the rest.   
	Up, she stood up to attention, with the muzzle beneath her breast.   
	She would not risk their hearing; she would not strive again;   
	For the road lay bare in the moonlight;
	         Blank and bare in the moonlight;
	And the blood of her veins, in the moonlight, throbbed to her love’s refrain.
	
	_Tlot-tlot; tlot-tlot!_ Had they heard it? The horsehoofs ringing clear;   
	_Tlot-tlot; tlot-tlot,_ in the distance? Were they deaf that they did not hear?
	Down the ribbon of moonlight, over the brow of the hill,
	The highwayman came riding--
	         Riding--riding--
	The red coats looked to their priming! She stood up, straight and still.
	
	_Tlot-tlot,_ in the frosty silence! _Tlot-tlot,_ in the echoing night!   
	Nearer he came and nearer. Her face was like a light.
	Her eyes grew wide for a moment; she drew one last deep breath,   
	Then her finger moved in the moonlight,
	         Her musket shattered the moonlight,
	Shattered her breast in the moonlight and warned him--with her death.
	
	He turned. He spurred to the west; he did not know who stood   
	Bowed, with her head o’er the musket, drenched with her own blood!   
	Not till the dawn he heard it, and his face grew grey to hear   
	How Bess, the landlord’s daughter,
	         The landlord’s black-eyed daughter,
	Had watched for her love in the moonlight, and died in the darkness there.
	
	Back, he spurred like a madman, shrieking a curse to the sky,
	With the white road smoking behind him and his rapier brandished high.
	Blood red were his spurs in the golden noon; wine-red was his velvet coat;
	When they shot him down on the highway,
	         Down like a dog on the highway,
	And he lay in his blood on the highway, with a bunch of lace at his throat.
	
	
	_And still of a winter’s night, they say, when the wind is in the trees,
	When the moon is a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas,   
	When the road is a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,   
	A highwayman comes riding--
	         Riding--riding--
	A highwayman comes riding, up to the old inn-door.
	
	Over the cobbles he clatters and clangs in the dark inn-yard.
	He taps with his whip on the shutters, but all is locked and barred.   
	He whistles a tune to the window, and who should be waiting there   
	But the landlord’s black-eyed daughter,
	         Bess, the landlord’s daughter,
	Plaiting a dark red love-knot into her long black hair._



7. THE HILL-FLOWERS

	_"I will lift up mine eyes to the hills."_
	
	
	I
	
	_Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
	Ere I waken in the city--Life, thy dawn makes all things new!
	And up a fir-clad glen, far from all the haunts of men,
	Up a glen among the mountains, oh my feet are wings again!_
	
	Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
	O mountains of my boyhood, I come again to you,
	By the little path I know, with the sea far below,
	And above, the great cloud-galleons with their sails of rose and snow;
	
	As of old, when all was young, and the earth a song unsung
	And the heather through the crimson dawn its Eden incense flung
	From the mountain-heights of joy, for a careless-hearted boy,
	And the lavrocks rose like fountain sprays of bliss that ne’er could cloy,
	
	From their little beds of bloom, from the golden gorse and broom,
	With a song to God the Giver, o’er that waste of wild perfume;
	Blowing from height to height, in a glory of great light,
	While the cottage-clustered valleys held the lilac last of night,
	
	So, when dawn is in the skies, in a dream, a dream, I rise,
	And I follow my lost boyhood to the heights of Paradise.
	Life, thy dawn makes all things new! Hills of Youth, come to you,
	Moving through the dew, moving through the dew.
	
	
	II
	
	Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
	Floats a brother’s face to meet me! Is it you? Is it you?
	For the night I leave behind keeps these dazzled eyes still, blind!
	But oh, the little hill-flowers, their scent is wise and kind;
	
	And I shall not lose the way from the darkness to the day,
	White dust can cling as their scent clings to memory for aye;
	And the least link in the chain can recall the whole again,
	And heaven at last resume its far-flung harvests, grain by grain.
	
	To the hill-flowers clings my dust, and tho’ eyeless Death may thrust
	All else into the darkness, in their heaven I put my trust;
	And a dawn shall bid me climb to the little spread of thyme
	Where first I heard the ripple of the fountain-heads of rhyme.
	
	And a fir-wood that I know, from dawn to sunset-glow,
	Shall whisper to a lonely sea, that swings far, far below.
	Death, thy dawn makes all things new. Hills of Youth,
	       I come to you, 
	Moving through the dew, moving through the dew.



8. IMMORTAL SAILS

	Now, in a breath, we’ll burst those gates of gold,
	   And ransack heaven before our moment fails.
	Now, in a breath, before we, too, grow old,
	   We’ll mount and sing and spread immortal sails.
	
	It is not time that makes eternity.
	   Love and an hour may quite out-span the years,
	And give us more to hear and more to see
	   Than life can wash away with all its tears.
	
	Dear, when we part, at last, that sunset sky
	   Shall not be touched with deeper hues than this;
	But we shall ride the lightning ere we die
	   And seize our brief infinitude of bliss,
	
	With time to spare for all that heaven can tell,
	While eyes meet eyes, and look their last farewell.



9. THE LITANY OF WAR

	Sandalphon, whose white wings to heaven upbear
	       The weight of human prayer,
	Stood silent in the still eternal Light
	       Of God, one dreadful night.
	His wings were clogged with blood and foul with mire,
	       His body seared with fire.
	“Hast thou no word for Me?“ the Master said.
	       The angel sank his head:
	
	“Word from the nations of the East and West,”
	       He moaned, “that blood is best.
	The patriot prayers of either half of earth,
	       Hear Thou, and judge their worth.
	Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
	       First, the first nation’s prayer:
	‘_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
	       Destroy our enemies, Lord!_’
	
	“Pure as the first, as passionate in trust
	       That their own cause is just;
	Puppets as fond in those dark hands of greed;
	       As fervent in their creed;
	As blindly moved, as utterly betrayed,
	       As urgent for Thine aid;
	Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear
	       The second nation’s prayer:
	‘_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
	       Destroy our enemies, Lord._’
	
	“Over their slaughtered children, one great cry
	       From either enemy!
	From either host, thigh-deep in filth and shame,
	       One prayer, one and the same;
	Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
	       From East and West, one prayer:
	‘_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
	       Destroy our enemies, Lord._‘”
	
	Then, on the Cross of His creative pain,
	       God bowed His head again.
	Then, East and West, over all seas and lands,
	       Out-stretched His piercèd hands.
	“And yet,“ Sandalphon whispered, “men deny
	       The Eternal Calvary.”



10. THE MYSTIC

	With wounds out-reddening every moon-washed rose
	King Love went thro’ earth’s garden-close!
	 From that first gate of birth in the golden gloom,
	I traced Him. Thorns had frayed His garment’s hem,
	Ay, and His flesh! I marked, I followed them
	 Down to that threshold of--the tomb?
	
	And there Love vanished, yet I entered! Night
	And Doubt mocked at the dwindling light:
	 Strange claw-like hands flung me their shadowy hate.
	I clomb the dreadful stairways of desire
	Between a thousand eyes and wings of fire
	 And knocked upon the second Gate.
	
	The second Gate! When, like a warrior helmed,
	In battle on battle overwhelmed,
	 My soul lay stabbed by all the swords of sense,
	Blinded and stunned by stars and flowers and trees,
	Did I not struggle to my bended knees
	 And wrestle with Omnipotence?
	
	Did earth not flee before me, when the breath
	Of worship smote her with strange death,
	 Withered her gilded garment, broke her sword,
	Shattered her graven images and smote
	All her light sorrows thro’ the breast and throat
	 Whose death-cry crowned me God and Lord?
	
	Yea, God and Lord! Had tears not purged my sight?
	I saw the myriad gates of Light
	 Opening and shutting in each way-side flower,
	And like a warder in the gleam of each,
	Death, whispering in some strange eternal speech
	 To every passing hour.
	
	The second Gate? Was I not born to pass
	A million? Though the skies be brass
	 And the earth iron, shall I not win thro’ all?
	Shall I who made the infinite heavens my mark
	Shrink from this first wild horror of the dark,
	 These formless gulfs, these glooms that crawl?
	
	Never was mine that easy faithless hope
	Which makes all life one flowery slope
	 To heaven! Mine be the vast assaults of doom,
	Trumpets, defeats, red anguish, age-long strife,
	Ten million deaths, ten million gates to life,
	 The insurgent heart that bursts the tomb.
	
	Vain, vain, unutterably vain are all
	The sights and sounds that sink and fall,
	 The words and symbols of this fleeting breath:
	Shall I not drown the finite in the Whole,
	Cast off this body and complete my soul
	 Thro’ deaths beyond this gate of death?
	
	It will not open! Through the bars I see
	The glory and the mystery
	 Wind upward ever! The earth-dawn breaks! I bleed
	With beating here for entrance. Hark, O hark,
	Love, Love, return and give me the great Dark,
	 Which is the Light of Life indeed.



11. NIOBE

	How like the sky she bends above her child,
	One with the great horizon of her pain!
	No sob from our low seas where woe runs wild,
	No weeping cloud, no momentary rain,
	Can mar the heaven-high visage of her grief,
	That frozen anguish, proud, majestic, dumb.
	She stoops in pity above the labouring earth,
	Knowing how fond, how brief
	Is all its hope, past, present, and to come,
	She stoops in pity, and yearns to assuage its dearth.
	
	Through that fair face the whole dark universe
	Speaks, as a thorn-tree speaks thro’ one white flower;
	And all those wrenched Promethean souls that curse
	The gods, but cannot die before their hour,
	Find utterance in her beauty. That fair head
	Bows over all earth’s graves. It was her cry
	Men heard in Rama when the twisted ways
	With children’s blood ran red.
	Her silence towers to Silences on high;
	And, in her face, the whole earth’s anguish prays.
	
	It is the pity, the pity of human love
	That strains her face, upturned to meet the doom,
	And her deep bosom, like a snow-white dove
	Frozen upon its nest, ne’er to resume
	Its happy breathing o’er the golden brace
	That she must shield till death. Death, death alone
	Can break the anguished horror of that spell.
	The sorrow on her face
	Is sealed: the living flesh is turned to stone;
	She knows all, all, that Life and Time can tell.
	
	Ah, yet, her woman’s love, so vast, so tender,
	Her woman’s body, hurt by every dart,
	Braving the thunder, still, still hide the slender
	Soft frightened child beneath her mighty heart.
	She is all one mute immortal cry, one brief
	Infinite pang of such victorious pain
	That she transcends the heavens and bows them down!
	The majesty of grief
	Is hers, and her dominion must remain
	Eternal. Grief alone can wear that crown.



12. THE OLD MEETING HOUSE

	Its quiet graves were made for peace till Gabriel blows his horn.
	Those wise old elms could hear no cry
	Of all that distant agony--
	Only the red-winged blackbird, and the rustle of thick ripe corn.
	
	The blue jay, perched upon that bronze, with bright unweeting eye
	Could never read the names that signed
	The noblest charter of mankind;
	But all of them were names we knew beneath our English skies.
	
	And on the low gray headstones, with their crumbling weather-stains,
	--Though cardinal birds, like drops of blood,
	Flickered across the haunted wood,--
	The names you’d see were names that woke like flowers in English lanes
	
	John Applegate was fast asleep; and Temperance Olden, too.
	And David Worth had quite forgot
	If Hannah’s lips were red or not;
	And Prudence veiled her eyes at last, as Prudence ought to do.
	
	And when, across that patch of heaven, that small blue leaf-edged space
	At times, a droning airplane went,
	No flicker of astonishment
	Could lift the heavy eyelids on one gossip’s upturned face.
	
	For William Speakman could not tell--so thick the grasses grow--
	If that strange humming in the sky
	Meant that the Judgment Day were nigh,
	Or if ’twere but the summer bees that blundered to and fro.
	
	And then, across the breathless wood, a Bell began to sound,
	The only Bell that wakes the dead,
	And Stockton Signer raised his head,
	And called to all the deacons in the ancient burial-ground.
	
	“The Bell, the Bell is ringing! Give me back my rusty sword.
	Though I thought the wars were done,
	Though I thought our peace was won,
	Yet I signed the Declaration, and the dead must keep their word.
	
	“There’s only one great ghost I know could make that ’larum ring.
	It’s the captain that we knew
	In the ancient buff and blue,
	It’s our Englishman, George Washington, who fought the German king!”
	
	So the sunset saw them mustering beneath their brooding boughs,
	Ancient shadows of our sires,
	Kindling with the ancient fires,
	While the old cracked Bell to southward shook the shadowy meeting house.



13. THE OLD SCEPTIC

	I am weary of disbelieving: why should I wound my love
	 To pleasure a sophist’s pride in a graven image of truth?
	I will go back to my home, with the clouds and the stars above,
	 And the heaven I used to know, and the God of my buried youth.
	
	I will go back to the home where of old in my boyish pride
	 I pierced my father’s heart with a murmur of unbelief.
	He only looked in my face as I spoke, but his mute eyes cried
	 Night after night in my dreams; and he died in grief, in grief.
	
	Books? I have read the books, the books that we write ourselves,
	 Extolling our love of an abstract truth and our pride of debate:
	I will go back to the love of the cotter who sings as he delves,
	 To that childish infinite love and the God above fact and date.
	
	To that ignorant infinite God who colours the meaningless flowers,
	 To that lawless infinite Poet who crowns the law with the crime;
	To the Weaver who covers the world with a garment of wonderful hours,
	 And holds in His hand like threads the tales and the truths of time.
	
	Is the faith of the cotter so simple and narrow as this? Ah, well,
	 It is hardly so narrow as yours who daub and plaster with dyes
	The shining mirrors of heaven, the shadowy mirrors of hell,
	 And blot out the dark deep vision, if it seem to be framed with lies.
	
	No faith I hurl against you, no fact to freeze your sneers.
	 Only the doubt you taught me to weld in the fires of youth
	Leaps to my hand like the flaming sword of nineteen hundred years,
	 The sword of the high God’s answer, _O Pilate, what is truth?_
	
	Your laughter has killed more hearts than ever were pierced with swords,
	 Ever you daub new mirrors and turn the old to the wall;
	And more than blood is lost in the weary battle of words;
	 For creeds are many; but God is One, and contains them all.
	
	Ah, why should we strive or cry? Surely the end is close!
	 Hold by your little truths: deem your triumph complete!
	But nothing is true or false in the infinite heart of the rose;
	 And the earth is a little dust that clings to our travelling feet.
	
	I will go back to my home and look at the wayside flowers,
	 And hear from the wayside cabins the kind old hymns again,
	Where Christ holds out His arms in the quiet evening hours,
	 And the light of the chapel porches broods on the peaceful lane.
	
	And there I shall hear men praying the deep old foolish prayers,
	 And there I shall see, once more, the fond old faith confessed,
	And the strange old light on their faces who hear as a blind man hears,--
	_Come unto Me, ye weary, and I will give you rest._
	
	I will go back and believe in the deep old foolish tales,
	 And pray the simple prayers that I learned at my mother’s knee,
	Where the Sabbath tolls its peace thro’ the breathless mountain-vales,
	 And the sunset’s evening hymn hallows the listening sea.



14. THE OPTIMIST

	Teach me to live and to forgive
	 The death that all must die
	Who pass in slumber through this heaven
	 Of earth and sea and sky;
	Who live by grace of Time and Space
	 At which their peace is priced;
	And cast their lots upon the robe
	 That wraps the cosmic Christ;
	
	Who cannot see the world-wide Tree
	 Where Love lies bleeding still;
	This universal cross of God
	 Our star-crowned Igdrasil.
	
	Teach me to live; I do not ask
	 For length of earthly days,
	Or that my heaven-appointed task
	 Should fall in pleasant ways;
	
	If in this hour of warmth and light
	 The last great knell were knolled;
	If Death should close mine eyes to-night
	 And all the tale be told;
	
	While I have lips to speak or sing
	 And power to draw this breath,
	Shall I not praise my Lord and King
	 Above all else, for death?
	
	When on a golden eve he drove
	 His keenest sorrow deep
	Deep in my heart, and called it love;
	 I did not wince or weep.
	
	A wild Hosanna shook the world
	 And wakened all the sky,
	As through a white and burning light
	 Her passionate face went by.
	
	When on a golden dawn he called
	 My best beloved away,
	I did not shrink or stand appalled
	 Before the hopeless day.
	
	The joy of that triumphant dearth
	 And anguish cannot die;
	The joy that casts aside this earth
	 For immortality.
	
	I would not change one word of doom
	 Upon the dreadful scroll,
	That gave her body to the tomb
	 And freed her fettered soul.
	
	For now each idle breeze can bring
	 The kiss I never seek;
	The nightingale has heard her sing,
	 The rose caressed her cheek.
	
	And every pang of every grief
	 That ruled my soul an hour,
	Has given new splendours to the leaf,
	 New glories to the flower;
	
	And melting earth into the heaven
	 Whose inmost heart is pain,
	Has drawn the veils apart and given
	 Her soul to mine again.



15. THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

	I
	
	_In the beginning?_--Slowly grope we back
	       Along the narrowing track,
	Back to the deserts of the world’s pale prime,
	       The mire, the clay, the slime;
	And then . . . what then? Surely to something less;
	       Back, back, to Nothingness!
	
	
	II
	
	You dare not halt upon that dwindling way!
	       There is no gulf to stay
	Your footsteps to the last. Go back you must!
	       Far, far below the dust,
	Descend, descend! Grade by dissolving grade,
	       We follow, unafraid!
	Dissolve, dissolve this moving world of men
	       Into thin air--and then?
	
	
	III
	
	O pioneers, O warriors of the Light,
	       In that abysmal night,
	Will you have courage, then, to rise and tell
	       Earth of this miracle?
	Will you have courage, then, to bow the head,
	       And say, when all is said--
	
	“Out of this Nothingness arose our thought!
	       This blank abysmal Nought
	Woke, and brought forth that lighted City street,
	       Those towers, that armoured fleet?“ . . .
	
	
	IV
	
	When you have seen those vacant primal skies
	       Beyond the centuries.
	Watched the pale mists across their darkness flow,
	       As in a lantern-show,
	Weaving, by merest “chance,“ out of thin air,
	       Pageants of praise and prayer;
	Watched the great hills like clouds arise and set,
	       And one--named Olivet;
	When you have seen, as a shadow passing away,
	       One child clasp hands and pray;
	When you have seen emerge from that dark mire
	       One martyr, ringed with fire;
	Or, from that Nothingness, by special grace,
	       One woman’s love-lit face, ...
	
	
	V
	
	Will you have courage, then, to front that law
	       (From which your sophists draw
	Their only right to flout one human creed)
	       That nothing can proceed--
	Not even thought, not even love--from less
	       Than its own nothingness?
	The law is yours! But dare you waive your pride,
	       And kneel where you denied?
	The law is yours! Dare you re-kindle, then,
	       One faith for faithless men,
	And say you found, on that dark road you trod,
	       _In the beginning--GOD_?



16. SONG

	I
	
	When that I loved a maiden
	 My heaven was in her eyes,
	And when they bent above me
	 I knew no deeper skies;
	But when her heart forsook me
	 My spirit broke its bars,
	For grief beyond the sunset
	 And love beyond the stars.
	
	
	II
	
	When that I loved a maiden
	 She seemed the world to me:
	Now is my soul the universe,
	 My dreams the sky and sea:
	There is no heaven above me,
	 No glory binds or bars
	My grief beyond the sunset,
	 My love beyond the stars.
	
	
	III
	
	When that I loved a maiden
	 I worshipped where she trod;
	But, when she clove my heart, the cleft
	 Set free the imprisoned god:
	Then was I king of all the world,
	 My soul had burst its bars,
	For grief beyond the sunset
	 And love beyond the stars.



17. ON THE WESTERN FRONT

	I
	
	I found a dreadful acre of the dead,
	Marked with the only sign on earth that saves.
	The wings of death were hurrying overhead,
	The loose earth shook on those unquiet graves;
	
	For the deep gun-pits, with quick stabs of flame,
	Made their own thunders of the sunlit air;
	Yet, as I read the crosses, name by name,
	Rank after rank, it seemed that peace was there;
	
	Sunlight and peace, a peace too deep for thought,
	The peace of tides that underlie our strife,
	The peace with which the moving heavens are fraught,
	The peace that is our everlasting life.
	
	The loose earth shook. The very hills were stirred.
	The silence of the dead was all I heard.
	 
	
	II
	
	We, who lie here, have nothing more to pray.
	To all your praises we are deaf and blind.
	We may not ever know if you betray
	Our hope, to make earth better for mankind.
	
	Only our silence, in the night, shall grow
	More silent, as the stars grow in the sky;
	And, while you deck our graves, you shall not know
	How many scornful legions pass you by.
	
	For we have heard you say (when we were living)
	That some small dream of good would “cost too much.”
	But when the foe struck, we have watched you giving,
	And seen you move the mountains with one touch.
	
	What can be done, we know. But, have no fear!
	If you fail now, we shall not see or hear.
