*** Boris Pasternak (1890 - 1960)


1. AFTER THE INTERVAL

	About three months ago, when first
	Upon our open, unprotected
	And freezing garden snowstorms burst
	In sudden fury, I reflected

	That I would shut myself away
	And in seclusion write a section
	Of winter poems, day by day,
	To supplement my spring collection.

	But nonsense piled up mountain-high,
	Like snow-drifts hindering and stifling
	And half the winter had gone by,
	Against all hopes, in petty trifling.

	I understood, alas, too late
	Why winter-while the snow was falling,
	Piercing the darkness with its flakes--
	From outside at my house was calling;

	And while with numb white-frozen lips
	It whispered, urging me to hurry,
	I sharpened pencils, played with clips,
	Made feeble jokes and did not worry.

	While at my desk I dawdled on
	By lamp-light on an early morning,
	The winter had appeared and gone--
	A wasted and unheeded warning.



2. AUGUST

	This was its promise, held to faithfully:
	The early morning sun came in this way
	Until the angle of its saffron beam
	Between the curtains and the sofa lay,

	And with its ochre heat it spread across
	The village houses, and the nearby wood,
	Upon my bed and on my dampened pillow
	And to the corner where the bookcase stood.

	Then I recalled the reason why my pillow
	Had been so dampened by those tears that fell--
	I’d dreamt I saw you coming one by one
	Across the wood to wish me your farewell.

	You came in ones and twos, a straggling crowd;
	Then suddenly someone mentioned a word:
	It was the sixth of August, by Old Style,
	And the Transfiguration of Our Lord.

	For from Mount Tabor usually this day
	There comes a light without a flame to shine,
	And autumn draws all eyes upon itself
	As clear and unmistaken as a sign.

	But you came forward through the tiny, stripped,
	The pauperly and trembling alder grove,
	Into the graveyard’s coppice, russet-red,
	Which, like stamped gingerbread, lay there and glowed.

	And with the silence of those high treetops
	Was neighbour only the imposing sky
	And in the echoed crowing of the cocks
	The distances and distances rang by:

	There in the churchyard underneath the trees,
	Like some surveyor from the government
	Death gazed on my pale face to estimate
	How large a grave would suit my measurement.

	All those who stood there could distinctly hear
	A quiet voice emerge from where I lay:
	The voice was mine, my past; prophetic words
	That sounded now, unsullied by decay:

	‘Farewell, wonder of azure and of gold
	Surrounding the Transfiguration’s power:
	Assuage now with a woman’s last caress
	The bitterness of my predestined hour!

	‘Farewell timeless expanse of passing years!
	Farewell, woman who flung your challenge steeled
	Against the abyss of humiliations:
	For it is I who am your battlefield!

	‘Farewell, you span of open wings outspread,
	The voluntary obstinacy of flight,
	O figure of the world revealed in speech,
	Creative genius, wonder-working might!’



3. AUTUMN

	I have allowed my family to scatter,
	All those who were my dearest to depart,
	And once again an age-long loneliness
	Comes in to fill all nature and my heart.

	Alone this cottage shelters me and you:
	The wood is an unpeopled wilderness
	And ways and footpaths wear, as in the song.
	Weeds almost overgrowing each recess;

	And where we sit together by ourselves
	The log walls gaze upon us mournfully.
	We gave no promise to leap obstacles,
	We shall yet face our end with honesty.

	At one we’ll sit, at three again we’ll rise,
	My book with me, your sewing in your hand,
	Nor with the dawning shall we realize
	When all our kissing shall have had an end.

	You leaves, more richly and more recklessly
	Rustle your dresses, spill yourselves away,
	And fill a past day’s cup of bitterness
	Still higher with the anguish of today!

	All this delight, devotion and desire!
	We’ll fling ourselves into September’s riot!
	Immure yourself within the autumn’s rustle
	Entirely: go crazy, or be quiet!

	How when you fall into my gentle arms
	Enrobed in that silk-tasselled dressing gown
	You shake the dress you wear away from you
	As only coppices shake their leaves down!--

	You are the blessing on my baneful way,
	When life has depths worse than disease can reach,
	And courage is the only root of beauty,
	And it is this that draws us each to each.



4. AUTUMN FROST

	The morning sun shows like a pillar
	Of fire through smoke on frosty days.
	As on a faulty snap, it cannot
	Make out my features in the haze.

	The distant trees will hardly see me
	Until the sun at last can break
	Out of the fog, and flash triumphant
	Upon the meadows by the lake.

	A passer-by in mist receding
	Is recognized when he has passed.
	You walk on hoarfrost-covered pathways
	As though on mats of plaited bast.

	The frost is covered up in gooseflesh,
	The air is false like painted cheeks,
	The earth is shivering, and sick of
	Breathing potato-stalks for weeks.



5. BAD DAYS

	When Passion week started and Jesus
	Came down to the city, that day
	Hosannahs burst out at his entry
	And palm leaves were strewn in his way.

	But days grow more stern and more stormy.
	No love can men’s hardness unbend;
	Their brows are contemptuously frowning,
	And now comes the postscript, the end.

	Grey, leaden and heavy, the heavens
	Were pressing on treetops and roofs.
	The Pharisees, fawning like foxes,
	Were secretly searching for proofs.

	The lords of the Temple let scoundrels
	Pass judgement, and those who at first
	Had fervently followed and hailed him,
	Now all just as zealously cursed.

	The crowd on the neighbouring sector
	Was looking inside through the gate.
	They jostled, intent on the outcome,
	Bewildered and willing to wait.

	And whispers and rumours were creeping,
	Repeating the dominant theme.
	The flight into Egypt, his childhood
	Already seemed faint as a dream.

	And Jesus remembered the desert,
	The days in the wilderness spent,
	The tempting with power by Satan,
	That lofty, majestic descent.

	He thought of the wedding at Cana,
	The feast and the miracles; and
	How once he had walked on the waters
	Through mist to a boat, as on land;

	The beggarly crowd in a hovel,
	The cellar to which he was led;
	How, started, the candle-flame guttered,
	When Lazarus rose from the dead . . .



6. BLACK SPRING

	Black spring! Pick up your pen, and weeping,
	Of February, in sobs and ink,
	Write poems, while the slush in thunder
	Is burning in the black of spring.

	Through clanking wheels, through church bells ringing
	A hired cab will take you where
	The town has ended, where the showers
	Are louder still than ink and tears.

	Where rooks, like charred pears, from the branches
	In thousands break away, and sweep
	Into the melting snow, instilling
	Dry sadness into eyes that weep.

	Beneath--the earth is black in puddles,
	The wind with croaking screeches throbs,
	And--the more randomly, the surer
	Poems are forming out of sobs.



7. CONFESSION

	Life returned with a cause-the way
	Some strange chance once interrupted it.
	Just as on that distant summer day,
	I am standing in the same old street.

	People are the same, and people’s worries,
	And the sunset’s still a fireball,
	Just the way death’s night once in a hurry
	Nailed it to the ancient mansion’s wall.

	Women, in the same cheap clothes attired,
	Are still wearing down their shoes at night.
	Afterwards, against the roofing iron
	They are by the garrets crucified.

	Here is one of them. She looks so weary
	As she steps across the threshold, and
	Rising from the basement, drab and dreary,
	Walks across the courtyard on a slant.

	And again I’m ready with excuses,
	And again it’s all the same to me.
	And the neighbour in the backyard pauses,
	Then goes out of sight, and leaves us be.

	Don’t cry, do not purse your lips up,
	They’re puffy as it is, dear.
	Mind you don’t break the drying scab
	Of smouldering spring fever.

	Your hand is on my breast. Let go!
	We are like two live wires.
	If we aren’t careful, we’ll be thrown
	Together unawares.

	The years will pass, you’ll marry yet
	And you’ll forget this squalor.
	To be a woman is a feat,
	To drive men mad, that’s valour.

	And as for me, I’ve been in thrall
	For ages-begged like alms,
	And worshipped the great miracle
	Of woman’s neck, back, arms.

	Though bound tight, at the end of day,
	By the anguished darkness’ loop,
	I’m ever lured to get away--
	I long to break things up.



8. A DREAM

	I dreamt of autumn in the window’s twilight,
	And you, a tipsy jesters’ throng amidst.
	And like a falcon, having stooped to slaughter,
	My heart returned to settle on your wrist.

	But time went on, grew old and deaf. Like thawing
	Soft ice old silk decayed on easy chairs.
	A bloated sunset from the garden painted
	The glass with bloody red September tears.

	But time grew old and deaf. And you, the loud one,
	Quite suddenly were still. This broke a spell.
	The dreaming ceased at once, as though in answer
	To an abruptly silenced bell.

	And I awakened. Dismal as the autumn
	The dawn was dark. A stronger wind arose
	To chase the racing birchtrees on the skyline,
	As from a running cart the streams of straws.



9. EVE

	By water’s edge, quiet willows stand,
	And from the steep bank, high noon flings
	White fleecy clouds into the pond
	As if they were a fisher’s seines.

	The firmament sinks like a net,
	A crowd of sunburnt bathers dive
	With yells into the pond, and head
	For this elusive netlike sky.

	Some women from the water rise
	Under the scanty willows’ lee,
	And stepping on the sand, wring dry
	Their bathing costumes hurriedly.

	The coils of fabric twist and slide
	Like water-snakes, and nimbly roll,
	As if the dripping garments hide
	Beguiling serpents in their folds.

	0 woman, neither looks nor shape
	Will nonplus me or make me gloat.
	You, all of you, are like a lump
	In my excitement-stricken throat.

	You look as if hewn in the rough--
	A stray verse line dashed off ad lib.
	You make me think it is the truth--
	That you were made out of my rib.

	And instantly you broke away
	From my embrace, and moved apart,
	All fear, confusion, disarray--
	And missing beats of a man’s heart.



10. FAIRY TALE

	Once, in times forgotten,
	In a fairy place,
	Through the steppe, a rider
	Made his way apace.

	While he sped to battle,
	Nearing from the dim
	Distance, a dark forest
	Rose ahead of him.

	Something kept repeating,
	Seemed his heart to graze:
	Tighten up the saddle,
	Fear the watering-place.

	But he did not listen.
	Heeding but his will,
	At full speed he bounded
	Up the wooded hill;

	Rode into a valley,
	Turning from the mound,
	Galloped through a meadow,
	Skirted higher ground;

	Reached a gloomy hollow,
	Found a trail to trace
	Down the woodland pathway
	To the watering-place.

	Deaf to voice of warning,
	And without remorse,
	Down the slope, the rider
	Led his thirsty horse.

	Where the stream grew shallow,
	Winding through the glen,
	Eerie flames lit up the
	Entrance to a den.

	Through thick clouds of crimson
	Smoke above the spring,
	An uncanny calling
	Made the forest ring.

	And the rider started,
	And with peering eye
	Urged his horse in answer
	To the haunting cry.

	Then he saw the dragon,
	And he gripped his lance;
	And his horse stood breathless
	Fearing to advance.

	Thrice around a maiden
	Was the serpent wound;
	Fire-breathing nostrils
	Cast a glare around.

	And the dragon’s body
	Moved his scaly neck,
	At her shoulder snaking
	Whiplike forth and back.

	By that country’s custom
	Was a young and fair
	Captive brought as ransom
	To the dragon’s lair.

	This then was the tribute
	That the people owed
	To the worm-protection
	For a poor abode.

	Now the dragon hugged his
	Victim in alarm,
	And the coils grew tighter
	Round her throat and arm.

	Skyward looked the horseman
	With imploring glance,
	And for the impending
	Fight he couched his lance.

	Tightly closing eyelids.
	Heights and cloudy spheres.
	Rivers. Waters. Boulders.
	Centuries and years.

	Helmetless, the wounded
	Lies, his life at stake.
	With his hooves the charger
	Tramples down the snake.

	On the sand, together--
	Dragon, steed, and lance;
	In a swoon the rider,
	The maiden--in a trance.

	Blue the sky; soft breezes
	Tender noon caress.
	Who is she? A lady?
	Peasant girl? Princess?

	Now in joyous wonder
	Cannot cease to weep;
	Now again abandoned
	To unending sleep.

	Now, his strength returning,
	Opens up his eyes;
	Now anew the wounded
	Limp and listless lies.

	But their hearts are beating.
	Waves surge up, die down;
	Carry them, and waken,
	And in slumber drown.

	Tightly closing eyelids.
	Heights and cloudy spheres.
	Rivers. Waters. Boulders.
	Centuries and years.



11. FROM EARLY DAWN THE THIRTIETH OF APRIL

	From early dawn the thirtieth of April
	Is given up to children of the town,
	And caught in trying on the festive necklace,
	By dusk it only just is settling down.

	Like heaps of squashy berries under muslin
	The town emerges out of crimson gauze.
	Along the streets the boulevards are dragging
	Their twilight with them, like a rank of dwarves.

	The evening world is always eve and blossom,
	But this one with a sprouting of its own
	From May-day anniversaries will flower
	One day into a commune fully blown.

	For long it will remain a day of shifting,
	Pre-festive cleaning, fanciful decor,
	As once it used to be with Whitsun birches
	Or pan-Athenian fires long before.

	Just so they will go on, conveying actors
	To their assembly points; beat sand; just so
	Pull up towards illuminated ledges
	The plywood boards, the crimson calico.

	Just so in threes the sailors briskly walking
	Will skirt the grass in gardens and in parks,
	The moon at nightfall sink into the pavements
	Like a dead city or a burnt-out hearth.

	But with each year more splendid and more spreading
	The taut beginning of the rose will bloom,
	More clearly grow in health and sense of honour,
	Sincerity more visibly will loom.

	The living folksongs, customs and traditions
	Will ever spreading, many-petalled lay
	Their scent on fields and industries and meadows
	From early buddings on the first of May,

	Until the full fermented risen spirit
	Of ripened years will shoot up, like the smell
	Of humid centifolia. It will have to
	Reveal itself, it cannot help but tell.



12. GARDEN

	The drowsy garden scatters insects
	Bronze as the ash from braziers blown.
	Level with me and with my candle,
	Hang flowering worlds, their leaves full-grown.

	As into some unheard-of dogma
	I move across into this night,
	Where a worn poplar age has grizzled
	Screens the moon’s strip of fallow light,

	Where the pond lies, an open secret,
	Where apple-bloom is surf and sigh,
	And where the garden, a lake-dwelling,
	Holds out in front of it the sky.



13. HAMLET

	The murmurs ebb; onto the stage I enter.
	I am trying, standing in the door,
	To discover in the distant echoes
	What the coming years may hold in store.

	The nocturnal darkness with a thousand
	Binoculars is focused onto me.
	Take away this cup, O Abba Father,
	Everything is possible to Thee.

	I am fond of this Thy stubborn project,
	And to play my part I am content.
	But another drama is in progress,
	And, this once, O let me be exempt.

	But the plan of action is determined,
	And the end irrevocably sealed.
	I am alone; all round me drowns in falsehood:
	Life is not a walk across a field.



14. I HANG LIMP ON THE CREATOR’S PEN

	I hang limp on the Creator’s pen
	Like a large drop of lilac gloss-paint.

	Underneath are dykes’ secrets; the air
	From the railways is sodden and sticky,
	Of the fumes of coal and night fires reeking.
	But the moment night kills sunset’s glare,
	It turns pink itself, tinged with far flares,
	And the fence stands stiff, paradox-stricken.

	It keeps muttering: stop it till dawn.
	Let the dry whiting finally settle.
	Hard as nails is the worm-eaten ground,
	And the echo’s as keen as a skittle.

	Warm spring wind, spots of cheviot and mud,
	Early naileries’ hoots faraway,
	On the grater of cobble-stones road,
	As on radishes lavishly sprayed,
	Tears stand out clearly at break of day.

	Like an acrid drop of thick lead paint,
	I hang on to the Creator’s pen.



15. JULY

	A ghost is roaming through the building,
	And shadows in the attic browse;
	Persistently intent on mischief
	A goblin roams about the house.

	He gets into your way, he fusses,
	You hear his footsteps overhead,
	He tears the napkin off the table
	And creeps in slippers to the bed.

	With feet unwiped he rushes headlong
	On gusts of draught into the hall
	And whirls the curtain, like a dancer,
	Towards the ceiling, up the wall.

	Who is this silly mischief-maker,
	This phantom and this double-face?
	He is our guest, our summer lodger,
	Who spends with us his holidays.

	Our house is taken in possession
	By him, while he enjoys a rest.
	July, with summer air and thunder--
	He is our temporary guest.

	July, who scatters from his pockets
	The fluff of blow-balls in a cloud,
	Who enters through the open window,
	Who chatters to himself aloud,

	Unkempt, untidy, absent-minded,
	Soaked through with smell of dill and rye,
	With linden-blossom, grass and beet-leaves,
	The meadow-scented month July.



16. MARCH

	The sun is hotter than the top ledge in a steam bath;
	The ravine, crazed, is rampaging below.
	Spring--that corn-fed, husky milkmaid--
	Is busy at her chores with never a letup.

	The snow is wasting (pernicious anemia--
	See those branching veinlets of impotent blue?)
	Yet in the cowbarn life is burbling, steaming,
	And the tines of pitchforks simply glow with health.

	These days--these days, and these nights also!
	With eavesdrop thrumming its tattoos at noon,
	With icicles (cachectic!) hanging on to gables,
	And with the chattering of rills that never sleep!

	All doors are flung open--in stable and in cowbarn;
	Pigeons peck at oats fallen in the snow;
	And the culprit of all this and its life-begetter--
	The pile of manure--is pungent with ozone.



17. MARY MAGDELENE

	People clean their homes before the feast.
	Stepping from the bustle of the street
	I go down before Thee on my knees
	And anoint with myrrh Thy holy feet.

	Groping round, I cannot find the shoes
	For the tears that well up with my sighs.
	My impatient tresses, breaking loose,
	Like a pall hang thick before my eyes.

	I take up Thy feet onto my lap,
	Wash them clean with hot tears from my eyes,
	In my hair Thy precious feet I wrap,
	And my string of pearls around them tie.

	I now see the future in detail,
	As if it were stopped in flight by Thee.
	Like a raving sibyl, I could tell
	What will happen, how it will all be.

	In the temple, veils will fall tomorrow,
	We shall form a frightened group apart,
	And the earth will shake-perhaps from sorrow
	And from pity for my tortured heart.

	Troops will then reform and march away
	To the thud of hoofs and heavy tread,
	And the cross will reach towards the sky
	Like a water-spout above our heads.

	By the cross, I’ll fall down on the ground,
	I shall bite my lips till I draw blood.
	On the cross, your arms will be spread out--
	Wide enough to hug the whole wide world.

	Who’s this for, this glory and this strife?
	Who’s this for, this torment and this might?
	Are there enough souls on earth, and lives?
	Are there enough cities, dales and heights?

	But three days-such days and nights will pass--
	They will fill me with such crushing dread
	That I’ll see the joyous truth, at last:
	I shall know Christ will rise from the dead.



18. PARTING

	A man is standing in the hall
	His house not recognizing.
	Her sudden leaving was a flight,
	Herself, maybe, surprising.

	The chaos reigning in the room
	He does not try to master.
	His tears and headache hide in gloom
	The extent of his disaster.

	His ears are ringing all day long
	As though he has been drinking.
	And why is it that all the time
	Of waves he keeps on thinking?

	When frosty window-panes blank out
	The world of light and motion,
	Despair and grief are doubly like
	The desert of the ocean.

	She was as dear to him, as close
	In all her ways and features,
	As is the seashore to the wave,
	The ocean to the beaches.

	As over rushes, after storm
	The swell of water surges,
	Into the deepness of his soul
	Her memory submerges.

	In years of strife, in times which were
	Unthinkable to live in,
	Upon a wave of destiny
	To him she had been driven,

	Through countless obstacles, and past
	All dangers never-ended,
	The wave had carried, carried her,
	Till close to him she’d landed.

	And now, so suddenly, she’d left.
	What power overrode them?
	The parting will destroy them both,
	The grief bone-deep corrode them.

	He looks around him. On the floor
	In frantic haste she’d scattered
	The contents of the cupboard, scraps
	Of stuff, her sewing patterns.

	He wanders through deserted rooms
	And tidies up for hours;
	Till darkness falls he folds away
	Her things into the drawers;

	And pricks his finger on a pin
	In her unfinished sewing,
	And sees the whole of her again,
	And silent tears come flowing.



19. SOUL

	My mournful soul, you, sorrowing
	For all my friends around,
	You have become the burial vault
	Of all those hounded down.

	Devoting to their memory
	A verse, embalming them,
	In torment, broken, lovingly
	Lamenting over them,

	In this our mean and selfish time,
	For conscience and for quest
	You stand--a columbarium
	To lay their souls to rest.

	The sum of all their agonies
	Has bowed you to the ground.
	You smell of dust, of death’s decay,
	Of morgue and burial mound.

	My beggarly, dejected soul,
	You heard and saw your fill;
	Remembered all and mixed it well,
	And ground it like a mill.

	Continue pounding and compound
	All that I witnessed here
	To graveyard compost, as you did
	For almost forty years.



20. SPARROW HILLS

	My kisses across your breast, like water from a jug!
	They’ll have an end, and soon, our days of summer heat.
	Nor shall we every night rise up in trailing dust
	The hurdy-gurdy’s bellow, stamp and drag our feet.

	I’ve heard about old age. What ominous forebodings!
	That no wave will lift again to the stars its hands,
	That waters will speak no more; no god in the woods;
	No heart within the pools; no life in meadowlands.

	O rouse your soul! This frenzied day is yours to have!
	It is the world’s midday. Why don’t you use your eyes?
	Look, there’s thought upon high hills in seething bubbles
	Of heat, woodpeckers, cones and needles, clouds and skies.

	Here tracks of city trolleys stop, and further
	The pines alone must satisfy. Trams cannot pass.
	It is always Sunday there! Plucking little branches,
	There the clearing capers, slipping on the grass.

	And strewing sunrays, Whitsun, and rambling walks,
	The woods will have us say the world was always so:
	Conceived like that by forests, hinted to the meadows,
	And spilt by clouds as on a chintz design below.



21. SPRING SHOWER

	Winked to the birdcherry, gulped amid tears,
	Splashed over carriages’ varnish, trees’ tremble.
	Full moon. The musicians are picking their way
	To the theatre. More and more people assemble.

	Puddles on stone. Like a throat overfilled
	With tears are the roses, deep with wet scalding
	Diamonds. Showers of gladness thrill,
	Eyelashes, stormclouds, and roses enfolding.

	The moon for the first time is casting in plaster
	An epic poem uncast till today:
	The cordons, the flutter of dresses, the speaker
	And people enraptured and carried away.

	Whose is the heart whose whole blood shot to glory
	Drained from the cheeks? We are held in his grip.
	The hands of Kerensky are squeezing together
	Into a bunch our aortas and lips.

	This is not night, not rain, not a chorus
	Of tearing acclaim for him, swelled to a roar--
	This is the blinding leap to the Forum
	From catacombs wanting an exit before.

	It is not roses, not Ups, not the roaring
	Crowd-it’s the surf on Theatre Square,
	Marking the end of the long sleep of Europe,
	Proud of her own reawakening here.



22. SUMMER DAY

	With us in springtime, until dawn,
	In orchards blazing bonfires flame
	--As pagan altars may have shone
	When fertile rites received acclaim.

	The virgin soil is dried and baked,
	And steaming vapors from it swarm,
	And all the earth is fire-caked
	As are in winter stove-beds warm.

	When toiling and in earth engrossed,
	My shirt I strip and throw away,
	With scorching sun my back is glossed
	And baked like some big lump of clay.

	And standing where the heat’s most hot,
	And with my eyes half in a daze,
	From head to foot, upon this spot,
	I’m covered with a coat of glaze.

	But when the night invades my room,
	And I peep through the windows dimmed,
	As jugs are filled, so with the bloom
	Of lilac, moisture, I am brimmed.

	It washes off the outer shell
	Of walls’ cooled evening face,
	And offers it to any girl,
	Born here and native of this place.



23. TO A FRIEND

	Come, don’t I know that, stumbling against shadows,
	Darkness could never have arrived at light?
	Do I rate happy hundreds over millions
	Of happy men? Am I a monster quite?

	Isn’t the Five-Year-Plan a yardstick for me,
	Its rise and fall my own? But I don’t quiz
	In asking: What shall I do with my thorax
	And with what’s slower than inertia is?

	The great Soviet gives to the highest passions
	In these brave days each one its rightful place,
	Yet vainly leaves one vacant for the poet.
	When that’s not empty, look for danger’s face.



24. WE WERE IN GEORGIA

	We were in Georgia. You can get this land
	If hell is multiplied by paradise,
	Bare indigence by tenderness, and if
	A hothouse serves as pedestal for ice.

	And then you’ll know what subtle doses of
	Success and labor, duty, mountain air
	Make the right mixture with the earth and sky
	For man to be the way we found him there.

	So that he grew, in famine and defeat
	And bondage, to this stature, without fault,
	Becoming thus a model and a mold,
	Something as stable and as plain as salt.



25. THE WEEPING GARDEN

	It’s terrible!--all drip and listening.
	Whether, as ever, it’s loneliness,
	splashing a branch, like lace, on the window,
	or whether perhaps there’s a witness.

	Choked there beneath its swollen
	burden--earth’s nostrils, and audibly,
	like August, far off in the distance,
	midnight, ripening slow with the fields.

	No sound. No one’s in hiding.
	Confirming its pure desolation,
	it returns to its game--slipping
	from roof, to gutter, slides on.

	I’ll moisten my lips, listening:
	whether, as ever, I’m loneliness,
	and ready maybe for weeping,
	or whether perhaps there’s a witness.

	But, silence. No leaves trembling.
	Nothing to see: sobs, and cries
	being swallowed, slippers splashing,
	between them, tears and sighs.



26. WET PAINT

	I should have seen the sign: “Fresh paint,”
	But useless to advise
	The careless soul, and memory’s stained
	With cheeks, calves, hands, lips, eyes.

	More than all failure, all success,
	I loved you, for your skill
	In whitening the yellowed world
	As white cosmetics will.

	Listen, my dark, my friend: by God,
	All will grow white somehow,
	Whiter than madness or lamp shades
	Or bandage on a brow.



27. WE’RE FEW, PERHAPS THREE

	We’re few, perhaps three, hellish fellows
	Who hail from the flaming Donetz,
	With a fluid gray bark for our cover
	Made of rain-clouds and soldiers’ soviets
	And verses and endless debates
	About art or it may be freight rates.

	We used to be people. We’re epochs.
	Pell-mell we rush caravanwise
	As the tundra to groans of the tender
	And tension of pistons and ties.
	Together we’ll rip through your prose,
	We’ll whirl, a tornado of crows,

	And be off! But you’ll not understand it
	Till late. So the wind in the dawn
	Hits the thatch on the roof-for a moment--
	But puts immortality on
	At trees’ stormy sessions, in speech
	Of boughs the roof’s shingles can’t reach.



28. WINTER NIGHT

	It snowed and snowed, the whole world over,
	Snow swept the world from end to end.
	A candle burned on the table;
	A candle burned.

	As during summer midges swarm
	To beat their wings against a flame
	Out in the yard the snowflakes swarmed
	To beat against the window pane

	The blizzard sculptured on the glass
	Designs of arrows and of whorls.
	A candle burned on the table;
	A candle burned.

	Distorted shadows fell
	Upon the lighted ceiling:
	Shadows of crossed arms,of crossed legs--
	Of crossed destiny.

	Two tiny shoes fell to the floor
	And thudded.
	A candle on a nightstand shed wax tears
	Upon a dress.

	All things vanished within
	The snowy murk-white, hoary.
	A candle burned on the table;
	A candle burned.

	A corner draft fluttered the flame
	And the white fever of temptation
	Upswept its angel wings that cast
	A cruciform shadow

	It snowed hard throughout the month
	Of February, and almost constantly
	A candle burned on the table;
	A candle burned.
