*** Charles Péguy (1873 - 1914)


1. FREEDOM

	_God speaks:_

	When you love someone, you love him as he is.
	I alone am perfect.
	It is probably for that reason
	That I know what perfection is
	And that I demand less perfection of those poor people.
	I know how difficult it is.
	And how often, when they are struggling in their trials,
	How often do I wish and am I tempted to put my hand under their stomachs
	In order to hold them up with my big hand
	Just like a father teaching his son how to swim
	In the current of the river
	And who is divided between two ways of thinking.
	For on the one hand, if he holds him up all the time and if he holds him too much,
	The child will depend on this and will never learn how to swim.
	But if he doesn’t hold him up just at the right moment
	That child is bound to swallow more water than is healthy for him.
	In the same way, when I teach them how to swim amid their trials
	I too am divided by two ways of thinking.
	Because if I am always holding them up, if I hold them up too often,
	They will never learn how to swim by themselves.
	But if I don’t hold them up just at the right moment,
	Perhaps those poor children will swallow more water than is healthy for them.
	Such is the difficulty, and it is a great one.
	And such is the doubleness itself, the two faces of the problem.
	On the one hand, they must work out their salvation for themselves. That is the rule.
	It allows of no exception. Otherwise it would not be interesting. They would not be men.
	Now I want them to be manly, to be men, and to win by themselves
	Their spurs of knighthood.
	On the other hand, they must not swallow more water than is healthy for them,
	Having made a dive into the ingratitude of sin.
	Such is the mystery of man’s freedom, says God,
	And the mystery of my government towards him and towards his freedom.
	If I hold him up too much, he is no longer free
	And if I don’t hold him up sufficiently, I am endangering his salvation.
	Two goods in a sense almost equally precious.
	For salvation is of infinite price.
	But what kind of salvation would a salvation be that was not free?
	What would you call it?
	We want that salvation to be acquired by himself,
	Himself, man. To be procured by himself.
	To come, in a sense, from himself. Such is the secret,
	Such is the mystery of man’s freedom.
	Such is the price we set on man’s freedom.
	Because I myself am free, says God, and I have created man in my own image and likeness.
	Such is the mystery, such the secret, such the price
	Of all freedom.
	That freedom of that creature is the most beautiful reflection in this world
	Of the Creator’s freedom. That is why we are so attached to it,
	And set a proper price on it.
	A salvation that was not free, that was not, that did not come from a free man could in no wise
	  be attractive to us. What would it amount to?
	What would it mean?
	What interest would such a salvation have to offer?
	A beatitude of slaves, a salvation of slaves, a slavish beatitude, how do you expect me to interested
	  in that kind of thing? Does one care to be loved by slaves?
	If it were only a matter of proving my might, my might has no need of those slaves, my might
	  is well enough known, it is sufficiently known that I am the Almighty.
	My might is manifest enough in all matter and in all events.
	My might is manifest enough in the sands of the sea and in the stars of heaven.
	It is not questioned, it is known, it is manifest enough in inanimate creation.
	It is manifest enough in the government,
	In the very event that is man.
	But in my creation which is endued with life, says God, I wanted something more.
	Infinitely better. Infinitely more. For I wanted that freedom.
	I created that very freedom. There are several degrees to my throne.
	When you once have known what it is to be loved freely, submission no longer has any taste.
	All the prostrations in the world
	Are not worth the beautiful upright attitude of a free man as he kneels. All the submission,
	  all the dejection in the world
	Are not equal in value to the soaring up point,
	The beautiful straight soaring up of one single invocation
	From a love that is free.



2. A LITTLE HOPE

	I am, God says, Master of three virtues.

	Faith is a faithful spouse.
	Charity is a mother burning with devotion.
	But hope is a very small girl.
	I am, God says, Master of three virtues.
	Charity is she who extends herself over the centuries.
	But my little hope
	is the one who each morning
	says Good Day to us.

	I am, God says, Master of three virtues.

	Faith it is who keeps watch down the ages;
	Charity it is who keeps watch down the ages.
	But little hope it is
	who goes to bed every evening,
	and who gets up each morning,
	having slept soundly through the night.

	I am, God says, the Master of Three Virtues.

	Faith is a soldier, a captain who defends a fortress.
	A town belonging to the King,
	On the marches of Gascony, on the marches of Lorraine.
	Charity is a doctor, a Little Sister of the poor,
	Who nurses the sick, who nurses the wounded,
	The poor subjects of the King,
	On the marches of Gascony, on the marches of Lorraine.
	But it is my little hope
	Who says good-day to the poor man and the orphan.

	I am, God says, the Lord of the Virtues.

	Faith is a church, a cathedral rooted in the soil of France
	Charity is a hospital, an alms-house which gathers up wretchedness of the world.
	But without hope it would be nothing but a cemetery.

	I am, God says, the Lord of the Virtues.

	It is Faith who watches through centuries of centuries.
	It is Charity who watches through centuries of centuries.
	But it is my little hope
	who lies down every evening
	and gets up every morning
	and really has very good nights.

	I am, God says, the Lord of that virtue.

	It is my little hope
	who goes to sleep every evening,
	in her child’s bed,
	after having said a good prayer,
	and who wakes every morning and gets up
	and says her prayers with new attention.

	I am, God says, Lord of the Three Virtues.

	Faith is a great tree, an oak rooted in the heart of France,
	And under the wings of that tree,
	Charity, my daughter Charity shelters all the distress of the world.
	And my little hope is only that little promise of a bud which shows itself at the very beginning
	  of April.



3. THE PASSION OF OUR LADY

	For the past three days she had been wandering, and following.
	She followed the people.
	She followed the events.
	She seemed to be following a funeral.
	But it was a living man’s funeral.--
	She followed like a follower.
	Like a servant.
	Like a weeper at a Roman funeral.--
	As if it had been her only occupation.
	To weep.--
	That is what he had done to his mother.
	Since the day when he had begun his mission.--
	You saw her everywhere.
	With the people and a little apart from the people.
	Under the porticoes, under the arcades, in drafty places.
	In the temples, in the palaces.
	In the streets.
	In the yards and in the back-yards.
	And she had also gone up to Calvary.
	She too had climbed up Calvary.
	A very steep hill.
	And she did not even feel that she was walking.
	She did not even feel that her feet were carrying her.--
	She too had gone up her Calvary.
	She too had gone up and up
	In the general confusion, lagging a little behind . . .
	She wept and wept under a big linen veil.
	A big blue veil . . .
	A little faded.--


	She wept as it will never be granted to a woman to weep.
	As it will never be asked
	Of a woman to weep on this earth.
	Never at any time.--
	What was very strange was that everyone respected her.
	People greatly respect the parents of the condemned.
	They even said: Poor woman.
	And at the same time they struck at her son.
	Because man is like that.--
	The world is like that.
	Men are what they are and you never can change them.
	She did not know that, on the contrary, he had come to change man.
	That he had come to change the world.
	She followed and wept.
	Everybody respected her.
	Everybody pitied her.
	They said: Poor woman.
	Because they weren’t perhaps really bad.
	They weren’t bad at heart.
	They fulfilled the Scriptures.--
	They honored, respected and admired her grief.
	They didn’t make her go away, they pushed her back only a little with special attentions
	Because she was the mother of the condemned.
	They thought: It’s the family of the condemned.
	They even said so in a low voice.
	They said it among themselves
	With a secret admiration.--
	She followed and wept, and didn’t understand very well.
	But she understood quite well that the government was against her boy.
	And that is a very bad business.--
	She understood that all the governments were together against her boy.
	The government of the Jews and the government of the Romans.
	The government of judges and the government of priests.
	The government of soldiers and the government of parsons.
	He could never get out of it.
	Certainly not.--
	What was strange was that all derision was heaped on him.
	Not on her at all.--
	There was only respect for her.
	For her grief.--
	They didn’t insult her.
	On the contrary.
	People even refrained from looking at her too much.
	All the more to respect her.
	So she too had gone up.
	Gone up with everybody else.
	Up to the very top of the hill.
	Without even being aware of it.
	Her legs had carried her and she did not even know it.
	She too had made the Way of the Cross.
	The fourteen stations of the Way of the Cross.
	Were there fourteen stations?
	Were there really fourteen stations?--
	She didn’t know for sure.
	She couldn’t remember.
	Yet she had not missed one.
	She was sure of that.
	But you can always make a mistake.
	In moments like that your head swims.
	Everybody was against him.
	Everybody wanted him to die.
	It is strange.
	People who are not usually together.
	The government and the people.
	That was awful luck.
	When you have someone for you and someone against you, sometimes you can get out of it.
	You can scramble out of it.
	But he wouldn’t.
	Certainly he wouldn’t.
	When you have everyone against you.
	But what had he done to everyone?

	I’ll tell you.
	He had saved the world.



4. PRAYER OF CONFIDENCE

	When we sit down at the cross formed by two ways
	And must choose regret along with remorse
	And dual fate forces us to pick one course
	And the keystone of two arches fixes our gaze,

	You alone, mistress of the secret, attest
	To the downward slope where one road goes.
	You know the other path that our steps chose,
	As one chooses the cedar for a chest.

	And not through virtue, which we don’t possess.
	And not for duty, which we do not love.
	But, as carpenters find the center of
	A board, to seek the center of wretchedness,

	And to approach the axis of distress,
	And for the dumb need to feel the whole curse,
	And to do whats harder and to suffer worse,
	And to take the blow in all its fulness.

	Through that sleight-of-hand, that very artfulness,
	Which will never make us happy anymore,
	Let us, o queen, at least preserve our honor,
	And along with it our simple tenderness.



5. THE SURRENDER OF SLEEP

	I

	Children don’t even think about being tired.
	They run like little puppies. They make the trip twenty times.
	And, consequently, twenty times more than they needed to.
	What does it matter to them. They know well that at night
	(But they don’t even think about it)
	They will fall asleep
	In their bed or even at the table
	And that sleep is the end of everything.
	This is their secret, that is the secret to being indefatigable.
	Indefatigable as children.
	Indefatigable like the child Hope.
	And always to start over again in the morning.
	Children can’t walk, but they really know how to run.
	The child doesn’t even think, doesn’t know that he’ll sleep at night.
	That he’ll fall asleep at night. And yet it’s this sleep
	Always at hand, always available, always present,
	Always underneath, in full reserve,
	That of yesterday, and that of tomorrow, like good food for one’s being,
	Like a strengthening of being, like a reservoir of being,
	That’s inexhaustible. Always there.
	That of this morning and that of this evening
	That strengthens his legs.
	The sleep from before, the sleep from after
	It’s this same bottomless sleep
	As continuous as being itself
	Which passes from night to night, from one night to the next, which
	continues from one night to the next
	By passing over the days
	Leaving the days as days, like so many holes.
	It’s in this same sleep that children bury their whole being
	Which maintains, which creates for them every day new legs,
	Their brand new legs.
	And also that which is in their new legs: new souls.
	Their new souls, their fresh souls.
	Fresh in the morning, fresh at noon, fresh in the evening.
	Fresh like the roses of France.
	Their souls with the undrooping collars. This is the secret to being
	indefatigable.
	Just sleep. Why don’t people make use of it.
	I’ve given this secret to everyone, says God, I haven’t sold it.
	He who sleeps well, lives well. He who sleeps, prays.
	(He who works, prays too. But there’s time for everything. Both for
	sleep and for work.
	Work and sleep are like two brothers. And they get on very well
	together.
	And sleep leads to work just like work leads to sleep.
	He who works well sleeps well, he who sleeps well works well.)


	II

	There must be, says God, some relationship,
	There must be something going on
	Between the kingdom of France and this little Hope.
	There’s some secret there. They work too well together. And yet they
	tell me
	That, there are men who don’t sleep.
	I don’t like the man who doesn’t sleep, says God.
	Sleep is the friend of man.
	Sleep is the friend of God.
	Sleep may be my most beautiful creation.
	And I too rested on the seventh day.
	He whose heart is pure, sleeps. And he who sleeps has a pure heart.
	This is the great secret to being as indefatigable as a child.
	To have that strength in your legs that a child has.
	Those new legs, those new souls
	And to start over every morning, always new,
	Like the young, like the new
	Hope. Yes, they tell me that there are men
	Who work well and who sleep poorly.
	Who don’t sleep. What a lack of confidence in me.
	It’s almost worse than if they worked poorly but slept well.
	Than if they worked but didn’t sleep, because sloth
	Is no worse a sin than anxiety
	In fact, it’s even a less serious than anxiety
	And than despair and than a lack of confidence in me.
	I’m not talking, says God, about those men
	Who don’t work and who don’t sleep.
	Those men are sinners, it goes without saying. They get what they had
	coming to them. Great sinners. All they have to do is work.
	I’m talking about those who work and who don’t sleep.
	I pity them. I’m talking about those who work, and who thus
	In doing this are following my commandment, poor children.
	And who, on the other hand, don’t have the courage, don’t have the
	confidence, don’t sleep.
	I pity them. I hold it against them. A bit. They don’t trust me.
	As a child lays innocently in his mother’s arms, thus do they not lay.
	Innocently in the arms of my Providence.
	They have the courage to work. They don’t have the courage to do
	nothing.
	They possess the virtue of work. They don’t possess the virtue of doing
	nothing.
	Of relaxing. Of resting. Of sleeping.
	Unhappy people, they don’t know what’s good.
	They look after their affairs well during the day.
	But they don’t want to give them to me to look after during the night.
	As if I weren’t capable of looking after them for one night.
	He who doesn’t sleep is unfaithful to Hope.
	And that’s the greatest infidelity.
	Because it’s an infidelity to the greatest Faith.
	Poor children, they manage their affairs wisely during the day.
	But, come nightfall, they can’t resolve
	They can’t resign themselves to entrust their affairs to my wisdom
	They can’t allow me to govern their affairs for the space of one night.
	To take over the management and government of their affairs.
	As if I weren’t capable, I suppose, of looking after them a bit.
	Of watching over them.
	Of managing and governing and all the rest.
	I manage plenty of other affairs, poor people, I govern creation, surely
	that’s more difficult.
	Maybe you could, without much loss, leave your affairs in my hands,
	wise men.
	Surely I am as wise as you are.
	Perhaps you could hand them over to me for the space of a night.
	While you sleep
	At least
	And maybe tomorrow morning you won’t find them too badly
	damaged.
	Maybe tomorrow morning they won’t be any worse off.
	I’m probably still capable of guiding them a bit.
	I’m talking of those who work
	And who in this follow my commandment.
	And who don’t sleep, and who in this
	Reject all that’s good in my creation,
	Sleep, all that I have created good
	And who reject all the same my same commandment.
	What ingratitude these poor children have toward me
	To reject such a good,
	Such a beautiful commandment.
	These poor children are following human wisdom.
	Human wisdom says Never put off till tomorrow
	What you can do today.
	Whereas I tell you He who can put off till tomorrow
	Is he who is most pleasing to God.
	He who sleeps like a child
	Is he, too, who sleeps like my precious Hope.
	And I tell you Put off till tomorrow
	Those concerns and those worries that are eating at you today
	And that might devour you today.
	Put off till tomorrow those sobs that choke you
	When you see today’s misery.
	Those sobs that rise in you and strangle you.
	Put off till tomorrow those tears that fill your eyes and cover your face.
	That flood you. That fall down your cheeks. Those tears flowing from
	your eyes.
	Because between today and tomorrow, I, God may have passed by.
	Human wisdom says: Cursed is he who puts off till tomorrow.
	And I say Happy, happy is he who puts off till tomorrow.
	Happy is he who puts off. Which means Happy is he who hopes. And
	who sleeps.
	And I say on the contrary Cursed.
	Cursed is he who lies awake and doesn’t trust me. What a mistrusting
	of me. Cursed is he who lies awake.
	And who drags.
	Cursed is he who drags through the evenings and through the nights.
	Through the eve of evening and through the fall of night.
	Like a snail’s trail across these beautiful eves.
	My creatures.
	Like a slug’s trail across these beautiful nightfalls.
	My creatures, my creation.
	The thick remembrances of daily cares.
	The burning, the gnawing.
	The dirty tracks of our cares, the bitterness and the anxieties.
	The sorrows.
	The trails of slugs. Upon the flowers of my night.
	Truly I tell you that this offends
	My precious Hope.
	Who wouldn’t want to entrust me with the supervision of his night.
	As if I hadn’t proven myself.
	Who wouldn’t want to entrust me with the supervision of one of his
	nights.
	As if I were asking for more than one.
	Who, having surrendered his affairs in poor condition when he went to
	bed,
	Has not found them well when he woke up.
	Because I may have paid him a visit.


	III

	As the sea is the reservoir of water so night is the reservoir of being.
	It’s the time that I’ve reserved for myself. No matter what these feverish
	days may do.
	As in the open sea, in the middle of the night, they bathe in the
	fullness of night.
	It’s they that are scattered, it’s they that are fragmented.
	The days are the Sporades Islands and night is the open sea
	Upon which St. Paul sailed
	And the border that descends from night to day
	Is always a rising border
	A steep border, and the border that rises from the day toward the night
	Is always a descending border. In the depths of night.
	O night, my finest invention, my most noble creation of all.
	My most beautiful creature. Creature of the greatest Hope.
	You give the most substance of Hope.
	You are the instrument, you are the very substance and the
	dwelling-place of Hope.
	And also, (and thus), you are ultimately the creature of the greatest
	Charity.
	Because it’s you who gently rock the whole of Creation
	Into a restoring Sleep.
	As one lays a child in his little bed,
	As his mother lays him down and as his mother tucks him in
	Ad kisses him (She’s not afraid of waking him up.
	He’s sleeping so soundly.)
	As his mother tucks him in and laughs and kisses his forehead
	For pleasure.
	And he too laughs, he laughs in response while sleeping.
	So too, o night, dark-eyed mother, universal mother,
	Not only mother of children (it’s so easy)
	But even mother of men and of women, which is so difficult,
	It’s you, night, who put to bed the whole of Creation
	In a bed of a few hours
	(Awaiting.) In a bed of a few hours
	Image, feeble image, and promise and prefiguration of the bed of every
	hour.
	Anticipated realization. Promise kept in advance
	Awaiting the bed of every hour.
	In which I, the Father, will lay my creation.
	O Night, you are night. And all the days together
	Will never be day, they will never be anything but several days.
	Scattered. The days will never be anything but flashes.
	Uncertain flashes, and you, night, you are my great somber light.
	I congratulate myself for having made night. The days are isles and
	islands.
	That pierce and split the sea.
	But they have to rest in the deep sea.
	They’re forced to.
	And you too, days, you’re forced to as well.
	You have to rest in the deep night.
	And you, night, you are the deep sea
	Upon which St. Paul sailed, not that little lake in Galilee.
	Al the days are nothing but members
	Dismembered members. It’s the days that emerge, but even so they
	have to be anchored in the deep water.
	In the deep night. Night, my finest invention, it’s you who calm, it’s
	you who soothe, it’s you who bring rest
	To aching limbs
	All out of joint from the days work.
	It’s you who calm, it’s you who soothe, it’s you who bring rest
	To aching hearts
	To bruised bodies, to limbs bruised from work, to hearts bruised from
	work
	And from daily cares and sorrow.
	O Night, o my daughter Night, the most religious of all my daughters
	The most reverent.
	Of all my daughters, of all my creatures, the most abandoned into my
	hands.
	You glorify me in the Sleep even more than your Brother, Day, glorifies me
	in Work.
	Because in work man only glorifies me by his work.
	Whereas in sleep it is I who glorify myself by man’s surrender.
	And it’s more certain, and I know better how to go about it.
	Night, you are for man a more nourishing food than bread and wine.
	Because the man who eats and drinks, if he doesn’t sleep, will not
	profit from his nourishment.
	And it will sour and upset his stomach.
	But if he sleeps, the bread and wine will become his flesh and blood.
	For working. For praying. For sleeping.
	Night, you alone dress wounds.
	Aching hearts. All out of joint. All torn.
	O my dark-eyed daughter, of all my daughters you alone are, and can
	call yourself, my accomplice.
	You are in league with me, because you and me, me through you,
	Together we cause man to fall into the trap of my arms
	And we take him a bit by surprise.
	But one takes what one can get. If anyone knows, it’s me.
	Night, you are the beautiful creation
	Of my wisdom.
	Night, o my daughter Night, o my silent daughter
	At Rebecca’s well, at the well of the Samaritan woman
	It’s you who draw the deepest water
	From the deepest well
	O night who gently rocks all creatures
	Into a restoring sleep.
	O night who bathes all wounds
	In the only fresh water and in the only deep water
	At Rebecca’s well, drawn from the deepest well.
	Friend of children, friend and sister to the young Hope
	O night who dresses all wounds
	At the well of the Samaritan woman, you who draw, from the deepest
	well,
	The deepest prayer.
	O night, o my daughter Night, you who know how to keep silent, o
	my daughter of the beautiful mantle.
	You who confer rest and forgetfulness. You how issue a healing balm,
	And silence, and shadow
	O my starry night, I created you first.
	You who send to sleep, you who already enshroud in an eternal
	Darkness,
	All of my most restless creatures,
	The fiery steed, the industrious ant,
	And man, that monster of unrest.
	Night you succeed in quieting man
	That well of unrest.
	By himself more restless than all of creation put together.
	Man, that well of anxiety.
	Just as you quiet the water in the well.
	O my night with the glorious dress
	You gather children and the young Hope
	Into the folds of your dress
	Though men resist you.
	O my beautiful night, I created you first.
	And practically before first
	O silent one, draped with veils
	You who descend on earth as a foretaste
	You who scatter by hand, who pour out over the earth
	An initial peace
	Forerunner of eternal peace.
	An initial rest
	Forerunner of eternal rest.
	An initial soothing balm, an initial beatitude
	Forerunner of eternal beatitude.
	You who soothe, you who embalm, you who console.
	You who bind wounds and injured limbs.
	You who silence hearts, you who quiet bodies
	Who still aching hearts, aching bodies,
	Wrought with pain,
	Worn-out limbs, backs broken
	With weariness, with care, with (mortal) anxieties,
	With sorrow,
	You who administer balm to throats torn with bitterness
	A cooling balm
	O my noble-hearted daughter, I created you first
	Practically before first, my great-bosomed daughter
	As I knew well what I was doing.
	Surely, I knew what I was doing.
	You who lay the child in his mother’s arms
	The child, brightened with a shadow of sleep
	Laughing inwardly, laughing secretly because of his confidence in his
	mother.
	And in me,
	Laughing secretly out of the corner of his serious mouth
	You who lay the child, inwardly bursting, overflowing with innocence
	And with confidence
	In the arms of his mother
	You who used to lay the child Jesus every night
	In the arms of the Most Holy and Immaculate one.
	You who are the turn-sister of hope.
	O my daughter, first among all. You who even succeed,
	You who occasionally succeed,
	You who lay man in the arms of my Providence
	My maternal Providence
	O my daughter, glittering and dark, I salute you
	You who restore, you who nourish, you who give rest
	O silence of darkness
	Such a silence reigned before the creation of anxiety.
	Before the beginning of the reign of anxiety
	Such a silence will reign, now a silence of light,
	When all this anxiety will have been consummated,
	When all this anxiety will have been exhausted.
	Whey they will have drawn all the water from the well.
	After the consummation, after the exhaustion of all this anxiety
	Man’s anxiety.
	Thus, my daughter, you come early and you come late
	For in this reign of anxiety you recall, you commemorate, you
	practically reestablish,
	You practically recommence the former Serenity that existed
	When my spirit brooded over the waters.
	But, my starry daughter, my daughter of the dark mantle, you are also
	very much ahead of your time, you are also precocious.
	For you announce, for you represent, for you practically commence in
	advance, every night,
	My great Serenity of light
	Eternal.
	Night, you are holy; Night, you are great; Night, you are beautiful.
	Night of the great mantle.
	Night, I love you and I salute you and I glorify you and you are my
	great daughter and my creature.
	O beautiful night, night of the great mantle, my daughter of the starry
	mantle
	You remind me, myself, you remind me of the great silence that existed
	Before I had unlocked the firmament of ingratitude.
	And you proclaim, even to me, you herald to me the silence that will
	exist
	After the end of man’s reign, when I will have reclaimed my scepter.
	And sometimes I think about it ahead of time, because this man really
	makes a lot of noise.
	But above all, Night, you remind me of that night.
	And I will remember it eternally.
	The ninth hour had sounded. It was in the country of my people of
	Israel.
	It was all over. That enormous adventure.
	From the sixth hour to the ninth hour there had been a darkness
	covering the entire countryside.
	Everything was finished. Let’s not talk about it anymore. It hurts me to
	think about it.
	My son’s incredible descent among men.
	Into their midst.
	When you think of what they made of him.
	Those thirty years that he was a carpenter among men.
	Those three years that he was a sort of preacher among men.
	A priest.
	Those three days when he fell victim to men.
	Among men.
	Those three nights when he was dead in the midst of men.
	Dead among the dead.
	Through the centuries of centuries that he’s been a host among men.
	This incredible adventure was finished.
	The adventure that has tied my hands, God, for all eternity.
	The adventure by which my Son has tied my hands.
	Tying the hands of my justice eternally, untying the hands of my
	mercy for eternally.
