*** Joseph Mary Plunkett (1887 - 1916)


1. HEAVEN IN HELL

	If the dread all-seeing stars, 
	Ringed Saturn and ruddy Mars 
	And their companions all the seven, 
	That play before the lord of Heaven, 
	Each blossoming nebula and all 
	The constellations, were to fall 
	Low at my feet and worship me, 
	Endow me with all sovranty 
	Of their wide kingdom of the blue-- 
	Yet I would not believe that you 
	Could love me--If besides the nine 
	Encircling legions all-divine 
	Should, chanting, teach me that my worth 
	Outshone the souls of men on earth 
	And seraphs in Heaven, and as well 
	That glittering demons deep in Hell 
	Fled at my frown, obeyed my word-- 
	If every flower and beast and bird 
	In God’s great earth and splendid sea 
	Should live and love and fight, for me 
	And my sweet singing and sad art-- 
	Yet could I not conceive your heart 
	Stooping to mine, nor your wild eyes 
	Unveiling their deep ecstasies, 
	Your tenebrous hair sweep near my lips, 
	Your eyelids bring your soul eclipse 
	For fear that I should be made blind 
	By love’s bright image in your mind. 
	You are the Standard of high Heaven, 
	The Banner brave towards which I’ve striven 
	To force my way--To seize and hold 
	The citadel of the city of gold 
	I must attain the Flag of love 
	Blazoned with the eternal Dove. 
	
	Once Immortality, a babe, 
	Played with the Future’s astrolabe 
	And marked a destiny thereon 
	More splendid than the morning sun 
	Leaping to glory from the earth: 
	More wondrous than the wonder-birth 
	Of the white moon from darkest rock; 
	More strange than should the sun unlock 
	His leashes and let slip the stars; 
	More desperate than the clanging wars 
	Twixt Hell and Heaven; still more great 
	Than any favourable fate; 
	But beyond all things beautiful, 
	Beyond Mortality’s foot-rule 
	Of loveliness, and little words-- 
	Sometimes, at twilit eve, when birds 
	Lapse from dream-silence into song, 
	Sometimes when Thunder’s rolling note 
	Reverberates from his iron throat, 
	They speak of such high mysteries 
	But no one can interpret these-- 
	All of this dim and deep design 
	If I should choose, its crown were mine 
	To win or lose by my sole hand 
	And heart. I chose, and joined the band 
	Of Heaven’s adventurers that seek 
	To climb the never-conquered peak 
	In solitude by their sole might. 
	In the dark innocence of night 
	I fought unknown inhuman foes 
	And left them in their battle-throes, 
	Hacked a way through them and advanced 
	To where the stars of morning danced 
	In your high honour, there I stood 
	To see you, till the morning-flood 
	Burst from the sky--but your sunrise 
	Striking my unaccustomed eyes 
	Smote them to darkness, and I turned 
	And stumbled towards the night. There burned 
	In heart and eyes a drunken flame 
	That sang and clamoured out your name, 
	And woke a madness in my head. 
	The enemies I had left for dead 
	Surrounded me with gibbering cries 
	And mocked me for my blinded eyes. 
	I curst them till they rose in rage 
	And flung me down a battle-gage 
	To fight them on the floors of Hell 
	Where solely they’re assailable. 
	I took the challenge straightaway 
	And leaped--and that was yesterday 
	Or was last year, but every hour 
	For weary years to break their power 
	Still must I fight, but now a gleam 
	Of hope comes to me like a dream, 
	To-day, though dimly, I do see, 
	My vision has come back to me. 
	And I have learnt in deepest Hell 
	I with terror-twisted eyes 
	Have watched you play in Paradise, 
	Tortured and torn by demons seven 
	Have kept my heart’s gaze fixed on Heaven, 
	Save when the smoky mists of blood 
	Have blinded me with their fell flood. 
	My desert heart all desolate 
	Lit with the mirage of your hate 
	I searched, my vision held above, 
	For green oasis of your love. 
	My heart’s dry desert, hot and wide, 
	Bounded by flames on every side, 
	So dim and old no song can tell, 
	Covers the tombs where dead kings dwell: 
	Now demons dance upon their tombs, 
	Shut with the seals of lasting dooms, 
	For them until the world be riven 
	No hope of Hell, no fear of Heaven. 
	But I, alas! am torn between 
	The things unseen and the things seen, 
	I alone of the souls I know 
	In Hell and Heaven am high and low, 
	High in Heaven and low in Hell: 
	From pit and peak inaccessible 
	To all but Satan and seraphim 
	My song gains power and grows more grim. 
	
	Only the straining of my vision 
	Toward the playing-fields elysian 
	Where you with starry comrades fling 
	Your fervours over eye and wing, 
	With deep and happy subtlety 
	Flavouring the wine-bag of the bee; 
	Thrones, principalities and powers 
	Showering with Eden-flowers: 
	With Michael’s sword and Raphael’s lute 
	Slaying and singing, making bruit 
	Of lovely laughter with your lips 
	Sounding as where the honey drips 
	At reaping-time by rippling brooks 
	Twining between the barley-stocks: 
	Only your shape that holds my sight, 
	Your ways that fill it with delight, 
	Your steps that blossom where you’ve trod, 
	Your laughter like the breath of God, 
	And all the braveries that extol 
	The living sword that is your soul: 
	Only your passion-haunted eyes 
	Interpreting your mysteries: 
	These are to me and my desire 
	For pillar of cloud and pillar of fire, 
	A gleam and gloom of Heaven, in Hell 
	A high continuous miracle.


2. I LOVE YOU WITH MY EVERY BREATH

	I love you with my every breath, 
	I make you songs like thunder birds, 
	Give you my life--you give me death 
	And stab me with your dreadful words. 
	
	You laid my head against your heart 
	Last night, my lips upon your breast 
	And now you say that we must part 
	For fear your heart should be oppressed: 
	
	You cannot go against the world 
	For my sake only--thus your phrase, 
	But I--God’s beauty is unfurled 
	In your gold hair, and in your gaze 
	
	The wisdom of God’s bride--each soul 
	That shares his love, and yours and mine, 
	Two lovers share your aureole 
	And one is mortal, one divine: 
	
	One came on earth that you might know 
	His love for you--that you deny, 
	Now you give me this equal blow: 
	One died for you, and one will die.


3. I SAW THE SUN AT MIDNIGHT

	I saw the Sun at midnight, rising red, 
	Deep-hued yet glowing, heavy with the stain 
	Of blood-compassion, and I saw It gain 
	Swiftly in size and growing till It spread 
	Over the stars; the heavens bowed their head 
	As from Its heart slow dripped a crimson rain, 
	Then a great tremor shook It, as of pain--
	The night fell, moaning, as It hung there dead. 
	
	O Sun, O Christ, O bleeding Heart of flame! 
	Thou givest Thine agony as our life’s worth, 
	And makest it infinite, lest we have dearth 
	Of rights wherewith to call upon Thy Name; 
	Thou pawnest Heaven as a pledge for Earth 
	And for our glory sufferest all shame.


4. I SEE HIS BLOOD UPON THE ROSE

	I see his blood upon the rose
	And in the stars the glory of His eyes,
	His body gleams amid eternal snows,
	His tears fall from the skies.
	
	I see his face in every flower;
	The thunder and the singing of the birds
	Are but His voice--and carven by His power
	Rocks are His written words.
	
	All pathways by His feet are worn,
	His strong heart stirs the ever-beating sea,
	His crown of thorns is twined with every thorn,
	His cross is every tree.


5. INITIATION

	Our lips can only stammer, yet we chant 
	High things of God. We do not hope to praise 
	The splendour and the glory of his ways, 
	Nor light up Heaven with our low descant: 
	But we will follow thee, his hierophant 
	Filling with secret canticles the days 
	To shadow forth in symbols for their gaze 
	What crowns and thrones await his militant. 
	
	For all his beauty showered on the earth 
	Is summed in thee, O thou most perfect flower; 
	His dew has filled thy chalice, and his power 
	Blows forth the fragrance of thy mystic worth: 
	White blossom of his Tree, behold the hour! 
	Fear not! thy fruit is Love’s most lovely birth.


6. THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD

	The drunken stars stagger across the sky,
	The moon wavers and sways like a wind-blown bud,
	Beneath my feet the earth like drifting scud
	Lapses and slides, wallows and shoots on high;
	Immovable things start suddenly flying by,
	The city shakes and quavers, a city of mud
	And ooze--a brawling cataract is my blood
	Of molten metal and fire--like God am I.
	
	When God crushes his passion-fruit for our thirst
	And the universe totters--I have burst the grape
	Of the world, and let its powerful blood escape
	Untasted--crying whether my vision durst
	See God’s high glory in a girl’s soft shape--
	God! Is my worship blessed or accurst?

