*** Edgar Allan Poe (1809 - 1849)


1. AL AARAAF

	I

	O! nothing earthly save the ray
	(Thrown back from flowers) of Beauty’s eye,
	As in those gardens where the day
	Springs from the gems of Circassy--
	O! nothing earthly save the thrill
	Of melody in woodland rill--
	Or (music of the passion-hearted)
	Joy’s voice so peacefully departed
	That like the murmur in the shell,
	Its echo dwelleth and will dwell--
	O! nothing of the dross of ours--
	Yet all the beauty--all the flowers
	That list our Love, and deck our bowers--
	Adorn yon world afar, afar--
	The wandering star.

	’Twas a sweet time for Nesace--for there
	Her world lay lolling on the golden air,
	Near four bright suns--a temporary rest--
	An oasis in desert of the blest.
	Away away--’mid seas of rays that roll
	Empyrean splendor o’er th’ unchained soul--
	The soul that scarce (the billows are so dense)
	Can struggle to its destin’d eminence--
	To distant spheres, from time to time, she rode,
	And late to ours, the favour’d one of God--
	But, now, the ruler of an anchor’d realm,
	She throws aside the sceptre--leaves the helm,
	And, amid incense and high spiritual hymns,
	Laves in quadruple light her angel limbs.

	Now happiest, loveliest in yon lovely Earth,
	Whence sprang the “Idea of Beauty” into birth,
	(Falling in wreaths thro’ many a startled star,
	Like woman’s hair ’mid pearls, until, afar,
	It lit on hills Achaian, and there dwelt),
	She look’d into Infinity--and knelt.
	Rich clouds, for canopies, about her curled--
	Fit emblems of the model of her world--
	Seen but in beauty--not impeding sight--
	Of other beauty glittering thro’ the light--
	A wreath that twined each starry form around,
	And all the opal’d air in color bound.

	All hurriedly she knelt upon a bed
	Of flowers: of lilies such as rear’d the head
	On the fair Capo Deucato, and sprang
	So eagerly around about to hang
	Upon the flying footsteps of--deep pride--
	Of her who lov’d a mortal--and so died.
	The Sephalica, budding with young bees,
	Uprear’d its purple stem around her knees:
	And gemmy flower, of Trebizond misnam’d--
	Inmate of highest stars, where erst it sham’d
	All other loveliness: its honied dew
	(The fabled nectar that the heathen knew)
	Deliriously sweet, was dropp’d from Heaven,
	And fell on gardens of the unforgiven In Trebizond--and on a sunny flower
	So like its own above that, to this hour,
	It still remaineth, torturing the bee
	With madness, and unwonted reverie:
	In Heaven, and all its environs, the leaf
	And blossom of the fairy plant, in grief
	Disconsolate linger--grief that hangs her head,
	Repenting follies that full long have fled,
	Heaving her white breast to the balmy air,
	Like guilty beauty, chasten’d, and more fair:
	Nyctanthes too, as sacred as the light
	She fears to perfume, perfuming the night:
	And Clytia pondering between many a sun,
	While pettish tears adown her petals run:
	And that aspiring flower that sprang on Earth--
	And died, ere scarce exalted into birth,
	Bursting its odorous heart in spirit to wing Its way to Heaven, from garden of a king:
	And Valisnerian lotus thither flown
	From struggling with the waters of the Rhone:
	And thy most lovely purple perfume, Zante!
	Isola d’oro!--Fior di Levante!
	And the Nelumbo bud that floats for ever
	With Indian Cupid down the holy river--
	Fair flowers, and fairy! to whose care is given
	To bear the Goddess’ song, in odors, up to Heaven:

	“Spirit! that dwellest where,
	In the deep sky,
	The terrible and fair,
	In beauty vie!
	Beyond the line of blue--
	The boundary of the star
	Which turneth at the view
	Of thy barrier and thy bar--
	Of the barrier overgone
	By the comets who were cast
	From their pride, and from their throne
	To be drudges till the last--
	To be carriers of fire
	(The red fire of their heart)
	With speed that may not tire
	And with pain that shall not part--
	Who livest--_that_ we know--
	In Eternity--we feel--
	But the shadow of whose brow
	What spirit shall reveal?
	Tho’ the beings whom thy Nesace,
	Thy messenger hath known
	Have dream’d for thy Infinity
	A model of their own--
	Thy will is done, O God!
	The star hath ridden high
	Thro’ many a tempest, but she rode
	Beneath thy burning eye;
	And here, in thought, to thee--
	In thought that can alone
	Ascend thy empire and so be
	A partner of thy throne--
	By winged Fantasy,
	My embassy is given,
	Till secrecy shall knowledge be
	In the environs of Heaven.”

	She ceas’d--and buried then her burning cheek
	Abash’d, amid the lilies there, to seek
	A shelter from the fervor of His eye;
	For the stars trembled at the Deity.
	She stirr’d not--breath’d not--for a voice was there
	How solemnly pervading the calm air!
	A sound of silence on the startled ear
	Which dreamy poets name “the music of the sphere.”
	Ours is a world of words: Quiet we call
	“Silence”--which is the merest word of all.

	All Nature speaks, and ev’n ideal things
	Flap shadowy sounds from the visionary wings--
	But ah! not so when, thus, in realms on high
	The eternal voice of God is passing by,
	And the red winds are withering in the sky!
	“What tho’ in worlds which sightless cycles run,
	Link’d to a little system, and one sun--
	Where all my love is folly, and the crowd
	Still think my terrors but the thunder cloud,
	The storm, the earthquake, and the ocean-wrath
	(Ah! will they cross me in my angrier path?)
	What tho’ in worlds which own a single sun
	The sands of time grow dimmer as they run,
	Yet thine is my resplendency, so given
	To bear my secrets thro’ the upper Heaven.
	Leave tenantless thy crystal home, and fly,
	With all thy train, athwart the moony sky--
	Apart--like fire-flies in Sicilian night,
	And wing to other worlds another light!
	Divulge the secrets of thy embassy
	To the proud orbs that twinkle--and so be
	To ev’ry heart a barrier and a ban
	Lest the stars totter in the guilt of man!”

	Up rose the maiden in the yellow night,
	The single-mooned eve!-on earth we plight
	Our faith to one love--and one moon adore--
	The birth-place of young Beauty had no more.
	As sprang that yellow star from downy hours,
	Up rose the maiden from her shrine of flowers,
	And bent o’er sheeny mountain and dim plain
	Her way--but left not yet her Therasæan reign.


	II

	High on a mountain of enamell’d head--
	Such as the drowsy shepherd on his bed
	Of giant pasturage lying at his ease,
	Raising his heavy eyelid, starts and sees
	With many a mutter’d “hope to be forgiven”
	What time the moon is quadrated in Heaven--
	Of rosy head, that towering far away Into the sunlit ether, caught the ray
	Of sunken suns at eve--at noon of night,
	While the moon danc’d with the fair stranger light--
	Uprear’d upon such height arose a pile
	Of gorgeous columns on th’ uuburthen’d air,
	Flashing from Parian marble that twin smile
	Far down upon the wave that sparkled there,
	And nursled the young mountain in its lair.
	Of molten stars their pavement, such as fall
	Thro’ the ebon air, besilvering the pall
	Of their own dissolution, while they die--
	Adorning then the dwellings of the sky.
	A dome, by linked light from Heaven let down,
	Sat gently on these columns as a crown--
	A window of one circular diamond, there,
	Look’d out above into the purple air
	And rays from God shot down that meteor chain
	And hallow’d all the beauty twice again,
	Save when, between th’ Empyrean and that ring,
	Some eager spirit flapp’d his dusky wing.
	But on the pillars Seraph eyes have seen
	The dimness of this world: that grayish green
	That Nature loves the best for Beauty’s grave
	Lurk’d in each cornice, round each architrave--
	And every sculptured cherub thereabout
	That from his marble dwelling peered out,
	Seem’d earthly in the shadow of his niche--
	Achaian statues in a world so rich?
	Friezes from Tadmor and Persepolis--
	From Balbec, and the stilly, clear abyss
	Of beautiful Gomorrah! Oh, the wave Is now upon thee--but too late to save!
	Sound loves to revel in a summer night:
	Witness the murmur of the gray twilight
	That stole upon the ear, in Eyraco,
	Of many a wild star-gazer long ago--
	That stealeth ever on the ear of him
	Who, musing, gazeth on the distance dim,
	And sees the darkness coming as a cloud--
	Is not its form--its voice--most palpable and loud?
	But what is this?--it cometh--and it brings
	A music with it--’tis the rush of wings--
	A pause--and then a sweeping, falling strain,
	And Nesace is in her halls again.
	From the wild energy of wanton haste
	Her cheeks were flushing, and her lips apart;
	The zone that clung around her gentle waist
	Had burst beneath the heaving of her heart.
	Within the centre of that hall to breathe
	She paus’d and panted, Zanthe! all beneath,
	The fairy light that kiss’d her golden hair
	And long’d to rest, yet could but sparkle there!

	Young flowers were whispering in melody
	To happy flowers that night--and tree to tree;
	Fountains were gushing music as they fell In many a star-lit grove, or moon-light dell;
	Yet silence came upon material things--
	Fair flowers, bright waterfalls and angel wings--
	And sound alone that from the spirit sprang
	Bore burthen to the charm the maiden sang:

	“Neath blue-bell or streamer--
	Or tufted wild spray
	That keeps, from the dreamer,
	The moonbeam away--
	Bright beings! that ponder,
	With half-closing eyes,
	On the stars which your wonder
	Hath drawn from the skies,
	Till they glance thro’ the shade, and
	Come down to your brow
	Like--eyes of the maiden
	Who calls on you now--
	Arise! from your dreaming
	In violet bowers,
	To duty beseeming
	These star-litten hours--
	And shake from your tresses
	Encumber’d with dew

	The breath of those kisses
	That cumber them too--
	(O! how, without you, Love!
	Could angels be blest?)
	Those kisses of true love
	That lull’d ye to rest!
	Up! shake from your wing
	Each hindering thing:
	The dew of the night--
	It would weigh down your flight;
	And true love caresses--
	O! leave them apart!
	They are light on the tresses,
	But lead on the heart.

	Ligeia! Ligeia!
	My beautiful one!
	Whose harshest idea
	Will to melody run,
	O! is it thy will
	On the breezes to toss?
	Or, capriciously still,
	Like the lone Albatross,
	Incumbent on night
	(As she on the air)
	To keep watch with delight
	On the harmony there?

	Ligeia! wherever
	Thy image may be,
	No magic shall sever
	Thy music from thee.
	Thou hast bound many eyes
	In a dreamy sleep--
	But the strains still arise
	Which _thy_ vigilance keep--

	The sound of the rain
	Which leaps down to the flower,
	And dances again
	In the rhythm of the shower--
	The murmur that springs
	From the growing of grass
	Are the music of things--
	But are modell’d, alas!
	Away, then, my dearest,
	O! hie thee away
	To springs that lie clearest
	Beneath the moon-ray--
	To lone lake that smiles,
	In its dream of deep rest,
	At the many star-isles
	That enjewel its breast--
	Where wild flowers, creeping,
	Have mingled their shade,
	On its margin is sleeping
	Full many a maid--
	Some have left the cool glade, and
	Have slept with the bee--
	Arouse them, my maiden,
	On moorland and lea--

	Go! breathe on their slumber,
	All softly in ear,
	The musical number
	They slumber’d to hear--
	For what can awaken
	An angel so soon
	Whose sleep hath been taken
	Beneath the cold moon,
	As the spell which no slumber
	Of witchery may test,
	The rhythmical number
	Which lull’d him to rest?”

	Spirits in wing, and angels to the view,
	A thousand seraphs burst th’ Empyrean thro’,
	Young dreams still hovering on their drowsy flight--
	Seraphs in all but “Knowledge,” the keen light
	That fell, refracted, thro’ thy bounds afar,
	O death! from eye of God upon that star;
	Sweet was that error--sweeter still that death--
	Sweet was that error--ev’n with _us_ the breath
	Of Science dims the mirror of our joy--
	To them ’twere the Simoom, and would destroy--
	For what (to them) availeth it to know
	That Truth is Falsehood--or that Bliss is Woe?
	Sweet was their death--with them to die was rife
	With the last ecstasy of satiate life--
	Beyond that death no immortality--
	But sleep that pondereth and is not “to be”--
	And there--oh! may my weary spirit dwell--
	Apart from Heaven’s Eternity--and yet how far from Hell!

	What guilty spirit, in what shrubbery dim
	Heard not the stirring summons of that hymn?
	But two: they fell: for heaven no grace imparts
	To those who hear not for their beating hearts.
	A maiden-angel and her seraph-lover--
	O! where (and ye may seek the wide skies over)
	Was Love, the blind, near sober Duty known?
	Unguided Love hath fallen--’mid “tears of perfect moan.”

	He was a goodly spirit--he who fell:
	A wanderer by mossy-mantled well--
	A gazer on the lights that shine above--
	A dreamer in the moonbeam by his love:
	What wonder? for each star is eye-like there,
	And looks so sweetly down on Beauty’s hair--
	And they, and ev’ry mossy spring were holy
	To his love-haunted heart and melancholy.
	The night had found (to him a night of wo)
	Upon a mountain crag, young Angelo--
	Beetling it bends athwart the solemn sky,
	And scowls on starry worlds that down beneath it lie.
	Here sate he with his love--his dark eye bent
	With eagle gaze along the firmament:
	Now turn’d it upon her--but ever then It trembled to the orb of EARTH again.

	“Ianthe, dearest, see! how dim that ray!
	How lovely ’tis to look so far away!
	She seemed not thus upon that autumn eve I left her gorgeous halls--nor mourned to leave,
	That eve--that eve--I should remember well--
	The sun-ray dropped, in Lemnos with a spell
	On th’ Arabesque carving of a gilded hall
	Wherein I sate, and on the draperied wall--
	And on my eyelids--O, the heavy light!
	How drowsily it weighed them into night!
	On flowers, before, and mist, and love they ran
	With Persian Saadi in his Gulistan:
	But O, that light!--I slumbered--Death, the while,
	Stole o’er my senses in that lovely isle
	So softly that no single silken hair
	Awoke that slept--or knew that he was there.

	“The last spot of Earth’s orb I trod upon
	Was a proud temple called the Parthenon;
	More beauty clung around her columned wall
	Then even thy glowing bosom beats withal,
	And when old Time my wing did disenthral
	Thence sprang I--as the eagle from his tower,
	And years I left behind me in an hour.
	What time upon her airy bounds I hung,
	One half the garden of her globe was flung
	Unrolling as a chart unto my view--
	Tenantless cities of the desert too!
	Ianthe, beauty crowded on me then,
	And half I wished to be again of men.”

	“My Angelo! and why of them to be?
	A brighter dwelling-place is here for thee--
	And greener fields than in yon world above,
	And woman’s loveliness--and passionate love.”
	“But list, Ianthe! when the air so soft
	Failed, as my pennoned spirit leapt aloft,
	Perhaps my brain grew dizzy--but the world I left so late was into chaos hurled,
	Sprang from her station, on the winds apart,
	And rolled a flame, the fiery Heaven athwart.
	Methought, my sweet one, then I ceased to soar,
	And fell--not swiftly as I rose before,
	But with a downward, tremulous motion thro’
	Light, brazen rays, this golden star unto!
	Nor long the measure of my falling hours,
	For nearest of all stars was thine to ours--
	Dread star! that came, amid a night of mirth,
	A red Daedalion on the timid Earth.”

	“We came--and to thy Earth--but not to us
	Be given our lady’s bidding to discuss:
	We came, my love; around, above, below,
	Gay fire-fly of the night we come and go,
	Nor ask a reason save the angel-nod
	_She_ grants to us as granted by her God--
	But, Angelo, than thine gray Time unfurled
	Never his fairy wing o’er fairer world!
	Dim was its little disk, and angel eyes
	Alone could see the phantom in the skies,
	When first Al Aaraaf knew her course to be
	Headlong thitherward o’er the starry sea--
	But when its glory swelled upon the sky,
	As glowing Beauty’s bust beneath man’s eye,
	We paused before the heritage of men,
	And thy star trembled--as doth Beauty then!”

	Thus in discourse, the lovers whiled away
	The night that waned and waned and brought no day.
	They fell: for Heaven to them no hope imparts
	Who hear not for the beating of their hearts.



2. ALONE

	From childhood’s hour I have not been
	As others were--I have not seen
	As others saw--I could not bring
	My passions from a common spring--
	From the same source I have not taken
	My sorrow--I could not awaken
	My heart to joy at the same tone--
	And all I loved--_I_ loved alone--
	_Thou_--in my childhood--in the dawn
	Of a most stormy life--was drawn
	From every depth of good and ill
	The mystery which binds me still--
	From the torrent, or the fountain--
	From the red cliff of the mountain--
	From the sun that round me roll’d In its autumn tint of gold--
	From the lightning in the sky
	As it passed me flying by--
	From the thunder and the storm--
	And the cloud that took the form
	(When the rest of Heaven was blue)
	Of a demon in my view.



3. ANNABEL LEE

	It was many and many a year ago,
	In a kingdom by the sea,
	That a maiden there lived whom you may know
	By the name of ANNABEL LEE;
	And this maiden she lived with no other thought
	Than to love and be loved by me.

	_I_ was a child and _she_ was a child,
	In this kingdom by the sea:
	But we loved with a love that was more than love--
	I and my ANNABEL LEE;
	With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
	Coveted her and me.

	And this was the reason that, long ago,
	In this kingdom by the sea,
	A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
	My beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
	So that her highborn kinsmen came
	And bore her away from me,
	To shut her up in a sepulchre
	In this kingdom by the sea.

	The angels, not half so happy in heaven,
	Went envying her and me--
	Yes!--that was the reason (as all men know,
	In this kingdom by the sea)
	That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
	Chilling and killing my ANNABEL LEE.

	But our love it was stronger by far than the love
	Of those who were older than we--
	Of many far wiser than we--
	And neither the angels in heaven above,
	Nor the demons down under the sea,
	Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
	Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE.

	For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
	Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
	And the stars never rise but I see the bright eyes
	Of the beautiful ANNABEL LEE;
	And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side
	Of my darling, my darling, my life and my bride,
	In her sepulchre there by the sea--
	In her tomb by the side of the sea.



4. THE BELLS

	I

	Hear the sledges with the bells--
	Silver bells!
	What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
	How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
	In their icy air of night!
	While the stars, that oversprinkle
	All the heavens, seem to twinkle
	With a crystalline delight;
	Keeping time, time, time,
	In a sort of Runic rhyme,
	To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells
	From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.


	II

	Hear the mellow wedding bells,
	Golden bells!
	What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!
	Through the balmy air of night
	How they ring out their delight!
	From the molten golden-notes,
	And all in tune,
	What a liquid ditty floats
	To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats
	On the moon!
	Oh, from out the sounding cells,
	What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!
	How it swells!
	How it dwells
	On the future! how it tells
	Of the rapture that impels
	To the swinging and the ringing
	Of the bells, bells, bells,
	Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!


	III

	Hear the loud alarum bells--
	Brazen bells!
	What a tale of terror now their turbulency tells!
	In the startled ear of night
	How they scream out their affright!
	Too much horrified to speak,
	They can only shriek, shriek,
	Out of tune,
	In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
	In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire
	Leaping higher, higher, higher,
	With a desperate desire,
	And a resolute endeavor
	Now--now to sit or never,
	By the side of the pale-faced moon.
	Oh, the bells, bells, bells!
	What a tale their terror tells
	Of Despair!
	How they clang, and clash, and roar!
	What a horror they outpour
	On the bosom of the palpitating air!
	Yet the ear it fully knows,
	By the twanging,
	And the clanging,
	How the danger ebbs and flows;
	Yet the ear distinctly tells,
	In the jangling,
	And the wrangling,
	How the danger sinks and swells,
	By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells--
	Of the bells--
	Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	In the clamor and the clangor of the bells!


	IV

	Hear the tolling of the bells--
	Iron bells!
	What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!
	In the silence of the night,
	How we shiver with affright
	At the melancholy menace of their tone!
	For every sound that floats
	From the rust within their throats
	Is a groan.
	And the people--ah, the people--
	They that dwell up in the steeple.
	All alone,
	And who tolling, tolling, tolling,
	In that muffled monotone,
	Feel a glory in so rolling
	On the human heart a stone--
	They are neither man nor woman--
	They are neither brute nor human--
	They are Ghouls:
	And their king it is who tolls;
	And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
	Rolls
	A pæan from the bells!
	And his merry bosom swells
	With the pæan of the bells!
	And he dances, and he yells;
	Keeping time, time, time,
	In a sort of Runic rhyme,
	To the pæan of the bells--
	Of the bells:
	Keeping time, time, time,
	In a sort of Runic rhyme,
	To the throbbing of the bells--
	Of the bells, bells, bells--
	To the sobbing of the bells;
	Keeping time, time, time,
	As he knells, knells, knells,
	In a happy Runic rhyme,
	To the rolling of the bells--
	Of the bells, bells, bells--
	To the tolling of the bells,
	Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,
	Bells, bells, bells--
	To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.



5. THE BOWERS WHEREAT IN DREAMS I SEE

	The bowers whereat, in dreams, I see
	The wantonest singing birds,

	Are lips--and all thy melody
	Of lip-begotten words--

	Thine eyes, in Heaven of heart enshrined
	Then desolately fall,
	O God! on my funereal mind
	Like starlight on a pall--

	Thy heart--_thy_ heart!--I wake and sigh,
	And sleep to dream till day
	Of the truth that gold can never buy--
	Of the baubles that it may.



6. BRIDAL BALLAD

	The ring is on my hand,
	And the wreath is on my brow;
	Satins and jewels grand
	Are all at my command.
	And I am happy now.

	And my lord he loves me well;
	But, when first he breathed his vow,
	I felt my bosom swell--
	For the words rang as a knell,
	And the voice seemed _his_ who fell In the battle down the dell,
	And who is happy now.

	But he spoke to reassure me,
	And he kissed my pallid brow,
	While a reverie came o’er me,
	And to the churchyard bore me,
	And I sighed to him before me,
	Thinking him dead D’Elormie,
	“Oh, I am happy now!”

	And thus the words were spoken,
	And thus the plighted vow,
	And, though my faith be broken,
	And, though my heart be broken,
	Behold the golden keys
	That _proves_ me happy now!

	Would to God I could awaken
	For I dream I know not how,
	And my soul is sorely shaken
	Lest an evil step be taken,--
	Lest the dead who is forsaken
	May not be happy now.



7. THE CITY IN THE SEA

	Lo! Death has reared himself a throne In a strange city lying alone
	Far down within the dim West,
	Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best
	Have gone to their eternal rest.
	There shrines and palaces and towers
	(Time-eaten towers and tremble not!)
	Resemble nothing that is ours.
	Around, by lifting winds forgot,
	Resignedly beneath the sky
	The melancholy waters lie.

	No rays from the holy Heaven come down
	On the long night-time of that town;
	But light from out the lurid sea
	Streams up the turrets silently--
	Gleams up the pinnacles far and free--
	Up domes--up spires--up kingly halls--
	Up fanes--up Babylon-like walls--
	Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers
	Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers--
	Up many and many a marvellous shrine
	Whose wreathed friezes intertwine
	The viol, the violet, and the vine.

	Resignedly beneath the sky
	The melancholy waters lie.
	So blend the turrets and shadows there
	That all seem pendulous in air,
	While from a proud tower in the town
	Death looks gigantically down.

	There open fanes and gaping graves
	Yawn level with the luminous waves;
	But not the riches there that lie In each idol’s diamond eye--
	Not the gaily-jewelled dead
	Tempt the waters from their bed;
	For no ripples curl, alas!
	Along that wilderness of glass--
	No swellings tell that winds may be
	Upon some far-off happier sea--
	No heavings hint that winds have been
	On seas less hideously serene.

	But lo, a stir is in the air!
	The wave--there is a movement there!
	As if the towers had thrust aside,
	In slightly sinking, the dull tide--
	As if their tops had feebly given
	A void within the filmy Heaven.
	The waves have now a redder glow--
	The hours are breathing faint and low--
	And when, amid no earthly moans,
	Down, down that town shall settle hence,
	Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,
	Shall do it reverence.



8. THE COLISEUM

	Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary
	Of lofty contemplation left to Time
	By buried centuries of pomp and power!
	At length--at length--after so many days
	Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,
	(Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee lie,)
	I kneel, an altered and an humble man,
	Amid thy shadows, and so drink within
	My very soul thy grandeur, gloom, and glory!

	Vastness! and Age! and Memories of Eld!
	Silence! and Desolation! and dim Night!
	I feel ye now--I feel ye in your strength--
	O spells more sure than e’er Judæan king
	Taught in the gardens of Gethsemane!
	O charms more potent than the rapt Chaldee
	Ever drew down from out the quiet stars!

	Here, where a hero fell, a column falls!
	Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,
	A midnight vigil holds the swarthy bat!
	Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair
	Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!
	Here, where on golden throne the monarch lolled,
	Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home,
	Lit by the wan light of the horned moon,
	The swift and silent lizard of the stones!

	But stay! these walls--these ivy-clad arcades--
	These mouldering plinths--these sad and blackened shafts--
	These vague entablatures--this crumbling frieze--
	These shattered cornices--this wreck--this ruin--
	These stones--alas! these gray stones--are they all--
	All of the famed, and the colossal left
	By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?

	“Not all”--the Echoes answer me--“not all!
	Prophetic sounds and loud, arise forever
	From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,
	As melody from Memnon to the Sun.
	We rule the hearts of mightiest men--we rule
	With a despotic sway all giant minds.
	We are not impotent--we pallid stones.
	Not all our power is gone--not all our fame--
	Not all the magic of our high renown--
	Not all the wonder that encircles us--
	Not all the mysteries that in us lie--
	Not all the memories that hang upon
	And cling around about us as a garment,
	Clothing us in a robe of more than glory.”



9. THE COLLOQUY OF MONOS AND UNA

	These things are in the future.

	_Sophocles_--_Antig._


	_Una._

	“Born again?”


	_Monos._

	Yes, fairest and best beloved Una, “born again.” These were the words upon whose mystical
	  meaning I had so long pondered, rejecting the explanations of the priesthood, until Death itself
	  resolved for me the secret.


	_Una._

	Death!


	_Monos._

	How strangely, sweet _Una_, you echo my words! I observe, too, a vacillation in your step, a joyous
	  inquietude in your eyes. You are confused and oppressed by the majestic novelty of the Life
	  Eternal.
	Yes, it was of Death I spoke. And here how singularly sounds that word which of old was wont to
	  bring terror to all hearts, throwing a mildew upon all pleasures!


	_Una._

	Ah, Death, the spectre which sate at all feasts! How often, Monos, did we lose ourselves
	  in speculations upon its nature! How mysteriously did it act as a check to human bliss, saying
	  unto it, “thus far, and no farther!” That earnest mutual love, my own Monos, which burned
	  within our bosoms, how vainly did we flatter ourselves, feeling happy in its first upspringing
	  that our happiness would strengthen with its strength! Alas, as it grew, so grew in our hearts
	  the dread of that evil hour which was hurrying to separate us forever! Thus in time it became
	  painful to love. Hate would have been mercy then.


	_Monos_.

	Speak not here of these griefs, dear Una--mine, mine forever now!


	_Una_.

	But the memory of past sorrow, is it not present joy? I have much to say yet of the things which
	  have been. Above all, I burn to know the incidents of your own passage through the dark Valley
	  and Shadow.


	_Monos_.

	And when did the radiant Una ask anything of her Monos in vain? I will be minute in relating
	  all, but at what point shall the weird narrative begin?


	_Una_.

	At what point?


	_Monos_.

	You have said.


	_Una_.

	Monos, I comprehend you. In Death we have both learned the propensity of man to define the indefinable.
	  I will not say, then, commence with the moment of life’s cessation--but commence with that sad,
	  sad instant when, the fever having abandoned you, you sank into a breathless and motionless
	  torpor, and I pressed down your pallid eyelids with the passionate fingers of love.


	_Monos_.

	One word first, my Una, in regard to man’s general condition at this epoch. You will remember
	  that one or two of the wise among our forefathers--wise in fact, although not in the world’s
	  esteem--had ventured to doubt the propriety of the term “improvement,” as applied to the progress
	  of our civilization. There were periods in each of the five or six centuries immediately
	  preceding our dissolution when arose some vigorous intellect, boldly contending for those principles
	  whose truth appears now, to our disenfranchised reason, so utterly obvious--principles
	  which should have taught our race to submit to the guidance of the natural laws rather than
	  attempt their control. At long intervals some master-minds appeared, looking upon each advance
	  in practical science as a retrogradation in the true utility. Occasionally the poetic intellect--that
	  intellect which we now feel to have been the most exalted of all--since those truths which
	  to us were of the most enduring importance could only be reached by that _analogy_ which speaks
	  in proof-tones to the imagination alone, and to the unaided reason bears no weight--occasionally
	  did this poetic intellect proceed a step farther in the evolving of the vague idea of the philosophic,
	  and find in the mystic parable that tells of the tree of knowledge, and of its forbidden
	  fruit, death-producing, a distinct intimation that knowledge was not meet for man in the infant
	  condition of his soul. And these men--the poets--living and perishing amid the scorn of the “utilitarians”--of
	  rough pedants, who arrogated to themselves a title which could have been properly applied
	  only to the scorned--these men, the poets, pondered piningly, yet not unwisely, upon the ancient
	  days when our wants were not more simple than our enjoyments were keen--days when _mirth_
	  was a word unknown, so solemnly deep-toned was happiness--holy, august, and blissful days,
	  blue rivers ran undammed, between hills unhewn, into far forest solitudes, primeval, odorous,
	  and unexplored. Yet these noble exceptions from the general misrule served but to strengthen
	  it by opposition. Alas! we had fallen upon the most evil of all our evil days. The great “movement”--that
	  was the cant term--went on: a diseased commotion, moral and physical. Art--the Arts--arose
	  supreme, and once enthroned, cast chains upon the intellect which had elevated them to power.
	  Man, because he could not but acknowledge the majesty of Nature, fell into childish exultation
	  at his acquired and still-increasing dominion over her elements. Even while he stalked a God
	  in his own fancy, an infantine imbecility came over him. As might be supposed from the origin
	  of his disorder, he grew infected with system, and with abstraction. He enwrapped himself
	  in generalities. Among other odd ideas, that of universal equality gained ground; and in the
	  face of analogy and of God--in despite of the loud warning voice of the laws of _gradation_
	  so visibly pervading all things in Earth and Heaven--wild attempts at an omniprevalent
	  Democracy were made. Yet this evil sprang necessarily from the leading evil, Knowledge.
	  Man could not both know and succumb. Meantime huge smoking cities arose, innumerable.
	  Green leaves shrank before the hot breath of furnaces. The fair face of Nature was deformed
	  as with the ravages of some loathsome disease. And methinks, sweet Una, even our slumbering
	  sense of the forced and of the far-fetched might have arrested us here. But now it appears
	  that we had worked out our own destruction in the perversion of our _taste_, or rather in the
	  blind neglect of its culture in the schools. For, in truth, it was at this crisis that taste
	  alone--that faculty which, holding a middle position between the pure intellect and the moral
	  sense, could never safely have been disregarded--it was now that taste alone could have led us
	  gently back to Beauty, to Nature, and to Life. But alas for the pure contemplative
	  spirit and majestic intuition of Plato! Alas for the which he justly regarded as an all-sufficient
	  education for the soul! Alas for him and for it!--since both were most desperately needed,
	  when both were most entirely forgotten or despised. Pascal, a philosopher whom we both love,
	  has said, how truly!--“_Que tout notre raisonnement se réduit à céder au sentiment;_”
	  and it is not impossible that the sentiment of the natural, had time permitted it, would have
	  regained its old ascendency over the harsh mathematical reason of the schools. But this thing
	  was not to be. Prematurely induced by intemperance of knowledge, the old age of the world drew
	  near. This the mass of mankind saw not, or, living lustily although unhappily, affected
	  not to see. But, for myself, the Earth’s records had taught me to look for widest ruin as the
	  price of highest civilization. I had imbibed a prescience of our Fate from comparison
	  of China the simple and enduring, with Assyria the architect, with Egypt the astrologer,
	  with Nubia, more crafty than either, the turbulent mother of all Arts. In the history of these
	  regions I met with a ray from the Future. The individual artificialities of the three latter
	  were local diseases of the Earth, and in their individual overthrows we had seen local remedies
	  applied; but for the infected world at large I could anticipate no regeneration save in death.
	  That man, as a race, should not become extinct, I saw that he must be “_born again._”

	And now it was, fairest and dearest, that we wrapped our spirits, daily, in dreams. Now it was
	  that, in twilight, we discoursed of the days to come, when the Art-scarred surface of the Earth,
	  having undergone that purification which alone could efface its rectangular obscenities,
	  should clothe itself anew in the verdure and the mountain-slopes and the smiling waters of Paradise,
	  and be rendered at length a fit dwelling-place for man:--for man the Death-purged--for
	  man to whose now exalted intellect there should be poison in knowledge no more--for the redeemed,
	  regenerated, blissful, and now immortal, but still for the _material_, man.


	_Una_.

	Well do I remember these conversations, dear Monos; but the epoch of the fiery overthrow
	  was not so near at hand as we believed, and as the corruption you indicate did surely warrant
	  us in believing. Men lived; and died individually. You yourself sickened, and passed into the
	  grave; and thither your constant Una speedily followed you. And though the century which has
	  since elapsed, and whose conclusion brings up together once more, tortured our slumbering
	  senses with no impatience of duration, yet my Monos, it was a century still.


	_Monos_.

	Say, rather, a point in the vague infinity. Unquestionably, it was in the Earth’s dotage that
	  I died. Wearied at heart with anxieties which had their origin in the general turmoil and decay,
	  I succumbed to the fierce fever. After some few days of pain, and many of dreamy delirium
	  replete with ecstasy, the manifestations of which you mistook for pain, while I longed but was
	  impotent to undeceive you--after some days there came upon me, as you have said, a breathless
	  and motionless torpor; and this was termed _Death_ by those who stood around me.
	Words are vague things. My condition did not deprive me of sentience. It appeared to me not greatly
	  dissimilar to the extreme quiescence of him, who, having slumbered long and profoundly,
	  lying motionless and fully prostrate in a mid-summer noon, begins to steal slowly back into
	  consciousness, through the mere sufficiency of his sleep, and without being awakened by external
	  disturbances.
	I breathed no longer. The pulses were still. The heart had ceased to beat. Volition had not departed,
	  but was powerless. The senses were unusually active, although eccentrically so--assuming
	  often each other’s functions at random. The taste and the smell were inextricably confounded,
	  and became one sentiment, abnormal and intense. The rose-water with which your tenderness
	  had moistened my lips to the last, affected me with sweet fancies of flowers--fantastic
	  flowers, far more lovely than any of the old Earth, but whose prototypes we have here blooming
	  around us. The eye-lids, transparent and bloodless, offered no complete impediment to vision.
	  As volition was in abeyance, the balls could not roll in their sockets--but all objects within
	  the range of the visual hemisphere were seen with more or less distinctness; the rays which
	  fell upon the external retina, or into the corner of the eye, producing a more vivid effect
	  than those which struck the front or interior surface. Yet, in the former instance, this effect
	  was so far anomalous that I appreciated it only as _sound_--sound sweet or discordant
	  as the matters presenting themselves at my side were light or dark in shade--curved
	  or angular in outline. The hearing, at the same time, although excited in degree, was not irregular
	  in action--estimating real sounds with an extravagance of precision, not less than of sensibility.
	  Touch had undergone a modification more peculiar. Its impressions were tardily received,
	  but pertinaciously retained, and resulted always in the highest physical pleasure. Thus the pressure
	  of your sweet fingers upon my eyelids, at first only recognized through vision, at length,
	  long after their removal, filled my whole being with a sensual delight immeasurable.
	  I say with a sensual delight. _All_ my perceptions were purely sensual. The materials furnished
	  the passive brain by the senses were not in the least degree wrought into shape by the deceased
	  understanding. Of pain there was some little; of pleasure there was much; but of moral pain
	  or pleasure none at all. Thus your wild sobs floated into my ear with all their mournful
	  cadences, and were appreciated in their every variation of sad tone; but they were soft musical
	  sounds and no more; they conveyed to the extinct reason no intimation of the sorrows which
	  gave them birth; while large and constant tears which fell upon my face, telling the bystanders
	  of a heart which broke, thrilled every fibre of my frame with ecstasy alone. And this was in truth
	  the _Death_ of which these bystanders spoke reverently, in low whispers--you, sweet Una, gaspingly,
	  with loud cries.
	They attired me for the coffin--three or four dark figures which flitted busily to and fro. As these
	  crossed the direct line of my vision they affected me as _forms;_ but upon passing to my side
	  their images impressed me with the idea of shrieks, groans, and, other dismal expressions
	  of terror, of horror, or of woe. You alone, habited in a white robe, passed in all directions
	  musically about.
	The day waned; and, as its light faded away, I became possessed by a vague uneasiness--an
	  anxiety such as the sleeper feels when sad real sounds fall continuously within his ear--low
	  distant bell-tones, solemn, at long but equal intervals, and commingling with melancholy
	  dreams. Night arrived; and with its shadows a heavy discomfort. It oppressed my limbs with the
	  oppression of some dull weight, and was palpable. There was also a moaning sound, not unlike
	  the distant reverberation of surf, but more continuous, which, beginning with the first twilight,
	  had grown in strength with the darkness. Suddenly lights were brought into the rooms, and this
	  reverberation became forthwith interrupted into frequent unequal bursts of the same sound,
	  but less dreary and less distinct. The ponderous oppression was in a great measure relieved;
	  and, issuing from the flame of each lamp (for there were many), there flowed unbrokenly
	  into my ears a strain of melodious monotone. And when now, dear Una, approaching the bed upon
	  which I lay outstretched, you sat gently by my side, breathing odor from your sweet lips, and
	  pressing them upon my brow, there arose tremulously within my bosom, and mingling with the merely
	  physical sensations which circumstances had called forth, a something akin to sentiment
	  itself--a feeling that, half appreciating, half responded to your earnest love and sorrow;
	  but this feeling took no root in the pulseless heart, and seemed indeed rather a shadow than
	  a reality, and faded quickly away, first into extreme quiescence, and then into a purely sensual
	  pleasure as before.
	And now, from the wreck and the chaos of the usual senses, there appeared to have arisen within
	  me a sixth, all perfect. In its exercise I found a wild delight--yet a delight still physical,
	  inasmuch as the understanding had in it no part. Motion in the animal frame had fully ceased.
	  No muscle quivered; no nerve thrilled; no artery throbbed. But there seemed to have sprung
	  up in the brain _that_ of which no words could convey to the merely human intelligence
	  even an indistinct conception. Let me term it a mental pendulous pulsation. It was the moral
	  embodiment of man’s abstract idea of _Time_. By the absolute equalization of this movement--or
	  of such as this--had the cycles of the firmamental orbs themselves been adjusted. By its aid
	  I measured the irregularities of the clock upon the mantel, and of the watches of the attendants.
	  Their tickings came sonorously to my ears. The slightest deviations from the true proportion--and
	  these deviations were omniprevalent--affected me just as violations of abstract truth were wont
	  on earth to affect the moral sense. Although no two of the timepieces in the chamber struck
	  the individual seconds accurately together, yet I had no difficulty in holding steadily
	  in mind the tones, and the respective momentary errors of each. And this--this keen, perfect
	  self-existing sentiment of _duration_--this sentiment existing (as man could not possibly
	  have conceived it to exist) independently of any succession of events--this idea--this
	  sixth sense, upspringing from the ashes of the rest, was the first obvious and certain step
	  of the intemporal soul upon the threshold of the temporal eternity.
	It was midnight; and you still sat by my side. All others had departed from the chamber of Death.
	  They had deposited me in the coffin. The lamps burned flickeringly; for this I knew by the tremulousness
	  of the monotonous strains. But suddenly these strains diminished in distinctness and in volume.
	  Finally they ceased. The perfume in my nostrils died away. Forms affected my vision no longer.
	  The oppression of the Darkness uplifted itself from my bosom. A dull shot like that of electricity
	  pervaded my frame, and was followed by total loss of the idea of contact. All of what man has
	  termed sense was merged in the sole consciousness of entity, and in the one abiding sentiment
	  of duration. The mortal body had been at length stricken with the hand of the deadly _Decay_.
	Yet had not all of sentience departed; for the consciousness and the sentiment remaining
	  supplied some of its functions by a lethargic intuition. I appreciated the direful change
	  now in operation upon the flesh, and, as the dreamer is sometimes aware of the bodily presence
	  of one who leans over him, so, sweet Una, I still dully felt that you sat by my side. So, too,
	  when the noon of the second day came, I was not unconscious of those movements which displaced
	  you from my side, which confined me within the coffin, which deposited me within the hearse,
	  which bore me to the grave, which lowered me within it, which heaped heavily the mould upon
	  me, and which thus left me, in blackness and corruption, to my sad and solemn slumbers with
	  the worm.
	And here in the prison-house which has few secrets to disclose, there rolled away days and weeks
	  and months; and the soul watched narrowly each second as it flew, and, without effort, took
	  record of its flight--without effort and without object.
	A year passed. The consciousness of _being_ had grown hourly more indistinct, and that of mere
	  _locality_ had in great measure usurped its position. The idea of entity was becoming merged
	  in that of _place_. The narrow space immediately surrounding what had been the body was now growing
	  to be the body itself. At length, as often happens to the sleeper (by sleep and its world alone
	  is _Death_ imaged)--at length, as sometimes happened on Earth to the deep slumberer, when some
	  flitting light half startled him into awaking, yet left him half enveloped in dreams--so
	  to me, in the strict embrace of the _Shadow_, came _that_ light which alone might have had power
	  to startle--the light of enduring _Love_. Men toiled at the grave in which I lay darkling.
	  They upthrew the damp earth. Upon my mouldering bones there descended the coffin of Una. And
	  now again all was void. That nebulous light had been extinguished. That feeble thrill had vibrated
	  itself into quiescence. Many _lustra_ had supervened. Dust had returned to dust. The worm had
	  food no more. The sense of being had at length utterly departed, and there reigned in its stead--
	  instead of all things, dominant and perpetual--the autocrats _Place_ and _Time._ For _that_
	  which _was not_--for that which had no form--for that which had no thought--for that which
	  had no sentience--for that which was soundless, yet of which matter formed no portion--for
	  all this nothingness, yet for all this immortality, the grave was still a home, and the corrosive
	  hours, co-mates.



10. THE CONQUEROR WORM

	Lo! ’tis a gala night
	Within the lonesome latter years!
	An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
	In veils, and drowned in tears,
	Sit in a theatre, to see
	A play of hopes and fears,
	While the orchestra breathes fitfully
	The music of the spheres.

	Mimes, in the form of God on high,
	Mutter and mumble low,
	And hither and thither fly--
	Mere puppets they, who come and go
	At bidding of vast formless things
	That shift the scenery to and fro,
	Flapping from out their Condor wings
	Invisible Wo!

	That motley drama--oh, be sure
	It shall not be forgot!
	With its Phantom chased for evermore,
	By a crowd that seize it not,
	Through a circle that ever returneth in
	To the self-same spot,
	And much of Madness, and more of Sin,
	And Horror the soul of the plot.

	But see, amid the mimic rout
	A crawling shape intrude!
	A blood-red thing that writhes from out
	The scenic solitude!
	It writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pangs
	The mimes become its food,
	And the angels sob at vermin fangs
	In human gore imbued.

	Out--out are the lights--out all!
	And, over each quivering form,
	The curtain, a funeral pall,
	Comes down with the rush of a storm,
	And the angels, all pallid and wan,
	Uprising, unveiling, affirm
	That the play is the tragedy, “Man,”
	And its hero the Conqueror Worm.



11. THE CONVERSATION OF EIROS AND CHARMION

	I will bring fire to thee.

	_Euripides_.--_Androm_.


	_Eiros_.

	Why do you call me Eiros?


	_Charmion_.

	So henceforward will you always be called. You must forget, too, _my_ earthly name, and speak
	  to me as Charmion.


	_Eiros_.

	This is indeed no dream!


	_Charmion_.

	Dreams are with us no more;--but of these mysteries anon. I rejoice to see you looking life-like
	  and rational. The film of the shadow has already passed from off your eyes. Be of heart, and
	  fear nothing. Your allotted days of stupor have expired, and to-morrow I will myself induct
	  you into the full joys and wonders of your novel existence.


	_Eiros_.

	True--I feel no stupor--none at all. The wild sickness and the terrible darkness have left me,
	  and I hear no longer that mad, rushing, horrible sound, like the “voice of many waters.”
	  Yet my senses are bewildered, Charmion, with the keenness of their perception of _the new_.


	_Charmion_.

	A few days will remove all this;--but I fully understand you, and feel for you. It is now ten earthly
	  years since I underwent what you undergo--yet the remembrance of it hangs by me still. You have
	  now suffered all of pain, however, which you will suffer in Aidenn.


	_Eiros_.

	In Aidenn?


	_Charmion_.

	In Aidenn.


	_Eiros_.

	O God!--pity me, Charmion!--I am overburthened with the majesty of all things--of the unknown
	  now known--of the speculative Future merged in the august and certain Present.


	_Charmion_.

	Grapple not now with such thoughts. To-morrow we will speak of this. Your mind wavers, and its
	  agitation will find relief in the exercise of simple memories. Look not around, nor forward--but
	  back. I am burning with anxiety to hear the details of that stupendous event which threw you
	  among us. Tell me of it. Let us converse of familiar things, in the old familiar language
	  of the world which has so fearfully perished.


	_Eiros_.

	Most fearfully, fearfully!--this is indeed no dream.


	_Charmion_.

	Dreams are no more. Was I much mourned, my Eiros?

	_Eiros_.

	Mourned, Charmion?--oh, deeply. To that last hour of all there hung a cloud of intense gloom
	  and devout sorrow over your household.


	_Charmion_.

	And that last hour--speak of it. Remember that, beyond the naked fact of the catastrophe
	  itself, I know nothing. When, coming out from among mankind, I passed into Night through
	  the Grave--at that period, if I remember aright, the calamity which overwhelmed you was utterly
	  unanticipated. But, indeed, I knew little of the speculative philosophy of the day.


	_Eiros_.

	The individual calamity was, as you say, entirely unanticipated; but analogous misfortunes
	  had been long a subject of discussion with astronomers. I need scarce tell you, my friend,
	  that, even when you left us, men had agreed to understand those passages in the most holy writings
	  which speak of the final destruction of all things by fire as having reference to the orb of the
	  earth alone, But in regard to the immediate agency of the ruin, speculation had been at fault
	  from that epoch in astronomical knowledge in which the comets were divested of the terrors
	  of flame. The very moderate density of these bodies had been well established. They had been
	  observed to pass among the satellites of Jupiter without bringing about any sensible alteration
	  either in the masses or in the orbits of these secondary planets. We had long regarded the wanderers
	  as vapory creations of inconceivable tenuity, and as altogether incapable of doing injury
	  to our substantial globe, even in the event of contact. But contact was not in any degree
	  dreaded; for the elements of all the comets were accurately known. That among _them_ we should
	  look for the agency of the threatened fiery destruction had been for many years considered
	  an inadmissible idea. But wonders and wild fancies had been of late days strangely rife among
	  mankind; and, although it was only with a few of the ignorant that actual apprehension
	  prevailed, upon the announcement by astronomers of a _new_ comet, yet this announcement
	  was generally received with I know not what of agitation and mistrust.
	The elements of the strange orb were immediately calculated, and it was at once conceded by all
	  observers that its path, at perihelion would bring it into very close proximity with the earth.
	  There were two or three astronomers of secondary note who resolutely maintained that a contact
	  was inevitable. I cannot very well express to you the effect of this intelligence upon the people.
	  For a few short days they would not believe an assertion which their intellect, so long employed
	  among worldly considerations, could not in any manner grasp. But the truth of a vitally important
	  fact soon makes its way into the understanding of even the most stolid. Finally, all men saw
	  that astronomical knowledge lies not, and they awaited the comet. Its approach was not at first
	  seemingly rapid, nor was its appearance of very unusual character. It was of a dull red, and
	  had little perceptible train. For seven or eight days we saw no material increase in its apparent
	  diameter, and but a partial alteration in its color. Meantime, the ordinary affairs of men were
	  discarded, and all interest absorbed in a growing discussion instituted by the philosophic
	  in respect to the cometary nature. Even the grossly ignorant aroused their sluggish capacities
	  to such considerations. The learned _now_ gave their intellect--their soul--to no such points
	  as the allaying of fear, or to the sustenance of loved theory. They sought--they panted for right
	  views. They groaned for perfected knowledge. _Truth_ arose in the purity of her strength
	  and exceeding majesty, and the wise bowed down and adored.
	That material injury to our globe or to its inhabitants would result from the apprehended
	  contact was an opinion which hourly lost ground among the wise; and the wise were now freely
	  permitted to rule the reason and the fancy of the crowd. It was demonstrated that the density
	  of the comet’s _nucleus_ was far less than that of our rarest gas; and the harmless passage
	  of a similar visitor among the satellites of Jupiter was a point strongly insisted upon, and
	  which served greatly to allay terror. Theologists, with an earnestness fear-enkindled,
	  dwelt upon the biblical prophecies, and expounded them to the people with a directness
	  and simplicity of which no previous instance had been known. That the final destruction
	  of the earth must be brought about by the agency of fire, was urged with a spirit that enforced
	  everywhere conviction; and that the comets were of no fiery nature (as all men now knew) was
	  a truth which relieved all, in a great measure, from the apprehension of the great calamity
	  foretold. It is noticeable that the popular prejudices and vulgar errors in regard to pestilences
	  and wars--errors which were wont to prevail upon every appearance of a comet--were now altogether
	  unknown, as if by some sudden convulsive exertion reason had at once hurled superstition
	  from her throne. The feeblest intellect had derived vigor from excessive interest.
	What minor evils might arise from the contact were points of elaborate question. The learned
	  spoke of slight geological disturbances, of probable alterations in climate, and consequently
	  in vegetation; of possible magnetic and electric influences. Many held that no visible or perceptible
	  effect would in any manner be produced. While such discussions were going on, their subject
	  gradually approached, growing larger in apparent diameter, and of a more brilliant lustre.
	  Mankind grew paler as it came. All human operations were suspended.
	There was an epoch in the course of the general sentiment when the comet had attained, at length,
	  a size surpassing that of any previously recorded visitation. The people now, dismissing
	  any lingering hope that the astronomers were wrong, experienced all the certainty of evil.
	  The chimerical aspect of their terror was gone. The hearts of the stoutest of our race beat
	  violently within their bosoms. A very few days suffered, however, to merge even such feelings
	  in sentiments more unendurable. We could no longer apply to the strange orb any _accustomed_
	  thoughts. Its _historical_ attributes had disappeared. It oppressed us with a hideous _novelty_
	  of emotion. We saw it not as an astronomical phenomenon in the heavens, but as an incubus
	  upon our hearts and a shadow upon our brains. It had taken, with unconceivable rapidity,
	  the character of a gigantic mantle of rare flame, extending from horizon to horizon.
	Yet a day, and men breathed with greater freedom. It was clear that we were already within the
	  influence of the comet; yet we lived. We even felt an unusual elasticity of frame and vivacity
	  of mind. The exceeding tenuity of the object of our dread was apparent; for all heavenly
	  objects were plainly visible through it. Meantime, our vegetation had perceptibly altered;
	  and we gained faith, from this predicted circumstance, in the foresight of the wise. A wild
	  luxuriance of foliage, utterly unknown before, burst out upon every vegetable thing.
	Yet another day--and the evil was not altogether upon us. It was now evident that its nucleus
	  would first reach us. A wild change had come over all men; and the first sense of _pain_ was
	  the wild signal for general lamentation and horror. The first sense of pain lay in a rigorous
	  construction of the breast and lungs, and an insufferable dryness of the skin. It could not be
	  denied that our atmosphere was radically affected; the conformation of this atmosphere
	  and the possible modifications to which it might be subjected, were now the topics of discussion.
	  The result of investigation sent an electric thrill of the intensest terror through the universal
	  heart of man.
	It had been long known that the air which encircled us was a compound of oxygen and nitrogen
	  gases, in the proportion of twenty-one measures of oxygen and seventy-nine of nitrogen in every
	  one hundred of the atmosphere. Oxygen, which was the principle of combustion, and the vehicle
	  of heat, was absolutely necessary to the support of animal life, and was the most powerful
	  and energetic agent in nature. Nitrogen, on the contrary, was incapable of supporting
	  either animal life or flame. An unnatural excess of oxygen would result, it had been ascertained,
	  in just such an elevation of the animal spirits as we had latterly experienced. It was the pursuit,
	  the extension of the idea, which had engendered awe. What would be the result of a _total
	  extraction of the nitrogen_? A combustion irresistible, all-devouring, omni-prevalent,
	  immediate;--the entire fulfilment, in all their minute and terrible details, of the fiery and
	  horror-inspiring denunciations of the prophecies of the Holy Book.
	Why need I paint, Charmion, the now disenchained frenzy of mankind? That tenuity in the comet
	  which had previously inspired us with hope, was now the source of the bitterness of despair.
	  In its impalpable gaseous character we clearly perceived the consummation of Fate. Meantime
	  a day again passed--bearing away with it the last shadow of Hope. We gasped in the rapid modification
	  of the air. The red blood bounded tumultuously through its strict channels. A furious delirium
	  possessed all men; and with arms rigidly outstretched towards the threatening heavens, they
	  trembled and shrieked aloud. But the nucleus of the destroyer was now upon us;--even here in Aidenn
	  I shudder while I speak. Let me be brief--brief as the ruin that overwhelmed. For a moment
	  there was a wild lurid light alone, visiting and penetrating all things. Then--let us bow down,
	  Charmion, before the excessive majesty of the great God!--then, there came a shouting and pervading
	  sound, as if from the mouth itself of HIM; while the whole incumbent mass of ether in which
	  we existed, burst at once into a species of intense flame, for whose surpassing brilliancy
	  and all-fervid heat even the angels in the high Heaven of pure knowledge have no name. Thus
	  ended all.



12. A DREAM

	In visions of the dark night
	I have dreamed of joy departed--
	But a waking dream of life and light
	Hath left me broken-hearted.

	Ah! what is not a dream by day
	To him whose eyes are cast
	On things around him with a ray
	Turned back upon the past?

	That holy dream--that holy dream,
	While all the world were chiding,
	Hath cheered me as a lovely beam,
	A lonely spirit guiding.

	What though that light, thro’ storm and night,
	So trembled from afar--
	What could there be more purely bright
	In Truth’s day star?



13. A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM

	Take this kiss upon the brow!
	And, in parting from you now,
	Thus much let me avow--
	You are not wrong, who deem
	That my days have been a dream:
	Yet if hope has flown away In a night, or in a day,
	In a vision or in none,
	Is it therefore the less _gone_?
	_All_ that we see or seem Is but a dream within a dream.

	I stand amid the roar
	Of a surf-tormented shore,
	And I hold within my hand
	Grains of the golden sand--
	How few! yet how they creep
	Through my fingers to the deep
	While I weep--while I weep!
	O God! can I not grasp
	Them with a tighter clasp?
	O God! can I not save
	_One_ from the pitiless wave?
	Is _all_ that we see or seem
	But a dream within a dream?



14. DREAMLAND

	By a route obscure and lonely,
	Haunted by ill angels only,
	Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
	On a black throne reigns upright,
	I have reached these lands but newly
	From an ultimate dim Thule--
	From a wild weird clime that lieth, sublime,
	Out of SPACE--out of TIME.

	Bottomless vales and boundless floods,
	And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,
	With forms that no man can discover
	For the dews that drip all over;
	Mountains toppling evermore Into seas without a shore;
	Seas that restlessly aspire,
	Surging, unto skies of fire;
	Lakes that endlessly outspread
	Their lone waters--lone and dead,
	Their still waters--still and chilly
	With the snows of the lolling lily.

	By the lakes that thus outspread
	Their lone waters, lone and dead,--
	Their sad waters, sad and chilly
	With the snows of the lolling lily,--

	By the mountains--near the river
	Murmuring lowly, murmuring ever,--
	By the gray woods,--by the swamp
	Where the toad and the newt encamp,--
	By the dismal tarns and pools
	Where dwell the Ghouls,--
	By each spot the most unholy--
	In each nook most melancholy,--

	There the traveller meets aghast
	Sheeted Memories of the past--
	Shrouded forms that start and sigh
	As they pass the wanderer by--
	White-robed forms of friends long given,
	In agony, to the Earth--and Heaven.

	For the heart whose woes are legion
	’Tis a peaceful, soothing region--
	For the spirit that walks in shadow
	’Tis--oh, ’tis an Eldorado!
	But the traveller, travelling through it,
	May not--dare not openly view it;
	Never its mysteries are exposed
	To the weak human eye unclosed;
	So wills its King, who hath forbid
	The uplifting of the fringed lid;
	And thus the sad Soul that here passes
	Beholds it but through darkened glasses.

	By a route obscure and lonely,
	Haunted by ill angels only.

	Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
	On a black throne reigns upright,
	I have wandered home but newly
	From this ultimate dim Thule.



15. DREAMS

	Oh! that my young life were a lasting dream!
	My spirit not awakening, till the beam
	Of an Eternity should bring the morrow.
	Yes! though that long dream were of hopeless sorrow,
	’Twere better than the cold reality
	Of waking life, to him whose heart must be,
	And hath been still, upon the lovely earth,
	A chaos of deep passion, from his birth.
	But should it be--that dream eternally
	Continuing--as dreams have been to me In my young boyhood--should it thus be given,
	’Twere folly still to hope for higher Heaven.
	For I have revelled when the sun was bright I’ the summer sky, in dreams of living light
	And loveliness,--have left my very heart Inclines of my imaginary apart
	From mine own home, with beings that have been
	Of mine own thought--what more could I have seen?
	’Twas once--and only once--and the wild hour
	From my remembrance shall not pass--some power
	Or spell had bound me--’twas the chilly wind
	Came o’er me in the night, and left behind Its image on my spirit--or the moon
	Shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon
	Too coldly--or the stars--howe’er it was
	That dream was that that night-wind--let it pass.
	_I have been_ happy, though in a dream.
	I have been happy--and I love the theme:
	Dreams! in their vivid coloring of life
	As in that fleeting, shadowy, misty strife
	Of semblance with reality which brings
	To the delirious eye, more lovely things
	Of Paradise and Love--and all my own!--
	Than young Hope in his sunniest hour hath known.



16. ELDORADO

	Gaily bedight,
	A gallant knight,
	In sunshine and in shadow,
	Had journeyed long,
	Singing a song,
	In search of Eldorado.
	But he grew old--
	This knight so bold--
	And o’er his heart a shadow
	Fell as he found
	No spot of ground
	That looked like Eldorado.

	And, as his strength
	Failed him at length,
	He met a pilgrim shadow--
	“Shadow,” said he,
	“Where can it be--
	This land of Eldorado?”

	“Over the Mountains
	Of the Moon,
	Down the Valley of the Shadow,
	Ride, boldly ride,”
	The shade replied,
	“If you seek for Eldorado!”



17. AN ENIGMA

	“Seldom we find,” says Solomon Don Dunce,
	“Half an idea in the profoundest sonnet.
	Through all the flimsy things we see at once
	As easily as through a Naples bonnet--
	Trash of all trash!--how _can_ a lady don it?
	Yet heavier far than your Petrarchan stuff--
	Owl-downy nonsense that the faintest puff
	Twirls into trunk-paper the while you con it.”
	And, veritably, Sol is right enough.
	The general tuckermanities are arrant
	Bubbles--ephemeral and _so_ transparent--
	But _this is_, now--you may depend upon it--
	Stable, opaque, immortal--all by dint
	Of the dear names that lie concealed within’t.



18. EULALIE

	I dwelt alone
	In a world of moan,
	And my soul was a stagnant tide,
	Till the fair and gentle Eulalie became my blushing bride--
	Till the yellow-haired young Eulalie became my smiling bride.
	Ah, less--less bright
	The stars of the night
	Than the eyes of the radiant girl!
	And never a flake
	That the vapor can make
	With the moon-tints of purple and pearl,
	Can vie with the modest Eulalie’s most unregarded curl--
	Can compare with the bright-eyed Eulalie’s most humble and careless
	curl.
	Now Doubt--now Pain
	Come never again,
	For her soul gives me sigh for sigh,
	And all day long
	Shines, bright and strong,
	Astarté within the sky,
	While ever to her dear Eulalie upturns her matron eye--
	While ever to her young Eulalie upturns her violet eye.



19. EVENING STAR

	’Twas noontide of summer,
	And midtime of night,
	And stars, in their orbits,
	Shone pale, through the light
	Of the brighter, cold moon.
	’Mid planets her slaves,
	Herself in the Heavens,
	Her beam on the waves.

	I gazed awhile
	On her cold smile;
	Too cold--too cold for me--
	There passed, as a shroud,
	A fleecy cloud,
	And I turned away to thee,
	Proud Evening Star,
	In thy glory afar
	And dearer thy beam shall be;
	For joy to my heart
	Is the proud part
	Thou bearest in Heaven at night,
	And more I admire
	Thy distant fire,
	Than that colder, lowly light.



20. FAIRYLAND

	Dim vales--and shadowy floods--
	And cloudy-looking woods,
	Whose forms we can’t discover
	For the tears that drip all over
	Huge moons there wax and wane--
	Again--again--again--
	Every moment of the night--
	Forever changing places--
	And they put out the star-light
	With the breath from their pale faces.
	About twelve by the moon-dial
	One more filmy than the rest
	(A kind which, upon trial,
	They have found to be the best)
	Comes down--still down--and down
	With its centre on the crown
	Of a mountain’s eminence,
	While its wide circumference In easy drapery falls
	Over hamlets, over halls,
	Wherever they may be--
	O’er the strange woods--o’er the sea--
	Over spirits on the wing--
	Over every drowsy thing--
	And buries them up quite In a labyrinth of light--
	And then, how deep!--O, deep!
	Is the passion of their sleep.
	In the morning they arise,
	And their moony covering Is soaring in the skies,
	With the tempests as they toss,
	Like--almost any thing--
	Or a yellow Albatross.
	They use that moon no more
	For the same end as before--
	Videlicet a tent--
	Which I think extravagant:
	Its atomies, however,
	Into a shower dissever,
	Of which those butterflies,
	Of Earth, who seek the skies,
	And so come down again
	(Never-contented thing!)
	Have brought a specimen
	Upon their quivering wings.



21. FOR ANNIE

	Thank Heaven! the crisis--
	The danger is past,
	And the lingering illness
	Is over at last--
	And the fever called “Living”
	Is conquered at last.

	Sadly, I know,
	I am shorn of my strength,
	And no muscle I move
	As I lie at full length--
	But no matter!--I feel
	I am better at length.

	And I rest so composedly,
	Now in my bed,
	That any beholder
	Might fancy me dead--
	Might start at beholding me
	Thinking me dead.

	The moaning and groaning,
	The sighing and sobbing,
	Are quieted now,
	With that horrible throbbing
	At heart:--ah, that horrible,
	Horrible throbbing!

	The sickness--the nausea--
	The pitiless pain--
	Have ceased, with the fever
	That maddened my brain--
	With the fever called “Living”
	That burned in my brain.

	And oh! of all tortures
	_That_ torture the worst
	Has abated--the terrible
	Torture of thirst,
	For the naphthaline river
	Of Passion accurst:--
	I have drank of a water
	That quenches all thirst:--

	Of a water that flows,
	With a lullaby sound,
	From a spring but a very few
	Feet under ground--
	From a cavern not very far
	Down under ground.

	And ah! let it never
	Be foolishly said
	That my room it is gloomy
	And narrow my bed--
	For man never slept
	In a different bed;
	And, to _sleep_, you must slumber
	In just such a bed.

	My tantalized spirit
	Here blandly reposes,
	Forgetting, or never
	Regretting its roses--
	Its old agitations
	Of myrtles and roses:

	For now, while so quietly
	Lying, it fancies
	A holier odor
	About it, of pansies--
	A rosemary odor,
	Commingled with pansies--
	With rue and the beautiful
	Puritan pansies.

	And so it lies happily,
	Bathing in many
	A dream of the truth
	And the beauty of Annie--
	Drowned in a bath
	Of the tresses of Annie.

	She tenderly kissed me,
	She fondly caressed,
	And then I fell gently
	To sleep on her breast--
	Deeply to sleep
	From the heaven of her breast.

	When the light was extinguished,
	She covered me warm,
	And she prayed to the angels
	To keep me from harm--
	To the queen of the angels
	To shield me from harm.

	And I lie so composedly,
	Now in my bed
	(Knowing her love)
	That you fancy me dead--
	And I rest so contentedly,
	Now in my bed,
	(With her love at my breast)
	That you fancy me dead--
	That you shudder to look at me.
	Thinking me dead.

	But my heart it is brighter
	Than all of the many
	Stars in the sky,
	For it sparkles with Annie--
	It glows with the light
	Of the love of my Annie--
	With the thought of the light
	Of the eyes of my Annie.



22. THE FOREST REVERIE

	’Tis said that when
	The hands of men
	Tamed this primeval wood,
	And hoary trees with groans of wo,
	Like warriors by an unknown foe,
	Were in their strength subdued,
	The virgin Earth
	Gave instant birth
	To springs that ne’er did flow--
	That in the sun
	Did rivulets run,
	And all around rare flowers did blow--
	The wild rose pale
	Perfumed the gale,
	And the queenly lily adown the dale
	(Whom the sun and the dew
	And the winds did woo),
	With the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew.

	So when in tears
	The love of years
	Is wasted like the snow,
	And the fine fibrils of its life
	By the rude wrong of instant strife
	Are broken at a blow--
	Within the heart
	Do springs upstart
	Of which it doth now know,
	And strange, sweet dreams,
	Like silent streams
	That from new fountains overflow,
	With the earlier tide
	Of rivers glide
	Deep in the heart whose hope has died--
	Quenching the fires its ashes hide,--
	Its ashes, whence will spring and grow
	Sweet flowers, ere long,--
	The rare and radiant flowers of song!



23. THE HAPPIEST DAY

	The happiest day--the happiest hour
	My seared and blighted heart hath known,
	The highest hope of pride and power,
	I feel hath flown.

	Of power! said I? Yes! such I ween
	But they have vanished long, alas!
	The visions of my youth have been--
	But let them pass.

	And pride, what have I now with thee?
	Another brow may ev’n inherit
	The venom thou hast poured on me--
	Be still my spirit!

	The happiest day--the happiest hour
	Mine eyes shall see--have ever seen
	The brightest glance of pride and power
	I feel have been:

	But were that hope of pride and power
	Now offered with the pain
	Ev’n _then_ I felt--that brightest hour
	I would not live again:

	For on its wing was dark alloy
	And as it fluttered--fell
	An essence--powerful to destroy
	A soul that knew it well.



24. THE HAUNTED PALACE

	In the greenest of our valleys
	By good angels tenanted,
	Once a fair and stately palace--
	Radiant palace--reared its head.
	In the monarch Thought’s dominion--
	It stood there!
	Never seraph spread a pinion
	Over fabric half so fair!

	Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
	On its roof did float and flow,
	(This--all this--was in the olden
	Time long ago),
	And every gentle air that dallied,
	In that sweet day,
	Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
	A winged odor went away.

	Wanderers in that happy valley,
	Through two luminous windows, saw
	Spirits moving musically,
	To a lute’s well-tunëd law,
	Bound about a throne where, sitting
	(Porphyrogene!)
	In state his glory well befitting,
	The ruler of the realm was seen.

	And all with pearl and ruby glowing
	Was the fair palace door,
	Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing,
	And sparkling evermore,
	A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty
	Was but to sing,
	In voices of surpassing beauty,
	The wit and wisdom of their king.

	But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
	Assailed the monarch’s high estate.
	(Ah, let us mourn!--for never morrow
	Shall dawn upon him desolate !)
	And round about his home the glory
	That blushed and bloomed,
	Is but a dim-remembered story
	Of the old time entombed.

	And travellers, now, within that valley,
	Through the red-litten windows see
	Vast forms, that move fantastically
	To a discordant melody,
	While, like a ghastly rapid river,
	Through the pale door
	A hideous throng rush out forever
	And laugh--but smile no more.



25. HYMN

	At morn--at noon--at twilight dim--
	Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
	In joy and wo--in good and ill--
	Mother of God, be with me still!
	When the Hours flew brightly by,
	And not a cloud obscured the sky,
	My soul, lest it should truant be,
	Thy grace did guide to thine and thee
	Now, when storms of Fate o’ercast
	Darkly my Present and my Past,
	Let my future radiant shine
	With sweet hopes of thee and thine!



26. HYMN TO ARISTOGEITON AND HARMODIUS

	Wreathed in myrtle, my sword I’ll conceal,
	Like those champions devoted and brave,
	When they plunged in the tyrant their steel,
	And to Athens deliverance gave.

	Beloved heroes! your deathless souls roam
	In the joy breathing isles of the blest;
	Where the mighty of old have their home--
	Where Achilles and Diomed rest.

	In fresh myrtle my blade I’ll entwine,
	Like Harmodius, the gallant and good,
	When he made at the tutelar shrine
	A libation of Tyranny’s blood.

	Ye deliverers of Athens from shame!
	Ye avengers of Liberty’s wrongs!
	Endless ages shall cherish your fame,
	Embalmed in their echoing songs!



27. I HEED NOT THAT MY EARTHLY LOT

	I heed not that my earthly lot
	Hath--little of Earth in it--
	That years of love have been forgot
	In the hatred of a minute:--
	I mourn not that the desolate
	Are happier, sweet, than I,
	But that _you_ sorrow for _my_ fate
	Who am a passer-by.



28. IMITATION

	A dark unfathomed tide
	Of interminable pride--
	A mystery, and a dream,
	Should my early life seem;
	I say that dream was fraught
	With a wild and waking thought
	Of beings that have been,
	Which my spirit hath not seen,
	Had I let them pass me by,
	With a dreaming eye!
	Let none of earth inherit
	That vision on my spirit;
	Those thoughts I would control,
	As a spell upon his soul:
	For that bright hope at last
	And that light time have past,
	And my wordly rest hath gone
	With a sigh as it passed on:
	I care not though it perish
	With a thought I then did cherish.



29. IN YOUTH I HAVE KNOWN ONE

	_How often we forget all time, when lone
	Admiring Nature’s universal throne;
	Her woods--her wilds--her mountains--the intense
	Reply of Hers to Our intelligence!_

	In youth I have known one with whom the Earth
	In secret communing held--as he with it,
	In daylight, and in beauty, from his birth:
	Whose fervid, flickering torch of life was lit
	From the sun and stars, whence he had drawn forth
	A passionate light such for his spirit was fit--
	And yet that spirit knew--not in the hour
	Of its own fervor--what had o’er it power.

	Perhaps it may be that my mind is wrought
	To a ferver by the moonbeam that hangs o’er,
	But I will half believe that wild light fraught
	With more of sovereignty than ancient lore
	Hath ever told--or is it of a thought
	The unembodied essence, and no more
	That with a quickening spell doth o’er us pass
	As dew of the night-time, o’er the summer grass?

	Doth o’er us pass, when, as th’ expanding eye
	To the loved object--so the tear to the lid
	Will start, which lately slept in apathy?
	And yet it need not be--(that object) hid
	From us in life--but common--which doth lie
	Each hour before us--but then only bid
	With a strange sound, as of a harp-string broken
	T’ awake us--’Tis a symbol and a token--

	Of what in other worlds shall be--and given
	In beauty by our God, to those alone
	Who otherwise would fall from life and Heaven
	Drawn by their heart’s passion, and that tone,
	That high tone of the spirit which hath striven
	Though not with Faith--with godliness--whose throne
	With desperate energy ’t hath beaten down;
	Wearing its own deep feeling as a crown.



30. THE ISLAND OF THE FAY

	“Nullus enim locus sine genio est.”
	--_Servius_.

	“_La musique_,” says Marmontel, in those “Contes Moraux” which in all our translations
	  we have insisted upon calling “Moral Tales,” as if in mockery of their spirit--”_la
	  musique est le seul des talens qui jouisse de lui-meme: tous les autres veulent des temoins_.”
	  He here confounds the pleasure derivable from sweet sounds with the capacity for creating
	  them. No more than any other _talent_, is that for music susceptible of complete enjoyment
	  where there is no second party to appreciate its exercise; and it is only in common with other
	  talents that it produces _effects_ which may be fully enjoyed in solitude. The idea which the
	  _raconteur_ has either failed to entertain clearly, or has sacrificed in its expression
	  to his national love of _point_, is doubtless the very tenable one that the higher order of music
	  is the most thoroughly estimated when we are exclusively alone. The proposition in this form
	  will be admitted at once by those who love the lyre for its own sake and for its spiritual
	  uses. But there is one pleasure still within the reach of fallen mortality, and perhaps only
	  one, which owes even more than does music to the accessory sentiment of seclusion. I mean the
	  happiness experienced in the contemplation of natural scenery. In truth, the man who would
	  behold aright the glory of God upon earth must in solitude behold that glory. To me at least
	  the presence, not of human life only, but of life, in any other form than that of the green
	  things which grow upon the soil and are voiceless, is a stain upon the landscape, is at war with
	  the genius of the scene. I love, indeed, to regard the dark valleys, and the gray rocks, and
	  the waters that silently smile, and the forests that sigh in uneasy slumbers, and the proud
	  watchful mountains that look down upon all,--I love to regard these as themselves but the colossal
	  members of one vast animate and sentient whole--a whole whose form (that of the sphere) is the
	  most perfect and most inclusive of all; whose path is among associate planets; whose meek handmaiden
	  is the moon; whose mediate sovereign is the sun; whose life is eternity; whose thought is that
	  of a god; whose enjoyment is knowledge; whose destinies are lost in immensity; whose cognizance
	  of ourselves is akin with our own cognizance of the _animalculæ_ which infest the brain, a being
	  which we in consequence regard as purely inanimate and material, much in the same manner as these
	  _animalculæ_ must thus regard us.
	Our telescopes and our mathematical investigations assure us on every hand, notwithstanding
	  the cant of the more ignorant of the priesthood, that space, and therefore that bulk, is an important
	  consideration in the eyes of the Almighty. The cycles in which the stars move are those best
	  adapted for the evolution, without collision, of the greatest possible number of bodies.
	  The forms of those bodies are accurately such as within a given surface to include the greatest
	  possible amount of matter; while the surfaces themselves are so disposed as to accommodate
	  a denser population than could be accommodated on the same surfaces otherwise arranged.
	  Nor is it any argument against bulk being an object with God that space itself is infinite;
	  for there may be an infinity of matter to fill it; and since we see clearly that the endowment
	  of matter with vitality is a principle--indeed, as far as our judgments extend, the _leading_
	  principle in the operations of Deity, it is scarcely logical to imagine it confined to the regions
	  of the minute, where we daily trace it, and not extending to those of the august. As we find
	  cycle within cycle without end, yet all revolving around one far-distant centre which is the
	  Godhead, may we not analogically suppose, in the same manner, life within life, the less within
	  the greater, and all within the Spirit Divine? In short, we are madly erring through self-esteem
	  in believing man, in either his temporal or future destinies, to be of more moment in the universe
	  than that vast “clod of the valley” which he tills and contemns, and to which he denies a soul,
	  for no more profound reason than that he does not behold it in operation.
	These fancies, and such as these, have always given to my meditations among the mountains
	  and the forests, by the rivers and the ocean, a tinge of what the every-day world would not fail
	  to term the fantastic. My wanderings amid such scenes have been many and far-searching,
	  and often solitary; and the interest with which I have strayed through many a dim deep valley,
	  or gazed into the reflected heaven of many a bright lake, has been an interest greatly deepened
	  by the thought that I have strayed and gazed _alone._ What flippant Frenchman was it who said,
	  in allusion to the well known work of Zimmermann, that _“la solitude est une belle chose;
	  mais il faut quelqu’un pour vous dire que la solitude est une belle chose”_? The epigram
	  cannot be gainsaid; but the necessity is a thing that does not exist.
	It was during one of my lonely journeyings, amid a far distant region of mountain locked within
	  mountain, and sad rivers and melancholy tarns writhing or sleeping within all, that I chanced
	  upon a certain rivulet and island. I came upon them suddenly in the leafy June, and threw myself
	  upon the turf beneath the branches of an unknown odorous shrub, that I might doze as I contemplated
	  the scene. I felt that thus only should I look upon it, such was the character of phantasm
	  which it wore.
	On all sides, save to the west where the sun was about sinking, arose the verdant walls of the
	  forest. The little river which turned sharply in its course, and was thus immediately
	  lost to sight, seemed to have no exit from its prison, but to be absorbed by the deep green
	  foliage of the trees to the east; while in the opposite quarter (so it appeared to me as I lay
	  at length and glanced upward) there poured down noiselessly and continuously into the valley
	  a rich golden and crimson waterfall from the sunset fountains of the sky.
	About midway in the short vista which my dreamy vision took in, one small circular island,
	  profusely verdured, reposed upon the bosom of the stream. So blended bank and shadow there,
	  that each seemed pendulous in air--so mirror-like was the glassy water, that it was scarcely
	  possible to say at what point upon the slope of the emerald turf its crystal dominion began.
	  My position enabled me to include in a single view both the eastern and western extremities
	  of the islet, and I observed a singularly-marked difference in their aspects. The latter was
	  all one radiant harem of garden beauties. It glowed and blushed beneath the eye of the slant
	  sunlight, and fairly laughed with flowers. The grass was short, springy, sweet-scented,
	  and Asphodel-interspersed. The trees were lithe, mirthful, erect, bright, slender, and graceful,
	  of eastern figure and foliage, with bark smooth, glossy, and parti-colored. There seemed a deep
	  sense of life and joy about all, and although no airs blew from out the heavens, yet everything
	  had motion through the gentle sweepings to and fro of innumerable butterflies, that might have
	  been mistaken for tulips with wings.
	The other or eastern end of the isle was whelmed in the blackest shade. A sombre, yet beautiful
	  and peaceful gloom, here pervaded all things. The trees were dark in color and mournful
	  in form and attitude-- wreathing themselves into sad, solemn, and spectral shapes, that conveyed
	  ideas of mortal sorrow and untimely death. The grass wore the deep tint of the cypress,
	  and the heads of its blades hung droopingly, and hither and thither among it were many small
	  unsightly hillocks, low and narrow, and not very long, that had the aspect of graves, but were
	  not, although over and all about them the rue and the rosemary clambered. The shades of the trees
	  fell heavily upon the water, and seemed to bury itself therein, impregnating the depths of the
	  element with darkness. I fancied that each shadow, as the sun descended lower and lower, separated
	  itself sullenly from the trunk that gave it birth, and thus became absorbed by the stream,
	  while other shadows issued momently from the trees, taking the place of their predecessors
	  thus entombed.
	This idea having once seized upon my fancy greatly excited it, and I lost myself forthwith
	  in reverie. “If ever island were enchanted,” said I to myself, “this is it. This is the haunt
	  of the few gentle Fays who remain from the wreck of the race. Are these green tombs theirs?--or
	  do they yield up their sweet lives as mankind yield up their own? In dying, do they not rather
	  waste away mournfully, rendering unto God little by little their existence, as these trees
	  render up shadow after shadow, exhausting their substance unto dissolution? What the wasting
	  tree is to the water that imbibes its shade, growing thus blacker by what it preys upon, may
	  not the life of the Fay be to the death which engulfs it?”
	As I thus mused, with half-shut eyes, while the sun sank rapidly to rest, and eddying currents
	  careered round and round the island, bearing upon their bosom large dazzling white flakes
	  of the bark of the sycamore, flakes which, in their multiform positions upon the water, a quick
	  imagination might have converted into anything it pleased; while I thus mused, it appeared
	  to me that the form of one of those very Fays about whom I had been pondering, made its way slowly
	  into the darkness from out the light at the western end of the island. She stood erect in a singularly
	  fragile canoe, and urged it with the mere phantom of an oar. While within the influence
	  of the lingering sunbeams, her attitude seemed indicative of joy, but sorrow deformed it as she
	  passed within the shade. Slowly she glided along, and at length rounded the islet and re-entered
	  the region of light. “The revolution which has just been made by the Fay,” continued I musingly,
	  “is the cycle of the brief year of her life. She has floated through her winter and through
	  her summer. She is a year nearer unto death: for I did not fail to see that as she came into
	  the shade, her shadow fell from her, and was swallowed up in the dark water, making its blackness
	  more black.”
	And again the boat appeared and the Fay, but about the attitude of the latter there was more of
	  care and uncertainty and less of elastic joy. She floated again from out the light and into
	  the gloom (which deepened momently), and again her shadow fell from her into the ebony water,
	  and became absorbed into its blackness. And again and again she made the circuit of the island
	  (while the sun rushed down to his slumbers), and at each issuing into the light there was more
	  sorrow about her person, while it grew feebler and far fainter and more indistinct, and at each
	  passage into the gloom there fell from her a darker shade, which became whelmed in a shadow
	  more black. But at length, when the sun had utterly departed, the Fay, now the mere ghost of her
	  former self, went disconsolately with her boat into the region of the ebony flood, and that
	  she issued thence at all I cannot say, for darkness fell over all things, and I beheld her magical
	  figure no more.



31. ISRAFEL

	_And the angel Israfel, whose heart-strings are a lute, and who has the sweetest voice of all God’s
	  creatures._
	--KORAN

	In Heaven a spirit doth dwell
	“Whose heart-strings are a lute;”
	None sing so wildly well
	As the angel Israfel,
	And the giddy Stars (so legends tell),
	Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell
	Of his voice, all mute.

	Tottering above
	In her highest noon,
	The enamoured Moon
	Blushes with love,
	While, to listen, the red levin
	(With the rapid Pleiads, even,
	Which were seven),
	Pauses in Heaven.

	And they say (the starry choir
	And the other listening things)
	That Israfeli’s fire Is owing to that lyre
	By which he sits and sings--
	The trembling living wire
	Of those unusual strings.

	But the skies that angel trod,
	Where deep thoughts are a duty--
	Where Love’s a grow-up God--
	Where the Houri glances are Imbued with all the beauty
	Which we worship in a star.

	Therefore, thou art not wrong,
	Israfeli, who despisest
	An unimpassioned song;
	To thee the laurels belong,
	Best bard, because the wisest!
	Merrily live and long!

	The ecstasies above
	With thy burning measures suit--
	Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,
	With the fervor of thy lute--
	Well may the stars be mute!

	Yes, Heaven is thine; but this
	Is a world of sweets and sours;
	Our flowers are merely--flowers,
	And the shadow of thy perfect bliss
	Is the sunshine of ours.

	If I could dwell
	Where Israfel
	Hath dwelt, and he where I,
	He might not sing so wildly well
	A mortal melody,
	While a bolder note than this might swell
	From my lyre within the sky.



32. THE LAKE

	In spring of youth it was my lot
	To haunt of the wide world a spot
	The which I could not love the less--
	So lovely was the loneliness
	Of a wild lake, with black rock bound,
	And the tall pines that towered around.

	But when the Night had thrown her pall
	Upon the spot, as upon all,
	And the mystic wind went by
	Murmuring in melody--
	Then--ah, then, I would awake
	To the terror of the lone lake.

	Yet that terror was not fright,
	But a tremulous delight--
	A feeling not the jewelled mine
	Could teach or bribe me to define--
	Nor Love--although the Love were thine.

	Death was in that poisonous wave,
	And in its gulf a fitting grave
	For him who thence could solace bring
	To his lone imagining--
	Whose solitary soul could make
	An Eden of that dim lake.



33. LENORE

	Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!
	Let the bell toll!--a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river.
	And, Guy de Vere, hast _thou_ no tear?--weep now or never more!
	See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!
	Come! let the burial rite be read--the funeral song be sung!--
	An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young--
	A dirge for her, the doubly dead in that she died so young.

	“Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,
	And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her--that she died!
	How _shall_ the ritual, then, be read?--the requiem how be sung
	By you--by yours, the evil eye,--by yours, the slanderous tongue
	That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?”

	_Peccavimus;_ but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
	Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong!
	The sweet Lenore hath “gone before,” with Hope, that flew beside,
	Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy bride--
	For her, the fair and _débonnaire_, that now so lowly lies,
	The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes--
	The life still there, upon her hair--the death upon her eyes.

	“Avaunt! to-night my heart is light. No dirge will I upraise,
	But waft the angel on her flight with a pæan of old days!
	Let _no_ bell toll!--lest her sweet soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
	Should catch the note, as it doth float up from the damned Earth.
	To friends above, from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven--
	From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven--
	From grief and groan to a golden throne beside the King of Heaven.”



34. MYSERIOUS STAR

	Mysterious star!
	Thou wert my dream
	All a long summer night--
	Be now my theme!
	By this clear stream,
	Of thee will I write;
	Meantime from afar
	Bathe me in light!

	Thy world has not the dross of ours,
	Yet all the beauty--all the flowers
	That list our love or deck our bowers In dreamy gardens, where do lie
	Dreamy maidens all the day;
	While the silver winds of Circassy
	On violet couches faint away.
	Little--oh! little dwells in thee
	Like unto what on earth we see:
	Beauty’s eye is here the bluest In the falsest and untruest--
	On the sweetest air doth float
	The most sad and solemn note--
	If with thee be broken hearts,
	Joy so peacefully departs,
	That its echo still doth dwell,
	Like the murmur in the shell.
	Thou! thy truest type of grief Is the gently falling leaf--
	Thou! thy framing is so holy
	Sorrow is not melancholy.



35. NOT LONG AGO

	Not long ago, the writer of these lines,
	In the mad pride of intellectuality,
	Maintained “the power of words”--denied that ever
	A thought arose within the human brain
	Beyond the utterance of the human tongue:
	And now, as if in mockery of that boast,
	Two words--two foreign soft dissyllables--
	Italian tones, made only to be murmured
	By angels dreaming in the moonlit “dew
	That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,”--
	Have stirred from out the abysses of his heart,
	Unthought-like thoughts that are the souls of thought,
	Richer, far wilder, far diviner visions
	Than even the seraph harper, Israfel,
	(Who has “the sweetest voice of all God’s creatures,”)
	Could hope to utter. And I! my spells are broken.
	The pen falls powerless from my shivering hand.
	With thy dear name as text, though hidden by thee,
	I cannot write--I cannot speak or think--
	Alas, I cannot feel; for ’tis not feeling,
	This standing motionless upon the golden
	Threshold of the wide-open gate of dreams,
	Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,
	And thrilling as I see, upon the right,
	Upon the left, and all the way along,
	Amid empurpled vapors, far away
	To where the prospect terminates--_thee only_!



36. THE POWER OF WORDS

	_Oinos._

	Pardon, Agathos, the weakness of a spirit new-fledged with immortality!


	_Agathos._

	You have spoken nothing, my Oinos, for which pardon is to be demanded. Not even here is knowledge
	  a thing of intuition. For wisdom, ask of the angels freely, that it may be given!


	_Oinos._

	But in this existence I dreamed that I should be at once cognizant of all things, and thus at once
	  happy in being cognizant of all.


	_Agathos._

	Ah, not in knowledge is happiness, but in the acquisition of knowledge! In forever knowing,
	  we are forever blessed; but to know all, were the curse of a fiend.


	_Oinos._

	But does not The Most High know all?


	_Agathos_.

	_That_ (since he is The Most Happy) must be still the _one_ thing unknown even to HIM.


	_Oinos._

	But, since we grow hourly in knowledge, must not _at last_ all things be known?


	_Agathos._

	Look down into the abysmal distances!--attempt to force the gaze down the multitudinous
	  vistas of the stars, as we sweep slowly through them thus--and thus--and thus! Even the spiritual
	  vision, is it not at all points arrested by the continuous golden walls of the universe?--the
	  walls of the myriads of the shining bodies that mere number has appeared to blend into unity?


	_Oinos_.

	I clearly perceive that the infinity of matter is no dream.


	_Agathos_.

	There are no dreams in Aidenn--but it is here whispered that, of this infinity of matter, the _sole_
	  purpose is to afford infinite springs at which the soul may allay the thirst _to know_ which
	  is forever unquenchable within it--since to quench it would be to extinguish the soul’s self.
	  Question me then, my Oinos, freely and without fear. Come! we will leave to the left the loud
	  harmony of the Pleiades, and swoop outward from the throne into the starry meadows beyond
	  Orion, where, for pansies and violets, and heart’s-ease, are the beds of the triplicate
	  and triple-tinted suns.


	_Oinos_.

	And now, Agathos, as we proceed, instruct me!--speak to me in the earth’s familiar tones! I understand
	  not what you hinted to me just now of the modes or of the methods of what during mortality,
	  we were accustomed to call Creation. Do you mean to say that the Creator is not God?


	_Agathos_.

	I mean to say that the Deity does not create.


	_Oinos_.

	Explain!


	_Agathos_.

	In the beginning only, he created. The seeming creatures which are now throughout the universe
	  so perpetually springing into being can only be considered as the mediate or indirect,
	  not as the direct or immediate results of the Divine creative power.


	_Oinos._

	Among men, my Agathos, this idea would be considered heretical in the extreme.


	_Agathos._

	Among the angels, my Oinos, it is seen to be simply true.


	_Oinos._

	I can comprehend you thus far--that certain operations of what we term Nature, or the natural
	  laws, will, under certain conditions, give rise to that which has all the _appearance_
	  of creation. Shortly before the final overthrow of the earth, there were, I well remember,
	  many very successful experiments in what some philosophers were weak enough to denominate
	  the creation of animalculæ.


	_Agathos._

	The cases of which you speak were, in fact, instances of the secondary creation, and of the _only_
	  species of creation which has ever been since the first word spoke into existence the first
	  law.


	_Oinos._

	Are not the starry worlds that, from the abyss of nonentity, burst hourly forth into the heavens--are
	  not these stars, Agathos, the immediate handiwork of the King?


	_Agathos._

	Let me endeavor, my Oinos, to lead you, step by step, to the conception I intend. You are well
	  aware that, as no thought can perish, so no act is without infinite result. We moved our hands,
	  for example, when we were dwellers on the earth, and in so doing we gave vibration to the atmosphere
	  which engirdled it. This vibration was indefinitely extended till it gave impulse to every
	  particle of the earth’s air, which thenceforward, _and forever_, was actuated by the one movement
	  of the hand. This fact the mathematicians of our globe well knew. They made the special effects,
	  indeed, wrought in the fluid by special impulses, the subject of exact calculation--so
	  that it became easy to determine in what precise period an impulse of given extent would engirdle
	  the orb, and impress (forever) every atom of the atmosphere circumambient. Retrograding,
	  they found no difficulty; from a given effect, under given conditions, in determining
	  the value of the original impulse. Now the mathematicians who saw that the results of any given
	  impulse were absolutely endless--and who saw that a portion of these results were accurately
	  traceable through the agency of algebraic analysis--who saw, too, the facility of the retrogradation--these
	  men saw, at the same time, that this species of analysis itself had within itself a capacity
	  for indefinite progress--that there were no bounds conceivable to its advancement and applicability,
	  except within the intellect of him who advanced or applied it. But at this point our mathematicians
	  paused.


	_Oinos._

	And why, Agathos, should they have proceeded?


	_Agathos._

	Because there were some considerations of deep interest beyond. It was deducible from what they
	  knew, that to a being of infinite understanding--one to whom the _perfection_ of the algebraic
	  analysis lay unfolded--there could be no difficulty in tracing every impulse given the air--and
	  the ether through the air--to the remotest consequences at any even infinitely remote epoch
	  of time. It is indeed demonstrable that every such impulse _given the air_, must _in the end_
	  impress every individual thing that exists _within the universe;_--and the being of infinite
	  understanding--the being whom we have imagined--might trace the remote undulations of the impulse--trace
	  them upward and onward in their influences upon all particles of all matter--upward
	  and onward forever in their modifications of old forms--or, in other words, _in their creation
	  of new_--until he found them reflected--unimpressive _at last_--back from the throne of the Godhead.
	  And not only could such a being do this, but at any epoch, should a given result be afforded
	  him--should one of these numberless comets, for example, be presented to his inspection--he
	  could have no difficulty in determining, by the analytic retrogradation, to what original
	  impulse it was due. This power of retrogradation in its absolute fulness and perfection--this
	  faculty of referring at _all_ epochs, _all_ effects to _all_ causes--is of course the prerogative
	  of the Deity alone--but in every variety of degree, short of the absolute perfection,
	  is the power itself exercised by the whole host of the Angelic Intelligences.


	_Oinos_.

	But you speak merely of impulses upon the air.


	_Agathos_.

	In speaking of the air, I referred only to the earth: but the general proposition has reference
	  to impulses upon the ether--which, since it pervades, and alone pervades all space, is thus
	  the great medium of _creation_.


	_Oinos_.

	Then all motion, of whatever nature, creates?


	_Agathos_.

	It must: but a true philosophy has long taught that the source of all motion is thought--and
	  the source of all thought is--


	_Oinos_.

	God.


	_Agathos_.

	I have spoken to you, Oinos, as to a child, of the fair Earth which lately perished--of
	  impulses upon the atmosphere of the earth.


	_Oinos_.

	You did.


	_Agathos_.

	And while I thus spoke, did there not cross your mind some thought of the _physical power of words_?
	  Is not every word an impulse on the air?


	_Oinos_.

	But why, Agathos, do you weep--and why, oh, why do your wings droop as we hover above this fair
	  star--which is the greenest and yet most terrible of all we have encountered in our flight?
	  Its brilliant flowers look like a fairy dream--but its fierce volcanoes like the passions
	  of a turbulent heart.


	_Agathos_.

	They _are_!--they _are_!--This wild star--it is now three centuries since, with clasped hands,
	  and with streaming eyes, at the feet of my beloved--I spoke it--with a few passionate
	  sentences--into birth. Its brilliant flowers _are_ the dearest of all unfulfilled dreams,
	  and its raging volcanoes _are_ the passions of the most turbulent and unhallowed of hearts!



37. Published, 1845

	* * * * *



38. A PÆAN

	How shall the burial rite be read?
	The solemn song be sung?
	The requiem for the loveliest dead,
	That ever died so young?

	Her friends are gazing on her
	And on her gaudy bier,
	And weep!--oh! to dishonor
	Dead beauty with a tear!

	They loved her for her wealth--
	And they hated her for her pride--
	But she grew in feeble health,
	And they _love_ her--that she died.

	They tell me (while they speak
	Of her “costly broider’d pall”)
	That my voice is growing weak--
	That I should not sing at all--

	Or that my tone should be
	Tun’d to such solemn song
	So mournfully--so mournfully,
	That the dead may feel no wrong.

	But she is gone above
	With young Hope at her side,
	And I am drunk with love
	Of the dead, who is my bride.--

	Of the dead--dead who lies
	All perfum’d there,
	With the death upon her eyes.
	And the life upon her hair.

	Thus on the coffin loud and long
	I strike--the murmur sent
	Through the gray chambers to my song,
	Shall be the accompaniment.

	Thou diedst in thy life’s June--
	But thou didst not die too fair:
	Thou didst not die too soon,
	Nor with too calm an air.

	From more than friends on earth
	Thy life and love are riven,
	To join the untainted mirth
	Of more than thrones in heaven.--

	Therefore, to thee this night
	I will no requiem raise,
	But waft thee on thy flight,
	With a Pæan of old days.



39. THE RAVEN

	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
	Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore--
	While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
	As of some one gently rapping--rapping at my chamber door.
	“’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door--
	Only this and nothing more.”

	Ah, distinctly I remember, it was in the bleak December,
	And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
	Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
	From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
	For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
	Nameless here for evermore.

	And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
	Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
	So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
	“’Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door--
	Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
	This it is and nothing more.”

	Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
	“Sir,” said I, “or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
	But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
	And so faintly you came tapping--tapping at my chamber door,
	That I scarce was sure I heard you”--here I opened wide the door:--
	Darkness there and nothing more.

	Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
	Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
	But the silence was unbroken, and the darkness gave no token,
	And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, “Lenore!”
	This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, “Lenore!”
	Merely this and nothing more.

	Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
	Soon I heard again a tapping, somewhat louder than before.
	“Surely,” said I, “surely that is something at my window lattice;
	Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
	Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;--
	’Tis the wind and nothing more.”

	Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
	In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore;
	Not the least obeisance made he: not an instant stopped or stayed he;
	But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
	Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
	Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

	Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
	By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
	“Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou,” I said, “art sure no craven,
	Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore--
	Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night’s Plutonian shore!”
	Quoth the Raven, “Nevermore.”

	Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
	Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
	For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
	Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
	Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
	With such name as “Nevermore.”

	But the Raven, sitting lonely on that placid bust, spoke only
	That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
	Nothing further then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
	Till I scarcely more than muttered, “Other friends have flown before--
	On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my hopes have flown before.”
	Then the bird said, “Nevermore.”

	Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
	“Doubtless,” said I, “what it utters is its only stock and store,
	Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
	Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
	Till the dirges of his Hope the melancholy burden bore
	Of ‘Never--nevermore.’”

	But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
	Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door;
	Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
	Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
	What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
	Meant in croaking “Nevermore.”

	This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
	To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom’s core;
	This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
	On the cushion’s velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o’er,
	But whose velvet violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o’er,
	_She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!

	Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
	Swung by Seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
	“Wretch,” I cried, “thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
	Respite--respite aad nepenthé from thy memories of Lenore!
	Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthé, and forget this lost Lenore!”
	Quoth the Raven, “Nevermore.”

	“Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
	Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
	Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
	On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
	Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!”
	Quoth the Raven, “Nevermore.”

	“Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!
	By that Heaven that bends above us--by that God we both adore--
	Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
	It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
	Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore.”
	Quoth the Raven, “Nevermore.”

	“Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!” I shrieked, upstarting--
	“Get thee back into the tempest and the Night’s Plutonian shore!
	Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
	Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
	Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!”
	Quoth the Raven, “Nevermore.”

	And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
	On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
	And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon’s that is dreaming,
	And the lamp-light o’er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
	And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
	Shall be lifted--nevermore!



40. ROMANCE

	Romance, who loves to nod and sing,
	With drowsy head and folded wing,
	Among the green leaves as they shake
	Far down within some shadowy lake,
	To me a painted paroquet
	Hath been--a most familiar bird--
	Taught me my alphabet to say--
	To lisp my very earliest word
	While in the wild wood I did lie,
	A child--with a most knowing eye.

	Of late, eternal Condor years
	So shake the very Heaven on high
	With tumult as they thunder by,
	I have no time for idle cares
	Though gazing on the unquiet sky.
	And when an hour with calmer wings Its down upon my spirit flings--
	That little time with lyre and rhyme
	To while away--forbidden things!
	My heart would feel to be a crime
	Unless it trembled with the strings.


	Succeeding years, too wild for song,
	Then rolled like tropic storms along,
	Where, though the garish lights that fly
	Dying along the troubled sky,
	Lay bare, through vistas thunder-riven,
	The blackness of the general Heaven,
	That very blackness yet doth fling
	Light on the lightning’s silver wing.

	For being an idle boy lang syne,
	Who read Anacreon and drank wine,
	I early found Anacreon rhymes
	Were almost passionate sometimes--
	And by strange alchemy of brain
	His pleasures always turned to pain--
	His naïveté to wild desire--
	His wit to love--his wine to fire--
	And so, being young and dipt in folly,
	I fell in love with melancholy.

	And used to throw my earthly rest
	And quiet all away in jest--
	I could not love except where Death
	Was mingling his with Beauty’s breath--
	Or Hymen, Time, and Destiny,
	Were stalking between her and me.

	But _now_ my soul hath too much room--
	Gone are the glory and the gloom--
	The black hath mellow’d into gray,
	And all the fires are fading away.

	My draught of passion hath been deep--
	I revell’d, and I now would sleep--
	And after drunkenness of soul
	Succeeds the glories of the bowl--
	An idle longing night and day
	To dream my very life away.

	But dreams--of those who dream as I,
	Aspiringly, are damned, and die:
	Yet should I swear I mean alone,
	By notes so very shrilly blown,
	To break upon Time’s monotone,
	While yet my vapid joy and grief
	Are tintless of the yellow leaf--
	Why not an imp the greybeard hath,
	Will shake his shadow in my path--
	And e’en the greybeard will o’erlook
	Connivingly my dreaming-book.



41. SANCTA MARIA

	Sancta Maria! turn thine eyes--
	Upon the sinner’s sacrifice,
	Of fervent prayer and humble love,
	From thy holy throne above.
	At morn; at noon; at twilight dim--
	Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
	In joy and woe; in good and ill--
	Mother of God, be with me still!
	When the Hours flew brightly by,
	And not a cloud obscured the sky,
	My soul, lest it should truant be,
	Thy grace did guide to thine and thee;
	Now, when storms of Fate o’ercast
	Darkly my Present and my Past,
	Let my Future radiant shine
	With sweet hopes of thee and thine!



42. SHADOW: A PARABLE

	Yea! though I walk through the valley of the _Shadow_.
	--_Psalm of David_

	Ye who read are still among the living; but I who write shall have long since gone my way into
	  the region of shadows. For indeed strange things shall happen, and secret things be known,
	  and many centuries shall pass away, ere these memorials be seen of men. And, when seen, there
	  will be some to disbelieve and some to doubt, and yet a few who will find much to ponder upon
	  in the characters here graven with a stylus of iron.
	The year had been a year of terror, and of feeling more intense than terror for which there is no
	  name upon the earth. For many prodigies and signs had taken place, and far and wide, over sea
	  and land, the black wings of the Pestilence were spread abroad. To those, nevertheless,
	  cunning in the stars, it was not unknown that the heavens wore an aspect of ill; and to me, the
	  Greek Oinos, among others, it was evident that now had arrived the alternation of that seven
	  hundred and ninety-fourth year when, at the entrance of Aries, the planet Jupiter is enjoined
	  with the red ring of the terrible Saturnus. The peculiar spirit of the skies, if I mistake
	  not greatly, made itself manifest, not only in the physical orb of the earth, but in the souls,
	  imaginations, and meditations of mankind.
	Over some flasks of the red Chian wine, within the walls of a noble hall, in a dim city called
	  Ptolemais, we sat, at night, a company of seven. And to our chamber there was no entrance
	  save by a lofty door of brass: and the door was fashioned by the artisan Corinnos, and, being
	  of rare workmanship, was fastened from within. Black draperies, likewise in the gloomy room,
	  shut out from our view the moon, the lurid stars, and the peopleless streets--but the boding
	  and the memory of Evil, they would not be so excluded. There were things around us and about
	  of which I can render no distinct account--things material and spiritual-- heaviness in the atmosphere--a
	  sense of suffocation--anxiety--and, above all, that terrible state of existence which the nervous
	  experience when the senses are keenly living and awake, and meanwhile the powers of thought
	  lie dormant. A dead weight hung upon us. It hung upon our limbs--upon the household furniture--upon
	  the goblets from which we drank; and all things were depressed, and borne down thereby--all
	  things save only the flames of the seven iron lamps which illumined our revel. Uprearing
	  themselves in tall slender lines of light, they thus remained burning all pallid and motionless;
	  and in the mirror which their lustre formed upon the round table of ebony at which we sat each
	  of us there assembled beheld the pallor of his own countenance, and the unquiet glare in the
	  downcast eyes of his companions. Yet we laughed and were merry in our proper way--which
	  was hysterical; and sang the songs of Anacreon--which are madness; and drank deeply--although
	  the purple wine reminded us of blood. For there was yet another tenant of our chamber in the
	  person of young Zoilus. Dead and at full length he lay, enshrouded;--the genius and the demon
	  of the scene. Alas! he bore no portion in our mirth, save that his countenance, distorted
	  with the plague, and his eyes in which Death had but half extinguished the fire of the pestilence,
	  seemed to take such an interest in our merriment as the dead may haply take in the merriment
	  of those who are to die. But although I, Oinos, felt that the eyes of the departed were upon
	  me, still I forced myself not to perceive the bitterness of their expression, and gazing down
	  steadily into the depths of the ebony mirror, sang with a loud and sonorous voice the songs
	  of the son of Teos. But gradually my songs they ceased, and their echoes, rolling afar off among
	  the sable draperies of the chamber, became weak, and undistinguishable, and so faded away.
	  And lo! from among those sable draperies, where the sounds of the song departed, there came
	  forth a dark and undefiled shadow--a shadow such as the moon, when low in heaven, might fashion
	  from the figure of a man: but it was the shadow neither of man nor of God, nor of any familiar
	  thing. And quivering awhile among the draperies of the room it at length rested in full view
	  upon the surface of the door of brass. But the shadow was vague, and formless, and indefinite,
	  and was the shadow neither of man nor God--neither God of Greece, nor God of Chaldæa, nor any
	  Egyptian God. And the shadow rested upon the brazen doorway, and under the arch of the entablature
	  of the door and moved not, nor spoke any word, but there became stationary and remained.
	  And the door whereupon the shadow rested was, if I remember aright, over against the feet of the
	  young Zoilus enshrouded. But we, the seven there assembled, having seen the shadow as it came
	  out from among the draperies, dared not steadily behold it, but cast down our eyes, and gazed
	  continually into the depths of the mirror of ebony. And at length I, Oinos, speaking some low
	  words, demanded of the shadow its dwelling and its appellation. And the shadow answered,
	  “I am SHADOW, and my dwelling is near to the Catacombs of Ptolemais, and hard by those dim plains
	  of Helusion which border upon the foul Charonian canal.” And then did we, the seven, start
	  from our seats in horror, and stand trembling, and shuddering, and aghast: for the tones in the
	  voice of the shadow were not the tones of any one being, but of a multitude of beings, and varying
	  in their cadences from syllable to syllable, fell duskily upon our ears in the well remembered
	  and familiar accents of many thousand departed friends.



43. SILENCE

	There are some qualities--some incorporate things,
	That have a double life, which thus is made
	A type of that twin entity which springs
	From matter and light, evinced in solid and shade.
	There is a twofold _Silence_--sea and shore--
	Body and soul. One dwells in lonely places,
	Newly with grass o’ergrown; some solemn graces,
	Some human memories and tearful lore,
	Render him terrorless: his name’s “No More.”
	He is the corporate Silence: dread him not!
	No power hath he of evil in himself;
	But should some urgent fate (untimely lot!)
	Bring thee to meet his shadow (nameless elf,
	That haunteth the lone regions where hath trod
	No foot of man), commend thyself to God!



44. SILENCE: A FABLE

	The mountain pinnacles slumber; valleys, crags, and caves _are silent_.
	“LISTEN to _me_,” said the Demon, as he placed his hand upon my head. “The region of which I speak
	  is a dreary region in Libya, by the borders of the river Zäire. And there is no quiet there,
	  nor silence.
	“The waters of the river have a saffron and sickly hue; and they flow not onward to the sea, but
	  palpitate forever and forever beneath the red eye of the sun with a tumultuous and convulsive
	  motion. For many miles on either side of the river’s oozy bed is a pale desert of gigantic
	  water-lilies. They sigh one unto the other in that solitude, and stretch towards the heaven
	  their long and ghastly necks, and nod to and fro their everlasting heads. And there is an indistinct
	  murmur which cometh out from among them like the rushing of subterrene water. And they sigh
	  one unto the other.
	“But there is a boundary to their realm--the boundary of the dark, horrible, lofty forest.
	  There, like the waves about the Hebrides, the low underwood is agitated continually.
	  But there is no wind throughout the heaven. And the tall primeval trees rock eternally
	  hither and thither with a crashing and mighty sound. And from their high summits, one by one,
	  drop everlasting dews. And at the roots, strange poisonous flowers lie writhing in perturbed
	  slumber. And overhead, with a rustling and loud noise, the gray clouds rush westwardly
	  forever until they roll, a cataract, over the fiery wall of the horizon. But there is no wind
	  throughout the heaven. And by the shores of the river Zäire there is neither quiet nor silence.
	“It was night, and the rain fell; and, falling, it was rain, but, having fallen, it was blood.
	  And I stood in the morass among the tall lilies, and the rain fell upon my head--and the lilies
	  sighed one unto the other in the solemnity of their desolation.
	“And, all at once, the moon arose through the thin ghastly mist, and was crimson in color. And
	  mine eyes fell upon a huge gray rock which stood by the shore of the river and was lighted
	  by the light of the moon. And the rock was gray and ghastly, and tall,--and the rock was gray.
	  Upon its front were characters engraven in the stones; and I walked through the morass of water-lilies,
	  until I came close unto the shore, that I might read the characters upon the stone. But I could
	  not decipher them. And I was going back into the morass when the moon shone with a fuller
	  red, and I turned and looked again upon the rock and upon the characters;--and the characters
	  were DESOLATION.
	“And I looked upwards, and there stood a man upon the summit of the rock; and I hid myself among
	  the water-lilies that I might discover the action of the man. And the man was tall and stately
	  in form, and wrapped up from his shoulders to his feet in the toga of old Rome. And the outlines
	  of his figure were indistinct--but his features were the features of a deity; for the mantle
	  of the night, and of the mist, and of the moon, and of the dew, had left uncovered the features
	  of his face. And his brow was lofty with thought, and his eye wild with care; and in the few
	  furrows upon his cheek, I read the fables of sorrow, and weariness, and disgust with mankind,
	  and a longing after solitude.
	“And the man sat upon the rock, and leaned his head upon his hand, and looked out upon the desolation.
	  He looked down into the low unquiet shrubbery, and up into the tall primeval trees, and up higher
	  at the rustling heaven, and into the crimson moon. And I lay close within shelter of the lilies,
	  and observed the actions of the man. And the man trembled in the solitude;--but the night waned,
	  and he sat upon the rock.
	“And the man turned his attention from the heaven, and looked out upon the dreary river Zäire,
	  and upon the yellow ghastly waters, and upon the pale legions of the water-lilies.
	  And the man listened to the sighs of the water-lilies, and to the murmur that came up from among
	  them. And I lay close within my covert and observed the actions of the man. And the man trembled
	  in the solitude;--but the night waned, and he sat upon the rock.
	“Then I went down into the recesses of the morass, and waded afar in among the wilderness
	  of the lilies, and called unto the hippopotami which dwelt among the fens in the recesses
	  of the morass. And the hippopotami heard my call, and came, with the behemoth, unto the foot
	  of the rock, and roared loudly and fearfully beneath the moon. And I lay close within my covert
	  and observed the actions of the man. And the man trembled in the solitude;--but the night waned,
	  and he sat upon the rock.
	“Then I cursed the elements with the curse of tumult; and a frightful tempest gathered in the heaven,
	  where before there had been no wind. And the heaven became livid with the violence of the tempest--and
	  the rain beat upon the head of the man--and the floods of the river came down--and the river
	  was tormented into foam--and the water-lilies shrieked within their beds--and the forest crumbled
	  before the wind--and the thunder rolled--and the lightning fell--and the rock rocked to its foundation.
	  And I lay close within my covert and observed the actions of the man. And the man trembled
	  in the solitude;--but the night waned, and he sat upon the rock.
	“Then I grew angry and cursed, with the curse of silence, the river, and the lilies, and the wind,
	  and the forest, and the heaven, and the thunder, and the sighs of the water-lilies.
	  And they became accursed, and _were still._ And the moon ceased to totter up its pathway
	  to heaven--and the thunder died away--and the lightning did not flash--and the clouds hung motionless--and
	  the waters sunk to their level and remained--and the trees ceased to rock--and the water-lilies
	  sighed no more--and the murmur was heard no longer from among them, nor any shadow of sound
	  throughout the vast illimitable desert. And I looked upon the characters of the rock, and they
	  were changed;--and the characters were SILENCE.
	“And mine eyes fell upon the countenance of the man, and his countenance was wan with terror.
	  And, hurriedly, he raised his head from his hand, and stood forth upon the rock and listened.
	  But there was no voice throughout the vast illimitable desert, and the characters upon the rock
	  were SILENCE. And the man shuddered, and turned his face away, and fled afar off, in haste,
	  so that I beheld him no more.”
	Now there are fine tales in the volumes of the Magi--in the iron-bound, melancholy volumes
	  of the Magi. Therein, I say, are glorious histories of the Heaven, and of the Earth, and of the
	  mighty Sea--and of the Genii that overruled the sea, and the earth, and the lofty heaven.
	  There was much lore, too, in the sayings which were said by the sybils; and holy, holy things
	  were heard of old by the dim leaves that trembled around Dodona--but, as Allah liveth, that
	  fable which the demon told me as he sat by my side in the shadow of the tomb, I hold to be the
	  most wonderful of all! And as the Demon made an end of his story, he fell back within the cavity
	  of the tomb and laughed. And I could not laugh with the Demon, and he cursed me because I could
	  not laugh. And the lynx which dwelleth forever in the tomb, came out therefrom, and lay down
	  at the feet of the Demon, and looked at him steadily in the face.



45. THE SLEEPER

	At midnight, in the month of June,
	I stand beneath the mystic moon.
	An opiate vapor, dewy, dim,
	Exhales from out her golden rim,
	And, softly dripping, drop by drop,
	Upon the quiet mountain top,
	Steals drowsily and musically Into the universal valley.
	The rosemary nods upon the grave;
	The lily lolls upon the wave;
	Wrapping the fog about its breast,
	The ruin moulders into rest;
	Looking like Lethe, see! the lake
	A conscious slumber seems to take,
	And would not, for the world, awake.
	All Beauty sleeps!--and lo! where lies
	(Her casement open to the skies)
	Irene, with her Destinies!

	Oh, lady bright! can it be right--
	This window open to the night!
	The wanton airs, from the tree-top,
	Laughingly through the lattice-drop--
	The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,
	Flit through thy chamber in and out,
	And wave the curtain canopy
	So fitfully--so fearfully--
	Above the closed and fringed lid
	’Neath which thy slumb’ring soul lies hid,
	That, o’er the floor and down the wall,
	Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!
	Oh, lady dear, hast thou no fear?
	Why and what art thou dreaming here?
	Sure thou art come o’er far-off seas,
	A wonder to these garden trees!
	Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress!
	Strange, above all, thy length of tress,
	And this all-solemn silentness!

	The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep
	Which is enduring, so be deep!
	Heaven have her in its sacred keep!
	This chamber changed for one more holy,
	This bed for one more melancholy,
	I pray to God that she may lie
	For ever with unopened eye,
	While the dim sheeted ghosts go by!

	My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,
	As it is lasting, so be deep;
	Soft may the worms about her creep!
	Far in the forest, dim and old,
	For her may some tall vault unfold--
	Some vault that oft hath flung its black
	And winged panels fluttering back,
	Triumphant, o’er the crested palls,
	Of her grand family funerals--
	Some sepulchre, remote, alone,
	Against whose portal she hath thrown,
	In childhood many an idle stone--
	Some tomb from out whose sounding door
	She ne’er shall force an echo more,
	Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!
	It was the dead who groaned within.



46. SONG

	I saw thee on thy bridal day--
	When a burning blush came o’er thee,
	Though happiness around thee lay,
	The world all love before thee:

	And in thine eye a kindling light
	(Whatever it might be)
	Was all on Earth my aching sight
	Of Loveliness could see.

	That blush, perhaps, was maiden shame--
	As such it well may pass--
	Though its glow hath raised a fiercer flame
	In the breast of him, alas!

	Who saw thee on that bridal day,
	When that deep blush _would_ come o’er thee,
	Though happiness around thee lay,
	The world all love before thee.



47. SONNET TO SCIENCE

	SCIENCE! true daughter of Old Time thou art!
	Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes.
	Why preyest thou thus upon the poet’s heart,
	Vulture, whose wings are dull realities
	How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise,
	Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering
	To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies,
	Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing!
	Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car?
	And driven the Hamadryad from the wood
	To seek a shelter in some happier star?
	Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood,
	The Elfin from the green grass, and from me
	The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree?



48. SPIRITS OF THE DEAD

	Thy soul shall find itself alone
	’Mid dark thoughts of the gray tombstone
	Not one, of all the crowd, to pry Into thine hour of secrecy.
	Be silent in that solitude
	Which is not loneliness--for then
	The spirits of the dead who stood
	In life before thee are again In death around thee--and their will
	Shall overshadow thee: be still.
	The night--tho’ clear--shall frown--
	And the stars shall not look down
	From their high thrones in the Heaven,
	With light like Hope to mortals given--
	But their red orbs, without beam,
	To thy weariness shall seem
	As a burning and a fever
	Which would cling to thee forever.
	Now are thoughts thou shalt not banish--
	Now are visions ne’er to vanish--
	From thy spirit shall they pass
	No more--like dew-drops from the grass.
	The breeze--the breath of God--is still--
	And the mist upon the hill
	Shadowy--shadowy--yet unbroken,
	Is a symbol and a token--
	How it hangs upon the trees,
	A mystery of mysteries!



49. TAMERLANE

	Kind solace in a dying hour!
	Such, father, is not (now) my theme--
	I will not madly deem that power
	Of Earth may shrive me of the sin
	Unearthly pride hath revelled in--
	I have no time to dote or dream:
	You call it hope--that fire of fire!
	It is but agony of desire:
	If I _can_ hope--O God! I can--
	Its fount is holier--more divine--
	I would not call thee fool, old man,
	But such is not a gift of thine.

	Know thou the secret of a spirit
	Bowed from its wild pride into shame
	O yearning heart! I did inherit
	Thy withering portion with the fame,
	The searing glory which hath shone
	Amid the Jewels of my throne,
	Halo of Hell! and with a pain
	Not Hell shall make me fear again--
	O craving heart, for the lost flowers
	And sunshine of my summer hours!
	The undying voice of that dead time,
	With its interminable chime,
	Rings, in the spirit of a spell,
	Upon thy emptiness--a knell.

	I have not always been as now:
	The fevered diadem on my brow I claimed and won usurpingly--
	Hath not the same fierce heirdom given
	Rome to the Cæsar--this to me?
	The heritage of a kingly mind,
	And a proud spirit which hath striven
	Triumphantly with human kind.
	On mountain soil I first drew life:
	The mists of the Taglay have shed
	Nightly their dews upon my head,
	And, I believe, the winged strife
	And tumult of the headlong air
	Have nestled in my very hair.

	So late from Heaven--that dew--it fell
	(’Mid dreams of an unholy night)
	Upon me with the touch of Hell,
	While the red flashing of the light
	From clouds that hung, like banners, o’er,
	Appeared to my half-closing eye
	The pageantry of monarchy;
	And the deep trumpet-thunder’s roar
	Came hurriedly upon me, telling
	Of human battle, where my voice,
	My own voice, silly child!--was swelling
	(O! how my spirit would rejoice,
	And leap within me at the cry)
	The battle-cry of Victory!

	The rain came down upon my head
	Unsheltered--and the heavy wind
	Rendered me mad and deaf and blind.
	It was but man, I thought, who shed
	Laurels upon me: and the rush--
	The torrent of the chilly air
	Gurgled within my ear the crush
	Of empires--with the captive’s prayer--
	The hum of suitors--and the tone
	Of flattery ’round a sovereign’s throne.

	My passions, from that hapless hour,
	Usurped a tyranny which men
	Have deemed since I have reached to power,
	My innate nature--be it so:
	But, father, there lived one who, then,
	Then--in my boyhood--when their fire
	Burned with a still intenser glow
	(For passion must, with youth, expire)
	E’en _then_ who knew this iron heart In woman’s weakness had a part.

	I have no words--alas!--to tell
	The loveliness of loving well!
	Nor would I now attempt to trace
	The more than beauty of a face
	Whose lineaments, upon my mind,
	Are--shadows on th’ unstable wind:
	Thus I remember having dwelt
	Some page of early lore upon,
	With loitering eye, till I have felt
	The letters--with their meaning--melt
	To fantasies--with none.

	O, she was worthy of all love!
	Love as in infancy was mine--
	’Twas such as angel minds above
	Might envy; her young heart the shrine
	On which my every hope and thought
	Were incense--then a goodly gift,
	For they were childish and upright--
	Pure--as her young example taught:
	Why did I leave it, and, adrift,
	Trust to the fire within, for light?

	We grew in age--and love--together--
	Roaming the forest, and the wild;
	My breast her shield in wintry weather--
	And, when the friendly sunshine smiled.
	And she would mark the opening skies,
	_I_ saw no Heaven--but in her eyes.
	Young Love’s first lesson is----the heart:
	For ’mid that sunshine, and those smiles,
	When, from our little cares apart,
	And laughing at her girlish wiles,
	I’d throw me on her throbbing breast,
	And pour my spirit out in tears--
	There was no need to speak the rest--
	No need to quiet any fears
	Of her--who asked no reason why,
	But turned on me her quiet eye!

	Yet _more_ than worthy of the love
	My spirit struggled with, and strove
	When, on the mountain peak, alone,
	Ambition lent it a new tone--
	I had no being--but in thee:
	The world, and all it did contain In the earth--the air--the sea--
	Its joy--its little lot of pain
	That was new pleasure--the ideal,
	Dim, vanities of dreams by night--
	And dimmer nothings which were real--
	(Shadows--and a more shadowy light!)
	Parted upon their misty wings,
	And, so, confusedly, became
	Thine image and--a name--a name!
	Two separate--yet most intimate things.

	I was ambitious--have you known
	The passion, father? You have not:
	A cottager, I marked a throne
	Of half the world as all my own,
	And murmured at such lowly lot--
	But, just like any other dream,
	Upon the vapor of the dew
	My own had past, did not the beam
	Of beauty which did while it thro’
	The minute--the hour--the day--oppress
	My mind with double loveliness.

	We walked together on the crown
	Of a high mountain which looked down
	Afar from its proud natural towers
	Of rock and forest, on the hills--
	The dwindled hills! begirt with bowers
	And shouting with a thousand rills.

	I spoke to her of power and pride,
	But mystically--in such guise
	That she might deem it nought beside
	The moment’s converse; in her eyes I read, perhaps too carelessly--
	A mingled feeling with my own--
	The flush on her bright cheek, to me
	Seemed to become a queenly throne
	Too well that I should let it be
	Light in the wilderness alone.

	I wrapped myself in grandeur then,
	And donned a visionary crown--
	Yet it was not that Fantasy
	Had thrown her mantle over me--
	But that, among the rabble--men,
	Lion ambition is chained down--
	And crouches to a keeper’s hand--
	Not so in deserts where the grand--
	The wild--the terrible conspire
	With their own breath to fan his fire.

	Look ’round thee now on Samarcand!--
	Is she not queen of Earth? her pride
	Above all cities? in her hand
	Their destinies? in all beside
	Of glory which the world hath known
	Stands she not nobly and alone?
	Falling--her veriest stepping-stone
	Shall form the pedestal of a throne--
	And who her sovereign? Timour--he
	Whom the astonished people saw
	Striding o’er empires haughtily
	A diademed outlaw!

	O, human love! thou spirit given,
	On Earth, of all we hope in Heaven!
	Which fall’st into the soul like rain
	Upon the Siroc-withered plain,
	And, failing in thy power to bless,
	But leav’st the heart a wilderness!
	Idea! which bindest life around
	With music of so strange a sound
	And beauty of so wild a birth--
	Farewell! for I have won the Earth.

	When Hope, the eagle that towered, could see
	No cliff beyond him in the sky,
	His pinions were bent droopingly--
	And homeward turned his softened eye.
	’Twas sunset: When the sun will part
	There comes a sullenness of heart
	To him who still would look upon
	The glory of the summer sun.
	That soul will hate the ev’ning mist
	So often lovely, and will list
	To the sound of the coming darkness (known
	To those whose spirits hearken) as one
	Who, in a dream of night, _would_ fly,
	But _cannot_, from a danger nigh.

	What tho’ the moon--tho’ the white moon
	Shed all the splendor of her noon,
	_Her_ smile is chilly--and _her_ beam,
	In that time of dreariness, will seem
	(So like you gather in your breath)
	A portrait taken after death.
	And boyhood is a summer sun
	Whose waning is the dreariest one--
	For all we live to know is known,
	And all we seek to keep hath flown--
	Let life, then, as the day-flower, fall
	With the noon-day beauty--which is all.
	I reached my home--my home no more--
	For all had flown who made it so.
	I passed from out its mossy door,
	And, tho’ my tread was soft and low,
	A voice came from the threshold stone
	Of one whom I had earlier known--
	O, I defy thee, Hell, to show
	On beds of fire that burn below,
	An humbler heart--a deeper woe.

	Father, I firmly do believe--
	I _know_--for Death who comes for me
	From regions of the blest afar,
	Where there is nothing to deceive,
	Hath left his iron gate ajar.
	And rays of truth you cannot see
	Are flashing thro’ Eternity----
	I do believe that Eblis hath
	A snare in every human path--
	Else how, when in the holy grove I wandered of the idol, Love,--
	Who daily scents his snowy wings
	With incense of burnt-offerings
	From the most unpolluted things,
	Whose pleasant bowers are yet so riven
	Above with trellised rays from Heaven
	No mote may shun--no tiniest fly--
	The light’ning of his eagle eye--
	How was it that Ambition crept,
	Unseen, amid the revels there,
	Till growing bold, he laughed and leapt In the tangles of Love’s very hair!



50. TO F

	Beloved! amid the earnest woes
	That crowd around my earthly path--
	(Drear path, alas! where grows
	Not even one lonely rose)--
	My soul at least a solace hath In dreams of thee, and therein knows
	An Eden of bland repose.

	And thus thy memory is to me
	Like some enchanted far-off isle In some tumultuous sea--
	Some ocean throbbing far and free
	With storm--but where meanwhile
	Serenest skies continually
	Just o’er that one bright inland smile.



51. TO FRANCES S. OSGOOD

	Thou wouldst be loved?--then let thy heart
	From its present pathway part not;
	Being everything which now thou art,
	Be nothing which thou art not.
	So with the world thy gentle ways,
	Thy grace, thy more than beauty,
	Shall be an endless theme of praise.
	And love a simple duty.



52. TO HELEN

	Helen, thy beauty is to me
	Like those Nicean barks of yore,
	That gently, o’er a perfumed sea,
	The weary, wayworn wanderer bore
	To his own native shore.

	On desperate seas long wont to roam,
	Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,
	Thy Naiad airs have brought me home
	To the glory that was Greece,
	To the grandeur that was Rome.

	Lo! in yon brilliant window niche,
	How statue-like I see thee stand,
	The agate lamp within thy hand!
	Ah, Psyche, from the regions which
	Are Holy Land!



53. TO ISADORE

	Beneath the vine-clad eaves
	Whose shadows fall before
	Thy lowly cottage door--
	Under the lilac’s tremulous leaves--
	Within thy snowy clasped hand
	The purple flowers it bore.
	Last eve in dreams, I saw thee stand,
	Like queenly nymph from Fairy-land--
	Enchantress of the flowery wand,
	Most beauteous Isadore!

	And when I bade the dream
	Upon thy spirit flee,
	Thy violet eyes to me
	Upturned, did overflowing seem
	With the deep, untold delight
	Of Love’s serenity;
	Thy classic brow, like lilies white
	And pale as the Imperial Night
	Upon her throne, with stars bedight,
	Enthralled my soul to thee!

	Ah! ever I behold
	Thy dreamy, passionate eyes,
	Blue as the languid skies
	Hung with the sunset’s fringe of gold;
	Now strangely clear thine image grows,
	And olden memories
	Are startled from their long repose
	Like shadows on the silent snows
	When suddenly the night-wind blows
	Where quiet moonlight lies.

	Like music heard in dreams
	Like strains of harps unknown,
	Of birds for ever flown,--
	Audible as the voice of streams
	That murmur in some leafy dell,
	I hear thy gentlest tone,
	And Silence cometh with her spell
	Like that which on my tongue doth dwell,
	When tremulous in dreams I tell
	My love to thee alone!

	In every valley heard
	Floating from tree to tree,
	Less beautiful to me,
	The music of the radiant bird,
	Than artless accents such as thine
	Whose echoes never flee!
	Ah! how for thy sweet voice I pine:--
	For uttered in thy tones benign
	(Enchantress!) this rude name of mine
	Doth seem a melody!



54. TO MARIE LOUISE

	Of all who hail thy presence as the morning--
	Of all to whom thine absence is the night--
	The blotting utterly from out high heaven
	The sacred sun--of all who, weeping, bless thee
	Hourly for hope--for life--ah, above all,
	For the resurrection of deep buried faith In truth, in virtue, in humanity--
	Of all who, on despair’s unhallowed bed
	Lying down to die, have suddenly arisen
	At thy soft-murmured words, “Let there be light!”
	At thy soft-murmured words that were fulfilled In thy seraphic glancing of thine eyes--
	Of all who owe thee most, whose gratitude
	Nearest resembles worship,--oh, remember
	The truest, the most fervently devoted,
	And think that these weak lines are written by him--
	By him who, as he pens them, thrills to think
	His spirit is communing with an angel’s.



55. TO MY MOTHER

	Because I feel that, in the Heavens above,
	The angels, whispering to one another,
	Can find, among their burning terms of love,
	None so devotional as that of “Mother,”
	Therefore by that dear name I long have called you--
	You who are more than mother unto me,
	And fill my heart of hearts, where Death installed you,
	In setting my Virginia’s spirit free.
	My mother--my own mother, who died early,
	Was but the mother of myself; but you
	Are mother to the one I loved so dearly,
	And thus are dearer than the mother I knew
	By that infinity with which my wife
	Was dearer to my soul than its soul-life.



56. TO ONE IN PARADISE

	Thou wast that all to me, love,
	For which my soul did pine--
	A green isle in the sea, love,
	A fountain and a shrine,
	All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,
	And all the flowers were mine.

	Ah, dream too bright to last!
	Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise
	But to be overcast!
	A voice from out the Future cries,
	“On! on!”--but o’er the Past
	(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies
	Mute, motionless, aghast!

	For, alas! alas! with me
	The light of Life is o’er!
	“No more--no more--no more”--
	(Such language holds the solemn sea
	To the sands upon the shore)
	Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,
	Or the stricken eagle soar!

	And all my days are trances,
	And all my nightly dreams
	Are where thy dark eye glances,
	And where thy footstep gleams--
	In what ethereal dances,
	By what eternal streams!

	Alas! for that accursed time
	They bore thee o’er the billow,
	From love to titled age and crime,
	And an unholy pillow!
	From me, and from our misty clime,
	Where weeps the silver willow!



57. TO THE RIVER

	Fair river! in thy bright, clear flow
	Of crystal, wandering water,
	Thou art an emblem of the glow
	Of beauty--the unhidden heart--
	The playful maziness of art
	In old Alberto’s daughter;

	But when within thy wave she looks--
	Which glistens then, and trembles--
	Why, then, the prettiest of brooks
	Her worshipper resembles;
	For in his heart, as in thy stream,
	Her image deeply lies--
	His heart which trembles at the beam
	Of her soul-searching eyes.



58. TO ZANTE

	Fair isle, that from the fairest of all flowers,
	Thy gentlest of all gentle names dost take!
	How many memories of what radiant hours
	At sight of thee and thine at once awake!
	How many scenes of what departed bliss!
	How many thoughts of what entombed hopes!
	How many visions of a maiden that is
	No more--no more upon thy verdant slopes!

	_No more!_ alas, that magical sad sound
	Transforming all! Thy charms shall please _no more_--
	Thy memory _no more!_ Accursed ground
	Henceforward I hold thy flower-enamelled shore,
	O hyacinthine isle! O purple Zante!
	“Isola d’oro! Fior di Levante!”



59. ULALUME

	The skies they were ashen and sober;
	The leaves they were crisped and sere--
	The leaves they were withering and sere;
	It was night in the lonesome October
	Of my most immemorial year;
	It was hard by the dim lake of Auber,
	In the misty mid region of Weir--
	It was down by the dank tarn of Auber,
	In the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

	Here once, through an alley Titanic.
	Of cypress, I roamed with my Soul--
	Of cypress, with Psyche, my Soul.
	These were days when my heart was volcanic
	As the scoriac rivers that roll--
	As the lavas that restlessly roll
	Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
	In the ultimate climes of the pole--
	That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek
	In the realms of the boreal pole.

	Our talk had been serious and sober,
	But our thoughts they were palsied and sere--
	Our memories were treacherous and sere--
	For we knew not the month was October,
	And we marked not the night of the year--
	(Ah, night of all nights in the year!)
	We noted not the dim lake of Auber--
	(Though once we had journeyed down here)--
	Remembered not the dank tarn of Auber,
	Nor the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

	And now as the night was senescent
	And star-dials pointed to morn--
	As the sun-dials hinted of morn--
	At the end of our path a liquescent
	And nebulous lustre was born,
	Out of which a miraculous crescent
	Arose with a duplicate horn--
	Astarte’s bediamonded crescent
	Distinct with its duplicate horn.

	And I said--“She is warmer than Dian:
	She rolls through an ether of sighs--
	She revels in a region of sighs:
	She has seen that the tears are not dry on
	These cheeks, where the worm never dies,
	And has come past the stars of the Lion
	To point us the path to the skies--
	To the Lethean peace of the skies--
	Come up, in despite of the Lion,
	To shine on us with her bright eyes--
	Come up through the lair of the Lion,
	With love in her luminous eyes.”

	But Psyche, uplifting her finger,
	Said--“Sadly this star I mistrust--
	Her pallor I strangely mistrust:--
	Oh, hasten!--oh, let us not linger!
	Oh, fly!--let us fly!--for we must.”
	In terror she spoke, letting sink her
	Wings till they trailed in the dust--
	In agony sobbed, letting sink her
	Plumes till they trailed in the dust--
	Till they sorrowfully trailed in the dust.

	I replied--“This is nothing but dreaming:
	Let us on by this tremulous light!
	Let us bathe in this crystalline light!
	Its Sibyllic splendor is beaming
	With Hope and in Beauty to-night:--
	See!--it flickers up the sky through the night!
	Ah, we safely may trust to its gleaming,
	And be sure it will lead us aright--
	We safely may trust to a gleaming
	That cannot but guide us aright,
	Since it flickers up to Heaven through the night.”

	Thus I pacified Psyche and kissed her,
	And tempted her out of her gloom--
	And conquered her scruples and gloom;
	And we passed to the end of a vista,
	But were stopped by the door of a tomb--
	By the door of a legended tomb;
	And I said--“What is written, sweet sister,
	On the door of this legended tomb?”
	She replied--“Ulalume--Ulalume--
	’Tis the vault of thy lost Ulalume!”

	Then my heart it grew ashen and sober
	As the leaves that were crisped and sere--
	As the leaves that were withering and sere;
	And I cried--“It was surely October
	On _this_ very night of last year
	That I journeyed--I journeyed down here--
	That I brought a dread burden down here!
	On this night of all nights in the year,
	Ah, what demon has tempted me here?
	Well I know, now, this dim lake of Auber--
	This misty mid region of Weir--
	Well I know, now, this dank tarn of Auber,--
	This ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.”



60. A VALENTINE

	For her this rhyme is penned, whose luminous eyes,
	Brightly expressive as the twins of Leda,
	Shall find her own sweet name, that, nestling lies
	Upon the page, enwrapped from every reader.
	Search narrowly the lines!--they hold a treasure
	Divine--a talisman--an amulet
	That must be worn _at heart_. Search well the measure--
	The words--the syllables! Do not forget
	The trivialest point, or you may lose your labor!
	And yet there is in this no Gordian knot
	Which one might not undo without a sabre,
	If one could merely comprehend the plot.
	Enwritten upon the leaf where now are peering
	Eyes scintillating soul, there lie _perdus_
	Three eloquent words oft uttered in the hearing
	Of poets by poets--as the name is a poet’s, too.
	Its letters, although naturally lying
	Like the knight Pinto--Mendez Ferdinando--
	Still form a synonym for Truth--Cease trying!
	You will not read the riddle, though you do the best you _can_ do.



61. THE VALLEY OF UNREST

	_Once_ it smiled a silent dell
	Where the people did not dwell;
	They had gone unto the wars,
	Trusting to the mild-eyed stars,
	Nightly, from their azure towers,
	To keep watch above the flowers,
	In the midst of which all day
	The red sun-light lazily lay,
	_Now_ each visitor shall confess
	The sad valley’s restlessness.
	Nothing there is motionless--
	Nothing save the airs that brood
	Over the magic solitude.
	Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees
	That palpitate like the chill seas
	Around the misty Hebrides!
	Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven
	That rustle through the unquiet Heaven
	Unceasingly, from morn till even,
	Over the violets there that lie In myriad types of the human eye--
	Over the lilies that wave
	And weep above a nameless grave!
	They wave:--from out their fragrant tops
	Eternal dews come down in drops.
	They weep:--from off their delicate stems
	Perennial tears descend in gems.



62. THE VILLAGE STREET

	In these rapid, restless shadows,
	Once I walked at eventide,
	When a gentle, silent maiden,
	Walked in beauty at my side.
	She alone there walked beside me
	All in beauty, like a bride.

	Pallidly the moon was shining
	On the dewy meadows nigh;
	On the silvery, silent rivers,
	On the mountains far and high,--
	On the ocean’s star-lit waters,
	Where the winds a-weary die.

	Slowly, silently we wandered
	From the open cottage door,
	Underneath the elm’s long branches
	To the pavement bending o’er;
	Underneath the mossy willow
	And the dying sycamore.

	With the myriad stars in beauty
	All bedight, the heavens were seen,
	Radiant hopes were bright around me,
	Like the light of stars serene;
	Like the mellow midnight splendor
	Of the Night’s irradiate queen.

	Audibly the elm-leaves whispered
	Peaceful, pleasant melodies,
	Like the distant murmured music
	Of unquiet, lovely seas;
	While the winds were hushed in slumber
	In the fragrant flowers and trees.

	Wondrous and unwonted beauty
	Still adorning all did seem,
	While I told my love in fables
	’Neath the willows by the stream;
	Would the heart have kept unspoken
	Love that was its rarest dream!

	Instantly away we wandered
	In the shadowy twilight tide,
	She, the silent, scornful maiden,
	Walking calmly at my side,
	With a step serene and stately,
	All in beauty, all in pride.

	Vacantly I walked beside her.
	On the earth mine eyes were cast;
	Swift and keen there came unto me
	Bitter memories of the past--
	On me, like the rain in Autumn
	On the dead leaves, cold and fast.

	Underneath the elms we parted,
	By the lowly cottage door;
	One brief word alone was uttered--
	Never on our lips before;
	And away I walked forlornly,
	Broken-hearted evermore.

	Slowly, silently I loitered,
	Homeward, in the night, alone;
	Sudden anguish bound my spirit,
	That my youth had never known;
	Wild unrest, like that which cometh
	When the Night’s first dream hath flown.

	Now, to me the elm-leaves whisper
	Mad, discordant melodies,
	And keen melodies like shadows
	Haunt the moaning willow trees,
	And the sycamores with laughter
	Mock me in the nightly breeze.

	Sad and pale the Autumn moonlight
	Through the sighing foliage streams;
	And each morning, midnight shadow,
	Shadow of my sorrow seems;
	Strive, O heart, forget thine idol!
	And, O soul, forget thy dreams!
