*** Alexander Pope (1688 - 1744)


1. (FROM) AN ESSAY ON MAN

	     What if the foot ordain’d the dust to tread,
	Or hand to toil, aspir’d to be the head?
	What if the head, the eye, or ear repin’d
	To serve mere engines to the ruling mind?
	Just as absurd for any part to claim
	To be another, in this gen’ral frame:
	Just as absurd, to mourn the tasks or pains,
	The great directing Mind of All ordains.
	
	     All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
	Whose body Nature is, and God the soul;
	That, chang’d through all, and yet in all the same,
	Great in the earth, as in th’ ethereal frame,
	Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
	Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees,
	Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
	Spreads undivided, operates unspent,
	Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
	As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart;
	As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
	As the rapt seraph that adores and burns;
	To him no high, no low, no great, no small;
	He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.


2. THE DYING CHRISTIAN TO HIS SOUL

	          Vital spark of heav’nly flame!
	          Quit, O quit this mortal frame:
	     Trembling, hoping, ling’ring, flying,
	     O the pain, the bliss of dying!
	Cease, fond Nature, cease thy strife,
	And let me languish into life.
	
	     Hark! they whisper; angels say,
	     Sister Spirit, come away!
	     What is this absorbs me quite?
	     Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
	Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
	Tell me, my soul, can this be death?
	
	The world recedes; it disappears!
	Heav’n opens on my eyes! my ears
	     With sounds seraphic ring!
	Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
	O Grave! where is thy victory?
	     O Death! where is thy sting?


3. ODE ON SOLITUDE

	Happy the man, whose wish and care 
	  A few paternal acres bound, 
	Content to breathe his native air, 
	                           In his own ground. 
	
	Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread, 
	  Whose flocks supply him with attire, 
	Whose trees in summer yield him shade, 
	                           In winter fire. 
	
	Blest, who can unconcernedly find 
	  Hours, days, and years slide soft away, 
	In health of body, peace of mind, 
	                           Quiet by day, 
	
	Sound sleep by night; study and ease, 
	  Together mixed; sweet recreation; 
	And innocence, which most does please, 
	                           With meditation. 
	
	Thus let me live, unseen, unknown; 
	  Thus unlamented let me die; 
	Steal from the world, and not a stone 
	                           Tell where I lie.


4. THE RIDDLE OF THE WORLD

	Know then thyself, presume not God to scan
	The proper study of Mankind is Man.
	Placed on this isthmus of a middle state,
	A Being darkly wise, and rudely great:
	With too much knowledge for the Sceptic side,
	With too much weakness for the Stoic’s pride,
	He hangs between; in doubt to act, or rest;
	In doubt to deem himself a God, or Beast;
	In doubt his mind and body to prefer;
	Born but to die, and reas’ning but to err;
	Whether he thinks to little, or too much;
	Chaos of Thought and Passion, all confus’d;
	Still by himself, abus’d or disabus’d;
	Created half to rise and half to fall;
	Great Lord of all things, yet a prey to all,
	Sole judge of truth, in endless error hurl’d;
	The glory, jest and riddle of the world.


5. SUMMER

	See what delights in sylvan scenes appear!
	Descending Gods have found Elysium here.
	In woods bright Venus with Adonis stray’d,
	And chaste Diana haunts the forest shade.
	Come lovely nymph, and bless the silent hours,
	When swains from shearing seek their nightly bow’rs;
	When weary reapers quit the sultry field,
	And crown’d with corn, their thanks to Ceres yield.
	This harmless grove no lurking viper hides,
	But in my breast the serpent Love abides.
	Here bees from blossoms sip the rosy dew,
	But your Alexis knows no sweets but you.
	Oh deign to visit our forsaken seats,
	The mossy fountains, and the green retreats!
	Where-e’er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade,
	Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade,
	Where-e’er you tread, the blushing flow’rs shall rise,
	And all things flourish where you turn your eyes.
	Oh! How I long with you to pass my days,
	Invoke the muses, and resound your praise;
	Your praise the birds shall chant in ev’ry grove,
	And winds shall waft it to the pow’rs above.
	But wou’d you sing, and rival Orpheus’ strain,
	The wond’ring forests soon shou’d dance again,
	The moving mountains hear the pow’rful call,
	And headlong streams hang list’ning in their fall!
	But see, the shepherds shun the noon-day heat,
	The lowing herds to murm’ring brooks retreat,
	To closer shades the panting flocks remove,
	Ye Gods! And is there no relief for Love?
	But soon the sun with milder rays descends
	To the cool ocean, where his journey ends;
	On me Love’s fiercer flames for every prey,
	By night he scorches, as he burns by day.


6. THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER

	Father of All! in every Age,
	In every Clime ador’d,
	By Saint, by Savage, and by Sage,
	Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!
	
	Thou Great First Cause, least Understood!
	Who all my Sense confin’d
	To know but this,--that Thou art Good,
	And that my self am blind:
	
	Yet gave me, in this dark Estate,
	To see the Good from Ill;
	And binding Nature fast in Fate,
	Left free the Human Will.
	
	What Conscience dictates to be done,
	Or warns me not to doe,
	This, teach me more than Hell to shun,
	That, more than Heav’n pursue.
	
	What Blessings thy free Bounty gives,
	Let me not cast away;
	For God is pay’d when Man receives,
	T’ enjoy, is to obey.
	
	Yet not to Earth’s contracted Span,
	Thy Goodness let me bound;
	Or think Thee Lord alone of Man,
	When thousand Worlds are round.
	
	Let not this weak, unknowing hand
	Presume Thy Bolts to throw,
	And deal Damnation round the land,
	On each I judge thy Foe.
	
	If I am right, oh teach my heart
	Still in the right to say;
	If I am wrong, Thy Grace impart
	To find that better Way.
	
	Save me alike from foolish Pride,
	Or impious Discontent,
	At ought thy Wisdom has deny’d,
	Or ought thy Goodness lent.
	
	Teach me to feel another’s Woe;
	To hide the Fault I see;
	That Mercy I to others show,
	That Mercy show to me.
	
	Mean tho’ I am, not wholly so
	Since quicken’d by thy Breath,
	O lead me wheresoe’er I go,
	Thro’ this day’s Life, or Death:
	
	This day, be Bread and Peace my Lot;
	All else beneath the Sun,
	Thou know’st if best bestow’d, or not;
	And let Thy Will be done.
	
	To Thee, whose Temple is all Space,
	Whose Altar, Earth, Sea, Skies:
	One Chorus let all Being raise!
	All Nature’s Incense rise!

