*** Dun Karm Psaila (1871 - 1961)


1. AN EVENING HYMN

	See how the night approaches,
	Boding a time of rest;
	Heaven is decked in crimson
	Sun’s setting in the west.
	Stars will soon make their entrance
	Filling, up high, the skies,
	Soon will the living slumber,
	All noise is hushed, and dies.
	
	_You, Lord, indwell the daybreak,
	An endless morn you fill,
	Yet we know night. So keep us,
	Make our hearts whole and still._
	
	See how the day is ended,
	Layers of work and rest,
	Shattered, at times, by sorrow,
	Sometimes with pleasure blest.
	Father so rich in mercy,
	All things come from your trove,
	You wish to see creation
	Enthralled with but your love.
	
	_You, Lord, indwell the daybreak,
	An endless morn you fill,
	Yet we know night. So keep us,
	Make our hearts whole and still._
	
	Sustain and clothe the needy,
	Stand by them, Lord, today,
	Comfort them, who are weeping,
	The tired, with rest, repay.
	Beckon the sinner, gently,
	Who wronged you and his kin,
	Let none lie down in anguish
	A fear of doom within.
	
	_You, Lord, indwell the daybreak,
	An endless morn you fill,
	Yet we know night. So keep us,
	Make our hearts whole and still._



2. IN FRONT OF THE IMAGE OF OUR LADY

	So beautiful I was when I saw you once
	In a dream, in the happiness of my youth;
	I was asleep alone in a small, secluded bed,
	And you came down from heaven and sat down with me.
	
	Good morning, sunrise, together,
	They are not as sweet as roses on your cheeks;
	Exceed all the glare of the heavens, o Blessed,
	The resin shone from your eyeballs.
	
	A rose that blooms in the dawn of May
	You look like a smile on your face, tender,
	At the time you are with me, my dear boy,
	The great Redeemer, who suffered and died for us.
	
	His eyes are broken in a sleepy, restful sleep
	Jesus on your chest his little head,
	From your heart to your heart the goodness of heaven rejoices . . .
	With you the angels with reverence look on with envy.
	
	Blessed be the hand that drew you! 
	She stole the stars, the beauty of the garden roses,
	And with all your liberty, O full of gratitude,
	Queen of Heaven, sweet Madonna.
	
	I was so beautiful, I remember very well,
	When in the dream of childhood I saw you;
	Of your eyes, of your mouth was this sweetness;
	And I’m in love with my mother’s name.



3. TO MY CANARY

	What was it that made us meet in this house so peaceful?
	You probably do not know, yellow bird;
	Nor do you know, when I go out
	For work in the morning, the door I close behind me,
	The keys I lock it, and I start to walk,
	And not a single breath is heard, until
	I turn the keys again and I come in.
	It’s better you do not know; that way no part
	In my life will you take, and between the days and nights
	You will live your life without any sorrows.
	
	As the light begins to shimmer, I see you awake,
	Bird of yellow hue, and your little head
	Comes out from under your wings where you shelter it
	From the night, when the sun sets and you go silent
	And prepare to sleep. Hastily you rest your chest
	On the rod near the other and clean yourself,
	Go down to nibble some seeds and instantly in the sweetness
	Of your voice, you begin to play inside my ears
	Which is soothed all the more. Fiddling and jumping
	Between a melody and another, you grab your thin nails, 
	on the metal that holds you as you come and go
	Up to your rod without tiring.  The pace
	Of your chest and wings, the look, the melody,
	Show that everything about you is tranquility and strength.
	With pristine innocence you look at me
	When I come close to  know you. You recognize me,
	Understand me too well; and for that you like me,
	Without showing any arrogance, I open the door
	Of your cage to give you food and water
	And with a full shout, as if you want to praise me
	As a favour for thinking of you, you sing to me 
	When I close the door and I hang your cage again
	In that part of the house where the cold cannot hurt you
	And only a little sunlight visits you. Futelessly I approach,
	Sometimes quiet on the tip of my toes
	To catch you asleep or idle from your rising
	To your setting sun, no rest and no
	Fatigue can get to you. What a splendid life,
	Living without thinking what has gone by, and what
	Jealousies and fights are going on outside your house!
	
	But I’m not jealous of you, yellow bird,
	Even though I like your life. Higher
	Than the life of this world is my hope.
	I know that a lot of times the bread I eat
	Is wet with tears, and instead of the word,
	Sometimes without my wanting, a sob comes out,
	For where I planted the rose bloomed in masses
	Thorns and petals, and whom with his pure love
	Could console me, ended in the grave before me.
	But I know the tears planted in the world
	Spring happiness in the heavens, and after this
	Dream we call life, comes
	The resurrection from death into the light of eternity.
	
	Such life we live then, yellow bird:
	You, tranquil in yourself and with my love;
	I, with the hope that God planted in my heart.
