*** John Crowe Ransom (1888 - 1974)


1. AN AMERICAN ADDRESSES PHILOMELA

	Procne, Philomela, and Itylus,
	Your names are liquid, your improbable tale
	Is recited in the classic numbers of the nightingale.
	Ah, but our numbers are not felicitous,
	It goes not liquidly for us!
	
	Perched on a Roman ilex and duly apostrophised,
	The nightingale descanted unto Ovid;
	She has even appeared to the Teutons, the swilled and gravid;
	At Fontainebleau it may be the bird was gallicised;
	Never was she baptised.
	
	To England came Philomela with her strain,
	Fleeing the hawk her husband ; querulous ghost,
	She wanders when he sits heavy on his roost,
	Utters herself in the original again,
	The untranslatable refrain.
	
	Not to these shores she came, this other Thrace,
	Environ barbarous to the royal Attic;
	How could her delicate dirge run democratic,
	Delivered in a cloudless boundless public place
	To a hypermuscular race?
	
	I pernoctated with the Oxford students once,
	And in the quadrangles, in the cloisters, on the Cher,
	Precociously knocked at antique doors ajar,
	Fatuously touched the hems of the Hierophants,
	Sick of my dissonance;
	
	I went out to Bagley Wood, I climbed the hill,
	Even the moon had slanted off in a twinkling,
	I heard the sepulchral owl and a few bells tinkling,
	There was no more villainous day to unfulfill,
	The diuturnity was still;
	
	Up from the darkest wood where Philomela sat,
	Her fairy numbers issued; what then ailed me?
	My ears are called capacious, but they failed me,
	Her classics registered a little flat!
	I rose, and venomously spat.
	
	Philomela, Philomela, lover of song,
	I have despaired of thee and am unworthy,
	My scene is prose, this people and I are earthy;
	Unto more beautiful, persistently more young
	Thy fabulous provinces belong.



2. APRIL

	SAVOR of love is thick on the April air,
	The blunted boughs dispose their lacy bloom,
	And many sorry steeds dismissed to pasture
	Toss their old forelocks, flourish heavy heels.
	Where is there any unpersuaded poet
	So angry still against the wrongs of winter
	Which caused the dainty earth to droop and die,
	So vengeant for his vine and summer song,
	As to decline the good releasing thaw?
	Poets have temperature and follow seasons,
	And covenants go out at equinox. 
	
	The champions! For Heaven, riding high
	Above the icy death, considered truly;
	“My agate icy work, I thought it fair;
	Yet I have lacked that pretty lift of praise
	That mounted once from these emaciate minstrels.
	They will not sing, and duty drops away
	And I must turn and make a soft amend!”
	At once he showered April down, until
	The bleak twigs bloom again; and soon, I swear,
	He shall receive his praise.



3. APRIL TREASON

	So he took her as anointed 
	In the part he had appointed, 
	She was lips for smiling faintly, 
	Eyes to look and level quaintly, 
	Length of limb and splendors of the bust 
	Which he honored as he must. 
	
	Queen of women playing model, 
	Pure of brow but brain not idle, 
	Sitting in her silence meetly, 
	Let her adjective be stately; 
	So he thought his art would manage right 
	In the honest Northern light. 
	
	But he fashioned it too coldly, 
	April broke-and-entered boldly, 
	Thinking how to suit the season’s 
	Odor, savor, heats and treasons: 
	Painter! do not stoop and play the host 
	Lest the man come uppermost. 
	
	Yet he knew that he was altered 
	When the perfect woman faltered, 
	Languish in her softly speaking, 
	Anguish, even, in her looking: 
	All the art had fled his fingertips 
	So he bent and kissed her lips. 
	
	He and Venus took their pleasure, 
	Then he turned upon his treasure, 
	Took and trampled it with loathing, 
	Flung it over cliffs to nothing; 
	Glittering in the sunlight while it fell 
	Like a lovely shattered shell. 
	
	Strict the silence that came onward 
	As they trod the foothill downward, 
	One more mocking noon of April, 
	Mischief always is in April; 
	Still she touched his fingers cold as ice 
	And recited, “It was nice.”



4. THE BACHELOR

	THE wind went cold as the day went old,
	And I went very sad,
	Till I saw something by the road
	That brought me round and glad. 
	
	The keen wind nipped me northerly
	And bent me back almost,
	And I was the worst discouraged man
	Abroad on any boast, 
	
	The road was rocks and wilderness
	And never a sign of a town,
	It tapered up a wicked hill,
	I tried to curse it down, 
	
	But like an undefeated man
	I mounted, slow and hard:
	And round the top was a little house
	With a woman in the yard. 
	
	She was a housewife in her yard,
	Tending her husband’s place;
	The broom was busy in her hand,
	The goodness in her face. 
	
	She brushed the yard, she brushed the step,
	She made the leaves to spin,
	Tidying up her husband’s place
	Outside as well as in. 
	
	I knew no woman and no house
	And night was just ahead;
	Yet I went cheerful down the hill
	Rested and warmed and fed. 
	
	For some man had a woman there
	To keep his board and bed;
	“I have seen women by these bad roads,
	Thank God for that,” I said.



5. BELLS FOR JOHN WHITESIDE’S DAUGHTER

	There was such speed in her little body,   
	And such lightness in her footfall,   
	It is no wonder her brown study
	Astonishes us all.
	
	Her wars were bruited in our high window.   
	We looked among orchard trees and beyond   
	Where she took arms against her shadow,   
	Or harried unto the pond
	
	The lazy geese, like a snow cloud
	Dripping their snow on the green grass,   
	Tricking and stopping, sleepy and proud,   
	Who cried in goose, Alas,
	
	For the tireless heart within the little   
	Lady with rod that made them rise
	From their noon apple-dreams and scuttle   
	Goose-fashion under the skies!
	
	But now go the bells, and we are ready,   
	In one house we are sternly stopped
	To say we are vexed at her brown study,   
	Lying so primly propped.



6. BLUE GIRLS

	Twirling your blue skirts, travelling the sward
	Under the towers of your seminary,
	Go listen to your teachers old and contrary
	Without believing a word.
	
	Tie the white fillets then about your hair
	And think no more of what will come to pass
	Than bluebirds that go walking on the grass
	And chattering on the air.
	
	Practice your beauty, blue girls, before it fail;
	And I will cry with my loud lips and publish
	Beauty which all our power shall never establish,
	It is so frail.
	
	For I could tell you a story which is true;
	I know a woman with a terrible tongue,
	Blear eyes fallen from blue,
	All her perfections tarnished--yet it is not long
	Since she was lovelier than any of you.



7. BY THE RIVERSIDE

	A GREAT green spread of meadow land,
	(Must rest his weight on an ample base),
	A secret water moving on,
	A clean blue air for his breathing-space,
	A pair of willows bending down
	In double witness to his grace,
	And on the rock his sinner sprawls
	And looks the Strong One face to face. 
	
	
	The sinner’s mocking tongue is dry,
	Wonder is on that mighty jeerer,
	He loves, and he never loved before,
	He wants the glowing sky no nearer,
	He likes the willows to be two,
	He would not have the water clearer,
	He thinks that God is perfect once:
	Heaven, rejoice! a new God-fearer. 
	
	
	And now each quiet thing awakes
	And dances madly, wavers, dips;
	These are God’s motions on the air, 
	His Pulse for the sinner’s finger-tips,
	His arrows shot across the blue,
	His love-words dropping from his lips,
	And who ever heard such whisperings,
	Who ever saw such fellowships?



8. CAPTAIN CARPENTER

	Captain Carpenter rose up in his prime 
	Put on his pistols and went riding out 
	But had got wellnigh nowhere at that time 
	Till he fell in with ladies in a rout. 
	
	It was a pretty lady and all her train 
	That played with him so sweetly but before 
	An hour she’d taken a sword with all her main 
	And twined him of his nose for evermore. 
	
	Captain Carpenter mounted up one day 
	And rode straightway into a stranger rogue 
	That looked unchristian but be that as may 
	The Captain did not wait upon prologue. 
	
	But drew upon him out of his great heart 
	The other swung against him with a club 
	And cracked his two legs at the shinny part 
	And let him roll and stick like any tub. 
	
	Captain Carpenter rode many a time 
	From male and female took he sundry harms 
	He met the wife of Satan crying “I’m 
	The she-wolf bids you shall bear no more arms. 
	
	Their strokes and counters whistled in the wind 
	I wish he had delivered half his blows 
	But where she should have made off like a hind 
	The **** bit off his arms at the elbows. 
	
	And Captain Carpenter parted with his ears 
	To a black devil that used him in this wise 
	O Jesus ere his threescore and ten years 
	Another had plucked out his sweet blue eyes. 
	
	Captain Carpenter got up on his roan 
	And sallied from the gate in hell’s despite 
	I heard him asking in the grimmest tone 
	If any enemy yet there was to fight? 
	
	“To any adversary it is fame 
	If he risk to be wounded by my tongue 
	Or burnt in two beneath my red heart’s flame 
	Such are the perils he is cast among. 
	
	“But if he can he has a pretty choice 
	From an anatomy with little to lose 
	Whether he cut my tongue and take my voice 
	Or whether it be my round red heart he choose.
	
	It was the neatest knave that ever was seen 
	Stepping in perfume from his lady’s bower 
	Who at this word put in his merry mien 
	And fell on Captain Carpenter like a tower. 
	
	I would not knock old fellows in the dust 
	But there lay Captain Carpenter on his back 
	His weapons were the old heart in his bust 
	And a blade shook between rotten teeth alack. 
	
	The rogue in scarlet and grey soon knew his mind. 
	He wished to get his trophy and depart 
	With gentle apology and touch refined 
	He pierced him and produced the Captain’s heart. 
	
	God’s mercy rest on Captain Carpenter now (a, 
	I thought him Sirs an honest gentleman 
	Citizen husband soldier and scholar enow 
	Let jangling kites eat of him if they can. 
	
	But God’s deep curses follow after those 
	That shore him of his goodly nose and ears 
	His legs and strong arms at the two elbows 
	And eyes that had not watered seventy years. 
	
	The curse of hell upon the sleek upstart 
	That got the Captain finally on his back 
	And took the red red vitals of his heart 
	And made the kites to whet their beaks clack clack.



9. THE CHRISTIAN

	I HEARD a story of a sailing man.
	He was a surly sort of mariner,
	He used to swear at all the seven seas,
	And rode them dauntless up and down the earth. 
	
	But when he sickened of the windy wash,
	He took to wife a proper village woman
	And put her in a precious little house;
	And there he weathered many winter seasons,
	Knocking the ashes neatly from his pipe
	Upon the tended hearth. 
	
	And only when he went upon the moors,
	And felt the sting and censure of the winds,
	And tasted of the salt blown in from sea,
	Then only would he curse the marriage morning,
	And swear he’d not go skulking back again
	To sit that hearth like any broken ****
	Whose running time was over.



10. A CHRISTMAS COLLOQUY

	THE country farmer has his joys
	Of little city girls and boys
	When brother Thomas brings his brood
	Of motherless brats in Christmas mood
	To try our country air and food.
	And O what splendid pies and cakes
	Their pleased and pretty grandma makes!
	And O what squeals and stomach-aches! 
	
	Poor Thomas shepherds him a flock
	Of city souls as hard as rock,
	And though they will not fill his larder
	He only preaches Christ the harder.
	But Ann, though seven years my niece,
	Is still a pagan little piece,
	And as she often hints to me
	She hates the sound of piety.
	Fair Inez is my ancient setter
	Who lies by the fire when we will let her:
	Alas, this amiable dog
	Heard all the bitter dialogue
	That passed between my niece and brother
	Misunderstanding one another. 
	
	
	_Ann:_
	
	Father, what will there be for me
	To-morrow on the Christmas tree?
	Have you told Santa what to bring,
	My pony, my doll, and everything? 
	
	
	_Thomas:_
	
	My daughter, Santa will know best
	What to bring you, and what the rest.
	But father and his little girl
	And everybody in the world
	Should dwell to-night on higher things,
	For hark! the herald angel sings,
	And in a manger poor and lowly
	Lies little Jesus, high and holy. 
	
	
	_Ann:_
	
	Father, don’t talk of little Jesus,
	You’re only doing it to tease us,
	It isn’t nearly time for bed,
	And I want to know what Santa said. 
	
	
	_Thomas:_
	
	Jesus is better than any toys
	For little sinning girls and boys,
	For Jesus saves, but sin destroys. 
	
	And O, it gives him sad surprise,
	There must be tears in Jesus’ eyes,
	When little girls with bad behavior
	Forget to own their Lord and Savior. 
	
	
	_Ann:_
	
	I didn’t, you know it isn’t true!
	I say my prayers, I always do,
	I know about Jesus very well,
	And God the Father, Heaven, and Hell.
	O please don’t say it any more,
	You’ve said it so many times before,
	But tell me all about Santa instead,
	And about the horns on his reindeer’s head,
	And what he will bring me on his sled. 
	
	
	_Thomas:_
	
	This night he was born on earth for us,
	And can my daughter mock him thus,
	And care more for her worldly pleasures
	Than Jesus’ love and heavenly treasures?
	For Jesus didn’t like to be
	So crowned with thorns and nailed to tree,
	But there was a sinful world to free,
	And out he went to Gethsemane-- 
	
	
	_Ann:_
	
	And left the twelve and went apart--
	O father, I know it off by heart,
	Please, father, please don’t finish it out,
	There’s so much else to talk about!
	I ask about Santa, and there you go,
	And now you’re spoiling my Christmas so,
	And you are the wickedest man I know! 
	
	
	Disgraceful scenes require the curtain,
	But lest the moral be uncertain,
	I briefly bring the good report
	That valiant Thomas held the fort,
	And wicked Ann was quite defeated,
	In vain denied, in vain entreated,
	In vain she wailed, in vain she wept,
	And said a briny prayer, and slept.
	While Inez, who had been perplexed
	To see good kinsfolk so much vexed,
	When peace descended on the twain,
	Lay down beside the fire again.



11. THE CLOAK MODEL

	“My son,” the stranger thus began,
	And drew me to the window side,
	“Now here are beauties better than
	You ever have dreamed, or ever can.
	But yet beware!” he cried. 
	
	A tidy citizen was he
	Although a dismal daffy one.
	“See this one pose and pout for me
	And march around magnificently.
	But I’m immune, my son. 
	
	“Observe how ripe the lady’s lips,
	How Titianesque the mop of hair,
	And where the great white shoulder dips
	Beneath its gauzy half-eclipse,
	You well may stare and stare. 
	
	“When I was young I said as you
	Are saying in your sapphic youth, 
	
	That ah! such lips were certain cue,
	And look! her bosom’s rhythm too,
	It signified her truth; 
	
	“Her broad brow meant intelligence
	And something better than a bone,
	Her body’s curves were spirit’s tents,
	Her fresh young skin was innocence
	Instead of meat that shone. 
	
	“I wish the moralists would thresh
	(Indeed the thing is very droll)
	God’s oldest joke, forever fresh:
	The fact that in the finest flesh
	There isn’t any soul.”



12. CONRAD IN TWILIGHT

	Conrad, Conrad, aren’t you old 
	To sit so late in your mouldy garden? 
	And I think Conrad knows it well, 
	Nursing his knees, too rheumy and cold 
	To warm the wraith of a Forest of Arden. 
	
	Neuralgia in the back of his neck, 
	His lungs filling with such miasma, 
	His feet dipping in leafage and muck: 
	Conrad! you’ve forgotten asthma. 
	
	Conrad’s house has thick red walls, 
	The log on Conrad’s hearth is blazing, 
	Slippers and pipe and tea are served, 
	Butter and toast are meant for pleasing! 
	Still Conrad’s back is not uncurved 
	And here’s an autumn on him, teasing. 
	
	Autumn days in our section 
	Are the most used-up thing on earth 
	(Or in the waters under the earth) 
	Having no more color nor predilection 
	Than cornstalks too wet for the fire, 
	A ribbon rotting on the byre, 
	A man’s face as weathered as straw 
	By the summer’s flare and winter’s flaw.



13. DARKNESS

	WHEN hurrying home on a rainy night
	And hearing tree-tops rubbed and tossed,
	And seeing never a friendly star
	And feeling your way when paths are crossed:
	Stop fast and turn three times around
	And try the logic of the lost. 
	
	
	Where is the heavenly light you dreamed?
	Where is your hearth and glowing ash?
	Where is your love by the mellow moon?
	Here is not even a lightning-flash,
	And in a place no worse than this
	Lost men shall wail and teeth shall gnash. 
	
	
	Lightning is quick and perilous,
	The dawn comes on too slow and pale,
	Your love brings only a yellow lamp,
	Yet of these lights one shall avail:
	The dark shall break for one of these,
	I’ve never known this thing to fail.



14. DEAD BOY

	The little cousin is dead, by foul subtraction,
	A green bough from Virginia’s aged tree,
	And none of the county kin like the transaction,
	Nor some of the world of outer dark, like me.
	
	A boy not beautiful, nor good, nor clever,
	A black cloud full of storms too hot for keeping,
	A sword beneath his mother’s heart--yet never
	Woman bewept her babe as this is weeping.
	
	A pig with a pasty face, so I had said,
	Squealing for cookies, kinned by poor pretense
	With a noble house. But the little man quite dead,
	I see the forbears’ antique lineaments.
	
	The elder men have strode by the box of death
	To the wide flag porch, and muttering low send round
	The bruit of the day. O friendly waste of breath!
	Their hearts are hurt with a deep dynastic wound.
	
	He was pale and little, the foolish neighbors say;
	The first-fruits, saith the Preacher, the Lord hath taken;
	But this was the old tree’s late branch wrenched away,
	Grieving the sapless limbs, the short and shaken.



15. DUMB-BELLS

	DUMB-BELLS left, dumb-bells right,
	Swing them hard, grip them tight!
	Thirty fat men of the town
	Must sweat their filthy paunches down.
	Dripping sweat and pumping blood
	They try to make themselves like God. 
	
	
	One and two, three and four,
	Cleave the air and smite the floor!
	Five and six, seven and eight,
	Legs apart, shoulders straight!
	Thirty fat men grunt and puff,
	Thirty bellies plead, Enough! 
	
	
	Dumb-bells up, dumb-bells down,
	Dumb-bells front, dumb-bells ground!
	Thirty’s God has just the girth
	To pull the levers of the earth,
	They made him sinewy and lean
	And washed him glittering white and clean. 
	
	
	Dumb-bells in, dumb-bells out,
	Count by fours and face about!
	Put by dumb-bells for to-day,
	Wash the stinking sweat away
	And go out clean. But come again;
	Worship’s every night at ten.



16. EMILY HARDCASTLE, SPINSTER

	We shall come tomorrow morning, who were not to have her love,   
	We shall bring no face of envy but a gift of praise and lilies   
	To the stately ceremonial we are not the heroes of.
	
	Let the sisters now attend her, who are red-eyed, who are wroth;   
	They were younger, she was finer, for they wearied of the waiting   
	And they married them to merchants, being unbelievers both.
	
	I was dapper when I dangled in my pepper-and-salt;   
	We were only local beauties, and we beautifully trusted
	If the proud one had to tarry, one would have her by default.
	
	But right across the threshold has her grizzled Baron come;
	Let them robe her, Bride and Princess, who’ll go down a leafy archway   
	And seal her to the Stranger for his castle in the gloom.



17. THE EQUILIBRISTS

	Full of her long white arms and milky skin 
	He had a thousand times remembered sin. 
	Alone in the press of people traveled he, 
	Minding her jacinth, and myrrh, and ivory. 
	
	Mouth he remembered: the quaint orifice 
	From which came heat that flamed upon the kiss, 
	Till cold words came down spiral from the head. 
	Grey doves from the officious tower illsped. 
	
	Body: it was a white field ready for love, 
	On her body’s field, with the gaunt tower above, 
	The lilies grew, beseeching him to take, 
	If he would pluck and wear them, bruise and break. 
	
	Eyes talking: Never mind the cruel words, 
	Embrace my flowers, but not embrace the swords. 
	But what they said, the doves came straightway flying 
	And unsaid: Honor, Honor, they came crying. 
	
	Importunate her doves. Too pure, too wise, 
	Clambering on his shoulder, saying, Arise, 
	Leave me now, and never let us meet, 
	Eternal distance now command thy feet. 
	
	Predicament indeed, which thus discovers 
	Honor among thieves, Honor between lovers. 
	O such a little word is Honor, they feel! 
	But the grey word is between them cold as steel. 
	
	At length I saw these lovers fully were come 
	Into their torture of equilibrium; 
	Dreadfully had forsworn each other, and yet 
	They were bound each to each, and they did not forget. 
	
	And rigid as two painful stars, and twirled 
	About the clustered night their prison world, 
	They burned with fierce love always to come near, 
	But honor beat them back and kept them clear.
	
	Ah, the strict lovers, they are ruined now! 
	I cried in anger. But with puddled brow 
	Devising for those gibbeted and brave 
	Came I descanting: Man, what would you have? 
	
	For spin your period out, and draw your breath, 
	A kinder saeculum begins with Death. 
	Would you ascend to Heaven and bodiless dwell? 
	Or take your bodies honorless to Hell ? 
	
	In Heaven you have heard no marriage is, 
	No white flesh tinder to your lecheries, 
	Your male and female tissue sweetly shaped 
	Sublimed away, and furious blood escaped. 
	
	Great lovers lie in Hell, the stubborn ones 
	Infatuate of the flesh upon the bones; 
	Stuprate, they rend each other when they kiss, 
	The pieces kiss again, no end to this. 
	
	But still I watched them spinning, orbited nice. 
	Their flames were not more radiant than their ice. 
	I dug in the quiet earth and wrought the tomb 
	And made these lines to memorize their doom:— 
	
	
	_Epitaph:_
	
	Equilibrists lie here; stranger, tread light; 
	Close, but untouching in each other’s sight; 
	Mouldered the lips arid ashy the tall skull. 
	Let them lie perilous and beautiful.



18. FOUR ROSES

	FOUR sisters sitting in one house,
	I said, these roses on a stem
	With bosoms bare. But wayfaring
	I went and ravished one of them. 
	
	So one was taken. But the three,
	They spread their petals just the same,
	They turned no decent pale for grief,
	They drew no fragrance back for shame. 
	
	The canker is on roses too!
	I cried, and lifted up the rod
	And scourged them bleeding to the ground.
	All, all are sinners unto God.



19. FRIENDSHIP

	I VIEWED him well, the visible fat fool,
	And yet I took him in; for I contended,
	Friends are not sent in order of our choosing,
	They come unsuited like the gifts of God.
	I would not do a perfidy to friendship,
	I let him past the private inner gate
	And made him be at home among my treasures
	Like my true friend. 
	
	Now I am ground with a grim torture daily
	That I have been befriended by a fool.
	He forages at will upon my garden,
	He noses all its pretty secrets out,
	And still the fool finds nothing to his liking.
	Meeting a modest velveteen affair,
	Peevish he hangs his sad and silly head:
	“Alas! such unsubstantial gaudy goods!”
	Thus he meets pansies; meeting zinnias,
	He nearly faints at such a rioting:
	“Alas! what fruit will these red wantons bear?” 
	
	And not a perfume spills upon the air
	But his malicious nose suspects a poison,
	As he goes browsing like an ancient ****,
	An old distempered ****. 
	
	I’d almost rather be a friendless man
	And have my house my own. The prying fool
	Asks me the queerest idiotic questions:
	“O friend, is this the harvest of your hands?
	How will you stand before the lord of harvests?
	These are the gardens of your idleness;
	Where is the vineyard, friend?”



20. GRACE

	WHO is it beams the merriest
	At killing a man, the laughing one?
	You are the one I nominate,
	God of the rivers of Babylon. 
	
	
	A hundred times I’ve taken the mules
	And started early through the lane,
	And come to the broken gate and looked,
	And there my partner was again,
	Sitting on top of a sorrel horse
	And picking the burrs from its matted mane,
	Saying he thought he’d help me work
	That field of corn before the rain;
	And I never spoke of the dollar a day,
	It’s no use causing hired men pain,
	But slipped it into his hand at dark
	While he undid the coupling chain;
	And whistled a gospel tune, and knew
	He’d join in strong on the refrain. 
	
	
	For I would pitch the treble high,
	“Down at the cross where my Savior died,”
	And then he rolled along the bass,
	“There did I bury my sin and pride.” 
	
	
	Sinful pride of a hired man!
	Out of a hired woman born!
	I’m thinking now how he was saved
	One day while plowing in the corn.
	We plowed that steamy morning through,
	I with the mule whose side was torn,
	And keeping an eye on the mule I saw
	That the sun looked high and the man looked worn;
	I would take him home to dinner with me,
	And there! my father’s dinner horn. 
	
	
	The sun blazed after dinner so
	We sat a while by the maple trees,
	Thinking of mother’s pickles and pies
	And smoking a friendly pipe at ease.
	I broached a point of piety,
	For pious men are quick to tease:
	Was it really true John dipped his crowd
	Down in the muddy Jordan’s lees? 
	
	
	And couldn’t the Baptists backslide too
	If only they went on Methodist sprees?
	And finally back to the field we went,
	The corn was well above my knees,
	The weeds were more than ankle high,
	And dangerous customers were these.
	We went to work in the heat again,
	I hoped we’d get a bit of breeze
	And thought the hired man was used
	To God’s most blazing cruelties. 
	
	
	Sundays, the hired man would pray
	To live in the sunshine of his face;
	Now here was answer come complete,
	Rather an overdose of grace! 
	
	
	He fell in the furrow, an honest place
	And an easy place for a man to fall.
	His horse went marching blindly on
	In a beautiful dream of a great fat stall.
	And God shone on in merry mood,
	For it was a foolish kind of sprawl,
	And I found a hulk of heaving meat
	That wouldn’t answer me at all
	And a fresh breeze made the young corn dance
	To a bright green, glorious carnival. 
	
	
	And really, is it not a gift
	To smile and be divinely gay,
	To rise above a circumstance
	And smile distressing scenes away? 
	
	
	But this was a thing that I had said,
	I was so forward and untamed:
	“I will not worship wickedness
	Though it be God’s--I am ashamed!
	For all his mercies God be thanked
	But for his tyrannies be blamed!
	He shall not have my love alone,
	With loathing too his name is named.” 
	
	
	I caught him up with all my strength
	And with a silly stumbling tread
	I dragged him over the soft brown dirt
	And dumped him down beside the shed. 
	
	
	I thought of the prayers the fool had prayed
	To his God, and I was seeing red,
	When all of a sudden he gave a heave
	And then with shuddering--vomited!
	And God, who had just received full thanks
	For all his kindly daily bread, 
	
	
	Now called it back again--perhaps
	To see that his birds of the air were fed.
	Not mother’s dainty dinner now,
	A rather horrible mess instead,
	Yet all of it God required of him
	Before the fool was duly dead. 
	
	
	Even of deaths there is a choice,
	I’ve seen you give a good one, God,
	But he in his vomit laid him down,
	Denied the decency of blood. 
	
	
	If silence from the dead, I swore,
	There shall be cursing from the quick!
	But I began to vomit too,
	Cursing and vomit ever so thick;
	The dead lay down, and I did too,
	Two ashy idiots: take your pick!
	A little lower than angels he made us,
	(Hear his excellent rhetoric),
	A credit we were to him, half of us dead,
	The other half of us lying sick. 
	
	
	The little clouds came Sunday-dressed
	To do a holy reverence, 
	The young corn smelled its sweetest too,
	And made him goodly frankincense,
	The thrushes offered music up,
	Choired in the wood beyond the fence. 
	
	
	And while his praises filled the earth
	A solitary crow sailed by,
	And while the whole creation sang
	He cawed--not knowing how to sigh.



21. THE INGRATE

	BY night we looked across my field,
	The tasseled corn was fine to see,
	The moon was yellow on the rows
	And seemed so wonderful to me,
	That with an old provincial pride
	I praised my moonlit Tennessee,
	And thought my poor befriended man
	Would never dare to disagree. 
	
	
	He was a frosty Russian man
	And wore a bushy Russian beard;
	He had two furtive faded eyes
	That some old horror once had seared;
	I wondered if they ever would
	Forget the horrors they had feared;
	Yet when I praised my pleasant field
	This stupid fellow almost jeered. 
	
	
	“Your moon shines very well, my friend,
	Your fields are good enough, I know; 
	At home our fields in the winter-time
	Were always white, and shining so!
	Our nights went beautiful like day,
	And bitter cold our winds would blow;
	And I remember how it looked,
	Dear God, my country of the snow!”



22. JANET WALKING

	Beautifully Janet slept
	Till it was deeply morning. She woke then   
	And thought about her dainty-feathered hen,   
	To see how it had kept.
	
	One kiss she gave her mother,
	Only a small one gave she to her daddy
	Who would have kissed each curl of his shining baby;   
	No kiss at all for her brother.
	
	“Old Chucky, Old Chucky!” she cried,   
	Running across the world upon the grass   
	To Chucky’s house, and listening. But alas,   
	Her Chucky had died.
	
	It was a transmogrifying bee
	Came droning down on Chucky’s old bald head
	And sat and put the poison. It scarcely bled,   
	But how exceedingly
	
	And purply did the knot
	Swell with the venom and communicate
	Its rigour! Now the poor comb stood up straight
	But Chucky did not.
	
	So there was Janet
	Kneeling on the wet grass, crying her brown hen   
	(Translated far beyond the daughters of men)   
	To rise and walk upon it.
	
	And weeping fast as she had breath
	Janet implored us, “Wake her from her sleep!”   
	And would not be instructed in how deep   
	Was the forgetful kingdom of death.



23. THE LOVER

	I SAT in a friendly company
	And wagged my wicked tongue so well,
	My friends were listening close to hear
	The wickedest tales that I could tell.
	For many a fond youth waits, I said,
	On many a worthless damozel;
	But every trusting fool shall learn
	To wish them heartily in hell. 
	
	
	And when your name was spoken too,
	I did not change, I did not start,
	And when they only praised and loved,
	I still could play my secret part,
	Cursing and lies upon my tongue,
	And songs and shouting in my heart. 
	
	
	But when you came and looked at me,
	You tried my poor pretence too much.
	O love, do you know the secret now
	Of one who would not tell nor touch?
	Must I confess before the pack
	Of babblers, idiots, and such? 
	
	
	Do they not hear the burst of bells,
	Pealing at every step you make?
	Are not their eyelids winking too,
	Feeling your sudden brightness break?
	O too much glory shut with us!
	O walls too narrow and opaque!
	O come into the night with me
	And let me speak, for Jesus’ sake.



24. MEN

	“How many goodly creatures are there here!”
	Miranda doted on the sight of seamen,
	The very casual adventurers
	Who took a flood as quickly as a calm,
	And kept their blue eyes blue to any weather.
	This was the famous manliness of men;
	And when she saw it on the dirty strangers,
	She clapped her pretty hands in sudden joy:
	“O brave new world!”



25. MIRIAM TAZEWELL

	When Miriam Tazewell heard the tempest bursting   
	And his wrathy whips across the sky drawn crackling   
	She stuffed her ears for fright like a young thing   
	And with heart full of the flowers took to weeping.
	
	But the earth shook dry his old back in good season,
	He had weathered storms that drenched him deep as this one,   
	And the sun, Miriam, ascended to his dominion,
	The storm was withered against his empyrean.
	
	After the storm she went forth with skirts kilted   
	To see in the hot sun her lawn deflowered,   
	Her tulip, iris, peony strung and pelted,
	Pots of geranium spilled and the stalks naked.
	
	The spring transpired in that year with no flowers   
	But the regular stars went busily on their courses,   
	Suppers and cards were calendared, and some bridals,   
	And the birds demurely sang in the bitten poplars.
	
	To Miriam Tazewell the whole world was villain,   
	The principle of the beast was low and masculine,   
	And not to unstop her own storm and be maudlin,   
	For weeks she went untidy, she went sullen.



26. MORNING

	THE skies were jaded, while the famous sun
	Slack of his office to confute the fogs
	Lay sick abed; but I, inured to duty,
	Sat for my food. Three hours each day we souls,
	Who might be angels but are fastened down
	With bodies, most infuriating freight,
	Sit fattening these frames and skeletons
	With filthy food, which they must cast away
	Before they feed again.



27. NECROLOGICAL

	The friar had said his paternosters duly
	And scourged his limbs, and afterwards would have slept;
	But with much riddling his head became unruly,
	He arose, from the quiet monastery he crept.
	
	Dawn lightened the place where the battle had been won.
	The people were dead--it is easy he thought to die--
	These dead remained, but the living were all gone,
	Gone with the wailing trumps of victory.
	
	The dead men wore no raiment against the air,
	Bartholomew’s men had spoiled them where they fell;
	In defeat the heroes’ bodies were whitely bare,
	The field was white like meads of asphodel.
	
	Not all were white; some gory and fabulous
	Whom the sword had pierced and then the grey wolf eaten;
	But the brother reasoned that heroes’ flesh was thus.
	Flesh fails, and the postured bones lie weather-beaten.
	
	The lords of chivalry lay prone and shattered.
	The gentle and the bodyguard of yeomen;
	Bartholomew’s stroke went home--but little it mattered,
	Bartholomew went to be stricken of other foemen.
	
	Beneath the blue ogive of the firmament
	Was a dead warrior, clutching whose mighty knees
	Was a leman, who with her flame had warmed his tent,
	For him enduring all men’s pleasantries.
	
	Close by the sable stream that purged the plain
	Lay the white stallion and his rider thrown,
	The great beast had spilled there his little brain,
	And the little groin of the knight was spilled by a stone.
	
	The youth possessed him then of a crooked blade
	Deep in the belly of a lugubrious wight;
	He fingered it well, and it was cunningly made;
	But strange apparatus was if for a Carmelite.
	
	Then he sat upon a hill and bowed his head
	As under a riddle, and in deep surmise
	So still that he likened himself unto those dead
	Whom the kites of Heaven solicited with sweet cries.



28. NOONDAY GRACE

	MY good old father tucked his head,
	(His face the color of gingerbread)
	Over the table my mother had spread,
	And folded his leathery hands and said: 
	
	“We thank thee, Lord, for this thy grace,
	And all thy bounties to the race;
	Turn not away from us thy face
	Till we come to our final resting-place.” 
	
	These were the words of the old elect,
	Or others to the same effect. 
	
	I love my father’s piety,
	I know he’s grateful as can be,
	A man that’s nearly seventy
	And past his taste for cookery.
	But I am not so old as he,
	And when I see in front of me
	Things that I like uncommonly, 
	
	(Cornfield beans my specialty,
	When every pod spills two or three),
	Then I forget the thou and thee
	And pray with total fervency: 
	
	Thank you, good Lord, for dinner-time!
	Gladly I come from the sweat and grime
	To play in your Christian pantomime. 
	
	I wash the black dust from my face,
	I sit again in a Christian’s place,
	I hear the ancient Christian’s grace. 
	
	My thanks for clean fresh napkin first,
	With faint red stain where the fruit-jar burst. 
	
	Thanks for a platter with kind blue roses,
	For mother’s centerpiece and posies,
	A touch of art right under our noses. 
	
	Mother, I’ll thank you for tumbler now
	Of morning’s milk from our Jersey cow. 
	
	And father, thanks for a generous yam,
	And a helping of home-cured country ham,
	(He knows how fond of it I am.) 
	
	For none can cure them as can he,
	And he won’t tell his recipe,
	But God was behind it, it seems to me. 
	
	Thank God who made the garden grow,
	Who took upon himself to know
	That we loved vegetables so.
	I served his plan with rake and hoe,
	And mother, boiling, baking, slow
	To her favorite tune of Old Black Joe,
	Predestined many an age ago. 
	
	Pearly corn still on the cob,
	My teeth are aching for that job. 
	
	Tomatoes, one would fill a dish,
	Potatoes, mealy as one could wish. 
	
	Cornfield beans and cucumbers,
	And yellow yams for sweeteners. 
	
	Pickles between for stepping-stones,
	And plenty of cornmeal bread in pones. 
	
	Sunday the preacher droned a lot
	About a certain whether or not: 
	
	Is God the universal friend,
	And if men pray can he attend
	To each man’s individual end? 
	
	They pray for individual things,
	Give thanks for little happenings,
	But isn’t his sweep of mighty wings
	Meant more for businesses of kings
	Than pulling small men’s petty strings? 
	
	He’s infinite, and all of that,
	The setting sun his habitat,
	The heavens they hold by his fiat,
	The glorious year that God begat;
	And what is creeping man to that,
	O preacher, valiant democrat? 
	
	“The greatest of all, his sympathy,
	His kindness, reaching down to me.” 
	
	Like mother, he finds it his greatest joy
	To have big dinners for his boy. 
	
	She understands him like a book,
	In fact, he helps my mother cook,
	And slips to the dining-room door to look; 
	
	And when we are at our noon-day meal,
	He laughs to think how fine we feel. 
	
	An extra fork is by my plate,
	I nearly noticed it too late! 
	
	Mother, you’re keeping a secret back!
	I see the pie-pan through the crack,
	Incrusted thick in gold and black. 
	
	There’s no telling what that secret pair
	Have cooked for me in the kitchen there, 
	
	There’s no telling what that pie can be,
	But tell me that it’s blackberry! 
	
	As long as I keep topside the sod,
	I’ll love you always, mother and God.



29. NOVEMBER

	THERE’S a patch of trees at the edge of the field,
	And a brown little house that is kept so warm,
	And a woman waiting by the hearth
	Who still keeps most of a woman’s charm. 
	
	She traffics in her woman’s goods
	And is my woman of affairs.
	Yet not so fast, my moral men,
	November’s most poetic airs
	Are heavy with old lovers’ tales,
	How hearths are holy with their prayers,
	How women give their fragrance up
	And give their love to the man that dares.
	Now who goes heedless hearing that?
	At last we trade, we laissez-faires. 
	
	O moralizers, it is hard
	When I am not a candidate
	For holy wedlock’s offices,
	That mother has picked me out a mate, 
	
	And couldn’t have made a sorrier choice
	Than that same Smiley’s daughter Kate,
	Who prays for the sinners of the town
	And never comes to meeting late,
	Who sings soprano in the choir
	And swallows Christian doctrine straight.
	Of all the girls deliver me
	From the girl you haven’t the heart to hate!
	Piety: O what a hideous thing!
	And thirty-odd pounds she’s underweight. 
	
	The winds of late November droop
	(Poor little failures) very low,
	As up and down the farm they pass,
	Pass up and down, and to and fro,
	And look for a home they are not to find,
	For they were homeless years ago.. 
	
	But years ago I knew a girl,
	Beautiful, fit for a Grand Vizier’s,
	A girl with laughing on her lips
	And in her eyes the quickest tears,
	And low of speech, as when one finds
	A mother cooing to her dears.
	I took the note into my heart,
	And so did other cavaliers. 
	
	If God had heard my prayer then,
	The good folk couldn’t point and say
	As mother says they’re pointing now:
	Behold, one stands in the sinners’ way!
	The stiffest sceptic bends his neck
	And stands on no more vain parley
	If such as she would have him come,
	Worship with her in the Baptist way,
	Accept the fables as he can,
	A Jewish God, a Passion Play;
	And such a lover never comes
	To fondling dirty drabs for pay.
	But God had another man for her,
	He cannot answer all that pray. 
	
	November winds are weak and cold,
	They lie at last beneath the blue
	And sleep in the fields as cold as they.
	I know but one good thing to do,
	So hearken, all ye mutineers:
	Every man to his rendezvous! 
	
	My woman waits by the hearth, I say,
	And what is a scarlet woman to you?
	Her sins are scarlet if you will,
	Her lips are hardly of that hue, 
	
	And many a time I’ve seen her sit
	Beside the hearth an hour or two,
	And set the pot upon the fire
	And wait until she’s spoken to.
	A hateful owl is roosting near
	Who mocks my woman, Hoo, Hoo, Hoo,
	But the pot sings back just as shrill as it can,
	And the angry fire-log crashes through;
	And there the woman waits and I,
	ponder the ways of God--and rue!



30. ONES WHO REJECT CHRIST

	THERE’S farmers and there’s farmers,
	There’s many a field and field,
	But none of the farmers round about
	Can haul such harvest-wagons out
	As I from an acre’s yield. 
	
	There’s plenty and plenty of farmers
	That leave the ground by the fence,
	Thinking it’s nice if a patch of roses
	Should scratch out the hay and tickle their noses
	With nice little wild-rose scents. 
	
	I’m not like other farmers,
	I make my farming pay;
	I never go in for sentiment,
	And seeing that roses yield no rent
	I cut the stuff away. 
	
	A very good thing for farmers
	If they would learn my way;
	For crops are all that a good field grows,
	And nothing is worse than a sniff of rose
	In the good strong smell of hay.



31. PAINTED HEAD

	By dark severance the apparition head
	Smiles from the air a capital on no
	Column or a Platonic perhaps head
	On a canvas sky depending from nothing;
	
	Stirs up an old illusion of grandeur
	By tickling the instinct of heads to be
	Absolute and to try decapitation
	And to play truant from the body bush;
	
	But too happy and beautiful for those sorts
	Of head (homekeeping heads are happiest)
	Discovers maybe thirty unwidowed years
	Of not dishonoring the faithful stem;
	
	Is nameless and has authored for the evil
	Historian headhunters neither book
	Nor state and is therefore distinct from tart
	Heads with crowns and guilty gallery heads;
	
	Wherefore the extravagant device of art
	Unhousing by abstraction this once head
	Was capital irony by a loving hand
	That knew the no treason of a head like this;
	
	Makes repentance in an unlovely head
	For having vinegarly traduced the flesh
	Till, the hurt flesh recusing, the hard egg
	Is shrunken to its own deathlike surface;
	
	And an image thus. The body bears the head
	(So hardly one they terribly are two)
	Feeds and obeys and unto please what end?
	Not to the glory of tyrant head but to
	
	The estate of body. Beauty is of body.
	The flesh contouring shallowly on a head
	Is a rock-garden needing body’s love
	And best bodiness to colorify
	
	The big blue birds sitting and sea-shell cats
	And caves, and on the iron acropolis
	To spread the hyacinthine hair and rear
	The olive garden for the nightingales.



32. PIAZZA PIECE

	--I am a gentleman in a dustcoat trying
	To make you hear. Your ears are soft and small   
	And listen to an old man not at all,
	They want the young men’s whispering and sighing.   
	But see the roses on your trellis dying
	And hear the spectral singing of the moon;
	For I must have my lovely lady soon,
	I am a gentleman in a dustcoat trying.
	
	--I am a lady young in beauty waiting   
	Until my truelove comes, and then we kiss.   
	But what grey man among the vines is this   
	Whose words are dry and faint as in a dream?   
	Back from my trellis, Sir, before I scream!   
	I am a lady young in beauty waiting.



33. PRAYER

	SHE would not keep at home, the foolish woman,
	She would not mind her precious girls and boys,
	She had to go, for it was Sunday morning,
	Down the hot road and to the barren pew
	And there abuse her superannuate knees
	To make a prayer. 
	
	She had a huge petition on her bosom--
	A heavy weight for such a lean old thing--
	Her youngest boy made merry in the village
	And had not entered into the communion;
	And having labored with him long for nothing
	She meant to ask of God to save him yet.
	Thank God she asked that favor! 
	
	The manner of it echoes still in Heaven.
	Before she dared to utter her desire
	The strange old woman made approach to God
	With many a low obeisance and abasement,
	As having done so many things she ought not, 
	
	And left undone so many things she ought,
	And being altogether very wicked;
	She testified she had not kept his temple,
	Which was her heart, all swept and white and ready;
	She testified it--O the shameless woman,
	The spotless housekeeper! 
	
	Now God sat beaming on his burnished throne
	And swept creation with appraising eye,
	Finding, I fear, not all was free from blemish,
	Yet keeping his magnificent composure;
	But wearing certain necessary airs,
	To suit with such incumbency of court,
	He still at heart was quite a gentleman;
	For when he saw that aged lady drooping
	And wearying her bones with genuflections
	For her unworthiness, he fell ashamed
	To think how hard it went with holy women
	To ease their poor predicaments by prayer:
	There on his heaven, and heard of all the hosts,
	He groaned, he made a mighty face so wry
	That several seraphin forgot their harping
	And scolded thus: “O what a wicked woman,
	To shrew his splendid features out of shape!”



34. PRELUDE TO AN EVENING

	Do not enforce the tired wolf
	Dragging his infected wound homeward
	To sit tonight with the warm children
	Naming the pretty kings of France.
	
	The images of the invaded mind
	Being as the monsters in the dreams
	Of your most brief enchanted headful,
	Suppose a miracle of confusion:
	
	That dreamed and undreamt become each other
	And mix the night and day of your mind;
	And it does not matter your twice crying
	From mouth unbeautied against the pillow
	
	To avert the gun of the same old soldier;
	For cry, cock-crow, or the iron bell
	Can crack the sleep-sense of outrage,
	Annihilate phantoms who were nothing.
	
	But now, by our perverse supposal,
	There is a drift of fog on your mornings;
	You in your peignoir, dainty at your orange cup,
	Feel poising round the sunny room
	
	Invisible evil, deprived and bold.
	All day the clock will metronome
	Your gallant fear; the needles clicking,
	The heels detonating the stair’s cavern
	
	Freshening the water in the blue bowls
	For the buck berries, with not all your love,
	You shall he listening for the low wind,
	The warning sibilance of pines.
	
	You like a waning moon, and I accusing
	Our too banded Eumenides,
	While you pronounce Noes wanderingly
	And smooth the heads of the hungry children.



35. RESURRECTION

	LONG, long before men die I sometimes read
	Their stoic backs as plain as graveyard stones,
	An epitaph of poor dead men indeed.
	I never pass those old and crooked bones,
	Ridden far down with burden and with age,
	Stopping the headlong highway till they lean
	Aside in honor of my equipage,
	But I am sick and shamed that Heaven has been
	So clumsy with the inelastic clay!
	“What pretty piece of hope then have you spun,
	My old defeated traveler,” I say,
	“That keeps you marching on? For I have none.
	I have looked often and I have not found
	Old men bowed low who ever rose up sound.”



36. ROSES

	I ENTERED dutiful, God knows,
	The room in which I was to sit
	With dreary unbelieving books.
	It was surprising, I suppose,
	To find such happy change in it:
	There stood a most celestial rose
	And looked the flower that my love looks
	Who, where she turns her smiling face
	Makes heavy earth a hopeful place. 
	
	I blessed the heart that wished me well
	When I had been bereft of much,
	And brought such word of beauty back.
	I went like one escaping hell
	To drink its fragrance and to touch,
	And stroked, O ludicrous to tell!
	A horrid thing of bric-a-brac,
	A make-believe, a mockery,
	And nothing that a rose should be. 
	
	Red real roses keep a thorn,
	And save their loveliness a while
	And in their perfect date unfold.
	But you, beyond all women born,
	Have spent so easily your smile,
	That I am not the less forlorn
	Nor these ironic walls less cold,
	Because it smiles, the chilly rose,
	As you are smiling, I suppose.



37. STREET LIGHT

	THE shine of many city streets
	Confuses any countryman;
	It flickers here and flashes there,
	It goes as soon as it began,
	It beckons many ways at once
	For him to follow if he can. 
	
	Under the lamp a woman stands,
	The lamps are shining equal well,
	But in her eyes are other lights,
	And lights plus other lights will tell:
	He loves the brightness of that street
	Which is the shining street to hell. 
	
	There’s light enough, and strong enough,
	To lighten every pleasant park;
	I’m sorry lights are held so cheap,
	I’d rather there were not a spark
	Than choose those shining ways for joy
	And have them lead me into dark.



38. SUNSET

	I KNOW you are not cruel,
	And you would not willingly hurt anything in the world.
	There is kindness in your eyes,
	There could not very well be more of it in eyes
	Already brimful of the sky.
	I thought you would some day begin to love me,
	But now I doubt it badly;
	It is no man-rival I am afraid of,
	It is God. 
	
	The meadows are very wide and green,
	And the big field of wheat is solid gold,
	Or a little darker than gold.
	Two people never sat like us by a fence of cedar rails
	On a still evening
	And looked at such fat fields.
	To me it is beautiful enough,
	I am stirred, 
	
	I say grand and wonderful, and grow adjectival,
	But to you
	It is God. 
	
	Cropping the clover are several spotted cows.
	They too are kind and gentle,
	And they stop and look round at me now and then
	As if they would say:
	“How good of you to come to see us!
	Please pardon us if we seem indifferent,
	But we have not much time to talk with you now,
	And really nothing to say.”
	Then they make their bow,
	Still kind and calm,
	And go their way again
	Towards the sunset.
	I suppose they are going to God. 
	
	Your eyes are not regarding me,
	Nor the four-leaf clovers I picked for you,
	(With a prayer and a gentle squeeze for each of them),
	Nor are they fretting over dress, and shoes,
	And image in the little glass,
	Restlessly,
	Like the eyes of other girls. 
	
	You are looking away over yonder
	To where the crooked rail-fence gets to the top
	Of the yellow hill
	And drops out of sight
	Into space.
	Is that infinity that catches it?
	And do you catch it too in your thoughts?
	I know that look;
	I have not seen it on another girl;
	And it terrifies me,
	For I cannot tell what it means,
	But I think
	It has something to do with God. 
	
	We are a mile from home,
	And soon it will be getting dark,
	And the big farm-bell will be ringing out for supper.
	We had better start for the house.
	Rover!
	O here he is, waiting.
	He has chased the rabbits and run after the birds
	A thousand miles or so,
	And now he is hungry and tired.
	But he is a southern gentleman 
	
	And will not whimper once
	Though you kept him waiting forever.
	He knows his mistress’ eyes as well as I,
	And when to be silent and respectful.
	I will try to be as patient as Rover,
	And we will be comrades and wait,
	Unquestioningly,
	Till this lady we love
	And her strange eyes
	Come home from God.



39. THE SWIMMER

	IN dog-days plowmen quit their toil,
	And frog-ponds in the meadow boil,
	And grasses on the upland broil,
	And all the coiling things uncoil,
	And eggs and meats and Christians spoil. 
	
	A mile away the valley breaks
	(So all good valleys do) and makes
	A cool green water for hot heads’ sakes,
	And sundry sullen dog-days’ aches. 
	
	The swimmer’s body is white and clean,
	It is washed by a water of deepest green
	The color of leaves in a starlight scene,
	And it is as white as the stars between. 
	
	But the swimmer’s soul is a thing possessed,
	His soul is naked as his breast,
	Remembers not its east and west,
	And ponders this way, I have guessed: 
	
	I have no home in the cruel heat
	On alien soil that blisters feet.
	This water is my native seat,
	And more than ever cool and sweet,
	So long by forfeiture escheat. 
	
	O my forgiving element!
	I gash you to my heart’s content
	And never need be penitent,
	So light you float me when breath is spent
	And close again where my rude way went. 
	
	And now you close above my head,
	And I lie low in a soft green bed
	That dog-days never have visited.
	“By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread:”
	The garden’s curse is at last unsaid 
	
	What do I need of senses five?
	Why eat, or drink, or sweat, or wive?
	What do we strive for when we strive?
	What do we live for when alive? 
	
	And what if I do not rise again,
	Never to goad a heated brain
	To hotter excesses of joy and pain? 
	
	Why should it be against the grain
	To lie so cold and still and sane? 
	
	Water-bugs play shimmer-shimmer,
	Naked body’s just a glimmer,
	Watch ticks every second grimmer:
	Come to the top, O wicked swimmer!



40. WINTER REMEMBERED

	Two evils, monstrous either one apart,
	Possessed me, and were long and loath at going:
	A cry of Absence, Absence, in the heart,
	And in the wood the furious winter blowing.
	
	Think not, when fire was bright upon my bricks,
	And past the tight boards hardly a wind could enter,
	I glowed like them, the simple burning sticks,
	Far from my cause, my proper heat and center.
	
	Better to walk forth in the frozen air
	And wash my wound in the snows; that would be healing;
	Because my heart would throb less painful there,
	Being caked with cold, and past the smart of feeling.
	
	And where I walked, the murderous winter blast
	Would have this body bowed, these eyeballs streaming,
	And though I think this heart’s blood froze not fast
	It ran too small to spare one drop for dreaming.
	
	Dear love, these fingers that had known your touch,
	And tied our separate forces first together,
	Were ten poor idiot fingers not worth much,
	Ten frozen parsnips hanging in the weather.
