*** Arthur Rimbaud (1854 - 1891)


1. ANTIQUE

	Pan’s elegant son--eyes rolling under a brow crowned with small blooms and berries, precious
	  balls! Hollowed with brown stripes, cheeks deepen on your gleaming fangs. Your chest recalls
	  a harp whose ringing circles up and down blond arms. Your heart beats in a belly where the double
	  sex is sleeping. Walk out at night now moving slowly, first this thigh, this other thigh,
	  then this left leg.



2. THE DRUNKEN BOAT

	As I was going down impassive Rivers,
	I no longer felt myself guided by haulers:
	Yelping redskins had taken them as targets
	And had nailed them naked to colored stakes.

	I was indifferent to all crews,
	The bearer of Flemish wheat or English cottons
	When with my haulers this uproar stopped
	The Rivers let me go where I wanted.

	Into the furious lashing of the tides
	More heedless than children’s brains the other winter
	I ran! And loosened Peninsulas
	Have not undergone a more triumphant hubbub

	The storm blessed my sea vigils
	Lighter than a cork I danced on the waves
	That are called eternal rollers of victims,
	Ten nights, without missing the stupid eye of the lighthouses!

	Sweeter than the flesh of hard apples is to children
	The green water penetrated my hull of fir
	And washed me of spots of blue wine
	And vomit, scattering rudder and grappling-hook

	And from then on I bathed in the Poem
	Of the Sea, infused with stars and lactescent,
	Devouring the azure verses; where, like a pale elated
	Piece of flotsam, a pensive drowned figure sometimes sinks;

	Where, suddenly dyeing the blueness, delirium
	And slow rhythms under the streaking of daylight,
	Stronger than alcohol, vaster than our lyres,
	The bitter redness of love ferments!

	I know the skies bursting with lightning, and the waterspouts
	And the surf and the currents; I know the evening,
	And dawn as exalted as a flock of doves
	And at times I have seen what man thought he saw!

	I have seen the low sun spotted with mystic horrors,
	Lighting up, with long violet clots,
	Resembling actors of very ancient dramas,
	The waves rolling far off their quivering of shutters!

	I have dreamed of the green night with dazzled snows
	A kiss slowly rising to the eyes of the sea,
	The circulation of unknown saps,
	And the yellow and blue awakening of singing phosphorous!

	I followed during pregnant months the swell,
	Like hysterical cows, in its assault on the reefs,
	Without dreaming that the luminous feet of the Marys
	Could constrain the snout of the wheezing Oceans!

	I struck against, you know, unbelievable Floridas
	Mingling with flowers panthers’ eyes and human
	Skin! Rainbows stretched like bridal reins
	Under the horizon of the seas to greenish herds!

	I have seen enormous swamps ferment, fish-traps
	Where a whole Leviathan rots in the rushes!
	Avalanches of water in the midst of a calm,
	And the distances cataracting toward the abyss!

	Glaciers, suns of silver, nacreous waves, skies of embers!
	Hideous strands at the end of brown gulfs
	Where giant serpents devoured by bedbugs
	Fall down from gnarled trees with black scent!

	I should have liked to show children those sunfish
	Of the blue wave, the fish of gold, the singing fish.
	--Foam of flowers rocked my drifting
	And ineffable winds winged me at times.

	At times a martyr weary of poles and zones,
	The sea, whose sob created my gentle roll,
	Brought up to me her dark flowers with yellow suckers
	And I remained, like a woman on her knees . . .

	Resembling an island tossing on my sides the quarrels
	And droppings of noisy birds with yellow eyes
	And I sailed on, when through my fragile ropes
	Drowned men sank backward to sleep!

	Now I, a boat lost in the foliage of caves,
	Thrown by the storm into the birdless air
	I whose water-drunk carcass would not have been rescued
	By the Monitors and the Hanseatic sailboats;

	Free, smoking, topped with violet fog,
	I who pierced the reddening sky like a wall,
	Bearing, delicious jam for good poets
	Lichens of sunlight and mucus of azure,

	Who ran, spotted with small electric moons,
	A wild plank, escorted by black seahorses,
	When Julys beat down with blows of cudgels
	The ultramarine skies with burning funnels;

	I, who trembled, hearing at fifty leagues off
	The moaning of the Behemoths in heat and the thick Maelstroms,
	Eternal spinner of the blue immobility
	I miss Europe with its ancient parapets!

	I have seen sidereal archipelagos! and islands
	Whose delirious skies are open to the sea-wanderer:
	--Is it in these bottomless nights that you sleep and exile yourself,
	Million golden birds, o future Vigor?--

	But, in truth, I have wept too much! Dawns are heartbreaking.
	Every moon is atrocious and every sun bitter.
	Acrid love has swollen me with intoxicating torpor
	O let my keel burst! O let me go into the sea!

	If I want a water of Europe, it is the black
	Cold puddle where in the sweet-smelling twilight
	A squatting child full of sadness releases
	A boat as fragile as a May butterfly.

	No longer can I, bathed in your languor, o waves,
	Follow in the wake of the cotton boats,
	Nor cross through the pride of flags and flames,
	Nor swim under the terrible eyes of prison ships.



3. EST-ELLE ALMÉE?

	Is she an Egyptian dancer? . . . In the first blue hours
	Will she destroy herself like deceased flowers.
	Before the brilliant expanse where we feel
	The enormously flourishing town exhale.

	It’s too exquisite! It’s too exquisite! but so necessary
	--For the Fisherwoman and the song of the Corsair,
	And also since the last maskers believed
	In night-feasts on the pure sea.



4. GENIE

	He is affection and the present since he opened the house to foaming winter and the hum of summer,
	  he who purified drink and food, he who is the charm of fleeting places and the superhuman
	  deliciousness of staying still. He is affection and the future, strength and love that we, standing
	  amid rage and troubles, see passing in the storm-rent sky and on banners of ecstasy.
	He is love, perfect and reinvented measurement, wonderful and unforeseen reason, and eternity:
	  machine beloved for its fatal qualities. We have all experienced the terror of his yielding
	  and of our own: O enjoyment of our health, surge of our faculties, egoistic affection and passion
	  for him, he who loves us for his infinite life
	And we remember him and he travels . . . And if the Adoration goes away, resounds, its promise
	  resounds: “Away with those superstitions, those old bodies, those couples and those ages. It’s
	  this age that has sunk!”
	He won’t go away, nor descend from a heaven again, he won’t accomplish the redemption of women’s
	  anger and the gaiety of men and of all that sin: for it is now accomplished, with him being,
	  and being loved.
	O his breaths, his heads, his racing; the terrible swiftness of the perfection of forms and of action.
	O fecundity of the spirit and immensity of the universe!
	His body! The dreamed-of release, the shattering of grace crossed with new violence!
	The sight, the sight of him! all the ancient kneeling and suffering lifted in his wake.
	His day! the abolition of all resonant and surging suffering in more intense music.
	His footstep! migrations more vast than ancient invasions.
	O him and us! pride more benevolent than wasted charities.
	O world! and the clear song of new misfortunes!
	He has known us all and loved us all. Let us, on this winter night, from cape to cape, from the
	  tumultuous pole to the castle, from the crowd to the beach, from glance to glance, our strengths
	  and feelings numb, learn to hail him and see him, and send him back, and under the tides and
	  at the summit of snowy deserts, follow his seeing, his breathing, his body, his day.



5. LARME

	Far from birds, from herds, from village girls,
	I used to drink, squatting in some heather
	Surrounded by tender woods of hazel trees,
	In a warm green afternoon vapour.

	What could I drink from this young Oise,
	Voiceless elms, flowerless lawn, overcast sky.
	What could I suck from the gourd of the _colocase_?
	Some insipid gold liqueur that makes you sweaty.

	As I was, I would have made a miserable sign for a hotel.
	Then, thunderstorms altered the sky until sundown.
	It was black country, lakes, poles,
	Columns beneath blue night, railway stations.

	The water from the woods vanished over virgin sands.
	The wind pitched icicles from the sky into the ponds . . .
	Well! like a diver for shells or gold,
	To think that drinking wasn’t even on my mind!



6. LIVES

	I

	Oh! the huge avenues of the holy land, the terraces of the temple! What has happened to the brahmin
	  who taught me the Proverbs? From then and from there I can still see even the old women! I remember
	  silvery hours and sun near rivers, the hand of the country on my shoulder, and our caresses
	  as we stood in the fiery fields.--A flight of red pigeons thunders around my thoughts--In
	  exile here I had a stage on which to perform the dramatic masterpieces of all literatures.
	  I might tell you about unheard-of wealth. I follow the story of the treasures you found. I see
	  the next chapter! My wisdom is as neglected as chaos is. What is my void, compared with the stupefaction
	  awaiting you?


	II

	I am a far more deserving inventor than all those who went before me; a musician, in fact, who
	  found something resembling the key of love. At present, a noble from a meager countryside
	  with a dark sky I try to feel emotion over the memory of mendicant childhood, over my apprenticeship
	  when I arrived wearing wooden shoes, polemics, five or six widowings, and a few wild escapades
	  when my strong head kept me from rising to the same pitch as my comrades. I don’t miss what
	  I once possessed of divine happiness: the calm of this despondent countryside gives a new vigor
	  to my terrible scepticism. But since this scepticism can no longer be put into effect, and since
	  I am now given over to a new worry--I expect to become a very wicked fool.


	III

	In an attic where at the age of twelve I was locked up, I knew the world and illustrated
	  the human comedy. In a wine cellar I learned history. At some night celebration, in a northern
	  city, I met all the wives of former painters. In an old back street in Paris I was taught
	  the classical sciences. In a magnificent palace, surrounded by all the Orient, I finished
	  my long work and spent my celebrated retirement. I have invigorated my blood. I am released
	  from my duty. I must not even think of that any longer. I am really from beyond the tomb, and
	  without work.



7. MORNING OF DRUNKENNESS

	O _my_ good! O _my_ beautiful! Atrocious fanfare where I won’t stumble! enchanted rack whereon
	  I am stretched! Hurrah for the amazing work and the marvelous body, for the first time! It began
	  amid the laughter of children, it will end with it. This poison will remain in all our veins
	  even when, as the trumpets turn back, we’ll be restored to the old discord. O let us now, we who
	  are so deserving of these torments! let us fervently gather up that superhuman promise made
	  to our created body and soul: that promise, that madness! Elegance, knowledge, violence!
	  They promised us to bury the tree of good and evil in the shade, to banish tyrannical
	  honesties, so that we might bring forth our very pure love. It began with a certain disgust
	  and ended--since we weren’t able to grasp this eternity all at once--in a panicked rout of perfumes.
	Laughter of children, discretion of slaves, austerity of virgins, horror in the faces and objects
	  of today, may you be consecrated by the memory of that wake. It began in all loutishness,
	  now it’s ending among angels of flame and ice.
	Little eve of drunkenness, holy! were it only for the mask with which you gratified us. We affirm
	  you, method! We don’t forget that yesterday you glorified each one of our ages. We have faith
	  in the poison. We know how to give our whole lives every day.
	Behold the time of the _Assassins_.



8. NOVEL

	I

	We aren’t serious when we’re seventeen.
	--One fine evening, to hell with beer and lemonade,
	Noisy cafés with their shining lamps!
	We walk under the green linden trees of the park

	The lindens smell good in the good June evenings!
	At times the air is so scented that we close our eyes.
	The wind laden with sounds--the town isn’t far--
	Has the smell of grapevines and beer . . .


	II

	--There you can see a very small patch
	Of dark blue, framed by a little branch,
	Pinned up by a naughty star, that melts
	In gentle quivers, small and very white . . .

	Night in June! Seventeen years old! --We are overcome by it all
	The sap is champagne and goes to our head . . .
	We talked a lot and feel a kiss on our lips
	Trembling there like a small insect . . .


	III

	Our wild heart moves through novels like Robinson Crusoe,
	--When, in the light of a pale street lamp,
	A girl goes by attractive and charming
	Under the shadow of her father’s terrible collar . . .

	And as she finds you incredibly naïve,
	While clicking her little boots,
	She turns abruptly and in a lively way . . .
	--Then _cavatinas_ die on your lips . . .


	IV

	You are in love. Occupied until the month of August.
	You are in love.--Your sonnets make Her laugh.
	All your friends go off, you are ridiculous.
	--Then one evening the girl you worship deigned to write to you . . . !

	--That evening, . . . --you return to the bright cafés,
	You ask for beer or lemonade . . .
	--We’re not serious when we are seventeen
	And when we have green linden trees in the park.



9. PHRASES

	When the world is reduced to a single dark wood for our two pairs of dazzled eyes--to a beach
	  for two faithful children--to a musical house for our clear understanding--then
	  I shall find you.
	When there is only one old man on earth, lonely, peaceful, handsome, living in unsurpassed
	  luxury, then I am at your feet.
	When I have realized all your memories,--when I am the girl who can tie your hands,--then
	  I will stifle you.


	When we are very strong, who draws back? or very happy, who collapses from ridicule? When we are
	  very bad, what can they do to us.
	Dress up, dance, laugh. I will never be able to throw Love out of the window.


	--Comrade of mine, beggar girl, monstrous child! How little you care about the wretched women,
	  and the machinations and my embarrassment. Join us with your impossible voice, oh your voice!
	  the one flatterer of this base despair.


	A dark morning in July. The taste of ashes in the air, the smell of wood sweating in the hearth,
	  steeped flowers, the devastation of paths, drizzle over the canals in the fields, why not already
	  playthings and incense?


	I stretched out ropes from spire to spire; garlands from window to window; golden chains from
	  star to star, and I dance.


	The high pond is constantly streaming. What witch will rise up against the white sunset? What
	  purple flowers are going to descend?


	While public funds disappear in brotherly celebrations, a bell of pink are rings in the clouds.


	Arousing a pleasant taste of Chinese ink, a black powder gently rains on my night,--I lower the
	  jets of the chandelier, throw myself on the bed, and turning toward the dark, I see you, O my
	  daughters and queens!



10. ROYALTY

	One fine morning, in the country of a very gentle people, a magnificent man and woman were shouting
	  in the public square. “My friends, I want her to be queen!” “I want to be queen!” She was laughing
	  and trembling. He spoke to their friends of revelation, of trials completed. They swooned
	  against each other.
	In fact they were regents for a whole morning as crimson hangings were raised against the houses,
	  and for the whole afternoon, as they moved toward groves of palm trees.



11. THE SEEKERS OF LICE

	When the child’s forehead, full of red torments,
	Implores the white swarm of indistinct dreams,
	There come near his bed two tall charming sisters
	With slim fingers that have silvery nails.

	They seat the child in front of a wide open
	Window where the blue air bathes a mass of flowers
	And in his heavy hair where the dew falls
	Move their delicate, fearful and enticing fingers.

	He listens to the singing of their apprehensive breath.
	Which smells of long rosy plant honey
	And which at times a hiss interrupts, saliva
	Caught on the lip or desire for kisses.

	He hears their black eyelashes beating in the perfumed
	Silence; and their gentle electric fingers
	Make in his half-drunken indolence the death of the little lice
	Crackle under their royal nails.

	Then the wine of Sloth rises in him,
	The sigh of an harmonica which could bring on delirium;
	The child feels, according to the slowness of the caresses
	Surging in him and dying continuously a desire to cry.



12. TO A REASON

	A tap of your finger on the drum releases all sounds and initiates the new harmony.
	A step of yours is the conscription of the new men and their marching orders.
	You look away: the new love!
	You look back,--the new love!
	“Change our fates, shoot down the plagues, beginning with time,” the children sing to you.
	“Build wherever you can the substance of our fortunes and our wishes,” they beg you.
	Arriving from always, you’ll go away everywhere.



13. VAGABONDS

	Pitiful brother--the dreadful nights I owed him! “I’ve got no real involvement in the business.
	  I toyed with his weakness, so--it was my fault--we wound up back in exile and enslavement.”

	He saw me as a loser, a weird child; he added his own prods.

	I answered my satanic doctor, jeering, and made it out the window. All down a landscape crossed
	  by unheard--of music, I spun my dreams of a nighttime wealth to come.

	After that more or less healthy pastime, I’d stretch out on a pallet. And almost every night,
	  soon as I slept, my poor brother would rise--dry mouth and bulging eyes (the way he’d dreamt
	  himself!)--and haul me into the room, howling his stupid dream.

	Truly convinced, I’d vowed to take him back to his primal state--child of the sun--and so we wandered,
	  fed on wine from the caves and gypsy bread, me bound to find the place itself and the code.



14. WAKES

	The lamps and the carpets of the wake make the noise of waves
	in the night, along the rut and around the steerage.
	The sea of the wake, such as the breast of Amélie.
	The tapestry, just at medium height, the wood of laces dyed
	in emerald, where the turtle-doves of the wake throw themselves.
