*** Yiannis Ritsos (1909 - 1990)


1. ON A DAY IN MAY YOU LEFT ME

	On a day in May you left me, on that May day I lost you,
	in springtime you loved so well, my son, when you went upstairs,
	
	To the sun-drenched roof and looked out and your eyes never had
	their lill of drinking in the light of the whole wide world at large.
	
	With your manly voice so sweet and so warm, you recounted
	as many things as all the pebbles strewn along the seashore.
	
	My son, you told me that all these wonderful things will be ours,
	but now your light has died out, our brightness and fire are gone.



2. ABSENCE

	In our hands we hold the shadow of our hands.
	The night is kind--the others do not see us holding our shadow
	We reinforce the night. We watch ourselves.
	So we think better of others.
	The sea still seeks our eyes and we are not there.
	A young girl buttons up her love in her breast
	and we look away smiling at the great distance.
	Perhaps high up, in the starlight, a skylight opens up
	that looks out on the sea, the olive trees and the burnt houses
	We listen to the butterfly gyrating in the glass of All Souls’ Day,
	and the fisherman’s daughter grinding serenity in her coffee-grinder.



3. ACHIEVEMENT

	What we had expected like the justification of our lives
	was achieved. No trace of desire, recall or terror
	remained in the center of our cells.
	Two hollow bodies cast on the shore of the night.
	Later as you were putting on your stockings--I looked closely at the bed,
	it was a very ancient animal turned into marble in the stance of coition
	treading with his four dead feet into the void.



4. THE ARCHITECT

	A group of young girls wearing flowery dresses
	laugh again at the corner of a ramshackle house. The builders
	hang their trousers and their shirts on a nail of the new edifice,
	they take the hod-carrier, the trowel, and they climb up
	the huge, naked scaffolding as if they were climbing up to heaven. The architect
	calculates, he remembers, he compares, he supervises,
	he appears a bit saddened, as if his blueprint had been left half-completed,
	as if the enormous edifice will never be completed. He takes a nail
	and he himself sinks it down into the plank. The nail goes in crooked.
	The workers laughed. He also laughed. He took off his shirt,
	sensing that in this their general laughter, his hands,
	his blue-print and their edifice had been completed.



5. ATTENUATION

	The women went swimming in the nude--they said they liked
	how the water ran off between their breasts. The children
	were irritable, they threw rocks into the sea. The old men
	watched from behind the closed shutters. Out in the garden,
	the dry fountain, and the faded green of the benches where
	no one ever sat; a few sparrows wandered here and there
	with an aimless freedom. Later, the women would come home;
	the iron gate would creak, the birds stop in their tracks as if
	something had been lost, something deep, abandoned. The eternal
	rivalries, the pettiness, the spite, would begin again.
	Large, sopping towels weighed down the clothesline in the yard.
	A pair of dark glasses forgotten on the white gravel,
	next to some wet footprints that had already begun to fade.



6. THE CRANE DANCE

	The clew paying out through his fingers, a deftness   
	that would bring him back to her, its softness the softness   
	of skin, as if drawn from herself directly, the faint   
	labial smell, guiding him up and out, as some dampness   
	on the air might lead a stone-blind man to the light.
	
	Asterios dead for sure, his crumpled horn, his muzzle   
	thick with blood, so at Delos they stopped,   
	Theseus and the young Athenians, and stepped   
	up to the “altar of horns” to dance a puzzle-
	dance, its moves unreadable except to those who’d walked   
	the blank meanders of the labyrinth.   
	And this was midday: a fierce sun, the blaze   
	of their nakedness, the glitter of repetitions, a dazzle   
	rising off the sea, the scents of pine and hyacinth . . .
	
	Well, things change: new passions, new threats, new fears.   
	New consequences, too. Nowadays, we don’t think much   
	about Theseus, the Minotaur, Ariadne on the beach   
	at Naxos, staring out at the coming years.   
	But people still dance that dance: just common folk,   
	those criss-cross steps that no one had to teach,   
	at weddings and wakes, in bars or parks,   
	as if hope and heart could meet, as if they might   
	even now, somehow, dance themselves out of the dark.



7. EPILOGUE

	Please cherish my memory--he said. I walked for thousand
	miles on end without bread and without water, along rocks and through
	thorns I walked, to fetch you bread, water and roses.
	I was always faithful to beauty. With fair mind I gave out
	all my fortune. I did not keep my lot. I am poor. With a tiny lily from
	the fields I brightened our harshest nights. Please cherish my memory.
	And forgive this last sorrow of mine:
	I would like--once again--to reap a ripe corn with the
	slender sickle moon. To stand at the threshold, to stare away
	and to chew with my front teeth the wheat
	admiring and blessing this world that I leave behind,
	admiring also Him who climbs up the hill in the
	golden rain of a sinking sun. There is a purple square patch in his
	left sleeve. It is not easy to see. It was this, more than anything else,
	that I wanted to show you.
	And probably, more than anything else, it would be worth
	remembering me for this.



8. ESTRANGEMENT

	Only a flower immersed in its perfume,
	a face anchored in its smile;--
	--does it exist? doesn’t it exist? lost;
	if you speak to it it will return, as if after thousands of years,
	perplexed, inept--it will not know its whereabouts, it will not know
	what expression to assume that will be a response.
	There is a praying stool of stone in an old, abandoned street.
	Every so often, at twilight, he walks down his marble stairway,
	he gathers wild flowers from among the rocks,
	he makes a wreath and he hangs it on his sacred image. Every so often
	some strayaway sheep stands there as if it is praying,
	chewing slowly, stupidly, the withered wreath.



9. THE HEARD AND THE UNHEARD

	A sudden unexpected motion; the palm of his hand
	made a fist over his wound to stanch the blood
	even though we had not heard any gun-shot,
	nor the whizz of the bullet. A little later,
	he lowered his hand and he smiled to himself;
	but again slowly he placed the palm of his hand
	over the same spot; he took out his wallet,
	paid the boy politely and departed.
	And the coffee cup cracked of itself.
	That at least we heard very clearly.



10. HIS EYEGLASSES

	Between his eyes and things there always stood
	his hermetic eyeglasses, circumspect, vacant,
	inquisitive and eclectic--impersonal stronghold of glass
	both barrier and lookout--two sheets of water
	around his mysterious and denuding gaze, or better:
	two scales of a balance placed--strange--not flat down
	but on their sides. And that kind of horizontal balance,
	what could it retain outside the void, outside
	the knowledge of the void--a balance naked, crystalline, dazzling,
	on the glistening of which is reflected the sequence
	of visions, inner and outer, in a harmonized equilibrium
	so concrete, so incorruptible, that the whole void is revoked.



11. HIS LAMP

	The lamp is peaceful, serviceable; he prefers it
	to any other lighting. He adjusts his light
	to the needs of the moment, to the age-old
	unavowable desire. And always
	this odor of kerosene, this subtle presence,
	very unobtrusive, at night, when he returns alone
	with so much fatigue in his limbs, so much futility
	in the texture of his coat, in the seams of the pockets,
	that every movement seems useless, unendurable--
	once more, to distract him, here’s the lamp--the wick,
	the match, the flickering flame (with its shadows
	on the bed, on the desk, on the walls), but especially
	the glass cover--its fragile transparency
	which, in a simple and human gesture,
	once more involves you: in saving yourself or in saving.



12. HIS LAMP AT THE BREAK OF DAY

	Well now, good evening; here they both are again, face to face,
	he and his lamp--he loves it, even though he seems
	indifferent and self-absorbed; and not solely
	because it’s useful to him, but also and especially
	because it insists on his caring.--Fragile relic
	of antique Greek lamps, it collects around itself
	memories and insects conscious of the night, it wipes out
	the wrinkles of old people, it enlarges brows,
	it magnifies the shadows of adolescent bodies, it covers up
	with a soft glow the whiteness of empty pages
	and the hidden crimson of poems. And when,
	at dawn, its light grows dim and blends with
	the pink of day, with the first noises
	of shutters, of push-carts, of fruit peddlers,
	it’s a palpable symbol of his own vigil, and more:
	a bridge of glass that connects his eyeglass lenses with the glass of the lamp,
	the lamp with the glass of the windows, as far as outdoors, as far as the distance and farther still--
	a bridge of glass that holds him up over the city, at the heart of the city,
	combining now, of its own free will, the night and the day.



13. HONEST CONFRONTATION

	All during the night they kept talking, getting offended, arguing,
	they tried ardently and sincerely to discover some arrangement, a means of separation,
	they humiliated and were humiliated, they repented,
	for all the time lost--the senseless ones; finally they threw off their clothing,
	and they stood there, beautiful, naked, degraded and unprotected. The dawn was breaking
	from the housetop opposite, a flock of birds took wing,
	like a card player finally throwing out a deck of marked cards.
	In this way, without arguments and without assurances,
	the day rose from the hills with the obdurate pride of the act.



14. IMMOBILITY OF THE VOYAGE

	Enormous nocturnal steamers arrested in their lights--
	the stewards, the porters, the automobiles, the naval guard,
	valises made of leather, pasted with foreign stamps,
	domestic baskets of reed or of wicker, a disconcerted goat,
	long lingering farewells, up above by the masts.
	
	You heard neither voice nor sob.--Is it perhaps that you did not notice?
	Everything was mute and spectral--motionless
	in movement--phantoms of other epochs and countries.
	
	The harbor is petrified in the perpetually moving lights,
	within the reflections of the deep. The pier,
	a prodigious pure white cube of silence
	and the voyage is neither a leave-taking nor a home-coming--an ethereal bridge
	over names that are familiar and names that are unfamiliar. And on this bridge,
	dressed in his white uniform, the youthful captain slowly paced.
	(Or was it perhaps the moon?)



15. IN THE BARRACKS

	The moon entered the barracks.
	She ransacked the blankets of the infantry.
	She seized a naked hand. Sleep.
	Someone is talking in his sleep. Someone is snoring.
	A shadow gesticulates on the long wall.
	The last trolley car has passed. All is quiet.
	
	Is it possible that all these may be dead tomorrow?
	Is it possible that they may already be dead?
	
	An infantryman wakes up.
	He looks around him with glassy eyes.
	A thread of blood hangs from the lips of the moon.



16. INJUSTICE

	Night. Only a single glance. A noiseless bullet.
	The metal shield of loneliness is riddled with holes.
	That fragmented rotundity.
	And pride on her knees.
	
	Beloved night. Beloved wound.
	The road, the sky, the stars,--exist
	that they might sink once more. Only a single glance.
	Outside of the loneliness the great peril
	of loneliness is lying in wait--beloved peril
	to measure yourself with another and the right to be yours
	and the whole injustice of it that the other person is also right.



17. THE LAMP THAT GOES OUT

	Comes the hour of immense lassitude. Dazzling forenoon,
	insidious--it marks the end of another of his nights, it goes
	the smooth remorse of the mirror one better, maliciously etching
	traces around the lips and the eyes. From here on out
	what good are the affability of the lamp and the closing of shutters.
	Inexorable awareness of the end of the sheets where the hot breath
	of a summer night cools down, where only a few ringlets
	nipped from youthful curls remain--a severed chain--
	that self-same chain--who devised it? No,
	what good are memory and poetry. And yet,
	at the very last moment, before falling asleep, bending
	over the glass of the lamp
	to blow out the flame so it too will go out--he realizes
	he’s blowing right into the crystalline ear of eternity
	an immortal word that’s his alone, his own breath, the moaning of matter.
	How the smoke from the lamp embalms his room at dawn!



18. LAST HOUR

	A perfume lingered in his room, nothing but memory
	perhaps, or a whiff of the spring evening
	through the half-open window. He set aside
	the things he had to take along. He covered the big mirror
	with a sheet. At his fingertips as always
	the feel of well-knit bodies
	and, a bit lonelier, that of his pen--nothing unexpected:
	sure-fire combination for poetry. He didn’t want
	to trick anyone. He was nearing the end. He asked
	one more time: “Is it a question of gratitude or of the will
	to gratitude?” His two old man’s slippers were sticking out
	from under his bed. He hadn’t bothered
	to cover them again--(O no doubt long ago). Only
	as he was putting the key in the pocket of his sweater
	he sat down on his suit-case, in the middle of the room,
	and, all alone, began to cry, measuring
	for the first time with this much precision his own innocence.



19. THE LEGACY

	No doubt, the one who died was an eminent being,
	unequalled; he’s bequeathed us a much better measure
	to measure ourselves and especially to measure our neighbor:
	--so-and-so no taller than this,
	infinitesimal, that one skimpy, and a third
	as spindle-legged as a gawk--not one
	who doesn’t have his price: nothing, not a thing.
	Nothing but ourselves making use of this measure
	for all its worth--but what measure are you talking about?
	It must be Nemesis, the archangel’s sword.
	By now we’ve got it polished, able hereafter
	to sever everything head after head.



20. THE MEANING OF SIMPLICITY

	I hide myself behind simple objects so you may find me,
	if you do not fund me, you will fund the objects,
	you will touch those objects my hand has touched
	the traces of our hands will mingle.
	
	The August moon gleams like a tin kitchen kettle
	(what I am telling you becomes like that),
	it lights the empty table and silence kneeling in the house
	silence is always kneeling.
	
	Every single word is an exodus
	for a meeting, cancelled many times,
	it is a true word when it insists on the meeting.



21. A MINIMUM DELAY

	At the very last moment, when you thought it would crumble to the bottom
	the noise of the speed of the fall transmitted it into light,
	into a soft light, while at the same time it had the presentiment
	that the shut-in and the asphyxiated were becoming open and free.
	
	There, at the foot of the cliff, a broader meadow spread out,
	musical hills, trees as if on knees bent beneath the weight of their fruit
	the verdant light of the moss puts an adolescent fluff on the legs of the statues
	and the perilous ravines that terrified them as it fell,
	were the attractive antinomies, the indispensable ones for the knowledge of the extent.
	
	A little patience then. A delay of only a second,
	only as much as is needed to remove his glove or his skin,
	to squeeze more tightly the naked flesh of our hand.



22. MISUNDERSTANDINGS

	His equivocations, unbearable. They put us to the test,
	and he himself is burdened by them; he clearly betrays
	his confusion, his indecision, his ignorance, his cowardice,
	his lack of firm principles. “Words,” he says,
	“are--not really drops of blood--I’d summon to mind rather when it rains
	and the puddles of water are stained by the red station signal--
	words, so to speak--a transfusion, an identification, unprecedented encounter, poetry.”
	Then he was silent. He was tricking us. What rain? What words? What blood?
	Who’d said that? Was it us? There’s no doubt he wants to trap us
	in his own incoherences. But he kept on looking somewhere in the distance,
	appearing generous and forbearing (like those who need others to be that way toward them)
	in a spotless shirt, a lead-gray suit, impeccable,
	a chrysanthemum in his buttonhole. In spite of it all,
	when he left we detected on the floor where he’d been standing
	a little pool of bright red, of exquisite design,
	like a rough map of Greece, like a map of the world
	with quite a few omissions and inaccuracies in the layout of the frontiers,
	frontiers that were practically invisible in the uniformity of the color,
	a map of the world in a school completely empty and closed, in July,
	where all the students have gone to the seashore for a tremendous and dazzling trip.



23. MOMENT

	An exhausted maritime district. The lamps are getting drowsy
	Miserable beer saloons in a row like poverty-stricken women
	who wait in front of the Municipal Hospital.
	The street is dark. They thought they would go to bed early. Suddenly
	the beer saloons were illuminated up to the very last chairs
	by the pure white laughter of an adolescent. And directly after,
	the vast expanse of the sea was heard, invincible, undivided.



24. THE NIGHT OF A SOLITARY

	How bitter is the furniture in the room of the solitary.
	The table is an animal, frozen stiff from the cold,
	the chair is a child that has lost its way in the snow-covered forest
	the sofa again becomes a bare tree, felled in the courtyard by the wind.
	
	And yet, in a little while, in there, is achieved
	a round, limpid silence like the lantern on a fishing boat
	and you completely crouched in the hollow by your bitterness,
	gaze through the water at the diaphanous, luminous deep,
	with the crystalline, dark green crevices,
	the unfamiliar ocean vegetation,
	and you gaze at the rose-colored, apathetic, enormous fish with their noble, wide movements,
	so long that you cannot tell if they are lying in ambush, or exploring, or sheltering themselves, or simply dreaming,
	because their eyes are opened so wide that they seem completely closed.
	
	And in the end, this has no importance whatsoever.
	Isn’t it perhaps enough that their movement is like beauty and like immobility?



25. NOT UNSUSPECTING

	Not that he was unsuspecting
	nor less just and sincere--
	often he had seen beyond the smile of the mirror
	all of the ineffable night and her ramifications
	often he had seen in the mirror
	not the face but the skull.
	
	However the tiny reflections on the window panes again convinced him,
	the convalescence of the furniture, the calm look of the morning
	that made no demands, requested no control,--these thin little lines
	on the floor left by the passing of the broom convinced him.
	
	Then there was a woman who smiled,
	softly, ardently, a fluffy smile,
	like the blanket hanging on the window,
	heated by the sun.
	
	And he felt in his nostrils the presentiment of ocean freshness.



26. THE POET’S PLACE

	The desk of sculptured ebony, the two silver candlesticks,
	his red pipe. He’s sitting, almost invisible in the armchair
	since he keeps the window always at his back. Behind his glasses,
	oversized and circumspect, he watches the person he’s talking with
	in the plentiful light, hiding himself behind his words--
	History, behind his own personae--invulnerable and distant,
	diverting attention to the tenuous reflections
	of a sapphire he wears on a finger; totally receptive,
	he relishes the expressions of the moment which make inept
	adolescents lick their lips with admiration. And he,
	cunning, avid, carnal, the Great Infallible himself,
	between a no and a yes, between desire and remorse,
	like a scourge in the hand of the god, wavers with his whole being
	while the light from the window behind his head
	irradiates a halo of forgiveness and innocence.
	“If poetry’s not an absolution,” he mutters for his own benefit,
	“then let’s not expect mercy from anywhere.”



27. POSTHUMOUS

	Many people laid claim to him, quarreled around him,
	perhaps because of his apparel--a strange outfit,
	solemn, imposing, yet not without a certain charm,
	a certain dash, like those phantasmal clothes worn by the gods
	when they consorted with humans--disguised,
	and while they were transacting business in a common tongue, abruptly--we’re told--
	a fold of their garment would blow outward with the breath of the infinite or the beyond.
	Well then, they quarreled. But what could he do about it? They ripped
	his clothes and his undergarments, they even tore off his belt. He became nothing more
	than an ordinary mortal, stripped naked, in a state of utter shame. Everybody
	abandoned him. It was at that very spot that he turned into stone. Many years later
	they discovered there the brilliant statue--
	tall, nude, haughty, made of Pentelic marble,
	of the Eternal Ephebe Heautontimoroúmenos--that’s the name they gave him.
	They covered him up with a large canvas and prepared
	an exceptional ceremony for the public unveiling.



28. PRO FORMA

	Flowerpots lining the whitewashed stairs.
	Two large yellow gourds on the open landing.
	That’s all I’m going to tell you, he said. The bicycle
	resting up against the sunlit curb. Its rider
	was inside eating. The steam from his bowl of wild greens
	clouded over the small shaving-mirror on the wall.
	The tablecloth was covered with printed roses.
	The real rose was indistinguishable from the rest.
	This was done on purpose by the rose.



29. RAINY

	Poor music of Saturday night
	coming from the dancing school in the neighborhood,
	poor music, frozen by the cold, by the clog-dancing shoes,
	every time the unpainted door is flung open, it flies out on the streets,
	it shivers with the cold under the lantern on the corner,
	it casts a glance upward at a tall window, or at the night,
	and then it casts its glance down to the mud,
	it looks for something, it expects something
	as if someone is ailing and the doctor is late.
	
	Poor music. It is cold. Nobody is opening the window
	to treat you to a litle lamplight, to a few black raisins,
	to tell you: “I remember,” twenty or thirty years ago
	some echoes of old carriages in the rain,
	a vapoury landscape painted on the spectacles of a certain poet.
	
	But the shoes are full of holes and covered with mud.
	The young couples are hurrying down the street, they do not hear.
	Somebody has stopped, standing close against the wall. He does not hear you, no.
	He is pasting something on the wall. Only the knife
	on the table is a thought and a lustre.
	
	Poor music, if you can squeeze in,
	enter through the holey elbow of the neighborhood.



30. RECOLLECTION

	A warm aroma had remained on the armpits of her coat.
	Her coat on the hanger in the corridor like a drawn curtain.
	What was happening now, belonged to another time. The light altered the faces,
	all unfamiliar. And if someone was about to enter the house
	that empty coat lifted its arms slowly, bitterly
	and silently it shut the door once more.



31. SHELTERS

	“Expressing oneself,” he said, “doesn’t mean saying something
	but simply talking; and the fact of talking
	means exposing oneself:--how do we talk?”
	His silence became so transparent at that moment
	that it concealed him completely behind the curtain
	while he pretended to be looking out the window.
	But--it was as if he felt our eyes on his back--
	he turned around, allowing his face to show
	as if he were wearing a long white tunic,
	rather comical, rather unfashionable in our era,
	and it was certainly intentional (he preferred it) because he figured
	that this way he would stave off
	our suspicion, our hostility, or our pity
	or that he was conceding us an excuse
	for our admiration in the future (which he’d predicted).



32. SUSPICIOUS SLEEP

	Up there, at the edge of the sky, a little above the mountain,
	a tiny little star shrieked out its happiness,
	--in a voice both rhythmic and dissonant
	like that of the small vegetable dealer who shrieks out the first fruits of summer,
	--in a voice so persistent, almost to seem desolate.
	And you felt guilty for lacking the desire,
	that you could not respond. At least not to have seen,
	not to have understood. Guilty,
	not reckoning the guilt of others. Alone by yourself you have loaded
	all responsibility on your shoulders. Then you understood
	your utter innocence. You went into the house not to see any more,
	and dressed as you were and with your shoes on, you lay down and went to sleep.



33. ON THE SUBJECT OF FORM

	He announced: “Form is neither invented nor imposed, it’s
	contained in its material and reveals itself every now and then
	in its impulse toward an outcome.” Commonplaces, we answered.
	abstract notions--what revelations is he talking about? He said nothing further,
	he stuck his chin between his two hands like a word
	between quotes--his indistinct cigarette remained
	in his closed lips--a white dash glowing
	in place of the points of suspension which he omitted on principle
	(or perhaps unconsciously) not to draw attention to his own silence.
	
	In that attitude, it vaguely seemed to us that he was waiting
	in a little railroad station under the shelter
	where for a brief instant, on a winter night,
	some solitary travelers, with that taste they share for coal,
	for the unlikely, for the voyage, and for the absolute
	in their secret and age-old company, meet. The smoke from the train
	was floating, placidly, above the two horizontal beams
	of the headlights, compact and sculptural, between
	two departures. He put out his cigarette and left.



34. TWILIGHT

	You’re familiar with that moment of twilight in the summer
	in the locked room; a feeble pinkish reflection
	slanted across the beams of the ceiling; and the poem
	unfinished on the table--two lines and not a jot more
	the unkept promise of a marvelous journey,
	of a certain freedom, a certain autonomy,
	a certain immortality (relative, quite naturally).
	
	Outside, in the street, already the call of the night,
	the nimble shadows of divinities, of human beings, of bikes,
	at the hour when work places let out and the young workmen
	with their tools, their drenched and scruffy hair,
	and their threadbare clothes all smirched with quicklime
	disappear into the apotheosis of clouds at nightfall.
	Eight brisk strokes of the clock, at the top of the stairs,
	in the hollow of the passageway--the inexorable strokes
	of an imperative hammer hidden behind the darkened
	glass--and at that exact moment the age-old sound
	of those keys about which he’s never been able to make up his mind
	whether they’re unlocking or passing judgment.



35. ULTIMATE LANDING

	It was a beautiful nocturnal adventure in a dead landscape,
	a voyage almost without a where or a why--
	diaphanous, ethereal colors, like mystic flowers without any form,
	I do not recall that we even sensed the perfume. Light of the moon
	on the shivering shoulders of the statues. Certainly some statues of juveniles
	were pacing soundlessly in the Municipal Garden, and perhaps they were feeding the swans of the lake.
	
	Afterward, I believe, the military trucks passed by, blindly, looking straight ahead of them, full of conquered infantrymen,
	and dead sergeant-majors, with eyes wide open, were driving them.
	The noise of the motors was not heard, and this we felt
	As something improbable and somewhat suspect; like the first lack in the nocturnal magic.
	
	Everybody became quiet, fatigued by a futile, almost pursued intensity,
	and the seconds were heard falling in the silence
	like the dandruff on the black jacket of the dead man.
	
	Then, unexpectedly, someone banged his fist on the table.
	“What is it?” we inquired. “What was it?” Precisely that. Nothing else.
	A square of sunlight was falling on the floor. And it was day.
	In the corner, a woman made the sight of the cross and said for no reason: “God be praised.”
	A little later, the wheels of the grocery wagon were heard,
	familiar, positive and useful, on a level with the house.



36. WHERE DID MY BOY FLY AWAY?

	Son, my flesh and blood. marrow of my bones, heart of my own heart,
	sparrow of my tiny courtyard, flower of my loneliness.
	
	Where did my boy fly away? Where’s he gone? Where’s he leaving me?
	The bird-cage is empty now, not a drop of water in the font.
	
	What ever made your dear eyes close and you are blind to my tears?
	How are you frozen in your tracks and deaf to my bitter words?



37. WITHOUT POSITION

	What was wide and serious like a foot stepping down
	on the first rock at a tempestuous hour, before night had actually fallen,
	and the stars had left a noise like the flasks of an army that suddenly spread over the earth,--
	that terrified him. He let out a little cry, like a sparrow over the well.
	The only thing he managed to hear was his own voice, he thought it was funny,
	and one moment, in his terror, the audacity of even this characteristic intoxicated him.
	
	Consider then, how the others must have been terrified. He turned back
	before he could get to feel gratitude
	for the journey or for his weariness.
	And he found everyone’s censure justified
	and justifying too for him to be proud of his justice.
