*** Mary Robinson (1757 - 1800)


1. DEBORAH’S PARROT

	’Twas in a little western town
	An ancient Maiden dwelt:
	Her name was MISS, or MISTRESS, Brown,
	Or DEBORAH, or DEBBY: She
	Was doom’d a Spinster pure to be,
	For soft delights her breast ne’er felt:
	Yet, she had watchful Ears and Eyes
	For ev’ry youthful neighbour,
	And never did she cease to labour
	A tripping female to surprize.

	And why was she so wond’rous pure,
	So stiff, so solemn--so demure?
	Why did she watch with so much care
	The roving youth, the wand’ring fair?
	The tattler, Fame, has said that she
	A Spinster’s life had long detested,
	But ‘twas her quiet destiny,
	Never to be molested !--
	And had Miss DEBBY’S form been grac’d,
	Fame adds,--She had not been so chaste;--
	But since for frailty she would roam,
	She ne’er was taught--to look at home .

	Miss DEBBY was of mien demure
	And blush’d, like any maid !
	She could not saucy man endure
	Lest she should be betray’d!
	She never fail’d at dance or fair
	To watch the wily lurcher’s snare;
	At Church, she was a model Godly!
	Though sometimes she had other eyes
	Than those, uplifted to the skies,
	Leering most oddly!
	And Scandal, ever busy, thought
	She rarely practic’d--what she taught.

	Her dress was always stiff brocade,
	With laces broad and dear;
	Fine Cobwebs ! that would thinly shade
	Her shrivell’d cheek of sallow hue,
	While, like a Spider, her keen eye,
	Which never shed soft pity’s tear,
	Small holes in others geer could spy,
	And microscopic follies, prying view.
	And sorely vex’d was ev’ry simple thing
	That wander’d near her never-tiring sting!

	Miss DEBBY had a PARROT, who,
	If Fame speaks true,
	Could prate, and tell what neighbours did,
	And yet the saucy rogue was never chid!
	Sometimes, he talk’d of roving Spouses
	Who wander’d from their quiet houses:
	Sometimes, he call’d a Spinster pure
	By names, that Virtue can’t indure!
	And sometimes told an ancient Dame
	Such tales as made her blush with shame!
	Then gabbled how a giddy Miss
	Would give the boist’rous Squire a kiss!
	But chiefly he was taught to cry,
	Who with the Parson toy’d? O fie! ”

	This little joke, Miss DEBBY taught him,
	To vex a young and pretty neighbour;
	But by her scandal-zealous labour
	To shame she brought him!
	For, the Old PARROT, like his teacher
	Was but a false and canting preacher,
	And many a gamesome pair had sworn
	Such lessons were not to be borne.

	At last, Miss DEBBY sore was flouted
	And by her angry neighbours scouted;
	She never knew one hour of rest,
	Of ev’ry Saucy Boor, the jest:
	The young despis’d her, and the Sage
	Look’d back on Time’s impartial page;
	They knew that youth was giv’n to prove
	The season of extatic joy,
	That none but Cynics would destroy,
	The early buds of Love.
	They also knew that DEBBY sigh’d
	For charms that envious Time deny’d;
	That she was vex’d with jealous Spleen
	That Hymen pass’d her by, unseen.

	For though the Spinster’s wealth was known,
	Gold will not purchase Love--alone .
	She, and her PARROT, now were thought
	The torments of their little Sphere;
	He, because mischievously taught,
	And She, because a maid austere !--
	In short, she deem’d it wise to leave
	A Place, where none remain’d, to grieve.

	Soon, to a distant town remov’d,
	Miss DEBBY’S gold an husband bought;
	And all she had her PARROT taught,
	(Her PARROT now no more belov’d,)
	Was quite forgotten. But, alas!
	As Fate would have it come to pass,
	Her Spouse was giv’n to jealous rage,
	For, both in Person and in Age ,
	He was the partner of his love,
	Ordain’d her second Self to prove!

	One day, Old JENKINS had been out
	With merry friends to dine,
	And, freely talking, had, no doubt
	Been also free with wine.
	One said, of all the wanton gay
	In the whole parish search it round,
	None like the PARSON could be found,
	Where a frail Maid was in the way.
	Another thought the Parson sure
	To win the heart of maid or wife;
	And would have freely pledg’d his life
	That young, or old, or rich or poor
	None could defy
	The magic of his roving eye!

	JENKINS went home, but all the night
	He dream’d of this strange tale!
	Yet, bless’d his stars ! with proud delight,
	His partner was not young, nor frail.
	Next morning, at the breakfast table.
	The PARROT, loud as he was able,
	Was heard repeatedly to cry,
	Who with the Parson toy’d? O fie!”

	Old JENKINS listen’d, and grew pale,
	The PARROT then, more loudly scream’d,
	And MISTRESS JENKINS heard the tale
	And much alarm’d she seem’d!
	Trembling she tried to stop his breath,
	Her lips and cheek as pale as death!
	The more she trembled, still the more
	Old JENKINS view’d her o’er and o’er;
	And now her yellow cheek was spread
	With blushes of the deepest red.

	And now again the PARROT’S Tale
	Made his old Tutoress doubly pale;
	For cowardice and guilt, they say
	Are the twin brothers of the soul;
	So MISTRESS JENKINS, her dismay
	Could not controul!
	While the accuser, now grown bold,
	Thrice o’er, the tale of mischief told.

	Now JENKINS from the table rose,
	“Who with the Parson toy’d?” he cried.
	“So MISTRESS FRAILTY, you must play,
	“And sport, your wanton hours away.
	“And with your gold, a pretty joke,
	“You thought to buy a pleasant cloak;
	“A screen to hide your shame--but know
	“I will not blind to ruin go.--
	“I am no modern Spouse , dy’e see,
	“Gold will not gild disgrace, with me!”
	Some say he seiz’d his fearful bride,
	And came to blows!
	Day after day, the contest dire
	Augmented, with resistless ire!
	And many a drubbing DEBBY bought
	For mischief, she her PARROT taught!

	Thus, SLANDER turns against its maker;
	And if this little Story reaches
	A SPINSTER, who her PARROT teaches,
	Let her a better task pursue,
	And here, the certain VENGEANCE view
	Which surely will, in TIME, O’ERTAKE HER.



2. LONDON’S SUMMER MORNING

	Who has not waked to list the busy sounds
	Of summer’s morning, in the sultry smoke
	Of noisy London? On the pavement hot
	The sooty chimney-boy, with dingy face
	And tattered covering, shrilly bawls his trade,
	Rousing the sleepy housemaid. At the door
	The milk-pail rattles, and the tinkling bell
	Proclaims the dustman’s office; while the street
	Is lost in clouds impervious. Now begins
	The din of hackney-coaches, waggons, carts;
	While tinmen’s shops, and noisy trunk-makers,
	Knife-grinders, coopers, squeaking cork-cutters,
	Fruit-barrows, and the hunger-giving cries
	Of vegetable-vendors, fill the air.
	Now every shop displays its varied trade,
	And the fresh-sprinkled pavement cools the feet
	Of early walkers. At the private door
	The ruddy housemaid twirls the busy mop,
	Annoying the smart ’prentice, or neat girl,
	Tripping with band-box lightly. Now the sun
	Darts burning splendor on the glittering pane,
	Save where the canvas awning throws a shade
	On the gay merchandise. Now, spruce and trim,
	In shops (where beauty smiles with industry)
	Sits the smart damsel; while the passenger
	Peeps through the window, watching every charm.
	Now pastry dainties catch the eye minute
	Of humming insects, while the limy snare
	Waits to enthrall them. Now the lamp-lighter
	Mounts the tall ladder, nimbly venturous,
	To trim the half-filled lamps, while at his feet
	The pot-boy yells discordant! All along
	The sultry pavement, the old-clothes-man cries
	In tone monotonous, while sidelong views
	The area for his traffic: now the bag
	Is slyly opened, and the half-worn suit
	(Sometimes the pilfered treasure of the base
	Domestic spoiler), for one half its worth,
	Sinks in the green abyss. The porter now
	Bears his huge load along the burning way;
	And the poor poet wakes from busy dreams,
	To paint the summer morning.



3. THE SNOWDROP

	The snowdrop, Winter’s timid child,
	Awakes to life, bedew’d with tears;
	And flings around its fragrance mild,
	And where no rival flow’rets bloom,
	Amid the bare and chilling gloom,
	A beauteous gem appears!

	All weak and wan, with head inclined,
	Its parent breast the drifted snow;
	It trembles while the ruthless wind
	Bends its slim form; the tempest lours,
	Its emerald eye drops crystal showers
	On its cold bed below.

	Poor flower! on thee the sunny beam,
	No touch of genial warmth bestows;
	Except to thaw the icy stream,
	Whose little current purls along
	Thy fair and glossy charms among,
	And whelms thee as it flows.

	The night-breeze tears thy silky dress,
	Which deck’d, with silvery lustre shone;
	The morn returns, not thee to bless,
	The gaudy crocus flaunts its pride,
	And triumphs where its rival died,
	Unshelter’d and unknown!

	No sunny beam shall gild thy grave,
	No bird of pity thee deplore;
	There shall no spreading branches wave;
	For Spring shall all her gems unfold,
	And revel ‘mid her buds of gold,
	When thou art seen no more!

	Where’er I find thee, gentle flower,
	Thou still art sweet and dear to me;
	For I have known the cheerless hour,
	Have seen the sunbeams cold and pale,
	Have felt the chilling wintry gale,
	And wept and shrunk like thee!
