*** Theodore Roethke (1908 - 1963)


1. I KNEW A WOMAN

	I knew a woman, lovely in her bones, 
	When small birds sighed, she would sigh back at them; 
	Ah, when she moved, she moved more ways than one: 
	The shapes a bright container can contain! 
	Of her choice virtues only gods should speak, 
	Or English poets who grew up on Greek 
	(I’d have them sing in a chorus, cheek to cheek). 
	
	How well her wishes went! She stroked my chin, 
	She taught me Turn, and Counter-turn, and Stand; 
	She taught me Touch, that undulant white skin; 
	I nibbled meekly from her proferred hand; 
	She was the sickle; I, poor I, the rake, 
	Coming behind her for her pretty sake 
	(But what prodigious mowing we did make). 
	
	Love likes a gander, and adores a goose: 
	Her full lips pursed, the errant notes to sieze; 
	She played it quick, she played it light and loose; 
	My eyes, they dazzled at her flowing knees; 
	Her several parts could keep a pure repose, 
	Or one hip quiver with a mobile nose 
	(She moved in circles, and those circles moved). 
	
	Let seed be grass, and grass turn into hay: 
	I’m martyr to a motion not my own; 
	What’s freedom for? To know eternity. 
	I swear she cast a shadow white as stone. 
	But who would count eternity in days? 
	These old bones live to learn her wanton ways: 
	(I measure time by how a body sways).



2. MOSS GATHERING

	To loosen with all ten fingers held wide and limber
	And lift up a patch, dark-green, the kind for lining cemetery baskets,
	Thick and cushiony, like an old-fashioned doormat, 
	The crumbling small hollow sticks on the underside mixed with roots, 
	And wintergreen berries and leaves still stuck to the top,--
	That was moss-gathering. 
	
	But something always went out of me when I dug loose those carpets 
	Of green, or plunged to my elbows in the spongy yellowish moss of the marshes:
	And afterwards I always felt mean, jogging back over the logging road, 
	As if I had broken the natural order of things in that swampland;
	Disturbed some rhythm, old and of vast importance,
	By pulling off flesh from the living planet;
	As if I had committed, against the whole scheme of life, a desecration. 



3. MY PAPA’S WALTZ

	The whiskey on your breath   
	Could make a small boy dizzy;   
	But I hung on like death:   
	Such waltzing was not easy.
	
	We romped until the pans   
	Slid from the kitchen shelf;   
	My mother’s countenance   
	Could not unfrown itself.
	
	The hand that held my wrist   
	Was battered on one knuckle;   
	At every step you missed
	My right ear scraped a buckle.
	
	You beat time on my head   
	With a palm caked hard by dirt,   
	Then waltzed me off to bed   
	Still clinging to your shirt.



4. ROOT CELLAR

	Nothing would sleep in that cellar, dank as a ditch,
	Bulbs broke out of boxes hunting for chinks in the dark,
	Shoots dangled and drooped,
	Lolling obscenely from mildewed crates,
	Hung down long yellow evil necks, like tropical snakes.
	And what a congress of stinks!
	Roots ripe as old bait,
	Pulpy stems, rank, silo-rich,
	Leaf-mold, manure, lime, piled against slippery planks.
	Nothing would give up life:
	Even the dirt kept breathing a small breath.
