*** Rumi (1207 - 1273)


1. BECAUSE I CANNOT SLEEP

	Because I cannot sleep
	I make music at night.
	I am troubled by the one
	whose face has the color of spring flowers.
	I have neither sleep nor patience,
	neither a good reputation nor disgrace.
	A thousand robes of wisdom are gone.
	All my good manners have moved a thousand miles away.
	The heart and the mind are left angry with each other.
	The stars and the moon are envious of each other.
	Because of this alienation the physical universe
	is getting tighter and tighter.
	The moon says, “How long will I remain
	suspended without a sun?”
	Without Love’s jewel inside of me,
	let the bazaar of my existence be destroyed stone by stone.
	O Love, You who have been called by a thousand names,
	You who know how to pour the wine
	into the chalice of the body,
	You who give culture to a thousand cultures,
	You who are faceless but have a thousand faces,
	O Love, You who shape the faces
	of Turks, Europeans, and Zanzibaris,
	give me a glass from Your bottle,
	or a handful of being from Your Branch.
	Remove the cork once more.
	Then we’ll see a thousand chiefs prostrate themselves,
	and a circle of ecstatic troubadours will play.
	Then the addict will be freed of craving.
	and will be resurrected,
	and stand in awe till Judgement Day.


2. THE BREEZE AT DAWN

	The breeze at dawn has secrets to tell you.
	Don’t go back to sleep.
	
	You must ask for what you really want.
	Don’t go back to sleep.
	
	People are going back and forth across the doorsill
	where the two worlds touch.
	
	The door is round and open.
	Don’t go back to sleep.


3. DID I NOT SAY TO YOU

	Did I not say to you, “Go not there, for I am your friend; in this
	mirage of annihilation I am the fountain of life?”
	
	Even though in anger you depart a hundred thousand years
	from me, in the end you will come to me, for I am your goal.
	
	Did I not say to you, “Be not content with worldly forms, for I
	am the fashioner of the tabernacle of your contentment?”
	
	Did I not say to you, “I am the sea and you are a single fish;
	go not to dry land, for I am your crystal sea?”
	
	Did I not say to you, “Go not like birds to the snare; come, for
	I am the power of flight and your wings and feet?”
	
	Did I not say to you, “They will waylay you and make you
	cold, for I am the fire and warmth and heat of your desire?”
	
	Did I not say to you, “They will implant in you ugly qualities
	so that you will forget that I am the source of purity to you?”
	
	Did I not say to you, “Do not say from what direction the servant’s 
	affairs come into order?” I am the Creator without directions.
	
	If you are the lamp of the heart, know where the road is to the house; 
	and if you are godlike of attribute, know that I am your Master.