*** George Santayana (1863 - 1952)


1. CAPE COD

	The low sandy beach and the thin scrub pine,
	The wide reach of bay and the long sky line,--
	O, I am sick for home!
	
	The salt, salt smell of the thick sea air,
	And the smooth round stones that the ebbtides wear,--
	When will the good ship come?
	
	The wretched stumps all charred and burned,
	And the deep soft rut where the cartwheel turned,--
	Why is the world so old?
	
	The lapping wave, and the broad gray sky
	Where the cawing crows and the slow gulls fly,
	Where are the dead untold?
	
	The thin, slant willows by the flooded bog,
	The huge stranded hulk and the floating log,
	Sorrow with life began!
	
	And among the dark pines, and along the flat shore,
	O the wind, and the wind, for evermore!
	What will become of man?


2. I WOULD I MIGHT FORGET THAN I AM I

	I would I might forget that I am I,
	And break the heavy chain that binds me fast,
	Whose links about myself my deeds have cast.
	What in the body’s tomb doth buried lie
	Is boundless; ’tis the spirit of the sky,
	Lord of the future, guardian of the past,
	And soon must forth, to know his own at last.
	In his large life to live, I fain would die.
	Happy the dumb beast, hungering for food,
	But calling not his suffering his own;
	Blessèd the angel, gazing on all good,
	But knowing not he sits upon a throne;
	Wretched the mortal, pondering his mood,
	And doomed to know his aching heart alone.


3. MIDNIGHT

	The dank earth reeks with three days’ rain,
	The phantom trees are dark and still,
	Above the darkness and the hill
	The tardy moon shines out again.
	O heavy lethargy of pain!
	O shadows of forgotten ill!
	
	My parrot lips, when I was young,
	To prove and to disprove were bold.
	The mighty world has tied my tongue,
	And in dull custom growing old
	I leave the burning truth untold
	And the heart’s anguish all unsung.
	
	Youth dies in man’s benumbed soul,
	Maid bows to woman’s broken life,
	A thousand leagues of silence roll
	Between the husband and the wife.
	The spirit faints with inward strife
	And lonely gazing at the pole.
	
	But how should reptiles pine for wings
	Or a parched desert know its dearth?
	Immortal is the soul that sings
	The sorrow of her mortal birth.
	O cruel beauty of the earth!
	O love’s unutterable stings!

