*** Siegfried Sassoon (1886 - 1967)


1. ATTACK

	At dawn the ridge emerges massed and dun
	In the wild purple of the glowering sun,
	Smouldering through spouts of drifting smoke that shroud
	The menacing scarred slope; and, one by one,
	Tanks creep and topple forward to the wire.
	The barrage roars and lifts. Then, clumsily bowed
	With bombs and guns and shovels and battle-gear,
	Men jostle and climb to meet the bristling fire.
	Lines of grey, muttering faces, masked with fear,
	They leave their trenches, going over the top,
	While time ticks blank and busy on their wrists,
	And hope, with furtive eyes and grappling fists,
	Flounders in mud. O Jesu, make it stop!



2. THE DEATH BED

	He drowsed and was aware of silence heaped
	Round him, unshaken as the steadfast walls;
	Aqueous like floating rays of amber light,
	Soaring and quivering in the wings of sleep.
	Silence and safety; and his mortal shore
	Lipped by the inward, moonless waves of death.
	
	Someone was holding water to his mouth.
	He swallowed, unresisting; moaned and dropped
	Through crimson gloom to darkness; and forgot
	The opiate throb and ache that was his wound.
	Water--calm, sliding green above the weir.
	Water--a sky-lit alley for his boat,
	Bird-voiced, and bordered with reflected flowers
	And shaken hues of summer; drifting down,
	He dipped contented oars, and sighed, and slept.
	
	Night, with a gust of wind, was in the ward,
	Blowing the curtain to a glimmering curve.
	Night. He was blind; he could not see the stars
	Glinting among the wraiths of wandering cloud;
	Queer blots of colour, purple, scarlet, green,
	Flickered and faded in his drowning eyes.
	
	Rain--he could hear it rustling through the dark;
	Fragrance and passionless music woven as one;
	Warm rain on drooping roses; pattering showers
	That soak the woods; not the harsh rain that sweeps
	Behind the thunder, but a trickling peace,
	Gently and slowly washing life away.
	
	He stirred, shifting his body; then the pain
	Leapt like a prowling beast, and gripped and tore
	His groping dreams with grinding claws and fangs.
	But someone was beside him; soon he lay
	Shuddering because that evil thing had passed.
	And death, who’d stepped toward him, paused and stared.
	
	Light many lamps and gather round his bed.
	Lend him your eyes, warm blood, and will to live.
	Speak to him; rouse him; you may save him yet.
	He’s young; he hated War; how should he die
	When cruel old campaigners win safe through?
	
	But death replied: ‘I choose him.’ So he went,
	And there was silence in the summer night;
	Silence and safety; and the veils of sleep.
	Then, far away, the thudding of the guns.



3. THE HERO

	‘Jack fell as he’d have wished,’ the mother said,
	And folded up the letter that she’d read.
	‘The Colonel writes so nicely.’ Something broke
	In the tired voice that quavered to a choke.
	She half looked up. ‘We mothers are so proud
	Of our dead soldiers.’ Then her face was bowed.
	
	Quietly the Brother Officer went out.
	He’d told the poor old dear some gallant lies
	That she would nourish all her days, no doubt
	For while he coughed and mumbled, her weak eyes
	Had shone with gentle triumph, brimmed with joy,
	Because he’d been so brave, her glorious boy.
	
	He thought how ‘Jack’, cold-footed, useless swine,
	Had panicked down the trench that night the mine
	Went up at Wicked Corner; how he’d tried
	To get sent home, and how, at last, he died,
	Blown to small bits. And no one seemed to care
	Except that lonely woman with white hair.



4. THE LAST MEETING

	I
	
	Because the night was falling warm and still
	Upon a golden day at April’s end,
	I thought; I will go up the hill once more
	To find the face of him that I have lost,
	And speak with him before his ghost has flown
	Far from the earth that might not keep him long.
	
	So down the road I went, pausing to see
	How slow the dusk drew on, and how the folk
	Loitered about their doorways, well-content
	With the fine weather and the waxing year.
	The miller’s house, that glimmered with grey walls,
	Turned me aside; and for a while I leaned
	Along the tottering rail beside the bridge
	To watch the dripping mill-wheel green with damp.
	The miller peered at me with shadowed eyes
	And pallid face: I could not hear his voice
	For sound of the weir’s plunging. He was old.
	His days went round with the unhurrying wheel.
	
	Moving along the street, each side I saw
	The humble, kindly folk in lamp-lit rooms;
	Children at table; simple, homely wives;
	Strong, grizzled men; and soldiers back from war,
	Scaring the gaping elders with loud talk.
	
	Soon all the jumbled roofs were down the hill,
	And I was turning up the grassy lane
	That goes to the big, empty house that stands
	Above the town, half-hid by towering trees.
	I looked below and saw the glinting lights:
	I heard the treble cries of bustling life,
	And mirth, and scolding; and the grind of wheels.
	An engine whistled, piercing-shrill, and called
	High echoes from the sombre slopes afar;
	Then a long line of trucks began to move.
	
	It was quite still; the columned chestnuts stood
	Dark in their noble canopies of leaves.
	I thought: ‘A little longer I’ll delay,
	And then he’ll be more glad to hear my feet,
	And with low laughter ask me why I’m late.
	The place will be too dim to show his eyes,
	But he will loom above me like a tree,
	With lifted arms and body tall and strong.’
	
	There stood the empty house; a ghostly hulk
	Becalmed and huge, massed in the mantling dark,
	As builders left it when quick-shattering war
	Leapt upon France and called her men to fight.
	Lightly along the terraces I trod,
	Crunching the rubble till I found the door
	That gaped in twilight, framing inward gloom.
	An owl flew out from under the high eaves
	To vanish secretly among the firs,
	Where lofty boughs netted the gleam of stars.
	I stumbled in; the dusty floors were strewn
	With cumbering piles of planks and props and beams;
	Tall windows gapped the walls; the place was free
	To every searching gust and jousting gale;
	But now they slept; I was afraid to speak,
	And heavily the shadows crowded in.
	
	I called him, once; then listened: nothing moved:
	Only my thumping heart beat out the time.
	Whispering his name, I groped from room to room.
	
	Quite empty was that house; it could not hold
	His human ghost, remembered in the love
	That strove in vain to be companioned still.
	
	
	II
	
	Blindly I sought the woods that I had known
	So beautiful with morning when I came
	Amazed with spring that wove the hazel twigs
	With misty raiment of awakening green.
	I found a holy dimness, and the peace
	Of sanctuary, austerely built of trees,
	And wonder stooping from the tranquil sky.
	
	Ah! but there was no need to call his name.
	He was beside me now, as swift as light.
	I knew him crushed to earth in scentless flowers,
	And lifted in the rapture of dark pines.
	‘For now,’ he said, ‘my spirit has more eyes
	Than heaven has stars; and they are lit by love.
	My body is the magic of the world,
	And dawn and sunset flame with my spilt blood.
	My breath is the great wind, and I am filled
	With molten power and surge of the bright waves
	That chant my doom along the ocean’s edge.
	
	‘Look in the faces of the flowers and find
	The innocence that shrives me; stoop to the stream
	That you may share the wisdom of my peace.
	For talking water travels undismayed.
	The luminous willows lean to it with tales
	Of the young earth; and swallows dip their wings
	Where showering hawthorn strews the lanes of light.
	
	‘I can remember summer in one thought
	Of wind-swept green, and deeps of melting blue,
	And scent of limes in bloom; and I can hear
	Distinct the early mower in the grass,
	Whetting his blade along some morn of June.
	
	‘For I was born to the round world’s delight,
	And knowledge of enfolding motherhood,
	Whose tenderness, that shines through constant toil,
	Gathers the naked children to her knees.
	In death I can remember how she came
	To kiss me while I slept; still I can share
	The glee of childhood; and the fleeting gloom
	When all my flowers were washed with rain of tears.
	
	‘I triumph in the choruses of birds,
	Bursting like April buds in gyres of song.
	My meditations are the blaze of noon
	On silent woods, where glory burns the leaves.
	I have shared breathless vigils; I have slaked
	The thirst of my desires in bounteous rain
	Pouring and splashing downward through the dark.
	Loud storm has roused me with its winking glare,
	And voice of doom that crackles overhead.
	I have been tired and watchful, craving rest,
	Till the slow-footed hours have touched my brows
	And laid me on the breast of sundering sleep.’
	
	
	III
	
	I know that he is lost among the stars,
	And may return no more but in their light.
	Though his hushed voice may call me in the stir
	Of whispering trees, I shall not understand.
	Men may not speak with stillness; and the joy
	Of brooks that leap and tumble down green hills
	Is faster than their feet; and all their thoughts
	Can win no meaning from the talk of birds.
	
	My heart is fooled with fancies, being wise;
	For fancy is the gleaming of wet flowers
	When the hid sun looks forth with golden stare.
	Thus, when I find new loveliness to praise,
	And things long-known shine out in sudden grace,
	Then will I think: ‘He moves before me now.’
	So he will never come but in delight,
	And, as it was in life, his name shall be
	Wonder awaking in a summer dawn,
	And youth, that dying, touched my lips to song.



5. MEMORY

	When I was young my heart and head were light,
	And I was gay and feckless as a colt
	Out in the fields, with morning in the may,
	Wind on the grass, wings in the orchard bloom.
	O thrilling sweet, my joy, when life was free
	And all the paths led on from hawthorn-time
	Across the carolling meadows into June.
	
	But now my heart is heavy-laden. I sit
	Burning my dreams away beside the fire:
	For death has made me wise and bitter and strong;
	And I am rich in all that I have lost.
	O starshine on the fields of long-ago,
	Bring me the darkness and the nightingale;
	Dim wealds of vanished summer, peace of home,
	And silence; and the faces of my friends.



6. THRUSHES

	Tossed on the glittering air they soar and skim,
	Whose voices make the emptiness of light
	A windy palace. Quavering from the brim
	Of dawn, and bold with song at edge of night,
	They clutch their leafy pinnacles and sing
	Scornful of man, and from his toils aloof
	Whose heart’s a haunted woodland whispering;
	Whose thoughts return on tempest-baffled wing;
	Who hears the cry of God in everything,
	And storms the gate of nothingness for proof.



7. THE TROOPS

	Dim, gradual thinning of the shapeless gloom
	Shudders to drizzling daybreak that reveals
	Disconsolate men who stamp their sodden boots
	And turn dulled, sunken faces to the sky
	Haggard and hopeless. They, who have beaten down
	The stale despair of night, must now renew
	Their desolation in the truce of dawn,
	Murdering the livid hours that grope for peace.
	
	Yet these, who cling to life with stubborn hands,
	Can grin through storms of death and find a gap
	In the clawed, cruel tangles of his defence.
	They march from safety, and the bird-sung joy
	Of grass-green thickets, to the land where all
	Is ruin, and nothing blossoms but the sky
	That hastens over them where they endure
	Sad, smoking, flat horizons, reeking woods,
	And foundered trench-lines volleying doom for doom.
	
	O my brave brown companions, when your souls
	Flock silently away, and the eyeless dead
	Shame the wild beast of battle on the ridge,
	Death will stand grieving in that field of war
	Since your unvanquished hardihood is spent.
	And through some mooned Valhalla there will pass
	Battalions and battalions, scarred from hell;
	The unreturning army that was youth;
	The legions who have suffered and are dust.
