*** Dorothy Sayers (1893 - 1957)


1. ALMA MATER

	_“Far beneath
	My holier passion, in their eyes and ears
	Enchantment vast but foolish lingereth.”_

	--H. G. Dixey: Sonnet on Oxford.

	_“Die Zauberin war ehrlich gegen den Ritter,” fuhr der Alte fort, “sie sagte ihm gleich voraus,
	  wenn er die reizende Herzogin nach seiner Veste Troja entfuehre, muesse es das sein und seiner
	  Burg und seines ganzen Stammes Untergang werden, aber zehn Jahre lang koenne er sich in Troja
	  vertheidigen, und Helens suesser Liebe froh sein.”

	“Und er nahm es an, oder er war ein Tropf!” rief der Jeungling._

	--De la Motte Fouqué: Sintram.

	WHEN Aphrodite offered a brief bliss
	To the Idalian shepherd-boy,
	He chose ten rapturous years of Helen’s kiss,
	And then, the sack of Troy.

	Think you that through the beating hours of night
	It set no spur to his desire
	To see in fancy the appalling light
	Of Ilion in fire?

	Or that he panted not to snatch at joy,
	Made sharp by pain and eager fear,
	Knowing, each kiss drove on the fate of Troy
	And brought destruction near?

	Love’s exile in Elysium, he knew well
	That fear and haste bear bitter fruits,
	That love left insecure’s a tree of hell,
	Snake-bitten at the roots.

	Therefore, the while he called on Helen’s name,
	And watched with apprehensive eye
	To catch the first avenging glare of flame,
	His soul was like to die:--

	“Ah, Helen! Helen! Helen! thy white breast
	And gold hair heaped in shining bands,--
	Would I might lay me quietly to rest
	In thy enfolding hands,

	“Lie still, and watch thine eyes grow dark with love,
	And feel thy kiss upon my brow,
	And think no more, nor ever stir nor move,
	Nor count the time, as now.

	“O happy lovers that can sleep, nor know
	What term is set them by the Fates!
	I slumber not, nor shall, until the foe
	Strike upon Ilion gates.

	“How should I so let slip the precious time
	The gods mete out so meagrely?
	Each word we speak rings like a dreadful chime,
	Marking the hours that flee.

	“Years, months and weeks and days and moments pass,
	Moments pile up to days and years,
	And every fragile hour of joy, alas!
	Breaks with its weight of tears.

	“High up beyond the beaker’s foaming brim
	I seek the purple wine to pour;
	My hand shakes frenzied at the flooded rim,
	The wine spills on the floor.

	“Helen, dear spouse! how many things there were
	To say to thee and hear again,
	Long vows of love, and worship, and sweet prayer--
	But now, all speech is vain,

	“For my tongue stammers and my sense is gone,
	Thinking how soon the time is sped;--
	I try to speak a thousand words in one,
	And all is left unsaid.

	“Helen, close-girded with immortal spells
	Of beauty and of ancient power,
	Let the gods slay me on thy breast! How else
	Shall I behold the hour

	“Foretold, foreseen, that to thy former home,
	To other arms and other lips,
	Shall drive thee over the unheeding foam
	In the thin Grecian ships?

	“Ah! Helen, Helen, Helen!--will that day
	Break on thine eyelids peacefully?
	Can Menelaus comfort thee?--He may;
	But what is there for me?”

	So, ere the towers of Ilion fell in smoke,
	Like some dear dream that breaks and flies,
	And fierce Pelides through the breaches broke,
	In grief did Paris rise

	To follow fate out to the bitter close,
	Feeling the nearness of the end,
	And saw, amid the press of angry foes,
	Death as his only friend.

	But calm-eyed Helen, to her former home
	Passed with the tall Achaean ships
	Unheeding, over the unheeding foam,
	To other arms and lips.

	Such was the story that the captives told
	To young Idaeus, in the years
	When that great tale of Troy was growing old,
	A babble in men’s ears.

	He answered: “While the sack of Troy went by,
	I, a weak babe on Helen’s breast,
	Passed from my father’s hand unwittingly,
	Duke Menelaus’ guest.

	“Since then, to manhood grown, I’ve served in war,
	And crossed the ocean’s level plain,
	But ever came, from journeying afar
	To Helen home again.

	“Helen, my mother, with the sea-deep eyes
	And brow unmarred by any fold,
	Crowned with unending beauty Hera-wise
	And everlasting gold;

	“Helen, my mother, whom I greatly love--
	Nowise for that majestic grace,
	The changeless beauty of the seed of Jove
	Set godlike on thy face;

	“The songs men made, the tears men shed for thee,
	The fire that vexed my father so--
	A very foolishness they seem to me
	That look on thee, and know

	“Only thy mother-breast and gentle arms
	That wont to shield me from affright,
	The voice that sang to quiet my alarms
	At the dread fall of night;

	“The eyes that watched my going when I bore
	Across the stinging ocean-wrack,
	The tender smile that greeted me on shore
	When the glad ships came back.

	“Art thou that one for whom full many a pyre
	Reeked up along the war-worn coast?
	That maddened Menelaus and my sire?
	For whom the Danaean host

	“Went out to die? for whom old Priam’s town
	Bore ten long years of siege and stress,
	Until her god-built citadel fell down
	Ruined to nothingness?

	“What kind of love is this, that rends and slays
	And drags high beauty in the dust,
	That makes unfruitful even joyous days
	By unappeasable lust?

	“O happy, holy as the soundless morn
	Setting grey feet upon the sea,
	Wet with soft, drenching dews, and perfumes borne
	On cool winds quietly,

	“Comes love like mine upon the fretful heart,
	A strong refreshment to the soul;
	Love that makes mad has only found a part,
	But I have known the whole.”

	Then Helen, lifting up her eyes, wherein
	The secrets of the years held place,
	Spake, looking seaward: “How shall I begin
	To show thee those old days?

	“Not yet, young son Idaeus, canst thou tell
	How many ways there be of love,--
	Love is a tree whose roots take hold of hell,
	That flowers before high Jove.

	“I was begot by heaven out of earth,
	Travail of earth and joy of heaven,
	And in the slow unfolding of my birth
	Came power; and I was given

	“To man at length, to be a burning brand
	And a Promethean fire to be,--
	Look upon me, my son, and understand
	Why men were slain for me.

	“Paris, my bridegroom, happy and unknown
	From Ida’s pleasant hill-slopes came;
	I taught him love, and left him overthrown--
	The world shall know his name.

	“If now the second time his choice were made
	Of loveless peace and love-made woe,
	Think’st thou the balance would be overweighed
	And he would let love go?

	“Nay, with each trembling moment of delight,
	Each precious kiss and passionate,
	Snatched, saved, and hoarded jealously, despite
	Man’s wrath and heaven’s hate--

	“Short glimpses of a glory that the years
	Hold not in store for mortal men,
	Although their eyes, strained through a mist of tears,
	Behold it now and then--

	“With these he never could be wholly sad
	In his great, hallowed town of Troy,
	Where passion quickened and made him more than glad
	With greater things than joy.

	“Wonder not, therefore, that I have no tears
	For those that loved me and are dead,
	I garner up the loves of all the years
	A coronal for my head.

	“High o’er the cloud-blue arches, and the dome
	Of those celestial palaces
	Where age-long Zeus built up his mighty home,
	The hall of judgment is.

	“There Time the Titan ceaselessly doth guard,
	With leaden and relentless mace,
	The sleep of young Eternity, his ward,
	The last of Saturn’s race;

	“Who when he wakes, to his full stature grown,
	And lays his hand upon the door,
	Almighty Zeus shall shudder from his throne,
	And Time shall be no more;

	“Who, from the swinging bowls of love and pain,
	Poised on the balance of despair,
	Shall pour the undiminished draughts of gain
	For hero souls to share.

	“Then first, then only, judged and justified
	By perfect working of God’s thought,
	I too may die, when time and chance have died,
	And pass away to naught;

	“Not blamed, nor blameless, but the tool of fate,
	And seed of lovers unafraid,
	Useless, when once they are regenerate
	Who made me, whom I made.

	“Hell of tall cities, hell of stately ships,
	Hell of all men and their desire,
	I hold love’s life between my bitter lips,
	Ruined about by fire.

	“O Father Zeus, father of gods and men,
	That madest love and madest joy,
	Set Helen in the citadel, and then
	Do what thou wilt with Troy!”

	She spake and ceased. Idaeus, doubtfully,
	Leaning on that beloved breast
	Smiled in her eyes, while over the dim sea
	The sun went down to rest.



2. BYZANTINE

	_Jesus Christ, the same yesterday
	and to-day and for ever._

	I SIT within My Father’s house, the Lord God crucified,
	My feet upon the altar-stone set straitly side by side,
	My knees are mighty to uphold, My hands outstretched to bless,
	My eyelids are immutable to judge unrighteousness.

	What though the bitter winds of war lay waste the house of prayer?
	They cannot shake My quiet robe nor stir My folded hair,
	I wrestled in Gethsemane, I cried and I was slain,
	Never, for any strife of men, to strive nor cry again.

	I sit within My Father’s house, with changeless face to see
	The shames and sins that turned away My Father’s face from Me;
	Be not amazed for all these things, I bore them long ago
	That am from everlasting God, and was and shall be so.



3. CAROL

	O know you how Queen Mary sits
	In heaven’s highest bowers,
	Tall lilies in her garden-beds,
	Set round with gilly-flowers?

	And know you how Queen Mary sits
	With rings upon her hands,
	While the seven blessed Virgins bind
	Her hair in golden bands?

	And when the Lord will comfort her
	For her seven swords of pain,
	He comes to stand beside her knee,
	A little child again.



4. CHRIST THE COMPANION

	WHEN I’ve thrown my books aside, being petulant and weary,
	And have turned down the gas, and the firelight has sufficed,
	When my brain’s too stiff for prayer, and too indolent for theory,
	Will You come and play with me, big Brother Christ?

	Will You slip behind the book-case? Will you stir the window-curtain,
	Peeping from the shadow with Your eyes like flame?
	Set me staring at the alcove where the flicker’s so uncertain,
	Then suddenly, at my elbow, leap up, catch me, call my name?

	Or take the great arm-chair, help me set the chestnuts roasting,
	And tell me quiet stories, while the brown skins pop,
	Of wayfarers and merchantmen and tramp of Roman hosting,
	And how Joseph dwelt with Mary in the carpenter’s shop?

	When I drift away in dozing, will You softly light the candles
	And touch the piano with Your kind, strong fingers,
	Set stern fugues of Bach and stately themes of Handel’s
	Stalking through the corners where the last disquiet lingers?

	And when we say good-night, and You kiss me on the landing,
	Will You promise faithfully and make a solemn tryst:
	You’ll be just at hand if wanted, close by here where we are standing,
	And be down in time for breakfast, big Brother Christ?



5. CHRIST WALKS THE WORLD AGAIN

	_--This is the heir; come let us kill him._

	_--Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning on her Beloved?_

	Christ walks the world again, His lute upon His back,
	His red robe rent to tatters, His riches gone to rack,
	The wind that wakes the morning blows His hair about His face,
	His hands and feet are ragged with the ragged briar’s embrace,
	For the hunt is up behind Him and His sword is at His side,…
	Christ the bonny outlaw walks the whole world wide,
	Singing: “Lady, lady, will you come away with Me,
	Lie among the bracken and break the barley bread?
	We will see new suns arise in golden, far-off skies,
	For the Son of God and Woman hath not where to lay His head.”

	Christ walks the world again, a prince of fairy-tale,
	He roams, a rascal fiddler, over mountain and down dale,
	Cast forth to seek His fortune in a bitter world and grim,
	For the stepsons of His Father’s house would steal His bride from Him;
	They have weirded Him to wander till He bring within His hands
	The water of eternal youth from black-enchanted lands,

	Singing: “Lady, lady, will you come away with Me,
	Or sleep on silken cushions in the bower of wicked men?
	For if we walk together through the wet and windy weather,
	When I ride back home triumphant, you will ride beside Me then.”

	Christ walks the world again, new-bound on high emprise,
	With music in His golden mouth and laughter in His eyes;
	The primrose springs before Him as He treads the dusty way,
	His singer’s crown of thorns has burst in blossom like the may,
	He heedeth not the morrow and He never looks behind,
	Singing: “Glory to the open skies and peace to all mankind.”

	Singing: “Lady, lady, will you come away with Me?
	Was never man lived longer for the hoarding of his breath;
	Here be dragons to be slain, here be rich rewards to gain . . .
	If we perish in the seeking . . . why, how small a thing is death!”



6. THE ELDER KNIGHT

	I

	I HAVE met you foot to foot, I have fought you face to face,
	I have held my own against you and lost no inch of place,
	And you shall never see
	How you have broken me.

	You sheathed your sword in the dawn, and you smiled with careless eyes,
	Saying “Merrily struck, my son, I think you may have your prize.”
	Nor saw how each hard breath
	Was painfully snatched from death.

	I held my head like a rock; I offered to joust again,
	Though I shook, and my palsied hand could hardly cling to the rein;
	Did you curse my insolence
	And over-confidence?

	You have ridden, lusty and fresh, to the morrow’s tournament;
	I am buffeted, beaten, sick at the heart and spent.--
	Yet, as God my speed be
	I will fight you again if need be.


	II

	A white cloud running under the moon
	And three stars over the poplar-trees,
	Night deepens into her lambent noon;
	God holds the world between His knees;
	Yesterday it was washed with the rain,
	But now it is clean and clear again.

	Your hands were strong to buffet me,
	But, when my plume was in the dust,
	Most kind for comfort verily;
	Success rides blown with restless lust;
	Herein is all the peace of heaven:
	To know we have failed and are forgiven.

	The brown, rain-scented garden beds
	Are waiting for the next year’s roses;
	The poplars wag mysterious heads,
	For the pleasant secret each discloses
	To his neighbour, makes them nod, and nod--
	So safe is the world on the knees of God.


	III

	I have the road before me; never again
	Will I be angry at the practised thrust
	That flicked my fingers from the lordly rein
	To scratch and scrabble among the rolling dust.

	I never will be angry--though your spear
	Bit through the pauldron, shattered the camail,
	Before I crossed a steed, through many a year
	Battle on battle taught you how to fail.

	Can you remember how the morning star
	Winked through the chapel window, when the day
	Called you from vigil to delights of war
	With such loud jollity, you could not pray?

	Pray now, Lord Lancelot; your hands are hard
	With the rough hilts; great power is in your eyes,
	Great confidence; you are not newly scarred,
	And conquer gravely now without surprise.

	Pray now, my master; you have still the joy
	Of work done perfectly; remember not
	The dizzying bliss that smote you when, a boy,
	You faced some better man, Lord Lancelot.

	Pray now--and look not on my radiant face,
	Breaking victorious from the bloody grips--
	Too young to speak in quiet prayer or praise
	For the strong laughter bubbling to my lips.

	Angry? because I scarce know how to stand,
	Gasping and reeling against the gates of death,
	While, with the shaft yet whole within your hand,
	You smile at me with undisordered breath?

	Not I--not I that have the dawn and dew,
	Wind, and the golden shore, and silver foam--
	I that here pass and bid good-bye to you--
	For I ride forward--you are going home.

	Truly I am your debtor for this hour
	Of rough and tumble--debtor for some good tricks
	Of tourney-craft;--yet see how, flower on flower,
	The hedgerows blossom! How the perfumes mix

	Of field and forest!--I must hasten on--
	The clover scent blows like a flag unfurled:
	When you are dead, or aged and alone,
	I shall be foremost knight in all the world--

	My world, not yours, beneath the morning’s gold,
	My hazardous world, where skies and seas are blue;
	Here is my hand. Maybe, when I am old,
	I shall remember you, and pray for you.



7. EPITAPH FOR A YOUNG MUSICIAN

	HERE was a man for whom time held the chance,
	If he had lived, of failure or success:
	Failure of fame, which is a sore distress,
	The world’s applause, maybe, or tolerance.

	But God smote England in her dalliance,
	And like his fellows, neither more nor less,
	Here was a man.

	So when death caught him in the haphazard dance,
	And robbed him of occasion to transgress,
	He lost the chance of failure; perfectness
	Was his alone. Stranger, rest here thy glance,
	Here was a man.



8. THE GATES OF PARADISE

	_FROM the grave-bed and the winding sheet
	Is a long way for dead feet,
	A dark road for dead eyes,
	That leads to the gates of Paradise._

	When Judas’ soul went through the night,
	To knock on Hades gate,
	His way was over the whin-pricked moor,
	And the noise of the wind was great.

	He had no lantern to his feet,
	Nor candle in his hand,
	Such as God gives to every man
	That dies at the time planned.

	The angels sit in highest Heaven
	And trim the lamps of God,
	And all day long make lights for those
	That travel death’s dim road.


	And when the cross is on thy breast,
	The chrism on thine eyes,
	Thy angel will bear down thy light
	Out of the starry skies
	And thou therewith shalt walk by night
	Safely to Paradise.

	But whoso doth so deadly sin
	To cast his life away,
	Finding his lamp not lit betimes
	Walks through the midnight grey.

	For a long night and half a day
	Did Judas walk alone
	Through the utter dark, for in that place
	Is neither sun nor moon.

	For a long night and half a day
	Did Judas vainly seek
	To reach the gates of Paradise,
	The salt tears on his cheek.

	With that he saw a candle gleam
	Borne by a hasty man,
	And Judas caught him by the cloak
	So swiftly as he ran.


	“O let me walk with thee, kind friend--
	I grope, I fail, I fall,
	I have no lamp nor candle-light
	And the night is over all.”

	“Full gladly, so thou make good speed,
	I run to keep the tryst,
	That was given to me at the gates of Hell,
	By sweet King Jesus Christ.”

	“I am the thief whom God forgave,
	On Calvary’s bitter tree,
	For ‘To-night,’ He said, ‘thou shalt rest thine head
	In Paradise, with Me.’”

	“And I am the man that sinned such a sin
	As the world remembers not,
	That sold for a price the Lord of Life--
	Judas Iscariot.”

	“Now God forbid, thou damnèd wretch,
	That ever this should be,
	That I should tryst with Jesus Christ,
	In the company of thee.”


	The first robber went his way,
	And Judas walked alone,
	Mirk, mirk was the black midnight,
	The heavy wind made moan.

	Right so there came a second man
	Was walking by the road:
	“O brother, let me share thy light
	As far as Hell’s abode.”

	“Now well I fear, my brother dear,
	Thou never wilt walk with me--
	I am that thief which railed on Christ
	All on His bitter tree.”

	“I cast shame on King Jesus then,
	Wearing His painful crown,
	And scorn upon His Royal Head,
	Whence the pale sweat dripped down.”

	“O rudd-red were the five blest wounds
	Where nails and spear went in,
	A thousand, thousand years of Purgatory fire
	Never can cleanse my sin.”


	“Why never, I ween,” said Judas then
	“Did two such sinners meet;
	I sold King Christ to the bloody Jews
	That pierced His Hands and Feet.”

	“Art thou that man,” quoth the robber,
	“Most cursed under skies?
	God do so to me if I go with thee
	To the gates of Paradise!”

	The second robber went his way,
	And Judas walked alone,
	Till he was aware of a grey man,
	That sat upon a stone,
	And the lamp he had in his right hand
	Shone brighter than the moon.

	“Come hither, come hither, thou darkling man,
	And bear me company,
	This lamp I hold will give us light,
	Enough for thee and me.”

	Judas walks with the grey-clad man,
	And fear is in his heart:
	“Speak yet again, thou man in grey
	And tell me what thou art.”


	“I bought a burden of deadly sin,
	And needs must pay the price,
	I bear it hither in my hand
	To the gates of Paradise.”

	“Sin cannot lie upon thy heart
	So heavy as on mine.”
	“Nay, sinner, whosoe’er thou art,
	’Tis a heavier load than thine.”
	He hath not askèd Judas’ name,
	And Judas makes no sign.

	“If sin is heavy on thy heart,
	And I must bear its weight,
	It is fit that we should go together
	To tryst at Hades gate.”


	Judas walked with the grey-clad man
	And feared to tell his name,
	He clasped his hand in the barren land,
	Bright burned the lanthorn’s flame,
	Brotherliwise and hand in hand,
	To Paradise they came.

	Satan looked out from Hades gate,
	His hand upon the key,
	“Good souls, before I let you in,
	First tell me who ye be.”

	“We be two men that died of late
	And come to keep Hell’s tryst,
	This is Judas Iscariot,
	And I am Jesus Christ.”



9. HARVEST

	As we walked through the merry, merry meads,
	All in the month of May,
	’Twas you that wore the gown of green,
	And I the gown of grey;
	For you I wept, for you I sighed,
	For you I very nearly died--
	Hey, fol the diddle diddle day,
	Hey, fol the dero day.

	But now as we come harvesting
	When the leaves are growing old,
	It’s you that wear the gown of grey
	And I the gown of gold,
	For me you weep, for me you sigh,
	For me I think that you will die--
	Hey, fol the diddle diddle day,
	Hey, fol the dero day.



10. HERE, THEN, AT HOME

	Here, then, at home, by no more storms distrest,
	Folding laborious hands we sit, wings furled;
	Here in close perfume lies the rose-leaf curled,
	Here the sun stands and knows not east nor west,
	Here no tide runs; we have come, last and best,
	From the wide zone through dizzying circles hurled,
	To that still centre where the spinning world
	Sleeps on its axis, to the heart of rest.

	Lay on thy whips, O Love, that me upright,
	Poised on the perilous point, in no lax bed
	May sleep, as tension at the verberant core
	Of music sleeps; for, if thou spare to smite,
	Staggering, we stoop, stooping, fall dumb and dead,
	And, dying so, sleep our sweet sleep no more.



11. IN CONTEMPLATION OF SUDDEN DEATH

	LORD, if this night my journey end,
	I thank Thee first for many a friend,
	The sturdy and unquestioned piers
	That run beneath my bridge of years.

	And next, for all the love I gave
	To things and men this side the grave,
	Wisely or not, since I can prove
	There always is much good in love.

	Next, for the power thou gavest me
	To view the whole world mirthfully,
	For laughter, paraclete of pain,
	Like April suns across the rain.

	Also that, being not too wise
	To do things foolish in men’s eyes,
	I gained experience by this,
	And saw life somewhat as it is.

	Next, for the joy of labour done
	And burdens shouldered in the sun;
	Nor less, for shame of labour lost,
	And meekness born of a barren boast.

	For every fair and useless thing
	That bids men pause from labouring
	To look and find the larkspur blue
	And marigolds of a different hue;

	For eyes to see and ears to hear,
	For tongue to speak and thews to bear,
	For hands to handle, feet to go,
	For life, I give Thee thanks also.

	For all things merry, quaint and strange,
	For sound and silence, strength, and change,
	And last, for death, which only gives
	Value to every thing that lives;

	For these, good Lord that madest me,
	I praise Thy name; since, verily,
	I of my joy have had no dearth
	Though this night were my last on earth.



12. THE LAST SONG

	The roadways of the blessed land
	Are set with poplar trees,
	And when we ride beneath the morn
	The glad ears of the bearded corn
	Are brushed against our knees.

	Look long. To-morrow we shall stand
	Thronged in the dreadful street,
	And bloody hands of men o’erborne
	Will clutch us by the feet.



13. A MAN GREATLY GIFTED

	YOU are the song that a jester sang,
	Gambolling down the woods alone,
	When a wide, low, yellow moon
	Stared into the dusk of June;

	And here and there, among the trees,
	Where sudden foxgloves showed like ghosts,
	The tiny streams, from edge to edge
	Slipped, smothered by the mossy ledge.

	The shadow dodged between the stems
	Fantastically lengthening,
	And like a silly, sweet guitar,
	The little bells were all a-jar.

	O music swifter than a sword,
	Sharper than scent of spikenard,
	Thus carelessly, to left and right
	Tossed by a jester in the night!



14. MATTER OF BRITTANY

	DRAW to the fire, and let us weave a web
	Of sounds and splendours intertwined--
	Of warriors riding two by two
	In silken surcoats stitched with blue,
	To seek and strive the whole world through
	For a scarlet fruit with silver rind;
	Of unsteered ships that drift for miles on miles
	Amid the creeks of myriad magic isles
	Over enchanted seas, that leave at ebb
	A beach of glittering gold behind.

	Hark! how the rain is rippling over the roofs
	And knocking hard on the window-pane!
	It rattles down the gutter-spout
	And beats the laurel-leaves about;
	So let us tell of a kempy stout
	With bells upon his bridle-rein--
	How, as he rode beneath the chattering boughs,
	He clashed the iron visor over his brows,
	Hearing upon his heel the hurried hoofs
	Of Breunor, Breuse or Agravaine.

	Of names like dusky jewels wedged in gold
	The tale shall cherish goodly store,
	Of Lionel and Lamorak
	And of Sir Lancelot du Lak,
	And him that bore upon his back
	Arms for the Lady Lyonor;
	Persant, Perimones and Pertolepe,
	And Arthur laid in Avalon asleep,
	Dinas and Dinadan and Bors the bold,
	And many a mighty warrior more.

	And grimly crouched in every woodland way
	A dragon with his emerald eyes
	Shall sit and blink on passing knights;
	In the deep dells, old eremites,
	Victors once of a thousand fights,
	Shall sing their masses at sunrise;
	And weary men shall stumble unaware
	On damsels dancing in a garden fair,
	And there, like Meraugis of Portlesguez,
	Dance, cheated of their memories.

	To towns where we shall feast at Pentecost,
	Carlion or Kynke Kenadon,
	Each day shall come a faery dame,
	Or else a giant with eyes of flame
	Shall bid to the beheading game
	Knights that the king sets store upon;
	And some shall find, at hour of day’s decline,
	The house beside the fountain and the pine,
	And learning much of marvel from their host,
	Shall hasten greatly to begone.

	Some, by the help of charmèd steeds shall--just--
	Leap through the whirling barriers
	That guard about the pleasant bower
	Where every moment is an hour,
	And with an elfin paramour
	Drowse and dream for a hundred years,
	But setting foot again on Middle Earth,
	Or tasting wheaten bread in hour of dearth,
	Shall crumble to a little cloud of dust
	Blown by the wind across the furze.

	Or sometimes through the arches of the wood
	The sad Good Friday bells will ring
	Loud in the ear of Percivale,
	Through many a year of ban and bale
	Yet questing after the Sangraal
	For comfort of the Fisher King;
	And suddenly across a vault of stars
	Shall drive a network of enchanted spars,
	And Lancelot and Galahad the good
	Behold the ship of hallowing.

	And first of all I’ll tell the tale to you,
	And you shall tell the next to me:
	How gentle Enid made complaint
	While riding with her lord Geraint,
	Or how the merry Irish Saint
	Went ever westward oversea;
	While your dim shadow moving on the wall
	Might be Sir Tristram’s, as he harped in hall
	Before Iseult of Ireland, always true,
	Or white Iseult of Brittany.



15. PIPES

	I sat beside the river
	when the summer sun was bright,
	And blew brave music
	as loudly as I might,
	On the sweet, hollow Pan-pipes--
	they were my delight.

	On the bare, black mountain
	where the storm had stripped the ground,
	I breathed a broken melody
	quite softly; and I found
	That all my pipes were shattered
	with the shrillness of the sound.

	God keep the river
	and God keep the reeds--
	I am for the City
	full of men’s deeds,
	To build a great organ
	for my new needs.



16. RECKONING

	I said to the devil one day,
	“What is the price that a man must pay?
	What is the end of shameful desire?”
	He answered: “Hell-fire.”

	“You sell sin for a song,” I said,
	“And the day of reckoning is far ahead;”
	Nor knew that, even when he threatens hell-fire,
	The devil is a liar.

	For the bitter end of shame
	Is not any sort of fire or flame,
	But the chill of a scorn too sick for laughter,
	Here, not hereafter.



17. RONDEL

	TO-MORROW, yes, those songs will break my heart,
	But I am only very glad to-night,
	Thrilling with fear and labour and delight
	To go thus gaily robed and play my part;

	Joy goes up with a shout--quick laughters dart
	Between the choruses that ring and smite--
	To-morrow, yes, those songs will break my heart,
	But I am only very glad to-night;

	Glad of the music and the jocund art
	That flings us all together; very bright
	Through the warm darkness streams the candle-light,
	More mirthfully our farewell songs upstart.
	To-morrow, yes--those songs will break my heart.



18. SNAP-DRAGONS

	I have the streets in mind
	And the yellow sun,--
	Lad, you are left behind,--
	All that is done.

	Snap-dragons on the wall
	Were homely to see,--
	What was it after all
	But vanity?

	Snap-dragons on the wall
	In my garden too,--
	There is little to recall
	For me and you.

	Dead blossoms adrift
	Are falling away,--
	You never gave me a gift
	Would last for a day.

	Swift is darkness--swift
	The death of a flower,--
	I never gave you a gift
	Would last for an hour.

	Gone is the level light
	From the wide lands,--
	I would be glad to-night
	Of the touch of your hands.



19. SYMBOL

	I found him in the church-yard,
	My brother who had died,
	With white lilies above him,
	And a hemlock by his side.

	Men plant the lilies
	In token of God’s grace,
	But the green and deadly hemlock,
	He grows in his own place.

	With the sick lily-odour
	I was all faint within,
	It was like a sweet and a seemly lie
	To cover the reek of sin.

	And truth goes trim and decent
	In a rich man’s funeral,
	But rich men will turn rotten,
	And so shall we all.

	Now the sour smell of the hemlock
	Is honest on the breath,
	It is like the after-taste of sin,
	And the foretaste of death.



20. THE THREE KINGS

	THE first king was very young,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	With doleful ballads on his tongue,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	He came bearing a branch of myrrh
	Than which no gall is bitterer,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	_Gifts for a baby King, O_.

	The second king was a man in prime,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	The solemn priest of a solemn time,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	With eyes downcast and reverent feet
	He brought his incense sad and sweet,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	_Gifts for a baby King, O_.

	The third king was very old,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	Both his hands were full of gold,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	Many a gaud and glittering toy,
	Baubles brave for a baby boy,
	_O balow, balow la lay_,
	_Gifts for a baby King, O_.



21. TO HER CAT IN WAR-TIME

	I am sorry, my little cat, I am sorry--
	If I had it, you should have it;
	But there is a war on.
	No, there are no table-scraps;
	there was only an omelette
	made from dehydrated eggs,
	and baked apples to follow,
	and we finished it all.
	The butcher has no lights,
	the fishmonger has no cod’s heads--
	there is nothing for you
	but cat-biscuit
	and those remnants of yesterday’s ham;
	you must do your best with it.
	Round and pathetic eyes,
	baby mouth opened in a reproachful cry,
	how can I explain to you?
	I know, I know :
	“Mistress, it is not nice;
	the ham is very salt
	and the cat-biscuit very dull,
	I sniffed at it and the smell was not enticing.
	Do you not love me any more?
	Mistress, I do my best for the war-effort;
	I killed four mice last week,
	yesterday I caught a young stoat,
	you stroked and praised me,
	you called me a clever cat,
	What have I done to offend you?
	I am industrious, I earn my keep;
	I am not like the parrot, who sits there
	using bad language and devouring
	parrot-seed at eight-and-sixpence a pound
	without working for it.
	If you will not pay me my wages
	there is no justice;
	If you have ceased to love me
	there is no charity.
	See now, I rub myself against your legs
	to express my devotion,
	which is not altered by any unkindness.
	My little heart is contracted
	because your goodwill is withdrawn from me;
	my ribs are rubbing together
	for lack of food,
	but indeed I cannot eat this--
	my soul revolts at the sight of it.
	I have tried, believe me,
	but it was like ashes in my mouth.
	If your favour is departed
	and your bowels of compassion are shut up,
	then all that is left to me
	is to sit in a draught on the stone floor and look miserable
	till I die of starvation
	and a broken heart.”
	Cat with the innocent face,
	What can I say?
	Everything is very hard on everybody.
	If you were a little Greek cat
	or a little Polish cat,
	there would be nothing for you at all,
	not even cat-food :
	indeed, you would be lucky
	if you were not eaten yourself.
	Think if you were a little Russian cat
	prowling among the cinders of a deserted city!
	Consider that pains and labour
	and the valour of merchant-seamen and fishermen
	have gone even to the making of this biscuit
	which smells so unappetising.
	Alas, there is no language
	in which I can tell you these things.
	Well, well!
	if you will not be comforted
	we will put the contents of your saucer
	into the chicken-bowl--there!
	all gone! nasty old cat-food--
	the hens, I dare say,
	will be grateful for it.
	Wait only a little
	and I will go to the butcher
	and see if by any chance
	he can produce the fragments of the insides of something.
	Only stop crying
	and staring in that unbearable manner--
	as soon as I have put on my hat
	we will try to do something about it.
	My hat is on,
	I have put on my shoes,
	I have taken my shopping basket--
	What are you doing on the table?
	The chicken-bowl is licked clean;
	there is nothing left in it at all.
	Cat,
	hell-cat, Hitler-cat, human,
	all-too-human cat,
	cat corrupt, infected,
	instinct with original sin,
	cat of a fallen and perverse creation,
	hypocrite with the innocent and limpid eyes--
	is nothing desirable
	till somebody else desires it?
	Is anything and everything attractive
	so long as it is got by stealing?
	Furtive and squalid cat,
	green glance, squinted over a cringing shoulder,
	streaking hurriedly out of the back door
	in expectation of judgment,
	your manners and morals are perfectly abhorrent to me,
	you dirty little thief and liar.
	Nevertheless,
	although you have made a fool of me,
	yet, bearing in mind your pretty wheedling ways
	(not to mention the four mice and the immature stoat)
	and having to put on my hat to go to the butcher’s,
	I may as well go.



22. WAR-TIME

	The splendour of the year, no less
	Is on thy loveliness,
	The light in no less glory falls
	On thy unchanging walls
	Now, than in other days;
	No sorrow can displace
	The ordered beauty of thy face;
	Yet thou dost watch the water-ways
	For thy lost lovers, with a grave and panoplied distress;

	Like Iseult looking over-sea
	With wan face wearily
	Under the coils of braided gold
	Resplendent fold on fold,
	And girded queenliwise
	With jewels of rich price,
	With vair, and scarlet of fine dyes,
	But still with shadow-haunted eyes
	Straining to Tristram hard bested in far-off Brittany.



23. WOMANLINESS

	The Master of the house came and sat him down to dine,
	And I served him on my bended knees with bread and meat and wine,
	With a peacock stuffed with peaches, in his pride for all to see,
	And the name of that resplendent dish was “Golden Flattery.”

	I served him with the bread of Toil, with meat of Strength and Sense,
	All on a fair white napkin of utter Reverence,
	With every course I brought him a gay and gilded cup
	Where God’s good wine of Laughter unceasing bubbled up.

	And well I know the banquet was all the heart could wish,
	For I served the Love I bore him as the salt with every dish,
	As salt to the meat, and as savour to the wine
	When my great Lord Paramount sat down to dine.
