*** William Shakespeare (1564 - 1616)


1. SONNET NO. 104

	To me fair friend you never can be old
	For as you were when first your eye I ey’d
	Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
	Have from the forests shook three summers’ pride
	Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn’d
	In process of the seasons have I seen
	Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn’d
	Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
	Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand
	Steal from his figure and no pace perceiv’d;
	So your sweet hue which methinks still doth stand
	Hath motion and mine eye may be deceiv’d:
	 For fear of which hear this thou age unbred:
	 Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.


2. SONNET NO. 106

	When in the chronicle of wasted time
	I see descriptions of the fairest wights
	And beauty making beautiful old rime
	In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights
	Then in the blazon of sweet beauty’s best
	Of hand of foot of lip of eye of brow
	I see their antique pen would have express’d
	Even such a beauty as you master now.
	So all their praises are but prophecies
	Of this our time all you prefiguring;
	And for they looked but with divining eyes
	They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
	 For we which now behold these present days
	 Have eyes to wonder but lack tongues to praise.


3. SONNET NO. 116

	Let me not to the marriage of true minds
	Admit impediments. Love is not love
	Which alters when it alteration finds
	Or bends with the remover to remove:
	O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
	That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
	It is the star to every wandering bark
	Whose worth’s unknown although his height be taken.
	Love’s not Time’s fool though rosy lips and cheeks
	Within his bending sickle’s compass come;
	Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks
	But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
	 If this be error and upon me prov’d
	 I never writ nor no man ever lov’d.


4. SONNET NO. 130

	My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;
	Coral is far more red than her lips red:
	If snow be white why then her breasts are dun;
	If hairs be wires black wires grow on her head.
	I have seen roses damask’d red and white
	But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
	And in some perfumes is there more delight
	Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
	I love to hear her speak yet well I know
	That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
	I grant I never saw a goddess go--
	My mistress when she walks treads on the ground:
	 And yet by heaven I think my love as rare
	 As any she belied with false compare.


5. SONNET NO. 134

	So now I have confess’d that he is thine
	And I my self am mortgag’d to thy will
	Myself I’ll forfeit so that other mine
	Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
	But thou wilt not nor he will not be free
	For thou art covetous and he is kind;
	He learn’d but surety-like to write for me
	Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
	The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take
	Thou usurer that putt’st forth all to use
	And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
	So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
	 Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
	 He pays the whole and yet am I not free.


6. SONNET NO. 138

	When my love swears that she is made of truth
	I do believe her though I know she lies
	That she might think me some untutor’d youth
	Unlearned in the world’s false subtleties.
	Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young
	Although she knows my days are past the best
	Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
	On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
	But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
	And wherefore say not I that I am old?
	O! love’s best habit is in seeming trust
	And age in love loves not to have years told:
	 Therefore I lie with her and she with me
	 And in our faults by lies we flatter’d be.


7. SONNET NO. 18

	Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?
	Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
	Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May
	And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:
	Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines
	And often is his gold complexion dimm’d
	And every fair from fair sometime declines
	By chance or nature’s changing course untrimm’d:
	But thy eternal summer shall not fade
	Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st
	Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade
	When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st
	 So long as men can breathe or eyes can see
	 So long lives this and this gives life to thee.


8. SONNET NO. 24

	Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath stell’d
	Thy beauty’s form in table of my heart;
	My body is the frame wherein ’tis held
	And perspective it is best painter’s art.
	For through the painter must you see his skill
	To find where your true image pictur’d lies
	Which in my bosom’s shop is hanging still
	That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
	Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
	Mine eyes have drawn thy shape and thine for me
	Are windows to my breast where-through the sun
	Delights to peep to gaze therein on thee;
	 Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
	 They draw but what they see know not the heart.


9. SONNET NO. 29

	When, in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes,
	I all alone beweep my outcast state,
	And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
	And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
	Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
	Featur’d like him, like him with friends possess’d,
	Desiring this man’s art and that man’s scope,
	With what I most enjoy contented least;
	Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
	Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
	Like to the lark at break of day arising
	From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate;
	For thy sweet love remember’d such wealth brings
	That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


10. SONNET NO. 98

	From you have I been absent in the spring
	When proud-pied April dress’d in all his trim
	Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing
	That heavy Saturn laugh’d and leap’d with him.
	Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
	Of different flowers in odour and in hue
	Could make me any summer’s story tell
	Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
	Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white
	Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
	They were but sweet but figures of delight
	Drawn after you you pattern of all those.
	 Yet seem’d it winter still and you away
	 As with your shadow I with these did play.