*** Karl Shapiro (1913 - 2000)


1. AUTO WRECK

	Its quick soft silver bell beating, beating,
	And down the dark one ruby flare
	Pulsing out red light like an artery,
	The ambulance at top speed floating down
	Past beacons and illuminated clocks
	Wings in a heavy curve, dips down,
	And brakes speed, entering the crowd.
	The doors leap open, emptying light;
	Stretchers are laid out, the mangled lifted
	And stowed into the little hospital.
	Then the bell, breaking the hush, tolls once.
	And the ambulance with its terrible cargo
	Rocking, slightly rocking, moves away,
	As the doors, an afterthought, are closed.
	
	We are deranged, walking among the cops
	Who sweep glass and are large and composed.
	One is still making notes under the light.
	One with a bucket douches ponds of blood
	Into the street and gutter.
	One hangs lanterns on the wrecks that cling,
	Empty husks of locusts, to iron poles.
	
	Our throats were tight as tourniquets,
	Our feet were bound with splints, but now,
	Like convalescents intimate and gauche,
	We speak through sickly smiles and warn
	With the stubborn saw of common sense,
	The grim joke and the banal resolution.
	The traffic moves around with care,
	But we remain, touching a wound
	That opens to our richest horror.
	Already old, the question _Who shall die?_
	Becomes unspoken _Who is innocent?_
	
	For death in war is done by hands;
	Suicide has cause and stillbirth, logic;
	And cancer, simple as a flower, blooms.
	But this invites the occult mind,
	Cancels our physics with a sneer,
	And spatters all we knew of denouement
	Across the expedient and wicked stones.


2. GOING TO SCHOOL

	What shall I teach in the vivid afternoon 
	With the sun warming the blackboard and a slip 
	Of cloud catching my eye? 
	Only the cones and sections of the moon. 
	Out of some flaking page of scholarship, 
	Only some foolish heresy 
	To counteract the authority of prose. 
	The ink runs freely and the dry chalk flows 
	Into the silent night of seven slates 
	Where I create the universe as if 
	It grew out of some old rabbinic glyph 
	Or hung upon the necessity of Yeats. 
	
	O dry imaginations, drink this dust 
	That grays the room and powders my coat sleeve, 
	For in this shaft of light 
	I dance upon the intellectual crust 
	Of our own age and hold this make-believe 
	Like holy-work before your sight. 
	This is the list of books that time has burned, 
	These are the lines that only poets have learned, 
	The frame of dreams, the symbols that dilate; 
	Yet when I turn from this dark exercise 
	I meet your bright and world-considering eyes 
	That build and build and never can create.


3. THE LEG

	Among the iodoform, in twilight sleep,
	_What have I lost?_ he first inquires,
	Peers in the middle distance where a pain,
	Ghost of a nurse, hastily moves, and day,
	Her blinding presence pressing in his eyes
	And now his ears. They are handling him
	With rubber hands. He wants to get up.
	
	One day beside some flowers near his nose
	He will be thinking, _When will I look at it?_
	And pain, still in the middle distance, will reply,
	_At what?_ and he will know it’s gone,
	O where! and begin to tremble and cry.
	He will begin to cry as a child cries
	Whose puppy is mangled under a screaming wheel.
	
	Later, as if deliberately, his fingers
	Begin to explore the stump. He learns a shape
	That is comfortable and tucked in like a sock.
	This has a sense of humor, this can despise
	The finest surgical limb, the dignity of limping,
	The nonsense of wheel-chairs. Now he smiles to the wall:
	The amputation becomes an acquisition.
	
	For the leg is wondering where he is (all is not lost)
	And surely he has a duty to the leg;
	He is its injury, the leg is his orphan,
	He must cultivate the mind of the leg,
	Pray for the part that is missing, pray for peace
	In the image of man, pray, pray for its safety,
	And after a little it will die quietly.
	
	The body, what is it, Father, but a sign
	To love the force that grows us, to give back
	What in Thy palm is senselessness and mud?
	Knead, knead the substance of our understanding
	Which must be beautiful in flesh to walk,
	That if Thou take me angrily in hand
	And hurl me to the shark, I shall not die.


4. OCTOBER 1

		That season when the leaf deserts the bole
		And half-dead see-saws through the October air
		Falling face-downward on the walks to print
		The decalcomania of its little soul--
		Hardly has the milkman’s sleepy horse
		On wooden shoes echoed across the blocks
		When with its back jaws open like a dredge
	The van comes lumbering up the curb to someone’s door and knocks.
	
		And four black genii muscular and shy
		Holding their shy caps enter the first room
		Where someone hurriedly surrenders up
		The thickset chair, the mirror half awry,
		Then to their burdens stoop without a sound.
		One with his bare hands rends apart the bed,
		One stuffs the china-barrel with stale print,
	Two bear the sofa toward the door with dark funereal tread.
	
		The corner lamp, the safety eye of night,
		Enveloped in the sun blinks and goes blind
		And soon the early risers pick their way
		Through kitchenware and pillows bolt upright.
		The bureau on the sidewalk with bare back
		And wrinkling veneer is most disgraced,
		The sketch of Paris suffers in the wind;
	Only the bike, its nose against the wall, does not show haste.
	
		Two hours--the movers mop their necks and look,
		Filing through dust and echoes back and forth.
		The halls are hollow and all the floors are cleared
		Bare to the last board, to the most secret nook;
		But on the street a small chaos survives
		That slowly now the leviathan ingests,
		And schoolboys and stenographers stare at
	The truck, the house, the husband in his hat who stands and rests.
	
		He turns with miserable expectant face
		And for the last time enters. On the wall
		A picture-stain spreads from the nail-hole down.
		Each object live and dead has left its trace.
		He leaves his key; but as he quickly goes
		This question comes behind: Did someone die?
		Is someone rich or poor, better or worse?
	What shall uproot a house and bring this care into his eye?


5. PSALM 151

	Are You looking for us? We are here.
	Have You been gathering fowers, Elohim?
	We are Your flowers, we have always been.
	When will You leave us alone?
	We are in America.
	We have been here three hundred years.
	And what new altar will You deck us with?
	
	Whom are You following, Pillar of Fire?
	What barn do You seek shelter in?
	At whose gate do You whimper
	In this great Palestine?
	Whose wages do You take in this New World?
	But Israel shall take what it shall take,
	Making us ready for your hungry Hand!
	
	Immigrant God, You follow me;
	You go with me, You are a distant tree;
	You are the beast that lows in my heart's gates;
	You are the dog that follows at my heel;
	You are the table on which I lean;
	You are the plate from which I eat.
	
	Shepherd of the flocks of praise,
	Youth of all youth, ancient of days,
	Follow us.


6. SCYROS

	_snuffle and snif and handkerchief_
	
		The doctor punched my vein
		The captain called me Cain
	Upon my belly sat the sow of fear
		With coins on either eye
		The President came by
	And whispered to the lords what none could hear
	
		High over where the storm
		Stood steadfast cruciform
	The golden eagle sank in wounded wheels
		White negroes laughing still
		Crept fiercely on Brazil
	Turning the navies upward on their keels
	
		Now one by one the trees
		Stripped to their naked knees
	To dance upon the heaps of shrunken dead
		The roof of England fell
		Great Paris tolled her bell
	And China staunched her milk and wept for bread
	
		No island singly lay
		But lost its name that day
	The Ainu dived across the plunging sands
		From dawn to dawn to dawn
		King George’s birds came on
	Strafing the tulips from his children’s hands
	
		Thus in the classic sea
		Southeast from Thessaly
	The dynamited mermen washed ashore
		And tritons dressed in steel
		Trolled heads with rod and reel
	And dredged potatoes from the Aegean floor
	
		Hot is the sky and green
		Where Germans have been seen
	The moon leaks metal on the Atlantic fields
		Pink boys in birthday shrouds
		Loop lightly through the clouds
	Or coast the peaks of Finland on their shields
	
		That prophet year by year
		Lay still but could not hear
	Where scholars tapped to find his new remains
		Gog and Magog ate pork
		In vertical New York
	And war began next Monday on the Danes


7. WAITRESS

	Whoever with the compasses of his eyes
	Is plotting the voyage of your steady shape
	As you come laden through the room and back
	And rounding your even bottom like a Cape
	Crooks his first finger, whistles through his lip
	Till you arrive, all motion, like a ship,
	
	He is my friend--consider his dark pangs
	And love of Niger, naked indigence,
	Dance him the menu of a poem and squirm
	Deep in the juke-box jungle, green and dense.
	Surely he files his teeth, punctures his nose,
	Carves out the god and takes off all his clothes.
	
	For once, the token on the table’s edge
	Sufficing, proudly and with hair unpinned
	You mounted the blueplate, stretched out and grinned
	Like Christmas fish and turkey pink and skinned,
	Eyes on the half-shell, loin with parsley stuck,
	Thigh bones and ribs and little toes to suck.
	
	I speak to you, ports of the northern myth,
	This dame is carved and eaten. One by one,
	God knows what hour, her different parts go home,
	Lastly her pants, and day or night is done;
	But on the restaurant the sign of fear
	Reddens and blazes--“English spoken here.”


8. WINTER IN CALIFORNIA

	It is winter in California, and outside
	Is like the interior of a florist shop:
	A chilled and moisture-laden crop
	Of pink camellias lines the path; and what
	Rare roses for a banquet or a bride,
	So multitudinous that they seem a glut!
	
	A line of snails crosses the golf-green lawn
	From the rosebushes to the ivy bed;
	An arsenic compound is distributed
	For them. The gardener will rake up the shells
	And leave in a corner of the patio
	The little mound of empty shells, like skulls.
	
	By noon the fog is burnt off by the sun
	And the world’s immensest sky opens a page
	For the exercise of a future age;
	Now jet planes draw straight lines, parabolas,
	And x’s, which the wind, before they’re done,
	Erases leisurely or pulls to fuzz.
	
	It is winter in the valley of the vine.
	The vineyards crucified on stakes suggest
	War cemeteries, but the fruit is pressed,
	The redwood vats are brimming in the shed,
	And on the sidings stand tank cars of wine,
	For which bright juice a billion grapes have bled.
	
	And skiers from the snow line driving home
	Descend through almond orchards, olive farms.
	Fig tree and palm tree--everything that warms
	The imagination of the wintertime.
	If the walls were older one would think of Rome:
	If the land were stonier one would think of Spain.
	
	But this land grows the oldest living things,
	Trees that were young when Pharoahs ruled the world,
	Trees whose new leaves are only just unfurled.
	Beautiful they are not; they oppress the heart
	With gigantism and with immortal wings;
	And yet one feels the sumptuousness of this dirt.
	
	It is raining in California, a straight rain
	Cleaning the heavy oranges on the bough,
	Filling the gardens till the gardens flow,
	Shining the olives, tiling the gleaming tile,
	Waxing the dark camellia leaves more green,
	Flooding the daylong valleys like the Nile.