*** Kenneth Slessor (1901 - 1971)


1. ADVICE TO PSYCHOLOGISTS

	You spies that pierce the mind with trenches, 
	Feasting your eyes through private panes, 
	Who, not content with Heavenly stenches, 
	Insist on taking up the drains, 
	For you I’ve only two suggestions, 
	Who prowl with torches in this Bog--
	Small good you’ll get from asking questions; 
	Walk on your nostrils, like a dog.



2. BEACH BURIAL

	Softly and humbly to the Gulf of Arabs
	The convoys of dead sailors come;
	At night they sway and wander in the waters far under,
	But morning rolls them in the foam.
	
	Between the sob and clubbing of gunfire
	Someone, it seems, has time for this,
	To pluck them from the shallows and bury them in burrows
	And tread the sand upon their nakedness;
	
	And each cross, the driven stake of tidewood,
	Bears the last signature of men,
	Written with such perplexity, with such bewildered pity,
	The words choke as they begin--
	
	“Unknown seaman”--the ghostly pencil
	Wavers and fades, the purple drips,
	The breath of wet season has washed their inscriptions
	As blue as drowned men’s lips,
	
	Dead seamen, gone in search of the same landfall,
	Whether as ememies they fought,
	Or fought with us, or neither; the sand joins them together,
	Enlisted on the other front.



3. A BUSHRANGER

	Jackey Jackey gallops on a horse like a swallow
	Where the carbines bark and the blackboys hollo.
	When the traps give chase (may the devil take his power!)
	He can ride ten mile in a quarter of an hour
	
	Take horse and follow, and you’ll hurt no feelings;
	He can fly down waterfalls and jump through ceilings,
	He can shoot off hats, for to have a bit of fun,
	With a bulldog bigger than a buffalo-gun
	
	Honeyed and profound in his conversation
	When he bails up Mails on Long Tom Station,
	In a flyaway coat with a black cravat,
	A snow-white collar and a cabbage-tree hat.
	
	Flowers in his button-hole and pearls in his pocket,
	He comes like a ghost and he goes like a rocket
	With a lightfoot heel on a blood-mare’s flank
	And a bagful of notes from the Joint Stock Bank
	
	Many pretty ladies he could witch out of marriage,
	Though he prig but a kiss in a bigwig’s carriage;
	For the cock of an eye or the lift of his reins,
	They would run barefoot through Patrick’s Plains.



4. CANNIBAL STREET

	“BUY, who’ll buy,” the pedlar sings, 
	“Bones of beggars, loins of kings, 
	Ribs of murder, haunch of hate, 
	And Beauty’s head on a butcher’s plate!” 
	Hook by hook, on steaming stalls, 
	The hero hangs, the harlot sprawls; 
	For Helen’s flesh, in such a street, 
	Is only a kind of dearer meat. 
	“Buy, who’ll buy,” the pedlar begs, 
	“Angel-wings and lady-legs, 
	Tender bits and dainty parts--
	Buy, who’ll buy my skewered hearts?” 
	Buy, who’ll buy? The cleavers fall, 
	The dead men creak, the live men call, 
	And I (God save me) bargained there, 
	Paid my pennies and ate my share.



5. FIVE BELLS

	Time that is moved by little fidget wheels
	Is not my time, the flood that does not flow.
	Between the double and the single bell
	Of a ship’s hour, between a round of bells
	From the dark warship riding there below,
	I have lived many lives, and this one life
	Of Joe, long dead, who lives between five bells.
	
	Deep and dissolving verticals of light
	Ferry the falls of moonshine down. Five bells
	Coldly rung out in a machine’s voice. Night and water
	Pour to one rip of darkness, the Harbour floats
	In the air, the Cross hangs upside-down in water.
	
	Why do I think of you, dead man, why thieve
	These profitless lodgings from the flukes of thought
	Anchored in Time? You have gone from earth,
	Gone even from the meaning of a name;
	Yet something’s there, yet something forms its lips
	And hits and cries against the ports of space,
	Beating their sides to make its fury heard.
	
	Are you shouting at me, dead man, squeezing your face
	In agonies of speech on speechless panes?
	Cry louder, beat the windows, bawl your name!
	
	But I hear nothing, nothing...only bells,
	Five bells, the bumpkin calculus of Time.
	Your echoes die, your voice is dowsed by Life,
	There’s not a mouth can fly the pygmy strait--
	Nothing except the memory of some bones
	Long shoved away, and sucked away, in mud;
	And unimportant things you might have done,
	Or once I thought you did; but you forgot,
	And all have now forgotten--looks and words
	And slops of beer; your coat with buttons off,
	Your gaunt chin and pricked eye, and raging tales
	Of Irish kings and English perfidy,
	And dirtier perfidy of publicans
	Groaning to God from Darlinghurst.
	Five bells.
	
	Then I saw the road, I heard the thunder
	Tumble, and felt the talons of the rain
	The night we came to Moorebank in slab-dark,
	So dark you bore no body, had no face,
	But a sheer voice that rattled out of air
	(As now you’d cry if I could break the glass),
	A voice that spoke beside me in the bush,
	Loud for a breath or bitten off by wind,
	Of Milton, melons, and the Rights of Man,
	And blowing flutes, and how Tahitian girls
	Are brown and angry-tongued, and Sydney girls
	Are white and angry-tongued, or so you’d found.
	But all I heard was words that didn’t join
	So Milton became melons, melons girls,
	And fifty mouths, it seemed, were out that night,
	And in each tree an Ear was bending down,
	Or something that had just run, gone behind the grass,
	When blank and bone-white, like a maniac’s thought,
	The naphtha-flash of lightning slit the sky,
	Knifing the dark with deathly photographs.
	There’s not so many with so poor a purse
	Or fierce a need, must fare by night like that,
	Five miles in darkness on a country track,
	But when you do, that’s what you think.
	Five bells.
	
	In Melbourne, your appetite had gone,
	Your angers too; they had been leeched away
	By the soft archery of summer rains
	And the sponge-paws of wetness, the slow damp
	That stuck the leaves of living, snailed the mind,
	And showed your bones, that had been sharp with rage,
	The sodden ectasies of rectitude.
	I thought of what you’d written in faint ink,
	Your journal with the sawn-off lock, that stayed behind
	With other things you left, all without use,
	All without meaning now, except a sign
	That someone had been living who now was dead:
	“At Labassa. Room 6 x 8
	On top of the tower; because of this, very dark
	And cold in winter. Everything has been stowed
	Into this room--500 books all shapes
	And colours, dealt across the floor
	And over sills and on the laps of chairs;
	Guns, photoes of many differant things
	And differant curioes that I obtained...”
	
	In Sydney, by the spent aquarium-flare
	Of penny gaslight on pink wallpaper,
	We argued about blowing up the world,
	But you were living backward, so each night
	You crept a moment closer to the breast,
	And they were living, all of them, those frames
	And shapes of flesh that had perplexed your youth,
	And most your father, the old man gone blind,
	With fingers always round a fiddle’s neck,
	That graveyard mason whose fair monuments
	And tablets cut with dreams of piety
	Rest on the bosoms of a thousand men
	Staked bone by bone, in quiet astonishment
	At cargoes they had never thought to bear,
	These funeral-cakes of sweet and sculptured stone.
	
	Where have you gone? The tide is over you,
	The turn of midnight water’s over you,
	As Time is over you, and mystery,
	And memory, the flood that does not flow.
	You have no suburb, like those easier dead
	In private berths of dissolution laid--
	The tide goes over, the waves ride over you
	And let their shadows down like shining hair,
	But they are Water; and the sea-pinks bend
	Like lilies in your teeth, but they are Weed;
	And you are only part of an Idea.
	I felt the wet push its black thumb-balls in,
	The night you died, I felt your eardrums crack,
	And the short agony, the longer dream,
	The Nothing that was neither long nor short;
	But I was bound, and could not go that way,
	But I was blind, and could not feel your hand.
	If I could find an answer, could only find
	Your meaning, or could say why you were here
	Who now are gone, what purpose gave you breath
	Or seized it back, might I not hear your voice?
	
	I looked out my window in the dark
	At waves with diamond quills and combs of light
	That arched their mackerel-backs and smacked the sand
	In the moon’s drench, that straight enormous glaze,
	And ships far off asleep, and Harbour-buoys
	Tossing their fireballs wearily each to each,
	And tried to hear your voice, but all I heard
	Was a boat’s whistle, and the scraping squeal
	Of seabirds’ voices far away, and bells,
	Five bells. Five bells coldly ringing out.
	Five bells.



6. FIVE VISIONS OF CAPTAIN COOK

	I
	         
	Cook was a captain of the Admiralty
	When sea-captains had the evil eye,
	Or should have, what with beating krakens off
	And casting nativities of ships;
	Cook was a captain of the powder-days
	When captains, you might have said, if you had been
	Fixed by their glittering stare, half-down the side,
	Or gaping at them up companionways,
	Were more like warlocks than a humble man--
	And men were humble then who gazed at them,
	Poor horn-eyed sailors, bullied by devils’ fists
	Of wind or water, or the want of both,
	Childlike and trusting, filled with eager trust--
	Cook was a captain of the sailing days
	When sea-captains were kings like this,
	Not cold executives of company-rules
	Cracking their boilers for a dividend
	Or bidding their engineers go wink
	At bells and telegraphs, so plates would hold
	Another pound. Those captains drove their ships
	By their own blood, no laws of schoolbook steam,
	Till yards were sprung, and masts went overboard--
	Daemons in periwigs, doling magic out,
	Who read fair alphabets in stars
	Where humbler men found but a mess of sparks,
	Who steered their crews by mysteries
	And strange, half-dreadful sortilege with books,
	Used medicines that only gods could know
	The sense of, but sailors drank
	In simple faith. That was the captain
	Cook was when he came to the Coral Sea
	And chose a passage into the dark.
	
	How many mariners had made that choice
	Paused on the brink of mystery! ‘Choose now!’
	The winds roared, blowing home, blowing home,
	Over the Coral Sea. ‘Choose now!’ the trades
	Cried once to Tasman, throwing him for choice
	Their teeth or shoulders, and the Dutchman chose
	The wind’s way, turning north. ‘Choose, Bougainville!’
	The wind cried once, and Bougainville had heard
	The voice of God, calling him prudently
	Out of the dead lee shore, and chose the north,
	The wind’s way. So, too, Cook made choice,
	Over the brink, into the devil’s mouth,
	With four months’ food, and sailors wild with dreams
	Of English beer, the smoking barns of home.
	So Cook made choice, so Cook sailed westabout,
	So men write poems in Australia.
	
	
	II
	
	Flowers turned to stone! Not all the botany
	Of Joseph Banks, hung pensive in a porthole,
	Could find the Latin for this loveliness,
	Could put the Barrier Reef in a glass box
	Tagged by the horrid Gorgon squint
	Of horticulture. Stone turned to flowers
	It seemed--you’d snap a crystal twig,
	One petal even of the water-garden,
	And have it dying like a cherry-bough.
	They’d sailed all day outside a coral hedge,
	And half the night. Cook sailed at night,
	Let there be reefs a fathom from the keel
	And empty charts. The sailors didn’t ask,
	Nor Joseph Banks. Who cared? It was the spell
	Of Cook that lulled them, bade them turn below,
	Kick off their sea-boots, puff themselves to sleep,
	Though there were more shoals outside
	Than teeth in a shark’s head. Cook snored loudest himself.
	
	One day, a morning of light airs and calms,
	They slid towards a reef that would have knifed
	Their boards to mash, and murdered every man.
	So close it sucked them, one wave shook their keel,
	The next blew past the coral. Three officers,
	In gilt and buttons, languidly on deck
	Pointed their sextants at the sun. One yawned,
	One held a pencil, one put eye to lens:
	Three very peaceful English mariners
	Taking their sights for longitude.
	I’ve never heard
	Of sailors aching for the longitude
	Of shipwrecks before or since. It was the spell
	Of Cook did this, the phylacteries of Cook.
	Men who ride broomsticks with a mesmerist
	Mock the typhoon. So, too, it was with Cook.
	
	
	III
	
	Two chronometers the captain had,
	One by Arnold that ran like mad,
	One by Kendal in a walnut case,
	Poor devoted creature with a hangdog face.
	
	Arnold always hurried with a crazed click-click
	Dancing over Greenwich like a lunatic,
	Kendal panted faithfully his watch-dog beat,
	Climbing out of Yesterday with sticky little feet.
	
	Arnold choked with appetite to wolf up time,
	Madly round the numerals his hands would climb,
	His cogs rushed over and his wheels ran miles,
	Dragging Captain Cook to the Sandwich Isles.
	
	But Kendal dawdled in the tombstoned past,
	With a sentimental prejudice to going fast,
	And he thought very often of a haberdasher’s door
	And a yellow-haired boy who would knock no more.
	
	All through the night-time, clock talked to clock,
	In the captain’s cabin, tock-tock-tock,
	One ticked fast and one ticked slow,
	And Time went over them a hundred years ago.
	
	
	IV
	
	Sometimes the god would fold his wings
	And, stone of Caesars turned to flesh,
	Talk of the most important things
	That serious-minded midshipmen could wish,
	
	Of plantains, and the lack of rum
	Or spearing sea-cows--things like this
	That hungry schoolboys, five days dumb,
	In jolly-boats are wonted to discuss.
	
	What midshipman would pause to mourn
	The sun that beat about his ears,
	Or curse the tide, if he could horn
	His fists by tugging on those lumbering oars?
	
	Let rum-tanned mariners prefer
	To hug the weather-side of yards,
	‘Cats to catch mice’ before they purr,
	Those were the captain’s enigmatic words.
	
	Here, in this jolly-boat they graced,
	Were food and freedom, wind and storm,
	While, fowling-piece across his waist,
	Cook mapped the coast, with one eye cocked for game.
	
	
	V
	
	After the candles had gone out, and those
	Who listened had gone out, and a last wave
	Of chimney-haloes caked their smoky rings
	Like fish-scales on the ceiling, a Yellow Sea
	Of swimming circles, the old man,
	Old Captain-in-the-Corner, drank his rum
	With friendly gestures to four chairs. They stood
	Empty, still warm from haunches, with rubbed nails
	And leather glazed, like aged serving-men
	Feeding a king’s delight, the sticky, drugged
	Sweet agony of habitual anecdotes.
	But these, his chairs, could bear an old man’s tongue,
	Sleep when he slept, be flattering when he woke,
	And wink to hear the same eternal name
	From lips new-dipped in rum.
	
	‘Then Captain Cook,
	I heard him, told them they could go
	If so they chose, but he would get them back,
	Dead or alive, he’d have them,’
	The old man screeched, half-thinking to hear ‘Cook!
	Cook again! Cook! It’s other cooks he’ll need,
	Cooks who can bake a dinner out of pence,
	That’s what he lives on, talks on, half-a-crown
	A day, and sits there full of Cook.
	Who’d do your cooking now, I’d like to ask,
	If someone didn’t grind her bones away?
	But that’s the truth, six children and half-a-crown
	A day, and a man gone daft with Cook.’
	
	That was his wife,
	Elizabeth, a noble wife but brisk,
	Who lived in a present full of kitchen-fumes
	And had no past. He had not seen her
	For seven years, being blind, and that of course
	Was why he’d had to strike a deal with chairs,
	Not knowing when those who chafed them had gone to sleep
	Or stolen away. Darkness and empty chairs,
	This was the port that Alexander Home
	Had come to with his useless cutlass-wounds
	And tales of Cook, and half-a-crown a day--
	This was the creek he’d run his timbers to,
	Where grateful countrymen repaid his wounds
	At half-a-crown a day. Too good, too good,
	This eloquent offering of birdcages
	To gulls, and Greenwich Hospital to Cook,
	Britannia’s mission to the sea-fowl.
	
	It was not blindness picked his flesh away,
	Nor want of sight made penny-blank the eyes
	Of Captain Home, but that he lived like this
	In one place, and gazed elsewhere. His body moved
	In Scotland, but his eyes were dazzle-full
	Of skies and water farther round the world--
	Air soaked with blue, so thick it dripped like snow
	On spice-tree boughs, and water diamond-green,
	Beaches wind-glittering with crumbs of gilt,
	And birds more scarlet than a duchy’s seal
	That had come whistling long ago, and far
	Away. His body had gone back,
	Here it sat drinking rum in Berwickshire,
	But not his eyes--they were left floating there
	Half-round the earth, blinking at beaches milked
	By suck-mouth tides, foaming with ropes of bubbles
	And huge half-moons of surf. Thus it had been
	When Cook was carried on a sailor’s back,
	Vengeance in a cocked hat, to claim his price,
	A prince in barter for a longboat.
	And then the trumpery springs of fate--a stone,
	A musket-shot, a round of gunpowder,
	And puzzled animals, killing they knew not what
	Or why, but killing . . . the surge of goatish flanks
	Armoured in feathers, like cruel birds:
	Wild, childish faces, killing; a moment seen,
	Marines with crimson coats and puffs of smoke
	Toppling face-down; and a knife of English iron,
	Forged aboard ship, that had been changed for pigs,
	Given back to Cook between the shoulder-blades.
	There he had dropped, and the old floundering sea,
	The old, fumbling, witless lover-enemy,
	Had taken his breath, last office of salt water.
	
	Cook died. The body of Alexander Home
	Flowed round the world and back again, with eyes
	Marooned already, and came to English coasts,
	The vague ancestral darknesses of home,
	Seeing them faintly through a glass of gold,
	Dim fog-shapes, ghosted like the ribs of trees
	Against his blazing waters and blue air.
	But soon they faded, and there was nothing left,
	Only the sugar-cane and the wild granaries
	Of sand, and.palm-trees and the flying blood
	Of cardinal-birds; and putting out one hand
	Tremulously in the direction of the beach,
	He felt a chair in Scotland. And sat down.



7. FIXED IDEAS

	Ranks of electroplated cubes, dwindling to glitters,
	Like the other pasture, the trigonometry of marble,
	Death’s candy-bed. Stone caked on stone,
	Dry pyramids and racks of iron balls.
	Life is observed, a precipitate of pellets,
	Or grammarians freeze it into spar,
	Their rhomboids, as for instance, the finest crystal
	Fixing a snowfall under glass. Gods are laid out
	In alabaster, with horny cartilage
	And zinc ribs; or systems of ecstasy
	Baked into bricks. There is a gallery of sculpture,
	Bleached bones of heroes, Gorgon masks of bushrangers;
	But the quarries are of more use than this,
	Filled with the rolling of huge granite dice,
	Ideas and judgments: vivisection, the Baptist Church,
	Good men and bad men, polygamy, birth-control . . .
	
	Frail tinkling rush
	Water-hair streaming
	Prickles and glitters
	Cloudy with bristles
	River of thought
	Swimming the pebbles--
	Undo, loosen your bubbles!



8. GULLIVER

	I’LL kick your walls to bits, I’ll die scratching a tunnel, 
	If you’ll give me a wall, if you’ll give me a simple stone, 
	If you’ll do me the honour of a dungeon--
	Anything but this tyranny of sinews. 
	Lashed with a hundred ropes of nerve and bone 
	I lie, poor helpless Gulliver, 
	In a twopenny dock for the want of a penny, 
	Tied up with stuff too cheap, and strings too many. 
	One chain is usually sufficient for a cur. 
	Hair over hair, I pick my cables loose, 
	But still the ridiculous manacles confine me. 
	I snap them, swollen with sobbing. What’s the use? 
	One hair I break, ten thousand hairs entwine me. 
	Love, hunger, drunkenness, neuralgia, debt, 
	Cold weather, hot weather, sleep and age--
	If I could only unloose their spongy fingers, 
	I’d have a chance yet, slip through the cage. 
	But who ever heard of a cage of hairs? 
	You can’t scrape tunnels in a net. 
	If you’d give me a chain, if you’d give me honest iron, 
	If you’d graciously give me a turnkey, 
	I could break my teeth on a chain, I could bite through metal, 
	But what can you do with hairs? 
	For God’s sake, call the hangman.



9. IN A/C WITH GHOSTS

	You can shuffle and scuffle and scold,
	   You can rattle the knockers and knobs,
	Or batter the doorsteps with buckets of gold
	   Till the Deputy-Governor sobs.
	You can sneak up a suitable plank
	   In a frantic endeavor to see--
	But what do they do in the Commonwealth Bank
	   When the Big Door bangs at Three?
	
	Listen in the cellars, listen in the vaults,
	Can’t you hear the tellers turning somersaults?
	Can’t you hear the spectres of inspectors and directors
	Dancing with the phantoms in a Dead Man’s Waltz?
	Some are ghosts of nabobs, poverty and stray bobs,
	Midas and his mistress, Mammon and his wife;
	Other ones are sentries, guarding double entries,
	Long-forgotten, double-dealing, troubled double-life.
	Down among the pass-books, money lent and spent,
	Down among the forests of the Four Per Cent.,
	Where the ledgers meet and moulder, and the overdrafts grow older,
	And the phantoms shrug a shoulder when you ask ’em for the rent.
	
	They are bogies of Grandfather’s cheques,
	   They are spectres of buried accounts,
	They are crinoline sweethearts with pearls on their necks,
	   Demanding enormous amounts.
	They are payment for suppers and flowers,
	   For diamonds to banish a tear,
	For sweet, pretty ladies in opulent hours . . .
	   And tombstones . . . and bailiffs . . . and beer . . .
	
	Down in the bowels of the bank, the ledgers lie rank upon rank,
	The debts of the ages come out of their pages,
	The bones of old loans creak and clank--
	Oh, if you could peep through the door
	To day at a Quarter Past Four,
	You’d find all the ghosts at their usual posts,
	And you wouldn’t sign cheques any more!



10. AN INSCRIPTION FOR DOG RIVER

	OUR general was the greatest and bravest of generals. 
	For his deeds, look around you on this coast--
	Here is his name cut next to Ashur-Bani-Pal’s, 
	Nebuchadnezzar’s and the Roman host; 
	And we, though our identities have been lost, 
	Lacking the validity of stone or metal, 
	We, too, are part of his memorial, 
	Having been put in for the cost, 
	Having bestowed on him all we had to give 
	In battles few can recollect, 
	Our strength, obedience and endurance, 
	Our wits, our bodies, our existence, 
	Even our descendants’ right to live--
	Having given him everything, in fact, 
	Except respect.



11. LAST TRAMS

	I
	
	THAT street washed with violet 
	Writes like a tablet 
	Of living here; that pavement 
	Is the metal embodiment 
	Of living here; those terraces 
	Filled with dumb presences 
	Lobbed over mattresses, 
	Lusts and repentances, 
	Ardours and solaces, 
	Passions and hatreds 
	And love in brass bedsteads . . . 
	Lost now in emptiness 
	Deep now in darkness 
	Nothing but nakedness, 
	Rails like a ribbon 
	And sickness of carbon 
	Dying in distances. 
	
	
	II
	
	THEN, from the skeletons of trams, 
	Gazing at lighted rooms, you’ll find 
	The black and Röntgen diagrams 
	Of window-plants across the blind 
	That print their knuckleduster sticks, 
	Their buds of gum, against the light 
	Like negatives of candlesticks 
	Whose wicks are lit by fluorite; 
	And shapes look out, or bodies pass, 
	Between the darkness and the flare, 
	Between the curtain and the glass, 
	Of men and women moving there. 
	So through the moment’s needle-eye, 
	Like phantoms in the window-chink, 
	Their faces brush you as they fly, 
	Fixed in the shutters of a blink; 
	But whose they are, intent on what, 
	Who knows? They rattle into void, 
	Stars of a film without a plot, 
	Snippings of idiot celluloid.



12. MANGROVES

	These black bush-waters, heavy with crusted boughs
	Like plumes above dead captains, wake the mind . . .
	Uncounted kissing, unremembered vows,
	Nights long forgotten, moons too dark to find,
	Or stars too cold . . . all quick things that have fled
	Whilst these old bubbles uprise in older stone,
	Return like pale dead faces of children dead,
	Staring unfelt through doors for ever unknown.
	
	O silent ones that drink these timeless pools,
	Eternal brothers, bending so deeply over,
	Your branches tremble above my tears again...
	And even my songs are stolen from some old lover
	Who cried beneath your leaves like other fools,
	While still they whisper “in vain . . .
	in vain . . . in vain . . .”



13. THE NABOB

	Coming out of India with ten thousand a year
	Exchanged for flesh and temper, a dry Faust
	Whose devil barters with digestion, has he paid dear
	For dipping his fingers in the Roc’s valley?
	
	Who knows? It’s certain that he owns a rage,
	A face like shark-skin, full of Yellow Jack,
	And that unreckoning tyranny of age
	That calls for turtles’ eggs in Twickenham.
	
	Sometimes, by moonlight, in a barge he’ll float
	Whilst hirelings blow their skulking flageolets,
	Served by a Rajah in a golden coat
	With pigeon-pie . . . Madeira . . . and Madeira . . .
	
	Or in his Bon de Paris with silver frogs
	He rolls puff-bellied in an equipage,
	Elegant chariot, through a gulf of fogs
	To dine on dolphin-steak with Post-Captains.
	
	Who knows? There are worse things than steak, perhaps,
	Worse things than oyster-sauces and tureens
	And worlds of provender like painted maps
	Pricked out with ports of claret and pitchcocked eels,
	
	And hubbubs of billiard-matches, burnt champagne,
	Beautiful ladies ‘of the establishment’
	Always in tempers, or melting out again,
	Bailiffs and Burgundy and writs of judgment--
	
	Thus to inhabit huge, lugubrious halls
	Damp with the steam of entrees, glazed with smoke,
	Raw drinking, greasy eating, bussing and brawls,
	Drinking and eating and bursting into bed-chambers.
	
	But, in the end, one says farewell to them;
	And if he’d curse to-day--God damn your blood!--
	Even his curses I’d not altogether condemn,
	Not altogether scorn; and if phantoms ate--
	
	Hickey, I’d say, sit down, pull up, set to:
	Here’s knife and fork, there’s wine, and there’s a barmaid.
	Let us submerge ourselves in onion-soup,
	Anything but this ‘damned profession of writing.’



14. NEW MAGIC

	At last I know--it’s on old ivory jars,
	Glassed with old miniatures and garnered once with musk.   
	I’ve seen those eyes like smouldering April stars
	As carp might see them behind their bubbled skies
	In pale green fishponds--they’re as green your eyes,   
	   As lakes themselves, changed to green stone at dusk.
	
	At last I know--it’s paned in a crystal hoop   
	On powder-boxes from some dead Italian girl,
	I’ve seen such eyes grow suddenly dark, and droop   
	Their small, pure lids, as if I’d pried too far   
	In finding you snared there on that ivory jar
	   By crusted motes of rose and smoky-pearl.



15. THE NIGHT RIDE

	Gas flaring on the yellow platform; voices running up and down;
	Milk-tins in cold dented silver; half-awake I stare,
	Pull up the blind, blink out--all sounds are drugged;
	the slow blowing of passengers asleep;
	engines yawning; water in heavy drips;
	Black, sinister travellers, lumbering up the station,
	one moment in the window, hooked over bags;
	hurrying, unknown faces--boxes with strange labels--
	all groping clumsily to mysterious ends,
	out of the gaslight, dragged by private Fates,
	their echoes die. The dark train shakes and plunges;
	bells cry out, the night-ride starts again.
	Soon I shall look out into nothing but blackness,
	pale, windy fields, the old roar and knock of the rails
	melts in dull fury. Pull down the blind. Sleep. Sleep
	Nothing but grey, rushing rivers of bush outside.
	Gaslight and milk-cans. Of Rapptown I recall nothing else.



16. NORTH COUNTRY

	North Country, filled with gesturing wood, 
	With trees that fence, like archers’ volleys, 
	The flanks of hidden valleys 
	Where nothing’s left to hide 
	
	But verticals and perpendiculars, 
	Like rain gone wooden, fixed in falling, 
	Or fingers blindly feeling 
	For what nobody cares; 
	
	Or trunks of pewter, bangled by greedy death, 
	Stuck with black staghorns, quietly sucking, 
	And trees whose boughs go seeking, 
	And tress like broken teeth 
	
	With smoky antlers broken in the sky; 
	Or trunks that lie grotesquely rigid, 
	Like bodies blank and wretched 
	After a fool’s battue, 
	
	As if they’ve secret ways of dying here 
	And secret places for their anguish 
	When boughs at last relinquish 
	Their clench of blowing air 
	
	But this gaunt country, filled with mills and saws, 
	With butter-works and railway-stations 
	And public institutions, 
	And scornful rumps of cows, 
	
	North Country, filled with gesturing wood--
	Timber’s the end it gives to branches, 
	Cut off in cubic inches, 
	Dripping red with blood. 



17. PAN AT LANE COVE

	SCALY with poison, bright with flame, 
	Great fungi steam beside the gate, 
	Run tentacles through flagstone cracks, 
	Or claw beyond, where meditate 
	Wet poplars on a pitchy lawn. 
	Some seignior of colonial fame 
	Has planted here a stone-cut faun 
	Whose flute juts like a frozen flame. 
	O lonely faun, what songs are these 
	For skies where no Immortals hide? 
	Why finger in this dour abode 
	Those Pan-pipes girdled at your side? 
	Your Gods, and Hellas too, have passed, 
	Forsaken are the Cyclades, 
	And surely, faun, you are the last 
	To pipe such ancient songs as these. 
	Yet, blow your stone-lipped flute and blow 
	Those red-and-silver pipes of Pan. 
	Cold stars are bubbling round the moon, 
	Which, like some golden Indiaman 
	Disgorged by waterspouts and blown 
	Through heaven’s archipelago, 
	Drives orange bows by clouds of stone . . . 
	Blow, blow your flute, you stone boy, blow! 
	And, Chiron, pipe your centaurs out, 
	The night has looped a smoky scarf 
	Round campanili in the town, 
	And thrown a cloak about Clontarf. 
	Now earth is ripe for Pan again, 
	Barbaric ways and Paynim rout, 
	And revels of old Samian men. 
	O Chiron, pipe your centaurs out. 
	This garden by the dark Lane Cove 
	Shall spark before thy music dies 
	With silver sandals; all thy gods 
	Be conjured from Ionian skies. 
	Those poplars in a fluting-trice 
	They’ll charm into an olive-grove 
	And dance a while in Paradise 
	Like men of fire above Lane Cove.



18. POLARITIES

	Sometimes she is like sherry, like the sun through a vessel of glass, 
	Like light through an oriel window in a room of yellow wood; 
	Sometimes she is the colour of lions, of sand in the fire of noon, 
	Sometimes as bruised with shadows as the afternoon. 
	Sometimes she moves like rivers, sometimes like trees; 
	Or tranced and fixed like South Pole silences; 
	Sometimes she is beauty, sometimes fury, sometimes neither, 
	Sometimes nothing, drained of meaning, null as water. 
	Sometimes, when she makes pea-soup or plays me Schumann, 
	I love her one way; sometimes I love her another 
	More disturbing way when she opens her mouth in the dark; 
	Sometimes I like her with camellias, sometimes with a parsley-stalk, 
	Sometimes I like her swimming in a mirror on the wall; 
	Sometimes I don’t like her at all.



19. SNOWDROPS

	The Snowdrop Girl in fields of snowdrops walks,
	Whiter than foam, deeper than waters flowing,
	Flakes of wild milk gone blowing, 
	Snowing on cloudy stalks.
	The Snowdrop Girl goes picking flowers of snow,
	Blossoms of darkness bubbling into dreams,
	In a strange country, by the shadowy streams
	Where the cruel petals of the Coke-tree grow.
	
	From the smoke and the fume of the backyard room,
	Where poverty sits and gloats,
	On runaway feet from a dirty street
	To a field of snow she floats;
	And tickets to Hell have a curious smell
	And a dangerous crystal whiff,
	Where men hawk Death in a snowdrops’s breath
	At a couple of shillings a sniff.



20. SOUTH COUNTRY

	After the whey-faced anonymity
	Of river-gums and scribbly-gums and bush,
	After the rubbing and the hit of brush,
	You come to the South Country
	
	As if the argument of trees were done,
	The doubts and quarrelling, the plots and pains,
	All ended by these clear and gliding planes
	Like an abrupt solution.
	
	And over the flat earth of empty farms
	The monstrous continent of air floats back
	Coloured with rotting sunlight and the black,
	Bruised flesh of thunderstorms:
	
	Air arched, enormous, pounding the bony ridge,
	Ditches and hutches, with a drench of light,
	So huge, from such infinities of height,
	You walk on the sky’s beach
	
	While even the dwindled hills are small and bare,
	As if, rebellious, buried, pitiful,
	Something below pushed up a knob of skull,
	Feeling its way to air.



21. STARS

	“THESE are the floating berries of the night, 
	They drop their harvest in dark alleys down, 
	Softly far down on groves of Venus, or on a little town 
	Forgotten at the world’s edge--and O, their light 
	Unlocks all closed things, eyes and mouths, and drifts 
	Quietly over kisses in a golden rain, 
	Drowning their flight, till suddenly the Cyprian lifts 
	Her small, white face to the moon, then hides again.”
	
	“They are the warm candles of beauty, hung in blessing on high, 
	Poised like bright comrades on boughs of night above: 
	They are the link-boys of Queen Venus, running out of the sky, 
	Spilling their friendly radiance on all her ways of love.” 
	
	“Should the girl’s eyes be lit with swimming fire, 
	O do not kiss it away, it is a star, a star!”
	
	So cried the passionate poet to his great, romantic guitar. 
	But I was beating off the stars, gazing, not rhyming. 
	I saw the bottomless, black cups of space 
	Between their clusters, and the planets climbing 
	Dizzily in sick airs, and desired to hide my face. 
	But I could not escape those tunnels of nothingness, 
	The cracks in the spinning Cross, nor hold my brain 
	From rushing for ever down that terrible lane, 
	Infinity’s trap-door, eternal and merciless.



22. A SUNSET

	THE old Quarry, Sun, with bleeding scales, 
	Flaps up the gullies, wets their crystal pebbles, 
	Floating with waters of gold; darkness exhales 
	Brutishly in the valley; smoke rises in bubbles; 
	Suddenly we stop at the meeting of two trails. 
	“Do you remember?” 
	“But now everything is changed--
	Trees ringed with death, the creek with its bells clanking 
	Dried like white bone.” Even our voices are estranged. 
	Darkness chokes the river; so nearly what I am thinking 
	It echoes, the whole thing might have been arranged!



23. TALBINGO

	‘Talbingo River’--as one says of bones:
	‘Captain’ or ‘Commodore’ that smelt gunpowder
	In old engagements no one quite believes
	Or understands. Talbingo had its blood
	As they did, ran with waters huge and clear
	Lopping down mountains,
	Turning crags to banks.
	
	Now it’s a sort of aching valley,
	Basalt shaggy with scales,
	A funnel of tobacco-coloured clay,
	Smoulders of puffed earth
	And pebbles and shell-bodied flies
	And water thickening to stone in pocks.
	
	That’s what we’re like out here,
	Beds of dried-up passions.



24. WILD GRAPES

	The old orchard, full of smoking air,
	Full of sour marsh and broken boughs, is there,
	But kept no more by vanished Mulligans,
	Or Hartigans, long drowned in earth themselves,
	Who gave this bitter fruit their care.
	
	Here’s where the cherries grew that birds forgot,
	And apples bright as dogstars; now there is not
	An apple or a cherry; only grapes,
	But wild ones, Isabella grapes they’re called,
	Small, pointed, black, like boughs of musket-shot.
	
	Eating their flesh, half-savage with black fur.
	Acid and gipsy-sweet, I thought of her,
	Isabella, the dead girl, who has lingered on
	Defiantly when all have gone away,
	In an old orchard where swallows never stir.
	
	Isabella grapes, outlaws of a strange bough,
	That in their harsh sweetness remind me somehow
	Of dark hair swinging and silver pins,
	A girl half-fierce, half-melting, as these grapes,
	Kissed here--or killed here--but who remembers now?



25. WINTER DAWN

	At five I wake, rise, rub on the smoking pane
	A port to see--water breathing in the air,
	Boughs broken. The sun comes up in a golden stain,
	Floats like a glassy sea-fruit. There is mist everywhere,
	White and humid, and the Harbour is like plated stone,
	Dull flakes of ice. One light drips out alone,
	One bead of winter-red, smouldering in the steam,
	Quietly over the roof-tops--another window
	Touched with a crystal fire in the sun’s gullies,
	One lonely star of the morning, where no stars gleam.
	
	Far away on the rim of this great misty cup,
	The sun gilds the dead suburbs as he rises up,
	Diamonds the wind-cocks, makes glitter the crusted spikes
	On moss-drowned gables. Now the tiles drip scarlet-wet,
	Swim like birds’ paving-stones, and sunlight strikes
	Their watery mirrors with a moister rivulet,
	Acid and cold. Here lie those mummied Kings,
	Men sleeping in houses, embalmed in stony coffins,
	Till the Last Trumpet calls their galleries up,
	And the suburbs rise with distant murmurings.
	
	O buried dolls, O men sleeping invisible there,
	I stare above your mounds of stone, lean down,
	Marooned and lonely in this bitter air,
	And in one moment deny your frozen town,
	Renounce your bodies--earth falls in clouds away,
	Stones lose their meaning, substance is lost in clay,
	Roofs fade, and that small smoking forgotten heap,
	The city, dissolves to a shell of bricks and paper,
	Empty, without purpose, a thing not comprehended,
	A broken tomb, where ghosts unknown sleep.
	
	And the least crystal weed, shaken with frost,
	The furred herbs of silver, the daisies round-eyed and tart,
	Painted in antic china, the smallest night-flower tossed
	Like a bright penny on the lawn, stirs more my heart,
	Strikes deeper this morning air, than mortal towers
	Dried to a common blindness, fainter than flowers,
	Fordone, extinguished, as the vapours break,
	And dead in the dawn. O Sun that kills with life,
	And brings to breath all silent things--O Dawn,
	Waken me with old earth, keep me awake!
