*** Robert Southwell (1561 - 1595)


1. THE BURNING BABE

	As I in hoary winter’s night stood shivering in the snow,
	Surpris’d I was with sudden heat which made my heart to glow;
	And lifting up a fearful eye to view what fire was near,
	A pretty Babe all burning bright did in the air appear;
	Who, scorched with excessive heat, such floods of tears did shed
	As though his floods should quench his flames which with his tears were fed.
	“Alas!” quoth he, “but newly born, in fiery heats I fry,
	Yet none approach to warm their hearts or feel my fire but I!
	
	My faultless breast the furnace is, the fuel wounding thorns,
	Love is the fire, and sighs the smoke, the ashes shame and scorns;
	The fuel Justice layeth on, and Mercy blows the coals,
	The metal in this furnace wrought are men’s defiled souls,
	For which, as now on fire I am to work them to their good,
	So will I melt into a bath to wash them in my blood.”
	
	With this he vanish’d out of sight and swiftly shrunk away,
	And straight I called unto mind that it was Christmas day.


2. A CHILD MY CHOICE

	Let folly praise that fancy loves, I praise and love that Child
	Whose heart no thought, whose tongue no word, whose hand no deed defiled.
	
	I praise Him most, I love Him best, all praise and love is His;
	While Him I love, in Him I live, and cannot live amiss.
	
	Love’s sweetest mark, laud’s highest theme, man’s most desired light,
	To love Him life, to leave Him death, to live in Him delight.
	
	He mine by gift, I His by debt, thus each to other due;
	First friend He was, best friend He is, all times will try Him true.
	
	Though young, yet wise; though small, yet strong; though man, yet God He is:
	As wise, He knows; as strong, He can; as God, He loves to bless.
	
	His knowledge rules, His strength defends, His love doth cherish all;
	His birth our joy, His life our light, His death our end of thrall.
	
	Alas! He weeps, He sighs, He pants, yet do His angels sing;
	Out of His tears, His sighs and throbs, doth bud a joyful spring.
	
	Almighty Babe, whose tender arms can force all foes to fly,
	Correct my faults, protect my life, direct me when I die!


3. CONTENT AND RICH

	I dwell in Grace’s court,
	Enriched with Virtue’s rights;
	Faith guides my wit, Love leads my will,
	Hope all my mind delights.
	
	In lowly vales I mount
	To pleasure’s highest pitch;
	My silly shroud true honour brings;
	My poor estate is rich.
	
	My conscience is my crown,
	Contented thoughts my rest;
	My heart is happy in itself;
	My bliss is in my breast.
	
	Enough, I reckon wealth; 
	That mean, the surest lot, 
	That lies too high for base contempt,
	Too low for envy’s shot.
	
	My wishes are but few
	All easy to fulfil;
	I make the limits of my power
	The bounds unto my will.
	
	I fear no care for gold;
	Well-doing is my wealth;
	My mind to me an empire is,
	While grace affordeth health.
	
	I clip high-climbing thoughts,
	The wings of swelling pride;
	Their fall is worst that from the heigh
	Of greatest honour slide.
	
	Since sails of largest size
	The storm doth soonest tear;
	I bear so low and small a sail
	As freeth me from fear.
	
	I wrestle not with rage,
	While fury’s flame doth burn;
	It is in vain to stop the stream
	Until the tide doth turn.
	
	But when the flame is out,
	And ebbing wrath doth end,
	I turn a late enraged foe
	Into a quiet friend.
	
	And, taught with often proof,
	A temper’d calm I find
	To be most solace to itself,
	Best cure for angry mind.
	
	Spare diet is my fare,
	My clothes more fit than fine;
	I know I feed and clothe a foe,
	That pamper’d would repine.
	
	I envy not their hap
	Whom favour doth advance;
	I take no pleasure in their pain
	That have less happy chance.
	
	To rise by others’ fall
	I deem a losing gain;
	All states with others’ ruin built,
	To ruin run amain.
	
	No change of fortune’s calm
	Can cast my comforts down;
	When fortune smiles, I smile to think
	How quickly she will frown.
	
	And when, in froward mood,
	She prov’d an angry foe;
	Small gain I found to let her come,--
	Less loss to let her go.


4. LOOK HOME

	Retired thoughts enjoy their own delights,
	As beauty doth in self-beholding eye;
	Man’s mind a mirror is of heavenly sights,
	A brief wherein all marvels summed lie,
	Of fairest forms and sweetest shapes the store,
	Most graceful all, yet thought may grace them more.
	
	The mind a creature is, yet can create,
	To nature’s patterns adding higher skill;
	Of finest works with better could the state
	If force of wit had equal power of will.
	Device of man in working hath no end,
	What thought can think, another thought can mend.
	
	Man’s soul of endless beauty image is,
	Drawn by the work of endless skill and might;
	This skillful might gave many sparks of bliss
	And, to discern this bliss, a native light;
	To frame God’s image as his worths required
	His might, his skill, his word and will conspired.
	
	All that he had his image should present,
	All that it should present it could afford,
	To that he could afford his will was bent,
	His will was followed with performing word.
	Let this suffice, by this conceive the rest,
	He should, he could, he would, he did, the best.


5. LOVE’S GARDEN GRIEF

	Vain loves avaunt! infamous is your pleasure,
	    Your joys deceit;
	Your jewels jests, and worthless trash your treasure,
	    Fools’ common bait.
	Your palace is a prison that allureth
	To sweet mishap, and rest that pain procureth.
	
	Your garden grief hedged in with thorns of envy
	    And stakes of strife;
	Your allies error gravel’d with jealousy
	    And cares of life;
	Your branches seats enwrapp’d with shades of sadness;
	Your arbours breed rough fits of raging madness.
	
	Your beds are sown with seeds of all iniquity
	    And poisoning weeds,
	Whose stalks ill thoughts, whose leaves words full of vanity,
	    Whose fruits misdeeds;
	Whose sap is sin, whose force and operation,
	To banish grace, and work the soul’s damnation.
	
	Your trees are dismal plants of pining corrosives,
	    Whose root is ruth,
	Whose bark is bale, whose timber stubborn fantasies,
	    Whose pith untruth;
	On which in lieu of birds whose voice delighteth,
	Of guilty conscience screeching note affrighteth.
	
	Your coolest summer gales are scalding sighings,
	    Your showers are tears;
	Your sweetest smell the stench of sinful living,
	    Your favours fears;
	Your gard’ner Satan, all you reap is misery,
	Your gain remorse and loss of all felicity.


6. MAN’S CIVIL WAR

	MY hovering thoughts would fly to heaven
	  And quiet nestle in the sky,
	Fain would my ship in Virtue’s shore
	  Without remove at anchor lie.
	
	But mounting thoughts are haled down
	  With heavy poise of mortal load,
	And blustring storms deny my ship
	  In Virtue’s haven secure abode.
	
	When inward eye to heavenly sights
	  Doth draw my longing heart’s desire,
	The world with jesses of delights
	  Would to her perch my thoughts retire,
	
	Fon Fancy trains to Pleasure’s lure,
	  Though Reason stiffly do repine;
	Though Wisdom woo me to the saint,
	  Yet Sense would win me to the shrine.
	
	Where Reason loathes, there Fancy loves,
	  And overrules the captive will;
	Foes senses are to Virtue’s lore,
	  They draw the wit their wish to fill.
	
	Need craves consent of soul to sense,
	  Yet divers bents breed civil fray;
	Hard hap where halves must disagree,
	  Or truce halves the whole betray!
	
	O cruel fight! where fighting friend
	  With love doth kill a favoring foe,
	Where peace with sense is war with God,
	  And self-delight the seed of woe!
	
	Dame Pleasure’s drugs are steeped in sin,
	  Their sugared taste doth breed annoy;
	O fickle sense! beware her gin,
	  Sell not thy soul to brittle joy!


7. THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST

	Behold the father is his daughter’s son,
	The bird that built the nest is hatched therein,
	The old of years an hour hath not outrun,
	Eternal life to live doth now begin,
	The Word is dumb, the mirth of heaven doth weep,
	Might feeble is, and force doth faintly creep.
	
	O dying souls, behold your living spring;
	O dazzled eyes, behold your sun of grace;
	Dull ears, attend what word this Word doth bring;
	Up, heavy hearts, with joy your joy embrace.
	From death, from dark, from deafness, from despairs
	This life, this light, this Word, this joy repairs.
	
	Gift better than himself God doth not know;
	Gift better than his God no man can see.
	This gift doth here the giver given bestow;
	Gift to this gift let each receiver be.
	God is my gift, himself he freely gave me;
	God’s gift am I, and none but God shall have me.
	
	Man altered was by sin from man to beast;
	Beast’s food is hay, hay is all mortal flesh.
	Now God is flesh and lies in manger pressed
	As hay, the brutest sinner to refresh.
	O happy field wherein that fodder grew,
	Whose taste doth us from beasts to men renew.


8. NEW HEAVEN, NEW WAR

	Come to your heaven, you heavenly choirs, 
	Earth hath the heaven of your desires; 
	Remove your dwelling to your God, 
	A stall is now his best abode; 
	Sith men their homage do deny, 
	Come, Angels, all their fault supply.
	
	His chilling cold doth heat require, 
	Come, Seraphins, in lieu of fire; 
	This little Ark no cover hath, 
	Let Cherubs’ wings his body swath; 
	Come, Raphael, this Babe must eat, 
	Provide our little Tobie meat.
	
	Let Gabriel be now his groom, 
	That first took up his earthly room; 
	Let Michael stand in his defence, 
	Whom love hath link’d to feeble sense; 
	Let Graces rock when he doth cry, 
	Let Angels sing his lullaby.
	
	The same you saw in heavenly seat, 
	Is he that now sucks Mary’s teat; 
	Agonize your King a mortal wight, 
	His borrowed weed lets not your sight; 
	Come, kiss the manger where he lies, 
	That is your bliss above the skies.
	
	This little Babe so few days old, 
	Is come to rifle Satan’s fold; 
	All hell doth at his presence quake, 
	Though he himself for cold do shake; 
	For in this weak, unarmed wise, 
	The gates of hell he will surprise.
	
	With tears he fights and wins the field, 
	His naked breast stands for a shield; 
	His battering shot are babish cries, 
	His arrows made of weeping eyes, 
	His martial ensigns cold and need, 
	And feeble flesh his warrior’s steed.
	
	His camp is pitched in a stall, 
	His bulwark but a broken wall; 
	The crib his trench, hay stalks his stakes, 
	Of shepherds he his muster makes; 
	And thus as sure his foe to wound, 
	The Angels’ trumps alarum sound.
	
	My soul with Christ join thou in fight, 
	Stick to the tents that he hath dight; 
	Within his crib is surest ward, 
	This little Babe will be thy guard; 
	If thou wilt foil thy foes with joy, 
	Then flit not from the heavenly boy.


9. TIMES GO BY TERMS

	THE lopped tree in time may grow again,
	   Most naked plants renew both fruit and flower;
	The sorriest wight may find release of pain,
	   The driest soil suck in some moistening shower.
	       Times go by turns, and chances change by course,
	       From foul to fair, from better hap to worse.
	
	The sea of Fortune doth not ever flow, 
	   She draws her favours to the lowest ebb.
	Her tides hath equal times to come and go,
	   Her loom doth weave the fine and coarsest web.
	       No joy so great but runneth to an end,
	       No hap so hard but may in fine amend.
	
	Not always fall of leaf, nor ever spring,
	   No endless night, yet not eternal day;
	The saddest birds a season find to sing,
	   The roughest storm a calm may soon allay.
	       Thus, with succeeding turns, God tempereth all,
	       That man may hope to rise, yet fear to fall.
	
	A chance may win that by mischance was lost;
	   The net, that holds no great, takes little fish;
	In some things all, in all things none are crossed;
	   Few all they need, but none have all they wish.
	       Unmeddled joys here to no man befall;
	       Who least, hath some; who most, hath never all.


10. A VALE OF TEARS

	A vale there is, enwrapt with dreadful shades,
	    Which thick of mourning pines shrouds from the sun,
	Where hanging cliffs yield short and dumpish glades,
	    And snowy flood with broken streams doth run.
	
	Where eye-room is from rock to cloudy sky,
	    From thence to dales with stony ruins strew’d,
	Then to the crushèd water’s frothy fry,
	    Which tumbleth from the tops where snow is thaw’d.
	
	Where ears of other sound can have no choice,
	    But various blust’ring of the stubborn wind
	In trees, in caves, in straits with divers noise;
	    Which now doth hiss, now howl, now roar by kind.
	
	Where waters wrestle with encount’ring stones,
	    That break their streams, and turn them into foam,
	The hollow clouds full fraught with thund’ring groans,
	    With hideous thumps discharge their pregnant womb.
	
	And in the horror of this fearful quire
	    Consists the music of this doleful place;
	All pleasant birds from thence their tunes retire,
	    Where none but heavy notes have any grace.
	
	Resort there is of none but pilgrim wights,
	    That pass with trembling foot and panting heart;
	With terror cast in cold and shivering frights,
	    They judge the place to terror framed by art.
	
	Yet nature’s work it is, of art untouch’d,
	    So strait indeed, so vast unto the eye,
	With such disorder’d order strangely couch’d,
	    And with such pleasing horror low and high,
	
	That who it views must needs remain aghast,
	    Much at the work, more at the Maker’s might;
	And muse how nature such a plot could cast
	    Where nothing seemeth wrong, yet nothing right.
	
	A place for mated mindes, an only bower
	    Where everything do soothe a dumpish mood;
	Earth lies forlorn, the cloudy sky doth lower,
	    The wind here weeps, here sighs, here cries aloud.
	
	The struggling flood between the marble groans,
	    Then roaring beats upon the craggy sides;
	A little off, amidst the pebble stones,
	    With bubbling streams and purling noise it glides.
	
	The pines thick set, high grown and ever green,
	    Still clothe the place with sad and mourning veil;
	Here gaping cliff, there mossy plain is seen,
	    Here hope doth spring, and there again doth quail.
	
	Huge massy stones that hang by tickle stays,
	    Still threaten fall, and seem to hang in fear;
	Some wither’d trees, ashamed of their decays,
	    Bereft of green are forced gray coats to wear.
	
	Here crystal springs crept out of secret vein,
	    Straight find some envious hole that hides their grace;
	Here searèd tufts lament the want of rain,
	    There thunder-wrack gives terror to the place.
	
	All pangs and heavy passions here may find
	    A thousand motives suiting to their griefs,
	To feed the sorrows of their troubled mind,
	    And chase away dame Pleasure’s vain reliefs.
	
	To plaining thoughts this vale a rest may be,
	    To which from worldly joys they may retire;
	Where sorrow springs from water, stone and tree;
	    Where everything with mourners doth conspire.
	
	Sit here, my soul, main streams of tears afloat,
	    Here all thy sinful foils alone recount;
	Of solemn tunes make thou the doleful note,
	    That, by thy ditties, dolour may amount.
	
	When echo shall repeat thy painful cries,
	    Think that the very stones thy sins bewray,
	And now accuse thee with their sad replies,
	    As heaven and earth shall in the latter day.
	
	Let former faults be fuel of thy fire,
	    For grief in limbeck of thy heart to still
	Thy pensive thoughts and dumps of thy desire,
	    And vapour tears up to thy eyes at will.
	
	Let tears to tunes, and pains to plaints be press’d,
	    And let this be the burden of thy song,--
	Come, deep remorse, possess my sinful breast;
	    Delights, adieu!  I harbour’d you too long.


11. THE VIRGIN MARY TO CHRIST ON THE CROSS

	What mist hath dimm’d that glorious face?
	What seas of grief my sun doth toss?
	The golden rays of heavenly grace
	Lies now eclipsèd on the cross.
	
	Jesus, my love, my Son, my God,
	Behold Thy mother wash’d in tears:
	Thy bloody wounds be made a rod
	To chasten these my later years.
	
	You cruel Jews, come work your ire
	Upon this worthless flesh of mine,
	And kindle not eternal fire
	By wounding Him who is divine.
	
	Thou messenger that didst impart
	His first descent into my womb,
	Come help me now to cleave my heart,
	That there I may my Son entomb.
	
	You angels, all that present were
	To show His birth with harmony,
	Why are you not now ready here,
	To make a mourning symphony?
	
	The cause I know you wail alone,
	And shed your tears in secrecy,
	Lest I should movèd be to moan,
	By force of heavy company.
	
	But wail, my soul, thy comfort dies,
	My woful womb, lament thy fruit;
	My heart give tears unto mine eyes,
	Let sorrow string my heavy lute.