*** Robert Southey (1774 - 1843)


1. AFTER BLENHEIM

	It was a summer evening; 
	Old Kaspar’s work was done, 
	And he before his cottage door 
	Was sitting in the sun; 
	And by him sported on the green 
	His little grandchild Wilhelmine. 
	
	She saw her brother Peterkin 
	Roll something large and round, 
	Which he beside the rivulet 
	In playing there had found. 
	He came to ask what he had found, 
	That was so large, and smooth, and round. 
	
	Old Kaspar took it from the boy, 
	Who stood expectant by; 
	And then the old man shook his head, 
	And with a natural sigh, 
	“‘Tis some poor fellow’s skull,” said he, 
	“Who fell in the great victory. 
	
	“I find them in the garden, 
	For there’s many here about; 
	And often, when I go to plow, 
	The plowshare turns them out; 
	For many thousand men,” said he, 
	“Were slain in that great victory.” 
	
	“Now tell us what ‘twas all about,” 
	Young Peterkin, he cries; 
	And little Wilhelmine looks up 
	With wonder-waiting eyes; 
	“Now tell us all about the war, 
	And what they fought each other for.” 
	
	“It was the English,” Kaspar cried, 
	“Who put the French to rout; 
	But what they fought each other for, 
	I could not well make out; 
	But everybody said,” quoth he, 
	“That ‘twas a famous victory. 
	
	“My father lived at Blenheim then, 
	Yon little stream hard by; 
	They burnt his dwelling to the ground, 
	And he was forced to fly; 
	So with his wife and child he fled, 
	Nor had he where to rest his head. 
	
	“With fire and sword the country round 
	Was wasted far and wide, 
	And many a childing mother then, 
	And new-born baby, died; 
	But things like that, you know, must be 
	At every famous victory. 
	
	“They say it was a shocking sight 
	After the field was won; 
	For many thousand bodies here 
	Lay rotting in the sun; 
	But things like that, you know, must be 
	After a famous victory. 
	
	“Great praise the Duke of Marlboro’ won, 
	And our good Prince Eugene.” 
	“Why, ‘twas a very wicked thing!” 
	Said little Wilhelmine. 
	“Nay, nay, my little girl,” quoth he; 
	“It was a famous victory. 
	
	“And everybody praised the Duke 
	Who this great fight did win.” 
	“But what good came of it at last?” 
	Quoth little Peterkin. 
	“Why, that I cannot tell,” said he; 
	“But ‘twas a famous victory.”


2. INCHCAPE ROCK

	No stir in the air, no stir in the sea,
	The Ship was still as she could be;
	Her sails from heaven received no motion,
	Her keel was steady in the ocean.
	
	Without either sign or sound of their shock,
	The waves flow’d over the Inchcape Rock;
	So little they rose, so little they fell,
	They did not move the Inchcape Bell.
	
	The worthy Abbot of Aberbrothok
	Had placed that bell on the Inchcape Rock;
	On a buoy in the storm it floated and swung,
	And over the waves its warning rung.
	
	When the Rock was hid by the surge’s swell,
	The Mariners heard the warning Bell;
	And then they knew the perilous Rock,
	And blest the Abbot of Aberbrothok
	
	The Sun in the heaven was shining gay,
	All things were joyful on that day;
	The sea-birds scream’d as they wheel’d round,
	And there was joyaunce in their sound.
	
	The buoy of the Inchcpe Bell was seen
	A darker speck on the ocean green;
	Sir Ralph the Rover walk’d his deck,
	And fix’d his eye on the darker speck.
	
	He felt the cheering power of spring,
	It made him whistle, it made him sing;
	His heart was mirthful to excess,
	But the Rover’s mirth was wickedness.
	
	His eye was on the Inchcape Float;
	Quoth he, “My men, put out the boat,
	And row me to the Inchcape Rock,
	And I’ll plague the Abbot of Aberbrothok.”
	
	The boat is lower’d, the boatmen row,
	And to the Inchcape Rock they go;
	Sir Ralph bent over from the boat,
	And he cut the bell from the Inchcape Float.
	
	Down sank the Bell with a gurgling sound,
	The bubbles rose and burst around;
	Quoth Sir Ralph, “The next who comes to the Rock,
	Won’t bless the Abbot of Aberbrothok.”
	
	Sir Ralph the Rover sail’d away,
	He scour’d the seas for many a day;
	And now grown rich with plunder’d store,
	He steers his course for Scotland’s shore.
	
	So thick a haze o’erspreads the sky,
	They cannot see the sun on high;
	The wind hath blown a gale all day,
	At evening it hath died away.
	
	On the deck the Rover takes his stand,
	So dark it is they see no land.
	Quoth Sir Ralph, “It will be lighter soon,
	For there is the dawn of the rising Moon.”
	
	“Canst hear,” said one, “the breakers roar?
	For methinks we should be near the shore.”
	“Now, where we are I cannot tell,
	But I wish we could hear the Inchcape Bell.”
	
	They hear no sound, the swell is strong,
	Though the wind hath fallen they drift along;
	Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock,
	“Oh Christ! It is the Inchcape Rock!”
	
	Sir Ralph the Rover tore his hair,
	He curst himself in his despair;
	The waves rush in on every side,
	The ship is sinking beneath the tide.
	
	But even is his dying fear,
	One dreadful sound could the Rover hear;
	A sound as if with the Inchcape Bell,
	The Devil below was ringing his knell.


3. MY DAYS AMONG THE DEAD ARE PAST

	My days among the Dead are past;
	   Around me I behold,
	Where’er these casual eyes are cast,
	   The mighty minds of old;
	My never-failing friends are they,
	With whom I converse day by day.
	
	With them I take delight in weal,
	   And seek relief in woe;
	And while I understand and feel
	   How much to them I owe,
	My cheeks have often been bedew’d
	With tears of thoughtful gratitude.
	
	My thoughts are with the Dead, with them
	   I live in long-past years,
	Their virtues love, their faults condemn,
	   Partake their hopes and fears,
	And from their lessons seek and find
	Instruction with an humble mind.
	
	My hopes are with the Dead, anon
	   My place with them will be,
	And I with them shall travel on
	   Through all Futurity;
	Yet leaving here a name, I trust,
	That will not perish in the dust.


4. THE OLD MAN’S COMFORTS

	You are old, Father William, the young man cried,
	   The few locks which are left you are grey;
	You are hale, Father William, a hearty old man,
	   Now tell me the reason I pray.
	
	In the days of my youth, Father William replied,
	   I remember’d that youth would fly fast,
	And abused not my health and my vigour at first
	   That I never might need them at last.
	
	You are old, Father William, the young man cried,
	   And pleasures with youth pass away,
	And yet you lament not the days that are gone,
	   Now tell me the reason I pray.
	
	In the days of my youth, Father William replied,
	   I remember’d that youth could not last;
	I thought of the future whatever I did,
	   That I never might grieve for the past.
	
	You are old, Father William, the young man cried,
	   And life must be hastening away;
	You are chearful, and love to converse upon death!
	   Now tell me the reason I pray.
	
	I am chearful, young man, Father William replied,
	   Let the cause thy attention engage;
	In the days of my youth I remember’d my God!
	   And He hath not forgotten my age.