*** Carl Spitteler (1845 - 1924)


1. THE HIKER

	Downy flakes whisper softly from the sky.
	A hiker climbs over firn and ice.
	The snow woman follows him with treacherous steps:
	
	“Hold still, my dear, and take me with you!
	The evening is near and the summit is far away.
	I’d be happy to play you a little song just to keep you entertained.”
	
	She puts the green shawm on her lip,
	She rejoiced at flowers and Lenz and Mai.
	He listened, cheeks wet with tears,
	Then he ticked the box and drew for bass.
	
	And darker clouds the twilight snow.
	She crept to his side on a cunning toe:
	“Stop! let me shine for you, you are wandering astray!
	I’ll tell you a friendly fairy tale.”
	
	A traffic light she drew from her robe:
	The homeland shines before his eyes,
	The hill, the garden, being a parent
	In the blissful golden glow of youth.
	
	He swayed. Already he shortens the measure of his steps,
	Then he ticked the box and drew for bass.
	
	And it storms and it rummages with storm power,
	White night yawns from the howling rock.
	His will failed, his knee sank.
	There she sat on a stone bench.
	
	“It’s comfortable here; come, sit down!
	I really know how to caress.
	And slumber lures you and a dream laughs at you:
	There is room on my warm bosom.”
	
	She looked so lovely, she nodded so sweetly,
	as if the sky wanted to open up to him.
	He staggers towards her in a staggering run
	and fell at her feet--never got up again.


2. THE LITTLE BELL’S COMPLAINT

	The little bell once sadly
	The organ thus addressed:
	“Your pipes’ rich store of changes
	Wakes envy in my breast
	You’ve countless ways of telling
	All that your soul can learn;
	And what you learn, we feel it,
	And when you feel, we yearn.
	But I, though grief and pity
	May rend my heart in twain,
	Can only tinkle sweetly,
	Again, and yet again.
	My deepest self is longing
	Once to ring out of tune.
	Who’ll teach me how to jangle?
	That were a bitter boon!”


3. PUBERTY

	On the upland, high above the village,
	Under hazel-branches lay the goatherd,
	Crossed his hands behind his neck for pillow,
	Pulled his straw-hat farther down for sunshade.
	But the straw-hat could not stop the golden
	Trickle of the sunbeams through its meshes.
	
	To himself the poor boy murmured sadly
	“Oh, to catch that glitter in my fingers,
	Tie it in my handkerchief and hasten
	Down into the village to the goldsmith!
	He would surely pay a thousand dollars--
	Then I’d buy a pair of spurs, a pony,
	Ride him to the manse, and knock so loudly
	(Using my new whip) that Fraulein Anna
	Eagerly would run to find her mother,
	Say: ‘Dear mother, hurry to the cellar,
	Bring a flask of ruby wine, the finest, 
	Set a fowl to roast within the oven;
	For a stranger soldierly and haughty
	Has arrived--he must have come to woo me.’
	
	Ah, but not the bottle, nor the chicken,
	Would I touch, however fine and tender;
	Nothing but herself, but Fraulein Anna!
	Her I’d set upon the pony, clasping
	Both my arms around her, and would gallop
	All along the street, along the village,
	Up the hill, and stop at Friedli’s hostel--
	Then we would be married in the autumn.”
	
	Thus the poor boy communed with his fancies;
	Then remembering all, and sighing deeply
	Thought: “The fool you are with your fool-stories!
	You will live and you will die a goatherd,
	Penniless and barefoot and a no-one.
	Anna would not look at you an instant.”
	
	Hark--the goats were bleating, at the tethers
	Dragging, and in circles wildly leaping;
	And in single file along the footpath
	Came two fine young ladies from the city.
	And the first one, calling to the second,
	Cried: ‘We are in luck! You see the boy there
	Stretched beneath a hazel-bough? His forehead’s
	All a mass of curls, his mouth is rosy,
	Rosy too his cheeks, and soft for kissing!’
	Saying so, she ran across the meadow,
	Stooped above the boy, while her companion
	Curtain-wise her petticoats extended.
	Then on the mouth and cheeks the first one kissed him--
	Ten or twelve times kissed the startled youngster.
	
	After that they altered their arrangements;
	While the first assumed the part of curtain,
	She who came the second took her kisses.
	Then they threw their arms round one another,
	Danced into the wood, and singing vanished.
	
	But the boy lay still among the grasses,
	Qualms of conscience, pangs of shame, upon him:
	“Curse thee for a faithless wanton fellow,
	Faithless to the loved, the peerless lady!
	On thee have the lips of stranger feasted,
	Sinner! And thyself hast likewise feasted!
	Never now of gracious Fraulein Anna
	Canst thou front the pure angelic beauty--
	As the burrowing mole before the sunlight
	Thou shalt flinch before that face from heaven.”
	
	But when evening bells began to tinkle
	And the boy, despairing, broken-hearted,
	Homeward slunk, his goat behind him dragging,
	Lo! Upon the path appeared the pastor,
	Then the pastor’s wife, and then--confound it!--
	Last of all herself, his Fraulein Anna.
	Wonders never cease, though--for the pastor
	Took him by the chin, and asked him kindly
	“How’s the weather? And the Paternosters?”
	And the pastor’s lady stroked his lovelocks,
	And his Fraulein Anna very sweetly
	Looked behind, and whispered to her mother:
	“Hasn’t he grown manly and good looking?”

