*** William Stafford (1914 - 1993)


1. FOR MY YOUNG FRIENDS WHO ARE AFRAID

	There is a country to cross you will
	find in the corner of your eye, in
	the quick slip of your foot--air far
	down, a snap that might have caught.
	And maybe for you, for me, a high, passing
	voice that finds its way by being
	afraid. That country is there, for us,
	carried as it is crossed. What you fear
	will not go away: it will take you into
	yourself and bless you and keep you.
	That’s the world, and we all live there.



2. JUST THINKING

	Got up on a cool morning. Leaned out a window.
	No cloud, no wind. Air that flowers held
	for awhile. Some dove somewhere.

	Been on probation most of my life. And
	the rest of my life been condemned. So these moments
	count for a lot--peace, you know.

	Let the bucket of memory down into the well,
	bring it up. Cool, cool minutes. No one
	stirring, no plans. Just being there.

	This is what the whole thing is about.



3. REMEMBERING MOUNTAIN MEN

	I put my foot in cold water
	and hold it there: early mornings
	they had to wade through broken ice
	to find the traps in the deep channel
	with their hands, drag up the chains and
	the drowned beaver. The slow current
	of the life below tugs at me all day.
	When I dream at night, they save a place for me,
	no matter how small, somewhere by the fire.



4. SECURITY

	Tomorrow will have an island. Before night
	I always find it. Then on to the next island.
	These places hidden in the day separate
	and come forward if you beckon.
	But you have to know they are there before they exist.

	Some time there will be a tomorrow without any island.
	So far, I haven’t let that happen, but after
	I’m gone others may become faithless and careless.
	Before them will tumble the wide unbroken sea,
	and without any hope they will stare at the horizon.

	So to you, Friend, I confide my secret:
	to be a discoverer you hold close whatever
	you find, and after a while you decide
	what it is. Then, secure in where you have been,
	you turn to the open sea and let go.



5. THINKING FOR BERKY

	In the late night listening from bed
	I have joined the ambulance or the patrol
	screaming toward some drama, the kind of end
	that Berky must have some day, if she isn’t dead.

	The wildest of all, her father and mother cruel,
	farming out there beyond the old stone quarry
	where high school lovers parked their lurching cars,
	Berky learned to love in that dark school.

	Early her face was turned away from home
	toward any hardworking place; but still her soul,
	with terrible things to do, was alive, looking out
	for the rescue that--surely, some day--would have to come.

	Windiest nights, Berky, I have thought for you,
	and no matter how lucky I’ve been I’ve touched wood.
	There are things not solved in our town though tomorrow came:
	there are things time passing can never make come true.

	We live in an occupied country, misunderstood;
	justice will take us millions of intricate moves.
	Sirens will hunt down Berky, you survivors in your beds
	listening through the night, so far and good.



6. THIS LIFE

	We would climb the highest dune,
	from there to gaze and come down:
	the ocean was performing;
	we contributed our climb.

	Waves leapfrogged and came
	straight out of the storm.
	What should our gaze mean?
	Kit waited for me to decide.

	Standing on such a hill,
	what would you tell your child?
	That was an absolute vista.
	Those waves raced far, and cold.

	“How far could you swim, Daddy,
	in such a storm?”
	“As far as was needed,” I said,
	and as I talked, I swam.
