*** Wallace Stevens (1879 - 1955)


1. ANECDOTE OF THE JAR

	I placed a jar in Tennessee,
	And round it was, upon a hill.
	It made the slovenly wilderness
	Surround that hill.
	
	The wilderness rose up to it,
	And sprawled around, no longer wild.
	The jar was round upon the ground
	And tall and of a port in air.
	
	It took dominion everywhere.
	The jar was gray and bare.
	It did not give of bird or bush,
	Like nothing else in Tennessee.


2. ANECDOTE OF THE PRINCE OF PEACOCKS

	In the moonlight
	I met Berserk,
	In the moonlight
	On the bushy plain.
	 
	Oh, sharp he was
	As the sleepless!
	 
	And, “Why are you red
	In this milky blue?”
	I said.
	“Why sun-colored,
	As if awake
	In the midst of sleep?”
	 
	“You that wander,”
	So he said,
	“On the bushy plain,
	Forget so soon.
	But I set my traps
	In the midst of dreams.”
	 
	I knew from this
	That the blue ground
	Was full of blocks
	And blocking steel.
	I knew the dread
	Of the bushy plain,
	And the beauty
	Of the moonlight
	Falling there,
	Falling
	As sleep falls
	In the innocent air.


3. ANOTHER WEEPING WOMAN

	Pour the unhappiness out
	From your too bitter heart,
	Which grieving will not sweeten.
	
	Poison grows in this dark.
	It is in the water of tears
	Its black blooms rise.
	
	The magnificent cause of being--
	The imagination, the one reality
	In this imagined world--
	
	Leaves you
	With him for whom no phantasy moves,
	And you are pierced by a death.


4. ARCADES OF PHILADELPHIA THE PAST

	Only the rich remember the past,
	The strawberries once in the Apennines,
	Philadelphia that the spiders ate.
	
	There they sit, holding their eyes in their hands.
	Queer, in this Vallombrosa of ears,
	That they never hear the past. To see,
	To hear, to touch, to taste, to smell, that’s now,
	That’s this. Do they touch the thing they see,
	Feel the wind of it, smell the dust of it?
	They do not touch it. Sounds never rise
	Out of what they see.
	They polish their eyes
	In their hands. The lilacs came long after.
	But the town and the fragrance were never one,
	Though the blue bushes bloomed--and bloom,
	Still bloom in the agate eyes, red blue,
	Red purple, never quite red itself.
	The tongue, the fingers and the nose
	Are comic trash, the ears are dirt,
	But the eyes are men in the palm of the hand.
	
	This? A man must be very poor
	With a single sense, though he smells clouds,
	Or to see the sea on Sunday, or
	To touch a woman cadaverous,
	Of poorness as an earth, to taste
	Dry seconds and insipid thirds,
	To hear himself and not to speak.
	
	The strawberries once in the Apennines . . .
	They seem a little painted, now.
	The mountains are scratched and used, clear fakes.


5. THE AURORAS OF AUTUMN

	I.
	
	This is where the serpent lives, the bodiless. 
	His head is air. Beneath his tip at night 
	Eyes open and fix on us in every sky. 
	
	Or is this another wriggling out of the egg, 
	Another image at the end of the cave, 
	Another bodiless for the body’s slough? 
	
	This is where the serpent lives. This is his nest, 
	These fields, these hills, these tinted distances, 
	And the pines above and along and beside the sea. 
	
	This is form gulping after formlessness, 
	Skin flashing to wished-for disappearances 
	And the serpent body flashing without the skin. 
	
	This is the height emerging and its base 
	These lights may finally attain a pole 
	In the midmost midnight and find the serpent there, 
	
	In another nest, the master of the maze 
	Of body and air and forms and images, 
	Relentlessly in possession of happiness. 
	
	This is his poison: that we should disbelieve 
	Even that. His meditations in the ferns, 
	When he moved so slightly to make sure of sun, 
	
	Made us no less as sure. We saw in his head, 
	Black beaded on the rock, the flecked animal, 
	The moving grass, the Indian in his glade. 
	
	
	II. 
	
	Farewell to an idea . . . A cabin stands, 
	Deserted, on a beach. It is white, 
	As by a custom or according to 
	
	An ancestral theme or as a consequence 
	Of an infinite course. The flowers against the wall 
	Are white, a little dried, a kind of mark 
	
	Reminding, trying to remind, of a white 
	That was different, something else, last year 
	Or before, not the white of an aging afternoon, 
	
	Whether fresher or duller, whether of winter cloud 
	Or of winter sky, from horizon to horizon. 
	The wind is blowing the sand across the floor. 
	
	Here, being visible is being white, 
	Is being of the solid of white, the accomplishment 
	Of an extremist in an exercise . . . 
	
	The season changes. A cold wind chills the beach. 
	The long lines of it grow longer, emptier, 
	A darkness gathers though it does not fall 
	
	And the whiteness grows less vivid on the wall. 
	The man who is walking turns blankly on the sand. 
	He observes how the north is always enlarging the change, 
	
	With its frigid brilliances, its blue-red sweeps 
	And gusts of great enkindlings, its polar green, 
	The color of ice and fire and solitude. 
	
	
	III.
	
	Farewell to an idea . . . The mother’s face, 
	The purpose of the poem, fills the room. 
	They are together, here, and it is warm, 
	
	With none of the prescience of oncoming dreams. 
	It is evening. The house is evening, half dissolved. 
	Only the half they can never possess remains, 
	
	Still-starred. It is the mother they possess, 
	Who gives transparence to their present peace. 
	She makes that gentler that can gentle be. 
	
	And yet she too is dissolved, she is destroyed. 
	She gives transparence. But she has grown old. 
	The necklace is a carving not a kiss. 
	
	The soft hands are a motion not a touch. 
	ill crumble and the books will burn. 
	They are at ease in a shelter of the mind 
	
	And the house is of the mind and they and time, 
	Together, all together. Boreal night 
	Will look like frost as it approaches them 
	
	And to the mother as she falls asleep 
	And as they say good-night, good-night. Upstairs 
	The windows will be lighted, not the rooms. 
	
	A wind will spread its windy grandeurs round 
	And knock like a rifle-butt against the door. 
	The wind will command them with invincible sound. 
	
	
	IV.
	
	Farewell to an idea . . . The cancellings, 
	The negations are never final. The father sits 
	In space, wherever he sits, of bleak regard, 
	
	As one that is strong in the bushes of his eyes. 
	He says no to no and yes to yes. He says yes 
	To no; and in saying yes he says farewell. 
	
	He measures the velocities of change. 
	He leaps from heaven to heaven more rapidly 
	Than bad angels leap from heaven to hell in flames. 
	
	But now he sits in quiet and green-a-day. 
	He assumes the great speeds of space and flutters them 
	From cloud to cloudless, cloudless to keen clear 
	
	In flights of eye and ear, the highest eye 
	And the lowest ear, the deep ear that discerns, 
	At evening, things that attend it until it hears 
	
	The supernatural preludes of its own, 
	At the moment when the angelic eye defines 
	Its actors approaching, in company, in their masks. 
	
	Master O master seated by the fire 
	And yet in space and motionless and yet 
	Of motion the ever-brightening origin, 
	
	Profound, and yet the king and yet the crown, 
	Look at this present throne. What company, 
	In masks, can choir it with the naked wind? 
	
	
	V. 
	
	The mother invites humanity to her house 
	And table. The father fetches tellers of tales 
	And musicians who mute much, muse much, on the tales. 
	
	The father fetches negresses to dance, 
	Among the children, like curious ripenesses 
	Of pattern in the dance’s ripening. 
	
	For these the musicians make insidious tones, 
	Clawing the sing-song of their instruments. 
	The children laugh and jangle a tinny time. 
	
	The father fetches pageants out of air, 
	Scenes of the theatre, vistas and blocks of woods 
	And curtains like a naive pretence of sleep. 
	
	Among these the musicians strike the instinctive poem. 
	The father fetches his unherded herds, 
	Of barbarous tongue, slavered and panting halves 
	
	Of breath, obedient to his trumpet’s touch. 
	This then is Chatillon or as you please. 
	We stand in the tumult of a festival. 
	
	What festival? This loud, disordered mooch? 
	These hospitaliers? These brute-like guests? 
	These musicians dubbing at a tragedy, 
	
	A-dub, a-dub, which is made up of this: 
	That there are no lines to speak? There is no play. 
	Or, the persons act one merely by being here. 
	
	
	VI.
	
	It is a theatre floating through the clouds, 
	Itself a cloud, although of misted rock 
	And mountains running like water, wave on wave, 
	
	Through waves of light. It is of cloud transformed 
	To cloud transformed again, idly, the way 
	A season changes color to no end, 
	
	Except the lavishing of itself in change, 
	As light changes yellow into gold and gold 
	To its opal elements and fire’s delight, 
	
	Splashed wide-wise because it likes magnificence 
	And the solemn pleasures of magnificent space 
	The cloud drifts idly through half-thought-of forms. 
	
	The theatre is filled with flying birds, 
	Wild wedges, as of a volcano’s smoke, palm-eyed 
	And vanishing, a web in a corridor 
	
	Or massive portico. A capitol, 
	It may be, is emerging or has just 
	Collapsed. The denouement has to be postponed . . . 
	
	This is nothing until in a single man contained, 
	Nothing until this named thing nameless is 
	And is destroyed. He opens the door of his house 
	
	On flames. The scholar of one candle sees 
	An Arctic effulgence flaring on the frame 
	Of everything he is. And he feels afraid.
	
	
	VII.
	
	Is there an imagination that sits enthroned 
	As grim as it is benevolent, the just 
	And the unjust, which in the midst of summer stops 
	
	To imagine winter? When the leaves are dead, 
	Does it take its place in the north and enfold itself, 
	Goat-leaper, crystalled and luminous, sitting 
	
	In highest night? And do these heavens adorn 
	And proclaim it, the white creator of black, jetted 
	By extinguishings, even of planets as may be, 
	
	Even of earth, even of sight, in snow, 
	Except as needed by way of majesty, 
	In the sky, as crown and diamond cabala?
	
	It leaps through us, through all our heavens leaps, 
	Extinguishing our planets, one by one, 
	Leaving, of where we were and looked, of where 
	
	We knew each other and of each other thought, 
	A shivering residue, chilled and foregone, 
	Except for that crown and mystical cabala. 
	
	But it dare not leap by chance in its own dark. 
	It must change from destiny to slight caprice. 
	And thus its jetted tragedy, its stele 
	
	And shape and mournful making move to find 
	What must unmake it and, at last, what can, 
	Say, a flippant communication under the moon. 
	
	
	VIII.
	
	There may be always a time of innocence. 
	There is never a place. Or if there is no time, 
	If it is not a thing of time, nor of place, 
	
	Existing in the idea of it, alone, 
	In the sense against calamity, it is not 
	Less real. For the oldest and coldest philosopher, 
	
	There is or may be a time of innocence 
	As pure principle. Its nature is its end, 
	That it should be, and yet not be, a thing 
	
	That pinches the pity of the pitiful man, 
	Like a book at evening beautiful but untrue, 
	Like a book on rising beautiful and true. 
	
	
	It is like a thing of ether that exists 
	Almost as predicate. But it exists, 
	It exists, it is visible, it is, it is. 
	
	So, then, these lights are not a spell of light, 
	A saying out of a cloud, but innocence. 
	An innocence of the earth and no false sign 
	
	Or symbol of malice. That we partake thereof, 
	Lie down like children in this holiness, 
	As if, awake, we lay in the quiet of sleep, 
	
	As if the innocent mother sang in the dark 
	Of the room and on an accordion, half-heard, 
	Created the time and place in which we breathed . . . 
	
	
	IX.
	
	And of each other thought--in the idiom 
	Of the work, in the idiom of an innocent earth, 
	Not of the enigma of the guilty dream. 
	
	We were as Danes in Denmark all day long 
	And knew each other well, hale-hearted landsmen, 
	For whom the outlandish was another day 
	
	Of the week, queerer than Sunday. We thought alike 
	And that made brothers of us in a home 
	In which we fed on being brothers, fed 
	
	And fattened as on a decorous honeycomb. 
	This drama that we live--We lay sticky with sleep. 
	This sense of the activity of fate--
	
	The rendezvous, when she came alone, 
	By her coming became a freedom of the two, 
	An isolation which only the two could share. 
	
	Shall we be found hanging in the trees next spring? 
	Of what disaster in this the imminence: 
	Bare limbs, bare trees and a wind as sharp as salt? 
	
	The stars are putting on their glittering belts. 
	They throw around their shoulders cloaks that flash 
	Like a great shadow’s last embellishment. 
	
	It may come tomorrow in the simplest word, 
	Almost as part of innocence, almost, 
	Almost as the tenderest and the truest part. 
	
	
	X.
	
	An unhappy people in a happy world--
	Read, rabbi, the phases of this difference. 
	An unhappy people in an unhappy world--
	
	Here are too many mirrors for misery. 
	A happy people in an unhappy world--
	It cannot be. There’s nothing there to roll 
	
	On the expressive tongue, the finding fang. 
	A happy people in a happy world--
	Buffo! A ball, an opera, a bar. 
	
	Turn back to where we were when we began: 
	An unhappy people in a happy world. 
	Now, solemnize the secretive syllables. 
	
	Read to the congregation, for today 
	And for tomorrow, this extremity, 
	This contrivance of the spectre of the spheres, 
	
	Contriving balance to contrive a whole, 
	The vital, the never-failing genius, 
	Fulfilling his meditations, great and small. 
	
	In these unhappy he meditates a whole, 
	The full of fortune and the full of fate, 
	As if he lived all lives, that he might know, 
	
	In hall harridan, not hushful paradise, 
	To a haggling of wind and weather, by these lights 
	Like a blaze of summer straw, in winter’s nick.


6. BANAL SOJOURN

	Two wooden tubs of blue hydrangeas stand at the foot of the stone steps.
	The sky is a blue gum streaked with rose. The trees are black.
	The grackles crack their throats of bone in the smooth air.
	Moisture and heat have swollen the garden into a slum of bloom.
	Pardie! Summer is like a fat beast, sleepy in mildew,
	Our old bane, green and bloated, serene, who cries,
	“That bliss of stars, that princox of evening heaven!” reminding of seasons,
	When radiance came running down, slim through the bareness.
	And so it is one damns that green shade at the bottom of the land.
	For who can care at the wigs despoiling the Satan ear?
	And who does not seek the sky unfuzzed, soaring to the princox?
	One has a malady, here, a malady. One feels a malady.


7. BANTAMS IN THE PINE-WOODS

	Chieftain Iffucan of Azcan in caftan
	Of tan with henna hackles, halt!
	 
	Damned universal cock, as if the sun
	Was blackamoor to bear your blazing tail.
	 
	Fat! Fat! Fat! Fat! I am the personal.
	Your world is you. I am my world.
	 
	You ten-foot poet among inchlings. Fat!
	Begone! An inchling bristles in these pines,
	 
	Bristles, and points their Appalachian tangs,
	And fears not portly Azcan nor his hoos.


8. BOUQUET OF ROSES IN SUNLIGHT

	Say that it is a crude effect, black reds,
	Pink yellows, orange whites, too much as they are
	To be anything else in the sunlight of the room,
	
	Too much as they are to be changed by metaphor,
	Too actual, things that in being real
	Make any imaginings of them lesser things.
	
	And yet this effect is a consequence of the way
	We feel and, therefore, is not real, except
	In our sense of it, our sense of the fertilest red,
	
	Of yellow as first color and of white,
	In which the sense lies still, as a man lies,
	Enormous, in a completing of his truth.
	
	Our sense of these things changes and they change,
	Not as in metaphor, but in our sense
	Of them. So sense exceeds all metaphor.
	
	It exceeds the heavy changes of the light.
	It is like a flow of meanings with no speech
	And of as many meanings as of men.
	
	We are two that use these roses as we are,
	In seeing them. This is what makes them seem
	So far bevond the rhetorician’s touch.


9. THE CANDLE A SAINT

	Green is the night, green kindled and appareled.
	It is she that walks among astronomers.
	
	She strides above the rabbit and the cat,
	Like a noble figure, out of the sky,
	
	Moving among the sleepers, the men,
	Those that lie chanting _green is the night_.
	
	Green is the night and out of madness woven,
	The self-same madness of the astronomers
	
	And of him that sees, beyond the astronomers,
	The topaz rabbit and the emerald cat,
	
	That sees above them, that sees rise up above them,
	The noble figure, the essential shadow,
	
	Moving and being, the image at its source,
	The abstract, the archaic queen. Green is the night.


10. CARLOS AMONG THE CANDLES

	_THE stage is indistinguishable when the curtain rises. The room represented is semi-circular. In the center, at the back, is a large round window, covered by long curtains. There is a door at the right and one at the left. Farther forward on the stage there are two long, low, wooden tables, one at the right and one at the left. The walls and the curtains over the window- are of a dark reddish-purple, with a dim pattern of antique gold. 
	
	Carlos is an eccentric pedant of about forty. He is dressed in black. He wears close-fitting breeches and a close-fitting, tightly-buttoned, short coat with long tails. His hair is rumpled. He leaps upon the stage through the door at the right. Nothing is visible through the door. He has a long thin white lighted taper, which he holds high above his head as he moves, fantastically, over the stage, examining the room in which he finds himself. 
	
	When he has completed examining the room, he tip-toes to the table at the right and lights a single candle at the edge of the table nearest the front of the stage. It is a thin black candle, not less than two feet high. All the other candles are like it. They give very little light. 
	
	He speaks in a lively manner, but is over-nice in sounding his words. 
	
	As the candle begins to burn, he steps back, regarding it. Nothing else is visible on the table._
	
	_Carlos:_ 
	
	How the solitude of this candle penetrates me! I light a candle in the darkness. It fills the darkness with solitude, which becomes my own. I become a part of the solitude of the candle . . . of the darkness flowing over the house and into it. . . This room . . . and the profound room outside. . . Just to go through a door, and the change . . . the becoming a part, instantly, of that profounder room . . . and equally to feel it communicating, with the same persistency, its own mood, its own influence . . . and there, too, to feel the lesser influences of the shapes of things, of exhalations, sounds ... to feel the mood of the candle vanishing and the mood of the special night coming to take its place. . . 
	
	[_He sighs. After a pause he pirouettes, and then continues._]
	
	I was always affected by the grand style. And yet I have been thinking neither of mountains nor of morgues. . . To think of this light and of myself . . . it is a duty. . . . Is it because it makes me think of myself in other places in such a light . . . or of other people in other places in such a light? How true that is: other people in other places in such a light . . . If I looked in at that window and saw a single candle burning in an empty room . . . but if I saw a figure . . . If, now, I felt that there was someone outside . . . The vague influence . . . the influence that clutches. . . But it is not only here and now . . . It is in the morning . . . the difference between a small window and a large window . . . a blue window and a green window . . . It is in the afternoon and in the evening . . . in effects, so drifting, that I know myself to be incalculable, since the causes of what I am are incalculable. . . 
	
	[_He springs toward the table, flourishing his taper. At the end farthest from the front of the stage, he discovers a second candle, which he lights. He goes back to his former position._]
	
	The solitude dissolves. . . The light of two candles has a meaning different from the light of one . . . and an effect different from the effect of one. . . And the proof that that is so, is that I feel the difference. . . The associations have drifted a little and changed, and I have followed in this change. . . If I see myself in other places in such a light, it is not as I saw myself before. If I see other people in ether places in such a light, the people and places are different from the people and places I saw before. The solitude is gone. It is as if a company of two or three people had just separated, or as if the were about to gather. These candles are too far apart. 
	
	[_He flourishes his taper above the table and finds a third candle in the center of it, which he lights._]
	
	And yet with only two candles it would have been a cold and respectable company; for the feeling of coldness and respectability persists in the presence of three, modified a little, as if a kind of stateliness had modified into a kind of elegance . . . How far away from the isolation of the single candle, as arrogant of the vacancy around it as three are arrogant of association . . . It is no longer as if a company had just separated. It is only as if it were about to gather . . . as if one were soon to forget the room because of the people in the room . . . people tempered by the lights around them, affected by the lights around them . . . sensible that one more candle would turn this formative elegance into formative luxury. 
	
	[_He lights a fourth candle. He indulges his humor._]
	
	And the suggestion of luxury into the suggestion of magnificence. 
	
	[_He lights a fifth candle--_]
	
	And the beginning of magnificence into the beginning of splendor. 
	
	[_He lights a sixth candle. He sighs deeply._]
	
	In how short a time have I been solitary, then respectable--in a company so cold as to be stately, then elegant, then conscious of luxury, even magnificence; and now I come, gradually, to the beginning of splendor. Truly, I am a modern. 
	
	[_He dances around the room._]
	
	To have changed so often and so much . . . or to have been changed . . . to have been carried by the lighting of six candles through so many lives and to have been brought among so many people . . . This grows more wonderful. Six candles burn like an adventure that has been completed. They are established. They are a city . . . six common candles . . . seven . . . 
	
	[_He lights another and another, until he has lighted twelve, saying after them, in turn:_]
	
	Eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve. 
	
	[_Following this, he goes on tip-toe to the center of the stage, where he looks at the candles. Their brilliance has raised his spirits to the point of gaiety. He turns from the lighted table to face the dark one at the left. He holds his taper before him._]
	
	Darkness again . . . as if a night wind had come blowing . . . but too weakly to fling the cloth of darkness. 
	
	[_He goes to the window, draws one of the curtains a little and peers out. He sees nothing._]
	
	I had as lief look into night as look into the dark corner of a room. Darkness expels me. 
	
	[_He goes forward, holding his taper high above him, until he comes to the table at the left. He finds this covered with candles, like the table at the right, and lights them, with whimsical motions, one by one. When all the candles have been lighted, he runs to the center of the stage, holding his hands over his eyes. Then he returns to the window and flings aside the curtains. The light from the window falls on the tall stalks of flowers outside. The flowers are like hollyhocks, but they are unnaturally large, of gold and silver. He speaks excitedly._]
	
	Where now is my solitude and the lonely figure of solitude? Where now are the two stately ones that left their coldness behind them? They have taken their bareness with them. Their coldness has followed them. Here there will be silks and fans . . . the movement of arms . . . rumors of Renoir . . . coiffures . . . hands . . . scorn of Debussy . . . communications of body to body. . . There will be servants, as fat as plums, bearing pineapples from the Azores . . . because of twenty-four candles, burning together, as if their light had dispelled a phantasm, falling on silks and fans . . . the movement of arms . . . The pulse of the crowd will beat out the shallow pulses . . . it will fill me. 
	
	[_A strong gust of wind suddenly blows into the room, extinguishing several of the candles on the table at the left. He runs to the table at the left and looks, as if startled, at the extinguished candles. He buries his head in his arms._]
	
	That, too, was phantasm. . . The night wind came into the room. . . The fans are invisible upon the floor. 
	
	[_In a burst of feeling, he blows out all the candles that are still burning on the table at the left. He crosses the stage and stands before the table at the right. After a moment he goes slowly to the back of the stage and draws the curtains over the ivindow. He returns to the table at the right._]
	
	What is there in the extinguishing of light? It is like twelve wild birds flying in autumn. 
	
	[_He blows out one of the candles._]
	
	It is like an eleven-limbed oak tree, brass-colored in frost . . . Regret . . . 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like ten green sparks of a rocket, oscillating in air . . . The extinguishing of light . . . how closely regret follows it. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like the diverging angles that follow nine leaves drifting in water, and that compose themselves brilliantly on the polished surface. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like eight pears in a nude tree, flaming in twilight . . . The extinguishing of light is like that. The season is sorrowful. The air is cold. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like the six Pleiades, and the hidden one, that makes them seven. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like the seven Pleiades, and the hidden one, that makes them six. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	The extinguishing of light is like the five purple palmations of cinquefoil withering. . . It is full of the incipiences of darkness . . . of desolation that rises as a feeling rises . . . Imagination wills the five purple palmations of cinquefoil. But in this light they have the appearance of withering . . . To feel and, in the midst of feeling, to imagine . . . 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	The extinguishing of light is like the four posts of a cadaver, two. at its head and two at its feet, to-wit: its arms and legs. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like three peregrins, departing. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle._]
	
	It is like heaven and earth in the eye of the disbeliever. 
	
	[_He blows out another candle. He dances around the room. He returns to the single candle that remains burning._]
	
	The extinguishing of light is like that old Hesper, clapped upon by clouds. 
	
	[_He stands in front of the candle, so as to obscure it._]
	
	The spikes of his light bristle around the edge of the bulk. The spikes bristle among the clouds and behind them. There is a spot where he was bright in the sky . . . It remains fixed a little in the mind. 
	
	[_He opens the door at the right. Outside, the night is as blue as water. He crosses the stage and opens the door at the left. Once more he flings aside the curtains. He extinguishes his taper. He looks out. He speaks with elation._]
	
	Oh, ho! Here is matter beyond invention. 
	
	[_He springs through the window. Curtain._]


11. CERTAIN PHENOMENA OF SOUND

	I
	
	The cricket in the telephone is still.
	A geranium withers on the window-sill.
	
	Cat’s milk is dry in the saucer. Sunday song
	Comes from the beating of the locust’s wings,
	
	That do not beat by pain, but calendar,
	Nor meditate the world as it goes round.
	
	Someone has left for a ride in a balloon
	Or in a bubble examines the bubble of air.
	
	The room is emptier than nothingness.
	Yet a spider spins in the left shoe under the bed--
	
	And old John Rocket dozes on his pillow.
	It is safe to sleep to a sound that time brings back.
	
	
	II
	
	So you’re home again, Redwood Roamer, and ready
	To feast . . . Slice the mango, Naaman, and dress it
	
	With white wine, sugar and lime juice. Then bring it,
	After we’ve drunk the Moselle, to the thickest shade
	
	Of the garden. We must prepare to hear the Roamer’s
	Story . . . The sound of that slick sonata,
	
	Finding its way from the house, makes music seem
	To be a nature, a place in which itself
	
	Is that which produces everything else, in which
	The Roamer is a voice taller than the redwoods,
	
	Engaged in the most prolific narrative,
	A sound producing the things that are spoken.
	
	
	III
	
	Eulalia, I lounged on the hospital porch,
	On the east, sister and nun, and opened wide
	A parasol, which I had found, against
	The sun. The interior of a parasol,
	It is a kind of blank in which one sees.
	So seeing, I beheld you walking, white,
	Gold-shined by sun, perceiving as I saw
	That of that light Eulalia was the name.
	Then I, Semiramide, dark-syllabled,
	Contrasting our two names, considered speech.
	You were created of your name, the word
	Is that of which you were the personage.
	There is no life except in the word of it.
	I write _Semiramide_ and in the script
	I am and have a being and play a part.
	You are that white Eulalia of the name.


12. COLLOQUY WITH A POLISH AUNT

	_Elle savait toutes les légendes du Paradis et tous les contes
	de la Pologne. Revue des Deux Mondes_
	
	_She_
	How is it that my saints from Voragine,
	In their embroidered slippers, touch your spleen?
	
	_He_
	Old pantaloons, duenna of the spring!
	
	_She_
	Imagination is the will of things . . .
	Thus, on the basis of the common drudge,
	You dream of women, swathed in indigo,
	Holding their books toward the nearer stars,
	To read, in secret, burning secrecies . . .


13. THE COMEDIAN AS THE LETTER C

	I. _The World without Imagination_
	
	Nota: man is the intelligence of his soil,
	The sovereign ghost. As such, the Socrates
	Of snails, musician of pears, principium
	And lex. Sed quaeritur: is this same wig
	Of things, this nincompated pedagogue,
	Preceptor to the sea? Crispin at sea
	Created, in his day, a touch of doubt.
	An eye most apt in gelatines and jupes,
	Berries of villages, a barber’s eye,
	An eye of land, of simple salad-beds,
	Of honest quilts, the eye of Crispin, hung
	On porpoises, instead of apricots,
	And on silentious porpoises, whose snouts
	Dibbled in waves that were mustachios,
	Inscrutable hair in an inscrutable world.
	
	One eats one paté, even of salt, quotha.
	It was not so much the lost terrestrial,
	The snug hibernal from that sea and salt,
	That century of wind in a single puff.
	What counted was mythology of self,
	Blotched out beyond unblotching. Crispin,
	The lutanist of fleas, the knave, the thane,
	The ribboned stick, the bellowing breeches, cloak
	Of China, cap of Spain, imperative haw
	Of hum, inquisitorial botanist,
	And general lexicographer of mute
	And maidenly greenhorns, now beheld himself,
	A skinny sailor peering in the sea-glass.
	What word split up in clickering syllables
	And storming under multitudinous tones
	Was name for this short-shanks in all that brunt?
	Crispin was washed away by magnitude.
	The whole of life that still remained in him
	Dwindled to one sound strumming in his ear,
	Ubiquitous concussion, slap and sigh,
	Polyphony beyond his baton’s thrust.
	
	Could Crispin stem verboseness in the sea,
	The old age of a watery realist,
	Triton, dissolved in shifting diaphanes
	Of blue and green? A wordy, watery age
	That whispered to the sun’s compassion, made
	A convocation, nightly, of the sea-stars,
	And on the cropping foot-ways of the moon
	Lay grovelling. Triton incomplicate with that
	Which made him Triton, nothing left of him,
	Except in faint, memorial gesturings,
	That were like arms and shoulders in the waves,
	Here, something in the rise and fall of wind
	That seemed hallucinating horn, and here,
	A sunken voice, both of remembering
	And of forgetfulness, in alternate strain.
	Just so an ancient Crispin was dissolved.
	The valet in the tempest was annulled.
	Bordeaux to Yucatan, Havana next,
	And then to Carolina. Simple jaunt.
	Crispin, merest minuscule in the gates,
	Dejected his manner to the turbulence.
	The salt hung on his spirit like a frost,
	The dead brine melted in him like a dew
	Of winter, until nothing of himself
	Remained, except some starker, barer self
	In a starker, barer world, in which the sun
	Was not the sun because it never shone
	With bland complaisance on pale parasols,
	Beetled, in chapels, on the chaste bouquets.
	Against his pipping sounds a trumpet cried
	Celestial sneering boisterously. Crispin
	Became an introspective voyager.
	
	Here was the veritable ding an sich, at last,
	Crispin confronting it, a vocable thing,
	But with a speech belched out of hoary darks
	Noway resembling his, a visible thing,
	And excepting negligible Triton, free
	From the unavoidable shadow of himself
	That lay elsewhere around him. Severance
	Was clear. The last distortion of romance
	Forsook the insatiable egotist. The sea
	Severs not only lands but also selves.
	Here was no help before reality.
	Crispin beheld and Crispin was made new.
	The imagination, here, could not evade,
	In poems of plums, the strict austerity
	Of one vast, subjugating, final tone.
	The drenching of stale lives no more fell down.
	What was this gaudy, gusty panoply?
	Out of what swift destruction did it spring?
	It was caparison of mind and cloud
	And something given to make whole among
	The ruses that were shattered by the large.
	 
	 
	
	II. _Concerning the Thunderstorms of Yucatan_
	
	In Yucatan, the Maya sonneteers
	Of the Caribbean amphitheatre,
	In spite of hawk and falcon, green toucan
	And jay, still to the night-bird made their plea,
	As if raspberry tanagers in palms,
	High up in orange air, were barbarous.
	But Crispin was too destitute to find
	In any commonplace the sought-for aid.
	He was a man made vivid by the sea,
	A man come out of luminous traversing,
	Much trumpeted, made desperately clear,
	Fresh from discoveries of tidal skies,
	To whom oracular rockings gave no rest.
	Into a savage color he went on.
	
	How greatly had he grown in his demesne,
	This auditor of insects! He that saw
	The stride of vanishing autumn in a park
	By way of decorous melancholy; he
	That wrote his couplet yearly to the spring,
	As dissertation of profound delight,
	Stopping, on voyage, in a land of snakes,
	Found his vicissitudes had much enlarged
	His apprehension, made him intricate
	In moody rucks, and difficult and strange
	In all desires, his destitution’s mark.
	He was in this as other freemen are,
	Sonorous nutshells rattling inwardly.
	His violence was for aggrandizement
	And not for stupor, such as music makes
	For sleepers halfway waking. He perceived
	That coolness for his heat came suddenly,
	And only, in the fables that he scrawled
	With his own quill, in its indigenous dew,
	Of an aesthetic tough, diverse, untamed,
	Incredible to prudes, the mint of dirt,
	Green barbarism turning paradigm.
	Crispin foresaw a curious promenade
	Or, nobler, sensed an elemental fate,
	And elemental potencies and pangs,
	And beautiful barenesses as yet unseen,
	Making the most of savagery of palms,
	Of moonlight on the thick, cadaverous bloom
	That yuccas breed, and of the panther’s tread.
	The fabulous and its intrinsic verse
	Came like two spirits parlaying, adorned
	In radiance from the Atlantic coign,
	For Crispin and his quill to catechize.
	But they came parlaying of such an earth,
	So thick with sides and jagged lops of green,
	So intertwined with serpent-kin encoiled
	Among the purple tufts, the scarlet crowns,
	Scenting the jungle in their refuges,
	So streaked with yellow, blue and green and red
	In beak and bud and fruity gobbet-skins,
	That earth was like a jostling festival
	Of seeds grown fat, too juicily opulent,
	Expanding in the gold’s maternal warmth.
	So much for that. The affectionate emigrant found
	A new reality in parrot-squawks.
	Yet let that trifle pass. Now, as this odd
	Discoverer walked through the harbor streets
	Inspecting the cabildo, the façade
	Of the cathedral, making notes, he heard
	A rumbling, west of Mexico, it seemed,
	Approaching like a gasconade of drums.
	The white cabildo darkened, the façade,
	As sullen as the sky, was swallowed up
	In swift, successive shadows, dolefully.
	The rumbling broadened as it fell. The wind,
	Tempestuous clarion, with heavy cry,
	Came bluntly thundering, more terrible
	Than the revenge of music on bassoons.
	Gesticulating lightning, mystical,
	Made pallid flitter. Crispin, here, took flight.
	An annotator has his scruples, too.
	He knelt in the cathedral with the rest,
	This connoisseur of elemental fate,
	Aware of exquisite thought. The storm was one
	Of many proclamations of the kind,
	Proclaiming something harsher than he learned
	From hearing signboards whimper in cold nights
	Or seeing the midsummer artifice
	Of heat upon his pane. This was the span
	Of force, the quintessential fact, the note
	Of Vulcan, that a valet seeks to own,
	The thing that makes him envious in phrase.
	
	And while the torrent on the roof still droned
	He felt the Andean breath. His mind was free
	And more than free, elate, intent, profound
	And studious of a self possessing him,
	That was not in him in the crusty town
	From which he sailed. Beyond him, westward, lay
	The mountainous ridges, purple balustrades,
	In which the thunder, lapsing in its clap,
	Let down gigantic quavers of its voice,
	For Crispin to vociferate again.
	
	
	III. _Approaching Carolina_
	
	The book of moonlight is not written yet
	Nor half begun, but, when it is, leave room
	For Crispin, fagot in the lunar fire,
	Who, in the hubbub of his pilgrimage
	Through sweating changes, never could forget
	That wakefulness or meditating sleep,
	In which the sulky strophes willingly
	Bore up, in time, the somnolent, deep songs.
	Leave room, therefore, in that unwritten book
	For the legendary moonlight that once burned
	In Crispin’s mind above a continent.
	America was always north to him,
	A northern west or western north, but north,
	And thereby polar, polar-purple, chilled
	And lank, rising and slumping from a sea
	Of hardy foam, receding flatly, spread
	In endless ledges, glittering, submerged
	And cold in a boreal mistiness of the moon.
	The spring came there in clinking pannicles
	Of half-dissolving frost, the summer came,
	If ever, whisked and wet, not ripening,
	Before the winter’s vacancy returned.
	The myrtle, if the myrtle ever bloomed,
	Was like a glacial pink upon the air.
	The green palmettoes in crepuscular ice
	Clipped frigidly blue-black meridians,
	Morose chiaroscuro, gauntly drawn.
	
	How many poems he denied himself
	In his observant progress, lesser things
	Than the relentless contact he desired;
	How many sea-masks he ignored; what sounds
	He shut out from his tempering ear; what thoughts,
	Like jades affecting the sequestered bride;
	And what descants, he sent to banishment!
	Perhaps the Arctic moonlight really gave
	The liaison, the blissful liaison,
	Between himself and his environment,
	Which was, and is, chief motive, first delight,
	For him, and not for him alone. It seemed
	Elusive, faint, more mist than moon, perverse,
	Wrong as a divagation to Peking,
	To him that postulated as his theme
	The vulgar, as his theme and hymn and flight,
	A passionately niggling nightingale.
	Moonlight was an evasion, or, if not,
	A minor meeting, facile, delicate.
	
	Thus he conceived his voyaging to be
	An up and down between two elements,
	A fluctuating between sun and moon,
	A sally into gold and crimson forms,
	As on this voyage, out of goblinry,
	And then retirement like a turning back
	And sinking down to the indulgences
	That in the moonlight have their habitude.
	But let these backward lapses, if they would,
	Grind their seductions on him, Crispin knew
	It was a flourishing tropic he required
	For his refreshment, an abundant zone,
	Prickly and obdurate, dense, harmonious
	Yet with a harmony not rarefied
	Nor fined for the inhibited instruments
	Of over-civil stops. And thus he tossed
	Between a Carolina of old time,
	A little juvenile, an ancient whim,
	And the visible, circumspect presentment drawn
	From what he saw across his vessel’s prow.
	
	He came. The poetic hero without palms
	Or jugglery, without regalia.
	And as he came he saw that it was spring,
	A time abhorrent to the nihilist
	Or searcher for the fecund minimum.
	The moonlight fiction disappeared. The spring,
	Although contending featly in its veils,
	Irised in dew and early fragrancies,
	Was gemmy marionette to him that sought
	A sinewy nakedness. A river bore
	The vessel inward. Tilting up his nose,
	He inhaled the rancid rosin, burly smells
	Of dampened lumber, emanations blown
	From warehouse doors, the gustiness of ropes,
	Decays of sacks, and all the arrant stinks
	That helped him round his rude aesthetic out.
	He savored rankness like a sensualist.
	He marked the marshy ground around the dock,
	The crawling railroad spur, the rotten fence,
	Curriculum for the marvellous sophomore.
	It purified. It made him see how much
	Of what he saw he never saw at all.
	He gripped more closely the essential prose
	As being, in a world so falsified,
	The one integrity for him, the one
	Discovery still possible to make,
	To which all poems were incident, unless
	That prose should wear a poem’s guise at last.
	
	
	IV. _The Idea of a Colony_
	
	Nota: his soil is man’s intelligence.
	That’s better. That’s worth crossing seas to find.
	Crispin in one laconic phrase laid bare
	His cloudy drift and planned a colony.
	Exit the mental moonlight, exit lex,
	Rex and principium, exit the whole
	Shebang. Exeunt omnes. Here was prose
	More exquisite than any tumbling verse:
	A still new continent in which to dwell.
	What was the purpose of his pilgrimage,
	Whatever shape it took in Crispin’s mind,
	If not, when all is said, to drive away
	The shadow of his fellows from the skies,
	And, from their stale intelligence released,
	To make a new intelligence prevail?
	Hence the reverberations in the words
	Of his first central hymns, the celebrants
	Of rankest trivia, tests of the strength
	Of his aesthetic, his philosophy,
	The more invidious, the more desired.
	The florist asking aid from cabbages,
	The rich man going bare, the paladin
	Afraid, the blind man as astronomer,
	The appointed power unwielded from disdain.
	His western voyage ended and began.
	The torment of fastidious thought grew slack,
	Another, still more bellicose, came on.
	He, therefore, wrote his prolegomena,
	And, being full of the caprice, inscribed
	Commingled souvenirs and prophecies.
	He made a singular collation. Thus:
	The natives of the rain are rainy men.
	Although they paint effulgent, azure lakes,
	And April hillsides wooded white and pink,
	Their azure has a cloudy edge, their white
	And pink, the water bright that dogwood bears.
	And in their music showering sounds intone.
	On what strange froth does the gross Indian dote,
	What Eden sapling gum, what honeyed gore,
	What pulpy dram distilled of innocence,
	That streaking gold should speak in him
	Or bask within his images and words?
	If these rude instances impeach themselves
	By force of rudeness, let the principle
	Be plain. For application Crispin strove,
	Abhorring Turk as Esquimau, the lute
	As the marimba, the magnolia as rose.
	
	Upon these premises propounding, he
	Projected a colony that should extend
	To the dusk of a whistling south below the south.
	A comprehensive island hemisphere.
	The man in Georgia waking among pines
	Should be pine-spokesman. The responsive man,
	Planting his pristine cores in Florida,
	Should prick thereof, not on the psaltery,
	But on the banjo’s categorical gut,
	Tuck tuck, while the flamingos flapped his bays.
	Sepulchral señors, bibbing pale mescal,
	Oblivious to the Aztec almanacs,
	Should make the intricate Sierra scan.
	And dark Brazilians in their cafés,
	Musing immaculate, pampean dits,
	Should scrawl a vigilant anthology,
	To be their latest, lucent paramour.
	These are the broadest instances. Crispin,
	Progenitor of such extensive scope,
	Was not indifferent to smart detail.
	The melon should have apposite ritual,
	Performed in verd apparel, and the peach,
	When its black branches came to bud, belle day,
	Should have an incantation. And again,
	When piled on salvers its aroma steeped
	The summer, it should have a sacrament
	And celebration. Shrewd novitiates
	Should be the clerks of our experience.
	
	These bland excursions into time to come,
	Related in romance to backward flights,
	However prodigal, however proud,
	Contained in their afflatus the reproach
	That first drove Crispin to his wandering.
	He could not be content with counterfeit,
	With masquerade of thought, with hapless words
	That must belie the racking masquerade,
	With fictive flourishes that preordained
	His passion’s permit, hang of coat, degree
	Of buttons, measure of his salt. Such trash
	Might help the blind, not him, serenely sly.
	It irked beyond his patience. Hence it was,
	Preferring text to gloss, he humbly served
	Grotesque apprenticeship to chance event,
	A clown, perhaps, but an aspiring clown.
	There is a monotonous babbling in our dreams
	That makes them our dependent heirs, the heirs
	Of dreamers buried in our sleep, and not
	The oncoming fantasies of better birth.
	The apprentice knew these dreamers. If he dreamed
	Their dreams, he did it in a gingerly way.
	All dreams are vexing. Let them be expunged.
	But let the rabbit run, the cock declaim.
	
	Trinket pasticcio, flaunting skyey sheets,
	With Crispin as the tiptoe cozener?
	No, no: veracious page on page, exact.
	
	
	V. _A Nice Shady Home_
	
	Crispin as hermit, pure and capable,
	Dwelt in the land. Perhaps if discontent
	Had kept him still the pricking realist,
	Choosing his element from droll confect
	Of was and is and shall or ought to be,
	Beyond Bordeaux, beyond Havana, far
	Beyond carked Yucatan, he might have come
	To colonize his polar planterdom
	And jig his chits upon a cloudy knee.
	But his emprize to that idea soon sped.
	Crispin dwelt in the land and dwelling there
	Slid from his continent by slow recess
	To things within his actual eye, alert
	To the difficulty of rebellious thought
	When the sky is blue. The blue infected will.
	It may be that the yarrow in his fields
	Sealed pensive purple under its concern.
	But day by day, now this thing and now that
	Confined him, while it cosseted, condoned,
	Little by little, as if the suzerain soil
	Abashed him by carouse to humble yet
	Attach. It seemed haphazard denouement.
	He first, as realist, admitted that
	Whoever hunts a matinal continent
	May, after all, stop short before a plum
	And be content and still be realist.
	The words of things entangle and confuse.
	The plum survives its poems. It may hang
	In the sunshine placidly, colored by ground
	Obliquities of those who pass beneath,
	Harlequined and mazily dewed and mauved
	In bloom. Yet it survives in its own form,
	Beyond these changes, good, fat, guzzly fruit.
	So Crispin hasped on the surviving form,
	For him, of shall or ought to be in is.
	
	Was he to bray this in profoundest brass
	Arointing his dreams with fugal requiems?
	Was he to company vastest things defunct
	With a blubber of tom-toms harrowing the sky?
	Scrawl a tragedian’s testament? Prolong
	His active force in an inactive dirge,
	Which, let the tall musicians call and call,
	Should merely call him dead? Pronounce amen
	Through choirs infolded to the outmost clouds?
	Because he built a cabin who once planned
	Loquacious columns by the ructive sea?
	Because he turned to salad-beds again?
	Jovial Crispin, in calamitous crape?
	Should he lay by the personal and make
	Of his own fate an instance of all fate?
	What is one man among so many men?
	What are so many men in such a world?
	Can one man think one thing and think it long?
	Can one man be one thing and be it long?
	The very man despising honest quilts
	Lies quilted to his poll in his despite.
	For realists, what is is what should be.
	And so it came, his cabin shuffled up,
	His trees were planted, his duenna brought
	Her prismy blonde and clapped her in his hands,
	The curtains flittered and the door was closed.
	Crispin, magister of a single room,
	Latched up the night. So deep a sound fell down
	It was as if the solitude concealed
	And covered him and his congenial sleep.
	So deep a sound fell down it grew to be
	A long soothsaying silence down and down.
	The crickets beat their tambours in the wind,
	Marching a motionless march, custodians.
	
	In the presto of the morning, Crispin trod,
	Each day, still curious, but in a round
	Less prickly and much more condign than that
	He once thought necessary. Like Candide,
	Yeoman and grub, but with a fig in sight,
	And cream for the fig and silver for the cream,
	A blonde to tip the silver and to taste
	The rapey gouts. Good star, how that to be
	Annealed them in their cabin ribaldries!
	Yet the quotidian saps philosophers
	And men like Crispin like them in intent,
	If not in will, to track the knaves of thought.
	But the quotidian composed as his,
	Of breakfast ribands, fruits laid in their leaves,
	The tomtit and the cassia and the rose,
	Although the rose was not the noble thorn
	Of crinoline spread, but of a pining sweet,
	Composed of evenings like cracked shutters flung
	Upon the rumpling bottomness, and nights
	In which those frail custodians watched,
	Indifferent to the tepid summer cold,
	While he poured out upon the lips of her
	That lay beside him, the quotidian
	Like this, saps like the sun, true fortuner.
	For all it takes it gives a humped return
	Exchequering from piebald fiscs unkeyed.
	
	
	VI. And Daughters with Curls
	
	Portentous enunciation, syllable
	To blessed syllable affined, and sound
	Bubbling felicity in cantilene,
	Prolific and tormenting tenderness
	Of music, as it comes to unison,
	Forgather and bell boldly Crispin’s last
	Deduction. Thrum, with a proud douceur
	His grand pronunciamento and devise.
	
	The chits came for his jigging, bluet-eyed,
	Hands without touch yet touching poignantly,
	Leaving no room upon his cloudy knee,
	Prophetic joint, for its diviner young.
	The return to social nature, once begun,
	Anabasis or slump, ascent or chute,
	Involved him in midwifery so dense
	His cabin counted as phylactery,
	Then place of vexing palankeens, then haunt
	Of children nibbling at the sugared void,
	Infants yet eminently old, then dome
	And halidom for the unbraided femes,
	Green crammers of the green fruits of the world,
	Bidders and biders for its ecstasies,
	True daughters both of Crispin and his clay.
	All this with many mulctings of the man,
	Effective colonizer sharply stopped
	In the door-yard by his own capacious bloom.
	But that this bloom grown riper, showing nibs
	Of its eventual roundness, puerile tints
	Of spiced and weathery rouges, should complex
	The stopper to indulgent fatalist
	Was unforeseen. First Crispin smiled upon
	His goldenest demoiselle, inhabitant,
	She seemed, of a country of the capuchins,
	So delicately blushed, so humbly eyed,
	Attentive to a coronal of things
	Secret and singular. Second, upon
	A second similar counterpart, a maid
	Most sisterly to the first, not yet awake
	Excepting to the motherly footstep, but
	Marvelling sometimes at the shaken sleep.
	Then third, a thing still flaxen in the light,
	A creeper under jaunty leaves. And fourth,
	Mere blusteriness that gewgaws jollified,
	All din and gobble, blasphemously pink.
	A few years more and the vermeil capuchin
	Gave to the cabin, lordlier than it was,
	The dulcet omen fit for such a house.
	The second sister dallying was shy
	To fetch the one full-pinioned one himself
	Out of her botches, hot embosomer.
	The third one gaping at the orioles
	Lettered herself demurely as became
	A pearly poetess, peaked for rhapsody.
	The fourth, pent now, a digit curious.
	Four daughters in a world too intricate
	In the beginning, four blithe instruments
	Of differing struts, four voices several
	In couch, four more personæ, intimate
	As buffo, yet divers, four mirrors blue
	That should be silver, four accustomed seeds
	Hinting incredible hues, four self-same lights
	That spread chromatics in hilarious dark,
	Four questioners and four sure answerers.
	
	Crispin concocted doctrine from the rout.
	The world, a turnip once so readily plucked,
	Sacked up and carried overseas, daubed out
	Of its ancient purple, pruned to the fertile main,
	And sown again by the stiffest realist,
	Came reproduced in purple, family font,
	The same insoluble lump. The fatalist
	Stepped in and dropped the chuckling down his craw,
	Without grace or grumble. Score this anecdote
	Invented for its pith, not doctrinal
	In form though in design, as Crispin willed,
	Disguised pronunciamento, summary,
	Autumn’s compendium, strident in itself
	But muted, mused, and perfectly revolved
	In those portentous accents, syllables,
	And sounds of music coming to accord
	Upon his law, like their inherent sphere,
	Seraphic proclamations of the pure
	Delivered with a deluging onwardness.
	Or if the music sticks, if the anecdote
	Is false, if Crispin is a profitless
	Philosopher, beginning with green brag,
	Concluding fadedly, if as a man
	Prone to distemper he abates in taste,
	Fickle and fumbling, variable, obscure,
	Glozing his life with after-shining flicks,
	Illuminating, from a fancy gorged
	By apparition, plain and common things,
	Sequestering the fluster from the year,
	Making gulped potions from obstreperous drops,
	And so distorting, proving what he proves
	Is nothing, what can all this matter since
	The relation comes, benignly, to its end?
	
	So may the relation of each man be clipped.


14. THE COMMON LIFE

	THAT’S the down-town frieze,
	Principally the church steeple,
	A black line beside a white line;
	And the stack of the electric plant,
	A black line drawn on flat air.
	
	It is a morbid light
	In which they stand,
	Like an electric lamp
	On a page of Euclid.
	
	In this light a man is a result,
	A demonstration, and a woman,
	Without rose and without violet,
	The shadows that are absent from Euclid,
	Is not a woman for a man.
	
	The paper is whiter
	For these black lines.
	It glares beneath the webs
	Of wire, the designs of ink,
	The planes that ought to have genius,
	The volumes like marble ruins
	Outlined and having alphabetical
	Notations and footnotes.
	
	The paper is whiter.
	The men have no shadows
	And the women have only one side.


15. THE CUBAN DOCTOR

	I went to Egypt to escape
	The Indian, but the Indian struck
	Out of his cloud and from his sky.
	
	This was no worm bred in the moon,
	Wriggling far down the phantom air,
	And on a comfortable sofa dreamed.
	
	The Indian struck and disappeared
	I knew my enemy was near--I,
	Drowsing in summer’s sleepiest horn.


16. DEATH OF A SOLDIER

	Life contracts and death is expected,
	As in a season of autumn.
	The soldier falls.
	 
	He does not become a three-days personage,
	Imposing his separation,
	Calling for pomp.
	 
	Death is absolute and without memorial,
	As in a season of autumn,
	When the wind stops,
	 
	When the wind stops and, over the heavens,
	The clouds go, nevertheless,
	In their direction.


17. A DISH OF PEACHES IN RUSSIA

	With my whole body I taste these peaches,
	I touch them and smell them. Who speaks?
	
	I absorb them as the Angevine
	Absorbs Aniou. I see them as a lover sees,
	
	As a young lover sees the first buds of spring
	And as the black Spaniard plays his guitar.
	
	Who speaks? But it must be that I,
	That animal, that Russian, that exile, from whom
	
	The bells of the chapel pullulate sounds at
	Heart. The peaches are large and round,
	
	Ah! and red; and they have peach fuzz, ah!
	They are full of juice and the skin is soft.
	
	They are full of the colors of my village
	And of fair weather, summer, dew, peace.
	
	The room is quiet where they are.
	The windows are open. The sunlight fills
	
	The curtains. Even the drifting of the curtains,
	Slight as it is, disturbs me. I did not know
	
	That such ferocities could tear
	One self from another, as these peaches do.


18. DISILLUSIONMENT OF TEN O’CLOCK

	The houses are haunted   
	By white night-gowns.   
	None are green,
	Or purple with green rings,   
	Or green with yellow rings,   
	Or yellow with blue rings.   
	None of them are strange,   
	With socks of lace
	And beaded ceintures.
	People are not going
	To dream of baboons and periwinkles.   
	Only, here and there, an old sailor,   
	Drunk and asleep in his boots,   
	Catches tigers
	In red weather.


19. THE DOCTOR OF GENEVA

	The doctor of Geneva stamped the sand
	That lay impounding the Pacific swell,
	Patted his stove-pipe hat and tugged his shawl.
	
	Lacustrine man had never been assailed
	By such long-rolling opulent cataracts,
	Unless Racine or Bossuet held the like.
	
	He did not quail. A man so used to plumb
	The multifarious heavens felt no awe
	Before these visible, voluble delugings,
	
	Which yet found means to set his simmering mind
	Spinning and hissing with oracular
	Notations of the wild, the ruinous waste,
	
	Until the steeples of his city clanked and sprang
	In an unburgherly apocalypse.
	The doctor used his handkerchief and sighed.


20. THE EMPEROR OF ICE-CREAM

	Call the roller of big cigars,
	The muscular one, and bid him whip
	In kitchen cups concupiscent curds.
	Let the wenches dawdle in such dress
	As they are used to wear, and let the boys
	Bring flowers in last month’s newspapers.
	Let be be finale of seem.
	The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream.
	
	Take from the dresser of deal.
	Lacking the three glass knobs, that sheet
	On which she embroidered fantails once
	And spread it so as to cover her face.
	If her horny feet protrude, they come
	To show how cold she is, and dumb.
	Let the lamp affix its beam.
	The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream.


21. EXPOSITION OF THE CONTENTS OF A CAB

	Victoria Clementina, negress,
	Took seven white dogs
	To ride in a cab.
	
	Bells of the dogs chinked.
	Harness of the horses shuffled
	Like brazen shells.
	
	Oh-hé-hé! Fragrant puppets
	By the green lake-pallors,
	She too is flesh,
	
	And a breech-cloth might wear,
	Netted of topaz and ruby
	And savage blooms;
	
	Thridding the squawkiest jungle
	In a golden sedan,
	White dogs at bay.
	
	What breech-cloth might you wear--
	Except linen, embroidered
	By elderly women?


22. FABLIAU OF FLORIDA

	Barque of phosphor
	On the palmy beach,
	 
	Move outward into heaven,
	Into the alabasters
	And night blues.
	 
	Foam and cloud are one.
	Sultry moon-monsters
	Are dissolving.
	 
	Fill your black hull
	With white moonlight.
	 
	There will never be an end
	To this droning of the surf.


23. FROM THE MISERY OF DON JOOST

	I have finished my combat with the sun;
	And my body, the old animal,
	Knows nothing more.
	
	The powerful seasons bred and killed,
	And were themselves the genii
	Of their own ends.
	
	Oh, but the very self of the storm
	Of sun and slaves, breeding and death,
	The old animal--
	
	The senses and feeling, the very sound
	And sight, and all there was of the storm--
	Knows nothing.


24. GOOD MAN, BAD WOMAN

	You say that spite avails her nothing, that
	You rest intact in conscience and intact
	In self, a man of longer time than days,
	Of larger company than one. Therefore,
	Pure scientist, you look with nice aplomb
	At this indifferent experience,
	Deploring sentiment. When May came last,
	And equally as scientist you walked
	Among the orchards in the apple-blocks
	And saw the blossoms, snow-bred pink and white,
	Making your heart of brass to intercept
	The childish onslaughts of such innocence,
	Why was it that you cast the brass away
	And bared yourself, and bared yourself in vain?
	She can corrode your world, if never you.


25. GUBBINAL

	That strange fower, the sun,
	Is just what you say.
	Have it your way.
	
	The world is ugly,
	And the people are sad.
	
	That tuft of jungle feathers,
	That animal eye,
	Is just what you say.
	
	That savage of fire,
	That seed--
	Have it your way.
	
	The world is ugly,
	And the people are sad.


26. HIBISCUS ON THE SLEEPING SHORES

	I say now, Fernando, that on that day
	The mind roamed as a moth roams,
	Among the blooms beyond the open sand;
	
	And that whatever noise the motion of the waves
	Made on the sea-weeds and the covered stones
	Disturbed not even the most idle ear.
	
	Then it was that that monstered moth
	Which had lain folded against the blue
	And the colored purple of the lazy sea,
	
	And which had drowsed along the bony shores,
	Shut to the blather that the water made,
	Rose up besprent and sought the flaming red
	
	Dabbled with yellow pollen--red as red
	As the flag above the old café--
	And roamed there all the stupid afternoon.


27. A HIGH-TONED OLD CHRISTIAN WOMAN

	Poetry is the supreme fiction, madame. 
	Take the moral law and make a nave of it 
	And from the nave build haunted heaven. Thus, 
	The conscience is converted into palms, 
	Like windy citherns hankering for hymns. 
	We agree in principle. That’s clear. But take 
	The opposing law and make a peristyle, 
	And from the peristyle project a masque 
	Beyond the planets. Thus, our bawdiness, 
	Unpurged by epitaph, indulged at last, 
	Is equally converted into palms, 
	Squiggling like saxophones. And palm for palm, 
	Madame, we are where we began. Allow, 
	Therefore, that in the planetary scene 
	Your disaffected flagellants, well-stuffed, 
	Smacking their muzzy bellies in parade, 
	Proud of such novelties of the sublime, 
	Such tink and tank and tunk-a-tunk-tunk, 
	May, merely may, madame, whip from themselves 
	A jovial hullabaloo among the spheres. 
	This will make widows wince. But fictive things 
	Wink as they will. Wink most when widows wince.


28. HOMUNCULUS ET LA BELLE ETOILE

	In the sea, Biscayne, there prinks
	The young emerald, evening star--
	Good light for drunkards, poets, widows,
	And ladies soon to be married.
	
	By this light the salty fishes
	Arch in the sea like tree-branches,
	Going in many directions
	Up and down.
	
	This light conducts
	The thoughts of drunkards, the feelings
	Of widows and trembling ladies,
	The movements of fishes.
	
	How pleasant an existence it is
	That this emerald charms philosophers,
	Until they become thoughtlessly willing
	To bathe their hearts in later moonlight,
	
	Knowing that they can bring back thought
	In the night that is still to be silent,
	Reflecting this thing and that,
	Before they sleep.
	
	It is better that, as scholars,
	They should think hard in the dark cuffs
	Of voluminous cloaks,
	And shave their heads and bodies.


29. THE HOUSE WAS QUIET AND THE WORLD WAS CALM

	The house was quiet and the world was calm.
	The reader became the book; and summer night
	
	Was like the conscious being of the book.
	The house was quiet and the world was calm.
	
	The words were spoken as if there was no book,
	Except that the reader leaned above the page,
	
	Wanted to lean, wanted much most to be
	The scholar to whom his book is true, to whom
	
	The summer night is like a perfection of thought.
	The house was quiet because it had to be.
	
	The quiet was part of the meaning, part of the mind:
	The access of perfection to the page.
	
	And the world was calm. The truth in a calm world,
	In which there is no other meaning, itself
	
	Is calm, itself is summer and night, itself
	Is the reader leaning late and reading there.


30. HYMN FROM WATERMELON PAVILION

	You dweller in the dark cabin,
	To whom the watermelon is always purple,   
	Whose garden is wind and moon,
	
	Of the two dreams, night and day,
	What lover, what dreamer, would choose   
	The one obscured by sleep?
	
	Here is the plantain by your door   
	And the best cock of red feather   
	That crew before the clocks.
	
	A feme may come, leaf-green,   
	Whose coming may give revel   
	Beyond revelries of sleep,
	
	Yes, and the blackbird spread its tail,   
	So that the sun may speckle,   
	While it creaks hail.
	
	You dweller in the dark cabin,   
	Rise, since rising will not waken,   
	And hail, cry hail, cry hail.


31. THE IDEA OF ORDER AT KEY WEST

	She sang beyond the genius of the sea.   
	The water never formed to mind or voice,   
	Like a body wholly body, fluttering
	Its empty sleeves; and yet its mimic motion   
	Made constant cry, caused constantly a cry,   
	That was not ours although we understood,   
	Inhuman, of the veritable ocean.
	
	The sea was not a mask. No more was she.   
	The song and water were not medleyed sound   
	Even if what she sang was what she heard,   
	Since what she sang was uttered word by word.
	It may be that in all her phrases stirred   
	The grinding water and the gasping wind;   
	But it was she and not the sea we heard.
	
	For she was the maker of the song she sang.   
	The ever-hooded, tragic-gestured sea
	Was merely a place by which she walked to sing.   
	Whose spirit is this? we said, because we knew   
	It was the spirit that we sought and knew   
	That we should ask this often as she sang.
	
	If it was only the dark voice of the sea   
	That rose, or even colored by many waves;   
	If it was only the outer voice of sky
	And cloud, of the sunken coral water-walled,   
	However clear, it would have been deep air,   
	The heaving speech of air, a summer sound   
	Repeated in a summer without end
	And sound alone. But it was more than that,   
	More even than her voice, and ours, among
	The meaningless plungings of water and the wind,   
	Theatrical distances, bronze shadows heaped   
	On high horizons, mountainous atmospheres   
	Of sky and sea.
	
	                          It was her voice that made   
	The sky acutest at its vanishing.   
	She measured to the hour its solitude.   
	She was the single artificer of the world
	In which she sang. And when she sang, the sea,   
	Whatever self it had, became the self
	That was her song, for she was the maker. Then we,   
	As we beheld her striding there alone,
	Knew that there never was a world for her   
	Except the one she sang and, singing, made.
	
	Ramon Fernandez, tell me, if you know,   
	Why, when the singing ended and we turned   
	Toward the town, tell why the glassy lights,   
	The lights in the fishing boats at anchor there,   
	As the night descended, tilting in the air,   
	Mastered the night and portioned out the sea,   
	Fixing emblazoned zones and fiery poles,   
	Arranging, deepening, enchanting night.
	
	Oh! Blessed rage for order, pale Ramon,   
	The maker’s rage to order words of the sea,   
	Words of the fragrant portals, dimly-starred,   
	And of ourselves and of our origins,
	In ghostlier demarcations, keener sounds.


32. INDIAN RIVER

	The trade-wind jingles the rings in the nets around the racks by the docks on Indian River.
	It is the same jingle of the water among roots under the banks of the palmettoes,
	It is the same jingle of the red-bird breasting the orange-treesout of the cedars.
	Yet there is no spring in Florida, neither in boskage perdu, nor on the nunnery beaches.


33. INFANTA MARINA

	Her terrace was the sand
	And the palms and the twilight.
	 
	She made of the motions of her wrist
	The grandiose gestures
	Of her thought.
	 
	The rumpling of the plumes
	Of this creature of the evening
	Came to be sleights of sails
	Over the sea.
	 
	And thus she roamed
	In the roamings of her fan,
	
	Partaking of the sea,
	And of the evening,
	As they flowed around
	And uttered their subsiding sound.


34. INVECTIVE AGAINST SWANS

	The soul, O ganders, flies beyond the parks
	And far beyond the discords of the wind.
	 
	A bronze rain from the sun descending marks
	The death of summer, which that time endures
	 
	Like one who scrawls a listless testament
	Of golden quirks and Paphian caricatures,
	 
	Bequeathing your white feathers to the moon
	And giving your bland motions to the air.
	 
	Behold, already on the long parades
	The crows anoint the statues with their dirt.
	 
	And the soul, O ganders, being lonely, flies
	Beyond your chilly chariots, to the skies.


35. LE MONOCLE DE MON ONCLE

	I.
	
	“Mother of heaven, regina of the clouds,   
	O sceptre of the sun, crown of the moon,   
	There is not nothing, no, no, never nothing,   
	Like the clashed edges of two words that kill.”
	And so I mocked her in magnificent measure.   
	Or was it that I mocked myself alone?   
	I wish that I might be a thinking stone.   
	The sea of spuming thought foists up again   
	The radiant bubble that she was. And then   
	A deep up-pouring from some saltier well   
	Within me, bursts its watery syllable.
	
	
	II.
	
	A red bird flies across the golden floor.   
	It is a red bird that seeks out his choir   
	Among the choirs of wind and wet and wing.   
	A torrent will fall from him when he finds.   
	Shall I uncrumple this much-crumpled thing?   
	I am a man of fortune greeting heirs;
	For it has come that thus I greet the spring.   
	These choirs of welcome choir for me farewell.   
	No spring can follow past meridian.
	Yet you persist with anecdotal bliss
	To make believe a starry connaissance.
	
	
	III.
	
	Is it for nothing, then, that old Chinese   
	Sat tittivating by their mountain pools
	Or in the Yangtse studied out their beards?   
	I shall not play the flat historic scale.   
	You know how Utamaro’s beauties sought   
	The end of love in their all-speaking braids.   
	You know the mountainous coiffures of Bath.   
	Alas! Have all the barbers lived in vain   
	That not one curl in nature has survived?   
	Why, without pity on these studious ghosts,   
	Do you come dripping in your hair from sleep?
	
	
	IV.
	
	This luscious and impeccable fruit of life   
	Falls, it appears, of its own weight to earth.   
	When you were Eve, its acrid juice was sweet,   
	Untasted, in its heavenly, orchard air.   
	An apple serves as well as any skull
	To be the book in which to read a round,   
	And is as excellent, in that it is composed
	Of what, like skulls, comes rotting back to ground.   
	But it excels in this, that as the fruit   
	Of love, it is a book too mad to read   
	Before one merely reads to pass the time.
	
	
	V.
	
	In the high west there burns a furious star.   
	It is for fiery boys that star was set
	And for sweet-smelling virgins close to them.   
	The measure of the intensity of love
	Is measure, also, of the verve of earth.
	For me, the firefly’s quick, electric stroke   
	Ticks tediously the time of one more year.   
	And you? Remember how the crickets came   
	Out of their mother grass, like little kin,   
	In the pale nights, when your first imagery   
	Found inklings of your bond to all that dust.
	
	
	VI.
	
	If men at forty will be painting lakes
	The ephemeral blues must merge for them in one,   
	The basic slate, the universal hue.   
	There is a substance in us that prevails.   
	But in our amours amorists discern   
	Such fluctuations that their scrivening   
	Is breathless to attend each quirky turn.   
	When amorists grow bald, then amours shrink   
	Into the compass and curriculum   
	Of introspective exiles, lecturing.   
	It is a theme for Hyacinth alone.
	
	
	VII.
	
	The mules that angels ride come slowly down   
	The blazing passes, from beyond the sun.   
	Descensions of their tinkling bells arrive.   
	These muleteers are dainty of their way.   
	Meantime, centurions guffaw and beat   
	Their shrilling tankards on the table-boards.   
	This parable, in sense, amounts to this:   
	The honey of heaven may or may not come,   
	But that of earth both comes and goes at once.   
	Suppose these couriers brought amid their train   
	A damsel heightened by eternal bloom.
	
	
	VIII.
	
	Like a dull scholar, I behold, in love,   
	An ancient aspect touching a new mind.
	It comes, it blooms, it bears its fruit and dies.   
	This trivial trope reveals a way of truth.
	Our bloom is gone. We are the fruit thereof.   
	Two golden gourds distended on our vines,   
	Into the autumn weather, splashed with frost,   
	Distorted by hale fatness, turned grotesque.
	We hang like warty squashes, streaked and rayed,   
	The laughing sky will see the two of us   
	Washed into rinds by rotting winter rains.
	
	
	IX.
	
	In verses wild with motion, full of din,   
	Loudened by cries, by clashes, quick and sure   
	As the deadly thought of men accomplishing   
	Their curious fates in war, come, celebrate   
	The faith of forty, ward of Cupido.
	Most venerable heart, the lustiest conceit   
	Is not too lusty for your broadening.
	I quiz all sounds, all thoughts, all everything   
	For the music and manner of the paladins   
	To make oblation fit. Where shall I find   
	Bravura adequate to this great hymn?
	
	
	X.
	
	The fops of fancy in their poems leave   
	Memorabilia of the mystic spouts,   
	Spontaneously watering their gritty soils.   
	I am a yeoman, as such fellows go.
	I know no magic trees, no balmy boughs,
	No silver-ruddy, gold-vermilion fruits.   
	But, after all, I know a tree that bears
	A semblance to the thing I have in mind.   
	It stands gigantic, with a certain tip
	To which all birds come sometime in their time.   
	But when they go that tip still tips the tree.
	
	
	XI.
	
	If sex were all, then every trembling hand   
	Could make us squeak, like dolls, the wished-for words.
	But note the unconscionable treachery of fate,   
	That makes us weep, laugh, grunt and groan, and shout
	Doleful heroics, pinching gestures forth
	From madness or delight, without regard
	To that first, foremost law. Anguishing hour!   
	Last night, we sat beside a pool of pink,
	Clippered with lilies scudding the bright chromes,   
	Keen to the point of starlight, while a frog   
	Boomed from his very belly odious chords.
	
	
	XII.
	
	A blue pigeon it is, that circles the blue sky,
	On sidelong wing, around and round and round.   
	A white pigeon it is, that flutters to the ground,   
	Grown tired of flight. Like a dark rabbi, I   
	Observed, when young, the nature of mankind,   
	In lordly study. Every day, I found
	Man proved a gobbet in my mincing world.   
	Like a rose rabbi, later, I pursued,
	And still pursue, the origin and course   
	Of love, but until now I never knew
	That fluttering things have so distinct a shade.


36. THE LOAD OF SUGAR-CANE

	The going of the glade-boat
	Is like water flowing;
	
	Like water flowing
	Through the green saw-grass,
	Under the rainbows;
	
	Under the rainbows
	That are like birds,
	Turning, bedizened,
	
	While the wind still whistles
	As kildeer do,
	
	When they rise
	At the red turban
	Of the boatman.


37. THE MAN ON THE DUMP

	Day creeps down. The moon is creeping up.
	The sun is a corbeil of flowers the moon Blanche   
	Places there, a bouquet. Ho-ho . . . The dump is full   
	Of images. Days pass like papers from a press.   
	The bouquets come here in the papers. So the sun,   
	And so the moon, both come, and the janitor’s poems   
	Of every day, the wrapper on the can of pears,   
	The cat in the paper-bag, the corset, the box
	From Esthonia: the tiger chest, for tea.
	
	The freshness of night has been fresh a long time.
	The freshness of morning, the blowing of day, one says   
	That it puffs as Cornelius Nepos reads, it puffs   
	More than, less than or it puffs like this or that.   
	The green smacks in the eye, the dew in the green   
	Smacks like fresh water in a can, like the sea
	On a cocoanut--how many men have copied dew   
	For buttons, how many women have covered themselves
	With dew, dew dresses, stones and chains of dew, heads   
	Of the floweriest flowers dewed with the dewiest dew.   
	One grows to hate these things except on the dump.
	
	Now, in the time of spring (azaleas, trilliums,   
	Myrtle, viburnums, daffodils, blue phlox),   
	Between that disgust and this, between the things   
	That are on the dump (azaleas and so on)   
	And those that will be (azaleas and so on),   
	One feels the purifying change. One rejects   
	The trash.
	
	That’s the moment when the moon creeps up   
	To the bubbling of bassoons. That’s the time
	One looks at the elephant-colorings of tires.   
	Everything is shed; and the moon comes up as the moon   
	(All its images are in the dump) and you see
	As a man (not like an image of a man),
	You see the moon rise in the empty sky.
	
	One sits and beats an old tin can, lard pail.
	One beats and beats for that which one believes.   
	That’s what one wants to get near. Could it after all
	Be merely oneself, as superior as the ear
	To a crow’s voice? Did the nightingale torture the ear,   
	Peck the heart and scratch the mind? And does the ear   
	Solace itself in peevish birds? Is it peace,
	Is it a philosopher’s honeymoon, one finds
	On the dump? Is it to sit among mattresses of the dead,   
	Bottles, pots, shoes and grass and murmur _aptest eve_:   
	Is it to hear the blatter of grackles and say
	_Invisible priest_; is it to eject, to pull
	The day to pieces and cry _stanza my stone_?
	Where was it one first heard of the truth? The the.


38. NOMAD EXQUISITE

	As the immense dew of Florida
	Brings forth
	The big-finned palm
	And green vine angering for life,
	 
	As the immense dew of Florida
	Brings forth hymn and hymn
	From the beholder,
	Beholding all these green sides
	And gold sides of green sides,
	 
	And blessed mornings,
	Meet for the eye of the young alligator,
	And lightning colors
	So, in me, come flinging
	Forms, flames, and the flakes of flames.


39. NUANCES OF A THEME BY WILLIAMS

	_It’s a strange courage
	you give me, ancient star:
	 
	Shine alone in the sunrise
	toward which you lend no part!_
	 
	
	I.
	
	Shine alone, shine nakedly, shine like bronze,
	that reflects neither my face nor any inner part
	of my being, shine like fire, that mirrors nothing.
	 
	
	II.
	
	Lend no part to any humanity that suffuses
	you in its own light.
	Be not chimera of morning,
	Half-man, half-star.
	Be not an intelligence,
	Like a widow’s bird
	Or an old horse.


40. OF HARTFORD IN A PURPLE LIGHT

	A long time you have been making the trip
	From Havre to Hartford, Master Soleil,
	Bringing the lights of Norway and all that.
	
	A long time the ocean has come with you,
	Shaking the water off, like a poodle,
	That splatters incessant thousands of drops,
	
	Each drop a petty tricolor. For this,
	The aunts in Pasadena, remembering,
	Abhor the plaster of the western horses,
	
	Souvenirs of museums. But, Master, there are
	Lights masculine and lights feminine.
	What is this purple, this parasol,
	
	This stage-light of the Opera?
	It is like a region full of intonings.
	It is Hartford seen in a purple light.
	
	A moment ago, light masculine,
	Working, with big hands, on the town,
	Arranged its heroic attitudes.
	
	But now as in an amour of women
	Purple sets purple round. Look, Master,
	See the river, the railroad, the cathedral
	
	When male light fell on the naked back
	Of the town, the river, the railroad were clear.
	Now, every muscle slops away.
	
	Hi! Whisk it, poodle, flick the spray
	Of the ocean, ever-freshening,
	On the irised hunks, the stone bouquet.


41. OF HEAVEN CONSIDERED AS A TOMB

	What word have you, interpreters, of men
	Who in the tomb of heaven walk by night,
	The darkened ghosts of our old comedy?
	Do they believe they range the gusty cold,
	With lanterns borne aloft to light the way,
	Freemen of death, about and still about
	To find whatever it is they seek? Or does
	That burial, pillared up each day as porte
	And spiritus passage into nothingness,
	Foretell each night the one abysmal night,
	When the host shall no more wander, nor the light
	Of the steadfast lanterns creep across the dark?
	Make hue among the dark comedians,
	Hallo them in the topmost distances
	For answer from their icy Elysée.


42. OF MERE BEING

	The palm at the end of the mind,
	Beyond the last thought, rises
	In the bronze decor,
	
	A gold-feathered bird
	Sings in the palm, without human meaning,
	Without human feeling, a foreign song.
	
	You know then that it is not the reason
	That makes us happy or unhappy.
	The bird sings. Its feathers shine.
	
	The palm stands on the edge of space.
	The wind moves slowly in the branches.
	The bird’s fire-fangled feathers dangle down.


43. OF THE MANNER OF ADDRESSING CLOUDS

	Gloomy grammarians in golden gowns,
	Meekly you keep the mortal rendezvous,
	Eliciting the still sustaining pomps
	Of speech which are like music so profound
	They seem an exaltation without sound.
	Funest philosophers and ponderers,
	Their evocations are the speech of clouds.
	So speech of your processionals returns
	In the casual evocations of your tread
	Across the stale, mysterious seasons.
	These
	Are the music of meet resignation; these
	The responsive, still sustaining pomps for you
	To magnify, if in that drifting waste
	You are to be accompanied by more
	Than mute bare splendors of the sun and moon.


44. OF THE SURFACE OF THINGS

	I.
	
	In my room, the world is beyond my understanding;
	But when I walk I see that it consists of three or four hills
	and a cloud.
	
	
	II.
	
	From my balcony, I survey the yellow air,
	Reading where I have written,
	“The spring is like a belle undressing.”
	
	
	III.
	
	The gold tree is blue.
	The singer has pulled his cloak over his head.
	The moon is in the folds of the cloak.


45. PALACE OF THE BABIES

	THe disbeliever walked the moonlit place,
	Outside of gates of hammered serafin,
	Observing the moon-blotches on the walls.
	
	The yellow rocked across the still façades,
	Or else sat spinning on the pinnacles,
	While he imagined humming sounds and sleep.
	
	The walker in the moonlight walked alone,
	And each black window of the building balked
	His loneliness and what was in his mind:
	
	If in a shimmering room the babies came,
	Drawn close by dreams of fledgling wing,
	It was because night nursed them in its fold.
	
	Night nursed not him in whose dark mind
	The clambering wings of birds of black revolved,
	Making harsh torment of the solitude.
	
	The walker in the moonlight walked alone,
	And in his heart his disbelief lay cold.
	His broad-brimmed hat came close upon his eyes.


46. THE PALTRY NUDE STARTS ON A SPRING VOYAGE

	But not on a shell, she starts,
	Archaic, for the sea.
	But on the first-found weed
	She scuds the glitters,
	Noiselessly, like one more wave.
	
	She too is discontent
	And would have purple stuff upon her arms,
	Tired of the salty harbors,
	Eager for the brine and bellowing
	Of the high interiors of the sea.
	
	The wind speeds her,
	Blowing upon her hands
	And watery back.
	She touches the clouds, where she goes,
	In the circle of her traverse of the sea.
	
	Yet this is meagre play
	In the scurry and water-shine,
	As her heels foam--
	Not as when the goldener nude
	Of a later day
	
	Will go, like the centre of sea-green pomp,
	In an intenser calm,
	Scullion of fate,
	Across the spick torrent, ceaselessly,
	Upon her irretrievable way.


47. (FROM) PETER PARASOL

	_Aux taureaux Dieu cornes donne
	Et sabots durs aux chevaux . . ._
	
	Why are not women fair,
	All, as Andromache--
	Having, each one, most praisable
	Ears, eyes, soul, skin, hair?
	
	Good God! That all beasts should have
	The tusks of the elephant,
	Or be beautiful
	As large, ferocious tigers are.
	
	It is not so with women.
	I wish they were all fair,
	And walked in fine clothes,
	With parasols, in the afternoon air.


48. PETER QUINCE AT THE CLAVIER

	I.
	
	Just as my fingers on these keys 
	Make music, so the selfsame sounds 
	On my spirit make a music, too. 
	
	Music is feeling, then, not sound; 
	And thus it is that what I feel, 
	Here in this room, desiring you, 
	
	Thinking of your blue-shadowed silk, 
	Is music. It is like the strain 
	Waked in the elders by Susanna: 
	
	Of a green evening, clear and warm, 
	She bathed in her still garden, while 
	The red-eyed elders, watching, felt 
	
	The basses of their beings throb 
	In witching chords, and their thin blood 
	Pulse pizzicati of Hosanna. 
	
	
	II.
	
	In the green water, clear and warm, 
	Susanna lay. 
	She searched 
	The touch of springs, 
	And found 
	Concealed imaginings. 
	She sighed, 
	For so much melody. 
	
	Upon the bank, she stood 
	In the cool 
	Of spent emotions. 
	She felt, among the leaves, 
	The dew 
	Of old devotions. 
	
	She walked upon the grass, 
	Still quavering. 
	The winds were like her maids, 
	On timid feet, 
	Fetching her woven scarves, 
	Yet wavering. 
	
	A breath upon her hand 
	Muted the night. 
	She turned--
	A cymbal crashed, 
	And roaring horns. 
	
	
	III.
	
	Soon, with a noise like tambourines, 
	Came her attendant Byzantines. 
	
	They wondered why Susanna cried 
	Against the elders by her side; 
	
	And as they whispered, the refrain 
	Was like a willow swept by rain. 
	
	Anon, their lamps’ uplifted flame 
	Revealed Susanna and her shame. 
	
	And then, the simpering Byzantines 
	Fled, with a noise like tambourines. 
	
	
	IV.
	
	Beauty is momentary in the mind--
	The fitful tracing of a portal; 
	But in the flesh it is immortal. 
	
	The body dies; the body’s beauty lives. 
	So evenings die, in their green going, 
	A wave, interminably flowing. 
	So gardens die, their meek breath scenting 
	The cowl of winter, done repenting. 
	So maidens die, to the auroral 
	Celebration of a maiden’s choral. 
	
	Susanna’s music touched the bawdy strings 
	Of those white elders; but, escaping, 
	Left only Death’s ironic scraping. 
	Now, in its immortality, it plays 
	On the clear viol of her memory, 
	And makes a constant sacrament of praise.


49. PHRASES

	I. 
	
	There’s a little square in Paris, 
	Waiting until we pass. 
	They sit idly there, 
	They sip the glass. 
	
	There’s a cab-horse at the corner, 
	There’s rain. The season grieves. 
	It was silver once, 
	And green with leaves. 
	
	There’s a parrot in a window, 
	Will see us on parade, 
	Hear the loud drums roll--
	And serenade. 
	
	
	II. 
	
	This was the salty taste of glory, 
	That it was not 
	Like Agamemnon’s story. 
	Only, an eyeball in the mud, 
	And Hopkins, 
	Flat and pale and gory! 
	
	
	III. 
	
	But the bugles, in the night, 
	Were wings that bore 
	To where our comfort was; 
	
	Arabesques of candle beams, 
	Winding 
	Through our heavy dreams; 
	
	Winds that blew 
	Where the bending iris grew; 
	
	Birds of intermitted bliss, 
	Singing in the night’s abyss; 
	
	Vines with yellow fruit, 
	That fell 
	Along the walls 
	That bordered Hell. 
	
	
	IV. 
	
	Death’s nobility again 
	Beautified the simplest men. 
	Fallen Winkle felt the pride 
	Of Agamemnon 
	When he died. 
	
	What could London’s 
	Work and waste 
	Give him--
	To that salty, sacrificial taste? 
	
	What could London’s 
	Sorrow bring--
	To that short, triumphant sting?


50. THE PLACE OF THE SOLITAIRES

	Let the place of the solitaires
	Be a place of perpetual undulation.
	
	Whether it be in mid-sea
	On the dark, green water-wheel,
	Or on the beaches,
	There must be no cessation
	Of motion, or of the noise of motion,
	The renewal of noise
	And manifold continuation;
	
	And, most, of the motion of thought
	And its restless iteration,
	
	In the place of the solitaires,
	Which is to be a place of perpetual undulation.


51. THE PLAIN SENSE OF THINGS

	After the leaves have fallen, we return
	To a plain sense of things. It is as if
	We had come to an end of the imagination,
	Inanimate in an inert savoir.
	
	It is difficult even to choose the adjective
	For this blank cold, this sadness without cause.
	The great structure has become a minor house.
	No turban walks across the lessened floors.
	
	The greenhouse never so badly needed paint.
	The chimney is fifty years old and slants to one side.
	A fantastic effort has failed, a repetition
	In a repetitiousness of men and flies.
	
	Yet the absence of the imagination had
	Itself to be imagined. The great pond,
	The plain sense of it, without reflections, leaves,
	Mud, water like dirty glass, expressing silence
	
	Of a sort, silence of a rat come out to see,
	The great pond and its waste of the lilies, all this
	Had to be imagined as an inevitable knowledge,
	Required, as a necessity requires.


52. PLOUGHING ON SUNDAY

	The white cock’s tail
	Tosses in the wind.
	The turkey-cock’s tail
	Glitters in the sun.
	
	Water in the fields.
	The wind pours down.
	The feathers flare
	And bluster in the wind.
	
	Remus, blow your horn!
	I’m ploughing on Sunday,
	Ploughing North America.
	Blow your horn!
	
	Tum-ti-tum,
	Ti-tum-tum-tum!
	The turkey-cock’s tail
	Spreads to the sun.
	
	The white cock’s tail
	Streams to the moon.
	Water in the fields.
	The wind pours down.


53. THE POEM THAT TOOK THE PLACE OF A MOUNTAIN

	There it was, word for word,
	The poem that took the place of a mountain.
	
	He breathed its oxygen,
	Even when the book lay turned in the dust of his table.
	
	It reminded him how he had needed
	A place to go to in his own direction,
	
	How he had recomposed the pines,
	Shifted the rocks and picked his way among clouds,
	
	For the outlook that would be right,
	Where he would be complete in an unexplained completion:
	
	The exact rock where his inexactnesses
	Would discover, at last, the view toward which they had edged,
	
	Where he could lie and, gazing down at the sea,
	Recognize his unique and solitary home.


54. POETRY IS A DESTRUCTIVE FORCE

	That’s what misery is,
	Nothing to have at heart.
	It is to have or nothing.
	
	It is a thing to have,
	A lion, an ox in his breast,
	To feel it breathing there.
	
	Corazón, stout dog,
	Young ox, bow-legged bear,
	He tastes its blood, not spit.
	
	He is like a man
	In the body of a violent beast.
	Its muscles are his own . . .
	
	The lion sleeps in the sun.
	Its nose is on its paws.
	It can kill a man.


55. A POSTCARD FROM THE VOLCANO

	Children picking up our bones
	Will never know that these were once   
	As quick as foxes on the hill;
	
	And that in autumn, when the grapes   
	Made sharp air sharper by their smell   
	These had a being, breathing frost;
	
	And least will guess that with our bones   
	We left much more, left what still is   
	The look of things, left what we felt
	
	At what we saw. The spring clouds blow   
	Above the shuttered mansion-house,   
	Beyond our gate and the windy sky
	
	Cries out a literate despair.
	We knew for long the mansion’s look   
	And what we said of it became
	
	A part of what it is ... Children,   
	Still weaving budded aureoles,
	Will speak our speech and never know,
	
	Will say of the mansion that it seems   
	As if he that lived there left behind   
	A spirit storming in blank walls,
	
	A dirty house in a gutted world,
	A tatter of shadows peaked to white,   
	Smeared with the gold of the opulent sun.


56. A RABBIT AS KING OF THE GHOSTS

	The difficulty to think at the end of day,   
	When the shapeless shadow covers the sun   
	And nothing is left except light on your fur--
	
	There was the cat slopping its milk all day,   
	Fat cat, red tongue, green mind, white milk   
	And August the most peaceful month.
	
	To be, in the grass, in the peacefullest time,   
	Without that monument of cat,   
	The cat forgotten in the moon;
	
	And to feel that the light is a rabbit-light,   
	In which everything is meant for you   
	And nothing need be explained;
	
	Then there is nothing to think of. It comes of itself;
	And east rushes west and west rushes down,
	No matter. The grass is full
	
	And full of yourself. The trees around are for you,   
	The whole of the wideness of night is for you,   
	A self that touches all edges,
	
	You become a self that fills the four corners of night.
	The red cat hides away in the fur-light
	And there you are humped high, humped up,
	
	You are humped higher and higher, black as stone--
	You sit with your head like a carving in space   
	And the little green cat is a bug in the grass.


57. THE REVOLUTIONISTS STOP FOR ORANGEADE

	Capitán profundo, capitán geloso,
	Ask us not to sing standing in the sun,
	Hairy-backed and hump-armed,
	Flat-ribbed and big-bagged.
	 
	There is no pith in music
	Except in something false.
	 
	Bellissimo, pomposo,
	Sing a song of serpent-kin,
	Necks among the thousand leaves,
	Tongues around the fruit.
	Sing in clownish boots
	Strapped and buckled bright.
	 
	Wear the breeches of a mask,
	Coat half-flare and half galloon;
	Wear a helmet without reason,
	Tufted, tilted, twirled, and twisted.
	Start the singing in a voice
	Rougher than a grinding shale.
	 
	Hang a feather by your eye,
	Nod and look a little sly.
	This must be the vent of pity,
	Deeper than a truer ditty
	Of the real that wrenches,
	Of the quick that’s wry.


58. THE SENSE OF THE SLEIGHT-OF-HAND MAN

	One’s grand flights, one’s Sunday baths,
	One’s tootings at the weddings of the soul
	Occur as they occur. So bluish clouds
	Occurred above the empty house and the leaves
	Of the rhododendrons rattled their gold,
	As if some one lived there. Such foods of white
	Came bursting from the clouds. So the wind
	Threw its contorted strength around the
	Could you have said the bluejay suddenly
	Would swoop to earth? It is a wheel, the rays
	Around the sun. The wheel survives the myths.
	The fire eye in the clouds survives the gods.
	To think of a dove with an eye of grenadine
	And pines that are cornets, so it occurs,
	And a little island full of geese and stars:
	It may be that the ignorant man, alone,
	Has any chance to mate his life with the life
	That is the sensual, pearly spouse, the life
	That is fluent in even the wintriest bronze.


59. THE SNOW MAN

	One must have a mind of winter
	To regard the frost and the boughs
	Of the pine-trees crusted with snow;
	
	And have been cold a long time
	To behold the junipers shagged with ice,
	The spruces rough in the distant glitter
	
	Of the January sun; and not to think
	Of any misery in the sound of the wind,
	In the sound of a few leaves,
	
	Which is the sound of the land
	Full of the same wind
	That is blowing in the same bare place
	
	For the listener, who listens in the snow,
	And, nothing himself, beholds
	Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is.


60. ST. ARMORER’S CHURCH FROM THE OUTSIDE

	St. Armorer’s was once an immense success.
	It rose loftily and stood massively; and to lie
	In its church-yard, in the province of St. Armorer’s,
	Fixed one for good in geranium-colored day.
	
	What is left has the foreign smell of plaster,
	The closed-in smell of hay. A sumac grows
	On the altar, growing toward the lights, inside.
	Reverberations leak and lack among holes
	
	Its chapel rises from Terre Ensevelie,
	An ember yes among its cindery noes,
	His own: a chapel of breath, an appearance made
	For a sign of meaning in the meaningless,
	
	No radiance of dead blaze, but something seen
	In a mystic eye, no sign of life but life,
	Itself, the presence of the intelligible
	In that which is created as its symbol.
	
	It is like a new account of everything old,
	Matisse at Vence and a great deal more than that,
	A new-colored sun, say, that will soon change forms
	And spread hallucinations on every leaf.
	
	The chapel rises, his own, his period,
	A civilization formed from the outward blank,
	A sacred syllable rising from sacked speech,
	The first car out of a tunnel en voyage
	
	Into lands of ruddy-ruby fruits, achieved
	Not merely desired, for sale, and market things
	That press, strong peasants in a peasant world,
	Their purports to a final seriousness-
	
	Final for him, the acceptance of such prose,
	Time’s given perfections made to seem like less
	Than the need of each generation to be itself,
	The need to be actual and as it is.
	
	St. Armorer’s has nothing of this present,
	This vif, this dizzle-dazzle of being new
	And of becoming, for which the chapel spreads out
	Its arches in its vivid element,
	
	In the air of newness of that element,
	In an air of freshness, clearness, greenness, blueness,
	That which is always beginning because it is part
	Of that which is always beginning, over and over.
	
	The chapel underneath St. Armorer’s walls,
	Stands in a light, its natural light and day,
	The origin and keep of its health and his own
	And there he walks and does as he lives and likes.


61. SUNDAY MORNING

	I.
	
	Complacencies of the peignoir, and late 
	Coffee and oranges in a sunny chair, 
	And the green freedom of a cockatoo 
	Upon a rug mingle to dissipate 
	The holy hush of ancient sacrifice. 
	She dreams a little, and she feels the dark 
	Encroachment of that old catastrophe, 
	As a calm darkens among water-lights. 
	The pungent oranges and bright, green wings 
	Seem things in some procession of the dead, 
	Winding across wide water, without sound. 
	The day is like wide water, without sound, 
	Stilled for the passing of her dreaming feet 
	Over the seas, to silent Palestine, 
	Dominion of the blood and sepulchre. 
	
	
	II.
	
	Why should she give her bounty to the dead? 
	What is divinity if it can come 
	Only in silent shadows and in dreams? 
	Shall she not find in comforts of the sun, 
	In pungent fruit and bright, green wings, or else 
	In any balm or beauty of the earth, 
	Things to be cherished like the thought of heaven? 
	Divinity must live within herself: 
	Passions of rain, or moods in falling snow; 
	Grievings in loneliness, or unsubdued 
	Elations when the forest blooms; gusty 
	Emotions on wet roads on autumn nights; 
	All pleasures and all pains, remembering 
	The bough of summer and the winter branch. 
	These are the measures destined for her soul. 
	
	
	III.
	
	Jove in the clouds had his inhuman birth. 
	No mother suckled him, no sweet land gave 
	Large-mannered motions to his mythy mind. 
	He moved among us, as a muttering king, 
	Magnificent, would move among his hinds, 
	Until our blood, commingling, virginal, 
	With heaven, brought such requital to desire 
	The very hinds discerned it, in a star. 
	Shall our blood fail? Or shall it come to be 
	The blood of paradise? And shall the earth 
	Seem all of paradise that we shall know? 
	The sky will be much friendlier then than now, 
	A part of labor and a part of pain, 
	And next in glory to enduring love, 
	Not this dividing and indifferent blue. 
	
	
	IV.
	
	She says, “I am content when wakened birds, 
	Before they fly, test the reality 
	Of misty fields, by their sweet questionings; 
	But when the birds are gone, and their warm fields 
	Return no more, where, then, is paradise?” 
	There is not any haunt of prophecy, 
	Nor any old chimera of the grave, 
	Neither the golden underground, nor isle 
	Melodious, where spirits gat them home, 
	Nor visionary south, nor cloudy palm 
	Remote on heaven’s hill, that has endured 
	As April’s green endures; or will endure 
	Like her remembrance of awakened birds, 
	Or her desire for June and evening, tipped 
	By the consummation of the swallow’s wings. 
	
	
	V.
	
	She says, “But in contentment I still feel 
	The need of some imperishable bliss.” 
	Death is the mother of beauty; hence from her, 
	Alone, shall come fulfilment to our dreams 
	And our desires. Although she strews the leaves 
	Of sure obliteration on our paths, 
	The path sick sorrow took, the many paths 
	Where triumph rang its brassy phrase, or love 
	Whispered a little out of tenderness, 
	She makes the willow shiver in the sun 
	For maidens who were wont to sit and gaze 
	Upon the grass, relinquished to their feet. 
	She causes boys to pile new plums and pears 
	On disregarded plate. The maidens taste 
	And stray impassioned in the littering leaves. 
	
	
	VI.
	
	Is there no change of death in paradise? 
	Does ripe fruit never fall? Or do the boughs 
	Hang always heavy in that perfect sky, 
	Unchanging, yet so like our perishing earth, 
	With rivers like our own that seek for seas 
	They never find, the same receding shores 
	That never touch with inarticulate pang? 
	Why set the pear upon those river-banks 
	Or spice the shores with odors of the plum? 
	Alas, that they should wear our colors there, 
	The silken weavings of our afternoons, 
	And pick the strings of our insipid lutes! 
	Death is the mother of beauty, mystical, 
	Within whose burning bosom we devise 
	Our earthly mothers waiting, sleeplessly. 
	
	
	VII.
	
	Supple and turbulent, a ring of men 
	Shall chant in orgy on a summer morn 
	Their boisterous devotion to the sun, 
	Not as a god, but as a god might be, 
	Naked among them, like a savage source. 
	Their chant shall be a chant of paradise, 
	Out of their blood, returning to the sky; 
	And in their chant shall enter, voice by voice, 
	The windy lake wherein their lord delights, 
	The trees, like serafin, and echoing hills, 
	That choir among themselves long afterward. 
	They shall know well the heavenly fellowship 
	Of men that perish and of summer morn. 
	And whence they came and whither they shall go 
	The dew upon their feet shall manifest. 
	
	
	VIII.
	
	She hears, upon that water without sound, 
	A voice that cries, “The tomb in Palestine 
	Is not the porch of spirits lingering. 
	It is the grave of Jesus, where he lay.” 
	We live in an old chaos of the sun, 
	Or old dependency of day and night, 
	Or island solitude, unsponsored, free, 
	Of that wide water, inescapable. 
	Deer walk upon our mountains, and the quail 
	Whistle about us their spontaneous cries; 
	Sweet berries ripen in the wilderness; 
	And, in the isolation of the sky, 
	At evening, casual flocks of pigeons make 
	Ambiguous undulations as they sink, 
	Downward to darkness, on extended wings.


62. TEA AT THE PALAZ OF HOON

	Not less because in purple I descended
	The western day through what you called
	The loneliest air, not less was I myself.
	
	What was the ointment sprinkled on my beard?
	What were the hymns that buzzed beside my ears?
	What was the sea whose tide swept through me there?
	
	Out of my mind the golden ointment rained,
	And my ears made the blowing hymns they heard.
	I was myself the compass of that sea:
	
	I was the world in which I walked, and what I saw
	Or heard or felt came not but from myself:
	And there I found myself more truly and more strange.


63. (FROM) THE INDIGO GLASS IN THE GRASS

	Which is real--
	This bottle of indigo glass in the grass,
	Or the bench with the pot of geraniums, the stained mattress and the washed overalls drying in the sun?
	Which of these truly contains the world?
	
	Neither one, nor the two together.


64. (FROM) THE MAN WITH THE BLUE GUITAR

	I.
	
	The man bent over his guitar,
	A shearsman of sorts. The day was green.
	
	They said, “You have a blue guitar,
	You do not play things as they are.”
	
	The man replied, “Things as they are 
	Are changed upon the blue guitar.”
	
	And they said then, “But play, you must,
	A tune beyond us, yet ourselves,
	
	A tune upon the blue guitar
	Of things exactly as they are.”
	
	
	II.
	
	I cannot bring a world quite round,
	Although I patch it as I can.
	
	I sing a hero’s head, large eye
	And bearded bronze, but not a man,
	
	Although I patch him as I can
	And reach through him almost to man.
	
	If to serenade almost to man
	Is to miss, by that, things as they are,
	
	Say it is the serenade 
	Of a man that plays a blue guitar.
	
	
	III.
	
	Ah, but to play man number one,
	To drive the dagger in his heart,
	
	To lay his brain upon the board 
	And pick the acrid colors out,
	
	To nail his thought across the door,
	Its wings spread wide to rain and snow,
	
	To strike his living hi and ho,
	To tick it, tock it, turn it true,
	
	To bang from it a savage blue,
	Jangling the metal of the strings�
	
	
	IV.
	
	So that’s life, then: things as they are?
	It picks its way on the blue guitar.
	
	A million people on one string?
	And all their manner in the thing,
	
	And all their manner, right and wrong,
	And all their manner, weak and strong?
	
	The feelings crazily, craftily call,
	Like a buzzing of flies in autumn air,
	
	And that’s life, then: things as they are,
	This buzzing of the blue guitar.
	
	
	V.
	
	Do not speak to us of the greatness of poetry,
	Of the torches wisping in the underground,
	
	Of the structure of vaults upon a point of light.
	There are no shadows in our sun,
	
	Day is desire and night is sleep.
	There are no shadows anywhere.
	
	The earth, for us, is flat and bare.
	There are no shadows. Poetry
	
	Exceeding music must take the place
	Of empty heaven and its hymns,
	
	Ourselves in poetry must take their place,
	Even in the chattering of your guitar.
	
	
	VI.
	
	A tune beyond us as we are,
	Yet nothing changed by the blue guitar;
	
	Ourselves in the tune as if in space,
	Yet nothing changed, except the place
	
	Of things as they are and only the place
	As you play them, on the blue guitar,
	
	Placed, so, beyond the compass of change,
	Perceived in a final atmosphere;
	
	For a moment final, in the way 
	The thinking of art seems final when
	
	The thinking of god is smoky dew.
	The tune is space. The blue guitar
	
	Becomes the place of things as they are,
	A composing of senses of the guitar.
	
	
	VII.
	
	It is the sun that shares our works.
	The moon shares nothing. It is a sea.
	
	When shall I come to say of the sun,
	It is a sea; it shares nothing;
	
	The sun no longer shares our works 
	And the earth is alive with creeping men,
	
	Mechanical beetles never quite warm?
	And shall I then stand in the sun, as now
	
	I stand in the moon, and call it good,
	The immaculate, the merciful good,
	
	Detached from us, from things as they are?
	Not to be part of the sun? To stand 
	
	Remote and call it merciful?
	The strings are cold on the blue guitar.
	
	
	VIII.
	
	The vivid, florid, turgid sky,
	The drenching thunder rolling by,
	
	The morning deluged still by night,
	The clouds tumultuously bright
	
	And the feeling heavy in cold chords
	Struggling toward impassioned choirs,
	
	Crying among the clouds, enraged
	By gold antagonists in air--
	
	I know my lazy, leaden twang 
	Is like the reason in a storm;
	
	And yet it brings the storm to bear.
	I twang it out and leave it there.
	
	
	IX.
	
	And the color, the overcast blue
	Of the air, in which the blue guitar
	
	Is a form, described but difficult,
	And I am merely a shadow hunched
	
	Above the arrowy, still strings,
	The maker of a thing yet to be made;
	
	The color like a thought that grows
	Out of a mood, the tragic robe
	
	Of the actor, half his gesture, half
	His speech, the dress of his meaning, silk
	
	Sodden with his melancholy words,
	The weather of his stage, himself.
	
	
	X.
	
	Raise reddest columns. Toll a bell
	And clap the hollows full of tin.
	
	Throw papers in the streets, the wills
	Of the dead, majestic in their seals.
	
	And the beautiful trombones-behold
	The approach of him whom none believes,
	
	Whom all believe that all believe,
	A pagan in a varnished care.
	
	Roll a drum upon the blue guitar.
	Lean from the steeple. Cry aloud,
	
	“Here am I, my adversary, that
	Confront you, hoo-ing the slick trombones,
	
	Yet with a petty misery
	At heart, a petty misery,
	
	Ever the prelude to your end,
	The touch that topples men and rock.”
	
	
	XV.
	
	Is this picture of Picasso’s, this “hoard
	Of destructions”, a picture of ourselves,
	
	Now, an image of our society?
	Do I sit, deformed, a naked egg,
	
	Catching at Good-bye, harvest moon,
	Without seeing the harvest or the moon?
	
	Things as they are have been destroyed.
	Have I? Am I a man that is dead
	
	At a table on which the food is cold?
	Is my thought a memory, not alive?
	
	Is the spot on the floor, there, wine or blood
	And whichever it may be, is it mine?
	
	
	XXIII.
	
	A few final solutions, like a duet
	With the undertaker: a voice in the clouds,
	
	Another on earth, the one a voice
	Of ether, the other smelling of drink,
	
	The voice of ether prevailing, the swell
	Of the undertaker’s song in the snow
	
	Apostrophizing wreaths, the voice
	In the clouds serene and final, next
	
	The grunted breath scene and final,
	The imagined and the real, thought
	
	And the truth, Dichtung und Wahrheit, all
	Confusion solved, as in a refrain
	
	One keeps on playing year by year,
	Concerning the nature of things as they are.
	
	
	XXX.
	
	From this I shall evolve a man.
	This is his essence: the old fantoche
	
	Hanging his shawl upon the wind,
	Like something on the stage, puffed out,
	
	His strutting studied through centuries.
	At last, in spite of his manner, his eye
	
	A-cock at the cross-piece on a pole
	Supporting heavy cables, slung
	
	Through Oxidia, banal suburb,
	One-half of all its installments paid.
	
	Dew-dapper clapper-traps, blazing
	From crusty stacks above machines.
	
	Ecce, Oxidia is the seed
	Dropped out of this amber-ember pod,
	
	Oxidia is the soot of fire,
	Oxidia is Olympia.
	
	
	XXXI.
	
	How long and late the pheasant sleeps�
	The employer and employee contend,
	
	Combat, compose their droll affair.
	The bubbling sun will bubble up,
	
	Spring sparkle and the cock-bird shriek.
	The employer and employee will hear
	
	And continue their affair. The shriek
	Will rack the thickets. There is no place,
	
	Here, for the lark fixed in the mind,
	In the museum of the sky. The cock
	
	Will claw sleep. Morning is not sun,
	It is this posture of the nerves,
	
	As if a blunted player clutched
	The nuances of the blue guitar.
	
	It must be this rhapsody or none,
	The rhapsody of things as they are.
	
	
	XXXII.
	
	Throw away the lights, the definitions,
	And say of what you see in the dark
	
	That it is this or that it is that,
	But do not use the rotted names.
	
	How should you walk in that space and know 
	Nothing of the madness of space,
	
	Nothing of its jocular procreations?
	Throw the lights away. Nothing must stand
	
	Between you and the shapes you take
	When the crust of shape has been destroyed.
	
	You as you are? You are yourself.
	The blue guitar surprises you.
	
	
	XXXIII.
	
	That generation’s dream, aviled
	In the mud, in Monday’s dirty light,
	
	That’s it, the only dream they knew,
	Time in its final block, not time
	
	To come, a wrangling of two dreams.
	Here is the bread of time to come,
	
	Here is its actual stone. The bread 
	Will be our bread, the stone will be
	
	Our bed and we shall sleep by night.
	We shall forget by day, except
	
	The moments when we choose to play
	The imagined pine, the imagined jay.


65. THINGS OF AUGUST

	I.
	
	These locusts by day, these crickets by night
	Are the instruments on which to play
	Of an old and disused ambit of the soul
	Or of a new aspect, bright in discovery--
	
	A disused ambit of the spirit’s way,
	The sort of thing that August crooners sing,
	By a pure fountain, that was a ghost, and is,
	Under the sun-slides of a sloping mountain;
	
	Or else a new aspect, say the spirit’s sex,
	Its attitudes, its answers to attitudes
	And the sex of its voices, as the voice of one
	Meets nakedly another’s naked voice.
	
	Nothing is lost, loud locusts. No note fails.
	These sounds are long in the living of the ear.
	The honky-tonk out of the somnolent grasses
	Is a memorizing, a trying out, to keep.
	
	
	II.
	
	We make, although inside an egg,
	Variations on the words spread sail.
	
	The morning-glories grow in the egg.
	It is full of the myrrh and camphor of summer
	
	And Adirondack glittering. The cat hawks it
	And the hawk cats it and we say spread sail,
	
	Spread sail, we say spread white, spread way.
	The shell is a shore. The egg of the sea
	
	And the egg of the sky are in shells, in walls, in skins
	And the egg of the earth lies deep within an egg.
	
	Spread outward. Crack the round dome. Break through.
	Have liberty not as the air within a grave
	
	Or down a well. Breathe freedom, oh, my native,
	In the space of horizons that neither love nor hate.
	
	
	III.
	
	High poetry and low:
	Experience in perihelion
	Or in the penumbra of summer night--
	
	The solemn sentences,
	Like interior intonations,
	The speech of truth in its true solitude,
	A nature that is created in what it says,
	The peace of the last intelligence;
	
	Or the same thing without desire,
	He that in this intelligence
	Mistakes it for a world of objects,
	Which, being green and blue, appease him,
	By chance, or happy chance, or happiness,
	According to his thought, in the Mediterranean
	Of the quiet of the middle of the night,
	With the broken statues standing on the shore.
	
	
	IV.
	
	The sad smell of the lilacs - one remembered it,
	Not as the fragrance of Persephone,
	Nor of a widow Dooley,
	But as of an exhumation returned to earth,
	
	The rich earth, of its own self made rich,
	Fertile of its own leaves and days and wars,
	Of its brown wheat rapturous in the wind,
	The nature of its women in the air,
	
	The stern voices of its necessitous men,
	This chorus as of those that wanted to live.
	The sentiment of the fatal is a part
	Of filial love. Or is it the element,
	
	An approximation of an element,
	A little thing to think of on Sunday walks,
	Something not to be mentioned to Mrs. Dooley,
	An arrogant dagger darting its arrogance,
	
	In the parent’s hand, perhaps parental lover
	One wished that there had been a season,
	Longer and later, in which the lilacs opened
	And spread about them a warmer, rosier odor.
	
	
	V.
	
	We’ll give the week-end to wisdom, to Weisheit, the rabbi,
	Lucidity of his city, joy of his nation,
	The state of circumstance.
	
	The thinker as reader reads what has been written
	He wears the words he reads to look upon
	Within his being,
	
	A crown within him of crispest diamonds,
	A reddened garment falling to his feet,
	A hand of light to turn the page,
	
	A finger with a ring to guide his eye
	From line to line, as we lie on the grass and listen
	To that which has no speech,
	
	The voluble intentions of the symbols,
	The ghostly celebrations of the picnic,
	The secretions of insight.
	
	
	VI.
	
	The world imagines for the beholder.
	He is born the blank mechanic of the mountains,
	
	The blank free of fields, their matin laborer.
	He is the possessed of sense not the possessor.
	
	He does not change the sea from crumpled tinfoil
	To chromatic crawler. But it is changed.
	
	He does not raise the rousing of fresh light
	On the still, black-slatted Eastward shutters.
	
	The woman is chosen but not by him,
	Among the endlessly emerging accords.
	
	The world? The inhuman as human? That which thinks not,
	Feels not, resembling thought, resembling feeling?
	
	It habituates him to the invisible,
	By its faculty of the exceptional,
	
	The faculty of ellipses and deviations,
	In which he exists but never as himself.
	
	
	VII.
	
	He turned from the tower to the house,
	From the spun sky and the high and deadly view,
	To the novels on the table,
	The geraniums on the sill.
	
	He could understand the things at home.
	And being up high had helped him when up high,
	As if on a taller tower
	He would be certain to see
	
	That, in the shadowless atmosphere,
	The knowledge of things lay round but unperceived:
	The height was not quite proper;
	The position was wrong.
	
	It was curious to have to descend
	And, seated in the nature of his chair,
	To feel the satisfactions
	Of that transparent air.
	
	
	VIII.
	
	When was it that the particles became
	The whole man, that tempers and beliefs became
	Temper and belief and that differences lost
	Difference and were one? It had to be
	In the presence of a solitude of the self,
	An expanse and the abstraction of an expanse,
	A zone of time without the ticking of clocks,
	A color that moved us with forgetfulness.
	
	When was it that we heard the voice of union?
	Was it as we sat in the park and the archaic form
	Of a woman with a cloud on her shoulder, rose
	Against the trees and then against the sky
	And the sense of the archaic touched us at once
	In a movement of the outlines of similarity?
	
	We resembled one another at the sight.
	The forgetful color of the autumn day
	Was full of these archaic forms, giants
	Of sense, evoking one thing in many men,
	Evoking an archaic space, vanishing
	In the space, leaving an outline of the size
	Of the impersonal person, the wanderer,
	The father, the ancestor, the bearded peer,
	The total of human shadows bright as glass.
	
	
	IX.
	
	A new text of the world,
	A scribble of fret and fear and fate,
	From a bravura of the mind,
	A courage of the eye,
	
	In which, for all the breathings
	From the edge of night,
	And for all the white voices
	That were rosen once,
	
	The meanings are our own
	It is a text that we shall be needing,
	To be the footing of noon,
	The pillar of midnight,
	
	That comes from ourselves, neither from knowing
	Nor not knowing, yet free from question,
	Because we wanted it so
	And it had to be,
	
	A text of intelligent men
	At the center of the unintelligible,
	As in a hermitage, for us to think,
	Writing and reading the rigid inscription.
	
	
	X.
	
	The mornings grow silent, the never-tiring wonder.
	The trees are reappearing in poverty.
	
	Without rain, there is the sadness of rain
	And an air of lateness. The moon is a tricorn
	
	Waved in pale adieu. The rex Impolitor
	Will come stamping here, the ruler of less than men,
	
	In less than nature. He is not here yet.
	Here the adult one is still banded with fulgor,
	
	Is still warm with the love with which she came,
	Still touches solemnly with what she was
	
	And willed. She has given too much, but not enough
	She is exhausted and a little old.


66. THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A BLACKBIRD

	I.
	
	Among twenty snowy mountains,   
	The only moving thing   
	Was the eye of the blackbird. 
	 
	
	II.
	
	I was of three minds,   
	Like a tree   
	In which there are three blackbirds.  
	
	
	III.
	
	The blackbird whirled in the autumn winds.   
	It was a small part of the pantomime.   
	
	
	IV.
	
	A man and a woman   
	Are one.   
	A man and a woman and a blackbird   
	Are one.  
	
	
	V.
	
	I do not know which to prefer,   
	The beauty of inflections   
	Or the beauty of innuendoes,   
	The blackbird whistling   
	Or just after.   
	
	
	VI.
	
	Icicles filled the long window   
	With barbaric glass.   
	The shadow of the blackbird   
	Crossed it, to and fro.   
	The mood   
	Traced in the shadow   
	An indecipherable cause.  
	
	
	VII.
	
	O thin men of Haddam,   
	Why do you imagine golden birds?   
	Do you not see how the blackbird   
	Walks around the feet   
	Of the women about you? 
	 
	
	VIII.
	
	I know noble accents   
	And lucid, inescapable rhythms;   
	But I know, too,   
	That the blackbird is involved   
	In what I know.   
	
	
	IX.
	
	When the blackbird flew out of sight,   
	It marked the edge   
	Of one of many circles.   
	
	
	X.
	
	At the sight of blackbirds   
	Flying in a green light,   
	Even the bawds of euphony   
	Would cry out sharply.   
	
	
	XI.
	
	He rode over Connecticut   
	In a glass coach.   
	Once, a fear pierced him,   
	In that he mistook   
	The shadow of his equipage   
	For blackbirds.   
	
	
	XII.
	
	The river is moving.   
	The blackbird must be flying. 
	 
	
	XIII.
	
	It was evening all afternoon.   
	It was snowing   
	And it was going to snow.   
	The blackbird sat   
	In the cedar-limbs.


67. THREE TRAVELERS WATCH A SUNRISE

	_THE characters are three Chinese, two negroes 
	and a girl. 
	The scene represents a forest of heavy trees on a hilltop in eastern Pennsylvania. To the right is a road, obscured by bushes. It is about four o’clock of a morning in August, at the present time.
	When the curtain rises, the stage is dark. The limb of a tree creaks. A negro carrying a lantern passes along the road. The sound is repeated. The negro comes through the bushes, raises his lantern and looks through the trees. Discerning a dark object among the branches, he shrinks back, crosses stage, and goes out through the wood to the left. A second negro comes through the bushes to the right. He carries two large baskets, which he places on the ground just inside of the bushes. Enter three Chinese, one of whom carries a lantern. They pause on the road._
	
	_Second Chinese._ All you need, 
	To find poetry, 
	Is to look for it with a lantern. [_The Chinese laugh._] 
	
	_Third Chinese._ I could find it without, 
	On an August night, 
	If I saw no more 
	Than the dew on the barns. 
	
	[_The Second Negro makes a sound to attract their attention. The three Chinese come through the bushes. The first is short, fat, quizzical, and of. middle age. The second is of middle height, thin and turning gray; a man of sense and sympathy. The third is a young man, intent, detached. They wear European clothes._] 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_Glancing at the baskets._] 
	Dew is water to see, 
	Not water to drink: 
	We have forgotten water to drink. 
	Yet I am content 
	Just to see sunrise again. 
	I have not seen it 
	Since the day we left Pekin. 
	It filled my doorway, 
	Like whispering women. 
	
	_First Chinese._ And I have never seen it. 
	If we have no water, 
	Do find a melon for me 
	In the baskets. 
	
	[_The Second Negro, who has been opening the baskets, hands the First Chinese a melon._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ Is there no spring? 
	
	[_The negro takes a water bottle of red porcelain from one of the baskets and places it near the Third Chinese._] 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_To Third Chinese._] Your porcelain 
	water bottle. 
	
	[_One of the baskets contains costumes of silk, red, blue and green. During the following speeches, the Chinese put on these costumes, with the assistance of the negro, and seat themselves on the ground._] 
	
	_Third Chinese._ This fetches its own water. 
	
	[_Takes the bottle and places it on the ground in the center of the stage._] 
	
	I drink from it, dry as it is, 
	As you from maxims, [_To Second Chinese._] 
	Or you from melons. [_To First Chinese._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ Not as I, from melons. 
	Be sure of that. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ Well, it is true of maxims. 
	
	[_He finds a book in the pocket of his costume, and reads from it._] 
	
	“The court had known poverty and wretchedness; hu- 
	manity had invaded its seclusion, with its suffering 
	and its pity.” 
	
	[_The limb of the tree creaks._] 
	Yes: it is true of maxims, 
	Just as it is true of poets, 
	Or wise men, or nobles, 
	Or jade. 
	
	_First Chinese._ Drink from wise men? From jade? 
	Is there no spring? 
	
	[_Turning to the negro, who has taken a jug from one of the baskets._] 
	Fill it and return. 
	
	[_The negro removes a large candle from one of the baskets and hands it to the First Chinese; then takes the jug and the lantern and enters the trees to the left. The First Chinese lights the candle and places it on the ground near the water bottle._] 
	
	_Third Chinese._ There is a seclusion of porcelain 
	That humanity never invades. 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_With sarcasm._] Porcelain! 
	
	_Third Chinese._ It is like the seclusion of sunrise, 
	Before it shines on any house. 
	
	_First Chinese._ Pooh! 
	
	_Second Chinese._ This candle is the sun; 
	This bottle is earth: 
	It is an illustration 
	Used by generations of hermits. 
	The point of difference from reality 
	Is this: 
	
	That, in this illustration, 
	The earth remains of one color--
	It remains red, 
	It remains what it is. 
	But when the sun shines on the earth, 
	In reality 
	It does not shine on a thing that remains 
	What it was yesterday. 
	The sun rises 
	On whatever the earth happens to be. 
	
	_Third Chinese._ And there are indeterminate moments 
	Before it rises, 
	
	Like this, [_With a backward gesture._] 
	Before one can tell 
	What the bottle is going to be--
	Porcelain, Venetian glass, 
	Egyptian . . . 
	Well, there are moments 
	When the candle, sputtering up, 
	
	Finds itself in seclusion, [_He raises the candle in the air._] 
	And shines, perhaps, for the beauty of shining. 
	That is the seclusion of sunrise 
	Before it shines on any house. [_Replacing the candle._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Wagging his head._] As abstract as 
	porcelain. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ Such seclusion knows beauty 
	As the court knew it. 
	The court woke 
	In its windless pavilions, 
	And gazed on chosen mornings, 
	As it gazed 
	On chosen porcelain. 
	
	What the court saw was always of the same color, 
	And well shaped, 
	And seen in a clear light. [_He points to the candle._] 
	It never woke to see, 
	And never knew, 
	The flawed jars, 
	The weak colors, 
	The contorted glass. 
	It never knew 
	The poor lights. [_He opens his book significantly._] 
	When the court knew beauty only, 
	And in seclusion, 
	It had neither love nor wisdom. 
	These came through poverty 
	And wretchedness, 
	Through suffering and pity. [_He pauses._] 
	It is the invasion of humanity 
	That counts. 
	
	[_The limb of the tree creaks. The First Chinese turns, for a moment, in the direction of the sound._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Thoughtfully._] The light of the most 
	tranquil candle 
	Would shudder on a bloody salver. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_With a gesture of disregard._] It is the 
	invasion 
	That counts. 
	
	If it be supposed that we are three figures 
	Painted on porcelain 
	As we sit here, 
	That we are painted on this very bottle, 
	The hermit of the place, 
	Holding this candle to us, 
	Would wonder; 
	But if it be supposed 
	That we are painted as warriors, 
	The candle would tremble in his hands; 
	Or if it be supposed, for example, 
	That we are painted as three dead men, 
	He could not see the steadiest light, 
	For sorrow. 
	It would be true 
	If an emperor himself 
	Held the candle. 
	He would forget the porcelain 
	For the figures painted on it. 
	
	_Third Chinese._ [_Shrugging his shoulders._] Let the candle 
	shine for the beauty of shining. 
	I dislike the invasion 
	And long for the windless pavilions. 
	And yet it may be true 
	That nothing is beautiful 
	Except with reference to ourselves, 
	Nor ugly, 
	
	Nor high, [_Pointing to the sky._] 
	Nor low. [_Pointing to the candle._] 
	No: not even sunrise. 
	
	Can you play of this [_Mockingly to First Chinese._] 
	For us? [_He stands up._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Hesitatingly._] I have a song 
	Called Mistress and Maid. 
	It is of no interest to hermits 
	Or emperors, 
	Yet it has a bearing; 
	For if we affect sunrise, 
	We affect all things. 
	
	_Third Chinese._ It is a pity it is of women. 
	Sing it. 
	
	[_He takes an instrument from one of the baskets and hands it to the First Chinese, who sings the following song, accompanying himself, somewhat tunelessly, on the instrument. The Third Chinese takes various things out of the basket for tea. He arranges fruit. The First Chinese watches him while he plays. The Second Chinese gazes at the ground. The sky shows the first signs of morning._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ The mistress says, in a harsh voice, 
	“He will be thinking in strange countries 
	Of the white stones near my door, 
	And I--I am tired of him.” 
	She says sharply, to her maid, 
	“Sing to yourself no more.” 
	
	Then the maid says, to herself, 
	
	“He will be thinking in strange countries 
	Of the white stones near her door; 
	But it is me he will see 
	At the window, as before.”
	
	“He will be thinking in strange countries 
	Of the green gown I wore. 
	He was saying good-by to her.” 
	The maid drops her eyes and says to her mistress, 
	“I shall sing to myself no more.” 
	
	_Third Chinese._ That affects the white stones, 
	To be sure. [_They laugh._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ And it affects the green gown. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ Here comes our black man. 
	
	[_The Second Negro returns, somewhat agitated, with water but without his lantern. He hands the jug to the Third Chinese. The First Chinese from time to time strikes the instrument. The Third Chinese, who faces the left, peers in the direction from which the negro has come._] 
	
	_Third Chinese._ You have left your lantern behind you. 
	It shines, among the trees, 
	Like evening Venus in a cloud-top. 
	
	[_The Second Negro grins but makes no explanation. He seats himself behind the Chinese to the right._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ Or like a ripe strawberry 
	Among its leaves. [_They laugh._] 
	I heard tonight 
	
	That they are searching the hill 
	For an Italian. 
	He disappeared with his neighbor’s daughter. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_Confidingly._] I am sure you heard 
	The first eloping footfall, 
	And the drum 
	Of pursuing feet. 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Amusedly._] It was not an elopement. 
	The young gentleman was seen 
	To climb the hill, 
	In the manner of a tragedian 
	Who sweats. 
	
	Such things happen in the evening. 
	He was 
	Un miserable. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ Reach the lady quickly. 
	
	[_The First Chinese strikes the instrument twice as a prelude to his narrative._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ There are as many points of view 
	From which to regard her 
	As there are sides to a round bottle. [_Pointing to the water bottle._] 
	She was represented to me 
	As beautiful. 
	
	[_They laugh. The First Chinese strikes the instrument, and looks at the Third Chinese, who yawns._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Reciting._] She was as beautiful as a 
	porcelain water bottle. 
	
	[_He strikes the instrument in an insinuating manner._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ She was represented to me 
	As young. 
	
	Therefore my song should go 
	Of the color of blood. 
	
	[_He strikes the instrument. The limb of the tree creaks. The First Chinese notices it and puts his hand on the knee of the Second Chinese, who is seated between him and the Third Chinese, to call attention to the sound. They are all seated so that they do not face the spot from which the sound comes. A dark object, hanging to the limb of the tree, becomes a dim silhouette. The sky grows constantly brighter. No color is to be seen 1 until the end of the play._]
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_To First Chinese._] It is only a tree 
	Creaking in the night wind. 
	
	_Third Chinese._ [_Shrugging his shoulders._] There would 
	be no creaking 
	In the windless pavilions. 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Resuming._] So far the lady of the present 
	ballad 
	Would have been studied 
	By the hermit and his candle 
	With much philosophy; 
	And possibly the emperor would have cried, 
	“More light!” 
	But it is a way with ballads 
	That the more pleasing they are 
	The worse end they come to ; 
	For here it was also represented 
	That the lady was poor--
	The hermit’s candle would have thrown 
	Alarming shadows, 
	And the emperor would have held 
	The porcelain in one hand . . . 
	She was represented as clinging 
	To that sweaty tragedian, 
	And weeping up the hill. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_With a grimace._] It does not sound 
	like an elopement. 
	
	_First Chinese._ It is a doleful ballad, 
	Fit for keyholes. 
	
	_Third Chinese._ Shall we hear more? 
	
	_Second Chinese._ Why not? 
	
	_Third Chinese._ We came for isolation, 
	To rest in sunrise. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_Raising his book slightly._] But this 
	will be a part of sunrise, 
	And can you tell how it will end?
	Venetian, 
	Egyptian, 
	Contorted glass . . . 
	
	[_He turns toward the light in the sky to the right, darkening the candle with his hands._] 
	
	In the meantime, the candle shines, [_Indicating the sunrise._] 
	As you say, [_To the Third Chinese._] 
	For the beauty of shining. 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Sympathetically._] Oh! it will end badly. 
	The lady’s father 
	Came clapping behind them 
	
	To the foot of the hill. 
	He came crying, 
	“Anna, Anna, Anna!” [_Imitating._] 
	He was alone without her, 
	Just as the young gentleman 
	Was alone without her: 
	Three beggars, you see, 
	Begging for one another. 
	
	[_The First Negro, carrying two lanterns, approaches cautiously through the trees. At the sight of him, the Second Negro, seated near the Chinese, jumps to his feet. The Chinese get up in alarm. The Second Negro goes around the Chinese toward the First Negro. All see the body of a man hanging to the limb of the tree. They gather together, keeping their eyes fixed on it. The First Negro comes out of the trees and places the lanterns on the ground. He looks at the group and then at the body._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_Moved._] The young gentleman of the 
	ballad. 
	
	_Third Chinese._ [_Slowly, approaching the body._] And 
	the end of the ballad. 
	Take away the bushes. 
	
	[_The negroes commence to pull away the bushes._] 
	
	_Second Chinese._ Death, the hermit, 
	Needs no candle 
	In his hermitage. 
	
	[_The Second Chinese snuffs out the candle. The First Chinese puts out the lanterns. As the bushes are pulled away, the figure of a girl, sitting half stupefied under the tree, suddenly becomes apparent to the Second Chinese and then to the Third Chinese. They step back. The negroes move to the left. When the First Chinese sees the girl, the instrument slips from his hands and falls noisily to the ground. The girl stirs._] 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_To the girl._] Is that you, Anna? 
	
	[_ The girl starts. She raises her head, looks around slowly, leaps to her feet and screams._] 
	
	_Second Chinese._ [_Gently._] Is that you, Anna? 
	
	[_She turns quickly toward the body, looks at it fixedly and totters up the stage._] 
	
	_Anna._ [_Bitterly._] Go. 
	Tell my father: 
	He is dead. 
	
	[_The Second and Third Chinese support her. The First Negro whispers to the First Chinese, then takes the lanterns and goes through the opening to the road, where he disappears in the direction of the valley._] 
	
	_First Chinese._ [_To Second Negro._] Bring us fresh water 
	From the spring. 
	
	[_The Second Negro takes the jug 1 and enters the trees to the left. The girl comes gradually to herself. She looks at the Chinese and at the sky. She turns her back toward the body, shuddering, and does, not look at it again._] 
	
	_Anna._ It will soon be sunrise. 
	
	_Second Chinese._ One candle replaces 
	Another. 
	
	[_The First Chinese walks toward the bushes to the right. He stands by the roadside, as if to attract the attention of anyone passing._] 
	
	_Anna._ [_Simply._] When he was in his fields, 
	I worked in ours--
	Wore purple to see; 
	And when I was in his garden 
	I wore gold ear-rings. 
	Last evening I met him on the road. 
	He asked me to walk with him 
	To the top of the hill. 
	I felt the evil, 
	But he wanted nothing. 
	He hanged himself in front of me. 
	
	[_She looks for support. The Second and Third Chinese help her toward the road. At the roadside, the First Chinese takes the place of the Third Chinese. The girl and the twr Chinese go through the bushes and disappear down the road. The stage is empty except for the Third Chinese. He walks slowly across the stage, pushing the instrument out of his way with his foot. It reverberates. He looks at the water bottle._] 
	
	_Third Chinese._ Of the color of blood . . . 
	Seclusion of porcelain . . . 
	Seclusion of sunrise . . . 
	
	[_He picks up the water bottle._] 
	The candle of the sun 
	Will shine soon 
	On this hermit earth. [_Indicating the bottle._] 
	It will shine soon 
	Upon the trees, 
	And find a new thing [_Indicating the body._] 
	Painted on this porcelain, [_Indicating the trees._] 
	But not on this. [_Indicating the bottle._] 
	
	[_He places the bottle on the ground. A narrow cloud over the valley becomes red. He turns toward it, then walks to the right. He finds 1 the book of the Second Chinese lying on the ground, picks it up and turns over the leaves._] 
	Red is not only 
	The color of blood, 
	Or [_Indicating the body._] 
	Of a man’s eyes,
	Or [_Pointedly._] 
	Of a girl’s. 
	
	And as the red of the sun 
	Is one thing to me 
	And one thing to another, 
	So it is the green of one tree [_Indicating._] 
	And the green of another, 
	Which without it would all be black. 
	Sunrise is multiplied, 
	Like the earth on which it shines, 
	By the eyes that open on it, 
	Even dead eyes, 
	As red is multiplied by the leaves of trees. 
	
	[_Toward the end of this speech, the Second Negro comes from the trees to the left, without being seen. The Third Chinese, whose back is turned toward the negro, walks through the bushes to the right and disappears on the road. The negro looks around at the objects on the stage. He sees the instrument, seats himself before it and strikes it several times, listening to the sound. One or two birds twitter. A voice, urging a horse, is heard at a distance. There is the crack of a whip. The negro stands up, walks to the right and remains at the side of the road. The curtain falls slowly._] 


68. TO THE ONE OF FICTIVE MUSIC

	Sister and mother and diviner love,
	And of the sisterhood of the living dead
	Most near, most clear, and of the clearest bloom,
	And of the fragrant mothers the most dear
	And queen, and of diviner love the day
	And flame and summer and sweet fire, no thread
	Of cloudy silver sprinkles in your gown
	Its venom of renown, and on your head
	No crown is simpler than the simple hair.
	 
	Now of the music summoned by the birth
	That separates us from the wind and sea,
	Yet leaves us in them, until earth becomes,
	By being so much of the things we are,
	Gross effigy and simulacrum, none
	Gives motion to perfection more serene
	Than yours, out of our imperfections wrought,
	Most rare, or ever of more kindred air
	In the laborious weaving that you wear.
	 
	For so retentive of themselves are men
	That music is intensest which proclaims
	The near, the clear, and vaunts the clearest bloom,
	And of all vigils musing the obscure,
	That apprehends the most which sees and names,
	As in your name, an image that is sure,
	Among the arrant spices of the sun,
	O bough and bush and scented vine, in whom
	We give ourselves our likest issuance.
	 
	Yet not too like, yet not so like to be
	Too near, too clear, saving a little to endow
	Our feigning with the strange unlike, whence springs
	The difference that heavenly pity brings.
	For this, musician, in your girdle fixed
	Bear other perfumes. On your pale head wear
	A band entwining, set with fatal stones.
	Unreal, give back to us what once you gave:
	The imagination that we spurned and crave.


69. THE WEEPING BURGHER

	It is with a strange malice
	That I distort the world.
	
	Ah! that ill humors
	Should mask as white girls.
	And ah! that Scaramouche
	Should have a black barouche.
	
	The sorry verities!
	Yet in excess, continual,
	There is cure of sorrow.
	
	Permit that if as ghost I come
	Among the people burning in me still,
	I come as belle design
	Of foppish line.
	
	And I, then, tortured for old speech--
	A white of wildly woven rings;
	I, weeping in a calcined heart--
	My hands such sharp, imagined things.
	 


70. THE WIND SHIFTS

	This is how the wind shifts:
	Like the thoughts of an old human,
	Who still thinks eagerly
	And despairingly.
	The wind shifts like this:
	Like a human without illusions,
	Who still feels irrational things within her.
	The wind shifts like this:
	Like humans approaching proudly,
	Like humans approaching angrily.
	This is how the wind shifts:
	Like a human, heavy and heavy,
	Who does not care.