*** Trumbull Stickney (1874 - 1904)


1. BE STILL

	Be still. The Hanging Gardens were a dream
	That over Persian roses flew to kiss
	The curlèd lashes of Semiramis.
	Troy never was, nor green Skamander stream.
	Provence and Troubadour are merest lies
	The glorious hair of Venice was a beam
	Made within Titian’s eye. The sunsets seem,
	The world is very old and nothing is.
	Be still. Thou foolish thing, thou canst not wake,
	Nor thy tears wedge thy soldered lids apart,
	But patter in the darkness of thy heart.
	Thy brain is plagued. Thou art a frighted owl
	Blind with the light of life thou ’ldst not forsake,
	And Error loves and nourishes thy soul.



2. I HEAR A RIVER

	I hear a river thro’ the valley wander
	Whose water runs, the song alone remaining.
	A rainbow stands and summer passes under.



3. I USED TO THINK

	I used to think
	The mind essential in the body, even
	As stood the body essential in the mind:
	Two inseparable things, by nature equal
	And similar, and in creation’s song
	Halving the total scale: it is not so.
	Unlike and cross like driftwood sticks they come
	Churned in the giddy trough: a chunk of pine,
	A slab of rosewood: mangled each on each
	With knocks and friction, or in deadly pain
	Sheathing each other’s splinters: till at last
	Without all stuff or shape they ’re jetted up
	Where in the bluish moisture rot whate’er
	Was vomited in horror from the sea.



4. IN A CITY GARDEN

	How strange that here is nothing as it was!
	The sward is young and new,
	The sod there shapes a different mass,
	The random trees stand other than I knew.
	No, here the Past has left no residue,
	No aftermath!
	By a new path
	The workmen homeward in the city twilight pass.

	Yet was this willow here.
	It hung as now its olive skeins aloft
	Into the sky, then blue and clear,--
	And yonder pair of poplar trees

	Rose also, soft
	And sibilant in the glory of the breeze.
	It’s early dark. One scarce distinguishes
	Their sullen feathering in the autumn sky.
	’Tis warm and still.
	Dull o’er the town the vapours lie.
	Innumerable
	And dodging the uncertain stare,
	The small, shrewd lampions dot the air.

	Many like me
	Loiter perhaps as I in after years,
	As looking here to see
	Some vestige of the living that was theirs,
	Some trace of yesterday,
	Somae hint or remnant, echo, clue--some thing,
	Some very little thing of what was they.
	Sure such are near! Else were it not so still
	This evening,
	So human-still and warm and kind.
	’Tis as of many moved
	In unison of will and mind to sing
	Low litanies to that which they had wholly loved.
	How sweet it is
	Under the perishable trees
	To hear the wings of the one human soul
	Fluttering up
	In Time’s dark branches to the lucid stars.
	More than Despair is Hope,
	And more than Hope is the Hope that despairs,
	And more than all
	Is Love that disbelieves the real years.

	Here in this place
	One August morning--when the earlier crowd,
	Showmen or populace,
	From many a region and of curious face,
	Abroad the holiday
	Quaint in the sun with garb and gesture glowed,
	And, speaking grave or gay
	The various accent of their lonely race,
	Between the shadowy gold bazars idled away--
	She, as a cloud
	All sunrise-coloured and alone,
	Thro’ the blue summer tremblin came to me.
	I dried her tears and here we sat us down.
	Little by little, as tripping oversea
	On flame-tipped waves the daylight’s long surprise
	Sweeps world and heaven in one,
	So love across our eyes
	Broke with the sun.
	Happy we walked away. The fairy sight
	Untangling shook a thousand chequered fires.
	Low under scarlet awnings rung on rung,
	Copper and bronze and azurite,
	Ranged on the sagging wires
	The trifles clinked in the red light.
	From beam and niche vendors in strange attires,
	Slipping dark hands along,
	Unhooked the quiet wool, the gaudy chintz,
	Or, precious where it hung,
	Long fluid jewels of auroral silk:
	And dryly to the sense
	Their attars old and dusty powders clung.
	Still passed the weavers and the dyers
	Many a jar, a bowl
	Turned as of water or of milk--
	Glazen and jade and porcelain--
	Far down the shadows colouring stole.
	As one had shook a jungle after rain
	And basketing the drops at random spilled
	Their red and green, their topaz and sapphires,
	All were here piled.--
	And wandering out we smiled
	To see across the glowing noon so high,
	So high and far,
	The incandescent minarets and domes and spires
	Lifting the fusion of the coloured choirs
	To the sky
	Softly--save only where
	A flag or pennant fallen slack
	Shotted the dazzling air.
	I came to-day to find her, I came back
	Humble with sweet desires
	Across this dun September atmosphere
	To her.
	I came, I knew she was not here:
	Now let me go.
	I came, I come because I love her so.

	Not in the acres of the Soul
	Does Nature drive the ploughshare of her change.
	It is not strange
	That here in part and whole
	The faithful eye sees all things as before.
	For past the newer flowers,
	Above the recent trees and clouds come o’er,
	Love finds the other hours
	Once more.



5. IN AMPEZZO

	Only once more and not again--the larches
	Shake to the wind their echo, “Not again,”--
	We see, below the sky that over-arches
	Heavy and blue, the plain

	Between Tofana lying and Cristallo
	In meadowy earths above the ringing stream:
	Whence interchangeably desire may follow,
	Hesitant as in dream,

	At sunset, south, by lilac promontories
	Under green skies ato Italy, or forth
	By calms of morning beyond Lavinores
	Tyrolward and to north:

	As now, this last of latter days, when over
	The brownish field by peasants are undone
	Some widths of grass, some plots of mountain clover
	Under the autumn sun,

	With honey-warm perfume that risen lingers
	In mazes of low heat, or takes the air,
	Passing delicious as a woman’s fingers
	Passing aid the hair;

	When scythes are swishing and the mower’s muscle
	Spans a repeated crescent to and fro,
	Or in dry stalks of corn the sickles rustle,
	Tangle, detach and go,

	Far thro’ the wide blue day and greening meadow
	Whose blots of amber beaded are with sheaves,
	Whereover pallidly a cloud-shadow
	Deadens the earth and leaves:

	Whilst high around and near, their heads of iron
	Sunken in sky whose azure overlights
	Ravine and edges, stand the gray and maron
	Desolate Dolomites,--

	And older than decay from the small summit
	Unfolds a stream of pebbly wreckage down
	Under the suns of midday, like some comet
	Struck into gravel stone.

	Faintly across this gold and amethystine
	September, images of summer fade;
	And gentle dreams now freshen on the pristine
	Viols, awhile unplayed,

	Of many a place where lovingly we wander,
	More dearly held that quickly we forsake,--
	A pine by sullen coasts, an oleander
	Reddening on the lake.

	And there, each year with more familiar motion,
	From many a bird and windy forestries,
	Or along shaking fringes of the ocean,
	Vapours of music rise.

	From many easts the morning gives her splendour;
	The shadows fill with colours we forget;
	Remembered tints at evening grow tender,
	Tarnished with violet.

	Let us away! soon sheets of winter metal
	On this discoloured mountain-land will close,
	While elsewhere Spring-time weaves a crimson petal,
	Builds and perfumes a rose.

	Away! for her the mountain sinks in gravel.
	Let us forget the unhappy site with change,
	And go, if only happiness be travel
	After the new and strange:--

	Unless ’twere better to be very single,
	To follow some diviner monotone,
	And in all beauties, where ourselves commingle,
	Love but a love, but one,

	Across this shadowy minute of our living,
	What time our hearts so magically sing,
	To meditate our fever, simply giving
	All in a little thing?

	Just as here, past yon dumb and melancholy
	Sameness of ruin, while the mountains ail,
	Summer and sunset-coloured autumn slowly
	Dissipate down the vale;

	And all these lines along the sky that measure
	Sorapis and the rocks of Mezzodi
	Crumble by foamy miles into the azure
	Mediterranean sea:

	Whereas to-day at sunrise, under brambles,
	A league above the moss and dying pines
	I picked this little--in my hand that trembles--
	Parcel of columbines.



6. IN THE PAST

	There lies a somnolent lake
	Under a noiseless sky,
	Where never the mornings break
	Nor the evenings die.

	Mad flakes of colour
	Whirl on its even face
	Iridescent and streaked with pallour;
	And, warding the silent place,

	The rocks rise sheer and gray
	From the sedgeless brink to the sky
	Dull-lit with the light of pale half-day
	Thro’ a void space and dry.

	And the hours lag dead in the air
	With a sense of coming eternity
	To the heart of the lonely boatman there:
	That boatman am I,

	I, in my lonely boat,
	A waif on the somnolent lake,
	Watching the colours creep and float
	With the sinuous track of a snake.

	Now I lean o’er the side
	And lazy shades in the water see,
	Lapped in the sweep of a sluggish tide
	Crawled in from the living sea;

	And next I fix mine eyes,
	So long that the heart declines,
	On the changeless face of the open skies
	Where no star shines;

	And now to the rocks I turn,
	To the rocks, around
	That lie like walls of a circling sun
	Wherein lie bound

	The waters that feel my powerless strength
	And meet my homeless oar
	Labouring over their ashen length
	Never to find a shore.

	But the gleam still skims
	At times on the somnolent lake,
	And a light there is that swims
	With the whirl of a snake;

	And tho’ dead be the hours i’ the air,
	And dayless the sky,
	The heart is alive of the boatman there:
	That boatman am I.



7. LEAVE HIM NOW QUIET BY THE WAY

	Leave him now quiet by the way
	To rest apart.
	I know what draws him to the dust alway
	And churns him in the builder’s lime:
	He has the fright of time.

	I heard it knocking in his breast
	A minute since;
	His human eyes did wince,
	He stubborned like the massive slaughter beast
	And as a thing o’erwhelmed with sound
	Stood bolted to the ground.

	Leave him, for rest alone can cure--
	If cure there be--
	This waif upon the sea.
	He is of those who slanted the great door
	And listened--wretched little lad--
	To what they said.



8. LIVE BLINDLY AND UPON THE HOUR

	Live blindly and upon the hour. The Lord,
	Who was the Future, died full long ago.
	Knowledge which is the Past is folly. Go,
	Poor child, and be not to thyself abhorred.
	Around thine earth sun-wingèd winds do blow
	And planets roll; a meteor draws his sword;
	The rainbow breaks his seven-coloured chord
	And the long strips of river-silver flow:
	Awake! Give thyself to the lovely hours.
	Drinking their lips, catch thou the dream in flight
	About their fragile hairs’ aërial gold.
	Thou art divine, thou livest,--as of old
	Apollo springing naked to the light,
	And all his island shivered into flowers.



9. LONELINESS

	These autumn gardens, russet, gray and brown,
	The sward with shrivelled foliage strown,
	The shrubs and trees
	By weary wings of sunshine overflown
	And timid silences,--

	Since first you, darling, called my spirit yours,
	Seem happy, and the gladness pours
	From day to day,
	And yester-year across this year endures
	Unto next year away.

	Now in these places where I used to rove
	And give the dropping leaves my love
	And weep to them,
	They seem to fall divinely from above,
	Like to a diadem

	Closing in one with the disheartened flowers.
	High up the migrant birds in showers
	Shine in the sky,
	And all the movement of the natural hours
	Turns into melody.



10. MAN STOOD ALONE

	And, the last day being come, Man stood alone
	Ere sunrise on the world’s dismantled verge,
	Awaiting how from everywhere should urge
	The Coming of the Lord. And, behold, none

	Did come,--but indistinct from every realm
	Of earth and air and water, growing more
	And louder, shriller, heavier, a roar
	Up the dun atmosphere did overwhelm

	His ears; and as he looked affrighted round
	Every manner of beast innumerable
	All thro’ the shadows crying grew, until
	The wailing was like grass upon the ground.

	Asudden then within his human side
	Their anguish, since the goad he wielded first,
	And, since he gave them not to drink, their thirst,
	Darted compressed and vital.--As he died,

	Low in the East now lighting gorgeously
	He saw the last sea-serpent iris-mailed
	Which, with a spear transfixèd, yet availed
	To pluck the sun down into the dead sea.



11. THE MELANCHOLY YEAR IS DEAD WITH RAIN

	The melancholy year is dead with rain.
	Drop after drop on every branch pursues.
	From far away beyond the drizzled flues
	A twilight saddens to the window pane.
	And dimly thro’ the chambers of the brain,
	From place to place and gently touching, moves
	My one and irrecoverable love’s
	Dear and lost shape one other time again.
	So in the last of autumn for a day
	Summer or summer’s memory returns.
	So in a mountain desolation burns
	Some rich belated flower, and with the gray
	Sick weather, in the world of rotting ferns
	From out the dreadful stones it dies away.



12. MNEMOSYNE

	It’s autumn in the country I remember.
	How warm a wind blew here about the ways!
	And shadows on the hillside lay to slumber
	During the long sun-sweetened summer-days.
	It’s cold abroad the country I remember.
	The swallows veering skimmed the golden grain
	At midday with a wing aslant and limber;
	And yellow cattle browsed upon the plain.
	It’s empty down the country I remember.

	I had a sister lovely in my sight:
	Her hair was dark, her eyes were very sombre;
	We sang together in the woods at night.

	It’s lonely in the country I remember.

	The babble of our children fills my ears,
	And on our hearth I stare the perished ember
	To flames that show all starry thro’ my tears.

	It’s dark about the country I remember.

	There are the mountains where I lived. The path
	Is slushed with cattle-tracks and fallen timber,
	The stumps are twisted by the tempests’ wrath.

	But that I knew these places are my own,
	I’d ask how came such wretchedness to cumber
	The earth, and I to people it alone.



13. MOUNT LYKAION

	Alone on Lykaion since man hath been
	Stand on the height two columns, where at rest
	Two eagles hewn of gold sit looking East
	Forever; and the sun goes down between.
	Far down the mountain’s oval green
	An order keeps the falling stones abreast.
	Below within the chaos last and least
	A river like a curl of light is seen.
	Beyond the river lies the even sea,
	Beyond the sea another ghost of sky,--
	O God, support the sickness of my eye
	Lest the far space and long antiquity
	Suck out my heart, and on this awful ground
	The great wind kill my little shell with sound.



14. NEAR HELIKON

	By such an all-embalming summer day
	As sweetens now among the mountain pines
	Down to the cornland yonder and the vines,
	To where the sky and sea are mixed in gray,
	How do all things together take their way
	Harmonious to the harvest, bringing wines
	And bread and light and whatsoe’er combines
	In the large wreath to make it round and gay.
	To me my troubled life doth now appear
	Like scarce distinguishable summits hung
	Around the blue horizon: places where
	Not even a traveller purposeth to steer,--
	Whereof a migrant bird in passing sung,
	And the girl closed her window not to hear.



15. ONCE

	THAT day her eyes were deep as night.
	She had the motion of the rose,
	The bird that veers across the light,
	The waterfall that leaps and throws
	Its irised spindrift to the sun.
	She seemed a wind of music passing on.

	Alone I saw her that one day
	Stand in the window of my life.
	Her sudden hand melted away
	Under my lips, and without strife
	I held her in my arms awhile
	And drew into my lips her living smile,--

	Now many a day ago and year!
	Since when I dream and lie awake
	In summer nights to feel her near,
	And from the heavy darkness break
	Glitters, till all my spirit swims
	And her hand hovers on my shaking limbs.

	If once again before I die
	I drank the laughter of her mouth
	And quenched my fever utterly,
	I say, and should it cost my youth,
	’T were well! for I no more should wait
	Hammering midnight on the doors of fate.



16. THE PASSIONS THAT WE FOUGHT

	The passions that we fought with and subdued
	Never quite die. In some maimed serpent’s coil
	They lurk, ready to spring and vindicate
	That power was once our torture and our lord.



17. SERVICE

	Chide me not, darling, that I sing
	Familiar thoughts and metres old:
	Nay, do not scold
	My spirit’s childish uttering.

	I know not why ’t is that or this
	I murmur to you thus or so:
	Only I know
	It throbs across my silences,

	It blows over my heart,--a long
	Infinite wind, again, again!
	Again! and then
	My life kneels down into a song.



18. SIR, SAY NO MORE

	Sir, say no more.
	Within me ’t is as if
	The green and climbing eyesight of a cat
	Crawled near my mind’s poor birds.



19. SIX O’CLOCK

	Now burst above the city’s cold twilight
	The piercing whistles and the tower-clocks:
	For day is done. Along the frozen docks
	The workmen set their ragged shirts aright.
	Thro’ factory doors a stream of dingy light
	Follows the scrimmage as it quickly flocks
	To hut and home among the snow’s gray blocks.--
	I love you, human labourers. Good-night!
	Good-night to all the blackened arms that ache!
	Good-night to every sick and sweated brow,
	To the poor girl that strength and love forsake,
	To the poor boy who can no more! I vow
	The victim soon shall shudder at the stake
	And fall in blood: we bring him even now.



20. ON SOME SHELLS FOUND INLAND

	These are my murmur-laden shells that keep
	A fresh voice tho’ the years be very gray.
	The wave that washed their lips and tuned their lay
	Is gone, gone with the faded ocean sweep,
	The royal tide, gray ebb and sunken neap
	And purple midday,--gone! To this hot clay
	Must sing my shells, where yet the primal day,
	Its roar and rhythm and splendour will not sleep.
	What hand shall join them to their proper sea
	If all be gone? Shall they forever feel
	Glories undone and world that cannot be?--
	’Twere mercy to stamp out this aged wrong,
	Dash them to earth and crunch them with the heel
	And make a dust of their seraphic song.



21. THEY LIVE ENAMOURED OF THE LOVELY MOON

	They lived enamoured of the lovely moon,
	The dawn and twilight on their gentle lake.
	Then Passion marvellously born did shake
	Their breast and drave them into the mid-noon.
	Their lives did shrink to one desire, and soon
	They rose fire-eyed to follow in the wake
	Of one eternal thought,--when sudden brake
	Their hearts. They died, in miserable swoon.
	Of all their agony not a sound was heard.
	The glory of the Earth is more than they.
	She asks her lovely image of the day:
	A flower grows, a million boughs are green,
	And over moving ocean-waves the bird
	Chases his shadow and is no more seen.



22. THO’ LACK OF LAURELS

	Tho’ lack of laurels and of wreaths not one
	Prove you our lives abortive, shall we yet
	Vaunt us our single aim, our hearts full set
	To win the guerdon which is never won.
	Witness, a purpose never is undone.
	And tho’ fate drain our seas of violet
	To gather round our lives her wide-hung net,
	Memories of hopes that are not shall atone.
	Not wholly starless is the ill-starred life,
	Not all is night in failure, and the shield
	Sometimes well grasped, tho’ shattered in the strife.
	And here while all the lowering heaven is ringed
	With our loud death-shouts echoed, on the field
	Stands forth our Nikè, proud, tho’ broken-winged.



23. YOU SAY, COLUMBUS WITH HIS ARGOSIES

	You say, Columbus with his argosies
	Who rash and greedy took the screaming main
	And vanished out before the hurricane
	Into the sunset after merchandise,
	Then under western palms with simple eyes
	Trafficked and robbed and triumphed home again:
	You say this is the glory of the brain
	And human life no other use than this?
	I then do answering say to you: The line
	Of wizards and of saviours, keeping trust
	In that which made them pensive and divine,
	Passes before us like a cloud of dust.
	What were they? Actors, ill and mad with wine,
	And all their language babble and disgust.
