*** Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837 - 1909)


1. A FORSAKEN GARDEN

	In a coign of the cliff between lowland and highland,
	At the sea-down’s edge between windward and lee,
	Walled round with rocks as an inland island,
	The ghost of a garden fronts the sea.
	A girdle of brushwood and thorn encloses
	The steep square slope of the blossomless bed
	Where the weeds that grew green from the graves of its roses
	Now lie dead.

	The fields fall southward, abrupt and broken,
	To the low last edge of the long lone land.
	If a step should sound or a word be spoken,
	Would a ghost not rise at the strange guest’s hand?
	So long have the grey bare walks lain guestless,
	Through branches and briars if a man make way,
	He shall find no life but the sea-wind’s, restless
	Night and day.

	The dense hard passage is blind and stifled
	That crawls by a track none turn to climb
	To the strait waste place that the years have rifled
	Of all but the thorns that are touched not of time.
	The thorns he spares when the rose is taken;
	The rocks are left when he wastes the plain.
	The wind that wanders, the weeds wind-shaken,
	These remain.

	Not a flower to be pressed of the foot that falls not;
	As the heart of a dead man the seed-plots are dry;
	From the thicket of thorns whence the nightingale calls not,
	Could she call, there were never a rose to reply.
	Over the meadows that blossom and wither
	Rings but the note of a sea-bird’s song;
	Only the sun and the rain come hither
	All year long.

	The sun burns sere and the rain dishevels
	One gaunt bleak blossom of scentless breath.
	Only the wind here hovers and revels
	In a round where life seems barren as death.
	Here there was laughing of old, there was weeping,
	Haply, of lovers none ever will know,
	Whose eyes went seaward a hundred sleeping
	Years ago.

	Heart handfast in heart as they stood, “Look thither,”
	Did he whisper? “look forth from the flowers to the sea;
	For the foam-flowers endure when the rose-blossoms wither,
	And men that love lightly may die—but we?”
	And the same wind sang and the same waves whitened,
	And or ever the garden’s last petals were shed,
	In the lips that had whispered, the eyes that had lightened,
	Love was dead.

	Or they loved their life through, and then went whither?
	And were one to the end—but what end who knows?
	Love deep as the sea as a rose must wither,
	As the rose-red seaweed that mocks the rose.
	Shall the dead take thought for the dead to love them?
	What love was ever as deep as a grave?
	They are loveless now as the grass above them
	Or the wave.

	All are at one now, roses and lovers,
	Not known of the cliffs and the fields and the sea.
	Not a breath of the time that has been hovers
	In the air now soft with a summer to be.
	Not a breath shall there sweeten the seasons hereafter
	Of the flowers or the lovers that laugh now or weep,
	When as they that are free now of weeping and laughter
	We shall sleep.

	Here death may deal not again for ever;
	Here change may come not till all change end.
	From the graves they have made they shall rise up never,
	Who have left nought living to ravage and rend.
	Earth, stones, and thorns of the wild ground growing,
	While the sun and the rain live, these shall be;
	Till a last wind’s breath upon all these blowing
	Roll the sea.

	Till the slow sea rise and the sheer cliff crumble,
	Till terrace and meadow the deep gulfs drink,
	Till the strength of the waves of the high tides humble
	The fields that lessen, the rocks that shrink,
	Here now in his triumph where all things falter,
	Stretched out on the spoils that his own hand spread,
	As a god self-slain on his own strange altar,
	Death lies dead.



2. THE GARDEN OF PROSERPINE

	Here, where the world is quiet;
	Here, where all trouble seems
	Dead winds’ and spent waves’ riot
	In doubtful dreams of dreams;
	I watch the green field growing
	For reaping folk and sowing,
	For harvest-time and mowing,
	A sleepy world of streams.

	I am tired of tears and laughter,
	And men that laugh and weep;
	Of what may come hereafter
	For men that sow to reap:
	I am weary of days and hours,
	Blown buds of barren flowers,
	Desires and dreams and powers
	And everything but sleep.

	Here life has death for neighbour,
	And far from eye or ear
	Wan waves and wet winds labour,
	Weak ships and spirits steer;
	They drive adrift, and whither
	They wot not who make thither;
	But no such winds blow hither,
	And no such things grow here.

	No growth of moor or coppice,
	No heather-flower or vine,
	But bloomless buds of poppies,
	Green grapes of Proserpine,
	Pale beds of blowing rushes
	Where no leaf blooms or blushes
	Save this whereout she crushes
	For dead men deadly wine.

	Pale, without name or number,
	In fruitless fields of corn,
	They bow themselves and slumber
	All night till light is born;
	And like a soul belated,
	In hell and heaven unmated,
	By cloud and mist abated
	Comes out of darkness morn.

	Though one were strong as seven,
	He too with death shall dwell,
	Nor wake with wings in heaven,
	Nor weep for pains in hell;
	Though one were fair as roses,
	His beauty clouds and closes;
	And well though love reposes,
	In the end it is not well.

	Pale, beyond porch and portal,
	Crowned with calm leaves, she stands
	Who gathers all things mortal
	With cold immortal hands;
	Her languid lips are sweeter
	Than love’s who fears to greet her
	To men that mix and meet her
	From many times and lands.

	She waits for each and other,
	She waits for all men born;
	Forgets the earth her mother,
	The life of fruits and corn;
	And spring and seed and swallow
	Take wing for her and follow
	Where summer song rings hollow
	And flowers are put to scorn.

	There go the loves that wither,
	The old loves with wearier wings;
	And all dead years draw thither,
	And all disastrous things;
	Dead dreams of days forsaken,
	Blind buds that snows have shaken,
	Wild leaves that winds have taken,
	Red strays of ruined springs.

	We are not sure of sorrow,
	And joy was never sure;
	To-day will die to-morrow;
	Time stoops to no man’s lure;
	And love, grown faint and fretful,
	With lips but half regretful
	Sighs, and with eyes forgetful
	Weeps that no loves endure.

	From too much love of living,
	From hope and fear set free,
	We thank with brief thanksgiving
	Whatever gods may be
	That no life lives for ever;
	That dead men rise up never;
	That even the weariest river
	Winds somewhere safe to sea.

	Then star nor sun shall waken,
	Nor any change of light:
	Nor sound of waters shaken,
	Nor any sound or sight:
	Nor wintry leaves nor vernal,
	Nor days nor things diurnal;
	Only the sleep eternal
	In an eternal night.



3. A LEAVE-TAKING

	Let us go hence, my songs; she will not hear.
	Let us go hence together without fear;
	Keep silence now, for singing-time is over,
	And over all old things and all things dear.
	She loves not you nor me as all we love her.
	Yea, though we sang as angels in her ear,
	She would not hear.

	Let us rise up and part; she will not know.
	Let us go seaward as the great winds go,
	Full of blown sand and foam; what help is here?
	There is no help, for all these things are so,
	And all the world is bitter as a tear.
	And how these things are, though ye strove to show,
	She would not know.

	Let us go home and hence; she will not weep.
	We gave love many dreams and days to keep,
	Flowers without scent, and fruits that would not grow,
	Saying ‘If thou wilt, thrust in thy sickle and reap.’
	All is reaped now; no grass is left to mow;
	And we that sowed, though all we fell on sleep,
	She would not weep.

	Let us go hence and rest; she will not love.
	She shall not hear us if we sing hereof,
	Nor see love’s ways, how sore they are and steep.
	Come hence, let be, lie still; it is enough.
	Love is a barren sea, bitter and deep;
	And though she saw all heaven in flower above,
	She would not love.

	Let us give up, go down; she will not care.
	Though all the stars made gold of all the air,
	And the sea moving saw before it move
	One moon-flower making all the foam-flowers fair;
	Though all those waves went over us, and drove
	Deep down the stifling lips and drowning hair,
	She would not care.

	Let us go hence, go hence; she will not see.
	Sing all once more together; surely she,
	She too, remembering days and words that were,
	Will turn a little toward us, sighing; but we,
	We are hence, we are gone, as though we had not been there.
	Nay, and though all men seeing had pity on me,
	She would not see.



4. A MATCH

	IF love were what the rose is,
	And I were like the leaf,
	Our lives would grow together
	In sad or singing weather,
	Blown fields or flowerful closes,
	Green pleasure or gray grief;
	If love were what the rose is,
	And I were like the leaf.

	If I were what the words are,
	And love were like the tune,
	With double sound and single
	Delight our lips would mingle,
	With kisses glad as birds are
	That get sweet rain at noon;
	If I were what the words are,
	And love were like the tune.

	If you were life, my darling,
	And I your love were death,
	We’d shine and snow together
	Ere March made sweet the weather
	With daffodil and starling
	And hours of fruitful breath;
	If you were life, my darling,
	And I your love were death.

	If you were thrall to sorrow,
	And I were page to joy,
	We’d play for lives and seasons
	With loving looks and treasons
	And tears of night and morrow
	And laughs of maid and boy;
	If you were thrall to sorrow,
	And I were page to joy.

	If you were April’s lady,
	And I were lord in May,
	We’d throw with leaves for hours
	And draw for days with flowers,
	Till day like night were shady
	And night were bright like day;
	If you were April’s lady,
	And I were lord in May.

	If you were queen of pleasure,
	And I were king of pain,
	We’d hunt down love together,
	Pluck out his flying-feather,
	And teach his feet a measure,
	And find his mouth a rein;
	If you were queen of pleasure,
	And I were king of pain.
