*** Rabindranath Tagore (1861 - 1941)


1. ENDLESS TIME

	Time is endless in thy hands, my lord. 
	There is none to count thy minutes. 
	
	Days and nights pass and ages bloom and fade like flowers. 
	Thou knowest how to wait. 
	
	Thy centuries follow each other perfecting a small wild flower. 
	
	We have no time to lose, 
	and having no time we must scramble for a chance. 
	We are too poor to be late. 
	
	And thus it is that time goes by 
	while I give it to every querulous man who claims it, 
	and thine altar is empty of all offerings to the last. 
	
	At the end of the day I hasten in fear lest thy gate be shut; 
	but I find that yet there is time.


2. ONE DAY IN SPRING

	One day in spring, a woman came
	In my lonely woods,
	In the lovely form of the Beloved.
	Came, to give to my songs, melodies,
	To give to my dreams, sweetness.
	Suddenly a wild wave
	Broke over my heart’s shores
	And drowned all language.
	To my lips no name came,
	She stood beneath the tree, turned,
	Glanced at my face, made sad with pain,
	And with quick steps, came and sat by me.
	Taking my hands in hers, she said:
	‘You do not know me, nor I you--
	I wonder how this could be?’
	I said:
	‘We two shall build, a bridge for ever
	Between two beings, each to the other unknown,
	This eager wonder is at the heart of things.’
	
	The cry that is in my heart is also the cry of her heart;
	The thread with which she binds me binds her too.
	Her have I sought everywhere,
	Her have I worshipped within me,
	Hidden in that worship she has sought me too.
	Crossing the wide oceans, she came to steal my heart.
	She forgot to return, having lost her own.
	Her own charms play traitor to her,
	She spreads her net, knowing not
	Whether she will catch or be caught.


3. WAITING

	The song I came to sing 
	remains unsung to this day. 
	I have spent my days in stringing 
	and in unstringing my instrument. 
	
	The time has not come true, 
	the words have not been rightly set; 
	only there is the agony 
	of wishing in my heart . . .
	
	I have not seen his face, 
	nor have I listened to his voice; 
	only I have heard his gentle footsteps 
	from the road before my house . . .
	
	But the lamp has not been lit 
	and I cannot ask him into my house; 
	I live in the hope of meeting with him; 
	but this meeting is not yet.