*** Allen Tate (1899 - 1979)


1. AENEAS AT WASHINGTON

	I myself saw furious with blood
	Neoptolemus, at his side the black Atridae,
	Hecuba and the hundred daughters, Priam
	Cut down, his filth drenching the holy fires.
	In that extremity I bore me well,
	A true gentleman, valorous in arms,
	Distinterested and honourable. Then fled
	That was a time when civilization
	Run by the few fell to the many, and
	Crashed to the shout of men, the clang of arms:
	Cold victualing I seized, I hoisted up
	The old man my father upon my back,
	In the smoke made by sea for a new world
	Saving little--a mind imperishable
	If time is, a love of past things tenuous
	As the hesitation of receding love.

	(To the reduction of uncitied littorals
	We brought chiefly the vigor of prophecy,
	Our hunger breeding calculation
	And fixed triumphs)

	I saw the thirsty dove
	IN the glowing fields of Troy, hemp ripening
	And tawny corn, the thickening Blue Grass
	All lying rich forever in the green sun.
	I see all things apart, the towers that men
	Contrive I too contrived long, long ago.
	Now I demand little. The singular passion
	Abides its object and consumes desire
	In the circling shadow of its appetite.
	There was a time when the young eyes were slow,
	Their flame steady beyond the firstling fire,

	I stood in the rain, far from home at nightfall
	By the Potomac, the great Dome lit the water,
	The city my blood had built I knew no more
	While the screech-owl whistled his new delight
	Consecutively dark.

	Stuck in the wet mire
	Four thousand leagues from the ninth buried city
	I thought of Troy, what we had built her for.



2. THE ANABASIS

	_Pro domus sue utilitati matronae mortuae poeta comis alloquitur:_

	Noble beyond degree
	In this democracy:
	Slight woman whose spent grace
	Banishes their visiòn
	To the thin trackless air,
	Halt now along the stair
	As they have seen you do
	Meridional and true,
	And with your nut-brown hair
	Restore locatiòn
	To them now blinded quite
	By the grave’s after-light,
	For unless it be done
	The slave heart all alone
	Strives timelessly
	To go where you are gone;
	Whether to vaults of air
	The imponderable nowhere,
	Or the pellucid sea-
	The regions that are fair
	Beyond heart’s mastery.
	They try your form to see
	(Its lineless agony)
	In our philosophy
	Which stops, as cold and bare
	As headless hair,
	As lifeless as your bones,
	Obtuse as meadow stones:
	Re-corporated be!
	(They cry you in despair)
	Lest we, a blind race,
	Imitate mortality
	For all our living’s pace,
	And drawn into the bliss
	Of your dispersèd face
	Should join, before our place,
	Death’s long anabasis.



3. BRIEF MESSAGE

	This, Warren, is our trouble now:
	Not even fools could disavow
	Three centuries of piety
	Grown bare as a cottonwood tree
	(A timber seldom drawn and sawn
	And chiefly used to hang men on),
	So face with calm that heritage
	And earn contempt before the age.



4. CAUSERIE

	_. . . party on the stage of the Earl Carroll Theatre on
	Feb. 23. At this party Joyce Hawley, a chorus-girl,
	bathed in the nude in a bathtub filled with alleged
	wine. New York Times._

	What are the springs of sleep? What is the motion
	Of dust in the lane that has an end in falling?
	Heroes, heroes, you auguries of passion,
	Where are the heroes with sloops and telescopes
	Who got out of bed at four to vex the dawn?
	Men for their last quietus scanned the earth,
	Alert on the utmost foothill of the mountains;
	They were the men who climbed the topmost screen
	Of the world, if sleep but lay beyond it,
	Sworn to the portage of our confirmed sensations,
	Seeking our image in the farthest hills.
	Now bearing a useless testimony of strife
	Gathered in a rumor of light, we know our end
	A packet of worm-seed, a garden of spent tissues.
	I’ve done no rape, arson, incest, no murder,
	Yet cannot sleep. The petty crimes of silence
	(Wary pander to whom the truth’s chief whore)
	I have omitted; no fool can say my tongue
	Reversed its fetish and made a cult of conscience.
	This innermost disturbance is a babble,
	It is a sign moved to my face as well
	Where every tide of heart surges to speech
	Until in that loquacity of visage
	One speaks a countenance fitter for death than hell.
	Always your features lean to one direction
	And by that charted distance know your doom.
	For death is ‘morality touched with emotion,’
	The syllable and full measure of affirmation;
	Give life the innocent crutch of quiet fools.

	Where is your house, in which room stands your bed?
	What window discovers these insupportable dreams?
	In a lean house spawned on baked limestone
	Blood history is the murmur of grasshoppers
	Eastward of the dawn. Have you a daughter,
	Daughters are the seed of occupations,
	Of asperities, such as wills, deeds, mortgages,
	Duels, estates, statesmen, pioneers, embezzlers,
	‘Eminent Virginians,’ reminiscences, bastards,
	The bar-sinister hushed, effaced by the porcelain tub.
	A daughter is the fruit of occupations;
	Let her not read history lest knowledge
	Of her fathers instruct her to be a petty bawd.
	Vittoria was herself, the contemporary strumpet
	A plain bitch.

	For miracles are faint
	And resurrection is our weakest clause of religion,
	I have known men in my youth who foundered on
	This point of doctrine: John Ransom, boasting hardy
	Entelechies yet botched in the head, lacking grace;
	Warren thirsty in Kentucky, his hair in the rain, asleep;
	None so unbaptized as Edmund Wilson the unwearied,
	That sly parody of the devil. They lacked doctrine;
	They waited. I, who watched out the first crisis
	With them, wait:
	For the incredible image. Now
	I am told that Purusha sits no more in our eyes.
	Year after year the blood of Christ will sleep
	In the holy tree, the branches sagged without bloom
	Till the plant overflowing the stale vegetation
	In May the creek swells with the anemone,
	The Lord God wastes his substance towards the ocean.
	In Christ we have lived, on the flood of Christ borne up,
	Who now is a precipitate flood of silence,
	We a drenched wreck off an imponderable shore:
	A jagged cloud is our memory of shore
	Whereon we figure hills below ultimate ranges.
	You cannot plot the tendency of man,
	Whither it leads is not mysterious
	In the various grave; but whence the impulse
	To lust for the apple of apples on Christ’s tree,
	To desire in the eye, to penetrate your sleep,
	Perhaps to catch in unexpected leaves
	The light incentive of your absolute suspicion?
	Over the mountains, the last barrier, you’d spill
	These relics of your sires in a pool of sleep,
	The sun being drained.

	We have learned to require
	In the infirm concessions of memory
	The privilege never to hear too much.
	What is this conversation, now secular,
	A speech not mine yet speaking for me in
	The heaving jelly of my tribal air?
	It rises in the throat, it climbs the tongue;
	It perches there for secret tutelage
	And gets it, of inscrutable instruction--
	Which is a puzzle like crepuscular light
	That has no visible source but fills the trees
	With equal foliage, as if the upper leaf
	No less than the under were only imminent shade.

	Manhood like a lawyer with his formulas
	Sesames his youth for innocent acquittal.

	The essential wreckage of your age is different,
	The accident the same; the Annabella
	Of proper incest, no longer incestuous:
	In an age of abstract experience, fornication
	Is self-expression, adjunct to Christian euphoria,
	And whores become delinquents; delinquents, patients;
	Patients, wards of society. Whores, by that rule,
	Are precious.

	Was it for this that Lucius
	Became the ass of Thessaly? For this did Kyd
	Unlock the lion of passion on the stage?
	To litter a race of politic pimps? To glut
	The Capitol with the progeny of thieves--
	Where now the antique courtesy of your myths
	Goes in to sleep under a still shadow?



5. DEATH OF LITTLE BOYS

	When little boys grown patient at last, weary,
	Surrender their eyes immeasurably to the night,
	The event will rage terrific as the sea;
	Their bodies fill a crumbling room with light.

	Then you will touch at the bedside, torn in two,
	Gold curls now deftly intricate with gray
	As the windowpane extends a fear to you
	From one peeled aster drenched with the wind all day.

	And over his chest the covers in the ultimate dream
	Will mount to the teeth, ascend the eyes, press back
	The locks while round his sturdy belly gleam
	Suspended breaths, white spars above the wreck:

	Till all the guests, come in to look, turn down
	Their palms, and delirium assails the cliff
	Of Norway where you ponder, and your little town
	Reels like a sailor drunk in a rotten skiff.

	The bleak sunshine shrieks its chipped music then
	Out to the milkweed amid the fields of wheat.
	There is a calm for you where men and women
	Unroll the chill precision of moving feet.



6. DITTY

	The moon will run all consciences to cover,
	Night is now the easy peer of day;
	Little boys no longer sight the plover
	Streaked in the sky, and cattle go
	Warily out in search of misty hay.
	Look at the blackbird, the pretty eager swallow,
	The buzzard, and all the birds that sail
	With the smooth essential flow
	Of time through men, who fail.

	For now the moon with friendless light carouses
	On hill and housetop, street and marketplace,
	Men will plunge, mile after mile of men,
	To crush this lucent madness of the face,
	Go home and put their heads upon the pillow,
	Turn with whatever shift the darkness cleaves,
	Tuck in their eyes, and cover
	The flying dark with sleep like falling leaves.



7. EDGES

	I’ve often wondered why she laughed
	On thinking why I wondered so;
	It seemed such waste that long white hands
	Should touch my hands and let them go.

	And once when we were parting there,
	Unseen of anything but trees,
	I touched her fingers, thoughtfully,
	For more than simple niceties.

	But for some futile things unsaid
	I should say all is done for us;
	Yet I have wondered how she smiled
	Beholding what was cavernous.



8. THE EYE

	I see the horses and the sad streets
	Of my childhood in an agate eye
	Roving, under the clean sheets,
	Over a black hole in the sky.

	The ill man becomes the child,
	The evil man becomes the lover;
	The natural man with evil roiled
	Pulls down the sphereless sky for cover.

	I see the gray heroes and the graves
	Of my childhood in the nuclear eye-
	Horizons spent in dun caves
	Sucked down into the sinking sky.

	The happy child becomes the man,
	The elegant man becomes the mind,
	The fathered gentleman who can
	Perform quick feats of gentle kind.

	I see the long field and the noon
	Of my childhood in the carbolic eye,
	Dissolving pupil of the moon
	Seared from the raveled hole of the sky.

	The nice ladies and gentlemen,
	The teaser and the jelly-bean
	Play cockalorum-and-the-hen,
	When the cool afternoons pour green:

	I see the father and the cooling cup
	Of my childhood in the swallowing sky
	Down, down, until down is up
	And there is nothing in the eye,

	Shut shutter of the mineral man
	Who takes the fatherless dark to bed,
	The acid sky to the brain-pan;
	And calls the crows to peck his head.



9. HOMILY

	If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out.

	If your tired unspeaking head
	Rivet the dark with linear sight,
	Crazed by a warlock with his curse
	Dreamed up in some loquacious bed,
	And if the stage-dark head rehearse
	The fifth act of the closing night,

	Why, cut it off, piece after piece,
	And throw the tough cortex away,
	And when you’ve marvelled on the wars
	That wove their interior smoke its way,
	Tear out the close vermiculate crease
	Where death crawled angrily at bay.



10. INSIDE AND OUTSIDE

	I

	Now twenty-four or maybe twenty-five
	Was the woman’s age, and her white brow was sleek;
	Lips parted in surprise, the flawless cheek;
	The long brown hair coiled sullenly alive;
	Her hands, dropt in her lap, could not arrive
	At the novel on the table, being weak;
	Nor breath, expunger of the mortal streak
	Of nature, its own tenement contrive;

	For look you how her body stiffly lies
	Just as she left it, unprepared to stay,
	The posture waiting on the sleeping eyes,
	While the body’s life, deep as a covered well,
	Instinctive as the wind, busy as May,
	Burns out a secret passageway to hell.


	II

	There is not anything to say to those
	Speechless, who have stood up white to the eye
	All night-till day, harrying the game too close,
	Quarries the perils that at midnight lie
	Waiting for those who hope to mortify
	With foolish daylight their most anxious fear,
	A bloodless and white fear that she may die
	In the hushed room, and leave them soundless here:

	There is no word that death can find to say
	Deeper than life, savager than their time.
	When Gabriel’s trumpet ends all life’s delay,
	Will crash the beams of firmamental woe:
	Not nature will sustain the even crime
	Of death, though death sustains all nature, so.



11. LAST DAYS OF ALICE

	Alice grown lazy, mammoth but not fat,
	Declines upon her lost and twilight age;
	Above in the dozing leaves the grinning cat
	Quivers forever with his abstract rage:

	Whatever light swayed on the perilous gate
	Forever sways, nor will the arching grass,
	Caught when the world clattered, undulate
	In the deep suspension of the looking-glass.

	Bright Alice! always pondering to gloze
	The spoiled cruelty she had meant to say
	Gazes learnedly down her airy nose
	At nothing, nothing thinking all the day.

	Turned absent-minded by infinity
	She cannot move unless her double move,
	The All-Alice of the world’s entity
	Smashed in the anger of her hopeless love,

	Love for herself who, as an earthly twain,
	Pouted to join her two in a sweet one;
	No more the second lips to kiss in vain
	The first she broke, plunged through the glass alone--

	Alone to the weight of impassivity,
	Incest of spirit, theorem of desire,
	Without will as chalky cliffs by the sea
	Empty as the bodiless flesh of fire:

	All space, that heaven is a dayless night,
	A nightless day driven by perfect lust
	For vacancy, in which her bored eyesight
	Stares at the drowsy cubes of human dust.

	--We too back to the world shall never pass
	Through the shattered door, a dumb shade-harried crowd
	Being all infinite, function depth and mass
	Without figure, a mathematical shroud

	Hurled at the air--blessed without sin!
	O God of our flesh, return us to Your wrath,
	Let us be evil could we enter in
	Your grace, and falter on the stony path!



12. LIGHT

	Last night I fled until I came
	To streets where leaking casements dripped
	Stale lamplight from the corpse of flame;
	A nervous window bled.

	The moon swagged in the air.
	Out of the mist a girl tossed
	Spittle of song; a hoarse light
	Spattered the fog with heavy hair.

	Damp bells in a remote tower
	Sharply released the throat of God,
	I leaned to the erect night
	Dead as stiff turf in winter sod.

	Then with the careless energy
	Of a dream, the forward curse
	Of a cold particular eye
	In the headlong hearse.



13. THE MEDITERRANEAN

	_Quen das finem, rex magne, dolorum?_

	Where we went in the boat was a long bay
	a slingshot wide, walled in by towering stone--
	Peaked margin of antiquity’s delay,
	And we went there out of time’s monotone:

	Where we went in the black hull no light moved
	But a gull white-winged along the feckless wave,
	The breeze, unseen but fierce as a body loved,
	That boat drove onward like a willing slave:

	Where we went in the small ship the seaweed
	Parted and gave to us the murmuring shore
	And we made feast and in our secret need
	Devoured the very plates Aeneas bore:

	Where derelict you see through the low twilight
	The green coast that you, thunder-tossed, would win,
	Drop sail, and hastening to drink all night
	Eat dish and bowl--to take that sweet land in!

	Where we feasted and caroused on the sandless
	Pebbles, affecting our day of piracy,
	What prophecy of eaten plates could landless
	Wanderers fulfil by the ancient sea?

	We for that time might taste the famous age
	Eternal here yet hidden from our eyes
	When lust of power undid its stuffless rage;
	They, in a wineskin, bore earth’s paradise.

	Let us lie down once more by the breathing side
	Of Ocean, where our live forefathers sleep
	As if the Known Sea still were a month wide--
	Atlantis howls but is no longer steep!

	What country shall we conquer, what fair land
	Unman our conquest and locate our blood?
	We’ve cracked the hemispheres with careless hand!
	Now, from the Gates of Hercules we flood

	Westward, westward till the barbarous brine
	Whelms us to the tired land where tasseling corn,
	Fat beans, grapes sweeter than muscadine
	Rot on the vine: in that land were we born.



14. MESSAGE FROM PARIS

	_Their faces are bony and sharp but very red, despite that their ancestors nigh two hundred
	  years have dwelt by the miasmal banks of tide-waters where malarial fever maketh men gaunt
	  and dosing with quinine shaketh them as with a palsy._


	I

	What years of the other times, what centuries
	Broken, divided up, and claimed? A few
	Here and there to the taste, in vigilance
	Ceaseless but now a little stale, to keep us
	Fearless, not worried as the hare scurrying
	Without memory . . .

	Provence,
	The Renascence, the age of Pericles, each
	A broad, rich-carpeted stair to pride
	With manhood now the cost--they’re easy to follow,
	For the ways taken are all notorious,
	Lettered, sculptured and rhymed;
	Those others, incuriously complete, lost,
	Not by poetry and statues timed,
	Shattered by sunlight and the impartial sleet . . .
	What years . . . what centuries

	Now only
	The bent eaves and the windows cracked,
	The thin grass picked by the wind
	Heaved by the mole; the hollow pine
	That screams in the latest storm--these,
	These emblems of twilight have we seen at length,
	And the man red-faced and tall seen, leaning
	In the day of his strength
	Not as a pine, but the stiff form
	Against the west pillar,
	Hearing the ox-cart in the street,
	His shadow gliding, a long nigger
	Gliding at his feet.


	II

	Wanderers to the east, wanderers west:
	I followed the cold northern track
	And the sleet sprinkled the sea;
	The dim foam mounted the night,
	The ship, black monster, mounted
	The depths of night,
	The absolute, steady sea.

	With dawn came the gull to the crest
	Stared at the spray, fell asleep
	Over the picked bones the white face
	Of the leaning man drowned deep,
	The red-faced man, ceased wandering,
	Never came to the boulevards
	Nor covertly spat in the sawdust,
	Sunk in his collar
	Shuffling the cards.

	The man with the red face the stiff back
	I cannot see in the rainfall
	Down Saint-Michel by the quays,
	At the corner the wind speaking
	Destiny, the four ways.


	III

	I cannot see you
	The incorruptibles,
	Yours was a secret fate,
	The stiff-backed liars, the dupes;
	The universal blue
	Of heaven rots,
	Your anger is out of date--
	What did you say mornings
	Evenings, what?
	The bent eaves
	On the cracked house
	That ghost of a hound
	The man red-faced and tall
	Will cast no shadow
	From the province of the drowned.



15. ODE TO THE CONFEDERATE DEAD

	Row after row with strict impunity
	The headstones yield their names to the element,
	The wind whirrs without recollection;
	In the riven troughs the splayed leaves
	Pile up, of nature the casual sacrament
	To the seasonal eternity of death;
	Then driven by the fierce scrutiny
	Of heaven to their election in the vast breath,
	They sough the rumour of mortality.

	Autumn is desolation in the plot
	Of a thousand acres where these memories grow
	From the inexhaustible bodies that are not
	Dead, but feed the grass row after rich row.
	Think of the autumns that have come and gone!--
	Ambitious November with the humors of the year,
	With a particular zeal for every slab,
	Staining the uncomfortable angels that rot
	On the slabs, a wing chipped here, an arm there:
	The brute curiosity of an angel’s stare
	Turns you, like them, to stone,
	Transforms the heaving air
	Till plunged to a heavier world below
	You shift your sea-space blindly
	Heaving, turning like the blind crab.

	_Dazed by the wind, only the wind
	The leaves flying, plunge_

	You know who have waited by the wall
	The twilight certainty of an animal,
	Those midnight restitutions of the blood
	You know--the immitigable pines, the smoky frieze
	Of the sky, the sudden call: you know the rage,
	The cold pool left by the mounting flood,
	Of muted Zeno and Parmenides.
	You who have waited for the angry resolution
	Of those desires that should be yours tomorrow,
	You know the unimportant shrift of death
	And praise the vision
	And praise the arrogant circumstance
	Of those who fall
	Rank upon rank, hurried beyond decision--
	Here by the sagging gate, stopped by the wall.

	_Seeing, seeing only the leaves
	Flying, plunge and expire_

	Turn your eyes to the immoderate past,
	Turn to the inscrutable infantry rising
	Demons out of the earth they will not last.
	Stonewall, Stonewall, and the sunken fields of hemp,
	Shiloh, Antietam, Malvern Hill, Bull Run.
	Lost in that orient of the thick and fast
	You will curse the setting sun.

	_Cursing only the leaves crying
	Like an old man in a storm_

	You hear the shout, the crazy hemlocks point
	With troubled fingers to the silence which
	Smothers you, a mummy, in time.

	The hound bitch
	Toothless and dying, in a musty cellar
	Hears the wind only.

	Now that the salt of their blood
	Stiffens the saltier oblivion of the sea,
	Seals the malignant purity of the flood,
	What shall we who count our days and bow
	Our heads with a commemorial woe
	In the ribboned coats of grim felicity,
	What shall we say of the bones, unclean,
	Whose verdurous anonymity will grow?
	The ragged arms, the ragged heads and eyes
	Lost in these acres of the insane green?
	The gray lean spiders come, they come and go;
	In a tangle of willows without light
	The singular screech-owl’s tight
	Invisible lyric seeds the mind
	With the furious murmur of their chivalry.

	_We shall say only the leaves
	Flying, plunge and expire_

	We shall say only the leaves whispering
	In the improbable mist of nightfall
	That flies on multiple wing:
	Night is the beginning and the end
	And in between the ends of distraction
	Waits mute speculation, the patient curse
	That stones the eyes, or like the jaguar leaps
	For his own image in a jungle pool, his victim.

	What shall we say who have knowledge
	Carried to the heart? Shall we take the act
	To the grave? Shall we, more hopeful, set up the grave
	In the house? The ravenous grave?

	Leave now
	The shut gate and the decomposing wall:
	The gentle serpent, green in the mulberry bush,
	Riots with his tongue through the hush--
	Sentinel of the grave who counts us all!



16. A PAUPER

	_. . . and the children’s teeth shall be set on edge._

	I see him old, trapped in a burly house
	Cold in the angry spitting of a rain
	Come down these sixty years.

	Why vehemently
	Astride the threshold do I wait, marking
	The ice softly pendent on his broken temple?
	Upon the silence I cast the mesh of rancor
	By which the gentler convergences of the flesh
	Scatter untokened, mercilessly estopped.

	Why so illegal these tears?

	The years’ incertitude and
	The dirty white fates trickling
	Blackly down the necessary years
	Define no attitude to the present winter,
	No mood to the cold matter.

	(I remember my mother, my mother,
	A stiff wind halted outside,
	In the hard ear my country
	Was a far shore crying
	With invisible seas)

	When tomorrow pleads the mortal decision
	Sifting rankly out of time’s sieve today,
	No words differently will be uttered
	Nor stuttered, like sheep astray.

	A pauper in the swift denominating
	Of a bald cliff with a proper name, having words
	As strumpets only, I cannot beat off
	Invincible modes of the sea, hearing:

	Be a man my son by God.

	He turned again
	To the purring jet yellowing the murder story,
	Deaf to the pathos circling in the air.



17. RED STAINS

	In a pyloned desert where the scorpion reigns
	My love and I plucked poppies breathing tales
	Of crimes now long asleep, whose once--red stains
	Dyed stabbing men, at sea with bloody sails.
	The golden sand drowsed. There a dog yelped loud;
	And in his cry rattled a hollow note
	Of deep uncanny knowledge of that crowd
	That loved and bled in winy times remote.
	The poppies fainted when the moon came wide;
	The cur lay still. Our passionate review
	Of red wise folly dreamed on . . . She by my side
	Stared at the Moon; and then I knew he knew.
	And then he smiled at _her_; to him ’twas funny--
	Her calm steel eyes, her earth--old throat of honey!



18. SONNETS OF THE BLOOD

	I

	WHAT is this flesh and blood compounded of
	But water seething with convulsive lime?
	This prowling strife of cells, sharp hate and love,
	Wears the long claw of flesh-devouring time.
	We who have seen the makers of our bone
	Bemused with history, then make more dust
	Pausing forever, and over their dust a stone,
	We know the chastened look of men who must
	Confess the canker gnawing the flesh flower
	And are made brothers by mortality;
	That is our treason to the murderous hour--
	To think of brothers, hard identity
	Not made of ash and lime by time undone
	Nor poured out quite when the life-blood has run.


	II

	Near to me as my flesh, my flesh and blood,
	And more mysterious, you are my brother;
	The light vaulting within your solitude
	Now studied burns lest you that rage should smother.
	It is a flame obscure to mortal eyes
	(Most like the fire that warms the deepest grave,
	For the cold grave’s the deepest of our lies)
	Of which our blood’s the long indentured slave.
	The fire that burns most secretly in you
	Does not expand you hidden and alone,
	For the same blaze consumes not one, but two,
	Me also, the same true marrow and bone
	Contrived and seasoned in a house of strife
	Built far back in the fundaments of life.


	III

	My brother, you would never think me vain
	Or rude if I should praise your dignity.
	Perhaps I shall not.
	Dignity’s the stain
	Of mortal sin that knows humility.
	Let me praise rather the hour when you were born
	Since if it’s vain ’twere only childlike so,
	I’ve heard that in the dark before that morn
	Considerate death would barely let you go.
	But you have lived as if to vindicate
	Once more our slavery to circumstance
	Not by contempt of our prescriptive fate
	But in your bearing towards its hour of chance,
	Which is a part so humble and so proud
	You’ll think but little of it in your shroud.


	IV

	The times have changed, there is not left to us
	The vice of privilege, the law of form--
	Who of our kin was pusillanimous
	And took the world so easy, so by storm?
	Why none, unless we count it arrogance
	To cultivate humility in pride,
	To look but blushingly and half-askance
	On boots and spurs that went the devil’s ride.
	There was, remember, that Virginian
	Who took himself to be brute nature’s law
	And cared not what men thought him, a tall man
	Who meditated calmly what he saw
	Until he freed his negroes, lest he be
	Too strict with nature and than they less free.


	V

	These generations that have sealed your heart
	Against the neighborly and easy joy
	Prefigured you to take the quiet part
	Of the secret mind while you were still a boy,
	Nay before that for it had all begun
	Even your courage to accept that fate
	In Shenandoah and along Bull Run
	Sunk in a time inimical to date,
	Wherefore you’re ridden by time anxious of hours
	As a right tackle crouched upon the line
	Awaits the snapper-back before the towers
	Like granite, risen in the fall sunshine
	And towering higher when as the play begins,
	His team’s thrown back, and loses as he wins.


	VI

	Our elder brother, whom I had not seen
	These twenty years until you brought him back
	From the cyclonic West where he had been
	Stormed by the shaking furies in the track
	We know so well, which is these arteries--
	You, elder brother, I am a little strange
	To you and you must study how to seize
	Mortality, that’s potent to derange
	Corpuscles for designs that it may choose,
	Our blood is altered by the sudden death
	Of one who of all persons could not use
	Life half so well as death. Let’s look beneath
	Her life. Perhaps hers only is our rest--
	To study this, all lifetime may be best.


	VII

	The fire I praise was once perduring flame
	Till it snuffs with our generation, out--
	No matter, it’s all one, it’s but a name
	Not as late honeysuckle half so stout,
	So think upon it how the fire burns blue
	Its hottest, when the fury’s all but spent;
	Thank God the fuel is low, we’ll not renew
	Such length of flame into our firmament;
	Think too the rooftree crackles and will fall
	On us, who saw the sacred fury’s height
	Seated in her great chair with the black shawl
	From head to feet, burning with motherly light
	More spectral than November eve could mix
	With sunset, to blaze on her pale crucifix.


	VIII

	This message for you lest we both go down
	Scattered with no character to death,
	For death’s untutored so that when we drown
	Severed, must be told we breathed one breath;
	Let it be said that sharp confusion stood,
	A vulture, at the heart of all our kin
	Until we heard the echo of our blood
	(Lost in the pulse of man) stricken with sin;
	For evil done these last two centuries
	We fulminate in exile from our earth
	Aged exclusions of blood memories
	Those superstitions of explosive birth,
	Until there’ll be of us not anything
	But gentle death, who is confusion’s king.


	IX

	Not power nor the storied hand of God
	Shall keep us whole in this dissevering air,
	Which is a stink upon this pleasant sod
	So foul, the hovering buzzard sees it fair.
	I ask you therefore will it end tonight
	And the moth tease again his windy flame,
	Or spiders eating their loves hide in the night
	At last, drowsy with self-devouring shame?
	This is the house of Atreus where we live--
	Which one of us the Greek, perplexed with crime,
	Questions the future that with his lucid sieve
	Strains off the appointed particles of time;
	It is not spoken now, for time is slow,
	Which brother, you or I, shall swiftly go.


	X

	Captains of industry, your aimless power
	Awakens harsh velleities of time,
	Let you, brother, a captain in your hour
	Be zealous that your numbers are all prime
	Lest false division with sly mathematic
	Plunder the inner mansion of our blood--
	The Thracian swollen with pride besiege the Attic
	Fierce lumber-jack felling the sacred wood:
	Yet the prime secret whose simplicity
	Your towering engine hammers to reduce,
	Though driven holds that bulwark of the sea
	Which breached will turn unspeaking fury loose
	To drown out him who swears to rectify
	Infinity--that has nor ear nor eye.



19. STRANGER

	This is the village where the funeral
	Stilted its dusty march over deep ruts
	Up the hillside covered with queen’s lace
	To the patch of weeds known finally to all.

	Of her virtues large tongues were loud
	As I, a stranger, trudged the streets
	Gay with huckstering: loud whispers from a few
	Sly wags who squeezed a humor from the shroud.

	For this was death.
	I should never see these men again
	And yet, like the swiftness of remembered evil--
	An issue for conscience, say--
	The cold heart of death was beating in my brain:
	A new figuration of an old phenomenon.

	This is the village where women walk the streets
	Selling eggs, breasts ungathered, hands like rawhide;
	Of their virtues the symbol can be washtubs
	But when they die it is a time of singing,

	And then the symbol changes with change of place.
	Let the wags wag as the pall-bearers climb the hill.
	Let a new slab look off into the sunset:
	The night drops down with sullen grace.



20. THE SUBWAY

	Dark accurate plunger down the successive knell
	Of arch on arch, where ogives burst a red
	Reverberance of hail upon the dead
	Thunder like an exploding crucible!
	Harshly articulate, musical steel shell
	Of angry worship, hurled religiously
	Upon your business of humility
	Into the iron forestries of hell:

	Till broken in the shift of quieter
	Dense altitudes tangential of your steel,
	I am become geometries, and glut
	Expansions like a blind astronomer
	Dazed, while the worldless heavens bulge and reel
	In the cold revery of an idiot.



21. THE SWIMMERS

	_Scene: Montgomery County, Kentucky, July 1911_

	Kentucky water, clear springs: a boy fleeing
	To water under the dry Kentucky sun,
	His four little friends in tandem with him, seeing

	Long shadows of grapevine wriggle and run
	Over the green swirl; mullein under the ear
	Soft as Nausicaa’s palm; sullen fun

	Savage as childhood’s thin
	O fountain, bosom source undying-dead
	Replenish me the spring of love and fear

	And give me back the eye that looked and fled
	When a thrush idling in the tulip tree
	Unwound the cold dream of the copperhead.

	--Along the creek the road was winding; we
	Felt the quicksilver sky. I see again
	The shrill companions of that odyssey:

	Bill Eaton, Charlie Watson, ‘Nigger’ Layne
	The doctor’s son, Harry Duesler who played
	The flute; and Tate, with water on the brain.

	Dog days: the dusty leaves where rain delayed
	Hung low on poison-oak and scuppernong,
	And we were following the active shade.

	Of water, that bells and bickers all night long.
	“No more’n a mile,” Layne said. All five stood still.
	Listening, I heard what seemed at first a song;

	Peering, I heard the hooves come down the hill.
	The posse passed, twelve horse; the leader’s face
	Was worn as limestone on an ancient sill.

	Then, as sleepwalkers shift from a hard place
	In bed, and rising to keep a formal pledge
	Descend a ladder into empty space,

	We scuttled down the bank below a ledge
	And marched stiff-legged in our common fright
	Along a hog-track by the riffle’s edge:

	Into a world where sound shaded the sight
	Dropped the dull hooves again; the horsemen came
	Again, all but the leader. It was night

	Momently and I feared: eleven same
	Jesus-Christers unmembered and unmade,
	Whose Corpse had died again in dirty shame.

	The bank then leveling in a speckled glade,
	We stopped to breathe above the swimming-hole;
	I gazed at its reticulated shade

	Recoiling in blue fear, and felt it roll
	Over my ears and eyes and lift my hair
	Like seaweed tossing on a sunk atoll.

	I rose again. Borne on the copper air
	A distant voice green as a funeral wreath
	Against a grave: “That dead nigger there.”

	The melancholy sheriff slouched beneath
	A giant sycamore; shaking his head
	He plucked a sassafras twig and picked his teeth:

	“We come too late.” He spoke to the tired dead
	Whose ragged shirt soaked up the viscous flow
	Of blood in which It lay discomfited.

	A butting horse-fly gave one ear a blow
	And glanced off, as the sheriff kicked the rope
	Loose from the neck and hooked it with his toe

	Away from the blood--I looked back down the slope:
	The friends were gone that I had hoped to greet--
	A single horseman came at a slow lope

	And pulled up at the hanged man’s horny feet;
	The sheriff noosed the feet, the other end
	The stranger tied to his pommel in a neat

	Slip-knot. I saw the Negro’s body bend
	And straighten, as a fish-line cast transverse
	Yields to the current that it must subtend.

	The sheriff’s Goddamn was a murmured curse
	Not for the dead but for the blinding dust
	That boxed the cortege in a cloudy hearse

	And dragged it towards our town.
	I knew I must Not stay till twilight in that silent road;
	Sliding my bare feet into the warm crust,

	I hopped the stonecrop like a panting toad
	Mouth open, following the heaving cloud
	That floated to the court-house square its load

	Of limber corpse that took the sun for shroud.
	These were three figures in the dying sun
	Whose light were company where three was crowd.

	My breath crackled the dead air like a shotgun
	As, sheriff and the stranger disappearing,
	The faceless head lay still. I could not run

	Or walk, but stood. Alone in the public clearing
	This private thing was owned by all the town.
	Though never claimed by us within my hearing.



22. WINTER MASK

	I

	Towards nightfall when the wind
	Tries the eaves and casements
	(A winter wind of the mind
	Long gathering its will)
	I lay the mind’s contents
	Bare, as upon a table,
	And ask, in a time of war,
	Whether there is still
	To a mind frivolously dull
	Anything worth living for.


	II

	If I am meek and dull
	And a poor sacrifice
	Of perverse will to cull
	The act from the attempt,
	Just look into damned eyes
	And give the returning glare;
	For the damned like it, the more
	Damnation is exempt
	From what would save its heir
	With a thing worth living for.


	III

	The poisoned rat in the wall
	Cuts through the wall like a knife,
	Then blind, drying, and small
	And driven to cold water,
	Dies of the water of life:
	Both damned in eternal ice,
	The traitor become the boor
	Who had led his friend to slaughter,
	Now bites his head not nice,
	The food that he lives for.


	IV

	I supposed two scenes of hell,
	Two human bestiaries,
	Might uncommonly well
	Convey the doom I thought;
	But lest the horror freeze
	The gentler estimation
	I go to the sylvan door
	Where nature has been bought
	In rational proration
	As a thing worth living for.


	V

	Should the buyer have been beware?
	It is an uneven trade
	For man has wet his hair
	Under the winter weather
	With only fog for shade:
	His mouth a bracketed hole
	Picked by the crows that bore
	Nature to their hanged brother,
	Who rattles against the bole
	The thing that he lived for.


	VI

	I asked the master Yeats
	Whose great style could not tell
	Why it is man hates
	His own salvati6n,
	Prefers the way to hell,
	And finds his last safety
	In the self-made curse that bore
	Him towards damnation:
	The drowned undrowned by the se
	The sea worth living for.



23. THE WOLVES

	There are wolves in the next room waiting
	With heads bent low, thrust out, breathing
	At nothing in the dark: between them and me
	A white door patched with light from the hall
	Where it seems never (so still is the house)
	A man has walked from the front door to the stair.
	It has all been forever; a beast claws the floor.
	I have brooded on angels and archfiends
	But no man has ever sat where the next room’s
	Crowded with wolves, and for the honor of man
	I affirm that never have I before. Now while
	I have looked for the evening star at a cold window
	And whistled when Arcturus spilt his light,
	I’ve heard the wolves scuffle, and said: So this
	Is man; so--and what better conclusion is there--
	The day will not follow night, and the heart
	Of man has a little dignity, but less patience
	Than a wolf’s, and a duller sense that cannot
	Smell its own mortality. (This and other
	Meditations will be suited to other times
	After dog silence howls my epitaph.)
	Now remember courage, go to the door,
	Open it and see whether coiled on the bed
	Or cringing by the wall a savage beast,
	Maybe with golden hair, with deep eyes
	Like a bearded spider on a sunlit floor,
	Will snarl--and man can never be alone.
