*** James Tate (1943 - 2015)


1. AT THE CLOTHESLINE

	Millie was in the backyard hanging the laundry. I was watching her from the kitchen window. Why does this give me so much pleasure? Because I love her in a million ways, and because I love the idea of clean laundry flapping in the wind. It's timeless, a new beginning, a promise of tomorrow. Clothespins! God, I love clothespins. We should stock up on them. Some day they may stop making them, and then what? If I were a painter, I would paint Millie hanging the laundry. That would be a painting that would make you happy, and break your heart. You would never know what was in her mind, big thoughts, little thoughts, no thoughts. Did she see the hawk circling overheard? Did she hate hanging laundry? Was she going to run away with a sailor? The sheets billowing like sails on an ancient skiff, the socks waving goodbye. Millie, O Millie, do you remember me? The man who traveled with cloth napkins and loved you in the great storm.



2. THE BLUE BOOBY

	The blue booby lives
	on the bare rocks
	of Galápagos
	and fears nothing.
	It is a simple life:
	they live on fish,
	and there are few predators.   
	Also, the males do not   
	make fools of themselves   
	chasing after the young   
	ladies. Rather,
	they gather the blue
	objects of the world
	and construct from them
	
	a nest--an occasional   
	Gaulois package,
	a string of beads,
	a piece of cloth from   
	a sailor’s suit. This   
	replaces the need for   
	dazzling plumage;   
	in fact, in the past   
	fifty million years
	the male has grown
	considerably duller,   
	nor can he sing well.   
	The female, though,
	
	asks little of him--
	the blue satisfies her   
	completely, has   
	a magical effect
	on her. When she returns
	from her day of
	gossip and shopping,
	she sees he has found her   
	a new shred of blue foil:   
	for this she rewards him   
	with her dark body,
	the stars turn slowly
	in the blue foil beside them   
	like the eyes of a mild savior.



3. BOUNDEN DUTY

	I got a call from the White House, from the President himself, asking me if I’d do him a personal favor. I like the President, so I said, “Sure, Mr. President, anything you like.” He said, “Just act like nothing’s going on. Act normal. That would mean the world to me. Can you do that, Leon?” “Why, sure, Mr. President, you’ve got it. Normal, that’s how I’m going to act. I won’t let on, even if I’m tortured,” I said, immediately regretting that “tortured” bit. He thanked me several times and hung up. I was dying to tell someone that the President himself called me, but I knew I couldn’t. The sudden pressure to act normal was killing me. And what was going on anyway. I didn’t know anything was going on. I saw the President on TV yesterday. He was shaking hands with a farmer. What if it wasn’t really a farmer? I needed to buy some milk, but suddenly I was afraid to go out. I checked what I had on. I looked “normal” to me, but maybe I looked more like I was trying to be normal. That’s pretty suspicious. I opened the door and looked around. What was going on? There was a car parked in front of my car that I had never seen before, a car that was trying to look normal, but I wasn’t fooled. If you need milk, you have to get milk, otherwise people will think something’s going on. I got into my car and sped down the road. I could feel those little radar guns popping behind every tree and bush, but, apparently, they were under orders not to stop me. I ran into Kirsten in the store. “Hey, what’s going on, Leon?” she said. She had a very nice smile. I hated to lie to her. “Nothing’s going on. Just getting milk for my cat,” I said. “I didn’t know you had a cat,” she said. “I meant to say coffee. You’re right, I don’t have a cat. Sometimes I refer to my coffee as my cat. It’s just a private joke. Sorry,” I said. “Are you all right?” she asked. “Nothing’s going on, Kirsten. I promise you. Everything is normal. The President shook hands with a farmer, a real farmer. Is that such a big deal?” I said. “I saw that,” she said, “and that man was definitely not a farmer.” “Yeah, I know,” I said, feeling better.



4. THE CHASTE STRANGER

	All the sexually active people in Westport look so clean and certain, I wonder if they’re dead. Their lives are tennis without end, the avocado-green Mercedes waiting calm as you please. Perhaps it is my brain that is unplugged, and these shadow-people don’t know how to drink martinis anymore. They are suddenly and mysteriously not in the least interested in fornicating with strangers. Well, there are a lot of unanswered questions here, and certainly no dinner invitations where a fella could probe Buffy‘s inner-mush, a really complicated adventure, in a 1930ish train station, outlandish bouquets, a poisonous insect found burrowing its way through the walls of the special restaurant and into one of her perfect nostrils--she was reading _Meetings with Remarkable Men_, needing succor, dreaming of a village near Bosnia, when a clattering of carts broke her thoughts-- “Those billy goats and piglets, they are all so ephemeral . . .” But now, in Westport Connecticut, a boy, a young man really, looking as if he had just come through a carwash, and dressed for the kind of success that made her girlfriends froth and lather, can be overheard speaking to no one in particular: “That _Paris Review_ crowd, I couldn’t tell if they were bright or just overbred.” Whereupon Buffy swings into action, pinning him to the floor: “I will unglue your very being from this planet, if ever . . .” He could appreciate her sincerity, not to mention her spiffy togs. Didymus the Blind has put three dollars on Total Departure, and I am tired of pumping my own gas. I’m Lewis your aluminum man, and we are whirling in a spangled frenzy toward a riddle and a doom--here’s looking up your old address.



5. CITY AT NIGHT

	The blue-black plumes of the fountain
	parched my yearning, and a tuft of cellophane
	clings fondly to my foot like a diadem.
	Down that street an uproar is dwindling,
	a small word had been magnified and was
	once again shrinking back to its reasonable size,
	and Joe Blow drifts down to the riverbank
	searching for relics, a man of sorrows.
	Then a new turmoil infects another flock,
	it's a good corner on which to sell balm.
	A seer bobs along, oblivious or beguiled.
	I look for my reflection in a window:
	Goodnight Joe, Goodnight Joe, Goodnight.



6. CRYPTOZOA

	I wish the stone lady would come to me.
	Parakeet or no parakeet
	the night is a vial of lighterfluid.
	And I have been good, composing the perishable song
	of my childhood: one dollar, one frond
	meekly but loyally exploding the oath of circles.
	I have been the best wound a diamond ever knew.
	
	But what can I do for you? Write an encyclopedia
	to which the least gnat could gain entrance?
	I love you and I do not love you, perambulating utensils,
	street names. An old man is giving mirrors
	to a young girl. The meek have inherited the Aypaper.
	The past is more present than this moment.
	I am drinking at a spring, my skin
	is red and white. A little burning sensation,
	a little joy I leave forever.
	
	Oh well, I keep singing: I sing the song
	of utensils, and there is one of street names,
	and one of the names of dead pets.
	The next day I am giving mirrors to a young girl.
	I give free shoes for life to a stone lady.
	She walks on air, she walks near the earth
	in a region called the cryptosphere.



7. THE DEFINITION OF GARDENING

	Jim just loves to garden, yes he does. He likes nothing better than to put on his little overalls and his straw hat. He says, “Let's go get those tools, Jim.” But then doubt begins to set in. He says, “What is a garden, anyway?” And thoughts about a “modernistic” garden begin to trouble him, eat away at his resolve. He stands in the driveway a long time. “Horticulture is a groping in the dark into the obscure and unfamiliar, kneeling before a disinterested secret, slapping it, punching it like a Chinese puzzle, birdbrained, babbling gibberish, dig and destroy, pull out and apply salt, hoe and spray, before it spreads, burn roots, where not desired, with gloved hands, poisonous, the self-sacrifice of it, the self-love, into the interior, thunderclap, excruciating, through the nose, the earsplitting necrology of it, the withering, shriveling, the handy hose holder and Persian insect powder and smut fungi, the enemies of the iris, wireworms are worse than their parents, there is no way out, flowers as big as heads, pock-marked, disfigured, blinking insolently at me, the me who so loves to garden because it prevents the heaving of the ground and the untimely death of porch furniture, and dark, murky days in a large city and the dream home under a permanent storm is also a factor to keep in mind.”



8. DEMIGODDESS

	Aunt Myrtle was very old now and lived alone. We hadn't visited her in years. The elegant mansion on a hill that I remembered from my childhood was now in such shocking disrepair it looked as if it might collapse into a heap of rubble any minute. We opened the gate and it fell right off its hinges. The shudders on the windows were mostly gone, as were more than half the shingles on the roof. Aunt Myrtle herself was a mess, her long stringy hair was filthy, and she walked around in an ancient bathrobe looking like a ghost. “This house needs some work, Aunt Myrtle,” I said. “It's the raccoons, she explained. “They're out to get me, taking the house apart board by board every night.” “But why would they do that?” I asked. told you they want me, they worship me, I'm their goddess, and they won't stop until I come and live with them. There are hundreds of them “Hundreds? My god. Naturally I couldn't sleep that night. I tiptoed around the creaky old house peering out of the windows Then around 2 a.m. I thought I heard something. From the kitchen window I saw Aunt Myrtle crouched in the backyard holding a plate of food in one hand and stroking the back of a standing raccoon with the other. They looked like very good friends, indeed. And one is enough in this world.



9. FUCK THE ASTRONAUTS

	I
	
	Eventually we must combine nightmares
	an angel smoking a cigarette on the steps
	of the last national bank, said to me.
	I put her out with my thumb. I don’t need that
	cheap talk I’ve got my own problems.
	It was sad, exciting, and horrible.
	It was exciting, horrible, and sad.
	It was horrible, sad, and exciting.
	It was inviting, mad, and deplorable.
	It was adorable, glad, and enticing.
	Eventually we must smoke a thumb
	cheap talk I’ve got my own angel
	on the steps of the problems the bank
	said to me I don’t need that.
	I will take this one window
	with its sooty maps and scratches
	so that my dreams will remember
	one another and so that my eyes will not
	become blinded by the new world.
	
	
	II
	
	The flames don’t dance or slither.
	They have painted the room green.
	Beautiful and naked, the wives
	are sleeping before the fire.
	Now it is out. The men have
	returned to the shacks,
	slaved creatures from the forest
	floor across their white
	stationwagons. That just about
	does it, says the other,
	dumping her bucket
	over her head. Well, I guess
	we got everything, says one,
	feeling around in the mud,
	as if for a child.
	Now they remember they want
	that mud, who can’t remember
	what they got up for.
	They parcel it out: when
	they are drunk enough
	they go into town with
	a bucket of mud, saying
	we can slice it up into
	windmills like a bloated cow. 
	Later, they paint the insides
	of the shack black,
	and sit sucking eggs all night,
	they want something real, useful,
	but there isn’t anything.
	
	
	III
	
	I will engineer the sunrise
	they have disassembled our shadows
	our echoes are erased from the walls
	your nipples are the skeletons of olives
	your nipples are an oriental delight
	your nipples blow away like cigarette papers
	your nipples are the mouths of mutes
	so I am not here any longer
	skein of lightning
	memory’s dark ink in your last smile
	where the stars have swallowed their train schedule
	where the stars have drowned in their dark petticoats
	like a sock of hamburger
	receiving the lightning
	into his clitoris
	red on red the prisoner
	confesses his waltz
	through the corkscrew lightning
	nevermind the lightning
	in your teeth let’s waltz
	I am the hashish pinball machine
	that rapes a piano.



10. THE GOVERNMENT LAKE

	The way to the toy store was blocked by a fallen tree in the road. There was a policeman directing traffic down a side street. I asked him, “What happened?” He said, “Lightning in the night.” I took the turn and drove down the street looking for a way to turn back. Other streets were blocked by fallen trees, and I couldn’t find a way back to the toy store. I kept driving and soon I was on the outskirts of town. I got on a highway and drove, soon forgetting the toy store and what I was supposed to get there. I drove on as if I was hypnotized, not noticing the signs for turnoffs. I must have driven a couple of hours before I woke up, then I took the next exit and had no idea where I was. I drove down a straight tree-lined lane with farm houses on either side. There was a lake at the end of the lane. I pulled over and parked. I got out and started walking. There were several docks along the shore. I walked out on one and watched the ducks swimming and diving. There was something bobbing in the middle of the lake. I stared at it for a long time before I realized it was a man’s head. Then, a moment later, it was a coconut. No, it was an old tire floating right side up. I gave up and started following the ducks. They would suddenly fly up and circle the lake and come down and splash land again. It was quite entertaining. A man walked up behind me and said, “This government lake is off-limits to the public. You’ll have to leave.” I said, “I didn’t know it was a government lake. Why should it be off-limits?” He said, “I’m sorry. You’ll have to leave.” “I don’t even know where I am,” I said. “You’ll still have to leave,” he said. “What about that man out there?” I said, pointing to the tire. “He’s dead,” he said. “No, he’s not. I just saw him move his arm,” I said. He removed his pistol from his holster and fired a shot. “Now he’s dead,” he said.



11. HALF-EATEN

	The fortune-teller told me I was going to come into a large sum of money soon. She told me my love life would continue to be happy and satisfying. She said my health would be vigorous. But then she looked worried. She said there was some kind of large cat in my near future--a cougar. And that cat would surprise me when I least expected it. And that, of course, cancelled out all the previous good news. I paid her and left her dirty, little storefront. I looked up and down the street, checked out the rooftops. Once home, I kissed Jo, and headed for my study where I looked up Cougar. Six to eight feet in length, 160 lbs., can drag five times their weight, can leap twenty feet in one bound, jump from sixty feet above the ground. I debated telling Jo. I knew she would ridicule me. Then I went back in the kitchen and told her. She stared at me in disgust, incapable of even finding words at first. Then she said, “You went to a fortune-teller? And you believe this outrageous crap about a cougar? And all these years I thought I was married to a sensible man. What happened to you, Ralph? Are you on drugs? Have you been drinking?” “Weirder things have happened,” I said. “Last week a man exploded in Chicago, spontaneous combustion, walking down the street. There were witnesses. It was in the paper. There used to be cougars in these parts, only they called them cata- mounts or mountain lions. There could be one left, has a thing for me.” “You're not serious, are you, because, if you are, I'm moving out until your bloody destiny has reached its climax, she said. It's strange how alone I felt just then. I thought, it's just me and the cat, now. I said, “Gee whiz, Jo, can't you take a little joke. You know I would never go to a fortune-teller. “Still,” she said, “I can fell it, you're a marked man.” 



12. IT HAPPENS LIKE THIS

	I was outside St. Cecelia’s Rectory smoking a cigarette when a goat appeared beside me. It was mostly black and white, with a little reddish brown here and there. When I started to walk away, it followed. I was amused and delighted, but wondered what the laws were on this kind of thing. There’s a leash law for dogs, but what about goats? People smiled at me and admired the goat. “It’s not my goat,” I explained. “It’s the town’s goat. I’m just taking my turn caring for it.” “I didn’t know we had a goat,” one of them said. “I wonder when my turn is.” “Soon,” I said. “Be patient. Your time is coming.” The goat stayed by my side. It stopped when I stopped. It looked up at me and I stared into its eyes. I felt he knew everything essential about me. We walked on. A policeman on his beat looked us over. “That’s a mighty fine goat you got there,” he said, stopping to admire. “It’s the town’s goat,” I said. “His family goes back three-hundred years with us,” I said, “from the beginning.” The officer leaned forward to touch him, then stopped and looked up at me. “Mind if I pat him?” he asked. “Touching this goat will change your life,” I said. “It’s your decision.” He thought real hard for a minute, and then stood up and said, “What’s his name?” “He’s called the Prince of Peace,” I said. “God! This town is like a fairy tale. Everywhere you turn there’s mystery  and wonder. And I’m just a child playing cops and robbers forever. Please forgive me if I cry.” “We forgive you, Officer,” I said. “And we understand why you, more than anybody, should never touch the Prince.” The goat and I walked on. It was getting dark and we were beginning to wonder where we would spend the night.



13. IT WASN'T ME

	I recall a miser's
	white goose
	sold for naught.
	I, too, have my jewels,
	my contingency plan
	winding down
	to the goose-flesh of this world.
	I have my hunter's reflex,
	my critical versions.
	Gruff parcel, that Turko.
	Soundless macabre, calculating.
	Jeannetje smacks Octave across the lips.
	
	I have my digitalis and black mittens,
	my pasty-faced actresses.
	
	Once, in a sailor suit, I ate an éclair.
	
	Backstage at the ballet
	I consulted a yellow skull,
	a grapefruit really.
	I disfigured somebody's sandwich.
	
	The waxworks don't open until nine.
	
	A stranger's visiting card
	blows off the bridge.
	
	At first light I have my stepchild,
	my white china basin,
	therapeutic jostling of the toddler.
	
	Suspicions are almost confirmed.
	Denials are swiftly circulating.



14. JIM'S ALL-NIGHT DINER

	Solemnity around the samovar
	warms the old interlopers:
	
	grief is momentarily rinsed
	away. They wait as if for
	a certain invitation.
	
	The voices outside are
	a panoply of scorn.
	
	These yellow thumbs haul up
	the hot liquid, but when
	the cup's drunk it is more
	
	like an orphanage.
	The dead letter department,
	the salvation army,
	
	the animal rescue league-
	these are the only destinations.
	One desires to touch
	
	their lowly shoulders
	with a plastic spoon
	
	and change them into green rabbits
	on a white Alpine mountain,
	their gauzy faces exhilarated.



15. THE LIST OF FAMOUS HATS

	Napoleon’s hat is an obvious choice I guess to list as a famous hat, but that’s not the hat I have in mind. That was his hat for show. I am thinking of his private bathing cap, which in all honesty wasn’t much different than the one any jerk might buy at a corner drugstore now, except for two minor eccentricities. The first one isn’t even funny: Simply it was a white rubber bathing cap, but too small. Napoleon led such a hectic life ever since his childhood, even farther back than that, that he never had a chance to buy a new bathing cap and still as a grown-up--well, he didn’t really grow that much, but his head did: He was a pinhead at birth, and he used, until his death really, the same little tiny bathing cap that he was born in, and this meant that later it was very painful to him and gave him many headaches, as if he needed more. So, he had to vaseline his skull like crazy to even get the thing on. The second eccentricity was that it was a tricorn bathing cap. Scholars like to make a lot out of this, and it would be easy to do. My theory is simple-minded to be sure: that beneath his public head there was another head and it was a pyramid or something.



16. THE LOST PILOT

	Your face did not rot 
	like the others--the co-pilot, 
	for example, I saw him
	
	yesterday. His face is corn-
	mush: his wife and daughter, 
	the poor ignorant people, stare
	
	as if he will compose soon. 
	He was more wronged than Job. 
	But your face did not rot
	
	like the others--it grew dark, 
	and hard like ebony; 
	the features progressed in their
	
	distinction. If I could cajole 
	you to come back for an evening, 
	down from your compulsive
	
	orbiting, I would touch you, 
	read your face as Dallas, 
	your hoodlum gunner, now,
	
	with the blistered eyes, reads 
	his braille editions. I would 
	touch your face as a disinterested
	
	scholar touches an original page. 
	However frightening, I would 
	discover you, and I would not
	
	turn you in; I would not make 
	you face your wife, or Dallas,
	or the co-pilot, Jim. You
	
	could return to your crazy 
	orbiting, and I would not try 
	to fully understand what
	
	it means to you. All I know 
	is this: when I see you, 
	as I have seen you at least
	
	once every year of my life, 
	spin across the wilds of the sky 
	like a tiny, African god,
	
	I feel dead. I feel as if I were 
	the residue of a stranger’s life, 
	that I should pursue you.
	
	My head cocked toward the sky, 
	I cannot get off the ground, 
	and, you, passing over again,
	
	fast, perfect, and unwilling 
	to tell me that you are doing 
	well, or that it was mistake
	
	that placed you in that world, 
	and me in this; or that misfortune 
	placed these worlds in us.



17. THE MOTORCYCLISTS

	My cuticles are a mess. Oh honey, by the way,
	did you like my new negligee? It’s a replica
	of one Kim Novak wore in some movie or other.
	I wish I had a foot-long chili dog right now.
	Do you like fireworks, I mean not just on the 4th of July,
	but fireworks any time? There are people
	like that, you know. They’re like people who like
	orchestra music, listen to it any time of day.
	Lopsided people, that’s what my father calls them.
	Me, I’m easy to please. I like ping-gong and bobcats,
	shatterproof drinking glasses, the smell of kerosene,
	the crunch of carrots. I like caterpillars and
	whirlpools, too. What I hate most is being the first
	one at the scene of a bad accident.
	
	Do I smell like garlic? Are we still in Kansas?
	I once had a chiropractor make a pass at me,
	did I ever tell you that? He said that your spine
	is happiest when you’re snuggling. Sounds kind
	of sweet now when I tell you, but he was a creep.
	Do you know that I have never understood what they meant
	by “grassy knoll.” It sounds so idyllic, a place to go
	to dream your life away, not kill somebody. They
	should have called it something like “the grudging notch.”
	But I guess that’s life. What is it they always say?
	“It’s always the sweetest ones that break your heart.”
	You getting hungry yet, hon? I am. When I was seven
	I sat in our field and ate an entire eggplant
	right off the vine. Dad loves to tell that story,
	
	but I still can’t eat eggplant. He says I’ll be the first
	woman President, it’d be a waste since I talk so much.
	Which do you think the fixtures are in the bathroom
	at the White House, gold or brass? It’d be okay with me
	if they were just brass. Honey, can we stop soon?
	I really hate to say it but I need a lady’s room.



18. THE NEW CHINESE FICTION

	Although the depiction of living forms was not explicitly forbidden, the only good news about famines was that the station was empty. It was about 2 A.M. The truck drove away. A tropical insect that lives in enormous cities stroked my hair awkwardly, organizing everyone's schedule. She drove me back to my hotel in a misty and allusive style, while the old schools continued the process of devolution. Part of the roof was loose and flapped noisily in the wind, who needed work like that? Poor brethren, do you have any good prose yet? The New Chinese fiction is getting better, I suspect, people walking and thinking and fussing, with a nest to fly out of, with a less intimate footing. Are we responsible for their playtimes? Keep up your music, my dears; there were a lot of people like that, with strange eyes, green fields and orchards. The little house they sat in produced simple people, cars full of blood, all they needed was a hat, extramusical sounds, purging the emotions. Expect no mercy, I said, from the sickbay. And try to imagine Howard Hughes piloting the plane that flew Cary Grant and Barbara Hutton off toward their marriage in 1950. Well, don't bother. The New Chinese fiction shouldn't concern itself with anything other than a stolen turnip and a coldness in the heart, and a lit window, a young man on a horse appearing and then disappearing.



19. NO SPITTING UP

	“People in glass elevators shouldn't carry snow shovels,” I said to Sheila, because we were in one with a lady who was. I faced the closed doors, rejected the view of the city without the slightest curiosity, because I already knew. What if this woman with the shovel suddenly went crazy, started flapping her wings like a chicken, like a fiend? I wonder what Sheila is thinking just now, I wonder if she has her eye on the snow shovel, how it can't rest in this glass elevator, how it is dancing inside of itself and making me dance. No one's paying the least attention to the tension between me and that shovel, that shovel and that window, that window and me.



20. NUISANCE

	It was more of a nuisance
	than an actual apparition.
	It wanted my microfilm, it
	was spraying me with an atomizer
	such as one I had never seen.
	I even carried an umbrella around
	inside the house for a while.
	I sat in my armchair with
	a saucer of warm milk and took
	my temperature several times.
	I calculated some errors
	I had made in recent days,
	all the while this tingling
	at my temples, as though I were
	being spied on by satellites,
	as though some inscrutably virulent
	sanitation problem were attacking
	my very foundation, and hecklers
	were arriving by the busloads.
	I tried yawning--it was broken.
	I could tidy up a bit, pad
	from room to room, polish
	the corroding molecular remnants.
	After all, it's just so much propaganda,
	really, it's nothing more than a massive
	injection of disembodied transparencies
	on a simple excursion, a vacation,
	brief, in all likelihood, millimeter
	by millimeter subtracting my formulas,
	maiming a few of my components.
	But, then again, I saw nothing.
	I could hardly be called a witness.



21. THE PAINTER OF THE NIGHT

	Someone called in a report that she had seen a man painting in the dark over by the pond. A police car was dispatched to go investigate. The two officers with their big flashlights walked all around the pond, but found nothing suspicious. Hatcher was the younger of the two, and he said to Johnson, “What do you think he was painting?” Johnson looked bemused and said, “The dark, stupid. What else could he have been painting?” Hatcher, a little hurt, said, “Frogs in the Dark, Lily-pads in the Dark, Pond in the Dark. Just as many things exist in the dark as they do in the light.” Johnson paused, exasperated. Then Hatcher added, “I'd like to see them. Hell, I might even buy one. Maybe there's more out there than we know. We are the police, after all. We need to know.”



22. PITY ASCENDING WITH THE FOG

	He had no past and he certainly
	had no future. All the important
	events were ending shortly before
	they began. He says he told mama
	earth what he would not accept: and I
	
	keep thinking it had something to do
	with her world. Nights expanding into
	enormous parachutes of fire, his
	eyes were little more than mercury.
	Or sky-diving in the rain when there
	
	was obviously no land beneath,
	half-dead fish surfacing all over
	his body. He knew all this too well.
	And she who might at anytime be
	saying the word that would embrace all
	
	he had let go, he let go of course.
	I think the pain for him will end in
	May or January, though the weather
	is far too clear for me to think of
	anything but august comedy.



23. PRIDE'S CROSSING

	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	I recognize her hand.
	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	her hair is as intricate as a thumbprint.
	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	her name is the threshold of sleep.
	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	it takes all night to get there.
	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	you have stepped over the barrier.
	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	you will understand afterwards.
	Where the railroad meets the sea,
	where the railroad meets the sea-
	I know only that our paths lie together,
	and you cannot endure if you remain alone.



24. RED BRICKS AND CAMPHOR TREES

	A mandolin from the madhouse
	was calling the lunatics to prayer.
	Mr. Beasely's Portuguese
	was improving by the hour.
	Little pissing brats just freed from school
	threw rotten eggs and wild chrysanthemums,
	and the gondolier was getting edgy.
	Mrs. Beasely promptly ruled that the trip
	to the Great Cloud Hermitage must begin,
	and the boatman blazed on past
	the little tombs with their fuddy-duddies.
	Oratorios by Handel and Haydn bounced
	out of buildings with a random elegance
	that subtly flustered their direction.
	A pyromaniac lit the lamps that shown
	the way past pillars which ignited
	like the soul of the architect
	who built them, past villas with delicate shadows.
	
	Mr. Beasely remembered his mother's music-room,
	touchy as wet paint. The current lady
	of his life slapped him awake, “I swear, Mr. Beasely,
	your past is a perilous irrelevance today.
	Biscuits and dried peaches, if you ask me.
	And soggy to boot! This decisive and dynamic
	driver of our vehicle shows more stamina,
	just look at his fangs!” He felt the early riddles
	of a language stir inside--a mandolin
	calling the lunatics to prayer.
	They carried sacred fires
	to hermaphroditic dieties
	at the end of Canal Street.
	
	Mr. Beasely closed his eyes and thought to himself:
	_I close my eyes to this civilized vista.
	And what she says is news, is news:
	‘Even the darkest night is really dark blue.’_



25. RIGHT CONDUCT

	A boy and a girl were playing together when they spotted a woodchuck and started chasing it. The woodchuck's burrow was at the edge of the forest and it safely disappeared into it, but the children did not see this and kept running into the forest. In no time at all they realized that they were lost and they sat down and began to cry. After a while, a man appeared and this frightened them all the more. They had been warned a thousand times never to talk to strangers. He assured them that he would not hurt them and that, in fact, he would lead them back to their home. They agreed to walk with him, but when he tried to make conversation they would not reply. “You act like you're prisoners of war,” he said. “Not much fun for me, but I guess that's good. When I was a kid my mother also told me never to talk to strangers. But I did anyway, because that's how you learn stuff. I always thought the stuff my ma and pa tried to teach me was boring. But from strangers you could learn the secret stuff, like how to break into a locked door or how to tame a wild stallion, stuff you could use in life.” It made sense what he was saying, but the kids were sworn to silence, a brainwashed silence in a shrunken world from which they could already faintly hear their mother scolding them.



26. SAINT JOHN OF THE CROSS IN PRISON

	Browsing among the zero-hours,
	and where I went from there.
	diabolical? No. I went out
	of myself into . . . I did not go
	out of myself into the after-
	
	noon of parrots; I did not go out
	of myself into the dew; I did
	not go out of myself into the
	bat-terrors. I did not say silence,
	I said nothing about the love I
	
	did not go out of myself into.
	I said nothing fire, I said nothing
	water, I said nothing air. I went
	out of myself into no, into
	nowhere. I was not alone.



27. THE SEARCH FOR LOST LIVES

	I was chasing this blue butterfly down the road when a car came by and clipped me.    It was nothing serious, but it angered me and I turned around and cursed the driver who didn't even slow down to see if I was hurt. Then I returned my attention to the butterfly which    was nowhere to be seen. One of the Doubleday    girls came running up the street with her toy poodle toward me. I stopped her and asked, “Have you seen a blue butterfly around here?” “It's down near that birch tree near Grandpa's,” she said. “Thanks,” I said, and walked briskly toward the tree. It was fluttering from flower to flower in Mr. Doubleday's extensive garden,    a celestial blueness to soothe the weary heart.    I didn't know what I was doing there. I certain- ly didn't want to capture it. It was like something I had known in another life, even if it was only in a dream, I wanted to confirm it.    I was a blind beggar on the streets of Cordoba when I first saw it, and now, again it was here.



28. THE SHADOWMAN

	In the backyard, I saw the shadow of a
	man, but I didn't see the man. I walked toward
	it and the shadow backed away. The shadowman
	was taller than I was. It mocked me. When I
	waved my arms, he waved his. I ran and it
	followed. When I stopped, it stopped. And all
	the while it was silent. It couldn't sing,
	but I could. I sang at the top of my lungs.
	The birds flew away in a cloud. The neighbors
	pounded on their windows. Finally, the shadowman
	turned and slithered into his hole.



29. SHROUD OF THE GNOME

	And what amazes me is that none of our modern inventions surprise or interest him, even a little. I tell him it is time he got his booster shots, but then I realize I have no power over him whatsoever. He becomes increasingly light-footed until I lose sight of him downtown between the federal building and the post office. A registered nurse is taking her coffee break. I myself needed a break, so I sat down next to her at the counter. “Don't mind me,” I said, “I'm just a hungry little Gnostic in need of a sandwich.” (This old line of mine had met with great success on any number of previous occasions.) I thought, a deaf, dumb, and blind nurse, sounds ideal! But then I remembered that some of the earliest Paleolithic office workers also feigned blindness when approached by nonoffice workers, so I paid my bill and disappeared down an alley where I composed myself. Amidst the piles of outcast citizenry and burning barrels of waste and rot, the plump rats darting freely, the havoc of blown newspapers, lay the little shroud of my lost friend: small and gray and threadbare, windworn by the ages of scurrying hither and thither, battered by the avalanches and private tornadoes of just being a gnome, but surely there were good times, too. And now, rejuvenated by the wind, the shroud moves forward, hesitates, dances sideways, brushes my foot as if for a kiss, and flies upward, whistling a little-known ballad about the pitiful, raw etiquette of the underworld.



30. SPIDERWEBS

	The man sitting next to me on the airplane pulled out the tray in front of him and set up his laptop computer as the stewardess gave permission to use electronic devices. He played the keyboard like a piano virtuoso, but nothing but annoying clicks came out of it. I read the airline magazine as if it were a suspense novel, although I glanced at his screen hoping to decipher something. He was too fast for the likes of me. Columns of figures appeared, mutated and disappeared. I was lonely and longed for some good old-fashioned human contact, but he wasn't having any of that raggedy-assed stuff. I couldn't even tell what he was trafficking in. When our snack came, he ignored it. Admittedly, it wasn't much, but still, I devoured it and stared at his hungrily. He gave me a brief glance of irritation, stuck it in his pocket, then went back to work. “Fascinating,” I said. “What?” he said. “I find your work fascinating. Of course, you've made several mistakes that will come back to haunt you, I said. He stared at me as if noticing me for the first time. “What are you talking about?” he said. “Nothing. It's none of my business,” I said, staring into my magazine. “Who are you? Are you a spy?” he said. “My name is Jeremy Bendix, and I'm a human being,” I said. “A human being?” he said. “Well, goody for you. I played golf on Maui yesterday. What does that make me, a piece of space debris? Now, I have work to do, no doubt riddled with grave mistakes, but still I'm going to do it, if you'll excuse me. And. with that, he turned his attention to the screen and worked more furiously than ever. I nodded off for a while, and when I awoke I looked at him and said, “Oops.” He said, “What?” And I repeated, “Oops.” He said, “What are you talking about now?” “Nothing, nothing. It's just that you've failed to take into account the effect of the recession in the Southeast Asian market, and the ripple it's had throughout Europe, not to mention elsewhere. Of course, I'm completely out of my league here, and I ought to shut up,” I said, and closed my eyes again. “I work hard, but it's not like I'm building a wall with stones that you can see and feel. I'm in the dark, crawling around on my hands and knees. All I can feel are the spiderwebs across my face and the dust beneath my hands. I hear nothing but the chatter of mice and rats. Can't you understand that?” he said. “What?” I said. “Are you talking to me?” “No,” he said, and closed up his laptop as we waited for the plane to land. “Listen, I was just kidding when I said that,” I said. “Said what?” he said. “About being a human being,” I said. “Oh yes, that, of course. I took it in the spirit of jest,” he said. I followed him through the terminal and we stood in line for taxis. “Where are you going?” he asked after a while. “I'm going to see a very poor blind man, who rarely eats or drinks, and who talks in riddles, well, not riddles really, but a very special kind of nonsense. He probably knows more than you and me together about the Asian market,” I said. “Sounds like my boss on a good day,” he said. “It is,” I said. “Good, we can share a taxi.” he said.



31. THE SQUARE AT DAWN

	Unconsumable material is everywhere;
	red machinery washes out the gutter.
	And the grim musicians
	
	are seen stalking themselves with rare
	cacti in their saxophones.
	Mosquitoes linger in the air
	
	like snowy egrets.
	What has happened to the rush of night?
	It is as white as an arctic wolf.
	
	A little buoyant coffin drifts
	across the square; larvae configure
	on the last gasp of a lamp,
	
	frying like the ink
	of an old elaborate alphabet.
	Such original works as feathers
	
	announce the angel of death
	is selling kisses in the alley.
	An early yellow bus of women
	
	takes photographs of the man
	who devours nails, as the heirloom
	quilt unravels behind the green
	
	unlatched door of our town idiot.
	The rent is up and the cat
	is dead: we ought to go home.



32. SUCCESS COMES TO COW CREEK

	I sit on the tracks, 
	a hundred feet from
	earth, fifty from the
	water. Gerald is
	inching toward me
	as grim, slow, and
	determined as a
	season, because he
	has no trade and wants 
	none. It’s been nine months 
	since I last listened 
	to his fate, but I
	know what he will say:
	he’s the fire hydrant
	of the underdog.
	
	When he reaches my
	point above the creek,
	he sits down without
	salutation, and
	spits profoundly out
	past the edge, and peeks
	for meaning in the
	ripple it brings. He
	scowls. He speaks: when you 
	walk down any street 
	you see nothing but
	coagulations
	of shit and vomit,
	and I’m sick of it.
	I suggest suicide;
	he prefers murder, 
	and spits again for 
	the sake of all the 
	great devout losers.
	
	A conductor’s horn 
	concerto breaks the 
	air, and we, two doomed 
	pennies on the track, 
	shove off and somersault 
	like anesthetized 
	fleas, ruffling the 
	ideal locomotive 
	poised on the water 
	with our light, dry bodies. 
	Gerald shouts 
	terrifically as
	he sails downstream like 
	a young man with a 
	destination. I 
	swim toward shore as 
	fast as my boots will 
	allow; as always, 
	neglecting to drown.



33. ON THE SUBJECT OF DOCTORS

	I like to see doctors cough.
	What kind of human being
	would grab all your money
	just when you're down?
	I'm not saying they enjoy this:
	“Sorry, Mr. Rodriguez, that's it,
	no hope! You might as well
	hand over your wallet.” Hell no,
	they'd rather be playing golf
	and swapping jokes about our feet.
	
	Some of them smoke marijuana
	and are alcoholics, and their moral
	turpitude is famous: who gets to see
	most sex organs in the world? Not
	poets. With the hours they keep
	they need drugs more than anyone.
	Germ city, there's no hope
	looking down those fire-engine throats.
	They're bound to get sick themselves
	sometime; and I happen to be there
	myself in a high fever
	taking my plastic medicine seriously
	with the doctors, who are dying.



34. THE THIEF

	My wife and I were spending a quiet night at home. She was reading a magazine on the couch and I was reading my novel in my chair. I said, “Darling, can I fix you a cup of hot chocolate?” She said, “That would be great.” So I got up and went into the kitchen and started to boil the milk. A few minutes later I handed her the cup. “Hmmm, smells great. Thank you, darling,” she said. I sat down and resumed my reading. She said, “Did you know a tiger has the same number of bones in it as a monkey?” “I don’t believe it,” I said. “And a whale has the same number as a mouse.” “Get out of here,” I said. “These are some little known facts discovered by a man named John D. Baxter,” she said. “He must be crazy,” I said. Then we were quiet for a while. I looked over and she was asleep. I went on reading my novel. Then I put my novel down and got up and started to tiptoe around the house. I went into our bedroom and over to the dresser. I opened up Mitzy’s jewelry box and let the jewels run through my fingers. There were some fantastic pieces in there, diamonds, rubies, emeralds. I thought about stealing some, but felt creepy about it. I put them back in the box and tiptoed back into the living room. I tripped on the coffee table and went crashing down. Mitzy woke with a start. “Go back to sleep,” I said. “What was that?” she said. “I tripped, that’s all,” I said. She started to get up. “Where are you going?” I said. “I want to look in my jewelry box,” she said. “Why?” I said. “I dreamed somebody was trying to steal something in there,” she said. She went into the bedroom and looked in the box, then came out. “It’s okay,” she said. “Well, I’m glad,” I said. She got back on the couch and picked up her magazine. “Did you know jellyfish have bigger brains than humans?” she said. “I don’t believe it,” I said. “Well, they do. It says right here,” she said.



35. TO FUZZY

	I was standing outside this cocktail bar, see, on the Nile,
	when along came this chick with whom I had passed the morning
	in the poolhall: We found we shared a deep interest in thaumaturgy
	as she stroked the 8-ball into the side pocket. Fuzzy Wuzzy,
	
	for that was her name. Probability was her strong suit.
	She was a gold mine on the skids, and I yearned to wangle
	a weekend with her. I bluffed, “The farther you get away from me
	the suddener you'll be back.” Rotten and lazy, I carried a gun.
	
	I began shrugging toward her, closer, until she turned to ice.
	“Since when did you escape from mud,” she said, and I considered
	my predicament, I took time for reflection. “Fuzzy Wuzzy,” I 
	said, “you learned the dark arts through a prolonged sojourn
	
	among myriads of bats nesting in abandoned mines, I know that.
	Still, as Nietzsche says, ‘Man has regarded his natural propensities
	with an _evil eye_ for too long.’ It is not that I wish you
	to visit depravities upon me, I would perish first!
	
	One of the big Pharaohs once told me in a dream that one day I would
	be very thin and sit in a soft armchair. I would be reading a letter,
	written in Chinese calligraphy, in pencil, scribbled hastily,
	and its central motif would be the mat the author was sitting on
	
	and the writing pencil with which his hand and arm, torso and brain
	and a lifetime of witnessing, were struggling. I know there are
	contradictions in all that I say. Fuzzy, whence is the unseen
	vindicated? Esteemed cocktail bar, the Pharaohs have edged your
	
	needs into retreat.”



36. THE TRUTH

	Mitzy fell asleep as soon as we got home, but I didn’t. The evening had upset me. Why did Jack keep asking me if I’d been married before? And why did my answer not satisfy him? It was probably just a bad joke. Jack’s humor is off sometimes. But he’s not a bad guy. Well, then I went to bed. When we woke up in the morning Mitzy said, “Jack was right about you, wasn’t he?” “What do you mean?” I said. “Jack said you were kicked out of the Army,” she said. “I was never in the Army, how could I be kicked out?” I said. “I don’t think he likes me.” “Oh, I think Jack likes you a lot. He just wishes you were more interesting,” she said. “And by making me secretly divorced and secretly kicked out of the Army I’m instantly more interesting, is that it?” I said. “According to Jack you are,” she said. “I think we had better have breakfast,” I said. “Good idea,” she said. During breakfast I said, “Don’t you think I’m interesting?” “Of course I do, honey,” she said. “Let’s forget it. I mean, Jack is an old friend. Maybe he was just drunk,” I said. “That’s probably it,” she said. “What are you going to do today?” I asked. “I’m thinking of buying a new dress for the wedding,” she said. “What wedding?” I said. “You know, Carol and Bob’s wedding, next Saturday,” she said. “Oh God, I forgot all about it,” I said. “How could you forget? Bob’s your best friend,” she said. “I know, I just had my mind on other things, but now I’ll focus on their wedding, I promise,” I said. Shortly after that Mitzy left the house. I cleaned up the breakfast dishes, then sat down on the couch. Why had Jack told the two secrets I had told him years ago. I had sworn him to silence, and now everybody knew. I had told him I would kill him if he ever told anybody. I wasn’t going to kill him, but I did think about disappearing, just vanishing altogether. Where would I go? What would I do? And I do love Mitzy. I could tell her the truth. I’ve had eighteen years to do that, and not a squeak so far.



37. TRYING TO HELP

	On another planet, a silvery starlet is brooding on her salary. Some gangly ranchers are blindfolding her for her own good, or so they say. It's all part of some lawful research, or maybe they said “awful research,” I wasn't listening. I was roving down a chestnut lane, thinking about origins in a contrite sort of way, amid the nearly inaudible society of aphids and such, modulating my little hireling feet none too carefully, an average stroller praying for keepsakes, or at least one, when I heard this eerie squeak from afar. For reasons which I refuse to explain I knew instantly what was going on, and I tried to negotiate in my rudimentary way. I offered up some rose petals, I think they were tempted but liked playing tough because it was in their contract or something. So I offered to play the fiddle on their patio for a whole night. No deal-I don't think they knew what a fiddle was, which was actually lucky for me since I have but one tiny tune. I sat down on my chestnut lane, tempted to sneer at my own timidity. Those squeaks from afar, all that damned distant research, provide the only keepsake for this day, my momentum crushed. Hours pass, crows pass, a pheasant crashes into an oak tree. In a dream she says to me, “Thanks for caring, mister, but it's all part of the plot, and I'm getting paid awfully well.” And now I can hardly walk.



38. A VAGABOND

	A vagabond is a newcomer
	in a heap of trouble.
	He’s an eyeball at a peephole
	that should be electrocuted.
	He’s a leper in a textile mill
	and likely to be beheaded, I mean,
	given a liverwurst sandwich
	on the break by the brook
	where the loaves are sliced.
	But he oughtn’t meddle
	with the powder puffs on the golf links--
	they have their own goats to tame,
	dirigibles to situate.
	He can act like an imbecile
	if the climate is propitious,
	a magnate of kidnap
	paradising around the oily depot,
	or a speck from a distant nebula
	wishing to purchase a certain skyscraper . . .
	
	Well, if it’s permitted, then
	let’s regulate him, let’s testify
	against his thimble, and moderate his gloves
	before they sew an apron.
	
	The local minister is thinking
	of moving to Holland, exchanging
	his old ballads for some lingerie.
	“Zatso!” says the vagabond.
	Homeless, like wheat that tattletales
	on the sermon, like wages swigged.
	“Zatso, zatso, zatso!” cries the vagabond.
	The minister reels under the weight
	of his thumbs, the vagabond seems to have
	jutted into his kernel, disturbed
	his terminal core. Slowly, and with
	trifling dignity, the minister removes
	from his lapel his last campaign button:
	_Don’t Mess with Raymond, New Hampshire._



39. VERY LATE, BUT NOT TOO LATE

	I was the last one to leave the party. I said goodnight to Stephanie and Jared. They were already in bed. In fact, they were making love, but they stopped and thanked me for coming. Walking down Kellog Street, with the full moon lighting my way, I wondered who those people really were, and why they had invited me. I had felt like a spy all evening, absorbing useless bits of information. It's amazing what people will tell a complete stranger. At the end of Kellog I turn right on Windsor. A woman was standing under the streetlight. She looked frightened. “Do you need help?” I said She was hesitant to speak, but finally said, “I'm lost.” “Where are you trying to go?” I asked. “Richards Street,” she said, “my aunt lives there.” “That's not far from here,” I said. “I'll walk you there.” And so we walked. I could tell she was still a little apprehensive. Her bus had gotten in late, and she had expected her aunt to meet her, and no one answered the phone when she tried to call her. When we got to her aunt's house there were no lights on. I waited while she knocked on the door. She knocked harder and harder, but the aunt didn't answer, “Listen, I said, “I live close by. Let's go over to my place and we can call the police. They'll figure this thing out. She hadn't much choice but to agree. We walked in silence, a smooth, rich flow of it. And when she reached out and held my hand, I felt as though my life had begun.



40. THE WALK HOME

	I told the doctor I wouldn’t be seeing him again. “No, I guess you won’t,” he said. I walked out the door feeling really good. Of course I knew I was going to die, but still the day looked bright to me. I walked down to the water. Ducks were circling around and about. A sailboat sailed by. I walked along the shore. The sun beat down on me. I felt as though I might live forever. I sat down on a bench and watched the joggers pass. A pretty blonde walked by and I said, “Hello.” She looked at me and said hello. A man with a greyhound on a leash walked by. I got up and started to walk. A woodpecker was pounding on a tree. An airplane flew over, leaving a thick trail of smoke. I left the lake and walked on up the road. I crossed at the streetlights and crossed the bridge. A car swerved to miss me. I thought, that could have been it, the end right there, but I walked on, bravely dodging the cars. When I got to the residential district, I felt relieved. There were large elms and maples overhanging the street, and people pushing baby carriages. Dogs ran loose everywhere. A man stopped me and asked if I knew where 347 Walnut Street was. I said I didn’t. He said, “Oh well, it didn’t matter anyway.” I said, “Why?” He said it was a funeral notice. I walked on, bumping into a fat lady with a load of groceries. I said I was sorry. She kept going, dropping a load of grapefruit. Then, further on, there was a giant explosion across the street. Police and firemen were there right away. It appears it was a gas main beneath the shop. No one was there, luckily, but the firetrucks had their hands full. I left before it was out. The shop was pretty much destroyed. When I got home I was tired. I made myself a cup of tea and sat down on the couch. I thought about calling my mother, but she was in heaven. I called her anyway. “Mom, how are you doing?” I said. “I’m bored. Don’t come here. There’s nothing to do,” she said. “Aren’t there angels?” I said. “Yes, but they’re boring,” she said. “But I was going to come see you,” I said. “Go to hell, it’s more exciting,” she said. I had fallen asleep with my teacup in my hand. When I awoke I realized I had thought it was a phone. My mother would never be so sarcastic about heaven.



41. A WEDDING

	She was in terrible pain the whole day,
	as she had been for months: a slipped disc,
	and there is nothing more painful. She
	
	herself was a nurse’s aide, also a poet
	just beginning to make a name for her
	nom de plume. As with most things in life,
	
	it happened when she was changing channels
	on her television. The lucky man, on the other
	hand, was smiling for the first time
	
	in his life, and it was fake. He was
	an aspiring philosopher of dubious potential,
	very serious, but somehow lacking in
	
	essential depth. He could have been
	an adequate undertaker. It was not the first
	time for either of them. It was a civil
	
	service, with no music, few flowers.
	Still, there was a slow and erratic tide
	of champagne--corks shot clear into the trees.
	
	And flashcubes, instant photos, some blurred
	and some too revealing, cake slices that aren’t
	what they were meant to be. The bride slept
	
	through much of it, and never did we figure out
	who was on whose team. I think the groom
	meant it in the end when he said, “We never
	
	thought anyone would come.” We were not the first
	to arrive, nor the last to leave. Who knows,
	it may all turn out for the best. And who
	
	really cares about such special days, they
	are not what we live for.



42. THE WHEELCHAIR BUTTERFLY

	O sleepy city of reeling wheelchairs
	where a mouse can commit suicide if he can
	
	concentrate long enough
	on the history book of rodents
	in this underground town
	
	of electrical wheelchairs!
	The girl who is always pregnant and bruised
	like a pear
	
	rides her many-stickered bicycle
	backward up the staircase
	of the abandoned trolleybarn.
	
	Yesterday was warm. Today a butterfly froze
	in midair; and was plucked like a grape
	by a child who swore he could take care
	
	of it. O confident city where
	the seeds of poppies pass for carfare,
	
	where the ordinary hornets in a human’s heart
	may slumber and snore, where bifocals bulge
	
	in an orange garage of daydreams,
	we wait in our loose attics for a new season
	
	as if for an ice-cream truck.
	An Indian pony crosses the plains
	
	whispering Sanskrit prayers to a crater of fleas.
	Honeysuckle says: I thought I could swim.
	
	The Mayor is urinating on the wrong side
	of the street! A dandelion sends off sparks:
	beware your hair is locked!
	
	Beware the trumpet wants a glass of water!
	Beware a velvet tabernacle!
	
	Beware the Warden of Light has married
	an old piece of string!



43. THE WHOLE WORLD'S SADLY TALKING TO ITSELF

	Hands full of sand, I say:
	take this, this is what I have saved;
	I earned this with my genius,
	and because I love you . . .
	
	take this, hurry.
	I am dropping everything.
	And then I listened:
	I was not saying anything;
	out of all that had gone into
	the composition of the language
	and what I knew of it
	I had chiselled these words-
	take this, hurry-
	and you could not hear me.
	I had said nothing.
	And then I am leaving,
	
	making ready to go to another street,
	when you, mingled between sleep
	and delirium, turned
	
	and handed me an empty sack:
	take this, friend;
	I am not coming back. The ghost
	of a flower poised on your lip.



44. WITH A CHILD ALL DAY

	Little ragamuffin, brat, a craving for sen-sen
	as we walked along the _Academie_;
	it is all that interests you.
	I remain quiet and my manner annoys you;
	I'm present and unaccounted for.
	The tunnels are not crowded in this part of the city.
	
	Finally I say I like dogs, possible dogs, worn thin.
	
	We're in the wrong place, our favorite season.
	Ill luck has surfaced again and you do as you please.
	I hang on to you around the corner.
	There is something lacking even now.
	Come, whitewash my fasting worth.
	
	Something living touched me; a plant?
	You pretend to recognize old friends.
	Why this embarrassed despair, this recoiling?
	City of Love--I can't breathe.
	
	Our own God gave us, gave us the bird.
	
	Goodbye.



45. THE WORKFORCE

	Do you have adequate oxen for the job?
	No, my oxen are inadequate.
	Well, how many oxen would it take to do an adequate job?
	I would need ten more oxen to do the job adequately.
	I'll see if I can get them for you.
	I'd be obliged if you could do that for me.
	Certainly. And do you have sufficient fishcakes for the men?
	We have fifty fishcakes, which is less than sufficient.
	I'll have them delivered on the morrow.
	Do you need maps of the mountains and the underworld?
	We have maps of the mountains but we lack maps of the underworld.
	Of course you lack maps of the underworld,
	there are no maps of the underworld.
	And, besides, you don't want to go there, it's stuffy.
	I had no intention of going there, or anywhere for that matter.
	It's just that you asked me if I needed maps. . . .
	Yes, yes, it's my fault, I got carried away.
	What do you need, then, you tell me?
	We need seeds, we need plows, we need scythes, chickens,
	pigs, cows, buckets and women.
	Women?
	We have no women.
	You're a sorry lot, then.
	We are a sorry lot, sir.
	Well, I can't get you women.
	I assumed as much, sir.
	What are you going to do without women, then?
	We will suffer, sir. And then we'll die out one by one.
	Can any of you sing?
	Yes, sir, we have many fine singers among us.
	Order them to begin singing immediately.
	Either women will find you this way or you will die
	comforted. Meanwhile busy yourselves
	with the meaningful tasks you have set for yourselves.
	Sir, we will not rest until the babes arrive.



46. THE WRONG WAY HOME

	All night a door floated down the river. It tried to remember little incidents of pleasure from its former life, like the time the lovers leaned against it kissing for hours and whispering those famous words. Later, there were harsh words and a shoe was thrown and the door was slammed. Comings and goings by the thousands, the early mornings and late nights, years, years. O they’ve got big plans, they’ll make a bundle. The door was an island that swayed in its sleep. The moon turned the doorknob just slightly, burned its fingers and ran, and still the door said nothing and slept. At least that’s what they like to say, the little fishes and so on. Far away, a bell rang, and then a shot was fired.
