*** Edward Taylor (1642 - 1729)


1. GOD’S DETERMINATIONS TOUCHING HIS ELECT

	Infinity, when all things it beheld
	In Nothing, and of Nothing all did build,
	Upon what base was fixed the lath wherein
	He turned this globe and rigalled it so trim?
	Who blew the bellows of His furnace vast?
	Or held the mold wherein the world was cast?
	Who laid its cornerstone? Or whose command?
	Where stand the pillars upon which it stands?
	Who laced and filleted the earth so fine,
	With rivers like green ribbons smaragdine?
	Who made the seas its selvedge and it locks
	Like a quilt ball within a silver box?
	Who spread its canopy? Or curtains spun?
	Who in this bowling alley bowled the sun?
	Who made it always when it rises set,
	To go at once both down, and up to get?
	Who the curtain rods made for this tapestry?
	Who hung the twinkling lanterns in the sky?
	Who? Who did this? Or who is He? Why, know
	It’s only Might Almighty this did do.
	His hand hath made this noble work which stands,
	His glorious handiwork not made by hands.
	Who spake all things from nothing; and with ease.
	Can speak all things to nothing, if He please.
	Whose little finger at His pleasure can
	Out mete ten thousand worlds with half a span:
	Whose Might Almighty can by half a looks
	Root up the rocks and rock the hills by the roots.
	Can take this mighty world up in His hand,
	And shake it like a squitchen or a wand.
	Whose single frown will make the heavens shake
	Like as an aspen-leaf the wind makes quake.
	Oh, what a might is this Whose single frown
	Doth shake the world as it would shake it down?
	Which All on Nothing fet, from Nothing, All:
	Hath All on Nothing set, lts Nothing fall.
	Gave All to nothing-man indeed, whereby
	Through nothing-man all might him glorify.
	In Nothing then embossed the brightest gem
	More precious than all preciousness in them.
	But nothing-man did throw down all by sin:
	And darkened that lightsome gem in him.
	That now his brightest diamond is grown
	Darker by far than any coal-pit stone.


2. I AM THE LIVING BREAD

	I kening through Astronomy Divine
	  The Worlds bright Battlement, wherein I spy
	A Golden Path my Pensill cannot line,
	  From that bright Throne unto my Threshold ly.
	  And while my puzzled thoughts about it pore
	  I finde the Bread of Life in’t at my doore.
	
	When that this Bird of Paradise put in
	  This Wicker Cage (my Corps) to tweedle praise
	Had peckt the Fruite forbad: and so did fling
	  Away its Food; and lost its golden dayes;
	  It fell into Celestiall Famine sore:
	  And never could attain a morsell more.
	
	Alas! alas! Poore Bird, what wilt thou doe?
	  The Creatures field no food for Souls e’re gave.
	And if thou knock at Angells dores they show
	  An Empty Barrell: they no soul bread have.
	  Alas! Poore Bird, the Worlds White Loafe is done
	  And cannot yield thee here the smallest Crumb.
	
	In this sad state, Gods Tender Bowells run
	  Out streams of Grace: And he to end all strife
	The Purest Wheate in Heaven, his deare-dear Son
	  Grinds, and kneads up into this Bread of Life.
	  Which Bread of Life from Heaven down came and stands
	  Disht on thy Table up by Angells Hands.
	
	Did God mould up this Bread in Heaven, and bake,
	  Which from his Table came, and to thine goeth?
	Doth he bespeake thee thus, This Soule Bread take.
	  Come Eate thy fill of this thy Gods White Loafe?
	  Its Food too fine for Angells, yet come, take
	  And Eate thy fill. Its Heavens Sugar Cake.
	
	What Grace is this knead in this Loafe? This thing
	  Souls are but petty things it to admire.
	Yee Angells, help: This fill would to the brim
	  Heav’ns whelm’d-down Chrystall meele Bowle, yea and higher.
	  This Bread of Life dropt in thy mouth, doth Cry.
	  Eate, Eate me, Soul, and thou shalt never dy.