*** Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809 - 1892)


1. AS THRO’ THE LAND AT EVE WE WENT

	As thro’ the land at eve we went,
	And pluck’d the ripen’d ears,
	We fell out, my wife and I,
	O we fell out I know not why,
	And kiss’d again with tears.
	And blessings on the falling out
	That all the more endears,
	When we fall out with those we love
	And kiss again with tears!
	For when we came where lies the child
	We lost in other years,
	There above the little grave,
	O there above the little grave,
	We kiss’d again with tears.



2. ASK ME NO MORE

	Ask me no more: the moon may draw the sea;
	The cloud may stoop from heaven and take the shape,
	With fold to fold, of mountain or of cape;
	But O too fond, when have I answer’d thee?
	Ask me no more.

	Ask me no more: what answer should I give?
	I love not hollow cheek or faded eye:
	Yet, O my friend, I will not have thee die!
	Ask me no more, lest I should bid thee live;
	Ask me no more.

	Ask me no more: thy fate and mine are seal’d:
	I strove against the stream and all in vain:
	Let the great river take me to the main:
	No more, dear love, for at a touch I yield;
	Ask me no more.



3. BREAK, BREAK, BREAK

	Break, break, break,
	On thy cold gray stones, O Sea!
	And I would that my tongue could utter
	The thoughts that arise in me.

	O, well for the fisherman’s boy,
	That he shouts with his sister at play!
	O, well for the sailor lad,
	That he sings in his boat on the bay!

	And the stately ships go on
	To their haven under the hill;
	But O for the touch of a vanish’d hand,
	And the sound of a voice that is still!

	Break, break, break
	At the foot of thy crags, O Sea!
	But the tender grace of a day that is dead
	Will never come back to me.



4. THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE

	Half a league, half a league,
	Half a league onward,
	All in the valley of Death
	Rode the six hundred.
	“Forward, the Light Brigade!
	Charge for the guns!” he said.
	Into the valley of Death
	Rode the six hundred.

	“Forward, the Light Brigade!”
	Was there a man dismayed?
	Not though the soldier knew
	Someone had blundered.
	Theirs not to make reply,
	Theirs not to reason why,
	Theirs but to do and die.
	Into the valley of Death
	Rode the six hundred.

	Cannon to right of them,
	Cannon to left of them,
	Cannon in front of them
	Volleyed and thundered;
	Stormed at with shot and shell,
	Boldly they rode and well,
	Into the jaws of Death,
	Into the mouth of hell
	Rode the six hundred.

	Flashed all their sabres bare,
	Flashed as they turned in air
	Sabring the gunners there,
	Charging an army, while
	All the world wondered.
	Plunged in the battery-smoke
	Right through the line they broke;
	Cossack and Russian
	Reeled from the sabre stroke
	Shattered and sundered.
	Then they rode back, but not
	Not the six hundred.

	Cannon to right of them,
	Cannon to left of them,
	Cannon behind them
	Volleyed and thundered;
	Stormed at with shot and shell,
	While horse and hero fell.
	They that had fought so well
	Came through the jaws of Death,
	Back from the mouth of hell,
	All that was left of them,
	Left of six hundred.

	When can their glory fade?
	O the wild charge they made!
	All the world wondered.
	Honour the charge they made!
	Honour the Light Brigade,
	Noble six hundred!



5. CLARIBEL

	Where Claribel low-lieth
	The breezes pause and die,
	Letting the rose-leaves fall:
	But the solemn oak-tree sigheth,
	Thick-leaved, ambrosial,
	With an ancient melody
	Of an inward agony,
	Where Claribel low-lieth.

	At eve the beetle boometh
	Athwart the thicket lone:
	At noon the wild bee hummeth
	About the moss’d headstone:
	At midnight the moon cometh,
	And looketh down alone.
	Her song the lintwhite swelleth,
	The clear-voiced mavis dwelleth,
	The callow throstle lispeth,
	The slumbrous wave outwelleth,
	The babbling runnel crispeth,
	The hollow grot replieth
	Where Claribel low-lieth.



6. COME DOWN, O MAID

	Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height:
	What pleasure lives in height (the shepherd sang)
	In height and cold, the splendour of the hills?
	But cease to move so near the Heavens, and cease
	To glide a sunbeam by the blasted Pine,
	To sit a star upon the sparkling spire;
	And come, for Love is of the valley, come,
	For Love is of the valley, come thou down
	And find him; by the happy threshold, he,
	Or hand in hand with Plenty in the maize,
	Or red with spirted purple of the vats,
	Or foxlike in the vine; nor cares to walk
	With Death and Morning on the silver horns,
	Nor wilt thou snare him in the white ravine,
	Nor find him dropt upon the firths of ice,
	That huddling slant in furrow-cloven falls
	To roll the torrent out of dusky doors:
	But follow; let the torrent dance thee down
	To find him in the valley; let the wild
	Lean-headed Eagles yelp alone, and leave
	The monstrous ledges there to slope, and spill
	Their thousand wreaths of dangling water-smoke,
	That like a broken purpose waste in air:
	So waste not thou; but come; for all the vales
	Await thee; azure pillars of the hearth
	Arise to thee; the children call, and I
	Thy shepherd pipe, and sweet is every sound,
	Sweeter thy voice, but every sound is sweet;
	Myriads of rivulets hurrying thro’ the lawn,
	The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
	And murmuring of innumerable bees.



7. CROSSING THE BAR

	Sunset and evening star,
	And one clear call for me!
	And may there be no moaning of the bar,
	When I put out to sea,

	But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
	Too full for sound and foam,
	When that which drew from out the boundless deep
	Turns again home.

	Twilight and evening bell,
	And after that the dark!
	And may there be no sadness of farewell,
	When I embark;

	For tho’ from out our bourne of Time and Place
	The flood may bear me far,
	I hope to see my Pilot face to face
	When I have crost the bar.



8. THE EAGLE

	He clasps the crag with crooked hands;
	Close to the sun in lonely lands,
	Ring’d with the azure world, he stands.

	The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls;
	He watches from his mountain walls,
	And like a thunderbolt he falls.



9. HOME THEY BROUGHT HER WARRIOR DEAD

	Home they brought her warrior dead:
	She nor swoon’d nor utter’d cry:
	All her maidens, watching, said,
	“She must weep or she will die.”

	Then they praised him, soft and low,
	Call’d him worthy to be loved,
	Truest friend and noblest foe;
	Yet she neither spoke nor moved.

	Stole a maiden from her place,
	Lightly to the warrior stepped,
	Took the face-cloth from the face;
	Yet she neither moved nor wept.

	Rose a nurse of ninety years,
	Set his child upon her knee--
	Like summer tempest came her tears--
	“Sweet my child, I live for thee.”



10. I HAVE LED HER HOME

	I have led her home, my love, my only friend,
	There is none like her, none.
	And never yet so warmly ran my blood
	And sweetly, on and on
	Calming itself to the long-wished-for end,
	Full to the banks, close on the promised good.

	None like her, none.
	Just now the dry-tongued laurels’ pattering talk
	Seem’d her light foot along the garden walk,
	And shook my heart to think she comes once more;
	But even then I heard her close the door,
	The gates of Heaven are closed, and she is gone.

	There is none like her, none.
	Nor will be when our summers have deceased.
	O, art thou sighing for Lebanon
	In the long breeze that streams to thy delicious East,
	Sighing for Lebanon,
	Dark cedar, tho’ thy limbs have here increased,
	Upon a pastoral slope as fair,

	And looking to the South, and fed
	With honeyed rain and delicate air,
	And haunted by the starry head
	Of her whose gentle will has changed my fate,
	And made my life a perfumed altar-frame;
	And over whom thy darkness must have spread
	With such delight as theirs of old, thy great
	Forefathers of the thornless garden, there
	Shadowing the snow-limbed Eve from whom she came.

	Here will I lie, while these long branches sway,
	And you fair stars that crown a happy day
	Go in and out as if at merry play,
	Who am no more so all forlorn,
	As when it seemed far better to be born
	To labour and the mattock-hardened hand
	Than nursed at ease and brought to understand
	A sad astrology, the boundless plan
	That makes you tyrants in your iron skies,
	Innumerable, pitiless, passionless eyes,
	Cold fires, yet with power to burn and brand
	His nothingness into man.

	But now shine on, and what care I,
	Who in this stormy gulf have found a pearl
	The countercharm of space and hollow sky,
	And do accept my madness, and would die
	To save from some slight shame one simple girl.

	Would die; for sullen-seeming Death may give
	More life to Love than is or ever was
	In our low world, where yet ’tis sweet to live.
	Let no one ask me how it came to pass;
	It seems that I am happy, that to me
	A livelier emerald twinkles in the grass,
	A purer sapphire melts into the sea.

	Not die; but live a life of truest breath,
	And teach true life to fight with mortal wrongs.
	Oh, why should Love, like men in drinking-songs,
	Spice his fair banquet with the dust of death?

	Make answer, Maud my bliss,
	Maud made my Maud by that long loving kiss,
	Life of my life, wilt thou not answer this?
	“The dusky strand of Death inwoven here
	With dear Love’s tie, makes love himself more dear.”
	Is that enchanted moan only the swell
	Of the long waves that roll in yonder bay?
	And hark the clock within, the silver knell
	Of twelve sweet hours that past in bridal white,
	And die to live, long as my pulses play;
	But now by this my love has closed her sight
	And given false death her hand, and stol’n away
	To dreamful wastes where footless fancies dwell

	Among the fragments of the golden day.
	May nothing there her maiden grace affright!
	Dear heart, I feel with thee the drowsy spell.
	My bride to be, my evermore delight,
	My own heart’s heart, my ownest own, farewell;
	It is but for a little space I go:
	And ye meanwhile far over moor and fell
	Beat to the noiseless music of the night!
	Has our whole earth gone nearer to the glow
	Of your soft splendour that you look so bright?
	I have climbed nearer out of lonely Hell.
	Beat, happy stars, timing with things below,
	Beat with my heart more blest than heart can tell.
	Blest, but for some dark undercurrent woe
	That seems to draw--but it shall not be so:
	Let all be well, be well.



11. ISABEL

	1

	Eyes not down-dropt nor over-bright, but fed
	With the clear-pointed flame of chastity,
	Clear, without heat, undying, tended by
	Pure vestal thoughts in the translucent fane
	Of her still spirit; locks not wide-dispread,
	Madonna-wise on either side her head;
	Sweet lips whereon perpetually did reign
	The summer calm of golden charity,
	Were fixed shadows of thy fixed mood,
	Revered Isabel, the crown and head,
	The stately flower of female fortitude,
	Of perfect wifehood and pure lowlihead.

	2

	The intuitive decision of a bright
	And thorough-edged intellect to part
	Error from crime; a prudence to withhold;
	The laws of marriage character’d in gold
	Upon the blanched tablets of her heart;
	A love still burning upward, giving light
	To read those laws; an accent very low
	In blandishment, but a most silver flow
	Of subtle-paced counsel in distress,
	Right to the heart and brain, tho’ undescried,
	Winning its way with extreme gentleness
	Thro’ all the outworks of suspicious pride;
	A courage to endure and to obey;
	A hate of gossip parlance, and of sway,
	Crown’d Isabel, thro’ all her placid life,
	The queen of marriage, a most perfect wife.


	3

	The mellow’d reflex of a winter moon;
	A clear stream flowing with a muddy one,
	Till in its onward current it absorbs
	With swifter movement and in purer light
	The vexed eddies of its wayward brother:
	A leaning and upbearing parasite,
	Clothing the stem, which else had fallen quite,
	With cluster’d flower-bells and ambrosial orbs
	Of rich fruit-bunches leaning on each other--
	Shadow forth thee:--the world hath not another
	(Though all her fairest forms are types of thee,
	And thou of God in thy great charity)
	Of such a finish’d chasten’d purity,
	And through thine eyes, e’en in thy soul, I see
	A lamp of vestal fire burning eternally.



12. LATE, LATE, SO LATE

	Late, late, so late! and dark the night and chill!
	Late, late, so late! but we can enter still.
	Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.

	No light had we: for that we do repent;
	And learning this, the bridegroom will relent.
	Too late, too late! ye cannot enter now.

	No light: so late! and dark and chill the night!
	O, let us in, that we may find the light!
	Too late, too late: ye cannot enter now.

	Have we not heard the bridegroom is so sweet?
	O, let us in, tho’ late, to kiss his feet!
	No, no, too late! ye cannot enter now.”



13. LOCKSLEY HALL

	Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet ’t is early morn:
	Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the bugle-horn.

	’T is the place, and all around it, as of old, the curlews call,
	Dreary gleams about the moorland flying over Locksley Hall;

	Locksley Hall, that in the distance overlooks the sandy tracts,
	And the hollow ocean-ridges roaring into cataracts.

	Many a night from yonder ivied casement, ere I went to rest,
	Did I look on great Orion sloping slowly to the West.

	Many a night I saw the Pleiads, rising thro’ the mellow shade,
	Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid.

	Here about the beach I wander’d, nourishing a youth sublime
	With the fairy tales of science, and the long result of Time;

	When the centuries behind me like a fruitful land reposed;
	When I clung to all the present for the promise that it closed:

	When I dipt into the future far as human eye could see;
	Saw the Vision of the world and all the wonder that would be.--

	In the Spring a fuller crimson comes upon the robin’s breast;
	In the Spring the wanton lapwing gets himself another crest;

	In the Spring a livelier iris changes on the burnish’d dove;
	In the Spring a young man’s fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love.

	Then her cheek was pale and thinner than should be for one so young,
	And her eyes on all my motions with a mute observance hung.

	And I said, “My cousin Amy, speak, and speak the truth to me,
	Trust me, cousin, all the current of my being sets to thee.”

	On her pallid cheek and forehead came a colour and a light,
	As I have seen the rosy red flushing in the northern night.

	And she turn’d--her bosom shaken with a sudden storm of sighs--
	All the spirit deeply dawning in the dark of hazel eyes--

	Saying, “I have hid my feelings, fearing they should do me wrong”;
	Saying, “Dost thou love me, cousin?” weeping, “I have loved thee long.”

	Love took up the glass of Time, and turn’d it in his glowing hands;
	Every moment, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden sands.

	Love took up the harp of Life, and smote on all the chords with might;
	Smote the chord of Self, that, trembling, pass’d in music out of sight.

	Many a morning on the moorland did we hear the copses ring,
	And her whisper throng’d my pulses with the fulness of the Spring.

	Many an evening by the waters did we watch the stately ships,
	And our spirits rush’d together at the touching of the lips.

	O my cousin, shallow-hearted! O my Amy, mine no more!
	O the dreary, dreary moorland! O the barren, barren shore!

	Falser than all fancy fathoms, falser than all songs have sung,
	Puppet to a father’s threat, and servile to a shrewish tongue!

	Is it well to wish thee happy?--having known me--to decline
	On a range of lower feelings and a narrower heart than mine!

	Yet it shall be; thou shalt lower to his level day by day,
	What is fine within thee growing coarse to sympathize with clay.

	As the husband is, the wife is: thou art mated with a clown,
	And the grossness of his nature will have weight to drag thee down.

	He will hold thee, when his passion shall have spent its novel force,
	Something better than his dog, a little dearer than his horse.

	What is this? his eyes are heavy; think not they are glazed with wine.
	Go to him, it is thy duty, kiss him, take his hand in thine.

	It may be my lord is weary, that his brain is overwrought:
	Soothe him with thy finer fancies, touch him with thy lighter thought.

	He will answer to the purpose, easy things to understand--
	Better thou wert dead before me, tho’ I slew thee with my hand!

	Better thou and I were lying, hidden from the heart’s disgrace,
	Roll’d in one another’s arms, and silent in a last embrace.

	Cursed be the social wants that sin against the strength of youth!
	Cursed be the social lies that warp us from the living truth!

	Cursed be the sickly forms that err from honest Nature’s rule!
	Cursed be the gold that gilds the straiten’d forehead of the fool!

	Well--’t is well that I should bluster!--Hadst thou less unworthy proved--
	Would to God--for I had loved thee more than ever wife was loved.

	Am I mad, that I should cherish that which bears but bitter fruit?
	I will pluck it from my bosom, tho’ my heart be at the root.

	Never, tho’ my mortal summers to such length of years should come
	As the many-winter’d crow that leads the clanging rookery home.

	Where is comfort? in division of the records of the mind?
	Can I part her from herself, and love her, as I knew her, kind?

	I remember one that perish’d; sweetly did she speak and move;
	Such a one do I remember, whom to look at was to love.

	Can I think of her as dead, and love her for the love she bore?
	No--she never loved me truly; love is love for evermore.

	Comfort? comfort scorn’d of devils! this is truth the poet sings,
	That a sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering happier things.

	Drug thy memories, lest thou learn it, lest thy heart be put to proof,
	In the dead unhappy night, and when the rain is on the roof.

	Like a dog, he hunts in dreams, and thou art staring at the wall,
	Where the dying night-lamp flickers, and the shadows rise and fall.

	Then a hand shall pass before thee, pointing to his drunken sleep,
	To thy widow’d marriage-pillows, to the tears that thou wilt weep.

	Thou shalt hear the “Never, never,” whisper’d by the phantom years,
	And a song from out the distance in the ringing of thine ears;

	And an eye shall vex thee, looking ancient kindness on thy pain.
	Turn thee, turn thee on thy pillow; get thee to thy rest again.

	Nay, but Nature brings thee solace; for a tender voice will cry.
	’T is a purer life than thine, a lip to drain thy trouble dry.

	Baby lips will laugh me down; my latest rival brings thee rest.
	Baby fingers, waxen touches, press me from the mother’s breast.

	O, the child too clothes the father with a dearness not his due.
	Half is thine and half is his: it will be worthy of the two.

	O, I see thee old and formal, fitted to thy petty part,
	With a little hoard of maxims preaching down a daughter’s heart.

	“They were dangerous guides the feelings--she herself was not exempt--
	Truly, she herself had suffer’d”--Perish in thy self-contempt!

	Overlive it--lower yet--be happy! wherefore should I care?
	I myself must mix with action, lest I wither by despair.

	What is that which I should turn to, lighting upon days like these?
	Every door is barr’d with gold, and opens but to golden keys.

	Every gate is throng’d with suitors, all the markets overflow.
	I have but an angry fancy; what is that which I should do?

	I had been content to perish, falling on the foeman’s ground,
	When the ranks are roll’d in vapour, and the winds are laid with sound.

	But the jingling of the guinea helps the hurt that Honour feels,
	And the nations do but murmur, snarling at each other’s heels.

	Can I but relive in sadness? I will turn that earlier page.
	Hide me from my deep emotion, O thou wondrous Mother-Age!

	Make me feel the wild pulsation that I felt before the strife,
	When I heard my days before me, and the tumult of my life;

	Yearning for the large excitement that the coming years would yield,
	Eager-hearted as a boy when first he leaves his father’s field,

	And at night along the dusky highway near and nearer drawn,
	Sees in heaven the light of London flaring like a dreary dawn;

	And his spirit leaps within him to be gone before him then,
	Underneath the light he looks at, in among the throngs of men:

	Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new:
	That which they have done but earnest of the things that they shall do:

	For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see,
	Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be;

	Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails,
	Pilots of the purple twilight dropping down with costly bales;

	Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rain’d a ghastly dew
	From the nations’ airy navies grappling in the central blue;

	Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rushing warm,
	With the standards of the peoples plunging thro’ the thunder-storm;

	Till the war-drum throbb’d no longer, and the battle-flags were furl’d
	In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world.

	There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe,
	And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law.

	So I triumph’d ere my passion sweeping thro’ me left me dry,
	Left me with the palsied heart, and left me with the jaundiced eye;

	Eye, to which all order festers, all things here are out of joint:
	Science moves, but slowly, slowly, creeping on from point to point:

	Slowly comes a hungry people, as a lion, creeping nigher,
	Glares at one that nods and winks behind a slowly-dying fire.

	Yet I doubt not thro’ the ages one increasing purpose runs,
	And the thoughts of men are widen’d with the process of the suns.

	What is that to him that reaps not harvest of his youthful joys,
	Tho’ the deep heart of existence beat for ever like a boy’s?

	Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers, and I linger on the shore,
	And the individual withers, and the world is more and more.

	Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers, and he bears a laden breast,
	Full of sad experience, moving toward the stillness of his rest.

	Hark, my merry comrades call me, sounding on the bugle-horn,
	They to whom my foolish passion were a target for their scorn:

	Shall it not be scorn to me to harp on such a moulder’d string?
	I am shamed thro’ all my nature to have loved so slight a thing.

	Weakness to be wroth with weakness! woman’s pleasure, woman’s pain--
	Nature made them blinder motions bounded in a shallower brain:

	Woman is the lesser man, and all thy passions, match’d with mine,
	Are as moonlight unto sunlight, and as water unto wine--

	Here at least, where nature sickens, nothing. Ah, for some retreat
	Deep in yonder shining Orient, where my life began to beat;

	Where in wild Mahratta-battle fell my father evil-starr’d,--
	I was left a trampled orphan, and a selfish uncle’s ward.

	Or to burst all links of habit--there to wander far away,
	On from island unto island at the gateways of the day.

	Larger constellations burning, mellow moons and happy skies,
	Breadths of tropic shade and palms in cluster, knots of Paradise.

	Never comes the trader, never floats an European flag,
	Slides the bird o’er lustrous woodland, swings the trailer from the crag;

	Droops the heavy-blossom’d bower, hangs the heavy-fruited tree--
	Summer isles of Eden lying in dark-purple spheres of sea.

	There methinks would be enjoyment more than in this march of mind,
	In the steamship, in the railway, in the thoughts that shake mankind.

	There the passions cramp’d no longer shall have scope and breathing space;
	I will take some savage woman, she shall rear my dusky race.

	Iron-jointed, supple-sinew’d, they shall dive, and they shall run,
	Catch the wild goat by the hair, and hurl their lances in the sun;

	Whistle back the parrot’s call, and leap the rainbows of the brooks,
	Not with blinded eyesight poring over miserable books--

	Fool, again the dream, the fancy! but I know my words are wild,
	But I count the gray barbarian lower than the Christian child.

	I, to herd with narrow foreheads, vacant of our glorious gains,
	Like a beast with lower pleasures, like a beast with lower pains!

	Mated with a squalid savage--what to me were sun or clime?
	I the heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time--

	I that rather held it better men should perish one by one,
	Than that earth should stand at gaze like Joshua’s moon in Ajalon!

	Not in vain the distance beacons. Forward, forward let us range,
	Let the great world spin for ever down the ringing grooves of change.

	Thro’ the shadow of the globe we sweep into the younger day;
	Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay.

	Mother-Age (for mine I knew not) help me as when life begun:
	Rift the hills, and roll the waters, flash the lightnings, weigh the Sun.

	O, I see the crescent promise of my spirit hath not set.
	Ancient founts of inspiration well thro’ all my fancy yet.

	Howsoever these things be, a long farewell to Locksley Hall!
	Now for me the woods may wither, now for me the roof-tree fall.

	Comes a vapour from the margin, blackening over heath and holt,
	Cramming all the blast before it, in its breast a thunderbolt.

	Let it fall on Locksley Hall, with rain or hail, or fire or snow;
	For the mighty wind arises, roaring seaward, and I go.



14. THE LOTOS-EATERS

	“Courage!” he said, and pointed toward the land,
	“This mounting wave will roll us shoreward soon.”
	In the afternoon they came unto a land
	In which it seemed always afternoon.
	All round the coast the languid air did swoon,
	Breathing like one that hath a weary dream.
	Full-faced above the valley stood the moon;
	And like a downward smoke, the slender stream
	Along the cliff to fall and pause and fall did seem.

	A land of streams! some, like a downward smoke,
	Slow-dropping veils of thinnest lawn, did go;
	And some thro’ wavering lights and shadows broke,
	Rolling a slumbrous sheet of foam below.
	They saw the gleaming river seaward flow
	From the inner land: far off, three mountain-tops,
	Three silent pinnacles of aged snow,
	Stood sunset-flush’d: and, dew’d with showery drops,
	Up-clomb the shadowy pine above the woven copse.

	The charmed sunset linger’d low adown
	In the red West: thro’ mountain clefts the dale
	Was seen far inland, and the yellow down
	Border’d with palm, and many a winding vale
	And meadow, set with slender galingale;
	A land where all things always seem’d the same!
	And round about the keel with faces pale,
	Dark faces pale against that rosy flame,
	The mild-eyed melancholy Lotos-eaters came.

	Branches they bore of that enchanted stem,
	Laden with flower and fruit, whereof they gave
	To each, but whoso did receive of them,
	And taste, to him the gushing of the wave
	Far far away did seem to mourn and rave
	On alien shores; and if his fellow spake,
	His voice was thin, as voices from the grave;
	And deep-asleep he seem’d, yet all awake,
	And music in his ears his beating heart did make.

	They sat them down upon the yellow sand,
	Between the sun and moon upon the shore;
	And sweet it was to dream of Fatherland,
	Of child, and wife, and slave; but evermore
	Most weary seem’d the sea, weary the oar,
	Weary the wandering fields of barren foam.
	Then some one said, “We will return no more”;
	And all at once they sang, “Our island home
	Is far beyond the wave; we will no longer roam.”


	_Choric Song_

	I

	There is sweet music here that softer falls
	Than petals from blown roses on the grass,
	Or night-dews on still waters between walls
	Of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass;
	Music that gentlier on the spirit lies,
	Than tir’d eyelids upon tir’d eyes;
	Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissful skies.
	Here are cool mosses deep,
	And thro’ the moss the ivies creep,
	And in the stream the long-leaved flowers weep,
	And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep.


	II

	Why are we weigh’d upon with heaviness,
	And utterly consumed with sharp distress,
	While all things else have rest from weariness?
	All things have rest: why should we toil alone,
	We only toil, who are the first of things,
	And make perpetual moan,
	Still from one sorrow to another thrown:
	Nor ever fold our wings,
	And cease from wanderings,
	Nor steep our brows in slumber’s holy balm;
	Nor harken what the inner spirit sings,
	“There is no joy but calm!”
	Why should we only toil, the roof and crown of things?


	III

	Lo! in the middle of the wood,
	The folded leaf is woo’d from out the bud
	With winds upon the branch, and there
	Grows green and broad, and takes no care,
	Sun-steep’d at noon, and in the moon
	Nightly dew-fed; and turning yellow
	Falls, and floats adown the air.
	Lo! sweeten’d with the summer light,
	The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
	Drops in a silent autumn night.
	All its allotted length of days
	The flower ripens in its place,
	Ripens and fades, and falls, and hath no toil,
	Fast-rooted in the fruitful soil.


	IV

	Hateful is the dark-blue sky,
	Vaulted o’er the dark-blue sea.
	Death is the end of life; ah, why
	Should life all labour be?
	Let us alone. Time driveth onward fast,
	And in a little while our lips are dumb.
	Let us alone. What is it that will last?
	All things are taken from us, and become
	Portions and parcels of the dreadful past.
	Let us alone. What pleasure can we have
	To war with evil? Is there any peace
	In ever climbing up the climbing wave?
	All things have rest, and ripen toward the grave
	In silence; ripen, fall and cease:
	Give us long rest or death, dark death, or dreamful ease.


	V

	How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream,
	With half-shut eyes ever to seem
	Falling asleep in a half-dream!
	To dream and dream, like yonder amber light,
	Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height;
	To hear each other’s whisper’d speech;
	Eating the Lotos day by day,
	To watch the crisping ripples on the beach,
	And tender curving lines of creamy spray;
	To lend our hearts and spirits wholly
	To the influence of mild-minded melancholy;
	To muse and brood and live again in memory,
	With those old faces of our infancy
	Heap’d over with a mound of grass,
	Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass!


	VI

	Dear is the memory of our wedded lives,
	And dear the last embraces of our wives
	And their warm tears: but all hath suffer’d change:
	For surely now our household hearths are cold,
	Our sons inherit us: our looks are strange:
	And we should come like ghosts to trouble joy.
	Or else the island princes over-bold
	Have eat our substance, and the minstrel sings
	Before them of the ten years’ war in Troy,
	And our great deeds, as half-forgotten things.
	Is there confusion in the little isle?
	Let what is broken so remain.
	The Gods are hard to reconcile:
	’Tis hard to settle order once again.
	There is confusion worse than death,
	Trouble on trouble, pain on pain,
	Long labour unto aged breath,
	Sore task to hearts worn out by many wars
	And eyes grown dim with gazing on the pilot-stars.


	VII

	But, propt on beds of amaranth and moly,
	How sweet (while warm airs lull us, blowing lowly)
	With half-dropt eyelid still,
	Beneath a heaven dark and holy,
	To watch the long bright river drawing slowly
	His waters from the purple hill--
	To hear the dewy echoes calling
	From cave to cave thro’ the thick-twined vine--
	To watch the emerald-colour’d water falling
	Thro’ many a wov’n acanthus-wreath divine!
	Only to hear and see the far-off sparkling brine,
	Only to hear were sweet, stretch’d out beneath the pine.


	VIII

	The Lotos blooms below the barren peak:
	The Lotos blows by every winding creek:
	All day the wind breathes low with mellower tone:
	Thro’ every hollow cave and alley lone
	Round and round the spicy downs the yellow Lotos-dust is blown.
	We have had enough of action, and of motion we,
	Roll’d to starboard, roll’d to larboard, when the surge was seething free,
	Where the wallowing monster spouted his foam-fountains in the sea.
	Let us swear an oath, and keep it with an equal mind,
	In the hollow Lotos-land to live and lie reclined
	On the hills like Gods together, careless of mankind.
	For they lie beside their nectar, and the bolts are hurl’d
	Far below them in the valleys, and the clouds are lightly curl’d
	Round their golden houses, girdled with the gleaming world:
	Where they smile in secret, looking over wasted lands,
	Blight and famine, plague and earthquake, roaring deeps and fiery sands,
	Clanging fights, and flaming towns, and sinking ships, and praying hands.
	But they smile, they find a music centred in a doleful song
	Steaming up, a lamentation and an ancient tale of wrong,
	Like a tale of little meaning tho’ the words are strong;
	Chanted from an ill-used race of men that cleave the soil,
	Sow the seed, and reap the harvest with enduring toil,
	Storing yearly little dues of wheat, and wine and oil;
	Till they perish and they suffer--some, ’tis whisper’d--down in hell
	Suffer endless anguish, others in Elysian valleys dwell,
	Resting weary limbs at last on beds of asphodel.
	Surely, surely, slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore
	Than labour in the deep mid-ocean, wind and wave and oar;
	O, rest ye, brother mariners, we will not wander more.



15. MARIANA

	With blackest moss the flower-plots
	Were thickly crusted, one and all:
	The rusted nails fell from the knots
	That held the pear to the gable-wall.
	The broken sheds look’d sad and strange:
	Unlifted was the clinking latch;
	Weeded and worn the ancient thatch
	Upon the lonely moated grange.
	She only said, “My life is dreary,
	He cometh not,” she said;
	She said, “I am aweary, aweary,
	I would that I were dead!”

	Her tears fell with the dews at even;
	Her tears fell ere the dews were dried;
	She could not look on the sweet heaven,
	Either at morn or eventide.
	After the flitting of the bats,
	When thickest dark did trance the sky,
	She drew her casement-curtain by,
	And glanced athwart the glooming flats.
	She only said, “The night is dreary,
	He cometh not,” she said;
	She said, “I am aweary, aweary,
	I would that I were dead!”

	Upon the middle of the night,
	Waking she heard the night-fowl crow:
	The cock sung out an hour ere light:
	From the dark fen the oxen’s low
	Came to her: without hope of change,
	In sleep she seem’d to walk forlorn,
	Till cold winds woke the gray-eyed morn
	About the lonely moated grange.
	She only said, “The day is dreary,
	He cometh not,” she said;
	She said, “I am aweary, aweary,
	I would that I were dead!”

	About a stone-cast from the wall
	A sluice with blacken’d waters slept,
	And o’er it many, round and small,
	The cluster’d marish-mosses crept.
	Hard by a poplar shook alway,
	All silver-green with gnarled bark:
	For leagues no other tree did mark
	The level waste, the rounding gray.
	She only said, “My life is dreary,
	He cometh not,” she said;
	She said “I am aweary, aweary
	I would that I were dead!”

	And ever when the moon was low,
	And the shrill winds were up and away,
	In the white curtain, to and fro,
	She saw the gusty shadow sway.
	But when the moon was very low
	And wild winds bound within their cell,
	The shadow of the poplar fell
	Upon her bed, across her brow.
	She only said, “The night is dreary,
	He cometh not,” she said;
	She said “I am aweary, aweary,
	I would that I were dead!”

	All day within the dreamy house,
	The doors upon their hinges creak’d;
	The blue fly sung in the pane; the mouse
	Behind the mouldering wainscot shriek’d,
	Or from the crevice peer’d about.
	Old faces glimmer’d thro’ the doors
	Old footsteps trod the upper floors,
	Old voices called her from without.
	She only said, “My life is dreary,
	He cometh not,” she said;
	She said, “I am aweary, aweary,
	I would that I were dead!”

	The sparrow’s chirrup on the roof,
	The slow clock ticking, and the sound
	Which to the wooing wind aloof
	The poplar made, did all confound
	Her sense; but most she loathed the hour
	When the thick-moted sunbeam lay
	Athwart the chambers, and the day
	Was sloping toward his western bower.
	Then said she, “I am very dreary,
	He will not come,” she said;
	She wept, “I am aweary, aweary,
	Oh God, that I were dead!”



16. MARIANA IN THE SOUTH

	With one black shadow at its feet,
	The house thro’ all the level shines,
	Close-latticed to the brooding heat,
	And silent in its dusty vines:
	A faint-blue ridge upon the right,
	An empty river-bed before,
	And shallows on a distant shore,
	In glaring sand and inlets bright.
	But “Aye Mary,” made she moan,
	And “Aye Mary,” night and morn,
	And “Ah,” she sang, “to be all alone,
	To live forgotten, and love forlorn.”

	She, as her carol sadder grew,
	From brow and bosom slowly down
	Thro’ rosy taper fingers drew
	Her streaming curls of deepest brown
	To left and right, and made appear,
	Still-lighted in a secret shrine,
	Her melancholy eyes divine,
	The home of woe without a tear.
	And “Aye Mary,” was her moan,
	“Madonna, sad is night and morn;”
	And “Ah,” she sang, “to be all alone,
	To live forgotten, and love forlorn.”

	Till all the crimson changed, and past
	Into deep orange o’er the sea,
	Low on her knees herself she cast,
	Before Our Lady murmur’d she:
	Complaining, “Mother, give me grace
	To help me of my weary load.”
	And on the liquid mirror glow’d
	The clear perfection of her face.
	“Is this the form,” she made her moan,
	“That won his praises night and morn?”
	And “Ah,” she said, “but I wake alone,
	I sleep forgotten, I wake forlorn.”

	Nor bird would sing, nor lamb would bleat,
	Nor any cloud would cross the vault,
	But day increased from heat to heat,
	On stony drought and steaming salt;
	Till now at noon she slept again,
	And seem’d knee-deep in mountain grass,
	And heard her native breezes pass,
	And runlets babbling down the glen.
	She breathed in sleep a lower moan,
	And murmuring, as at night and morn
	She thought, “My spirit is here alone,
	Walks forgotten, and is forlorn.”

	Dreaming, she knew it was a dream:
	She felt he was and was not there.
	She woke: the babble of the stream
	Fell, and, without, the steady glare
	Shrank one sick willow sere and small.
	The river-bed was dusty-white;
	And all the furnace of the light
	Struck up against the blinding wall.
	She whisper’d, with a stifled moan
	More inward than at night or morn,
	“Sweet Mother, let me not here alone
	Live forgotten and die forlorn.”

	And, rising, from her bosom drew
	Old letters, breathing of her worth,
	For “Love”, they said, “must needs be true,
	To what is loveliest upon earth.”
	An image seem’d to pass the door,
	To look at her with slight, and say,
	“But now thy beauty flows away,
	So be alone for evermore.”
	“O cruel heart,” she changed her tone,
	“And cruel love, whose end is scorn,
	Is this the end to be left alone,
	To live forgotten, and die forlorn?”

	But sometimes in the falling day
	An image seem’d to pass the door,
	To look into her eyes and say,
	“But thou shalt be alone no more.”
	And flaming downward over all
	From heat to heat the day decreased,
	And slowly rounded to the east
	The one black shadow from the wall.
	“The day to night,” she made her moan,
	“The day to night, the night to morn,
	And day and night I am left alone
	To live forgotten, and love forlorn.”

	At eve a dry cicala sung,
	There came a sound as of the sea;
	Backward the lattice-blind she flung,
	And lean’d upon the balcony.
	There all in spaces rosy-bright
	Large Hesper glitter’d on her tears,
	And deepening thro’ the silent spheres
	Heaven over Heaven rose the night.
	And weeping then she made her moan,
	“The night comes on that knows not morn,
	When I shall cease to be all alone,
	To live forgotten, and love forlorn.”



17. MARRIAGE MORNING

	Light, so low upon earth,
	You send a flash to the sun.
	Here is the golden close of love,
	All my wooing is done.
	Oh, all the woods and the meadows,
	Woods, where we hid from the wet,
	Stiles where we stayed to be kind,
	Meadows in which we met!
	Light, so low in the vale
	You flash and lighten afar,
	For this is the golden morning of love,
	And you are his morning star.
	Flash, I am coming, I come,
	By meadow and stile and wood,
	Oh, lighten into my eyes and my heart,
	Into my heart and my blood!
	Heart, are you great enough
	For a love that never tires?
	O heart, are you great enough for love?
	I have heard of thorns and briers.
	Over the thorns and briers,
	Over the meadows and stiles,
	Over the world to the end of it
	Flash of a million miles.



18. MERLIN AND VIVIEN

	In Love, if Love be Love, if Love be ours,
	Faith and unfaith can ne’er be equal powers:
	Unfaith in aught is want of faith in all.

	It is the little rift within the lute,
	That by and by will make the music mute,
	And ever widening slowly silence all.

	The little rift within the lover’s lute,
	Or little pitted speck in garner’d fruit,
	That rotting inward slowly moulders all.

	It is not worth the keeping: let it go:
	But shall it? answer, darling, answer, no.
	And trust me not at all or all in all.



19. THE MILLER’S DAUGHTER

	It is the miller’s daughter,
	And she is grown so dear, so dear,
	That I would be the jewel
	That trembles in her ear:
	For hid in ringlets day and night,
	I’d touch her neck so warm and white.

	And I would be the girdle
	About her dainty dainty waist,
	And her heart would beat against me,
	In sorrow and in rest:
	And I should know if it beat right,
	I’d clasp it round so close and tight.

	And I would be the necklace,
	And all day long to fall and rise
	Upon her balmy bosom,
	With her laughter or her sighs,
	And I would lie so light, so light,
	I scarce should be unclasp’d at night.



20. A MONODRAMA

	Come into the garden, Maud,
	For the black bat, night, has flown,
	Come into the garden, Maud,
	I am here at the gate alone;
	And the woodbine spices are wafted abroad,
	And the musk of the rose is blown.

	For a breeze of morning moves,
	And the planet of Love is on high,
	Beginning to faint in the light that she loves
	In a bed of daffodil sky,
	To faint in the light of the sun she loves,
	To faint in his light, and to die.

	All night have the roses heard
	The flute, violin, bassoon;
	All night has the casement jessamine stirr’d
	To the dancers dancing in tune;
	Till a silence fell with the waking bird,
	And a hush with the setting moon.

	I said to the lily, “There is but one
	With whom she has heart to be gay.
	When will the dancers leave her alone?
	She is weary of dance and play.”
	Now half to the setting moon are gone,
	And half to the rising day;
	Low on the sand and loud on the stone
	The last wheel echoes away.

	I said to the rose, “The brief night goes
	In babble and revel and wine.
	O young lord-lover, what sighs are those,
	For one that will never be thine?
	But mine, but mine,” so I sware to the rose,
	“For ever and ever, mine.”

	And the soul of the rose went into my blood,
	As the music clash’d in the hall;
	And long by the garden lake I stood,
	For I heard your rivulet fall
	From the lake to the meadow and on to the wood,
	Our wood, that is dearer than all;

	From the meadow your walks have left so sweet
	That whenever a March-wind sighs
	He sets the jewel-print of your feet
	In violets blue as your eyes,
	To the woody hollows in which we meet
	And the valleys of Paradise.

	The slender acacia would not shake
	One long milk-bloom on the tree;
	The white lake-blossom fell into the lake
	As the pimpernel dozed on the lea;
	But the rose was awake all night for your sake,
	Knowing your promise to me;
	The lilies and roses were all awake,
	They sigh’d for the dawn and thee.

	Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls,
	Come hither, the dances are done,
	In gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls,
	Queen lily and rose in one;
	Shine out, little head, sunning over with curls,
	To the flowers, and be their sun.

	There has fallen a splendid tear
	From the passion-flower at the gate.
	She is coming, my dove, my dear;
	She is coming, my life, my fate;
	The red rose cries, “She is near, she is near;”
	And the white rose weeps, “She is late;”
	The larkspur listens, “I hear, I hear;”
	And the lily whispers, “I wait.”

	She is coming, my own, my sweet;
	Were it ever so airy a tread,
	My heart would hear her and beat,
	Were it earth in an earthy bed;
	My dust would hear her and beat,
	Had I lain for a century dead,
	Would start and tremble under her feet,
	And blossom in purple and red.



21. NOW SLEEPS THE CRIMSON PETAL

	Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white;
	Nor waves the cypress in the palace walk;
	Nor winks the gold fin in the porphyry font.
	The firefly wakens; waken thou with me.

	Now droops the milk-white peacock like a ghost,
	And like a ghost she glimmers on to me.

	Now lies the Earth all Danaë to the stars,
	And all thy heart lies open unto me.

	Now slides the silent meteor on, and leaves
	A shining furrow, as thy thoughts in me.

	Now folds the lily all her sweetness up,
	And slips into the bosom of the lake.
	So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip
	Into my bosom and be lost in me.



22. O SWALLOW

	O Swallow, Swallow, flying, flying South,
	Fly to her, and fall upon her gilded eaves,
	And tell her, tell her, what I tell to thee.

	O tell her, Swallow, thou that knowest each,
	That bright and fierce and fickle is the South,
	And dark and true and tender is the North.

	O Swallow, Swallow, if I could follow, and light
	Upon her lattice, I would pipe and trill,
	And cheep and twitter twenty million loves.

	O were I thou that she might take me in,
	And lay me on her bosom, and her heart
	Would rock the snowy cradle till I died.

	Why lingereth she to clothe her heart with love,
	Delaying as the tender ash delays
	To clothe herself, when all the woods are green?

	O tell her, Swallow, that thy brood is flown:
	Say to her, I do but wanton in the South,
	But in the North long since my nest is made.

	O tell her, brief is life but love is long,
	And brief the sun of summer in the North,
	And brief the moon of beauty in the South.

	O Swallow, flying from the golden woods,
	Fly to her, and pipe and woo her, and make her mine,
	And tell her, tell her, that I follow thee.



23. O THAT ’TWERE POSSIBLE

	O that ’twere possible
	After long grief and pain
	To find the arms of my true love
	Round me once again!

	When I was wont to meet her
	In the silent woody places
	By the home that gave me birth,
	We stood tranced in long embraces
	Mixt with kisses sweeter sweeter
	Than anything on earth.

	A shadow flits before me,
	Not thou, but like to thee:
	Ah Christ, that it were possible
	For one short hour to see
	The souls we loved, that they might tell us
	What and where they be.

	It leads me forth at evening,
	It lightly winds and steals
	In a cold white robe before me,
	When all my spirit reels
	At the shouts, the leagues of lights,
	And the roaring of the wheels.

	Half the night I waste in sighs,
	Half in dreams I sorrow after
	The delight of early skies;
	In a wakeful doze I sorrow
	For the hand, the lips, the eyes,
	For the meeting of the morrow,
	The delight of happy laughter,
	The delight of low replies.

	’Tis a morning pure and sweet,
	And a dewy splendour falls
	On the little flower that clings
	To the turrets and the walls;
	’Tis a morning pure and sweet,
	And the light and shadow fleet;
	She is walking in the meadow,
	And the woodland echo rings;
	In a moment we shall meet;
	She is singing in the meadow,
	And the rivulet at her feet
	Ripples on in light and shadow
	To the ballad that she sings.

	So I hear her sing as of old,
	My bird with the shining head,
	My own dove with the tender eye?
	But there rings on a sudden a passionate cry,
	There is some one dying or dead,
	And a sullen thunder is roll’d;
	For a tumult shakes the city,
	And I wake, my dream is fled;
	In the shuddering dawn, behold,
	Without knowledge, without pity,
	By the curtains of my bed
	That abiding phantom cold.

	Get thee hence, nor come again,
	Mix not memory with doubt,
	Pass, thou deathlike type of pain,
	Pass and cease to move about!
	’Tis the blot upon the brain
	That will show itself without.

	Then I rise, the eave-drops fall,
	And the yellow vapours choke
	The great city sounding wide;
	The day comes, a dull red ball
	Wrapt in drifts of lurid smoke
	On the misty river-tide.

	Thro’ the hubbub of the market
	I steal, a wasted frame;
	It crosses here, it crosses there,
	Thro’ all that crowd confused and loud,
	The shadow still the same;
	And on my heavy eyelids
	My anguish hangs like shame.

	Alas for her that met me,
	That heard me softly call,
	Came glimmering thro’ the laurels
	At the quiet evenfall,
	In the garden by the turrets
	Of the old manorial hall.

	Would the happy spirit descend
	From the realms of light and song,
	In the chamber or the street,
	As she looks among the blest,
	Should I fear to greet my friend
	Or to say “Forgive the wrong,”
	Or to ask her, “Take me, sweet,
	To the regions of thy rest”?

	But the broad light glares and beats,
	And the shadow flits and fleets
	And will not let me be;
	And I loathe the squares and streets,
	And the faces that one meets,
	Hearts with no love for me:
	Always I long to creep
	Into some still cavern deep,
	There to weep, and weep, and weep
	My whole soul out to thee.



24. OENONE

	There lies a vale in Ida, lovelier
	Than all the valleys of Ionian hills.
	The swimming vapour slopes athwart the glen,
	Puts forth an arm, and creeps from pine to pine,
	And loiters, slowly drawn. On either hand
	The lawns and meadow-ledges midway down
	Hang rich in flowers, and far below them roars
	The long brook falling thro’ the clov’n ravine
	In cataract after cataract to the sea.
	Behind the valley topmost Gargarus
	Stands up and takes the morning: but in front
	The gorges, opening wide apart, reveal
	Troas and Ilion’s column’d citadel,
	The crown of Troas.

	Hither came at noon
	Mournful Oenone, wandering forlorn
	Of Paris, once her playmate on the hills.
	Her cheek had lost the rose, and round her neck
	Floated her hair or seem’d to float in rest.
	She, leaning on a fragment twined with vine,
	Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shade
	Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.

	“O mother Ida, many-fountain’d Ida,
	Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	For now the noonday quiet holds the hill:
	The grasshopper is silent in the grass:
	The lizard, with his shadow on the stone,
	Rests like a shadow, and the winds are dead.
	The purple flower droops: the golden bee
	Is lily-cradled: I alone awake.
	My eyes are full of tears, my heart of love,
	My heart is breaking, and my eyes are dim,
	And I am all aweary of my life.

	“O mother Ida, many-fountain’d Ida,
	Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	Hear me, O Earth, hear me, O Hills, O Caves
	That house the cold crown’d snake! O mountain brooks,
	I am the daughter of a River-God,
	Hear me, for I will speak, and build up all
	My sorrow with my song, as yonder walls
	Rose slowly to a music slowly breathed,
	A cloud that gather’d shape: for it may be
	That, while I speak of it, a little while
	My heart may wander from its deeper woe.

	“O mother Ida, many-fountain’d Ida,
	Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	I waited underneath the dawning hills,
	Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
	And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
	Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
	Leading a jet-black goat white-horn’d, white-hooved,
	Came up from reedy Simois all alone.

	“O mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	Far-off the torrent call’d me from the cleft:
	Far up the solitary morning smote
	The streaks of virgin snow. With down-dropt eyes
	I sat alone: white-breasted like a star
	Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard skin
	Droop’d from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
	Cluster’d about his temples like a God’s:
	And his cheek brighten’d as the foam-bow brightens
	When the wind blows the foam, and all my heart
	Went forth to embrace him coming ere he came.

	“Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
	Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,
	That smelt ambrosially, and while I look’d
	And listen’d, the full-flowing river of speech
	Came down upon my heart.

	My own Oenone,
	Beautiful-brow’d Oenone, my own soul,
	Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingrav’n
	“For the most fair,” would seem to award it thine,
	As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
	The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
	Of movement, and the charm of married brows.”

	“Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
	And added ‘This was cast upon the board,
	When all the full-faced presence of the Gods
	Ranged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
	Rose feud, with question unto whom ’twere due:
	But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve,
	Delivering that to me, by common voice
	Elected umpire, Herè comes to-day,
	Pallas and Aphroditè, claiming each
	This meed of fairest. Thou, within the cave
	Behind yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
	Mayst well behold them unbeheld, unheard
	Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of Gods.’

	“Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	It was the deep midnoon: one silvery cloud
	Had lost his way between the piney sides
	Of this long glen. Then to the bower they came,
	Naked they came to that smooth-swarded bower,
	And at their feet the crocus brake like fire,
	Violet, amaracus, and asphodel,
	Lotos and lilies: and a wind arose,
	And overhead the wandering ivy and vine,
	This way and that, in many a wild festoon
	Ran riot, garlanding the gnarled boughs
	With bunch and berry and flower thro’ and thro’.

	“O mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	On the tree-tops a crested peacock lit,
	And o’er him flow’d a golden cloud, and lean’d
	Upon him, slowly dropping fragrant dew.
	Then first I heard the voice of her, to whom
	Coming thro’ Heaven, like a light that grows
	Larger and clearer, with one mind the Gods
	Rise up for reverence. She to Paris made
	Proffer of royal power, ample rule
	Unquestion’d, overflowing revenue
	Wherewith to embellish state, ‘from many a vale
	And river-sunder’d champaign clothed with corn,
	Or labour’d mine undrainable of ore.
	Honour,’ she said, ‘and homage, tax and toll,
	From many an inland town and haven large,
	Mast-throng’d beneath her shadowing citadel
	In glassy bays among her tallest towers.’

	“O mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	Still she spake on and still she spake of power,
	‘Which in all action is the end of all;
	Power fitted to the season; wisdom-bred
	And throned of wisdom--from all neighbour crowns
	Alliance and allegiance, till thy hand
	Fail from the sceptre-staff. Such boon from me,
	From me, Heaven’s Queen, Paris, to thee king-born,
	A shepherd all thy life but yet king-born,
	Should come most welcome, seeing men, in power
	Only, are likest Gods, who have attain’d
	Rest in a happy place and quiet seats
	Above the thunder, with undying bliss
	In knowledge of their own supremacy.’

	“Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	She ceased, and Paris held the costly fruit
	Out at arm’s-length, so much the thought of power
	Flatter’d his spirit; but Pallas where she stood
	Somewhat apart, her clear and bared limbs
	O’erthwarted with the brazen-headed spear
	Upon her pearly shoulder leaning cold,
	The while, above, her full and earnest eye
	Over her snow-cold breast and angry cheek
	Kept watch, waiting decision, made reply.

	“Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control,
	These three alone lead life to sovereign power.
	Yet not for power (power of herself
	Would come uncall’d for) but to live by law,
	Acting the law we live by without fear;
	And, because right is right, to follow right
	Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.’

	“Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	Again she said: ‘I woo thee not with gifts.
	Sequel of guerdon could not alter me
	To fairer. Judge thou me by what I am,
	So shalt thou find me fairest.

	Yet, indeed,
	If gazing on divinity disrobed
	Thy mortal eyes are frail to judge of fair,
	Unbias’d by self-profit, oh! rest thee sure
	That I shall love thee well and cleave to thee,
	So that my vigour, wedded to thy blood,
	Shall strike within thy pulses, like a God’s,
	To push thee forward thro’ a life of shocks,
	Dangers, and deeds, until endurance grow
	Sinew’d with action, and the full-grown will,
	Circled thro’ all experiences, pure law,
	Commeasure perfect freedom.’

	Here she ceas’d
	And Paris ponder’d, and I cried, ‘O Paris,
	Give it to Pallas!’ but he heard me not,
	Or hearing would not hear me, woe is me!

	“O mother Ida, many-fountain’d Ida,
	Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	Idalian Aphroditè beautiful,
	Fresh as the foam, new-bathed in Paphian wells,
	With rosy slender fingers backward drew
	From her warm brows and bosom her deep hair
	Ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat
	And shoulder: from the violets her light foot
	Shone rosy-white, and o’er her rounded form
	Between the shadows of the vine-bunches
	Floated the glowing sunlights, as she moved.

	“Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes,
	The herald of her triumph, drawing nigh
	Half-whisper’d in his ear, ‘I promise thee
	The fairest and most loving wife in Greece.’
	She spoke and laugh’d: I shut my sight for fear:
	But when I look’d, Paris had raised his arm,
	And I beheld great Herè’s angry eyes,
	As she withdrew into the golden cloud,
	And I was left alone within the bower;
	And from that time to this I am alone,
	And I shall be alone until I die.

	“Yet, mother Ida, harken ere I die.
	Fairest--why fairest wife? am I not fair?
	My love hath told me so a thousand times.
	Methinks I must be fair, for yesterday,
	When I past by, a wild and wanton pard,
	Eyed like the evening star, with playful tail
	Crouch’d fawning in the weed. Most loving is she?
	Ah me, my mountain shepherd, that my arms
	Were wound about thee, and my hot lips prest
	Close, close to thine in that quick-falling dew
	Of fruitful kisses, thick as Autumn rains
	Flash in the pools of whirling Simois!

	“O mother, hear me yet before I die.
	They came, they cut away my tallest pines,
	My tall dark pines, that plumed the craggy ledge
	High over the blue gorge, and all between
	The snowy peak and snow-white cataract
	Foster’d the callow eaglet--from beneath
	Whose thick mysterious boughs in the dark morn
	The panther’s roar came muffled, while I sat
	Low in the valley. Never, never more
	Shall lone OEnone see the morning mist
	Sweep thro’ them; never see them overlaid
	With narrow moon-lit slips of silver cloud,
	Between the loud stream and the trembling stars.

	“O mother, hear me yet before I die.
	I wish that somewhere in the ruin’d folds,
	Among the fragments tumbled from the glens,
	Or the dry thickets, I could meet with her
	The Abominable, that uninvited came
	Into the fair Pele{:i}an banquet-hall,
	And cast the golden fruit upon the board,
	And bred this change; that I might speak my mind,
	And tell her to her face how much I hate
	Her presence, hated both of Gods and men.

	“O mother, hear me yet before I die.
	Hath he not sworn his love a thousand times,
	In this green valley, under this green hill,
	Ev’n on this hand, and sitting on this stone?
	Seal’d it with kisses? water’d it with tears?
	O happy tears, and how unlike to these!
	O happy Heaven, how canst thou see my face?
	O happy earth, how canst thou bear my weight?
	O death, death, death, thou ever-floating cloud,
	There are enough unhappy on this earth,
	Pass by the happy souls, that love to live:
	I pray thee, pass before my light of life,
	And shadow all my soul, that I may die.
	Thou weighest heavy on the heart within,
	Weigh heavy on my eyelids: let me die.

	“O mother, hear me yet before I die.
	I will not die alone, for fiery thoughts
	Do shape themselves within me, more and more,
	Whereof I catch the issue, as I hear
	Dead sounds at night come from the inmost hills,
	Like footsteps upon wool. I dimly see
	My far-off doubtful purpose, as a mother
	Conjectures of the features of her child
	Ere it is born: her child!--a shudder comes
	Across me: never child be born of me,
	Unblest, to vex me with his father’s eyes!

	“O mother, hear me yet before I die.
	Hear me, O earth. I will not die alone,
	Lest their shrill happy laughter come to me
	Walking the cold and starless road of death
	Uncomforted, leaving my ancient love
	With the Greek woman. I will rise and go
	Down into Troy, and ere the stars come forth
	Talk with the wild Cassandra, for she says
	A fire dances before her, and a sound
	Rings ever in her ears of armed men.
	What this may be I know not, but I know
	That, wheresoe’er I am by night and day,
	All earth and air seem only burning fire.”



25. OF OLD SAT FREEDOM ON THE HEIGHTS

	Of old sat Freedom on the heights,
	The thunders breaking at her feet:
	Above her shook the starry lights:
	She heard the torrents meet.

	There in her place she did rejoice,
	Self-gather’d in her prophet-mind,
	But fragments of her mighty voice
	Came rolling on the wind.

	Then stept she down thro’ town and field
	To mingle with the human race,
	And part by part to men reveal’d
	The fulness of her face--

	Grave mother of majestic works,
	From her isle-altar gazing down,
	Who, God-like, grasps the triple forks,
	And, King-like, wears the crown:

	Her open eyes desire the truth.
	The wisdom of a thousand years
	Is in them. May perpetual youth
	Keep dry their light from tears;

	That her fair form may stand and shine,
	Make bright our days and light our dreams,
	Turning to scorn with lips divine
	The falsehood of extremes!



26. OUR ENEMIES HAVE FALL’N

	Our enemies have fall’n, have fall’n: the seed,
	The little seed they laugh’d at in the dark,
	Has risen and cleft the soil, and grown a bulk
	Of spanless girth, that lays on every side
	A thousand arms and rushes to the Sun.

	Our enemies have fall’n, have fall’n: they came;
	The leaves were wet with women’s tears: they heard
	A noise of songs they would not understand:
	They mark’d it with the red cross to the fall,
	And would have strown it, and are fall’n themselves.

	Our enemies have fall’n, have fall’n: they came,
	The woodmen with their axes: lo the tree!
	But we will make it faggots for the hearth,
	And shape it plank and beam for roof and floor,
	And boats and bridges for the use of men.

	Our enemies have fall’n, have fall’n: they struck;
	With their own blows they hurt themselves, nor knew
	There dwelt an iron nature in the grain:
	The glittering axe was broken in their arms,
	Their arms were shatter’d to the shoulder blade.

	Our enemies have fall’n, but this shall grow
	A night of Summer from the heat, a breadth
	Of Autumn, dropping fruits of power; and roll’d
	With music in the growing breeze of Time,
	The tops shall strike from star to star, the fangs
	Shall move the stony bases of the world.



27. THE PASSING OF ARTHUR

	That story which the bold Sir Bedivere,
	First made and latest left of all the knights,
	Told, when the man was no more than a voice
	In the white winter of his age, to those
	With whom he dwelt, new faces, other minds.

	For on their march to westward, Bedivere,
	Who slowly paced among the slumbering host,
	Heard in his tent the moanings of the King:

	“I found Him in the shining of the stars,
	I mark’d Him in the flowering of His fields,
	But in His ways with men I find Him not.
	I waged His wars, and now I pass and die.
	O me! for why is all around us here
	As if some lesser god had made the world,
	But had not force to shape it as he would,
	Till the High God behold it from beyond,
	And enter it, and make it beautiful?
	Or else as if the world were wholly fair,
	But that these eyes of men are dense and dim,
	And have not power to see it as it is:
	Perchance, because we see not to the close;--
	For I, being simple, thought to work His will,
	And have but stricken with the sword in vain;
	And all whereon I lean’d in wife and friend
	Is traitor to my peace, and all my realm
	Reels back into the beast, and is no more.
	My God, thou hast forgotten me in my death:
	Nay--God my Christ--I pass but shall not die.”

	Then, ere that last weird battle in the west,
	There came on Arthur sleeping, Gawain kill’d
	In Lancelot’s war, the ghost of Gawain blown
	Along a wandering wind, and past his ear
	Went shrilling, “Hollow, hollow all delight!
	Hail, King! to-morrow thou shalt pass away.
	Farewell! there is an isle of rest for thee.
	And I am blown along a wandering wind,
	And hollow, hollow, hollow all delight.”
	And fainter onward, like wild birds that change
	Their season in the night and wail their way
	From cloud to cloud, down the long wind the dream
	Shrill’d; but in going mingled with dim cries
	Far in the moonlit haze among the hills,
	As of some lonely city sack’d by night,
	When all is lost, and wife and child with wail
	Pass to new lords; and Arthur woke and call’d,
	“Who spake? A dream. O light upon the wind,
	Thine, Gawain, was the voice--are these dim cries
	Thine? or doth all that haunts the waste and wild
	Mourn, knowing it will go along with me?”

	This heard the bold Sir Bedivere and spake:
	“O me, my King, let pass whatever will,
	Elves, and the harmless glamour of the field;
	But in their stead thy name and glory cling
	To all high places like a golden cloud
	For ever: but as yet thou shalt not pass.
	Light was Gawain in life, and light in death
	Is Gawain, for the ghost is as the man;
	And care not thou for dreams from him, but rise--
	I hear the steps of Modred in the west,
	And with him many of thy people, and knights
	Once thine, whom thou hast loved, but grosser grown
	Than heathen, spitting at their vows and thee.
	Right well in heart they know thee for the King.
	Arise, go forth and conquer as of old.”

	Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
	“Far other is this battle in the west
	Whereto we move, than when we strove in youth,
	And brake the petty kings, and fought with Rome,
	Or thrust the heathen from the Roman wall,
	And shook him thro’ the north. Ill doom is mine
	To war against my people and my knights.
	The king who fights his people fights himself.
	And they my knights, who loved me once, the stroke
	That strikes them dead is as my death to me.
	Yet let us hence, and find or feel a way
	Thro’ this blind haze, which ever since I saw
	One lying in the dust at Almesbury,
	Hath folded in the passes of the world.”

	Then rose the King and moved his host by night,
	And ever push’d Sir Modred, league by league,
	Back to the sunset bound of Lyonnesse--
	A land of old upheaven from the abyss
	By fire, to sink into the abyss again;
	Where fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt,
	And the long mountains ended in a coast
	Of ever-shifting sand, and far away
	The phantom circle of a moaning sea.
	There the pursuer could pursue no more,
	And he that fled no further fly the King;
	And there, that day when the great light of heaven
	Burn’d at his lowest in the rolling year,
	On the waste sand by the waste sea they closed.
	Nor ever yet had Arthur fought a fight
	Like this last, dim, weird battle of the west.
	A deathwhite mist slept over sand and sea:
	Whereof the chill, to him who breathed it, drew
	Down with his blood, till all his heart was cold
	With formless fear; and ev’n on Arthur fell
	Confusion, since he saw not whom he fought.

	For friend and foe were shadows in the mist,
	And friend slew friend not knowing whom he slew;
	And some had visions out of golden youth,
	And some beheld the faces of old ghosts
	Look in upon the battle; and in the mist
	Was many a noble deed, many a base,
	And chance and craft and strength in single fights,
	And ever and anon with host to host
	Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail hewn,
	Shield-breakings, and the clash of brands, the crash
	Of battleaxes on shatter’d helms, and shrieks
	After the Christ, of those who falling down
	Look’d up for heaven, and only saw the mist;
	And shouts of heathen and the traitor knights,
	Oaths, insult, filth, and monstrous blasphemies,
	Sweat, writhings, anguish, labouring of the lungs
	In that close mist, and cryings for the light,
	Moans of the dying, and voices of the dead.

	Last, as by some one deathbed after wail
	Of suffering, silence follows, or thro’ death
	Or deathlike swoon, thus over all that shore,
	Save for some whisper of the seething seas,
	A dead hush fell; but when the dolorous day
	Grew drearier toward twilight falling, came
	A bitter wind, clear from the North, and blew
	The mist aside, and with that wind the tide
	Rose, and the pale King glanced across the field
	Of battle: but no man was moving there;
	Nor any cry of Christian heard thereon,
	Nor yet of heathen; only the wan wave
	Brake in among dead faces, to and fro
	Swaying the helpless hands, and up and down
	Tumbling the hollow helmets of the fallen,
	And shiver’d brands that once had fought with Rome,
	And rolling far along the gloomy shores
	The voice of days of old and days to be.

	Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere,
	And whiter than the mist that all day long
	Had held the field of battle was the King:

	“Hearest thou this great voice that shakes the world,
	And wastes the narrow realm whereon we move,
	And beats upon the faces of the dead,
	My dead, as tho’ they had not died for me?--
	O Bedivere, for on my heart hath fall’n
	Confusion, till I know not what I am,
	Nor whence I am, nor whether I be King.
	Behold, I seem but King among the dead.”

	Then spake the bold Sir Bedivere: “My King,
	King everywhere! and so the dead have kings,
	There also will I worship thee as King.
	Yet still thy life is whole, and still I live
	Who love thee; but who hates thee, he that brought
	The heathen back among us, yonder stands,
	Modred, unharm’d, the traitor of thine house.”

	Then spake the King: “My house hath been my doom.
	But call not thou this traitor of my house
	Who hath but dwelt beneath one roof with me.
	My house are rather they who sware my vows,
	Yea, even while they brake them, own’d me King.
	And well for thee, saying in my dark hour,
	When all the purport of my throne hath fail’d,
	That quick or dead thou hottest me for King.
	King am I, whatsoever be their cry;
	And one last act of kinghood shalt thou see
	Yet, ere I pass.” And uttering this the King
	Made at the man: then Modred smote his liege
	Hard on that helm which many a heathen sword
	Had beaten thin; while Arthur at one blow,
	Striking the last stroke with Excalibur,
	Slew him, and all but slain himself, he fell.

	So all day long the noise of battle roll’d
	Among the mountains by the winter sea;
	Until King Arthur’s Table, man by man,
	Had fall’n in Lyonnesse about their lord,
	King Arthur. Then, because his wound was deep,
	The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him,
	And bore him to a chapel nigh the field,
	A broken chancel with a broken cross,
	That stood on a dark strait of barren land:
	On one side lay the Ocean, and on one
	Lay a great water, and the moon was full.

	Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
	“The sequel of to-day unsolders all
	The goodliest fellowship of famous knights
	Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep
	They sleep--the men I loved. I think that we
	Shall never more, at any future time,
	Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds,
	Walking about the gardens and the halls
	Of Camelot, as in the days that were.
	I perish by this people which I made,--
	Tho’ Merlin sware that I should come again
	To rule once more; but, let what will be, be,
	I am so deeply smitten thro’ the helm
	That without help I cannot last till morn.
	Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur,
	Which was my pride: for thou rememberest how
	In those old days, one summer noon, an arm
	Rose up from out the bosom of the lake,
	Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
	Holding the sword--and how I row’d across
	And took it, and have worn it, like a king;
	And, wheresoever I am sung or told
	In aftertime, this also shall be known:
	But now delay not: take Excalibur,
	And fling him far into the middle mere:
	Watch what thou seëst, and lightly bring me word.”

	To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere:
	“It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus,
	Aidless, alone, and smitten thro’ the helm--
	A little thing may harm a wounded man;
	Yet I thy hest will all perform at full,
	Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word.”

	So saying, from the ruin’d shrine he stept,
	And in the moon athwart the place of tombs,
	Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men,
	Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang
	Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down
	By zigzag paths, and juts of pointed rock,
	Came on the shining levels of the lake.

	There drew he forth the brand Excalibur,
	And o’er him, drawing it, the winter moon,
	Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth
	And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt:
	For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks,
	Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work
	Of subtlest jewellery. He gazed so long
	That both his eyes were dazzled as he stood,
	This way and that dividing the swift mind,
	In act to throw: but at the last it seem’d
	Better to leave Excalibur conceal’d
	There in the many-knotted waterflags,
	That whistled stiff and dry about the marge.
	So strode he back slow to the wounded King.

	Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
	“Hast thou perform’d my mission which I gave?
	What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?”

	And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
	“I heard the ripple washing in the reeds,
	And the wild water lapping on the crag.”

	To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale:
	“Thou hast betray’d thy nature and thy name,
	Not rendering true answer, as beseem’d
	Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight:
	For surer sign had follow’d, either hand
	Or voice, or else a motion of the mere.
	This is a shameful thing for men to lie.
	Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again,
	As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing
	I bade thee, watch, and lightly bring me word.”

	Then went Sir Bedivere the second time
	Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere,
	Counting the dewy pebbles, fix’d in thought;
	But when he saw the wonder of the hilt,
	How curiously and strangely chased, he smote
	His palms together, and he cried aloud:

	“And if indeed I cast the brand away,
	Surely a precious thing, one worthy note,
	Should thus be lost for ever from the earth,
	Which might have pleased the eyes of many men.
	What good should follow this, if this were done?
	What harm, undone? Deep harm to disobey,
	Seeing obedience is the bond of rule.
	Were it well to obey then, if a king demand
	An act unprofitable, against himself?
	The King is sick, and knows not what he does.
	What record, or what relic of my lord
	Should be to aftertime, but empty breath
	And rumours of a doubt? But were this kept,
	Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings,
	Some one might show it at a joust of arms,
	Saying, ‘King Arthur’s sword, Excalibur,
	Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake.
	Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps
	Upon the hidden bases of the hills.’
	So might some old man speak in the aftertime
	To all the people, winning reverence.
	But now much honour and much fame were lost.”

	So spake he, clouded with his own conceit,
	And hid Excalibur the second time,
	And so strode back slow to the wounded King.

	Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily:
	“What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?’

	And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
	“I heard the water lapping on the crag,
	And the long ripple washing in the reeds.”

	To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath:
	“Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue,
	Unknightly, traitor-hearted! Woe is me!
	Authority forgets a dying king,
	Laid widow’d of the power in his eye
	That bow’d the will. I see thee what thou art,
	For thou, the latest-left of all my knights,
	In whom should meet the offices of all,
	Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt;
	Either from lust of gold, or like a girl
	Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes.
	Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice,
	And the third time may prosper, get thee hence:
	But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur,
	I will arise and slay thee with my hands.”

	Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran,
	And, leaping down the ridges, lightly, plunged
	Among the bulrush beds, and clutch’d the sword,
	And strongly wheel’d and threw it. The great brand
	Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,
	And flashing round and round, and whirl’d in an arch,
	Shot like a streamer of the northern morn,
	Seen where the moving isles of winter shock
	By night, with noises of the Northern Sea.
	So flash’d and fell the brand Excalibur:
	But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm
	Clothed in white samite, mystic wonderful,
	And caught him by the hilt, and brandish’d him
	Three times, and drew him under in the mere.
	And lightly went the other to the King.

	Then spoke King Arthur, drawing thicker breath:
	“Now see I by thine eyes that this is done.
	Speak out: what is it thou hast heard, or seen?”

	And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
	“Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems
	Should blind my purpose, for I never saw,
	Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die,
	Not tho’ I live three lives of mortal men,
	So great a miracle as yonder hilt.
	Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him;
	But when I look’d again, behold an arm,
	Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
	That caught him by the hilt, and brandish’d him
	Three times, and drew him under in the mere.”

	And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard:
	“My end draws nigh; ’tis time that I were gone.
	Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight,
	And bear me to the margin; yet I fear
	My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die.”

	So saying, from the pavement he half rose,
	Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm,
	And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes
	As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere
	Remorsefully regarded thro’ his tears,
	And would have spoken, but he found not words;
	Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee,
	O’er both his shoulders drew the languid hands,
	And rising bore him thro’ the place of tombs.

	But, as he walk’d, King Arthur panted hard,
	Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed
	When all the house is mute. So sigh’d the King,
	Muttering and murmuring at his ear, “Quick, quick!
	I fear it is too late, and I shall die.”
	But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge,
	Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walk’d,
	Larger than human on the frozen hills.
	He heard the deep behind him, and a cry
	Before. His own thought drove him like a goad.
	Dry clash’d his harness in the icy caves
	And barren chasms, and all to left and right
	The bare black cliff clang’d round him, as he based
	His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
	Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels--
	And on a sudden, lo! the level lake,
	And the long glories of the winter moon.

	Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge,
	Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,
	Beneath them; and descending they were ware
	That all the decks were dense with stately forms,
	Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream--by these
	Three Queens with crowns of gold: and from them rose
	A cry that shiver’d to the tingling stars,
	And, as it were one voice, an agony
	Of lamentation, like a wind that shrills
	All night in a waste land, where no one comes,
	Or hath come, since the making of the world.

	Then murmur’d Arthur, “Place me in the barge.”
	So to the barge they came. There those three Queens
	Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept.
	But she, that rose the tallest of them all
	And fairest, laid his head upon her lap,
	And loosed the shatter’d casque, and chafed his hands,
	And call’d him by his name, complaining loud,
	And dropping bitter tears against a brow
	Striped with dark blood: for all his face was white
	And colourless, and like the wither’d moon
	Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east;
	And all his greaves and cuisses dash’d with drops
	Of onset; and the light and lustrous curls--
	That made his forehead like a rising sun
	High from the daïs-throne--were parch’d with dust
	Or, clotted into points and hanging loose,
	Mix’d with the knightly growth that fringed his lips.
	So like a shatter’d column lay the King;
	Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest,
	From spur to plume a star of tournament,
	Shot thro’ the lists at Camelot, and charged
	Before the eyes of ladies and of kings.

	Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere:
	“Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go?
	Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes?
	For now I see the true old times are dead,
	When every morning brought a noble chance,
	And every chance brought out a noble knight.
	Such times have been not since the light that led
	The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh.
	But now the whole Round Table is dissolved
	Which was an image of the mighty world,
	And I, the last, go forth companionless,
	And the days darken round me, and the years,
	Among new men, strange faces, other minds.”

	And slowly answer’d Arthur from the barge:
	“The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
	And God fulfils himself in many ways,
	Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.
	Comfort thyself: what comfort is in me?
	I have lived my life, and that which I have done
	May He within himself make pure! but thou,
	If thou shouldst never see my face again,
	Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer
	Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice
	Rise like a fountain for me night and day.
	For what are men better than sheep or goats
	That nourish a blind life within the brain,
	If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
	Both for themselves and those who call them friend?
	For so the whole round earth is every way
	Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.
	But now farewell. I am going a long way
	With these thou seëst--if indeed I go
	(For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)--
	To the island-valley of Avilion;
	Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
	Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
	Deep-meadow’d, happy, fair with orchard lawns
	And bowery hollows crown’d with summer sea,
	Where I will heal me of my grievous wound.”

	So said he, and the barge with oar and sail
	Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan
	That, fluting a wild carol ere her death,
	Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood
	With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere
	Revolving many memories, till the hull
	Look’d one black dot against the verge of dawn,
	And on the mere the wailing died away.

	But when that moan had past for evermore,
	The stillness of the dead world’s winter dawn
	Amazed him, and he groan’d, The King is gone.
	And therewithal came on him the weird rhyme,
	“From the great deep to the great deep he goes.”

	Whereat he slowly turn’d and slowly clomb
	The last hard footstep of that iron crag;
	Thence mark’d the black hull moving yet, and cried,
	“He passes to be King among the dead,
	And after healing of his grievous wound
	He comes again; but--if he come no more--
	O me, be yon dark Queens in yon black boat,
	Who shriek’d and wail’d, the three whereat we gazed
	On that high day, when, clothed with living light,
	They stood before his throne in silence, friends
	Of Arthur, who should help him at his need?”

	Then from the dawn it seem’d there came, but faint
	As from beyond the limit of the world,
	Like the last echo born of a great cry,
	Sounds, as if some fair city were one voice
	Around a king returning from his wars.

	Thereat once more he moved about, and clomb
	Ev’n to the highest he could climb, and saw,
	Straining his eyes beneath an arch of hand,
	Or thought he saw, the speck that bare the King,
	Down that long water opening on the deep
	Somewhere far off, pass on and on, and go
	From less to less and vanish into light.
	And the new sun rose bringing the new year.



28. RECOLLECTIONS OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS

	When the breeze of a joyful dawn blew free
	In the silken sail of infancy,
	The tide of time flow’d back with me,
	The forward-flowing tide of time;
	And many a sheeny summer-morn,
	Adown the Tigris I was borne,
	By Bagdat’s shrines of fretted gold,
	High-walled gardens green and old;
	True Mussulman was I and sworn,
	For it was in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Anight my shallop, rustling thro’
	The low and bloomed foliage, drove
	The fragrant, glistening deeps, and clove
	The citron-shadows in the blue:
	By garden porches on the brim,
	The costly doors flung open wide,
	Gold glittering thro’ lamplight dim,
	And broider’d sofas on each side:
	In sooth it was a goodly time,
	For it was in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Often, where clear-stemm’d platans guard
	The outlet, did I turn away
	The boat-head down a broad canal
	From the main river sluiced, where all
	The sloping of the moon-lit sward
	Was damask-work, and deep inlay
	Of braided blooms unmown, which crept
	Adown to where the water slept.
	A goodly place, a goodly time,
	For it was in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	A motion from the river won
	Ridged the smooth level, bearing on
	My shallop thro’ the star-strown calm,
	Until another night in night
	I enter’d, from the clearer light,
	Imbower’d vaults of pillar’d palm,
	Imprisoning sweets, which, as they clomb
	Heavenward, were stay’d beneath the dome
	Of hollow boughs.--A goodly time,
	For it was in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Still onward; and the clear canal
	Is rounded to as clear a lake.
	From the green rivage many a fall
	Of diamond rillets musical,
	Thro’ little crystal arches low
	Down from the central fountain’s flow
	Fall’n silver-chiming, seem’d to shake
	The sparkling flints beneath the prow.
	A goodly place, a goodly time,
	For it was in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Above thro’ many a bowery turn
	A walk with vary-colour’d shells
	Wander’d engrain’d. On either side
	All round about the fragrant marge
	From fluted vase, and brazen urn
	In order, eastern flowers large,
	Some dropping low their crimson bells
	Half-closed, and others studded wide
	With disks and tiars, fed the time
	With odour in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Far off, and where the lemon-grove
	In closest coverture upsprung,
	The living airs of middle night
	Died round the bulbul as he sung;
	Not he: but something which possess’d
	The darkness of the world, delight,
	Life, anguish, death, immortal love,
	Ceasing not, mingled, unrepress’d,
	Apart from place, withholding time,
	But flattering the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Black the garden-bowers and grots
	Slumber’d: the solemn palms were ranged
	Above, unwoo’d of summer wind:
	A sudden splendour from behind
	Flush’d all the leaves with rich gold-green,
	And, flowing rapidly between
	Their interspaces, counterchanged
	The level lake with diamond-plots
	Of dark and bright. A lovely time,
	For it was in the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Dark-blue the deep sphere overhead,
	Distinct with vivid stars inlaid,
	Grew darker from that under-flame:
	So, leaping lightly from the boat,
	With silver anchor left afloat,
	In marvel whence that glory came
	Upon me, as in sleep I sank
	In cool soft turf upon the bank,
	Entranced with that place and time,
	So worthy of the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Thence thro’ the garden I was drawn--
	A realm of pleasance, many a mound,
	And many a shadow-chequer’d lawn
	Full of the city’s stilly sound,
	And deep myrrh-thickets blowing round
	The stately cedar, tamarisks,
	Thick rosaries of scented thorn,
	Tall orient shrubs, and obelisks
	Graven with emblems of the time,
	In honour of the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	With dazed vision unawares
	From the long alley’s latticed shade
	Emerged, I came upon the great
	Pavilion of the Caliphat.
	Right to the carven cedarn doors,
	Flung inward over spangled floors,
	Broad-based flights of marble stairs
	Ran up with golden balustrade,
	After the fashion of the time,
	And humour of the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	The fourscore windows all alight
	As with the quintessence of flame,
	A million tapers flaring bright
	From twisted silvers look’d to shame
	The hollow-vaulted dark, and stream’d
	Upon the mooned domes aloof
	In inmost Bagdat, till there seem’d
	Hundreds of crescents on the roof
	Of night new-risen, that marvellous time,
	To celebrate the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Then stole I up, and trancedly
	Gazed on the Persian girl alone,
	Serene with argent-lidded eyes
	Amorous, and lashes like to rays
	Of darkness, and a brow of pearl
	Tressed with redolent ebony,
	In many a dark delicious curl,
	Flowing beneath her rose-hued zone;
	The sweetest lady of the time,
	Well worthy of the golden prime
	Of good Haroun Alraschid.

	Six columns, three on either side,
	Pure silver, underpropt a rich
	Throne of the massive ore, from which
	Down-droop’d, in many a floating fold,
	Engarlanded and diaper’d
	With inwrought flowers, a cloth of gold.
	Thereon, his deep eye laughter-stirr’d
	With merriment of kingly pride,
	Sole star of all that place and time,
	I saw him--in his golden prime,
	THE GOOD HAROUN ALRASCHID!



29. RING OUT, WILD BELLS

	Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
	The flying cloud, the frosty light:
	The year is dying in the night;
	Ring out, wild bells, and let him die . . .

	Ring out false pride in place and blood,
	The civic slander and the spite;
	Ring in the love of truth and right,
	Ring in the common love of good.

	Ring out old shapes of foul disease;
	Ring out the narrowing lust of gold;
	Ring out the thousand wars of old,
	Ring in the thousand years of peace.

	Ring in the valiant man and free,
	The larger heart, the kindlier hand;
	Ring out the darkness of the land,
	Ring in the Christ that is to be.



30. SONG FROM THE MARRIAGE OF GERAINT

	Turn, Fortune, turn thy wheel, and lower the proud;
	Turn thy wild wheel thro’ sunshine, storm, and cloud;
	Thy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate.

	Turn, Fortune, turn thy wheel with smile or frown;
	With that wild wheel we go not up or down;
	Our hoard is little, but our hearts are great.

	Smile and we smile, the lords of many lands;
	Frown and we smile, the lords of our own hands;
	For man is man and master of his fate.

	Turn, turn thy wheel above the staring crowd;
	Thy wheel and thou are shadows in the cloud;
	Thy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate.



31. THE SPLENDOUR FALLS ON CASTLE WALLS

	The splendour falls on castle walls
	And snowy summits old in story:
	The long light shakes across the lakes,
	And the wild cataract leaps in glory.
	Blow, bugle, blow, set the wild echoes flying,
	Blow, bugle; answer, echoes, dying, dying, dying.

	O hark, O hear! how thin and clear,
	And thinner, clearer, farther going!
	O sweet and far from cliff and scar
	The horns of Elfland faintly blowing!
	Blow, let us hear the purple glens replying:
	Blow, bugle; answer, echoes, dying, dying, dying.

	O love, they die in yon rich sky,
	They faint on hill or field or river:
	Our echoes roll from soul to soul,
	And grow for ever and for ever.
	Blow, bugle, blow, set the wild echoes flying,
	And answer, echoes, answer, dying, dying, dying.



32. ST. AGNES’ EVE

	Deep on the convent-roof the snows
	Are sparkling to the moon:
	My breath to heaven like vapour goes;
	May my soul follow soon!
	The shadows of the convent-towers
	Slant down the snowy sward,
	Still creeping with the creeping hours
	That lead me to my Lord:
	Make Thou my spirit pure and clear
	As are the frosty skies,
	Or this first snowdrop of the year
	That in my bosom lies.

	As these white robes are soil’d and dark,
	To yonder shining ground;
	As this pale taper’s earthly spark,
	To yonder argent round;
	So shows my soul before the Lamb,
	My spirit before Thee;
	So in mine earthly house I am,
	To that I hope to be.
	Break up the heavens, O Lord! and far,
	Thro’ all yon starlight keen,
	Draw me, thy bride, a glittering star,
	In raiment white and clean.

	He lifts me to the golden doors;
	The flashes come and go;
	All heaven bursts her starry floors,
	And strows her lights below,
	And deepens on and up! the gates
	Roll back, and far within
	For me the Heavenly Bridegroom waits,
	To make me pure of sin.
	The sabbaths of Eternity,
	One sabbath deep and wide--
	A light upon the shining sea--
	The Bridegroom with his bride!



33. SWEET AND LOW

	Sweet and low, sweet and low,
	Wind of the western sea,
	Low, low, breathe and blow,
	Wind of the western sea!
	Over the rolling waters go,
	Come from the dying moon, and blow,
	Blow him again to me;
	While my little one, while my pretty one, sleeps.

	Sleep and rest, sleep and rest,
	Father will come to thee soon;
	Rest, rest, on mother’s breast,
	Father will come to thee soon;
	Father will come to his babe in the nest,
	Silver sails all out of the west
	Under the silver moon:
	Sleep, my little one, sleep, my pretty one, sleep.



34. TEARS, IDLE TEARS

	Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean,
	Tears from the depth of some divine despair
	Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,
	In looking on the happy Autumn-fields,
	And thinking of the days that are no more.

	Fresh as the first beam glittering on a sail,
	That brings our friends up from the underworld,
	Sad as the last which reddens over one
	That sinks with all we love below the verge;
	So sad, so fresh, the days that are no more.

	Ah, sad and strange as in dark summer dawns
	The earliest pipe of half-awaken’d birds
	To dying ears, when unto dying eyes
	The casement slowly grows a glimmering square;
	So sad, so strange, the days that are no more.

	Dear as remember’d kisses after death,
	And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feign’d
	On lips that are for others; deep as love,
	Deep as first love, and wild with all regret;
	O Death in Life, the days that are no more!



35. THY VOICE IS HEARD

	Thy voice is heard thro’ rolling drums,
	That beat to battle where he stands;
	Thy face across his fancy comes,
	And gives the battle to his hands:
	A moment, while the trumpets blow,
	He sees his brood about thy knee;
	The next, like fire he meets the foe,
	And strikes him dead for thine and thee.



36. TITHONIUS

	The woods decay, the woods decay and fall,
	The vapours weep their burthen to the ground,
	Man comes and tills the field and lies beneath,
	And after many a summer dies the swan.
	Me only cruel immortality
	Consumes: I wither slowly in thine arms,
	Here at the quiet limit of the world,
	A white-hair’d shadow roaming like a dream
	The ever-silent spaces of the East,
	Far-folded mists, and gleaming halls of morn.

	Alas! for this gray shadow, once a man--
	So glorious in his beauty and thy choice,
	Who madest him thy chosen, that he seem’d
	To his great heart none other than a God!
	I ask’d thee, ‘Give me immortality.’
	Then didst thou grant mine asking with a smile,
	Like wealthy men, who care not how they give.
	But thy strong Hours indignant work’d their wills,
	And beat me down and marr’d and wasted me,
	And tho’ they could not end me, left me maim’d
	To dwell in presence of immortal youth,
	Immortal age beside immortal youth,
	And all I was, in ashes. Can thy love,
	Thy beauty, make amends, tho’ even now,
	Close over us, the silver star, thy guide,
	Shines in those tremulous eyes that fill with tears
	To hear me? Let me go: take back thy gift:
	Why should a man desire in any way
	To vary from the kindly race of men
	Or pass beyond the goal of ordinance
	Where all should pause, as is most meet for all?

	A soft air fans the cloud apart; there comes
	A glimpse of that dark world where I was born.
	Once more the old mysterious glimmer steals
	From thy pure brows, and from thy shoulders pure,
	And bosom beating with a heart renew’d.
	Thy cheek begins to redden thro’ the gloom,
	Thy sweet eyes brighten slowly close to mine,
	Ere yet they blind the stars, and the wild team
	Which love thee, yearning for thy yoke, arise,
	And shake the darkness from their loosen’d manes,
	And beat the twilight into flakes of fire.

	Lo! ever thus thou growest beautiful
	In silence, then before thine answer given
	Departest, and thy tears are on my cheek.

	Why wilt thou ever scare me with thy tears,
	And make me tremble lest a saying learnt,
	In days far-off, on that dark earth, be true?
	‘The Gods themselves cannot recall their gifts.’

	Ay me! ay me! with what another heart
	In days far-off, and with what other eyes
	I used to watch--if I be he that watch’d--
	The lucid outline forming round thee; saw
	The dim curls kindle into sunny rings;
	Changed with thy mystic change, and felt my blood
	Glow with the glow that slowly crimson’d all
	Thy presence and thy portals, while I lay,
	Mouth, forehead, eyelids, growing dewy-warm
	With kisses balmier than half-opening buds
	Of April, and could hear the lips that kiss’d
	Whispering I knew not what of wild and sweet,
	Like that strange song I heard Apollo sing,
	While Ilion like a mist rose into towers.

	Yet hold me not for ever in thine East:
	How can my nature longer mix with thine?
	Coldly thy rosy shadows bathe me, cold
	Are all thy lights, and cold my wrinkled feet
	Upon thy glimmering thresholds, when the steam
	Floats up from those dim fields about the homes
	Of happy men that have the power to die,
	And grassy barrows of the happier dead.
	Release me, and restore me to the ground;
	Thou seëst all things, thou wilt see my grave:
	Thou wilt renew thy beauty morn by morn;
	I earth in earth forget these empty courts,
	And thee returning on thy silver wheels.



37. ULYSSES

	It little profits that an idle king,
	By this still hearth, among these barren crags,
	Match’d with an aged wife, I mete and dole
	Unequal laws unto a savage race,
	That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me.
	I cannot rest from travel: I will drink
	Life to the lees: All times I have enjoy’d
	Greatly, have suffer’d greatly, both with those
	That loved me, and alone, on shore, and when
	Thro’ scudding drifts the rainy Hyades
	Vext the dim sea: I am become a name;
	For always roaming with a hungry heart
	Much have I seen and known; cities of men
	And manners, climates, councils, governments,
	Myself not least, but honour’d of them all;
	And drunk delight of battle with my peers,
	Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy.
	I am a part of all that I have met;
	Yet all experience is an arch wherethro’
	Gleams that untravell’d world whose margin fades
	For ever and forever when I move.
	How dull it is to pause, to make an end,
	To rust unburnish’d, not to shine in use!
	As tho’ to breathe were life! Life piled on life
	Were all too little, and of one to me
	Little remains: but every hour is saved
	From that eternal silence, something more,
	A bringer of new things; and vile it were
	For some three suns to store and hoard myself,
	And this gray spirit yearning in desire
	To follow knowledge like a sinking star,
	Beyond the utmost bound of human thought.

	This is my son, mine own Telemachus,
	To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle,--
	Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil
	This labour, by slow prudence to make mild
	A rugged people, and thro’ soft degrees
	Subdue them to the useful and the good.
	Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere
	Of common duties, decent not to fail
	In offices of tenderness, and pay
	Meet adoration to my household gods,
	When I am gone. He works his work, I mine.

	There lies the port; the vessel puffs her sail:
	There gloom the dark, broad seas. My mariners,
	Souls that have toil’d, and wrought, and thought with me--
	That ever with a frolic welcome took
	The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed
	Free hearts, free foreheads--you and I are old;
	Old age hath yet his honour and his toil;
	Death closes all: but something ere the end,
	Some work of noble note, may yet be done,
	Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods.
	The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks:
	The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep
	Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,
	‘T is not too late to seek a newer world.
	Push off, and sitting well in order smite
	The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
	To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
	Of all the western stars, until I die.
	It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
	It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,
	And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.
	Tho’ much is taken, much abides; and tho’
	We are not now that strength which in old days
	Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are;
	One equal temper of heroic hearts,
	Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
	To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.



38. YOU ASK ME WHY, THO’ ILL AT EASE

	You ask me, why, tho’ ill at ease,
	Within this region I subsist,
	Whose spirits falter in the mist,
	And languish for the purple seas.

	It is the land that freemen till,
	That sober-suited Freedom chose,
	The land, where girt with friends or foes
	A man may speak the thing he will;

	A land of settled government,
	A land of just and old renown,
	Where Freedom slowly broadens down
	From precedent to precedent:

	Where faction seldom gathers head,
	But by degrees to fullness wrought,
	The strength of some diffusive thought
	Hath time and space to work and spread.

	Should banded unions persecute
	Opinion, and induce a time
	When single thought is civil crime,
	And individual freedom mute;

	Tho’ Power should make from land to land
	The name of Britain trebly great--
	Tho’ every channel of the State
	Should fill and choke with golden sand--

	Yet waft me from the harbour-mouth,
	Wild wind! I seek a warmer sky,
	And I will see before I die
	The palms and temples of the South.
