*** Francis Thompson (1859 - 1907)


1. AN ARAB LOVE SONG

	The hunchèd camels of the night
	Trouble the bright
	And silver waters of the moon.
	The Maiden of the Morn will soon
	Through Heaven stray and sing,
	Star gathering.
	
	Now while the dark about our loves is strewn,
	Light of my dark, blood of my heart, O come!
	And night will catch her breath up, and be dumb.
	
	Leave thy father, leave thy mother
	And thy brother;
	Leave the black tents of thy tribe apart!
	Am I not thy father and thy brother,
	And thy mother?
	And thou--what needest with thy tribe’s black tents
	Who hast the red pavilion of my heart?



2. ASSUMPTA MARIA

	Mortals, that behold a Woman,
	  Rising ’twixt the Moon and Sun;
	Who am I the heavens assume? an
	  All am I, and I am one.
	
	Multitudinous ascend I,
	  Dreadful as a battle arrayed,
	For I bear you whither tend I;
	  Ye are I:  be undismayed!
	I, the Ark that for the graven
	  Tables of the Law was made;
	Man’s own heart was one, one Heaven,
	  Both within my womb were laid.
	    For there Anteros with Eros
	      Heaven with man conjoin-ed was,--
	    Twin-stone of the Law, Ischyros,
	      Agios Athanatos.
	
	I, the flesh-girt Paradises
	  Gardenered by the Adam new,
	Daintied o’er with sweet devices
	  Which He loveth, for He grew.
	I, the boundless strict savannah
	  Which God’s leaping feet go through;
	I, the heaven whence the Manna,
	  Weary Israel, slid on you!
	    He the Anteros and Eros,
	      I the body, He the Cross;
	    He upbeareth me, Ischyros,
	      Agios Athanatos!
	
	I am Daniel’s mystic Mountain,
	  Whence the mighty stone was rolled;
	I am the four Rivers’ fountain,
	  Watering Paradise of old;
	Cloud down-raining the Just One am,
	  Danae of the Shower of Gold;
	I the Hostel of the Sun am;
	  He the Lamb, and I the Fold.
	    He the Anteros and Eros,
	      I the body, He the Cross;
	    He is fast to me, Ischyros,
	      Agios Athanatos!
	
	I, the presence-hall where Angels
	  Do enwheel their plac-ed King--
	Even my thoughts which, without change else,
	  Cyclic burn and cyclic sing.
	To the hollow of Heaven transplanted,
	  I a breathing Eden spring,
	Where with venom all outpanted
	  Lies the slimed Curse shrivelling.
	    For the brazen Serpent clear on
	      That old fang-ed knowledge shone;
	    I to Wisdom rise, Ischyron,
	      Agion Athanaton!
	
	See in highest heaven pavilioned
	  Now the maiden Heaven rest,
	The many-breasted sky out-millioned
	  By the splendours of her vest.
	Lo, the Ark this holy tide is
	  The un-handmade Temple’s guest,
	And the dark Egyptian bride is
	  Whitely to the Spouse-Heart prest!
	    He the Anteros and Eros,
	      Nail me to Thee, sweetest Cross!
	    He is fast to me, Ischyros,
	      Agios Athanatos!
	
	’Tell me, tell me, O Belov-ed,
	  Where Thou dost in mid-day feed!
	For my wanderings are reprov-ed,
	  And my heart is salt with need.’
	’Thine own self not spellest God in,
	  Nor the lisping papyrus reed?
	Follow where the flocks have trodden,
	  Follow where the shepherds lead.’
	    He, the Anteros and Eros,
	      Mounts me in AEgyptic car,
	    Twin-yoked; leading me, Ischyros,
	      Trembling to the untempted Far.
	
	’Make me chainlets, silvern, golden,
	  I that sow shall surely reap;
	While as yet my Spouse is holden
	  Like a Lion in mountained sleep.’
	’Make her chainlets, silvern, golden,
	  She hath sown and she shall reap;
	Look up to the mountains olden,
	  Whence help comes with lioned leap.’
	    By what gushed the bitter Spear on,
	      Pain, which sundered, maketh one;
	    Crucified to Him, Ischyron,
	      Agion Athanaton!
	
	Then commanded and spake to me
	  He who framed all things that be;
	And my Maker entered through me,
	  In my tent His rest took He.
	Lo! He standeth, Spouse and Brother;
	  I to Him, and He to me,
	Who upraised me where my mother
	  Fell, beneath the apple-tree.
	    Risen ’twixt Anteros and Eros,
	      Blood and Water, Moon and Sun,
	    He upbears me, He Ischyros,
	      I bear Him, the Athanaton!
	
	Where is laid the Lord arisen?
	  In the light we walk in gloom;
	Though the sun has burst his prison,
	  We know not his biding-room.
	Tell us where the Lord sojourneth,
	  For we find an empty tomb.
	’Whence He sprung, there He returneth,
	  Mystic Sun,--the Virgin’s Womb.’
	    Hidden Sun, His beams so near us,
	      Cloud enpillared as He was
	    From of old, there He, Ischyros,
	      Waits our search, Athanatos.
	
	Who will give Him me for brother,
	  Counted of my family,
	Sucking the sweet breasts of my Mother?--
	  I His flesh, and mine is He;
	To my Bread myself the bread is,
	  And my Wine doth drink me:  see,
	His left hand beneath my head is,
	  His right hand embraceth me!
	    Sweetest Anteros and Eros,
	      Lo, her arms He leans across;
	    Dead that we die not, stooped to rear us,
	      Thanatos Athanatos.
	
	Who is She, in candid vesture,
	  Rushing up from out the brine?
	Treading with resilient gesture
	  Air, and with that Cup divine?
	She in us and we in her are,
	  Beating Godward:  all that pine,
	Lo, a wonder and a terror!
	  The Sun hath blushed the Sea to Wine!
	    He the Anteros and Eros,
	      She the Bride and Spirit; for
	    Now the days of promise near us,
	      And the Sea shall be no more.
	
	Open wide thy gates, O Virgin,
	  That the King may enter thee!
	At all gates the clangours gurge in,
	  God’s paludament lightens, see!
	Camp of Angels!  Well we even
	  Of this thing may doubtful be,--
	If thou art assumed to Heaven,
	  Or is Heaven assumed to thee!
	    Consummatum.  Christ the promised,
	      Thy maiden realm is won, O Strong!
	    Since to such sweet Kingdom comest,
	      Remember me, poor Thief of Song!
	
	Cadent fails the stars along:-
	  Mortals, that behold a woman
	    Rising ’twixt the Moon and Sun;
	  Who am I the heavens assume? an
	    All am I, and I am one.



3. AT LORD’S

	It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk,
	Though my own red roses there may blow;
	It is little I repair to the matches of the Southron folk,
	Though the red roses crest the caps, I know.
	For the field is full of shades as I near the shadowy coast,
	And a ghostly batsman plays to the bowling of a ghost,
	And I look through my tears on a soundless-clapping host
	As the run-stealers flicker to and fro,
	To and fro:--
	O my Hornby and my Barlow long ago!



4. BEFORE HER PORTRAIT IN YOU

	As lovers, banished from their lady’s face
	And hopeless of her grace,
	Fashion a ghostly sweetness in its place,
	Fondly adore
	Some stealth-won cast attire she wore,
	A kerchief or a glove:
	And at the lover’s beck
	Into the glove there fleets the hand,
	Or at impetuous command
	Up from the kerchief floats the virgin neck:
	So I, in very lowlihead of love,--
	Too shyly reverencing
	To let one thought’s light footfall smooth
	Tread near the living, consecrated thing,--
	Treasure me thy cast youth.
	This outworn vesture, tenantless of thee,
	Hath yet my knee,
	For that, with show and semblance fair
	Of the past Her
	Who once the beautiful, discarded raiment bare,
	It cheateth me.
	As gale to gale drifts breath
	Of blossoms’ death,
	So dropping down the years from hour to hour
	This dead youth’s scent is wafted me to-day:
	I sit, and from the fragrance dream the flower.
	So, then, she looked (I say);
	And so her front sunk down
	Heavy beneath the poet’s iron crown:
	On her mouth museful sweet--
	(Even as the twin lips meet)
	Did thought and sadness greet:
	Sighs
	In those mournful eyes
	So put on visibilities;
	As viewless ether turns, in deep on deep, to dyes.
	Thus, long ago,
	She kept her meditative paces slow
	Through maiden meads, with waved shadow and gleam
	Of locks half-lifted on the winds of dream,
	Till love up-caught her to his chariot’s glow.
	Yet, voluntary, happier Proserpine!
	This drooping flower of youth thou lettest fall
	I, faring in the cockshut-light, astray,
	Find on my ’lated way,
	And stoop, and gather for memorial,
	And lay it on my bosom, and make it mine.
	To this, the all of love the stars allow me,
	I dedicate and vow me.
	I reach back through the days
	A trothed hand to the dead the last trump shall not raise.
	The water-wraith that cries
	From those eternal sorrows of thy pictured eyes
	Entwines and draws me down their soundless intricacies!



5. A CORYMBUS FOR AUTUMN

	     HEARKEN my chant, ’tis
	As a Bacchante’s,
	A grape-spurt, a vine-splash, a tossed tress, flown vaunt ’tis!
	     Suffer my singing,
	Gipsy of Seasons, ere thou go winging;
	     Ere Winter throws
	     His slaking snows
	In thy feasting-flagon’s impurpurate glows!
	The sopped sun--toper as ever drank hard--
	     Stares foolish, hazed,
	     Rubicund, dazed,
	Totty with thine October tankard.
	Tanned maiden! with cheeks like apples russet,
	  And breast a brown agaric faint-flushing at tip,
	And a mouth too red for the moon to buss it,
	  But her cheek unvow its vestalship;
	     Thy mists enclip
	Her steel-clear circuit illuminous,
	     Until it crust
	     Rubiginous
	With the glorious gules of a glowing rust.
	Far other saw we, other indeed,
	     The crescent moon, in the May-days dead,
	     Fly up with its slender white wings spread
	Out of its nest in the sea’s waved mead!
	How are the veins of thee, Autumn, laden?
	           Umbered juices,
	           And pulpèd oozes
	  Pappy out of the cherry-bruises,
	Froth the veins of thee, wild, wild maiden!
	           With hair that musters
	           In globèd clusters,
	  In tumbling clusters, like swarthy grapes,
	Round thy brow and thine ears o’ershaden;
	With the burning darkness of eyes like pansies,
	           Like velvet pansies
	           Wherethrough escapes
	The splendid might of thy conflagrate fancies;
	  With robe gold-tawny not hiding the shapes
	           Of the feet whereunto it falleth down,
	        Thy naked feet unsandallèd;
	With robe gold-tawny that does not veil
	        Feet where the red
	        Is meshed in the brown,
	Like a rubied sun in a Venice-sail.
	
	The wassailous heart of the Year is thine!
	His Bacchic fingers disentwine
	        His coronal
	        At thy festival;
	His revelling fingers disentwine
	        Leaf, flower, and all,
	        And let them fall
	Blossom and all in thy wavering wine.
	The Summer looks out from her brazen tower,
	  Through the flashing bars of July,
	Waiting thy ripened golden shower;
	  Whereof there cometh, with sandals fleet,
	        The North-west flying viewlessly,
	  With a sword to sheer, and untameable feet,
	        And the gorgon-head of the Winter shown
	        To stiffen the gazing earth as stone.
	
	  In crystal Heaven’s magic sphere
	        Poised in the palm of thy fervid hand,
	  Thou seest the enchanted shows appear
	  That stain Favonian firmament;
	  Richer than ever the Occident
	        Gave up to bygone Summer’s wand.
	Day’s dying dragon lies drooping his crest,
	Panting red pants into the West.
	Or the butterfly sunset claps its wings
	  With flitter alit on the swinging blossom,
	The gusty blossom, that tosses and swings,
	  Of the sea with its blown and ruffled bosom;
	Its ruffled bosom wherethrough the wind sings
	Till the crispèd petals are loosened and strown
	        Overblown, on the sand;
	        Shed, curling as dead
	     Rose-leaves curl, on the fleckèd strand.
	Or higher, holier, saintlier when, as now,
	All nature sacerdotal seems, and thou.
	     The calm hour strikes on yon golden gong,
	        In tones of floating and mellow light
	     A spreading summons to even-song:
	        See how there
	        The cowlèd night
	     Kneels on the Eastern sanctuary-stair.
	What is this feel of incense everywhere?
	  Clings it round folds of the blanch-amiced clouds,
	Upwafted by the solemn thurifer,
	           The mighty spirit unknown,
	That swingeth the slow earth before the embannered Throne?
	  Or is’t the Season under all these shrouds
	Of light, and sense, and silence, makes her known
	        A presence everywhere,
	        An inarticulate prayer,
	A hand on the soothed tresses of the air?
	        But there is one hour scant
	Of this Titanian, primal liturgy;
	        As there is but one hour for me and thee,
	  Autumn, for thee and thine hierophant,
	        Of this grave ending chant.
	        Round the earth still and stark
	Heaven’s death-lights kindle, yellow spark by spark,
	Beneath the dreadful catafalque of the dark.
	
	        And I had ended there:
	But a great wind blew all the stars to flare,
	And cried, “I sweep the path before the moon!
	Tarry ye now the coming of the moon,
	        For she is coming soon;”
	Then died before the coming of the moon.
	And she came forth upon the trepidant air,
	        In vesture unimagined-fair,
	        Woven as woof of flag-lilies;
	        And curdled as of flag-lilies
	        The vapour at the feet of her,
	And a haze about her tinged in fainter wise.
	  As if she had trodden the stars in press,
	  Till the gold wine spurted over her dress,
	  Till the gold wine gushed out round her feet;
	        Spouted over her stainèd wear,
	  And bubbled in golden froth at her feet,
	        And hung like a whirlpool’s mist round her.
	  Still, mighty Season, do I see’t,
	  Thy sway is still majestical!
	  Thou hold’st of God, by title sure,
	Thine indefeasible investiture,
	  And that right round thy locks are native to;
	The heavens upon thy brow imperial,
	        This huge terrene thy ball,
	And o’er thy shoulders thrown wide air’s depending pall.
	  What if thine earth be blear and bleak of hue?
	        Still, still the skies are sweet!
	  Still, Season, still thou hast thy triumphs there!
	        How have I, unaware,
	Forgetful of my strain inaugural,
	  Cleft the great rondure of thy reign complete,
	Yielding thee half, who hast indeed the all?
	     I will not think thy sovereignty begun
	        But with the shepherd sun
	     That washes in the sea the stars’ gold fleeces
	        Or that with day it ceases,
	     Who sets his burning lips to the salt brine,
	        And purples it to wine;
	     While I behold how ermined Artemis
	        Ordainèd weed must wear,
	        And toil thy business;
	        Who witness am of her,
	     Her too in autumn turned a vintager;
	     And, laden with its lampèd clusters bright,
	     The fiery-fruited vineyard of this night.



6. DAISY

	WHERE the thistle lifts a purple crown
	  Six foot out of the turf,
	And the harebell shakes on the windy hill--
	  O the breath of the distant surf!--
	
	The hills look over on the South,
	  And southward dreams the sea;
	And, with the sea-breeze hand in hand,
	  Came innocence and she.
	
	Where ’mid the gorse the raspberry
	  Red for the gatherer springs,
	Two children did we stray and talk
	  Wise, idle, childish things.
	
	She listened with big-lipped surprise,
	  Breast-deep mid flower and spine:
	Her skin was like a grape, whose veins
	  Run snow instead of wine.
	
	She knew not those sweet words she spake,
	  Nor knew her own sweet way;
	But there’s never a bird, so sweet a song
	  Thronged in whose throat that day!
	
	Oh, there were flowers in Storrington
	  On the turf and on the spray;
	But the sweetest flower on Sussex hills
	  Was the Daisy-flower that day!
	
	Her beauty smoothed earth’s furrowed face!
	  She gave me tokens three:--
	A look, a word of her winsome mouth,
	  And a wild raspberry.
	
	A berry red, a guileless look,
	  A still word,--strings of sand!
	And yet they made my wild, wild heart
	  Fly down to her little hand.
	
	For standing artless as the air,
	  And candid as the skies,
	She took the berries with her hand,
	  And the love with her sweet eyes.
	
	The fairest things have fleetest end:
	  Their scent survives their close,
	But the rose’s scent is bitterness
	  To him that loved the rose!
	
	She looked a little wistfully,
	  Then went her sunshine way:--
	The sea’s eye had a mist on it,
	  And the leaves fell from the day.
	
	She went her unremembering way,
	  She went and left in me
	The pang of all the partings gone,
	  And partings yet to be.
	
	She left me marvelling why my soul
	  Was sad that she was glad;
	At all the sadness in the sweet,
	  The sweetness in the sad.
	
	Still, still I seemed to see her, still
	  Look up with soft replies,
	And take the berries with her hand,
	  And the love with her lovely eyes.
	
	Nothing begins, and nothing ends,
	  That is not paid with moan;
	For we are born in other’s pain,
	  And perish in our own.



7. A DEAD ASTRONOMER

	Starry amorist, starward gone,
	Thou art--what thou didst gaze upon!
	Passed through thy golden garden’s bars,
	Thou seest the Gardener of the Stars.
	
	She, about whose moon-ed brows
	Seven stars make seven glows,
	Seven lights for seven woes;
	She, like thine own Galaxy,
	All lustres in one purity:--
	What said’st thou, Astronomer,
	When thou did’st discover HER?
	When thy hand its tube let fall,
	Thou found’st the fairest Star of all!



8. DREAM TRYST

	The breaths of kissing night and day
	Were mingled in the eastern Heaven,
	Throbbing with unheard melody,
	Shook Lyra all its star-cloud seven.
	When dusk shrank cold, and light trod shy,
	And dawn’s grey eyes were troubled grey;
	And souls went palely up to the sky,
	And mine to Lucidè,
	There was no change in her sweet eyes
	Since last I saw those sweet eyes shine;
	There was no change in her deep heart
	Since last that deep heart knocked at mine.
	Her eyes were clear, her eyes were Hope’s,
	Wherein did ever come and go;
	The sparkle of the fountain drops
	From her sweet soul below.
	The chambers in the house of dream
	Are fed with so divine an air,
	That Time’s hoar wings grow young therein,
	And they who walk there are most fair.
	I joyed for me, I joyed for her,
	Who with the Past meet girt about:
	Where her last kiss still warms the air,
	Nor can her eyes go out.



9. DREAM-TRYST

	THE breaths of kissing night and day
	  Were mingled in the eastern Heaven:
	Throbbing with unheard melody
	  Shook Lyra all its star-chord seven:
	     When dusk shrunk cold, and light trod shy,
	        And dawn’s grey eyes were troubled grey;
	     And souls went palely up the sky,
	        And mine to Lucidé.
	
	There was no change in her sweet eyes
	  Since last I saw those sweet eyes shine;
	There was no change in her deep heart
	  Since last that deep heart knocked at mine.
	     Her eyes were clear, her eyes were Hope’s,
	        Wherein did ever come and go
	     The sparkle of the fountain-drops
	        From her sweet soul below.
	
	The chambers in the house of dreams
	  Are fed with so divine an air,
	That Time’s hoar wings grow young therein,
	  And they who walk there are most fair.
	     I joyed for me, I joyed for her,
	        Who with the Past meet girt about:
	     Where our last kiss still warms the air,
	     Nor can her eyes go out.



10. ENDED IS OUR BRIEF SWEET PLAY 

	Go, songs, for ended is our brief, sweet play;
	Go, children of swift joy and tardy sorrow:
	And some are sung, and that was yesterday,
	And some are unsung, and that may be tomorrow.
	
	Go forth; and if it be o’er stony way,
	Old joy can lend what newer grief must borrow:
	And it was sweet, and that was yesterday,
	And sweet is sweet, though purchased with sorrow.
	
	Go, songs, and come not back from your far way:
	And if men ask you why ye smile and sorrow,
	Tell them ye grieve, for your hearts know Today,
	Tell them ye smile, for your eyes know Tomorrow.



11. EPILOGUE

	VIRTUE may unlock hell, or even
	A sin turn in the wards of Heaven,
	(As ethics of the text-book go),
	So little men their own deeds know,
	Or through the intricate _mêlée_
	Guess whitherward draws the battle-sway;
	So little, if they know the deed,
	Discern what therefrom shall succeed.
	To wisest moralists ’tis but given
	To work rough border-law of Heaven,
	Within this narrow life of ours,
	These marches ’twixt delimitless Powers.
	Is it, if Heaven the future showed,
	Is it the all-severest mode
	To see ourselves with the eyes of God?
	God rather grant, at His assize,
	He see us not with our own eyes!
	
	Heaven, which man’s generations draws
	Nor deviates into replicas,
	Must of as deep diversity
	In judgment as creation be.
	There is no expeditious road
	To pack and label men for God,
	And save them by the barrel-load.
	Some may perchance, with strange surprise,
	Have blundered into Paradise.
	In vasty dusk of life abroad,
	They fondly thought to err from God,
	Nor knew the circle that they trod;
	And wandering all the night about,
	Found them at morn where they set out.
	Death dawned; Heaven lay in prospect wide:--
	Lo! they were standing by His side!
	
	The rhymer a life uncomplex,
	With just such cares as mortals vex,
	So simply felt as all men feel,
	Lived purely out to his soul’s weal.
	A double life the Poet lived,
	And with a double burthen grieved;
	The life of flesh and life of song,
	The pangs to both lives that belong;
	Immortal knew and mortal pain,
	Who in two worlds could lose and gain.
	And found immortal fruits must be
	Mortal through his mortality.
	The life of flesh and life of song!
	If one life worked the other wrong,
	What expiating agony
	May for him damned to poesy
	Shut in that little sentence be--
	What deep austerities of strife--
	“He lived his life.”  He lived _his_ life!



12. A FALLEN YEW

	IT seemed corrival of the world’s great prime,
	  Made to un-edge the scythe of Time,
	     And last with stateliest rhyme.
	
	No tender Dryad ever did indue
	  That rigid chiton of rough yew,
	     To fret her white flesh through:
	
	But some god like to those grim Asgard lords,
	  Who walk the fables of the hordes
	     From Scandinavian fjords,
	
	Upheaved its stubborn girth, and raised unriven,
	  Against the whirl-blast and the levin,
	     Defiant arms to Heaven.
	
	When doom puffed out the stars, we might have said,
	  It would decline its heavy head,
	     And see the world to bed.
	
	For this firm yew did from the vassal leas,
	  And rain and air, its tributaries,
	     Its revenues increase,
	
	And levy impost on the golden sun,
	  Take the blind years as they might run,
	     And no fate seek or shun.
	
	But now our yew is strook, is fallen--yea
	  Hacked like dull wood of every day
	     To this and that, men say.
	
	Never!--To Hades’ shadowy shipyards gone,
	  Dim barge of Dis, down Acheron
	     It drops, or Lethe wan.
	
	Stirred by its fall--poor destined bark of Dis!--
	  Along my soul a bruit there is
	     Of echoing images,
	
	Reverberations of mortality:
	  Spelt backward from its death, to me
	     Its life reads saddenedly.
	
	Its breast was hollowed as the tooth of eld;
	  And boys, their creeping unbeheld,
	     A laughing moment dwelled.
	
	Yet they, within its very heart so crept,
	  Reached not the heart that courage kept
	     With winds and years beswept.
	
	And in its boughs did close and kindly nest
	  The birds, as they within its breast,
	     By all its leaves caressed.
	
	But bird nor child might touch by any art
	  Each other’s or the tree’s hid heart,
	     A whole God’s breadth apart;
	
	The breadth of God, he breadth of death and life!
	  Even so, even so, in undreamed strife
	     With pulseless Law, the wife,--
	
	The sweetest wife on sweetest marriage-day,--
	  Their souls at grapple in mid-way,
	     Sweet to her sweet may say:
	
	“I take you to my inmost heart, my true!”
	  Ah, fool! but there is one heart you
	     Shall never take him to!
	
	The hold that falls not when the town is got,
	  The heart’s heart, whose immurèd plot
	     Hath keys yourself keep not!
	
	Its ports you cannot burst--you are withstood--
	  For him that to your listening blood
	     Sends precepts as he would.
	
	Its gates are deaf to Love, high summoner;
	  Yea, Love’s great warrant runs not there:
	     You are your prisoner.
	
	Yourself are with yourself the sole consortress
	  In that unleaguerable fortress;
	     It knows you not for portress
	
	Its keys are at the cincture hung of God;
	  Its gates are trepidant to His nod;
	     By Him its floors are trod.
	
	And if His feet shall rock those floors in wrath,
	  Or blest aspersion sleek His path,
	     Is only choice it hath.
	
	Yea, in that ultimate heart’s occult abode
	  To lie as in an oubliette of God,
	     Or as a bower untrod,
	
	Built by a secret Lover for His Spouse;--
	  Sole choice is this your life allows,
	     Sad tree, whose perishing boughs
	        So few birds house!



13. A HOLOCAUST

	_‘No man ever attained supreme knowledge, unless his heart had been torn up by the roots.’_
	
	When I presage the time shall come--yea, now
	  Perchance is come, when you shall fail from me,
	Because the mighty spirit, to whom you vow
	  Faith of kin genius unrebukably,
	Scourges my sloth, and from your side dismissed
	  Henceforth this sad and most, most lonely soul
	Must, marching fatally through pain and mist,
	  The God-bid levy of its powers enrol;
	When I presage that none shall hear the voice
	  From the great Mount that clangs my ordained advance,
	That sullen envy bade the churlish choice
	  Yourself shall say, and turn your altered glance;
	O God! Thou knowest if this heart of flesh
	  Quivers like broken entrails, when the wheel
	Rolleth some dog in middle street, or fresh
	  Fruit when ye tear it bleeding from the peel;
	If my soul cries the uncomprehended cry
	  When the red agony oozed on Olivet!
	Yet not for this, a caitiff, falter I,
	  Beloved whom I must lose, nor thence regret
	The doubly-vouched and twin allegiance owed
	  To you in Heaven, and Heaven in you, Lady.
	How could you hope, loose dealer with my God,
	  That I should keep for you my fealty?
	For still ’tis thus:-because I am so true,
	My Fair, to Heaven, I am so true to you!



14. THE HOUND OF HEAVEN

	I FLED Him, down the nights and down the days;
	  I fled Him, down the arches of the years;
	I fled Him, down the labyrinthine ways
	  Of my own mind; and in the mist of tears
	I hid from Him, and under running laughter.
	              Up vistaed hopes, I sped;
	              And shot, precipitated
	Adown Titanic glooms of chasmed fears,
	  From those strong Feet that followed, followed after.
	              But with unhurrying chase,
	              And unperturbéd pace,
	     Deliberate speed, majestic instancy,
	              They beat--and a Voice beat
	              More instant than the Feet--
	     “All things betray thee, who betrayest Me.”
	
	              I pleaded, outlaw-wise,
	By many a hearted casement, curtained red,
	  Trellised with intertwining charities;
	(For, though I knew His love Who followéd,
	              Yet was I sore adread
	Lest, having Him, I must have naught beside)
	But, if one little casement parted wide,
	  The gust of His approach would clash it to
	  Fear wist not to evade, as Love wist to pursue.
	Across the margent of the world I fled,
	  And troubled the gold gateways of the stars,
	  Smiting for shelter on their changèd bars;
	              Fretted to dulcet jars
	And silvern chatter the pale ports o’ the moon.
	I said to dawn: Be sudden--to eve: Be soon;
	  With thy young skiey blossoms heap me over
	              From this tremendous Lover!
	Float thy vague veil about me, lest He see!
	  I tempted all His servitors, but to find
	My own betrayal in their constancy,
	In faith to Him their fickleness to me,
	  Their traitorous trueness, and their loyal deceit.
	To all swift things for swiftness did I sue;
	  Clung to the whistling mane of every wind.
	        But whether they swept, smoothly fleet,
	     The long savannahs of the blue;
	              Or whether, Thunder-driven,
	        They clanged his chariot ’thwart a heaven,
	Plashy with flying lightnings round the spurn o’ their feet:--
	  Fear wist not to evade as Love wist to pursue.
	        Still with unhurrying chase,
	        And unperturbèd pace,
	  Deliberate speed, majestic instancy,
	           Came on the following Feet,
	           And a Voice above their beat--
	     “Naught shelters thee, who wilt not shelter Me.”
	
	I sought no more that, after which I strayed,
	     In face of man or maid;
	But still within the little children’s eyes
	     Seems something, something that replies,
	_They_ at least are for me, surely for me!
	I turned me to them very wistfully;
	But just as their young eyes grew sudden fair
	     With dawning answers there,
	Their angel plucked them from me by the hair.
	“Come then, ye other children, Nature’s--share
	With me” (said I) “your delicate fellowship;
	     Let me greet you lip to lip,
	     Let me twine with you caresses,
	           Wantoning
	     With our Lady-Mother’s vagrant tresses,
	           Banqueting
	     With her in her wind-walled palace,
	     Underneath her azured daïs,
	     Quaffing, as your taintless way is,
	           From a chalice
	Lucent-weeping out of the dayspring.”
	           So it was done:
	_I_ in their delicate fellowship was one--
	Drew the bolt of Nature’s secrecies.
	     _I_ knew all the swift importings
	     On the wilful face of skies;
	     I knew how the clouds arise
	     Spumèd of the wild sea-snortings;
	           All that’s born or dies
	     Rose and drooped with--made them shapers
	Of mine own moods, or wailful or divine--
	     With them joyed and was bereaven.
	     I was heavy with the even,
	     When she lit her glimmering tapers
	     Round the day’s dead sanctities.
	     I laughed in the morning’s eyes.
	I triumphed and I saddened with all weather,
	     Heaven and I wept together,
	And its sweet tears were salt with mortal mine;
	Against the red throb of its sunset-heart
	           I laid my own to beat,
	           And share commingling heat;
	But not by that, by that, was eased my human smart.
	In vain my tears were wet on Heaven’s grey cheek.
	For ah! we know not what each other says,
	     These things and I; in sound _I_ speak--
	_Their_ sound is but their stir, they speak by silences.
	Nature, poor stepdame, cannot slake my drouth;
	     Let her, if she would owe me,
	Drop yon blue bosom-veil of sky, and show me
	     The breasts o’ her tenderness:
	Never did any milk of hers once bless
	              My thirsting mouth.
	              Nigh and nigh draws the chase,
	              With unperturbèd pace,
	     Deliberate speed majestic instancy
	              And past those noisèd Feet
	              A voice comes yet more fleet--
	  “Lo! naught contents thee, who content’st not Me.”
	
	Naked I wait Thy love’s uplifted stroke!
	My harness piece by piece Thou hast hewn from me,
	              And smitten me to my knee;
	     I am defenceless utterly,
	     I slept, methinks, and woke,
	And, slowly gazing, find me stripped in sleep.
	In the rash lustihead of my young powers,
	     I shook the pillaring hours
	And pulled my life upon me; grimed with smears,
	I stand amid the dust o’ the mounded years--
	My mangled youth lies dead beneath the heap.
	My days have crackled and gone up in smoke,
	Have puffed and burst as sun-starts on a stream.
	     Yea, faileth now even dream
	The dreamer, and the lute the lutanist;
	Even the linked fantasies, in whose blossomy twist
	I swung the earth a trinket at my wrist,
	Are yielding; cords of all too weak account
	For earth with heavy griefs so overplussed.
	     Ah! is Thy love indeed
	A weed, albeit an amaranthine weed,
	Suffering no flowers except its own to mount?
	     Ah! must--
	     Designer infinite!--
	Ah! must Thou char the wood ere Thou canst limn with it?
	My freshness spent its wavering shower i’ the dust;
	And now my heart is as a broken fount,
	Wherein tear-drippings stagnate, spilt down ever
	     From the dank thoughts that shiver
	Upon the sighful branches of my mind.
	     Such is; what is to be?
	The pulp so bitter, how shall taste the rind?
	I dimly guess what Time in mists confounds;
	Yet ever and anon a trumpet sounds
	From the hid battlements of Eternity,
	Those shaken mists a space unsettle, then
	Round the half-glimpsèd turrets slowly wash again;
	     But not ere him who summoneth
	     I first have seen, enwound
	With grooming robes purpureal, cypress-crowned;
	His name I know, and what his trumpet saith.
	Whether man’s heart or life it be which yields
	     Thee harvest, must Thy harvest fields
	     Be dunged with rotten death?
	           Now of that long pursuit
	           Comes on at hand the bruit;
	     That Voice is round me like a bursting sea:
	           “And is thy earth so marred,
	           Shattered in shard on shard?
	     Lo, all things fly thee, for thou fliest Me!
	
	     “Strange, piteous, futile thing!
	Wherefore should any set thee love apart?
	Seeing none but I makes much of naught” (He said),
	“And human love needs human meriting:
	     How hast thou merited--
	Of all man’s clotted clay the dingiest clot?
	     Alack, thou knowest not
	How little worthy of any love thou art!
	Whom wilt thou find to love ignoble thee,
	     Save Me, save only Me?
	All which I took from thee I did but take,
	     Not for thy harms,
	But just that thou might’st seek it in My arms.
	     All which thy child’s mistake
	Fancies as lost, I have stored for thee at home:
	     Rise, clasp My hand, and come.”
	
	           Halts by me that footfall:
	           Is my gloom, after all,
	     Shade of His hand, outstretched caressingly?
	           “Ah, fondest, blindest, weakest,
	           I am He Whom thou seekest!
	     Thou dravest love from thee, who dravest Me.”



15. IN NO STRANGE LAND

	_The kingdom of God is within you_
	
	O world invisible, we view thee,
	O world intangible, we touch thee,
	O world unknowable, we know thee,
	Inapprehensible, we clutch thee!
	
	Does the fish soar to find the ocean,
	The eagle plunge to find the air--
	That we ask of the stars in motion
	If they have rumor of thee there?
	
	Not where the wheeling systems darken,
	And our benumbed conceiving soars!--
	The drift of pinions, would we hearken,
	Beats at our own clay-shuttered doors.
	
	The angels keep their ancient places--
	Turn but a stone and start a wing!
	’Tis ye, ’tis your estrangèd faces,
	That miss the many-splendored thing.
	
	But (when so sad thou canst not sadder)
	Cry--and upon thy so sore loss
	Shall shine the traffic of Jacob’s ladder
	Pitched betwixt Heaven and Charing Cross.
	
	Yea, in the night, my Soul, my daughter,
	Cry--clinging to Heaven by the hems;
	And lo, Christ walking on the water,
	Not of Genesareth, but Thames!



16. A MAY BURDEN

	Though meadow-ways as I did tread,
	The corn grew in great lustihead,
	And hey! the beeches burgeoned.
	By Goddes fay, by Goddes fay!
	It is the month, the jolly month,
	It is the jolly month of May.
	
	God ripe the wines and corn, I say,
	And wenches for the marriage-day,
	And boys to teach love’s comely play.
	By Goddes fay, by Goddes fay!
	It is the month, the jolly month,
	It is the jolly month of May.
	
	As I went down by lane and lea,
	The daisies reddened so, pardie!
	“Blushets!” I said, “I well do see,
	By Goddes fay, by Goddes fay!
	The thing ye think of in this month,
	Heigho! this jolly month of May.”
	
	As down I went by rye and oats,
	The blossoms smelt of kisses; throats
	Of birds turned kisses into notes;
	By Goddes fay, by Goddes fay!
	The kiss it is a growing flower,
	I trow, this jolly month of May.
	
	God send a mouth to every kiss,
	Seeing the blossom of this bliss
	By gathering doth grow, certes!
	By Goddes fay, by Goddes fay!
	Thy brow-garland pushed all aslant
	Tells--but I tell not, wanton May!



17. NEW YEAR’S CHIMES

	What is the song the stars sing?
	(And a million songs are as song of one)
	This is the song the stars sing:
	(Sweeter song’s none)
	One to set, and many to sing,
	(And a million songs are as song of one)
	One to stand, and many to cling,
	The many things, and the one Thing,
	The one that runs not, the many that run.
	The ever new weaveth the ever old,
	(And a million songs are as song of one)
	Ever telling the never told;
	The silver saith, and the said is gold,
	And done ever the never done.
	The chase that’s chased is the Lord o’ the chase,
	(And a million songs are as song of one)
	And the pursued cries on the race;
	And the hounds in leash are the hounds that run.
	Hidden stars by the shown stars’ sheen:
	(And a million suns are but as one)
	Colours unseen by the colours seen,
	And sounds unheard heard sounds between,
	And a night is in the light of the sun.
	An ambuscade of lights in night,
	(And a million secrets are but as one)
	And anight is dark in the sun’s light,
	And a world in the world man looks upon.
	Hidden stars by the shown stars’ wings,
	(And a million cycles are but as one)
	And a world with unapparent strings
	Knits the stimulant world of things;
	Behold, and vision thereof is none.
	The world above in the world below,
	(And a million worlds are but as one)
	And the One in all; as the sun’s strength so
	Strives in all strength, glows in all glow
	Of the earth that wits not, and man thereon.
	Braced in its own fourfold embrace
	(And a million strengths are as strength of one)
	And round it all God’s arms of grace,
	The world, so as the Vision says,
	Doth with great lightning-tramples run.
	And thunder bruiteth into thunder,
	(And a million sounds are as sound of one)
	From stellate peak to peak is tossed a voice of wonder,
	And the height stoops down to the depths thereunder,
	And sun leans forth to his brother-sun.
	And the more ample years unfold
	(With a million songs as song of one)
	A little new of the ever old,
	A little told of the never told,
	Added act of the never done.
	Loud the descant, and low the theme,
	(A million songs are as song of one)
	And the dream of the world is dream in dream,
	But the one Is is, or nought could seem;
	And the song runs round to the song begun.
	This is the song the stars sing,
	(Tonèd all in time)
	Tintinnabulous, tuned to ring
	A multitudinous-single thing
	(Rung all in rhyme).



18. THE POPPY

	SUMMER set lip to earth’s bosom bare.
	And left the flushed print in a poppy there:
	Like a yawn of fire from the grass it came,
	And the fanning wind puffed it to flapping flame.
	
	With burnt mouth red like a lion’s it drank
	The blood of the sun as he slaughtered sank,
	And dipped its cup in the purpurate shine
	When the eastern conduits ran with wine.
	
	Till it grew lethargied with fierce bliss,
	And hot as a swinked gipsy is,
	And drowsed in sleepy savageries,
	With mouth wide a-pout for a sultry kiss.
	
	A child and man paced side by side,
	Treading the skirts of eventide;
	But between the clasp of his hand and hers
	Lay, felt not, twenty withered years.
	
	She turned, with the rout of her dusk South hair,
	And saw the sleeping gipsy there;
	And snatched and snapped it in swift child’s whim,
	With--“Keep it, long as you live!”--to him.
	
	And his smile, as nymphs from their laving meres,
	Trembled up from a bath of tears;
	And joy, like a mew sea-rocked apart,
	Tossed on the wave of his troubled heart.
	
	For _he_ saw what she did not see,
	That--as kindled by its own fervency--
	The verge shrivelled inward smoulderingly:
	
	And suddenly ’twixt his hand and hers
	He knew the twenty withered years--
	No flower, but twenty shrivelled years.
	
	“Was never such thing until this hour,”
	Low to his heart he said; “the flower
	Of sleep brings wakening to me,
	And of oblivion memory.”
	
	“Was never this thing to me,” he said,
	“Though with bruisèd poppies my feet are red!”
	And again to his own heart very low:
	“O child!  I love, for I love and know;
	
	“But you, who love nor know at all
	The diverse chambers in Love’s guest-hall,
	Where some rise early, few sit long:
	In how differing accents hear the throng
	His great Pentecostal tongue;
	
	“Who know not love from amity,
	Nor my reported self from me;
	A fair fit gift is this, meseems,
	You give--this withering flower of dreams.
	
	“O frankly fickle, and fickly true,
	Do you know what the days will do to you?
	To your Love and you what the days will do,
	O frankly fickle, and fickly true?
	
	“You have loved me, Fair, three lives--or days:
	’Twill pass with the passing of my face.
	But where _I_ go, your face goes too,
	To watch lest I play false to you.
	
	“I am but, my sweet, your foster-lover,
	Knowing well when certain years are over
	You vanish from me to another;
	Yet I know, and love, like the foster-mother.
	
	“So, frankly fickle, and fickly true!
	For my brief life--while I take from you
	This token, fair and fit, meseems,
	For me--this withering flower of dreams.”
	
	                          * * * * * * *
	
	The sleep-flower sways in the wheat its head,
	Heavy with dreams, as that with bread:
	The goodly grain and the sun-flushed sleeper
	The reaper reaps, and Time the reaper.
	
	I hang ’mid men my needless head,
	And my fruit is dreams, as theirs is bread:
	The goodly men and the sun-hazed sleeper
	Time shall reap, but after the reaper
	The world shall glean of me, me the sleeper!
	
	Love! love! your flower of withered dream
	In leavèd rhyme lies safe, I deem,
	Sheltered and shut in a nook of rhyme,
	From the reaper man, and his reaper Time.
	
	Love! _I_ fall into the claws of Time:
	But lasts within a leavèd rhyme
	All that the world of me esteems--
	My withered dreams, my withered dreams.



19. TO A SNOWFLAKE

	What heart could have thought you?--
	Past our devisal
	(O filigree petal!)
	Fashioned so purely,
	Fragilely, surely,
	From what Paradisal
	Imagineless metal,
	Too costly for cost?
	Who hammered you, wrought you,
	From argentine vapor?--
	“God was my shaper.
	Passing surmisal,
	He hammered, He wrought me,
	From curled silver vapor,
	To lust of His mind--
	Thou could’st not have thought me!
	So purely, so palely,
	Tinily, surely,
	Mightily, frailly,
	Insculped and embossed,
	With His hammer of wind,
	And His graver of frost.”



20. TO DAISIES

	Ah, drops of gold in whitening flame
	Burning, we know your lovely name--
	Daisies, that little children pull!
	Like all weak things, over the strong
	Ye do not know your power for wrong,
	And much abuse your feebleness.
	Daisies, that little children pull,
	As ye are weak, be merciful!
	O hide your eyes! they are to me
	Beautiful insupportably.
	Or be but conscious ye are fair,
	And I your loveliness could bear,
	But, being fair so without art,
	Ye vex the silted memories of my heart!
	
	As a pale ghost yearning strays
	With sundered gaze,
	’Mid corporal presences that are
	To it impalpable--such a bar
	Sets you more distant than the morning-star.
	Such wonder is on you, and amaze,
	I look and marvel if I be
	Indeed the phantom, or are ye?
	The light is on your innocence
	Which fell from me.
	The fields ye still inhabit whence
	My world-acquainted treading strays,
	The country where I did commence;
	And though ye shine to me so near,
	So close to gross and visible sense,--
	Between us lies impassable year on year.
	
	To other time and far-off place
	Belongs your beauty: silent thus,
	Though to other naught you tell,
	To me your ranks are rumorous
	Of an ancient miracle.
	Vain does my touch your petals graze,
	I touch you not; and though ye blossom here,
	Your roots are fast in alienated days.
	Ye there are anchored, while Time’s stream
	Has swept me past them: your white ways
	And infantile delights do seem
	To look in on me like a face,
	Dead and sweet, come back through dream,
	With tears, because for old embrace
	It has no arms.
	
	These hands did toy,
	Children, with you, when I was child,
	And in each other’s eyes we smiled:
	Not yours, not yours the grievous-fair
	Apparelling
	With which you wet mine eyes; you wear,
	Ah me, the garment of the grace
	I wove you when I was a boy;
	O mine, and not the year’s your stolen Spring!
	And since ye wear it,
	Hide your sweet selves! I cannot bear it.
	For when ye break the cloven earth
	With your young laughter and endearment,
	No blossomy carillon ’tis of mirth
	To me; I see my slaughtered joy
	Bursting its cerement.



21. TO MONICA THOUGHT DYING

	        YOU, O the piteous you!
	        Who all the long night through
	        Anticipatedly
	        Disclose yourself to me
	        Already in the ways
	Beyond our human comfortable days;
	        How can you deem what Death
	        Impitiably saith
	        To me, who listening wake
	        For your poor sake?
	        When a grown woman dies
	You know we think unceasingly
	What things she said, how sweet, how wise;
	And these do make our misery.
	        But you were (you to me
	The dead anticipatedly!)
	You--eleven years, was’t not, or so?--
	        Were just a child, you know;
	        And so you never said
	Things sweet immeditatably and wise
	To interdict from closure my wet eyes:
	        But foolish things, my dead, my dead!
	        Little and laughable,
	        Your age that fitted well.
	And was it such things all unmemorable,
	        Was it such things could make
	Me sob all night for your implacable sake?
	
	        Yet, as you said to me,
	In pretty make-believe of revelry,
	        So the night long said Death
	        With his magniloquent breath;
	        (And that remembered laughter
	Which in our daily uses followed after,
	Was all untuned to pity and to awe):
	        _“A cup of chocolate,
	        One farthing is the rate,
	        You drink it through a straw.”_
	
	        How could I know, how know
	Those laughing words when drenched with sobbing so?
	Another voice than yours, than yours, he hath!
	        My dear, was’t worth his breath,
	His mighty utterance?--yet he saith, and saith!
	This dreadful Death to his own dreadfulness
	        Doth dreadful wrong,
	This dreadful childish babble on his tongue!
	That iron tongue made to speak sentences,
	And wisdom insupportably complete,
	Why should it only say the long night through,
	        In mimicry of you,--
	        _“A cup of chocolate,
	        One farthing is the rate,
	You drink it through a straw, a straw, a straw!”_
	        Oh, of all sentences,
	        Piercingly incomplete!
	Why did you teach that fatal mouth to draw,
	        Child, impermissible awe,
	        From your old trivialness?
	        Why have you done me this
	        Most unsustainable wrong,
	        And into Death’s control
	Betrayed the secret places of my soul?
	        Teaching him that his lips,
	Uttering their native earthquake and eclipse,
	        Could never so avail
	To rend from hem to hem the ultimate veil
	        Of this most desolate
	Spirit, and leave it stripped and desecrate,--
	        Nay, never so have wrung
	From eyes and speech weakness unmanned, unmeet;
	As when his terrible dotage to repeat
	Its little lesson learneth at your feet;
	        As when he sits among
	        His sepulchres, to play
	With broken toys your hand has cast away,
	With derelict trinkets of the darling young.
	Why have you taught--that he might so complete
	        His awful panoply
	        From your cast playthings--why,
	This dreadful childish babble to his tongue,
	        Dreadful and sweet?



22. WHAT SHALL I YOUR TRUE LOVE TELL?

	What shall I your true love tell,
	Earth forsaking maid?
	What shall I your true love tell
	When life’s spectre’s laid?
	“Tell him that, our side the grave,
	Maid may not believe
	Life should be so sad to have,
	That’s so sad to leave!”
	What shall I your true love tell
	When I come to him?
	What shall I your true love tell
	Eyes growing dim?
	“Tell him this, when you shall part
	From a maiden pined;
	That I see him with my heart,
	Now my eyes are blind.”
	What shall I your true love tell
	Speaking while is scant?
	What shall I your true love tell
	Death’s white postulant?
	“Tell him love, with speech at strife,
	For last utterance saith:
	`I who loved with all my life,
	Loved with all my death.’”
