*** R. S. Thomas (1913 - 2000)


1. EVANS

	Evans? Yes, many a time
	I came down his bare flight
	Of stairs into the gaunt kitchen
	With its wood fire, where crickets sang
	Accompaniment to the black kettle"s
	Whine, and so into the cold
	Dark to smother in the thick tide
	Of night that drifted about the walls
	Of his stark farm on the hill ridge.
	
	It was not the dark filling my eyes
	And mouth appalled me; not even the drip
	Of rain like blood from the one tree
	Weather-tortured. It was the dark
	Silting the veins of that sick man
	I left stranded upon the vast
	And lonely shore of his bleak bed.



2. GOOD

	The old man comes out on the hill
	and looks down to recall earlier days
	in the valley. He sees the stream shine,
	the church stand, hears the litter of
	children’s voices. A chill in the flesh
	tells him that death is not far off
	now: it is the shadow under the great boughs
	of life. His garden has herbs growing.
	The kestrel goes by with fresh prey
	in its claws. The wind scatters the scent
	of wild beans. The tractor operates
	on the earth’s body. His grandson is there
	ploughing; his young wife fetches him
	cakes and tea and a dark smile. It is well.



3. THE INTERROGATION

	But the financiers will ask
	In that day: IS it not better
	To leave broken bank balances
	Behind than broken heads?
	
	And Christ recognizing the
	New warriors will feel breaching
	His healed side their terrible
	Pencil and the haemorrhage of its figures.



4. KNEELING

	Moments of great calm,
	Kneeling before an altar
	Of wood in a stone church
	In summer, waiting for the God   
	To speak; the air a staircase   
	For silence; the sun’s light   
	Ringing me, as though I acted   
	A great rôle. And the audiences   
	Still; all that close throng
	Of spirits waiting, as I,
	For the message.
	                        Prompt me, God;
	But not yet. When I speak,   
	Though it be you who speak   
	Through me, something is lost.   
	The meaning is in the waiting.



5. A PEASANT

	Iago Prytherch his name, though, be it allowed,
	Just an ordinary man of the bald Welsh hills,
	Who pens a few sheep in a gap of cloud.
	Docking mangels, chipping the green skin
	From the yellow bones with a half-witted grin
	Of satisfaction, or churning the crude earth
	To a stiff sea of clods that glint in the wind--
	So are his days spent, his spittled mirth
	Rarer than the sun that cracks the cheeks
	Of the gaunt sky perhaps once in a week.
	And then at night see him fixed in his chair
	Motionless, except when he leans to gob in the fire.
	There is something frightening in the vacancy of his mind.
	His clothes, sour with years of sweat
	And animal contact, shock the refined,
	But affected, sense with their stark naturalness.
	Yet this is your prototype, who, season by season
	Against siege of rain and the wind’s attrition,
	Preserves his stock, an impregnable fortress
	Not to be stormed, even in death’s confusion.
	Remember him, then, for he, too, is a winner of wars,
	Enduring like a tree under the curious stars.



6. WALTER LLYWARCH

	I am, as you know, Walter Llywarch,
	Born in Wales of approved parents,
	Well goitred, round in the bum,
	Sure prey of the slow virus
	Bred in quarries of grey rain.
	
	Born in autumn at the right time
	For hearing stories from the cracked lips
	Of old folk dreaming of summer,
	I piled them on to the bare hearth
	Of my own fancy to make a blaze
	To warm myself, but achieved only
	The smoke’s acid that brings the smart
	Of false tears into the eyes.
	
	Months of fog, months of drizzle;
	Thought wrapped in the grey cocoon
	Of race, of place, awaiting the sun’s
	Coming, but when the sun came,
	Touching the hills with a hot hand,
	Wings were spread only to fly
	Round and round in a cramped cage
	Or beat in vain at the sky’s window.
	
	School in the week, on Sunday chapel:
	Tales of a land fairer than this
	Were not so tall, for others had proved it
	Without the grave’s passport, they sent
	The fruit home for ourselves to taste.
	
	Walter Llywarch--the words were a name
	On a lost letter that never came
	For one who waited in the long queue
	Of life that wound through a Welsh valley.
	I took instead, as others had done
	Before, a wife from the back pews
	In chapel, rather to share the rain
	Of winter evenings, than to intrude
	On her pale body; and yet we lay
	For warmth together and laughed to hear
	Each new child’s cry of despair.
