*** Georg Trakl (1887 - 1914)


1. DE PROFUNDIS

	There is a stubble field on which a black rain falls. 
	There is a tree which, brown, stands lonely here. 
	There is a hissing wind which haunts deserted huts--
	How sad this evening. 
	
	Past the village pond 
	The gentle orphan still gathers scanty ears of corn. 
	Golden and round her eyes are gazing in the dusk 
	And her lap awaits the heavenly bridegroom. 
	
	Returning home 
	Shepherds found the sweet body 
	Decayed in the bramble bush. 
	
	A shade I am remote from sombre hamlets. 
	The silence of God 
	I drank from the woodland well. 
	
	On my forehead cold metal forms. 
	Spiders look for my heart. 
	There is a light that fails in my mouth. 
	
	At night I found myself upon a heath, 
	Thick with garbage and the dust of stars. 
	In the hazel copse 
	Crystal angels have sounded once more. 



2. GRODEK

	At evening the autumn woodlands ring 
	With deadly weapons. Over the golden plains 
	And lakes of blue, the sun 
	More darkly rolls. The night surrounds 
	Warriors dying and the wild lament 
	Of their fragmented mouths. 
	Yet silently there gather in the willow combe 
	Red clouds inhabited by an angry god, 
	Shed blood, and the chill of the moon. 
	All roads lead to black decay. 
	Under golden branching of the night and stars 
	A sister’s shadow sways through the still grove 
	To greet the heroes’ spirits, the bloodied heads. 
	And softly in the reeds Autumn’s dark flutes resound. 
	O prouder mourning!--You brazen altars, 
	The spirit’s hot flame is fed now by a tremendous pain: 
	The grandsons, unborn.



3. WINTER EVENING

	When snow falls against the window, 
	Long sounds the evening bell . . .
	For so many has the table 
	Been prepared, the house set in order. 
	
	From their wandering, many 
	Come on dark paths to this gateway. 
	The tree of grace is flowering in gold 
	Out of the cool sap of the earth. 
	
	In stillness, wanderer, step in: 
	Grief has worn the threshold into stone. 
	But see: in pure light, glowing 
	There on the table: bread and wine.
