*** Ivan Turgenev (1818 - 1883)


1. ALMS

	Near a large town, along the broad highroad walked an old sick man. 
	
	He tottered as he went; his old wasted legs, halting, dragging, stumbling, 
	moved painfully and feebly, as though they did not belong to him; his 
	clothes hung in rags about him; his uncovered head drooped on his 
	breast . . . He was utterly worn-out. 
	
	He sat down on a stone by the wayside, bent forward, leant his elbows on 
	his knees, hid his face in his hands; and through the knotted fingers the 
	tears dropped down on to the grey, dry dust. 
	
	He remembered . . . 
	
	Remembered how he too had been strong and rich, and how he had wasted his 
	health, and had lavished his riches upon others, friends and enemies . . .
	And here, he had not now a crust of bread; and all had forsaken him, 
	friends even before foes . . . Must he sink to begging alms? There was 
	bitterness in his heart, and shame. 
	
	The tears still dropped and dropped, spotting the grey dust. 
	
	Suddenly he heard some one call him by his name; he lifted his weary head, 
	and saw standing before him a stranger. 
	
	A face calm and grave, but not stern; eyes not beaming, but clear; a look 
	penetrating, but not unkind. 
	
	‘Thou hast given away all thy riches,’ said a tranquil voice . . . ‘But thou 
	dost not regret having done good, surely?’ 
	
	‘I regret it not,’ answered the old man with a sigh; ‘but here I am dying 
	now.’ 
	
	‘And had there been no beggars who held out their hands to thee,’ the 
	stranger went on, ‘thou wouldst have had none on whom to prove thy 
	goodness; thou couldst not have done thy good works.’ 
	
	The old man answered nothing, and pondered. 
	
	‘So be thou also now not proud, poor man,’ the stranger began again. ‘Go 
	thou, hold out thy hand; do thou too give to other good men a chance to 
	prove in deeds that they are good.’ 
	
	The old man started, raised his eyes . . . but already the stranger had 
	vanished, and in the distance a man came into sight walking along the road. 
	
	The old man went up to him, and held out his hand. This man turned away 
	with a surly face, and gave him nothing. 
	
	But after him another passed, and he gave the old man some trifling alms. 
	
	And the old man bought himself bread with the coppers given him, and sweet 
	to him seemed the morsel gained by begging, and there was no shame in his 
	heart, but the contrary: peace and joy came as a blessing upon him.


2. CABBAGE SOUP

	A peasant woman, a widow, had an only son, a young man of twenty, the best
	workman in the village, and he died.
	
	The lady who was the owner of the village, hearing of the woman’s trouble,
	went to visit her on the very day of the burial.
	
	She found her at home.
	
	Standing in the middle of her hut, before the table, she was, without
	haste, with a regular movement of the right arm (the left hung listless at
	her side), scooping up weak cabbage soup from the bottom of a blackened
	pot, and swallowing it spoonful by spoonful.
	
	The woman’s face was sunken and dark; her eyes were red and swollen… but
	she held herself as rigid and upright as in church.
	
	‘Heavens!’ thought the lady, ‘she can eat at such a moment . . . what coarse
	feelings they have really, all of them!’
	
	And at that point the lady recollected that when, a few years before, she
	had lost her little daughter, nine months old, she had refused, in her
	grief, a lovely country villa near Petersburg, and had spent the whole
	summer in town! Meanwhile the woman went on swallowing cabbage soup.
	
	The lady could not contain herself, at last. ‘Tatiana!’ she said . . .
	‘Really! I’m surprised! Is it possible you didn’t care for your son? How is
	it you’ve not lost your appetite? How can you eat that soup!’
	
	‘My Vasia’s dead,’ said the woman quietly, and tears of anguish ran once
	more down her hollow cheeks. ‘It’s the end of me too, of course; it’s
	tearing the heart out of me alive. But the soup’s not to be wasted; there’s
	salt in it.’
	
	The lady only shrugged her shoulders and went away. Salt did not cost her
	much.


3. A DREAM

	I fancied I was somewhere in Russia, in the wilds, in a simple country 
	house. 
	
	The room big and low pitched with three windows; the walls whitewashed; no 
	furniture. Before the house a barren plain; gradually sloping downwards, it 
	stretches into the distance; a grey monotonous sky hangs over it, like the 
	canopy of a bed. 
	
	I am not alone; there are some ten persons in the room with me. All quite 
	plain people, simply dressed. They walk up and down in silence, as it 
	were stealthily. They avoid one another, and yet are continually looking 
	anxiously at one another. 
	
	Not one knows why he has come into this house and what people there are 
	with him. On all the faces uneasiness and despondency . . . all in turn 
	approach the windows and look about intently as though expecting something 
	from without. 
	
	Then again they fall to wandering up and down. Among us is a small-sized 
	boy; from time to time he whimpers in the same thin voice, ‘Father, I’m 
	frightened!’ My heart turns sick at his whimper, and I too begin to be 
	afraid . . . of what? I don’t know myself. Only I feel, there is coming 
	nearer and nearer a great, great calamity. 
	
	The boy keeps on and on with his wail. Oh, to escape from here! How 
	stifling! How weary! how heavy . . . But escape is impossible. 
	
	That sky is like a shroud. And no wind . . . Is the air dead or what? 
	
	All at once the boy runs up to the window and shrieks in the same piteous 
	voice, ‘Look! look! the earth has fallen away!’ 
	
	‘How? fallen away?’ Yes; just now there was a plain before the house, and 
	now it stands on a fearful height! The horizon has sunk, has gone down, and 
	from the very house drops an almost overhanging, as it were scooped-out, 
	black precipice. 
	
	We all crowded to the window . . . Horror froze our hearts. ‘Here it is . . . 
	here it is!’ whispers one next me. 
	
	And behold, along the whole far boundary of the earth, something began to 
	stir, some sort of small, roundish hillocks began heaving and falling. 
	
	‘It is the sea!’ the thought flashed on us all at the same instant. ‘It 
	will swallow us all up directly . . . Only how can it grow and rise upwards? 
	To this precipice?’ 
	
	And yet, it grows, grows enormously . . . Already there are not separate 
	hillocks heaving in the distance . . . One continuous, monstrous wave 
	embraces the whole circle of the horizon. 
	
	It is swooping, swooping, down upon us! In an icy hurricane it flies, 
	swirling in the darkness of hell. Everything shuddered-and there, in 
	this flying mass-was the crash of thunder, the iron wail of thousands of 
	throats . . .
	
	Ah! what a roaring and moaning! It was the earth howling for terror . . .
	
	The end of it! the end of all! 
	
	The child whimpered once more . . . I tried to clutch at my companions, 
	but already we were all crushed, buried, drowned, swept away by that 
	pitch-black, icy, thundering wave! Darkness . . . darkness everlasting! 
	
	Scarcely breathing, I awoke.


4. THE EGOIST

	He had every qualification for becoming the scourge of his family.
	
	He was born healthy, was born wealthy, and throughout the whole of his long
	life, continuing to be wealthy and healthy, he never committed a single
	sin, never fell into a single error, never once made a slip or a blunder.
	
	He was irreproachably conscientious! . . . And complacent in the sense of
	his own conscientiousness, he crushed every one with it, his family, his
	friends and his acquaintances.
	
	His conscientiousness was his capital . . . and he exacted an exorbitant
	interest for it.
	
	His conscientiousness gave him the right to be merciless, and to do no good
	deeds beyond what it dictated to him; and he was merciless, and did no good
	. . . for good that is dictated is no good at all.
	
	He took no interest in any one except his own exemplary self, and was
	genuinely indignant if others did not take as studious an interest in it!
	
	At the same time he did not consider himself an egoist, and was
	particularly severe in censuring, and keen in detecting egoists and egoism.
	To be sure he was. The egoism of another was a check on his own.
	
	Not recognising the smallest weakness in himself he did not understand, did
	not tolerate any weakness in any one. He did not, in fact, understand any
	one or any thing, since he was all, on all sides, above and below, before
	and behind, encircled by himself.
	
	He did not even understand the meaning of forgiveness. He had never had to
	forgive himself . . . What inducement could he have to forgive others?
	
	Before the tribunal of his own conscience, before the face of his own God,
	he, this marvel, this monster of virtue, raised his eyes heavenwards, and
	with clear unfaltering voice declared, ‘Yes, I am an exemplary, a truly
	moral man!’
	
	He will repeat these words on his deathbed, and there will be no throb even
	then in his heart of stone--in that heart without stain or blemish!
	
	Oh, hideousness of self-complacent, unbending, cheaply bought virtue; thou
	art almost more revolting than the frank hideousness of vice!


5. THE FACE OF CHRIST

	I saw myself, in dream, a youth, almost a boy, in a low-pitched wooden 
	church. The slim wax candles gleamed, spots of red, before the old pictures 
	of the saints. 
	
	A ring of coloured light encircled each tiny flame. Dark and dim it was 
	in the church . . . But there stood before me many people. All fair-haired, 
	peasant heads. From time to time they began swaying, falling, rising 
	again, like the ripe ears of wheat, when the wind of summer passes in slow 
	undulation over them. 
	
	All at once some man came up from behind and stood beside me. 
	
	I did not turn towards him; but at once I felt that this man was Christ. 
	
	Emotion, curiosity, awe overmastered me suddenly. I made an effort . . . and 
	looked at my neighbour. 
	
	A face like every one’s, a face like all men’s faces. The eyes looked a 
	little upwards, quietly and intently. The lips closed, but not compressed; 
	the upper lip, as it were, resting on the lower; a small beard parted in 
	two. The hands folded and still. And the clothes on him like every one’s. 
	
	‘What sort of Christ is this?’ I thought. ‘Such an ordinary, ordinary man! 
	It can’t be!’ 
	
	I turned away. But I had hardly turned my eyes away from this ordinary man 
	when I felt again that it really was none other than Christ standing beside 
	me. 
	
	Again I made an effort over myself . . . And again the same face, like all 
	men’s faces, the same everyday though unknown features. 
	
	And suddenly my heart sank, and I came to myself. Only then I realised that 
	just such a face--a face like all men’s faces--is the face of Christ.


6. HOW FAIR, HOW FRESH WERE THE ROSES

	Somewhere, sometime, long, long ago, I read a poem. It was soon forgotten 
	. . . but the first line has stuck in my memory--
	
	_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
	
	Now is winter; the frost has iced over the window-panes; in the dark room 
	burns a solitary candle. I sit huddled up in a corner; and in my head the 
	line keeps echoing and echoing--
	
	_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
	
	And I see myself before the low window of a Russian country house. The 
	summer evening is slowly melting into night, the warm air is fragrant of 
	mignonette and lime-blossom; and at the window, leaning on her arm, her 
	head bent on her shoulder, sits a young girl, and silently, intently gazes 
	into the sky, as though looking for new stars to come out. What candour, 
	what inspiration in the dreamy eyes, what moving innocence in the parted 
	questioning lips, how calmly breathes that still-growing, still-untroubled 
	bosom, how pure and tender the profile of the young face! I dare not speak 
	to her; but how dear she is to me, how my heart beats! 
	
	_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
	
	But here in the room it gets darker and darker . . .. The candle burns dim and 
	gutters, dancing shadows quiver on the low ceiling, the cruel crunch of the 
	frost is heard outside, and within the dreary murmur of old age . . .
	
	_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
	
	There rise up before me other images. I hear the merry hubbub of home life 
	in the country. Two flaxen heads, bending close together, look saucily at 
	me with their bright eyes, rosy cheeks shake with suppressed laughter, 
	hands are clasped in warm affection, young kind voices ring one above the 
	other; while a little farther, at the end of the snug room, other hands, 
	young too, fly with unskilled fingers over the keys of the old piano, and 
	the Lanner waltz cannot drown the hissing of the patriarchal samovar . . .
	
	_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._
	
	The candle flickers and goes out . . .. Whose is that hoarse and hollow cough? 
	Curled up, my old dog lies, shuddering at my feet, my only companion . . .
	I’m cold . . . I’m frozen . . . and all of them are dead . . . dead . . . 
	
	_How fair, how fresh were the roses . . ._


7. THE ROSE

	The last days of August . . . Autumn was already at hand. 
	
	The sun was setting. A sudden downpour of rain, without thunder or 
	lightning, had just passed rapidly over our wide plain. 
	
	The garden in front of the house glowed and steamed, all filled with the 
	fire of the sunset and the deluge of rain. 
	
	She was sitting at a table in the drawing-room, and, with persistent 
	dreaminess, gazing through the half-open door into the garden. 
	
	I knew what was passing at that moment in her soul; I knew that, after a 
	brief but agonising struggle, she was at that instant giving herself up to 
	a feeling she could no longer master. 
	
	All at once she got up, went quickly out into the garden, and disappeared. 
	
	An hour passed . . . a second; she had not returned. 
	
	Then I got up, and, getting out of the house, I turned along the walk by 
	which-of that I had no doubt-she had gone. 
	
	All was darkness about me; the night had already fallen. But on the damp 
	sand of the path a roundish object could be discerned-bright red even 
	through the mist. 
	
	I stooped down. It was a fresh, new-blown rose. Two hours before I had seen 
	this very rose on her bosom. 
	
	I carefully picked up the flower that had fallen in the mud, and, going 
	back to the drawing-room, laid it on the table before her chair. 
	
	And now at last she came back, and with light footsteps, crossing the whole 
	room, sat down at the table. 
	
	Her face was both paler and more vivid; her downcast eyes, that looked 
	somehow smaller, strayed rapidly in happy confusion from side to side. 
	
	She saw the rose, snatched it up, glanced at its crushed, muddy petals, 
	glanced at me, and her eyes, brought suddenly to a standstill, were bright 
	with tears. 
	
	‘What are you crying for?’ I asked. 
	
	‘Why, see this rose. Look what has happened to it.’ 
	
	Then I thought fit to utter a profound remark. 
	
	‘Your tears will wash away the mud,’ I pronounced with a significant 
	expression. 
	
	‘Tears do not wash, they burn,’ she answered. And turning to the hearth she 
	flung the rose into the dying flame. 
	
	‘Fire burns even better than tears,’ she cried with spirit; and her lovely 
	eyes, still bright with tears, laughed boldly and happily. 
	
	I saw that she too had been in the fire.


8. THE SPARROW

	I was returning from hunting, and walking along an avenue of the garden, my 
	dog running in front of me. 
	
	Suddenly he took shorter steps, and began to steal along as though tracking 
	game. 
	
	I looked along the avenue, and saw a young sparrow, with yellow about its 
	beak and down on its head. It had fallen out of the nest (the wind was 
	violently shaking the birch-trees in the avenue) and sat unable to move, 
	helplessly flapping its half-grown wings. 
	
	My dog was slowly approaching it, when, suddenly darting down from a tree 
	close by, an old dark-throated sparrow fell like a stone right before his 
	nose, and all ruffled up, terrified, with despairing and pitiful cheeps, it 
	flung itself twice towards the open jaws of shining teeth. 
	
	It sprang to save; it cast itself before its nestling . . . but all its tiny 
	body was shaking with terror; its note was harsh and strange. Swooning with 
	fear, it offered itself up! 
	
	What a huge monster must the dog have seemed to it! And yet it could not 
	stay on its high branch out of danger . . . A force stronger than its will 
	flung it down. 
	
	My Trésor stood still, drew back . . . Clearly he too recognised this force. 
	
	I hastened to call off the disconcerted dog, and went away, full of 
	reverence. 
	
	Yes; do not laugh. I felt reverence for that tiny heroic bird, for its 
	impulse of love. 
	
	Love, I thought, is stronger than death or the fear of death. Only by it, 
	by love, life holds together and advances.


9. TO-MORROW

	How empty, dull, and useless is almost every day when it is spent! How few
	the traces it leaves behind it! How meaningless, how foolish those hours as
	they coursed by one after another!
	
	And yet it is man’s wish to exist; he prizes life, he rests hopes on it, on
	himself, on the future . . . Oh, what blessings he looks for from the future!
	
	But why does he imagine that other coming days will not be like this day he
	has just lived through?
	
	Nay, he does not even imagine it. He likes not to think at all, and he does
	well.
	
	‘Ah, to-morrow, to-morrow!’ he comforts himself, till ‘to-morrow’ pitches
	him into the grave.
	
	Well, and once in the grave, thou hast no choice, thou doest no more
	thinking.


10. THE TWO BROTHERS

	It was a vision . . .
	
	Two angels appeared to me . . . two genii.
	
	I say angels, genii, because both had no clothes on their naked bodies, and
	behind their shoulders rose long powerful wings.
	
	Both were youths. One was rather plump, with soft smooth skin and dark
	curls. His eyes were brown and full, with thick eyelashes; his look
	was sly, merry, and eager. His face was charming, bewitching, a little
	insolent, a little wicked. His full soft crimson lips were faintly
	quivering. The youth smiled as one possessing power-self-confidently and
	languidly; a magnificent wreath of flowers rested lightly on his shining
	tresses, almost touching his velvety eyebrows. A spotted leopard’s skin,
	pinned up with a golden arrow, hung lightly from his curved shoulder to
	his rounded thigh. The feathers of his wings were tinged with rose colour;
	the ends of them were bright red, as though dipped in fresh-spilt scarlet
	blood. From time to time they quivered rapidly with a sweet silvery sound,
	the sound of rain in spring.
	
	The other was thin, and his skin yellowish. At every breath his ribs could
	be seen faintly heaving. His hair was fair, thin, and straight; his eyes
	big, round, pale grey… his glance uneasy and strangely bright. All his
	features were sharp; the little half-open mouth, with pointed fish-like
	teeth; the pinched eagle nose, the projecting chin, covered with whitish
	down. The parched lips never once smiled.
	
	It was a well-cut face, but terrible and pitiless! (Though the face of the
	first, the beautiful youth, sweet and lovely as it was, showed no trace of
	pity either.) About the head of the second youth were twisted a few broken
	and empty ears of corn, entwined with faded grass-stalks. A coarse grey
	cloth girt his loins; the wings behind, a dull dark grey colour, moved
	slowly and menacingly.
	
	The two youths seemed inseparable companions. Each of them leaned upon the
	other’s shoulder. The soft hand of the first lay like a cluster of grapes
	upon the bony neck of the second; the slender wrist of the second, with its
	long delicate fingers, coiled like a snake about the girlish bosom of the
	first.
	
	And I heard a voice. This is what it said: ‘Love and Hunger stand before
	thee--twin brothers, the two foundation-stones of all things living.
	
	‘All that lives moves to get food, and feeds to bring forth young.
	
	‘Love and Hunger--their aim is one; that life should cease not, the life of
	the individual and the life of others--the same universal life.’


11. TWO RICH MEN

	When I hear the praises of the rich man Rothschild, who out of his immense
	revenues devotes whole thousands to the education of children, the care of
	the sick, the support of the aged, I admire and am touched.
	
	But even while I admire it and am touched by it, I cannot help recalling a
	poor peasant family who took an orphan niece into their little tumble-down
	hut.
	
	‘If we take Katka,’ said the woman, ‘our last farthing will go on her,
	there won’t be enough to get us salt to salt us a bit of bread.’
	
	‘Well, . . . we’ll do without salt,’ answered the peasant, her husband.
	
	Rothschild is a long way behind that peasant!

