*** John Updike (1932 - 2009)


1. 61 AND 2/3

	How many more, I must ask myself,
	such perfect ends of Augusts will I witness?--
	the schoolgirls giggling in their months-old tans,
	
	tittering of school soon to come as they hang on the curbs
	as brown as maple seeds, the strip of curbside grass
	sunparched in the tired shade beneath the maple
	
	that in its globular cloud of green cumulus
	holds now an arc, a bulge of rouge,
	held up to the bored blue sky like a cheek to kiss.



2. BACK FROM VACATION

	“Back from vacation”, the barber announces, 
	or the postman, or the girl at the drugstore, now tan. 
	They are amazed to find the workaday world 
	still in place, their absence having slipped no cogs, 
	their customers having hardly missed them, and 
	there being so sparse an audience to tell of the wonders, 
	the pyramids they have seen, the silken warm seas, 
	the nighttimes of marimbas, the purchases achieved 
	in foreign languages, the beggars, the flies, 
	the hotel luxury, the grandeur of marble cities. 
	But at Customs the humdrum pressed its claims. 
	Gray days clicked shut around them; the yoke still fit, 
	warm as if never shucked. The world is still so small, 
	the evidence says, though their hearts cry, “Not so!”



3. BRIDGE

	In my dreams I am always trying to get to the dummy
	its ledge of superior attack, its long chest of treasure,
	the diamonds like stubby daggers, the clubs and the spades
	blunt and black maces poised to crush a trick,
	and the hearts, those bifurcated, lethal rubies.
	Yet something holds me back, some truth about numbers
	inflexible and invisible, while losers pour
	out from my hand, one after another,
	to meet the derision of our enemies’ trump
	and their face cards--the supercilious queen
	with her slim arched eyebrow, and the simpleton king,
	his armless hand like a baby’s on his sword.
	Dears, there are gears in the logic of combat,
	and they grind away while we age and chat.



4. BURNING TRASH

	At night--the light turned off, the filament
	Unburdened of its atom-eating charge,
	His wife asleep, her breathing dipping low
	To touch a swampy source--he thought of death.
	Her father’s hilltop home allowed him time
	To sense the nothing standing like a sheet
	Of speckless glass behind his human future.
	He had two comforts he could see, just two.
	
	One was the cheerful fullness of most things:
	Plump stones and clouds, expectant pods, the soil
	Offering up pressure to his knees and hands.
	The other was burning the trash each day.
	He liked the heat, the imitation danger,
	And the way, as he tossed in used-up news,
	String, napkins, envelopes, and paper cups,
	Hypnotic tongues of order intervened.



5. CHAMBERED NAUTILUS

	How many rooms one occupies to lead
	a life!--the child’s small cell, within earshot
	of his parents’ smothered moans; the college room
	assigned by number, a poster-clad outpost
	of freedom; the married man’s bedchamber,
	cramped scene of glad possession and sneaking sorrow;
	the holiday rental, redolent of salt
	and sun and other people’s cast-off days;
	the capstone mansion with its curtained pomp;
	the businessman’s hotel, a one-night stand
	whose trim twin beds and TV sketch a dream
	of habitation soon forgot; the chill
	guest room; the pricey white hospital space,
	where now the moaning has become one’s own.



6. CLAREMONT HOTEL

	_Claremont Hotel, Southwest Harbor, Maine_
	
	_Click. Clack._ Struck-wicket thud. Human ex-
	clamations, mannerly. Such are the sounds
	of croquet, carried by an idle breeze.
	Saltwater, just beyond, is steely blue,
	bedecked by mooring-balls and colored buoys,
	beneath a sky where tufts of cirrus hang
	like combings from a pampered, moon-white dog.
	Vacationland, all bays and sails and trees.
	
	The lumbermen who rafted logs downstream,
	the fishermen whose slickers gleamed through storms,
	as did the struggling silver in their nets,
	impart, though dead, a hardness to this coast
	where, mornings, wickets on their vacant courts
	make, with their shadows, rhomboidal pairs of wings.
	
	Maine mountains, vestiges of Ap-
	palachians once mightier than Rockies,
	have balding tops, like men, and crumbling sides
	that seek to fill the sea with scree and piles
	of giant building blocks for reassembly
	next aeon. Rocking on the Claremont porch
	in my fortuity and gazing past
	the croquet court and sail-filled, too-blue bay
	
	and shoreline summer homes to pine-dark slopes
	that hide their hiking trails, I see a spot,
	below the crest, a broad gray bare spot where I
	would like to be, like very much, so much
	a lightning crackle floods my chest with pain:
	the viewer, like the view, is wearing out.



7. COLONOSCOPY

	Talk about intimacy! I’d almost rather not.
	The day before, a tussle with nausea
	(DRINK ME: a liter of sickly-sweet liquid)
	and diarrhea, so as to present oneself
	pristine as a bride to the groom with his tools,
	his probe and tiny TV camera
	and honeyed words. He has a tan,
	just back from a deserved vacation
	from his accustomed nether regions.
	
	Begowned, recumbent on one’s side,
	one views through uprolled eyes the screen whereon
	one’s big intestine snakes sedately by,
	its segments marked by tidy annular
	construction-seams as in a prefab tunnel
	slapped up by the mayor’s son-in-law.
	A sudden wash of sparkling liquid shines
	in the inserted light, and hairpin turns
	loom far ahead and soon are vaulted past
	impalpably; we float, we fall, we veer
	in these soft, pliant passages spelunked
	by everything one eats.
	
	            Then all goes dark,
	as God intended it whenever He
	sealed shut in Adam’s abdomen
	life’s slimy, twisting, smelly miracle.
	The bridegroom’s voice, below the edge of sight
	like buried treasure, announces,
	“Perfect. Not a polyp. See you in
	five years.” Five years? The funhouse may have folded.



8. DOG’S DEATH

	She must have been kicked unseen or brushed by a car. 
	Too young to know much, she was beginning to learn 
	To use the newspapers spread on the kitchen floor 
	And to win, wetting there, the words, ‘Good dog! Good dog!‘ 
	
	We thought her shy malaise was a shot reaction. 
	The autopsy disclosed a rupture in her liver. 
	As we teased her with play, blood was filling her skin 
	And her heart was learning to lie down forever. 
	
	Monday morning, as the children were noisily fed 
	And sent to school, she crawled beneath the youngest’s bed. 
	We found her twisted and limp but still alive. 
	In the car to the vet’s, on my lap, she tried 
	
	To bite my hand and died. I stroked her warm fur 
	And my wife called in a voice imperious with tears. 
	Though surrounded by love that would have upheld her, 
	Nevertheless she sank and, stiffening, disappeared. 
	
	Back home, we found that in the night her frame, 
	Drawing near to dissolution, had endured the shame 
	Of diarrhea and had dragged across the floor 
	To a newspaper carelessly left there. Good dog.



9. DOWN TIME

	Waiting for Tom, the boy who can fix my computer if anybody can,
	I observe how the minutes, emptied of content,
	ooze past like transparent microörganisms
	in magnification’s slow motion. I have the time
	at last to consider my life, this its stubby stale end--
	whither, and wherefore, and who says?
	But I fail to. I look out the window again.
	A wisp from the woods announces that my neighbor is burning brush.
	Wind tugs the rising plume this way and that,
	a signifier that doesn’t know its mind.
	My desktop is cluttered, but what
	can be discarded utterly with certainty
	of its not coming back to haunt us from the kingdom of the lost?
	My wife no longer acts like a mistress,
	but surely I am too frail to seek a mistress;
	_passé_ the pink salmon’s slick effortful flipping
	up the icy, carbonated cataracts.
	Is there anything to write about but human sadness?
	Even if there were, I couldn’t write it today.
	My neighbor’s smoke has stopped rising; his fire, too, is down.



10. EVENING CONCERT, SAINTE-CHAPELLE

	The celebrated windows flamed 
	with light directly pouring north 
	across the Seine; we rustled into place. 
	Then violins vaunting Vivaldi’s strident strength, 
	then Brahms, seemed to suck 
	with their passionate sweetness, 
	bit by bit, the vigor from the red, 
	the blazing blue, so that the listening eye 
	saw suddenly the thick black lines, 
	in shapes of shield and cross and strut and brace, 
	that held the holy glowing fantasy together. 
	The music surged; the glow became a milk, 
	a whisper to the eye, a glimmer ebbed 
	until our beating hearts, 
	our violins were cased in thin but solid sheets of lead.



11. EX-BASKETBALL PLAYER

	Pearl Avenue runs past the high-school lot,
	Bends with the trolley tracks, and stops, cut off
	Before it has a chance to go two blocks,
	At Colonel McComsky Plaza. Berth’s Garage
	Is on the corner facing west, and there,
	Most days, you’ll find Flick Webb, who helps Berth out.
	
	Flick stands tall among the idiot pumps—
	Five on a side, the old bubble-head style,
	Their rubber elbows hanging loose and low.
	One’s nostrils are two S’s, and his eyes
	An E and O. And one is squat, without
	A head at all—more of a football type.
	
	Once Flick played for the high-school team, the Wizards.
	He was good: in fact, the best. In ’46
	He bucketed three hundred ninety points,
	A county record still. The ball loved Flick.
	I saw him rack up thirty-eight or forty
	In one home game. His hands were like wild birds.
	
	He never learned a trade, he just sells gas,
	Checks oil, and changes flats. Once in a while,
	As a gag, he dribbles an inner tube,
	But most of us remember anyway.
	His hands are fine and nervous on the lug wrench.
	It makes no difference to the lug wrench, though.
	
	Off work, he hangs around Mae’s Luncheonette.
	Grease-gray and kind of coiled, he plays pinball,
	Smokes those thin cigars, nurses lemon phosphates.
	Flick seldom says a word to Mae, just nods
	Beyond her face toward bright applauding tiers
	Of Necco Wafers, Nibs, and Juju Beads.



12. FLIGHT TO LIMBO

	The line didn’t move, though there were not 
	many people in it. In a half-hearted light 
	the lone agent dealt patiently, noiselessly, endlessly 
	with a large dazed family ranging 
	from twin toddlers in strollers to an old lady 
	in a bent wheelchair. Their baggage 
	was all in cardboard boxes. The plane was delayed, 
	the rumor went through the line. We shrugged, 
	in our hopeless overcoats. Aviation 
	had never seemed a very natural idea. 
	
	Bored children floated with faces drained of blood. 
	The girls in the tax-free shops stood frozen 
	amid promises of a beautiful life abroad. 
	Louis Armstrong sang in some upper corner, 
	a trickle of ignored joy. 
	Outside, in an unintelligible darkness 
	that stretched to include the rubies of strip malls, 
	winged behemoths prowled looking for the gates 
	where they could bury their koala-bear noses 
	and suck our dimming dynamos dry. 
	
	Boys in floppy sweatshirts and backward hats 
	slapped their feet ostentatiously 
	while security attendants giggled 
	and the voice of a misplaced angel melodiously 
	parroted FAA regulations. Women in saris 
	and kimonos dragged, as their penance, behind them 
	toddlers clutching Occidental teddy bears, 
	and chair legs screeched in the food court 
	while ill-paid wraiths mopped circles of night 
	into the motionless floor.



13. HOEING

	I sometimes fear the younger generation will be deprived 
	of the pleasures of hoeing; 
	there is no knowing 
	how many souls have been formed by this simple exercise. 
	
	The dry earth like a great scab breaks, revealing 
	moist-dark loam--
	the pea-root’s home, 
	a fertile wound perpetually healing. 
	
	How neatly the green weeds go under! 
	The blade chops the earth new. 
	Ignorant the wise boy who 
	has never rendered thus the world fecunder.



14. IN EXTREMIS

	I saw my toes the other day. 
	I hadn’t looked at them for months. 
	Indeed, they might have passed away. 
	And yet they were my best friends once. 
	When I was small, I knew them well. 
	I counted on them up to ten 
	And put them in my mouth to tell 
	The larger from the lesser. Then 
	I loved them better than my ears, 
	My elbows, adenoids, and heart. 
	But with the swelling of the years 
	We drifted, toes and I, apart. 
	Now, gnarled and pale, each said, j’accuse!--
	I hid them quickly in my shoes.



15. JANUARY

	The days are short, 
	The sun a spark, 
	Hung thin between 
	The dark and dark. 
	
	Fat snowy footsteps 
	Track the floor. 
	Milk bottles burst 
	Outside the door. 
	
	The river is 
	A frozen place 
	Held still beneath 
	The trees of lace. 
	
	The sky is low. 
	The wind is gray. 
	The radiator 
	Purrs all day.



16. NOT CANCELLED YET

	Some honorary day
	if I play my remaining cards right
	I might be a postage stamp
	but I won’t be there to lick me
	and licking was what I liked,
	in tasty anticipation of
	the long dark slither from the mailbox,
	from box to pouch to hand
	to bag to box to slot to hand:
	that box is best
	whose lid slams open as well as shut,
	admitting a parcel of daylight,
	the green top of a tree,
	and a flickering of fingers, letting go.



17. ONE TOUGH KERATOSIS

	My hands have had their fun, and now must suffer.
	A wealth of sun, especially on the right,
	ungolf-gloved hand, pays dividends of damage:
	white horny spots, pre-cancerous, that grow
	until the squinting dermatologist
	hits back by spraying liquid nitrogen,
	which stings like a persistent, icy bee.
	
	One spot especially fascinated me--
	a trapezoidal chip of cells gone wrong
	between my wrist and thumb, in vexing view
	whenever I wrote or gestured. Blasted, it
	sat up on a red blister, then a scab.
	How hideous! Obsessing helplessly,
	I couldn’t stop my wishing it away,
	
	and yet it clung, a staring strange bull’s-eye
	both part of me and not, like consciousness
	or an immortal, ugly soul. I touched
	it morning, noon, and night, a talisman
	of human imperfection and self-hate.
	The dermatologist had botched his job,
	I feared. Only death would unmar me. Then
	
	it fell off in a New York taxicab.
	I brushed it lightly, settling back, and felt
	a kind of tiny birth-pang near my thumb.
	Release! Pinched fingers held a piece of flesh
	no longer me--so small and dry and meek
	I wondered how the thing had held, so long
	and fiercely, my attention. Fighting down
	
	an urge to slip it in my jacket pocket
	to save among my other souvenirs,
	or else to pop it in my mouth, to give
	those cells another chance, I dropped it to
	the dirty taxi floor, to join Manhattan’s
	unfathomable trafficking of dust.
	A tidy rosy trace has still to heal.



18. PENUMBRAE

	The shadows have their seasons, too. 
	The feathery web the budding maples 
	cast down upon the sullen lawn 
	
	bears but a faint relation to 
	high summer’s umbrageous weight 
	and tunnellike continuum-- 
	
	black leached from green, deep pools 
	wherein a globe of gnats revolves 
	as airy as an astrolabe. 
	
	The thinning shade of autumn is 
	an inherited Oriental, 
	red worn to pink, nap worn to thread. 
	
	Shadows on snow look blue. The skier, 
	exultant at the summit, sees his poles 
	elongate toward the valley: thus 
	
	each blade of grass projects another 
	opposite the sun, and in marshes 
	the mesh is infinite, 
	
	as the winged eclipse an eagle in flight 
	drags across the desert floor 
	is infinitesimal. 
	
	And shadows on water!-- 
	the beech bough bent to the speckled lake 
	where silt motes flicker gold, 
	
	or the steel dock underslung 
	with a submarine that trembles, 
	its ladder stiffened by air. 
	
	And loveliest, because least looked-for, 
	gray on gray, the stripes 
	the pearl-white winter sun 
	
	hung low beneath the leafless wood 
	draws out from trunk to trunk across the road 
	like a stairway that does not rise.



19. PERFECTION WASTED

	And another regrettable thing about death 
	is the ceasing of your own brand of magic, 
	which took a whole life to develop and market-- 
	the quips, the witticisms, the slant 
	adjusted to a few, those loved ones nearest 
	the lip of the stage, their soft faces blanched 
	in the footlight glow, their laughter close to tears, 
	their tears confused with their diamond earrings, 
	their warm pooled breath in and out with your heartbeat, 
	their response and your performance twinned. 
	The jokes over the phone. The memories packed 
	in the rapid-access file. The whole act. 
	Who will do it again? That’s it: no one; 
	imitators and descendants aren’t the same.



20. PLANTING TREES

	Our last connection with the mythic. 
	My mother remembers the day as a girl 
	she jumped across a little spruce 
	that now overtops the sandstone house 
	where still she lives; her face delights 
	at the thought of her years translated 
	into wood so tall, into so mighty 
	a peer of the birds and the wind. 
	
	Too, the old farmer still stout of step 
	treads through the orchard he has outlasted 
	but for some hollow-trunked much-lopped 
	apples and Bartlett pears. The dogwood 
	planted to mark my birth flowers each April, 
	a soundless explosion. We tell its story 
	time after time: the drizzling day, 
	the fragile sapling that had to be staked. 
	
	At the back of our acre here, my wife and I, 
	freshly moved in, freshly together, 
	transplanted two hemlocks that guarded our door 
	gloomily, green gnomes a meter high. 
	One died, gray as sagebrush next spring. 
	The other lives on and some day will dominate 
	this view no longer mine, its great 
	lazy feathery hemlock limbs down-drooping, 
	its tent-shaped caverns resinous and deep. 
	Then may I return, an old man, a trespasser, 
	and remember and marvel to see 
	our small deed, that hurried day, 
	so amplified, like a story through layers of air 
	told over and over, spreading.



21. PURA VIDA

	Such heat! It brings the brain back to its basic blank. 
	Small, recurrent events become the daily news-- 
	the white-nosed coati treading the cecropia’s 
	bending thin branches like sidewalks in the sky, 
	the scarlet-rumped tanager flitting like a spark 
	in the tinder of dank green, the nodding palm leaves 
	perforated like Jacquard cards in a code of wormholes, 
	the black hawk skimming nothingness over and over. 
	
	What does the world’s wide brimming mean, with hunger 
	the unstated secret, dying the proximate reality? 
	_Con mucho gusto_--the muchness extends to the stars, 
	as wet and numerous as larvae underground 
	where the ants in their preset patterns scurry and nurture, 
	and the queen, immobilized, pours forth her eggs 
	in the dark. We are far from oaks and stoplights, 
	from England’s chill classrooms and Tuscany’s paved hills. 
	
	For thought is a stridulation, an insect sizzling, 
	knit of the moment’s headlines and temperate-zone quips, 
	viable in the debris of our rotting educations, 
	that thatch where peer-groups call each to each in semes 
	ecosystematically. Great God Himself 
	wilts with a rise in temperature, a drop in soil acidity, 
	a new language in its grimacing opacity. 
	The brain’s dry buzz revives, a bit, as evening falls.



22. RELATIVES

	Just the thought of them makes your jawbone ache: 
	those turkey dinners, those holidays with 
	the air around the woodstove baked to a stupor, 
	and Aunt Lil’s tablecloth stained by her girlhood’s gravy. 
	A doggy wordless wisdom whimpers from 
	your uncles’ collected eyes; their very jokes 
	creak with genetic sorrow, a strain 
	of common heritage that hurts the gut. 
	
	Sheer boredom and fascination! A spidering 
	of chromosomes webs even the infants in 
	and holds us fast around the spread 
	of rotting food, of too-sweet pie. 
	The cousins buzz, the nephews crawl; 
	to love one’s self is to love them all.



23. A RESCUE

	I wrote some words today that will see print.
	Maybe they will last “forever’--
	that is, more than ten years, in that
	someone will read them, their ink making
	a light scratch on his mind, or hers.
	I think back with greater satisfaction
	upon a yellow bird--a goldfinch?--
	that had flown into our potting shed
	and could not get out,
	battering its wings unintelligently
	upon the dusty panes of the never-opened windows.
	Without much reflection, for once, I stepped
	to where its panicked heart
	was making commotion, the flared wings drumming,
	and with clumsy soft hands
	pinned it against a pane,
	held cupped this agitated essence of the air,
	and through the open door released it,
	like a self-flung ball,
	to all that lovely perishing outdoors.



24. RETURNING NATIVE

	What can you say about Pennsylvania 
	in regard to New England except that 
	it is slightly less cold, and less rocky, 
	or rather that the rocks are different? 
	Redder, and gritty, and piled up here and there, 
	whether as glacial moraine or collapsed springhouse 
	is not easy to tell, so quickly 
	are human efforts bundled back into nature. 
	
	In fall, the trees turn yellower--
	hard maple, hickory, and oak 
	give way to tulip poplar, black walnut, 
	and locust. The woods are overgrown 
	with wild-grape vines, and with greenbrier 
	spreading its low net of anxious small claws. 
	In warm November, the mulching forest floor 
	smells like a rotting animal. 
	
	A genial pulpiness, in short: the sky 
	is soft with haze and paper-gray 
	even as the sun shines, and the rain 
	falls soft on the shoulders of farmers 
	while the children keep on playing, 
	their heads of hair beaded like spider webs. 
	A deep-dyed blur softens the bleak cities 
	whose people palaver in prolonged vowels. 
	
	There is a secret here, some death-defying joke 
	the eyes, the knuckles, the bellies imply--
	a suet of consolation fetched straight 
	from the slaughterhouse and hung out 
	for chickadees to peck in the lee of the spruce, 
	where the husks of sunflower seeds 
	and the peace-signs of bird feet crowd 
	the snow that barely masks the still-green grass. 
	
	I knew that secret once, and have forgotten. 
	The death-defying secret--it rises 
	toward me like a dog’s gaze, loving 
	but bewildered. When winter sits cold and black 
	on Boston’s granite hills, in Philly, 
	slumped between its two polluted rivers, 
	warmth’s shadow leans close to the wall 
	and gets the cement to deliver a kiss.



25. SAYING GOODBYE TO VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

	They will not be the same next time. The sayings 
	so cute, just slightly off, will be corrected. 
	Their eyes will be more skeptical, plugged in 
	the more securely to the worldly buzz 
	of television, alphabet, and street talk, 
	culture polluting their gazes’ dawn blue. 
	It makes you see at last the value of 
	those boring aunts and neighbors (their smells 
	of summer sweat and cigarettes, their faces 
	like shapes of sky between shade-giving leaves) 
	who knew you from the start, when you were zero, 
	cooing their nothings before you could be bored 
	or knew a name, not even you own, or how 
	this world brave with hellos turns all goodbye.



26. SEVEN STANZAS AT EASTER

	Make no mistake: if He rose at all 
	it was as His body; 
	if the cells’ dissolution did not reverse, the molecules 
	reknit, the amino acids rekindle, 
	the Church will fall. 
	
	It was not as the flowers, 
	each soft Spring recurrent; 
	it was not as His Spirit in the mouths and fuddled 
	eyes of the eleven apostles; 
	it was as His flesh: ours. 
	
	The same hinged thumbs and toes, 
	the same valved heart 
	that-pierced-died, withered, paused, and then 
	regathered out of enduring Might 
	new strength to enclose. 
	
	Let us not mock God with metaphor, 
	analogy, sidestepping, transcendence; 
	making of the event a parable, a sign painted in the 
	faded credulity of earlier ages: 
	let us walk through the door. 
	
	The stone is rolled back, not papier-mâché, 
	not a stone in a story, 
	but the vast rock of materiality that in the slow 
	grinding of time will eclipse for each of us 
	the wide light of day. 
	
	And if we will have an angel at the tomb, 
	make it a real angel, 
	weighty with Max Planck’s quanta, vivid with hair, 
	opaque in the dawn light, robed in real linen 
	spun on a definite loom. 
	
	Let us not seek to make it less monstrous, 
	for our own convenience, our own sense of beauty, 
	lest, awakened in one unthinkable hour, we are 
	embarrassed by the miracle, 
	and crushed by remonstrance.



27. SUBTROPICAL NIGHT

	Orion is upstanding overhead
	and Venus does a dance of slow recession
	with a thin new moon balanced on its back--
	Artemis’s bow, aimed straight down.
	The palms don’t deign to rustle in the dark,
	that dark which falls with an intemperate speed
	and seems a shade of silver-green wherein
	the oleander blooms burn black, like coals
	
	So flat, this Florida has sidewalks that
	seem made for wheelchairs and for shuffling steps
	too old and slow to wear away concrete.
	The starlight walks upon the dimpled Gulf,
	the banyans widen sideways while we watch
	a Cadillac prowls by, in search of sleep.



28. TAO IN THE YANKEE STADIUM BLEACHERS

	Distance brings proportion. From here
	the populated tiers
	as much as players seem part of the show:
	a constructed stage beast, three folds of Dante’s rose,
	or a Chinese military hat
	cunningly chased with bodies.
	“Falling from his chariot, a drunk man is unhurt
	because his soul is intact. Not knowing his fall,
	he is unastonished, he is invulnerable.”
	So, too, the “pure man”—“pure”
	in the sense of undisturbed water.
	
	“It is not necessary to seek out
	a wasteland, swamp, or thicket.”
	The opposing pitcher’s pertinent hesitations,
	the sky, this meadow, Mantle’s thick baked neck,
	the old men who in the changing rosters see
	a personal mutability,
	green slats, wet stone are all to me
	as when an emperor commands
	a performance with a gesture of his eyes.
	
	“No king on his throne has the joy of the dead,”
	the skull told Chuang-tzu.
	The thought of death is peppermint to you
	when games begin with patriotic song
	and a democratic sun beats broadly down.
	The Inner Journey seems unjudgeably long
	when small boys purchase cups of ice
	and, distant as a paradise,
	experts, passionate and deft,
	hold motionless while Berra flies to left.



29. ON THE ROAD

	Those dutiful dogtrots down airport corridors 
	while gnawing at a Dunkin’ Donuts cruller, 
	those hotel rooms where the TV remote 
	waits by the bed like a suicide pistol, 
	those hours in the air amid white shirts 
	whose wearers sleep-read through thick staid thrillers, 
	those breakfast buffets in prairie Marriotts-- 
	such venues of transit grow dearer than home. 
	
	The tricycle in the hall, the wife’s hasty kiss, 
	the dripping faucet and uncut lawn--this is life? 
	No, _vita_ thrives via the road, in the laptop 
	whose silky screen shimmers like a dark queen’s mirror, 
	in the polished shoe that signifies killer intent, 
	and in the solitary mission, a bumpy glide 
	down through the cloud cover to a single runway 
	at whose end a man just like you guards the Grail.



30. TO TWO OF MY CHARACTERS

	Emily, as I entered a real greenhouse,
	I feared I failed to do you justice, to see
	with Teddy’s eyes, to smell as he would have
	the cyclamens, the mums, the pithy tilth
	and near-obscene sweet richness of it all,
	which he ascribed to you, despite
	your gimpy leg and spiky manner--
	you were his hothouse houri, dizzying.
	
	And Essie, did I make it clear enough
	just how your face combined the Wilmot cool
	precision, the clean Presbyterian cut,
	hellbent on election, with the something
	soft your mother brought to the blend, the petals
	of her willing to unfold at a touch?
	I wanted you to be beautiful, the both of you,
	and, here among real flowers, fear I failed.



31. TOOLS

	Tell me, how do the manufacturers of tools
	turn a profit? I have used the same clawed hammer
	for forty years. The screwdriver misted with rust
	once slipped into my young hand, a new householder’s.
	Tools wait obliviously to be used: the pliers,
	notched mouth agape like a cartoon shark’s; the wrench
	with its jaws on a screw; the plane still sharp enough
	to take its fragrant, curling bite; the brace and bit
	still fit to chew a hole in pine like a patient thought;
	the tape rule, its inches unaltered though I have shrunk;
	the carpenter’s angle, still absolutely right though I
	have strayed; the wooden bubble level from my father’s
	meagre horde. Their stubborn shapes pervade the cellar,
	enduring with a thrift that shames our wastrel lives.



32. TOSSING AND TURNING

	The spirit has infinite facets, but the body
	confiningly few sides.
	
	There is the left,
	the right, the back, the belly, and tempting
	in-betweens, northeasts and northwests,
	that tip the heart and soon pinch circulation
	in one or another arm.
	
	Yet we turn each time
	with fresh hope, believing that sleep
	will visit us here, descending like an angel
	down the angle our flesh’s sextant sets,
	tilted toward that unreachable star
	hung in the night between our eyebrows, whence
	dreams and good luck flow.
	
	Uncross
	your ankles. Unclench your philosophy.
	This bed was invented by others; know we go
	to sleep less to rest than to participate
	in the twists of another world.
	This churning is our journey.
	
	It ends,
	can only end, around a corner
	we do not know
	we are turning.



33. VENETIAN CANDY

	How long will our bewildered heirs
	marooned in possessions not theirs
	puzzle at disposing of these three
	cunning feignings of hard candy in glass—
	the striped little pillowlike mock-sweets,
	the flared end-twists as of transparent paper?
	
	No clue will be attached, no trace
	of the sunny day of their purchase,
	at a glittering shop a few doors
	up from Harry’s Bar, a disappointing place
	for all its testaments from Hemingway.
	The Grand Canal was also aglitter
	while the lesser canals lay in the shade
	like snakes, flicking wet tongues
	and gliding to green rendezvous.
	
	The immaculate salesgirl, in her aloof
	Italian succulence, sized us up,
	a middle-aged American couple,
	as unserious shoppers who,
	still half jet-lagged, would cling to their lire
	in the face of any enchanted vase
	or ethereal wineglass that might shatter
	in the luggage going home.
	
	Yet we wanted something, something small . . .
	This? No . . . How much is ten thousand? Dizzy,
	at last we decided. She wrapped
	the three glass candies, the cheapest
	items in the shop, with a showy care
	worthy of crown jewels—tissue,
	tape, and tissue again sprang up
	beneath her blood-red fingernails,
	plus a jack-in-the-box-shaped paper bag
	adorned with harlequin lozenges, sad
	though she surely was, on her feet waiting
	all day for a wild rich Arab, a compulsive Japanese.
	_Grazie, signor . . . grazie, signora . . . ciao._
	
	Nor will our thing-weary heirs decipher
	the little repair, the reattached triangle
	of glass from the paper-imitating end-twist,
	its mending a labor of love in the cellar,
	by winter light, by the man of the house,
	mixing transparent epoxy and rigging
	a clever small clamp as if to keep
	intact the time that we, alive,
	had spent in the feathery bed
	at the Europa e Regina.



34. VERO BEACH BIRTHDAY

	Three score three years ago, a thousand miles
	north of this strand, a bundle of innards
	and outward signifiers was conjured from
	the reluctant loins of a Pennsylvania lass
	with literary aspirations. It took
	forceps to get me out, but once out, I
	resolved to have what fun there was-candy,
	the comic strips, the opposite sex, and golf.
	
	Now here among retired CEOs
	deposited in walled communities
	whose seven-figure pastel domiciles
	bespeak funereal discipline--a wealth
	of wasps preserved in money’s sparkling amber.
	the forceps tug me one notch further out.
