*** César Vallejo (1892 - 1938)


1. THE BIG PEOPLE

	What time are the big people
	going to come back?
	Blind Santiago is striking six
	and already it’s very dark.
	
	Mother said that she wouldn’t be delayed
	
	Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel,
	be careful of going over there, where
	doubled-up griefs whimpering their memories
	have just gone
	toward the quiet poultry-yard, where
	the hens are still getting settled,
	who have been startled so much.
	
	We’d better just stay here.
	Mother said that she wouldn’t be delayed.
	
	And we shouldn’t be sad. Let’s go see
	the boats--mine is prettier than anybody’s!--
	we were playing with them the whole blessed day,
	without fighting among ourselves, as it should be:
	they stayed behind in the puddle, all ready,
	loaded with pleasant things for tomorrow.
	
	Let’s wait like this, obedient
	and helpless, for the homecoming, the apologies
	of the big people, who are always the first
	to abandon the rest of us in the house--
	as if we couldn’t get away too!
	
	Aguedita, Nativa, Miguel?
	I am calling, I am feeling around for you in the darkness.
	Don’t leave me behind by myself,
	to be locked in all alone.



2. MASSES

	When the battle was over,
	And the fighter was dead, a man came toward him
	And said to him: “Do not die; I love you so!”
	But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
	
	And two came near, and repeated it.
	“Do not leave us! Courage! Return to life!”
	But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
	
	Twenty arrived, a hundred, a thousand, five hundred thousand,
	Shouting: “So much love, and it can do nothing against death!”
	But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
	
	Millions of persons stood around him,
	All with the same request: “Stay here, brother!”
	But the corpse, how sad! went on dying.
	
	Then all the men on the earth
	Stood around him; the corpse looked at them sadly, deeply
	moved;
	He sat up slowly,
	Put his arms around the furst man; started to walk . . .



3. MIGUEL

	I’m sitting here on the old patio
	beside your absence. It is a black well.
	We’d be playing, now. . . I can hear Mama yell   
	“Boys! Calm down!” We’d laugh, and off I’d go   
	to hide where you’d never look. . . under the stairs,   
	in the hall, the attic. . . Then you’d do the same.
	Miguel, we were too good at that game.   
	Everything would always end in tears.
	
	No one was laughing on that August night
	you went to hide away again, so late
	it was almost dawn. But now your brother’s through
	with this hunting and hunting and never finding you.
	The shadows crowd him. Miguel, will you hurry   
	and show yourself? Mama will only worry.



4. UNDER THE POPLARS

	     Like priestly imprisoned poets,         
	the poplars of blood have fallen asleep.
	On the hills, the flocks of Bethlehem                  
	chew arias of grass at sunset.                  
	
	     The ancient shepherd, who shivers         
	at the last martyrdoms of light,                  
	in his Easter eyes has caught                           
	a purebred flock of stars.                           
	
	     Formed in orphanhood, he goes down         
	with rumors of burial to the praying field,         
	and the sheep bells are seasoned with shadow.
	
	     It survives, the blue warped         
	in iron, and on it, pupils shrouded,                  
	a dog etches its pastoral howl.
