*** Lope de Vega (1562 - 1635)


1. COUNTRY LIFE

	Let the vain courtier waste his days,
	Lured by the charms that wealth displays,
	The couch of down, the hoard of costly fare;
	Be his to kiss the ungrateful hand
	That waves the sceptre of command,
	And rear full many a palace in the air:
	Whilst Ï enjoy, all unconfined,
	The glowing sun, the genial wind,
	And tranquil hours, to rustic toil assigned;
	And prize far more, in peace and health,
	Contented indigence, than joyless wealth.
	Not mine in Fortune’s face to bend,
	At Grandeur’s altar to attend,
	Reflect his smile, and tremble at his frown;
	Nor mine a fond aspiring thought,
	A wish, a sigh, a vision, fraught
	With Fame’s bright phantom, Glory’s deathless crown!
	Nectareous draughts and viands pure
	Luxuriant nature will insure;
	These the clear fount and fertile field
	Still to the wearied shepherd yield;
	And when repose and visions reign,
	Then we are equals all, the monarch and the swain


2. THE GOOD SHEPHERD

	SHEPHERD! who with thine amorous, sylvan song
	Hast broken the slumber that encompassed me,
	Who mad’st Thy crook from the accursed tree
	On which Thy powerful arms were stretched so long!
	Lead me to mercy’s ever-flowing fountains;
	For Thou my shepherd, guard, and guide shalt be;
	I will obey Thy voice, and wait to see
	Thy feet all beautiful upon the mountains.
	
	Hear, Shepherd Thou who for Thy flock art dying,
	Oh, wash away these scarlet sins, for Thou
	Rejoicest at the contrite sinner’s vow.
	Oh, wait! to Thee my weary soul is crying,
	Wait for me: Yet why ask it, when I see,
	With feet nailed to the cross, Thou’rt waiting still for me!


3. O NAVIS

	POOR bark of Life, upon the billows hoarse
	Assailed by storms of envy and deceit,
	Across what cruel seas in passage fleet
	My and sword alone direct thy course!
	My pen is dull; my sword of little force;
	Thy side lies open to the wild waves’ beat
	As out from Favor’s harbors we retreat,
	Pursued by hopes deceived and vain remorse.
	
	Let heaven by star to guide thee! here below
	How vain the joys that foolish hearts desire!
	Here friendship dies and enmity keeps true;
	Here happy days have left thee long ago!
	But seek not port, brave thou the tempest’s ire;
	Until the end thy fated course pursue!


4. TOMORROW

	Lord, what am I, that, with unceasing care,
	Thou didst seek after me,--that thou didst wait,
	Wet with unhealthy dews, before my gate,
	And pass the gloomy nights of winter there?
	O, strange delusion, that I did not greet
	Thy blest approach! and, O, to heaven how lost,
	If my ingratitude’s unkindly frost
	Has chilled the bleeding wounds upon thy feet!
	How oft my guardian angel gently cried,
	“Soul, from thy casement look, and thou shalt see
	How he persists to knock and wait for thee!”
	And, O, how often to that voice of sorrow,
	“To-morrow we will open,” I replied!
	And when the morrow came, I answered still,
	“To-morrow.”

