*** Peter Viereck (1916 - 2006)


1. A WALK ON MOSS

	I
	
	Two lovers walking in a lovers’ garden,
	Dreaming old books with heavy-lidded pages
	About two lovers walking in a garden.
	They walk as dawdlingly as bark uncurls,
	More inwardly than deep green lavishes;
	They walk as timelessly as moss spells out
	To every step the Braille of “dream forever,”
	Where “forever” means an hour’s walk on moss.
	His eyes that drowse too open, dream illusions:
	That worlds--what kind?--exist outside the garden.
	Then just in time both dim their eyes--to wake;
	And then she sees no grief on earth beyond
	The hint of pebbles in a sandal or
	A starling lost in rhododendron bushes.
	
	
	II
	
	Two lovers, speaking in a garden, spangling
	Confetti of tropes. In fun articulating
	Extravagant picnics of sound. Let her say: “I am
	A mere coiffure of baubles who thank the sun,
	‘It is your noon that loans us stellar ways.’”
	
	“If head-dress,” let him answer,
	“then Milky Way.
	A pompadour of trellised fireflies.
	An intricacy of comets at toss of the head,
	
	A disciplined waterfall of well-tuned skies.
	“Then you, disheveler of cosmic primness,
	It is who orchestrates that luminary
	Lustre as startlingly as combs in winter.”
	
	And he: “Swim, tortoise-shell, on such sweet tides!”
	So let them speak--like Byzantines of love--
	A minute in fun, their courtship having been
	In truth least courtierlike of pastorals,
	Needing each other as simply as fetching water
	From stillness of wells. Two lovers, two true loves:
	As inarticulate as bread is shared.
	
	
	III
	
	A garden of togethers, waifs of groves,
	Two twigs slender as rain, leaning
	As tenderly as eyelids almost-meet.
	Or else an “ah” and “oh,” a pair of breaths
	So in, so through, so hoveringly past
	Corporeal gates as if two sighs were drifting
	Through sultry, gnat-stirred southlands, fluttered at
	By dusks of moth-eyed, mild astonishments.
	Yet lovers both: branded to the bone with knowledge,
	Stifled to the lungs with incense of fulfilment,
	Stained with each other’s scents like painter’s palettes.
	Palettes whose perfect white is white and isn’t,
	Being blended from all colors ever found.
	Dark and pure their thicket of entangling;
	Dark and heavy its cloying; darkly white
	The gentleness--heavy, heavy--of the gorged lovers.
	
	
	IV
	
	From time to time they watch a goldfish circling.
	Beside white groves. The shade of saplings covers
	The pond as chastely as a shadow longs.
	White shadow, ceremoniously emblemed
	With slow wet rings that fade as sad as gold does.
	What have they to do--touching, as they walk,
	Only each other’s knowing fingertips--
	What have they to do, satiated and kind,
	Two lovers in a garden-walk, what else
	But watch a rainbow of fins paddle like petals
	Across a mirrored indolence of birches?
	More real than they themselves are, for an hour
	Is not the only solid stuff in dreamland
	The slow wet gold reflected from the circlings
	Of fish on the reflected white of bark?
	Here limbs are air, and contours cannot press.
	And only surfaces are deep.
	And nothing true except reflectedness.
	
	
	V
	
	Here and now, nothing is willed, and nothing touches;
	Not even the slowed up air--westering breezelessly--
	Ripples the gauze of her shoulders. For an hour,
	Luxuriance has grown past wantonness; has grown
	Back down into a bud, as darkly pure
	As satin, as unfolded as cocoons . . .
	And so two lovers walking in a garden
	Became one moon. Pure white, drained beyond fire,
	One moon in empty skies,
	Rich beyond clouds and to itself enough.



2. WE RAN ALL THE WAY HOME

	1
	
	Callously innocent in our disinfected games,
	We plastic-swaddled children of fifty years
	With unlined faces, hacking down some gnarls,
	Unpeeled a dryad once, stript, trapt, and spitting;--
	That older race, filth of unswaddled pulse-beat,
	A god and shieldless,
	uninnocently tender.
	
	
	2
	
	Plodding back home, yanking a god we cornered:
	A lassoed cataract amid canals.
	Then hours of swapping new toys for old spells,
	Till sobered by the hygiene-spraying aunts:
	“What makes our young ones fuss round just some stump?
	Go clutter honest lumber up with spooks,
	Read dryads in, go hunt for haunters; yet
	When all is said and done of ‘myth’ and ‘magic’,
	One flashlight shrivels any hunk of dusk.
	But watch for tricks: with lyric buzz re-enter
	Flies, incense, backwardness, those Old Expelled.
	Her spells?--her frauds! Aim lights--look, nothing there.
	
	
	3
	
	Frauds of the dryad:
	                speech, growth, weapon mocked us.
	Her weapon: raids by quicksilver evadings.
	Her growth: tree rhythm, an unfolding. Her speech:
	A riffraff of breezes, truant from asphalt and logic,
	Leaving behind a litter of petals and doubts.
	Of anti-metal something shimmered then
	(A winging of sap against a steeling of will)
	That would have rusted something of machine in us,
	Had something in us of weight not tamed that wine.
	We tamed by gifts. Gave metal’s just-as-good:
	“Instead! Instead! You need; we give; you change.”
	And so a god gets nursed into a pet;
	
	
	4
	
	But threshes about.
	               Exchanged her splintry wood--
	Imagine being cooped in living coarseness--
	For kind soft straw we dumped upon the pavement
	Of a prefab garage we lavished on her,
	A half-mile from our street. Ingratitude
	Of gods we house! Not one gift worked
	To stop that twisting on that first-class straw.
	
	
	5
	
	A far-off tremor shook our sleep that evening;
	A twirl of arms and boughs; recurrent dream:
	_No start,
	   Around around,
	       She is a god she is a plant
	           Undertow of flesh and ocean
	           Ocean and flesh of undertow
	       A plant is she a god is she
	   Around around,
	No end._
	
	
	6
	
	That obscene vibrance jarred our own snug beds
	And blighted every crib from birth with pulse:
	“Dear aunts, we have bad dreams, seal unrest out.”
	So much of other nuisance, junk, and murk
	We’ve killed for its own good, to scrape earth pure;
	But when some bitch-dog wags immortal hide,
	Our “put her out of her misery” won’t put.
	A rotten gyp when gift and gun both fail;
	No other vermin lasts; it’s them, it’s she, it’s
	Immortals always spoil our cleaning up.
	. . . And so a pet gets cursed into a god.
	
	
	7
	
	Next dream, half farce: she sowed--amid tame starches--
	Song’s fleeing laurel, wriggly still with nymph,
	And love’s wild myrtle,--till a crop of sighs
	Drowned out the crackle of our breakfast cornflakes.
	   “Deft aunts, help quick; growth shrinks us; school in panic.
	   Whatever sprouts, throbs to the dryad’s tossing.”
	“Growth just won’t shape like plastics, you poor boys;
	To wither myrtle, plant it in a pot;
	To wither laurel, spray it with a footnote.
	But darker than her wars, her lures. Those fancy
	God-molls got gossiped of in Arcady.
	Neighbors saw them bend near bulls, and as for swans--
	Then stomp more moral than a quadruped;
	Be well-scrubbed knights; in short, go lynch that foreigner.”
	Creation gets reversed to kill a god.
	
	
	8
	
	What cannot kill unkillable, can torture;
	She, writhing stubborn, droned unwelcome myth:
	_“Two signs, when first your campfire banned us, wrangled:
	Circle and line. Our cycle, your ascent.
	‘Revere each season’s own true bend,’ we sang then;
	‘Drain, build, stamp logic on,’ clanged will, male, steel.
	Clang-knit geometries of girders garland
	Your plumb-lines now
	                   and grid our zigzag ways.”_
	“Bulldozer world: grove’s awe and rubble razed for
	A smile of blueprints on a surge of chins.’
	
	_“Your lavishness with clicks and slot machines--”_
	
	“--(here tin gives birth, true stainless birth, not life’s kind)--”
	
	_“--is but man’s fear of liking being owned again
	By cornucopian lap.“_
	                   “All nest and trap and
	Prayer lips and infinite pillowing mercy . . . and quicksand
	Hail man-the-improver, for his is the world without end.”
	
	From deicide, man deified. But she:
	
	
	9
	
	_“Girl was the older race’s core, unshrined by
	Who shrines machine, the heavy public man
	Too willed to play or pray. And girlhood once
	Uprooted roots out child, man, landmark too,
	Untending--to be priestess means to tend--
	The linking ivy of a heritage.
	Apart, apart the mute shared sap-flow dries,
	Into a crackle of unclutching. Hail
	The chattery scorch-torch-ping of progress popping.“_
	
	“Back to your lute-strings; our rustproof nerves twang prose.”
	
	_“What have you prosed us to?--once tide, ode, bud.
	Good for your files and glands, the thing your time-clock
	And cot call ‘woman’ means but gelded male.
	Yet girl-lap templed--inner Delphi--teaches
	   Doer what grower knows of spell and rite,
	   Willing what being knows of soul and gut.“_
	
	“A belly swelled into an oracle?”
	
	_“Don’t think apart the mixed-up dark of things.
	As we need your half, starving you’ll need ours;
	No crop from conquering plow without our furrow;
	Spray all your fruit-trees clean, they still won’t dangle
	Till fouled into life by dryad-rut within._
	
	
	10
	
	Was heard to pray when thought herself unheard:
	   _“You high ones, old ones, watching two by two
	   Wherever shrineless gods are exiled to,
	   Send down your lightning. But your olive too.
	   Cool whisper of the ages, not the age,
	   Expand the shallows of men’s anchorage,
	   Apprentice them to more than they can hear.
	   You earth-deep resonance they dare not hear,
	   Be everywhere, like fragrance of the orange,
	   Yet single and sonorous as its root,
	   Till lives are sweet and inward as an orange,
	   And every death a quilt of leaves on root.“_
	
	
	11
	
	Nerve-drugs for war words; for daft wings, a cage.
	We hiked to her garage dorm, spruced it up with
	Bars into really not too glum a cell:
	“To help you help yourself to be mature.”
	Chain stopped much nonsense; only her locks now threshing,--
	Fever of clouds across her forehead’s moon.
	That orbitless sick moon our purging kindness
	Drained glow-worm dim; yet sneaky silver embered
	Outrageously between the bars of norm--
	Whenever, chained or bribed, she still said “no”
	The one vile puking way still left to say it:
	
	_“At hefty orbit sleazily genteeled
	   (Shuttling from chintzy homes to brassy markets,
	   From taciful tantrums of your filtered hearts
	   To drive-in heavens of a public grin),
	My unchromed gullet vomits, vomits, vomits.“_
	
	
	12
	
	Oh aunts, the vileness of last gasp of gods!
	Yet that foul no, the same that threshed our sleep through,
	Somehow exulted more than all our yes.
	Exultant oceanic resonances--
	Dolphins of air--tinkled her chains like gauds;
	Far off, where bulging breakers shriek their spray
	Of birthday round a trouble-making island,
	Her pulse found girl-communion.
	                               Drawing up from
	The caterwauling deeps at Kythera
	That pain-surviving bitch-tenacity
	That just can’t help enduring through and through,
	She prayed her second prayer. But this time peer to peer,
	Tree-skirt to foam-skirt sister, tide to tide:--
	_“Undertow,
	You other blue,
	Tow these to you.
	Came sky; in upside-down of sky, there always
	Was undertow.
	Came Greek year; shrines held only what a port can
	Of undertow.
	Came eons, Lilith, Venusburg; there always
	Was undertow.
	Queened, demoned, pseudo-tamed, renamed, there always
	Was undertow.
	Lines of the straighteners, net of nerves and subways,
	Came; always indestructible below
	Is undertow.
	Now undertow’s
	Fierce coarseness, sinew us who are so birch-bark
	Gentle we pale with gladness at glint of dew.
	Them, goddess, too,
	Swerve
	       not too late
	                   from where they hurtle to;
	Sway up unearned for these who earn the lightning,
	The olive too.“_
	
	
	13
	
	Silence below. Prayer scorned. “You are alone.”
	_“Silence? No balm for these but their own ghat?
	They tried to force the wooed consent of things.
	Then, under-goddess, must they all the way
	(From whiz to slag) plumb their own plumb-line’s end?
	Once there were promises intense as noons.
	Hail man-the-improver,
	For his is the end of the world. In technicolor.“_
	   To us: _“Lively is not alive; a pyre
	   Seems snugger than a hearth a little while.“_
	Then royal-slim within imagined pine:
	_“Nears its end the chummy phase of will, male, steel,--
	Bang triply stoked; a few toys more, then feeds
	Your ash my wilds,
	                   re-greened;
	                                wild sap, strict dance;
	The second bloomtide of the hacked first gods._



3. WHY CAN’T I LIVE FOREVER?

	  _“Here comes a candle to light you to bed,
	   And here comes a chopper to chop off your head”_
	                       (Nursery rhyme)
	
	DEATH is a blind flamingo, hunting fishes.
	He does not mean to gobble you or me--
	And when his beak swings wildly, never wishes
	To scare us so. If only he could see!
	
	At night he wades through surf to seek a mate.
	That’s why he stinks of salt and oyster shells.
	It is his blindness keeps him celibate:
	This bungler thinks he kisses when he kills.
	
	I wish he wouldn’t make us die. I wish
	He’d spread his wings one night and fly away
	To higher planets for his girls and fish.
	But he’s got used to Earth
	               and plans to stay.
