*** Derek Walcott (1930 - 2017)


1. AFTER THE STORM

	There are so many islands!
	As many islands as the stars at night
	on that branched tree from which meteors are shaken
	like falling fruit around the schooner Flight.
	But things must fall, and so it always was,
	on one hand Venus, on the other Mars;
	fall, and are one, just as this earth is one
	island in archipelagoes of stars.
	My first friend was the sea. Now,is my last.
	I stop talking now. I work, then I read,
	cotching under a lantern hooked to the mast.
	I try to forget what happiness was,
	and when that don’t work,I study the stars.
	Sometimes is just me, and the soft-scissored foam
	as the deck turn white and the moon open
	a cloud like a door, and the light over me
	is a road in white moonlight taking me home.
	Shabine sang to you from the depths of the sea.



2. BECUNE POINT

	I
	
	Stunned heat of noon. In shade, tan, silken cows
	hide in the thorned acacias. A butterfly staggers.
	      
	Stamping their hooves from thirst, small horses drowse
	or whinny for water. On parched, ochre headlands, daggers
	
	of agave bristle in primordial defense,
	like a cornered monster backed up against the sea.
	
	A mongoose charges dry grass and fades through a fence
	faster than an afterthought. Dust rises easily.
	
	Haze of the Harmattan, Sahara dust, memory’s haze
	from the dried well of Africa, the headland’s desert
	
	or riders in swirling burnooses, mixed with the greys
	of hills veiled in Impressionist light. We inherit
	   
	two worlds of associations, or references, drought
	that we heighten into Delacroix’s North Africa,
	
	veils, daggers, lances, herds the Harmattan brought
	with a phantom inheritance, which the desperate seeker
	
	of a well-spring staggers in the heat in search of--
	heroic ancestors; the other that the dry season brings
	
	is the gust of a European calendar, but it is the one love
	that thirsts for confirmations in the circling rings
	
	of the ground dove’s cooing on stones, in the acacia’s
	thorns and the agave’s daggers, that they are all ours,
	
	the white horsemen of the Sahara, India’s and Asia’s
	plumed mongoose and crested palmtree, Benin and Pontoise.
	
	We are history’s afterthought, as the mongoose races
	ahead of its time; in drought we discover our shadows,
	
	our origins that range from the most disparate places,
	from the dugouts of Guinea to the Nile’s canted dhows.
	
	
	II
	
	The incredible blue with its bird-inviting cloud,
	in which there are crumbling towers, banners and domes,
	
	and the sliding Carthage of sunsets, the marble shroud
	drawn over associations that are Greece’s and Rome’s
	
	and rarely of Africa. They continue at sixty-seven
	to echo in the corridors of the head, perspectives
	
	of a corridor in the Vatican that led, not to heaven,
	but to more paintings of heaven, ideas in lifted sieves
	
	drained by satiety because great art can exhaust us,
	and even the steadiest faith can be clogged by excess,
	
	the self-assured Christs, the Madonnas’ inflexible postures
	without the mess of motherhood. With this blue I bless
	
	emptiness where these hills are barren of tributes
	and the repetitions of power, our sky’s naive
	
	ceiling without domes and spires, an earth whose roots
	like the thorned acacia’s deepen my belief.



3. BLEECKER STREET, SUMMER

	Summer for prose and lemons, for nakedness and languor,
	for the eternal idleness of the imagined return,
	for rare flutes and bare feet, and the August bedroom
	of tangled sheets and the Sunday salt, ah violin!
	
	When I press summer dusks together, it is
	a month of street accordions and sprinklers
	laying the dust, small shadows running from me.
	
	It is music opening and closing, Italia mia, on Bleecker,
	ciao, Antonio, and the water-cries of children
	tearing the rose-coloured sky in streams of paper;
	it is dusk in the nostrils and the smell of water
	down littered streets that lead you to no water,
	and gathering islands and lemons in the mind.
	
	There is the Hudson, like the sea aflame.
	I would undress you in the summer heat,
	and laugh and dry your damp flesh if you came.



4. A CITY’S DEATH BY FIRE

	After that hot gospeller has levelled all but the churched sky,
	I wrote the tale by tallow of a city’s death by fire;
	Under a candle’s eye, that smoked in tears, I
	Wanted to tell, in more than wax, of faiths that were snapped like wire.
	All day I walked abroad among the rubbled tales,
	Shocked at each wall that stood on the street like a liar;
	Loud was the bird-rocked sky, and all the clouds were bales
	Torn open by looting, and white, in spite of the fire.
	By the smoking sea, where Christ walked, I asked, why
	Should a man wax tears, when his wooden world fails?
	In town, leaves were paper, but the hills were a flock of faiths;
	To a boy who walked all day, each leaf was a green breath
	Rebuilding a love I thought was dead as nails,
	Blessing the death and the baptism by fire.



5. DARK AUGUST

	So much rain, so much life like the swollen sky
	of this black August. My sister, the sun,
	broods in her yellow room and won’t come out.
	
	Everything goes to hell; the mountains fume
	like a kettle, rivers overrun; still,
	she will not rise and turn off the rain.
	
	She is in her room, fondling old things,
	my poems, turning her album. Even if thunder falls
	like a crash of plates from the sky,
	
	she does not come out.
	Don’t you know I love you but am hopeless
	at fixing the rain? But I am learning slowly
	
	to love the dark days, the steaming hills,
	the air with gossiping mosquitoes,
	and to sip the medicine of bitterness,
	
	so that when you emerge, my sister,
	parting the beads of the rain,
	with your forehead of flowers and eyes of forgiveness,
	
	all with not be as it was, but it will be true
	(you see they will not let me love
	as I want), because, my sister, then
	
	I would have learnt to love black days like bright ones,
	The black rain, the white hills, when once
	I loved only my happiness and you.



6. THE DAY, WITH ALL ITS PAIN AHEAD, IS YOURS

	The day, with all its pain ahead, is yours.
	The ceaseless creasing of the morning sea,
	the fluttering gamboge cedar leaves allegro,
	the rods of the yawning branches trolling the breeze,
	the rusted meadows, the wind-whitened grass,
	the coos of the stone-colored ground doves on the road,
	the echo of benediction on a house
	its rooms of pain, its verandah of remorse
	when joy lanced through its open-hearted doors
	like a hummingbird out to the garden and the pool
	in which the sky has fallen. These are all yours,
	and pain has made them brighter as absence does
	after a death, as the light heals the grass.
	And the twig-brown lizard scuttles up its branch
	like fingers on the struts of a guitar.
	I hear the detonations of agave
	the stuttering outbursts of bougainvillea,
	I see the acacia’s bonfire, the begonia’s bayonets,
	and the tamarind’s thorns and the broadsides of clouds
	from the calabash
	and the cedars fluttering their white flags of surrender
	and the flame trees’ siege of the fort.
	I saw black bulls, horns lowered, galloping, goring the mist
	that rose, unshrouding the hillocks of Santa Cruz
	and the olives of Esperanza
	Andalusian idyll, and answer
	and the moon’s blank tambourine
	and the drizzle’s guitars
	and the sunlit wires of the rain
	the shawls and the used stars
	and the ruined fountains.



7. DESIRE AND DISEASE COMMINGLING

	Desire and disease commingling,
	commingling, the white hair and the white page
	with the fear of white sight, blindness, amputation,
	a recurring kidney stone, the plague of AIDS,
	shaken in the mirror by that bewildered look,
	the truculence, the drooping lip of a spiritual lout.
	Look at it any way you like, it’s an old man’s book
	whenever you write it, whenever it comes out,
	the age in your armpits in the pleats of your crotch,
	the faded perfumes of cherished conversations,
	and the toilet gurgling its eclogues, resurrecting names
	in its hoarse swivelling into an echo after.
	This is the music of memory, water.



8. THE DIALECT OF THE SCRUB IN THE DRY SEASON

	I
	
	The dialect of the scrub in the dry season
	withers the flow of English. Things burn for days
	without translation, with the heat
	of the scorched pastures and their skeletal cows.
	Every noun is a stump with its roots showing,
	and the creole language rushes like weeds
	until the entire island is overrun,
	then the rain begins to come in paragraphs
	and hazes this page, hazes the grey of islets,
	the grey of eyes, the rainstorm’s wild-haired beauty.
	
	The first daybreak of rain, the crusted drought
	broken in half like bread, the quiet trumpet mouth
	of a rainbow and the wiry drizzle fighting
	decease, half the year blowing out to sea
	in hale, refreshing gusts, the withered lilies
	drink with grateful mouths, and the first blackbird
	of the new season announces itself on a bough
	the hummingbird is reglistened drilling
	the pierced hedges, my small shaft to your heart,
	my emerald arrow: A crowd crosses a bridge
	from Canaries to the Ponte Vecchio, from
	Piaille to Pescara, and a volley of blackbirds
	
	fans over Venice or the broken pier of Choiseul,
	and love is as wide as the span of my open palm
	for frontiers that read like one country,
	one map of affection that closes around my pen.
	I had forgotten the benediction of rain
	edged with sunlight, the prayers of dripping leaves
	and the cat testing the edge of the season
	with careful paw. And I have nothing more
	to write about than gratitude. For la mer,
	soleil-là, the bow of the arc-en-ciel
	and the archery of blackbirds from its
	radiant bow. The rest of the year is rain.
	
	
	II
	
	There was a beautiful rain this morning.
	“I was asleep.”
	                           He stroked her forehead.
	She smiled at him, then laughed as she kept yawning.
	“It was lovely rain.” But I thought of the dead
	I know. The sun shone through the rain
	and it was lovely.
	                                “I’m sure,” she said.
	There were so many names the rain recited:
	Alan, Joseph and Claude and Charles and Roddy.
	The sunlight came through the rain and the drizzle shone
	as it had done before for everybody.
	For John and Inge, Devindra and Hamilton.
	“Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon,”
	wrote Edward Thomas. Her eyes closed in my arms,
	but it was sleep. She was asleep again,
	while the bright rain moved from Massade to Monchy.
	
	Sometimes I stretch out, or you stretch out your hand,
	and we lock palms; our criss-crossed histories join
	and two maps fit. Bays, boundaries, rivers, roads,
	one country, one warm island. Is that noise rain
	on the hot roof, is it sweeping out to sea
	by the stones and shells of the almond cemetery?
	
	
	III
	
	The road is wet, the leaves wet, but the sun inching,
	and always the astonishment: in March?
	This blustery, this grey? The waves chopping
	and circling and ramming into one another
	like sheep in a maddened pen from a whiff of wolf,
	or white mares, bug-eyed from the lightning’s whip,
	and, if they could, whinnying. But the light will win.
	The sun fought with the rain in the leaves and won;
	then the rain came back and it was finer out to sea.
	A drizzle blurred the promontories evenly
	and now the manchineels and acacias sparkled
	with the new rain and the cows’ hides darkened
	as the horses dipped their heads and shook their manes,
	and over the horizon the faint arc
	of an almost imperceptible bow appeared
	then dimmed across the channel towards Martinique.
	This miracle was usual for the season.
	“The sun came out just for you,” he said.
	
	And it was true. The light entered her forehead
	and blazoned her difference there.
	The pastures were beaded, roofs shone on the hills,
	a sloop was working its way against huge clouds
	as patches of sunlight widened with a new zeal
	towards detachment, towards simplicity.
	Who said that they were lying side by side,
	the cupped spoon of her torso in his own
	in the striped shadows of mid-afternoon?
	
	
	IV
	
	The doors are open, the house breathes and I feel
	a balm so heavy and a benediction
	so weightless that the past is just blue air
	and cobalt motion lanced with emerald
	and sail-flecks and the dove’s continuous complaint
	about repletion, its swollen note of gratitude-
	all incantation is the monody of thanks
	to the sky’s motionless or moving altars,
	even to the faint drone of that silver insect
	that is the morning plane over Martinique,
	while, take this for what you will, the frangipani
	that, for dry months, contorted, crucified
	in impotence or barrenness, endured, has come
	with pale pink petals and blades of olive leaves,
	parable of my loin-longing, my silver age.
	
	From the salt brightness of my balcony
	I look across to the abandoned fort;
	no History left, just natural history,
	as a cloud’s shadow subtilizes thought.
	On a sloped meadow lifted by the light,
	the Hessians spun like blossoms from the immortelle,
	the tattered pennons of the sea-almond fluttered
	to the spray-white detonations of the lilac
	against blue the hue of a grenadier, dried pods
	of the flamboyant rattle their sabres
	and a mare’s whinny across the parched pastures
	launches white scuds of sails across the channel,
	the race of a schooner launched in a canal.
	A grey sky trawls its silver wires of rain;
	these are the subtleties of the noon sea:
	lime, emerald, lilac, cobalt, ultramarine.



9. THE FIST

	The fist clenched round my heart
	loosens a little, and I gasp
	brightness; but it tightens
	again. When have I ever not loved
	the pain of love? But this has moved
	
	past love to mania. This has the strong
	clench of the madman, this is
	gripping the ledge of unreason, before
	plunging howling into the abyss.
	
	Hold hard then, heart. This way at least you live.



10. FROM A BLUE KEG, THE BARREL’S THUMB-TUNED GOATSKIN

	I
	
	From a blue keg, the barrel’s thumb-tuned goatskin,
	the choirs of ancestral ululation
	are psalms and pivot for the prodigal
	in a dirt yard at Piaille, are confrontation,
	old incantation and fresh sacrifice
	where a ram is tethered, without the scrolled horns,
	wool locks and beard of the scapegoat,
	in the Old Testament, or black blood gushing in a trench
	in Attic ceremony and rite. Death softens the eyes
	of the still, unbleating sheep, a common ewe,
	as for you this is common. There is no awe
	in repetition, no claim, no tribal ecstasy,
	no pardon in the bent smoke from Guinea,
	the sprinkled white rum, or the meal crumbled
	on the small stone altar, in the broken memory
	of the slaver’s coast and the braided villages
	of thatch and coalpot from the salted passage
	to this paralysis where your pale feet cannot keep time
	feel no communion with its celebrants,
	they keep another time, the time you keep
	comes with a different metre, your skin
	what sheath and prison that it has become
	as a dried chrysalis with no ressurection
	and one unwished for. Star-embers fade.
	
	II
	
	I could give facts and dates, but to what use?
	In the lush chasms and fissures of Choiseul
	an ogre bred my grandam, whelped my father,
	erected my tall aunts; slopes with potato vines,
	and the narrow, clean dark water of River Doree,
	the fragrant hogplums and chapel of La Fargue;
	go in search of his own shire, unlatch a gate
	that opens into Albion, its faery flowers,
	its source of intellectual bastardy,
	without embarrassment or degradation,
	without belligerence or accusation,
	and mostly selfishly, without self-contempt,
	a curious and self-nourishing integer
	outside their given numbers and their dates,
	as nameless as the bush, beyond heredity
	or prophecy, or the quiet panic of clocks,
	the shallow penitence of mirrors. Mongrel.
	And out of this chord, this discord will come
	the Atlantic’s drone, the Caribbean hum
	of chaos in an ochre afternoon
	the enclosing harmony that we call home
	when the sea mints its quicksilver, when
	the cedars sag and the light ends up with nothing.
	The facts! The Facts! The history. The cause.
	You need a history to make your case.
	
	III
	
	1492. 1833. 1930.
	Dates. The one thing about which there is no discourse.
	Dates multiplied by events, by consequences,
	are what add up to History. We have a few coins
	struck for a mere handful of events,
	as amateur numismatists, regal profiles,
	none worthy in the traditional way of memory
	slavery being an infinity of endeavour
	without pause or payment, without commemoration,
	only the long division of day into dark,
	of drought into rainburst, equinoxes glide
	over their own shadows, and all our dates,
	our calendars, hymns and anniversaries,
	were bequeathed to us. Left to itself
	the brain would be mantled like coral in the cool
	shade of a reefs outcrop and turret, swayed
	like reeds in meditation, dateless.
	The petals of the sun curl, wilting on its stalk--
	here comes the quiet lily crescent of the moon.
	
	IV
	
	From this thick tree issues miraculous bread.
	The breadfruit makes itself from copious shade,
	whose dial is the ground’s dry, palmate leaves,
	a voluble, invaluable dome, a library,
	where all the town’s talk is stored,
	and in whose core is coiled--a tempest,
	a rising sea in wind, the spinning pages
	of remorseful texts, Bligh’s log and cannonballs
	and bowling thunder, shelter from the rain    
	and so magnanimous in circumference
	that it has no time without shade, and shade
	is suffering. The sun makes their suffering mute.
	This bedraggled backyard, this unfulfilled lot,
	this little field of leaves, brittle and fallen,
	of all the cities of the world, this is your centre.
	O to be luminous and exact! As this tree is
	in ripening sunshine, that your own leaves could shine
	with nourishment, and give such shade and peace,
	the mirror of each canvas that you sign.
	Despite acclamation, despite contempt,
	I was never part of that catalogue
	in spite of friends in the same business
	neither of the free-verse orthodoxy, nor the other--
	the clogged, elegiac thickness of memory;
	farther away from all that, forever,
	knee-high in the foam of the page
	wading by sounding caves.
	Gradually it hardens, the death-mask of Fame.
	
	V
	
	And Sancta Trinidad. It is that sacred to me.
	However fragmentary, through a sunlit hedge,
	by the running of clear water over the sun-wiry stones
	and a cool hoarding of bamboos without a bridge
	phrases of Spain in summer, in the vale of Santa Cruz,
	perhaps because of the name, but the bamboo’s fountains
	arch, sounding sweet, surreptitious, twittering leaves
	and shadows moving over indigo mountains.
	In a green street of hedges and vermilion roofs,
	and gates that creak open into banana yards
	and doors that groan on the evocation of ginger
	behind which are the hill with five cresting palms
	whose long fingers are stirring tropical almanacs
	darkened with rain over the grey savannahs
	of zebu and bison and the small chalk temples
	of an almost erased Asia, and the ovations of cane
	through which turbaned horsemen carry feathering lances.
	The cloud-white egret, the heron whose hue
	is wet slate, move through a somnolence
	as sweet as malaria to a child whose parched lips
	are soothed by a servant or his own mother,
	to the sudden great sound of rain on the roofs,
	cloudburst of benediction, dry seas in his ears.



11. THE GROUND DOVE STUTTERED FOR A FEW STEPS

	I
	
	The ground dove stuttered for a few steps then flew
	up from his path to settle in the sun-browned
	branches that were now barely twigs; in drought it coos
	with its relentless valve, a tiring sound,
	not like the sweet exchanges of turtles in the Song
	of Solomon, or the flutes of Venus in frescoes
	though all the mounds in the dove-calling drought
	the hills and gulches all briary and ochre
	and the small dervishes that swivelled in the dust
	were like an umber study for a fresco
	of The Prodigal Son, this scorched, barren acre.
	He had the smell of cities in his clothes,
	the steam and soot of trains of Fascist stations
	and their resounding vaults, he had the memory of rain
	carried in his head, the rain on Pescara’s beach
	with the pastel hotels, and instead of the doves
	the air-show with the jets soaring and swooping
	over the Fair, the smell off that beach
	came back on the rock-road where the turtle lifted
	its mating music into the dry acacias,
	and mixed with the smell off the galloping sea-flock,
	each odour distinct, of sheep trampling their pens
	as if their fear had caught the wolf-scent.
	
	The rock-brown dove had fluttered from that fear
	that what he loved and knew once as a boy    
	would panic and forget him from the change
	of character that the grunting swine could smell.
	A sow and her litter. Acknowledged prodigal.
	
	Grey sunrise through a sky of frosted glass,
	the great trees sodden, the paths below them pooled,
	the headlands veiled and muslin-thin, no birds,
	and pale green combers cresting through the drizzle;
	a change of climate, the clouding of the self
	in a sudden culture but one more confident
	in its glazed equestrian statues in wet parks,
	its railway stations echoing like the combers
	in the ground-shaken caves under the cliff;
	gathering, cresting then dissolving shallows
	as light steps quietly into the house.
	Light that inaudibly fits in the house
	as a book on a bookshelf with its spines of tombs
	and names, mouths slightly parted, eager to speak
	wherever their station now. Every library
	is a cemetery in sunlight. Sometimes, a shaft . . .
	
	Across the dry hillock, leaves chasing dead leaves
	in resurrecting gusts, or in the ochre quiet
	leaves too many to rake on the road’s margins,
	too loaded to lift themselves, they lapsed singly
	or in a yellow chute from the cedar, burnt branches;
	lyres of desiccation choked the dry gutters
	everywhere in the country, La Feuillée, Monchy,
	by the caked track to Saltibus, over D’ennery.
	Drought. Song of the wireless harp of the frangipani
	that still makes a tangled music out of silence.
	
	
	II
	
	Now to cherish the depredations of April
	even on the threshold of March, its sunlit eve--
	the _gommier maudit_ unshouldering its leaves,
	barrow after loaded barrow, the leaves fading, yellow,
	burnt grass and the tigerish shadows on the hillside,
	and the azure a trowelled blue, and blue hill-smoke,
	parched shortcuts and rust, cattle anchored in shadows
	and groaning like winches, the didactic drought
	against the hot sea that teaches what? Thirst
	for the grace that springs in grooves of oblivious dust.
	
	A fine haze screens the headland, the drizzle drifts.
	Is every noun: breakwater, headland, haze,
	seen through a gauze of English, a bright scrim,
	a mesh in which light now defines the wires
	and not its natural language? Were your life and work
	simply a good translation? Would headland,
	haze and the spray-wracked breakwater
	pronounce their own names differently?
	And have I looked at life, in other words,
	through some inoperable cataract?
	“What language do you speak in your own country?”
	Every noun has its echo, a noun is a noise,
	as every stone in the expanding sunlight
	finds an exact translation in its shadow,
	and it may be that you were halved by language
	as definitively as the meridian    
	of Greenwich or by Pope Alexander’s line,
	but what makes this, if this is all it is,
	more than just bearable, in fact, exultation
	is the stone that is looked at, and the manchineels,
	bitter, poisonous yellow berries, treacherous apples
	that look like Eden’s on the tree of knowledge
	when the first noun was picked and named and eaten
	and the shadow of knowledge defined every edge
	originating language and then difference,
	and subtlety, the snake and contradiction
	and the sudden Babel of the manchineel.
	
	III
	
	The blank page grows a visionary wood.
	A parallel section, no, in fact a whole province
	of far, of foreign, of self-translating leaves
	stands on the place where it has always stood
	the right-hand margin of the page
	loud, soft but voluble in their original language,
	an orchestrating lexicon, veined manuscripts
	going far back in time and deep in roots
	and echoing in the tunnel of the right ear
	with echoes: oak-echo, beech-echo, linden-echo,
	and beech and birds a half-ancestral forest
	whose metre was an ocean’s and whose break,
	parting declared the white-lined conjugation
	of combers’ centuries. This ocean, English and this forest weald,
	this clattering natterer “burn”, this distance, mist,
	kept its high columns marching as my pen moves
	towards that gap of light that comes upon
	the bright salt arc of a bare unprinted beach
	or where the piper leaves a print, its claws,
	dim, imperceptible as an ancient rune--
	that is the landscape, that, the stand of forest
	made up of all these leaves and lines that
	still rasp with delight with rhyme and incantation
	pages of shade turning into translation.
	And my left hand another vegetation
	but not their opposite or their enemy,
	palms and wild fern and praising them, the sea,
	sea-almond, grape and vine and agave
	that the wind’s finger folded carefully
	drawing its thumb to mark the dog-eared wave
	across the dry hill, leaves chasing leaves
	in a shiny, scurrying wind, and, in the brown quiet,
	leaves, unraked, tiling the road’s margins,
	so loaded they don’t lift, they lapse singly, yellow,
	or chute from the cedars. Lyres of desiccation
	in March’s autumn, filling the dry gutters,
	everywhere in the country, La Feuillée, Monchy,
	except for the wireless harp of the frangipani
	that still makes its music out of extreme stillness.
	In my own botanic origins, _frangere panem_
	to break bread, flower-flour in its white lilies,
	except that in rare blossom I now remember
	the flower is pink. It doesn’t matter.
	Since whatever hue it is, its wafer it serves that need,
	petal on the sky’s open palate at early mass
	every morning but here most on this Sunday
	with its Lenten drought, the heart-coloured flowers then
	the caterpillars determinedly devour,
	on a Sunday when a sadness still eats at the parallel
	petals of my beaten heart, and the white pews of the sea,
	the waves coming in aisles, my longing
	for the communion of breakfast, the leafless,
	flower-less but crusted bark of the frangipani,
	frangere panem, the pain that I break and eat
	flower and flour, pain and pain,
	bright Easter coming, like the seas white communion.
	
	IV
	
	In the country of the ochre afternoon
	it is always still and hot, the dry leaves stirring
	infrequently sometimes with the rattling pods
	of what they call “women’s tongues, in
	the afternoon country the far hills are very quiet
	and heat-hazed, but mostly in the middle
	of the country of the afternoon I see the brown heat
	of the skin of my first love, so still, so perfect,
	so unaltered, and I see how she walked
	with her sunburnt hands against the still sea-almonds,
	to a remembered cove, where she stood on the small dock--
	that was when I thought we were immortal
	and that love would be folded doves and folded oars
	and water lapping against eroding stone
	in the ochre country of the afternoon.



12. A LESSON FOR THIS SUNDAY

	The growing idleness of summer grass
	With its frail kites of furious butterflies
	Requests the lemonade of simple praise
	In scansion gentler than my hammock swings
	And rituals no more upsetting than a
	Black maid shaking linen as she sings
	The plain notes of some Protestant hosanna--
	Since I lie idling from the thought in things--
	
	Or so they should, until I hear the cries
	Of two small children hunting yellow wings,
	Who break my Sabbath with the thought of sin.
	Brother and sister, with a common pin,
	Frowning like serious lepidopterists.
	The little surgeon pierces the thin eyes.
	Crouched on plump haunches, as a mantis prays
	She shrieks to eviscerate its abdomen.
	The lesson is the same. The maid removes
	Both prodigies from their interest in science.
	The girl, in lemon frock, begins to scream
	As the maimed, teetering thing attempts its flight.
	She is herself a thing of summery light,
	Frail as a flower in this blue August air,
	Not marked for some late grief that cannot speak.
	
	The mind swings inward on itself in fear
	Swayed towards nausea from each normal sign.
	Heredity of cruelty everywhere,
	And everywhere the frocks of summer torn,
	The long look back to see where choice is born,
	As summer grass sways to the scythe’s design.



13. LOVE AFTER LOVE

	The time will come 
	when, with elation 
	you will greet yourself arriving 
	at your own door, in your own mirror 
	and each will smile at the other’s welcome, 
	
	and say, sit here. Eat. 
	You will love again the stranger who was your self.
	Give wine. Give bread. Give back your heart 
	to itself, to the stranger who has loved you 
	
	all your life, whom you ignored 
	for another, who knows you by heart. 
	Take down the love letters from the bookshelf, 
	
	the photographs, the desperate notes, 
	peel your own image from the mirror. 
	Sit. Feast on your life.



14. MAP OF THE NEW WORLD

	At the end of this sentence, rain will begin.
	At the rain’s edge, a sail.
	
	Slowly the sail will lose sight of islands;
	into a mist will go the belief in harbours
	of an entire race.
	
	The ten-years war is finished.
	Helen’s hair, a grey cloud.
	Troy, a white ashpit
	by the drizzling sea.
	
	The drizzle tightens like the strings of a harp.
	A man with clouded eyes picks up the rain
	and plucks the first line of the Odyssey.



15. MIDSUMMER, TOBAGO

	Broad sun-stoned beaches.
	
	White heat.
	A green river.
	
	A bridge,
	scorched yellow palms
	
	from the summer-sleeping house
	drowsing through August.
	
	Days I have held,
	days I have lost,
	
	days that outgrow, like daughters,
	my harbouring arms.



16. PENTECOST

	Better a jungle in the head
	than rootless concrete.
	Better to stand bewildered
	by the fireflies’ crooked street;
	
	winter lamps do not show
	where the sidewalk is lost,
	nor can these tongues of snow
	speak for the Holy Ghost;
	
	the self-increasing silence
	of words dropped from a roof
	points along iron railings,
	direction, in not proof.
	
	But best is this night surf
	with slow scriptures of sand,
	that sends, not quite a seraph,
	but a late cormorant,
	
	whose fading cry propels
	through phosphorescent shoal
	what, in my childhood gospels,
	used to be called the Soul.



17. PRODIGAL, WHAT WERE YOUR WANDERINGS ABOUT?

	I
	
	Prodigal, what were your wanderings about?
	The smoke of homecoming, the smoke of departure.
	The earth grew music and the tubers sprouted
	to Sesenne’s singing, rain-water, fresh patois
	in a clay carafe, a clear spring in the ferns,
	and pure things took root like the sweet-potato vine.
	Over the sea at dusk, an arrowing curlew,
	as the sun turns into a cipher from a green flash,
	clouds crumble like cities, the embers of Carthage;
	any man without a history stands in nettles
	and no butterflies console him, like surrendering flags,
	does he, still a child, long for battles and castles
	from the books of his beginning, in a hieratic language
	he will never inherit, but one in which he writes
	“Over the sea at dusk, an arrowing curlew,”
	his whole life a language awaiting translation?
	
	Since I am what I am, how was I made?
	To ascribe complexion to the intellect
	is not an insult, since it takes its plaid
	like the invaluable lizard from its background,
	and if our work is piebald mimicry
	then virtue lies in its variety
	to be adept. On the warm stones of Florence
	I subtly alter to a Florentine    
	till the sun passes, in London
	I am pieced by fog, and shaken from reflection
	in Venice, a printed page in the sun 
	on which a cabbage-white unfolds, a bookmark.
	To break through veils like spiders’ webs,
	crack carapaces like a day-moth and achieve
	a clarified frenzy and feel the blood settle
	like a brown afternoon stream in River Doree
	is what I pulsed for in my brain and wrist
	for the drifting benediction of a drizzle
	drying on this page like asphalt, for peace that passes
	like a changing cloud, to a hawk’s slow pivot.
	
	
	II
	
	In the vale of Santa Cruz I look to the hills.
	The white flowers have the fury of battle,
	they lay siege to the mountains, for war
	there is the tumult of the white ravines,
	and the cascade’s assault; they bow their plumes,
	Queen Anne’s lace, bougainvillea, orchid and oleander,
	and they are as white as arrested avalanches,
	angry and Alpine, their petals blur into
	a white gust from the Matterhom or the streets of Zermatt.
	Both worlds are welded, they were seamed by delight.
	Santa Cruz, in spring. Deep hills with blue clefts.
	I have come back for the white egrets
	feeding in a flock on the lawn, darting their bills
	in that finical stride, gawkily elegant,
	then suddenly but leisurely sailing
	to settle, but not too far off, like angels.
	
	
	III
	
	I wake at sunrise to angelic screams.
	And time is measuring my grandchildren’s cries
	and time outpaces the sepia water
	of the racing creek, time takes its leisure, cunning
	in the blocked hollows of the pool, the elephantine stones
	in the leaf-marked lagoon, time sails
	with the soundless buzzard over the smoking hills
	and the clouds that fray and change
	and time waits very quiet between the mountains
	and the brown tracks in the valleys of the Northern Range,
	a cover of overhanging bamboo, in Maraval
	where, if the bed were steeper, a brown stream races
	or tries to, pooling in rocks, with great avail
	for me at least, or where a range’s blues
	and indigo over which wide hawks sail
	their shadows on the wells of Santa Cruz,
	dark benedictions on the brook’s muttering shale,
	and the horses are slowly plunging their manes
	as they climb up from the paved-with-lilies pond,
	so much mythology in their unharnessed necks!
	These little things take root as I add my praise
	to the huge lawn at the back of the house, a field,
	a bright, unaltered meadow, a small savannah
	for cries and bicycles and joy-crazed dogs
	bolting after pedalling boys, the crescent ghost
	of the new moon showing and on the thick slopes
	this forest like green billowing smoke
	pierced by the flame petals of the immortelle.
	
	
	IV
	
	Petals of the flame tree against ice-cream walls
	and the arches across the park with its tacit fountain,
	the old idlers on the benches, this is the prose
	that spreads like the shade of an immortal banyan
	in front of the library, the bulk that darkens
	the violin of twilight when traffic has vanished
	and nearly over also the colonial regime when the wharves
	cradled the rocking schooners of our boyhood to
	the echo of vespers in the alien cathedral.
	In the hot green silence a dragonfly’s drone
	crossing the scorched hill to the shade of the cedars
	and spiced laurels, the _lauriers canelles_,
	the word itself lifting the plurals of its leaves,
	from the hot ground, from this page, the singeing smells.
	How simple to write this after you have gone,
	that your death that afternoon had the same ease
	as stopping at the side of the road under the trees
	to buy cassava bread that comes in two sorts
	sweet and unsweetened, from the huge cauldron,
	on the road between Soufrière and Canaries.
	The heat collects in the depths between the ridges
	and the high hawks circle in the gathering haze;
	like consonants round a vowel, insistent midges
	hum round noun’s hexagon, and the hornet’s house.
	Delve in the hot, still valley of Soufrière,
	the black, baking asphalt and its hedges dripping shade
	and here is the ultimate nullity despite the moil
	of the churning vegetation. The small church
	hidden in leaves. In mid-afternoon, the halt--
	then dart of a quizzical lizard across the road.



18. THE SEA IS HISTORY

	Where are your monuments, your battles, martyrs?
	Where is your tribal memory? Sirs,
	in that gray vault. The sea. The sea
	has locked them up. The sea is History.
	
	First, there was the heaving oil,
	heavy as chaos;
	then, likea light at the end of a tunnel,
	
	the lantern of a caravel,
	and that was Genesis.
	Then there were the packed cries,
	the shit, the moaning:
	
	Exodus.
	Bone soldered by coral to bone,
	mosaics
	mantled by the benediction of the shark’s shadow,
	
	that was the Ark of the Covenant.
	Then came from the plucked wires
	of sunlight on the sea floor
	
	the plangent harp of the Babylonian bondage,
	as the white cowries clustered like manacles
	on the drowned women,
	
	and those were the ivory bracelets
	of the Song of Solomon,
	but the ocean kept turning blank pages
	
	looking for History.
	Then came the men with eyes heavy as anchors
	who sank without tombs,
	
	brigands who barbecued cattle,
	leaving their charred ribs like palm leaves on the shore,
	then the foaming, rabid maw
	
	of the tidal wave swallowing Port Royal,
	and that was Jonah,
	but where is your Renaissance?
	
	Sir, it is locked in them sea sands
	out there past the reef’s moiling shelf,
	where the men-o’-war floated down;
	
	strop on these goggles, I’ll guide you there myself.
	It’s all subtle and submarine,
	through colonnades of coral,
	
	past the gothic windows of sea fans
	to where the crusty grouper, onyx-eyed,
	blinks, weighted by its jewels, like a bald queen;
	
	and these groined caves with barnacles
	pitted like stone
	are our cathedrals,
	
	and the furnace before the hurricanes:
	Gomorrah. Bones ground by windmills
	into marl and cornmeal,
	
	and that was Lamentations--
	that was just Lamentations,
	it was not History;
	
	then came, like scum on the river’s drying lip,
	the brown reeds of villages
	mantling and congealing into towns,
	
	and at evening, the midges’ choirs,
	and above them, the spires
	lancing the side of God
	
	as His son set, and that was the New Testament.
	
	Then came the white sisters clapping
	to the waves’ progress,
	and that was Emancipation--
	
	jubilation, O jubilation--
	vanishing swiftly
	as the sea’s lace dries in the sun,
	
	but that was not History,
	that was only faith,
	and then each rock broke into its own nation;
	
	then came the synod of flies,
	then came the secretarial heron,
	then came the bullfrog bellowing for a vote,
	
	fireflies with bright ideas
	and bats like jetting ambassadors
	and the mantis, like khaki police,
	
	and the furred caterpillars of judges
	examining each case closely,
	and then in the dark ears of ferns
	
	and in the salt chuckle of rocks
	with their sea pools, there was the sound
	like a rumour without any echo
	
	of History, really beginning.



19. THE SEASON OF PHANTASMAL PEACE

	Then all the nations of birds lifted together
	the huge net of the shadows of this earth
	in multitudinous dialects, twittering tongues,
	stitching and crossing it. They lifted up
	the shadows of long pines down trackless slopes,
	the shadows of glass-faced towers down evening streets,
	the shadow of a frail plant on a city sill--
	the net rising soundless as night, the birds’ cries soundless, until
	there was no longer dusk, or season, decline, or weather,
	only this passage of phantasmal light
	that not the narrowest shadow dared to sever.
	
	And men could not see, looking up, what the wild geese drew,
	what the ospreys trailed behind them in silvery ropes
	that flashed in the icy sunlight; they could not hear
	battalions of starlings waging peaceful cries,
	bearing the net higher, covering this world
	like the vines of an orchard, or a mother drawing
	the trembling gauze over the trembling eyes
	of a child fluttering to sleep;
	
	it was the light
	that you will see at evening on the side of a hill
	in yellow October, and no one hearing knew
	what change had brought into the raven’s cawing,
	the killdeer’s screech, the ember-circling chough
	such an immense, soundless, and high concern
	for the fields and cities where the birds belong,
	except it was their seasonal passing, Love,
	made seasonless, or, from the high privilege of their birth,
	something brighter than pity for the wingless ones
	below them who shared dark holes in windows and in houses,
	and higher they lifted the net with soundless voices
	above all change, betrayals of falling suns,
	and this season lasted one moment, like the pause
	between dusk and darkness, between fury and peace,
	but, for such as our earth is now, it lasted long.



20. THE STAR-APPLE KINGDOM

	There were still shards of an ancient pastoral
	in those shires of the island where the cattle drank
	their pools of shadow from an older sky,
	surviving from when the landscape copied such subjects as
	“Herefords at Sunset in the Valley of the Wye.”
	The mountain water that fell white from the mill wheel
	sprinkling like petals from the star-apple trees,
	and all of the windmills and sugar mills moved by mules
	on the treadmill of Monday to Monday, would repeat
	in tongues of water and wind and fire, in tongues
	of Mission School pickaninnies, like rivers remembering
	their source, Parish Trelawny, Parish St. David, Parish
	St. Andrew, the names afflicting the pastures,
	the lime groves and fences of marl stone and the cattle
	with a docile longing, an epochal content.
	And there were, like old wedding lace in an attic,
	among the boas and parasols and the tea-coloured
	daguerreotypes, hints of an epochal happiness
	as ordered and infinite to the child
	as the great house road to the Great House
	down a perspective of casuarinas plunging green manes
	in time to the horses, an orderly life
	reduced by lorgnettes day and night, one disc the sun,
	the other the moon, reduced into a pier glass:
	nannies diminished to dolls, mahogany stairways
	no larger than those of an album in which
	the flash of cutlery yellows, as gamboge as
	the piled cakes of teatime on that latticed
	bougainvillea verandah that looked down toward
	a prospect of Cuyp-like Herefords under a sky
	lurid as a porcelain souvenir with these words:
	“Herefords at Sunset in the Valley of the Wye.”
	 
	Strange, that the rancour of hatred hid in that dream
	of slow dreams and lily-like parasols, in snaps
	of fine old colonial families, curled at the edge
	not from age or from fire or the chemicals, no, not at all,
	but because, off at its edges, innocently excluded
	stood the groom, the cattle boy, the housemaid, the gardeners,
	the tenants, the good Negroes down in the village,
	their mouths in the locked jaw of a silent scream.
	A scream which would open the doors to swing wildly
	all night, that was bringing in heavier clouds,
	more black smoke than cloud, frightening the cattle
	in whose bulging eyes the Great House diminished;
	a scorching wind of a scream
	that began to extinguish the fireflies,
	that dried the water mill creaking to a stop
	as it was about to pronounce Parish Trelawny
	all over, in the ancient pastoral voice,
	a wind that blew all without bending anything,
	neither the leaves of all the album nor the lime groves;
	blew Nanny floating back in white from a feather
	to a chimerical, chemical pin speck that shrank
	the drinking Herefords to brown porcelain cows
	on a mantel piece, Trelawny trembling with dusk,
	the scorched pastures of the old benign Custos; blew
	for the decent servants and the lifelong cook,
	and shriveled to a shard that ancient pastoral
	of dusk in a gilt-edged frame now catching the evening sun
	in Jamaica, making both epochs one.
	 
	He looked out from the Great House windows on
	clouds that still held the fragrances of fire,
	he saw the Botanical Gardens officially drown
	in a formal dusk, where governors had strolled
	and black gardeners had smiled over glinting shears
	at the lilies of parasols on the floating lawns,
	the flame trees obeyed his will and lowered their wicks,
	the flowers tightened their fists in the name of thrift,
	the porcelain lamps of ripe cocoa, the magnolia’s jet
	dimmed on the one circuit with the ginger lilies
	and left a lonely bulb on the verandah,
	and, had his mandate extended to that ceiling
	of star-apple candelabra, he would have ordered
	the sky to sleep, saying, I’m tired,
	save the starlight for victories, we can’t afford it,
	leave the moon on for one more hour, and that’s it.
	But though his power, the given mandate, extended
	from tangerine daybreaks to star-apple dusks,
	his hand could not dam that ceaseless torrent of dust
	that carried the shacks of the poor, to their root-rock music,
	down the gullies of Yallahs and August Town,
	to lodge them on thorns of maca, with their rags
	crucified by cactus, tins, old tires, cartons;
	from the black Warieka Hills the sky glowered fierce as
	the dials of a million radios,
	a throbbing sunset that glowed like a grid
	where the dread beat rose from the jukebox of Kingston.
	He saw the fountains dried of quadrilles, the water-music
	of the country dancers, the fiddlers like fifes
	put aside. He had to heal
	this malarial island in its bath of bay leaves,
	its forests tossing with fever, the dry cattle
	groaning like winches, the grass that kept shaking
	its head to remember its name. No vowels left
	in the mill wheel, the river. Rock stone. Rock stone.
	 
	The mountains rolled like whales through phosphorous stars
	as he swayed like a stone down fathoms into sleep,
	drawn by that magnet which pulls down half the world
	between a star and a star, by that black power
	that has the assassin dreaming of snow,
	that poleaxes the tyrant to a sleeping child.
	The house is rocking at anchor, but as he falls
	his mind is a mill wheel in moonlight,
	and he hears, in the sleep of his moonlight, the drowned
	bell of Port Royal’s cathedral, sees the copper pennies
	of bubbles rising from the empty eye-pockets
	of green buccaneers, the parrot fish floating
	from the frayed shoulders of pirates, sea-horses
	drawing gowned ladies in their liquid promenade      
	across the moss-green meadows of the sea;
	he heard the drowned choirs under Palisadoes,
	a hymn ascending to earth from a heaven inverted
	by water, a crab climbing the steeple,
	and he climbed from that submarine kingdom
	as the evening lights came on in the institute, 
	the scholars lamplit in their own aquarium,
	he saw them mouthing like parrot fish, as he passed
	upward from that baptism, their history lessons,  
	the bubbles like ideas which he could not break:
	Jamaica was captured by Penn and Venables,
	Port Royal perished in a cataclysmic earthquake.
	 
	Before the coruscating façades of cathedrals
	from Santiago to Caracas, where the penitential archbishops
	washed the feet of paupers (a parenthetical moment
	that made the Caribbean a baptismal font,
	turned butterflies to stone, and whitened like doves
	the buzzards circling municipal garbage),
	the Caribbean was borne like an elliptical basin
	in the hands of acolytes, and a people were absolved
	of a history which they did not commit;
	the slave pardoned his whip, and the dispossessed
	said the rosary of islands for three hundred years,
	a hymn that resounded like the hum of the sea
	inside a sea-cave, as their knees turned to stone,
	while the bodies of patriots were melting down walls
	still crusted with mute outcries of La Revolución!
	“San Salvador, pray for us, St. Thomas, San Domingo,
	ora pro nobis, intercede for us, Sancta Lucia
	of no eyes,” and when the circular chaplet
	reached the last black bead of Sancta Trinidad
	they began again, their knees drilled into stone,
	where Colón had begun, with San Salvador’s bead,
	beads of black colonies round the necks of Indians.
	And while they prayed for an economic miracle,
	ulcers formed on the municipal portraits,
	the hotels went up, and the casinos and brothels,
	and the empires of tobacco, sugar, and bananas,
	until a black woman, shawled like a buzzard,
	climbed up the stairs and knocked at the door
	of his dream, whispering in the ear of the keyhole:
	“Let me in, I’m finished with praying, I’m the Revolution.
	I am the darker, the older America.”
	She was as beautiful as a stone in the sunrise,
	her voice had the gutturals of machine guns
	across khaki deserts where the cactus flower
	detonates like grenades, her sex was the slit throat    
	of an Indian, her hair had the blue-black sheen of the crow.
	She was a black umbrella blown inside out                 
	by the wind of revolution, La Madre Dolorosa,
	a black rose of sorrow, a black mine of silence,
	raped wife, empty mother, Aztec virgin
	transfixed by arrows from a thousand guitars,
	a stone full of silence, which, if it gave tongue
	to the tortures done in the name of the Father,
	would curdle the blood of the marauding wolf,
	the fountain of generals, poets, and cripples
	who danced without moving over their graves
	with each revolution; her Caesarean was stitched
	by the teeth of machine guns, and every sunset
	she carried the Caribbean’s elliptical basin
	as she had once carried the penitential napkins
	to be the footbath of dictators, Trujillo, Machado, 
	and those whose faces had yellowed like posters,
	on municipal walls. Now she stroked his hair
	until it turned white, but she would not understand
	that he wanted no other power but peace
	that he wanted a revolution without any bloodshed,
	he wanted a history without any memory,
	streets without statues,
	and a geography without myth. He wanted no armies
	but those regiments of bananas, thick lances of cane,
	and he sobbed, “I am powerless, except for love.”
	She faded from him, because he could not kill;
	she shrank to a bat that hung day and night
	in the back of his brain. He rose in his dream.
	 
	The soul, which was his body made as thin
	as its reflection and invulnerable
	without its clock, was losing track of time;
	it walked the mountain tracks of the Maroons,
	it swung with Gordon from the creaking gibbet,
	it bought a pack of peppermints and cashews
	from one of the bandanna’d mammies outside the ward,
	it heard breath pitched to the decibels
	of the peanut vendors’ carts, it entered a municipal wall
	Stirring the slogans that shrieked his name: saviour! 
	and others: lackey! he melted like a spoon
	through the alphabet soup of CIA, PNP, OPEC,
	that resettled once he passed through with this thought:
	I should have foreseen those seraphs with barbed-wire hair,
	beards like burst mattresses, and wild eyes of garnet,
	who nestled the Coptic Bible to their ribs, would
	call me Joshua, expecting him to bring down Babylon
	by Wednesday, after the fall of Jericho; yes, yes,
	I should have seen the cunning bitterness of the rich
	who left me no money but these mandates:
	 
	His aerial mandate, which
	contained the crows whose circuit
	was this wedding band that married him to his island.
	His marine mandate, which
	was the fishing limits
	which the shark scissored like silk with its teeth
	between Key West and Havana;
	his terrestrial:
	the bled hills rusted with bauxite;
	paradisal:
	the chimneys like angels sheathed in aluminium.
	 
	In shape like a cloud
	he saw the face of his father,
	the hair like white cirrus blown back
	in a photographic wind,
	the mouth of mahogany winced shut,
	the eyes lidded, resigned
	to the first compromise,
	the last ultimatum,
	the first and last referendum.
	One morning the Caribbean was cut up                       
	by seven prime ministers who bought the sea in bolts--   
	one thousand miles of aquamarine with lace trimmings;
	one million yards of lime-coloured silk,                      
	one mile of violet, leagues of cerulean satin--         
	who sold it at a markup to the conglomerates,
	the same conglomerates who had rented the water spouts
	for ninety-nine years in exchange for fifty ships,
	who retailed it in turn to the ministers                  
	with only one bank account, who then resold it   
	in ads for the Caribbean Economic Community,
	till everyone owned a little piece of the sea,
	from which some made saris, some made bandannas;
	the rest was offered on trays to white cruise ships
	taller than the post office; then the dogfights   
	began in the cabinets as to who had first sold
	the archipelago for this chain store of islands.
	 
	Now a tree of grenades was his star-apple kingdom,
	over fallow pastures his crows patrolled,
	he felt his fist involuntarily tighten
	into a talon that was strangling five doves,
	the mountains loomed leaden under martial law,
	the suburban gardens flowered with white paranoia
	next to the bougainvilleas of astonishing April;
	the rumours were a rain that would not fall:
	that enemy intelligence had alerted the roaches’
	quivering antennae, that bats flew like couriers,
	transmitting secrets between the embassies;
	over dials in the war rooms, the agents waited
	for a rifle crack from Havana; down shuttered avenues
	roared a phalanx of Yamahas. They left
	a hole in the sky that closed on silence.
	 
	He didn’t hear the roar of the motorcycles
	diminish in circles like those of the water mill
	in a far childhood; he was drowned in sleep;
	he slept, without dreaming, the sleep after love
	in the mineral oblivion of night
	whose flesh smells of cocoa, whose teeth are white
	as coconut meat, whose breath smells of ginger,
	whose braids are scented like sweet-potato vines
	in furrows still pungent with the sun.
	He slept the sleep that wipes out history,
	he slept like the islands on the breast of the sea,
	like a child again in her star-apple kingdom.
	 
	Tomorrow the sea would gleam like nails    
	under a zinc sky where the barren frangipani          
	was hammered, a horizon without liners;
	tomorrow the heavy caravels of clouds would wreck
	and dissolve in their own foam on the reefs
	of the mountains, tomorrow a donkey’s yawn         
	would saw the sky in half, and at dawn        
	would come the noise of a government groaning uphill.    
	But now she held him, as she holds us all,    
	her history-orphaned islands, she to whom 
	we came late as our muse, our mother,
	who suckled the islands, who, when she grows old
	with her breasts wrinkled like eggplants,
	is the head-tie mother, the bleached-sheets-on-the-river-rocks mother,   
	the gospel mother, the t’ank-you-parson mother    
	who turns into mahogany, the lignum-vitae mother,
	her sons like thorns,  
	her daughters dry gullies that give birth to stones,
	who was, in our childhood, the housemaid and the cook,
	the young grand’ who polished the plaster figure    
	of Clio, Muse of history, in her seashell grotto         
	in the Great House parlour, Anadyomene washed  
	in the deep Atlantic heave of her housemaid’s hymn.  
	 
	In the indigo dawn the palms unclenched their fists,
	his eyes opened the flowers, and he lay as still
	as the waterless mill wheel. The sun’s fuse caught;
	it hissed on the edge of the skyline, and day exploded
	its remorseless avalanche of dray carts and curses,
	the roaring oven of Kingston, its sky as fierce
	as the tin box of a patties cart. Down the docks     
	between the Levantine smells of the warehouses
	nosed the sea-wind with its odour of a dog’s damp fur.
	He lathered in anger and refreshed his love.
	He was lathered like a horse, but the instant
	the shower crowned him and he closed his eyes,
	he was a bride under lace, remarrying his country,
	a child drawn by the roars of the mill wheel’s electorate,
	those vows reaffirmed; he dressed, went down to breakfast,
	and sitting again at the mahogany surface
	of the breakfast table, its dark hide as polished
	as the sheen of mares, saw his father’s face
	and his own face blent there, and looked out
	to the drying garden and its seeping pond.
	 
	What was the Caribbean? A green pond mantling
	behind the Great House columns of Whitehall,
	behind the Greek façades of Washington,
	with bloated frogs squatting on lily pads
	like islands, islands that coupled as sadly as turtles
	engendering islets, as the turtle of Cuba
	mounting Jamaica engendered the Caymans, as, behind
	the hammerhead turtle of Haiti-San Domingo
	trailed the little turtles from Tortuga to Tobago;
	he followed the bobbing trek of the turtles
	leaving America for the open Atlantic,
	felt his own flesh loaded like the pregnant beaches
	with their moon-guarded eggs--they yearned for Africa,
	they were lemmings drawn by magnetic memory
	to an older death, to broader beaches
	where the coughing of lions was dumbed by breakers.
	Yes, he could understand their natural direction
	but they would drown, sea-eagles circling them,
	and the languor of frigates that do not beat wings,
	and he closed his eyes, and felt his jaw drop
	again with the weight of that silent scream.             
	He cried out at the turtles as one screams at children
	with the anger of love, it was the same scream
	which, in his childhood, had reversed an epoch         
	that had bent back the leaves of his star-apple kingdom,
	made streams race uphill, pulled the water wheel backward
	like the wheels in a film, and at that outcry,
	from the raw ropes and tendons of his throat,    
	the sea-buzzards receded and receded into specks,
	and the osprey vanished.  
	
	On the knee-hollowed steps
	of the crusted cathedral, there was a woman in black,
	the black of moonless nights, within whose eyes   
	shone seas in starlight like the glint of knives
	(the one who had whispered to the keyhole of his ear),
	washing the steps, and she heard it first.        
	She was one of a flowing black river of women
	who bore elliptical basins to the feet of pauper
	on the Day of Thorns, who bore milk pails to cows
	in a pastoral sunrise, who bore baskets on their heads
	down the haemophilic red hills of Haiti,
	now with the squeezed rag dripping from her hard hands
	the way that vinegar once dropped from a sponge,
	but she heard as a dog hears, as all the underdogs
	of the world hear, the pitched shriek of silence.
	Star-apples rained to the ground in that silence,
	the silence was the green of cities undersea,
	and the silence lasted for half an hour
	in that single second, a seashell silence, resounding
	with silence, and the men with barbed-wire beards saw
	in that creak of light that was made between
	the noises of the world that was equally divided
	between rich and poor, between North and South,
	between white and black, between two Americas,
	he fields of silent Zion in Parish Trelawny,
	in Parish St. David, in Parish St. Andrew,
	leaves dancing like children without any sound,
	in the valley of Tryall, and the white, silent roar
	of the old water wheel in the star-apple kingdom;
	and the woman’s face, had a smile been decipherable
	in that map of parchment so rivered with wrinkles,
	would have worn the same smile with which he now
	cracked the day open and began his egg.
