*** Robert Penn Warren (1905 - 1989)


1. MORTAL LIMIT

	I saw the hawk ride updraft in the sunset over Wyoming.
	It rose from coniferous darkness, past gray jags
	Of mercilessness, past whiteness, into the gloaming
	Of dream-spectral light above the lazy purity of snow-snags.
	
	There--west--were the Tetons. Snow-peaks would soon be
	In dark profile to break constellations. Beyond what height
	Hangs now the black speck? Beyond what range will gold eyes see
	New ranges rise to mark a last scrawl of light?
	
	Or, having tasted that atmosphere’s thinness, does it
	Hang motionless in dying vision before
	It knows it will accept the mortal limit,
	And swing into the great circular downwardness that will restore
	
	The breath of earth? Of rock? Of rot? Of other such
	Items, and the darkness of whatever dream we clutch?


2. TELL ME A STORY

	Long ago, in Kentucky, I, a boy, stood
	By a dirt road, in first dark, and heard
	The great geese hoot northward.
	
	I could not see them, there being no moon
	And the stars sparse. I heard them.
	
	I did not know what was happening in my heart.
	
	It was the season before the elderberry blooms,
	Therefore they were going north.
	
	The sound was passing northward.


3. TRUE LOVE

	In silence the heart raves. It utters words
	Meaningless, that never had
	A meaning. I was ten, skinny, red-headed,
	
	Freckled. In a big black Buick,
	Driven by a big grown boy, with a necktie, she sat
	In front of the drugstore, sipping something
	
	Through a straw.  There is nothing like
	Beauty.  It stops your heart. It
	Thickens your blood. It stops your breath. It
	
	Makes you feel dirty. You need a hot bath.
	I leaned against a telephone pole, and watched.
	I thought I would die if she saw me.
	
	How could I exist in the same world with that brightness?
	Two years later she smiled at me. She
	Named my name.  I thought I would wake up dead.
	
	Her grown brothers walked with the bent-knee
	Swagger of horsemen. They were slick-faced.
	Told jokes in the barbershop.  Did no work.
	
	Their father was what is called a drunkard.
	Whatever he was he stayed on the third floor
	Of the big white farmhouse under the maples for twenty-five years.
	
	He never came down. They brought everything up to him.
	I did not know what a mortgage was.
	His wife was a good, Christian woman, and prayed.
	
	When the daughter got married, the old man came down wearing
	An old tail coat, the pleated shirt yellowing.
	The sons propped him. I saw the wedding. There were
	
	Engraved invitations, it was so fashionable. I thought
	I would cry. I lay in bed that night
	And wondered if she would cry when something was done to her.
	
	The mortgage was foreclosed.  That last word was whispered.
	She never came back. The family
	Sort of drifted off. Nobody wears shiny boots like that now.
	
	But I know she is beautiful forever, and lives
	In a beautiful house, far away.
	She called my name once. I didn’t even know she knew it.


4. A WAY TO LOVE GOD

	Here is the shadow of truth, for only the shadow is true.
	And the line where the incoming swell from the sunset Pacific
	First leans and staggers to break will tell all you need to know
	About submarine geography, and your father’s death rattle
	Provides all biographical data required for the Who’s Who of the dead.
	
	I cannot recall what I started to tell you, but at least
	I can say how night-long I have lain under the stars and
	Heard mountains moan in their sleep. By daylight,
	They remember nothing, and go about their lawful occasions
	Of not going anywhere except in slow disintegration. At night
	They remember, however, that there is something they cannot remember.
	So moan. Theirs is the perfected pain of conscience that
	Of forgetting the crime, and I hope you have not suffered it. I have.
	
	I do not recall what had burdened my tongue, but urge you
	To think on the slug’s white belly, how sick-slick and soft,
	On the hairiness of stars, silver, silver, while the silence
	Blows like wind by, and on the sea’s virgin bosom unveiled
	To give suck to the wavering serpent of the moon; and,
	In the distance, in plaza, piazza, place, platz, and square,
	Boot heels, like history being born, on cobbles bang.
	
	Everything seems an echo of something else.
	
	And when, by the hair, the headsman held up the head
	Of Mary of Scots, the lips kept on moving,
	But without sound. The lips,
	They were trying to say something very important.
	
	But I had forgotten to mention an upland
	Of wind-tortured stone white in darkness, and tall, but when
	No wind, mist gathers, and once on the Sarré at midnight,
	I watched the sheep huddling. Their eyes
	Stared into nothingness. In that mist-diffused light their eyes
	Were stupid and round like the eyes of fat fish in muddy water,
	Or of a scholar who has lost faith in his calling.
	
	Their jaws did not move. Shreds
	Of dry grass, gray in the gray mist-light, hung
	From the side of a jaw, unmoving.
	
	You would think that nothing would ever again happen.
	
	That may be a way to love God.