*** Reed Whittemore (1919 - 2012)


1. ANOTHER TEACHER

	He hated them all one by one but wanted to show them
	What was important and vital and by God if
	They thought they’d never have use for it he was
	Sorry as hell for them, that’s all, with their genteel
	Mercantile Main Street Babbitt
	Bourgeois-barbaric faces, they were beyond
	Saving, clearly, quite out of reach, and so he
	G-rrr
	Got up every morning and g-rrr ate his breakfast
	And g-rrr lumbered off to his eight o’clock
	Gladly to teach.



2. AN ENGLISH TEACHER

	After a summer of beaches Mr. Meeching,
	Dressed as always in flannel and bristling tweed,
	Applied his tanned physique again to teaching
	Shelley and Meeching and how to (romantically) bleed.

	Standing before his first class with the erotic
	Air of the Cape still curling his hair,
	He thought of the sand and the breakers, and of an exotic
	Quohaug chowder with camembert.

	Abstracted, class roll in hand, he let his gaze wander
	Lazily out over thirty-three heads to a dim
	Window where trees became masts and grass water
	And lobsters crawled on the steps of the briny gym.

	Sadly recalled to the roll, the text and the faces,
	He saw stretched before him a continent of drab
	And merely poetic commonplaces
	With nary a long-necked clam or soft-shelled crab.

	Poor Meeching.
	Would he ever again get through to the ocean side?
	He doubted it,
	Having no thoughts to comfort his soul in his dark night of teaching
	Except that lucky old Shelley (by drowning) died.



3. GOD’S ACRES

	He who can tell a grosbeak from a grackle,
	Red oak from maple, marigold from heather
	May get on. But will that other,
	Inward drawn,
	Who never on his T-shirt smugly
	Sewed at camp a badge or feather
	For mastery of wood or shore or meadow?

	Not likely.

	His is not a placid, plotted
	Nature trail of brae and coot,
	Dingle, willet, plash and pintail,
	Botany and fruit,

	But thorns, thorns, thorns his flesh to scratch
	As he slogs nameless in his briar patch



4. LADDERS

	“He flew up the ladder, tapped at the shutter . . .”
	-Stendhal, _The Red and the Black_

	I am frightened by ladders, Freud, by ladders,
	Ladders that rock and shudder and sink in the ground.
	As I rise to dangerous roofs and windows and branches,
	My soul, Freud, my soul sinks in the ground.

	What does this tell of my love, Freud, my love?
	Is every swaying balcony or boudoir
	Out of reach of my love because of my nerve’s
	Faltering, Freud, after three rungs, Freud, or four?

	Help me, Freud, oh help me master the gap
	Between the ground and all such high and precarious places.
	Hold the ladder firm, and when I fly up,
	Tell me, Freud, of successful similar cases.

	Without you, Freud, my love will tumble, and then
	Never, Freud, will I fly up ladders again.



5. THE PALMS

	The de luxe tourist resort auto court
	Of the senses
	Has deck chairs and bright umbrellas, and over these
	Palms, always palms preside. But not from the palms
	Themselves, or their fruit,
	But their silhouettes and rustlings proceeds the dazzle
	That blinds and deceives,
	As a shell at a child’s ear strums forth the sea,
	As a spangled bauble burbles of old bazaars,
	And as sirens sweet in the storm-torn straits--but enough!
	--Oh, essence of palm,
	If all those bearded explorers with frozen fingers
	Had planted a tropic grove in polar snows,
	What poet would not have been warmed, and what motel
	Would not have been aired and graced with vast verandahs
	Where sunstruck nations
	Gathered unto your fronds, while hired beauties
	Squirmed to and fro in bikinis, and herons and pelicans
	Languidly glided over the arctic sea.



6. THE PRIMITIVES

	To visit the vision in broken
	English of peoples who live on corn,
	Nuts and a broad-leaved prairie grass
	In houses of brick and mud with their beasts of burden and children
	Is to be, as always, tricked.
	There are no primitive peoples.

	When the guide to the old part of town
	Points to the son of the son
	Of the father of fathers, Jarvis
	(Discoverer of the wheel),
	He has no choice but to choose as always, always
	A native of Springfield.

	None of the gnarled old crones
	In flaxen bags in Gaza
	But has danced the jellyroll blues
	In Springfield.

	None of the brittle bones
	In the catacombs
	But are my cousin Jonathan
	Of Springfield.

	There are no primitive peoples. All old crockery
	Stems from the common culture where converge,
	At Springfield,
	The Nile, The Tigris and The Ganges.



7. THE SIEGE

	We raise our own, our king’s, our Khufu’s walls
	And hide behind with yams against our yielding
	Because we have been paid or whipped to build
	Against unbuilding.

	But no old colonial pillbox with its beams
	Fitted and spiked to rib
	Many a cluster of lungs and hearts from cold;
	No buttressed granite keep, or church, or shed
	Pillared against the slug, or mouse, or mold;
	Not even the snuggest web
	Woven of words and prayers for iron tomes
	Will serve to hold off Ugly, The Plugger, the dread
	Borer in the bastions of our ruin.



8. A TALE OF A POEM AND A SQUASH

	Let me take this acorn squash, grown in my garden,
	And place beside it a poem grown in a hothouse.
	You will note the difference at once; the former is jolly
	And fat, self-contained, the latter anaemic,
	Colorless, tasteless, the clearest evidence
	That a poem does not make a squash. But now take the squash,
	And shoving its roundness into a lyric book,
	Look!
	How those covers squinch, being quashed, to elucidate
	Something or other

	where was I?

	Of late
	I have been reading too much on this subject.
	Art is not life, I am told, and thus in my garden
	(Which as a matter of fact has no squashes,
	Just toads), I fund myself gathering
	Wool mostly, a few old tomatoes of rhymes,
	And a mythical rosebud or two in the hope that these items
	Will store well against winter, my chosen season,
	When nothing from nature is blooming except my
	Dog, a few plants on a windowsill, and of course people,
	Most of whom,
	Like myself,
	Are not of the soil, the good earth, and in winter look
	More like a poem than a--

	but, as I say,
	This subject unnerves me.
	Where,
	Where does one go--into war? poverty?--
	To keep those squashes and poems from preening and posing
	For any nitwitted author who has mouths
	To feed and a ballpoint pen
	And some paper
	And thinks that if he could settle, once and for all,
	Life and art, art and life, and how they are
	Knit, he (that nit)
	Could stake himself some sort of claim on our cultural garden,
	And be forever in squ . . .

	but, as I say,
	I have been thinking of going away.



9. THOUGHTS OF THE CALIFORNIA DESERT

	Under palm trees, oranges, olives and pears
	The indolent desert slouches, half an eye closed
	And half an eye out for men of affairs whose cares
	Keep them from keeping their gaudy gardens hosed.

	Slouches and yawns, that clown. Leaves in disdain
	Gaseous dragons their nauseous knights to nettle.
	Flips his tail coyly, rolls over, says he would fain
	Die a dry death. Haw! browning a petal.

	Has it too good, too good. Is vastly diverted
	Watching his merchants and bankers stumble out doors.
	Parries their blows, says he loves, loves to be squirted
	As at him they fiercely empty their reservoirs.

	Sleeps a great deal, drinks deep, drinks deep and makes hay,
	Thinking he’ll swallow the bankers and all one day.



10. THREE POEMS TO JACKSON

	I

	Darkness comes early, stays late
	In my winter country; the frost
	Goes four feet down; trees are like sticks;
	A light snow lingers
	For a month or two, getting dirty. I write every day
	But throw much away.

	My third book will appear in the spring, a small book,
	A slight book,
	Containing no plays or long narrative poems,
	Borrowing hardly at all from the middle ages,
	Making few affirmations, avoiding inversions,
	Using iambics distrustfully, favoring lines
	Of odd lengths and irony.

	I am forty.
	I seem to know the dimensions of what I can do
	And the season to do it in.
	Give me a few more winters like this one, and spring--
	Or the thought of spring--
	Will cease to be a disturbance, and I’ll be
	Solid,
	Jackson.


	II

	Steam on a winter stream. Cold air
	Meeting warm water
	Condenses? I suppose so.
	But why should the water not freeze
	Like me? I don’t know.
	I am mufflered, mittened, booted and earflapped
	Like a child. I am taking the air.
	The air is bitter.
	The water is dark, incredibly dark; I look down
	And see nothing and see that Narcissus
	Was a summer child, a child who knew green
	Scum and tadpoles, not
	Black water.

	Nature would rather we rest our psyches in winter.
	She gives us no looking glass; she withdraws
	From our poems, leaving us
	Only our own thoughts, words and inflections
	To fund solace in. When we look out
	We see nothing like us; we live
	In a land of the dead with our mittens on; if we
	Walk all day in the rutted road by the stream,
	We find not even a stranger to befriend us.

	But I am forty.
	I look down from the stone bridge to the water,
	And I see, yes, my face. It sends me,
	Jackson.


	III

	And the lawyers said, and the wisemen said,
	“It is better to come to terms.”
	With what?
	With all that ice, stickery, black water?
	Of course not. Given a choice we choose
	To walk in the meadows, pick clover, commune with
	What there is to commune with. It is moral.
	How, then, come to terms?

	What the lawyers meant, and the wisemen, was that we
	Trundle out to the stone bridge and play at terms.
	Then the snow sparkles,
	The stream converts to a prize-winning shot from a kodak,
	And we think of spring.

	I have a book of lyrics coming out
	In the spring.
	I am twenty.
	The spirit is strong within me; I have not
	Come to terms with winter but bludgeoned winter
	To my terms.
	Is the air warm?
	I take off my coat.
	Is the grass soft?
	Off, shoes.
	And so on.
	One does these things as a poet. I am a poet,
	Jackson.



11. THREE SONNETS TO TIME

	I

	When a man dies and is lowered into the ground
	And thus leaves behind all his failings at bed and board,
	He achieves something: fleshbound
	Was he a lout; bonebound is lord.

	The ceremonies are instructive: our double standard
	Permits us to dignify process--the sun’s burning,
	The moon’s dead whirling, the mountain’s crumbling sand ward--
	And meanwhile mock the living, the yet barnstorming.

	Yet man without the respect of man when he lives
	Comes to but feeble flourishings, war or sonnet.
	If the hat comes off after the visitor leaves,
	All the world’s grandest mouthings are but ironic.

	What he looks for, feels for, fears for, is, does
	Must be honored, surely, before his bones, his was.


	II

	In books, and in sealed containers at world’s fairs,
	Time is reduced to something tasteless and soluble.
	Why? When not in capsules it turns hairs,
	And bleaches golden words in the mouths of the voluble.

	We put up statues and plaques, and deposit regret
	At the tombs and shrines of time’s late enthusiasts.
	Why? We trust that with gifts we help time forget
	Our rickety present for all those marble pasts.

	But time does not live for capsules, stones, bones, books.
	It breathes even as we, and would be friends.
	When we tote pills, do shrines, muster backward looks,
	Will it not be offended, question our ends?

	--Thus, to dear time I pray, whom I swear to love
	Far beyond all that is timeless, below or above.


	III

	Again and again we deceive time. We sleep, we meander
	As if it were nothing to us when we’d come, or be, through,
	Or where, in the limitless world, our ship would founder,
	Or do whatever ships in metaphor do.

	We wear all the bright fashions, read soft books
	And lie in the sun in Nassau with our hides.
	We build our castles and line our secretest nooks
	With the addresses where passion or drink resides.

	And though time is never deceived--it is we, with our slippers on,
	Who are caught by surprise when our light verse yawns its last
	yawn--
	To the last hour we must strive to keep not looking drawn
	From lamenting in secret, mumbling dirges at dawn.

	It is a game, but a very solemn one, this that we play
	With art, drama and rhetoric as we decay.



12. THE WALK HOME

	As one grows older and Caesar, Hitler,
	Lear and the salesman are bundled off one by one,
	It is hard to sustain discomposure. The files thicken.
	“Leaves,” says the poet,
	“grass, and birds of the field,”
	Conjuring up a glass and a good book
	On some green hill
	Where nobody bears or cares more than old care will.

	Who’s in, who’s out--such words harden
	In bronze or plastic; pipes and slippers
	Move to their destined places, swords to theirs;
	And one walking home at dusk with the evening paper
	Thinks with erosive irreverence that perhaps
	He should let his subscription to that sheet lapse.

	What, then, would the world do? As swords clashed
	Under the sun, and Prince Hal and Sir Winston
	Triumphed on all continents, would then the word
	Sweep the ranks that one watching watched no longer?
	As he closed his eves to all but his own thin theme,
	Would the world then oblige, age and dream his dream?

	Dream. Dream. And still dream. And leave not a wrack.
	As one grows older
	Plato’s, Bottom’s and all such country rouses
	Thicken the files with the rest;
	And walking home at dusk with the sages, age
	Thinks no more than age must always think:--
	The world doesn’t oblige, and old pipes stink.



13. THE WORLD AROUND US

	Serpents,
	Take, let us, a simple Christian,
	Not child wholly, nor saint,
	But one sharing their ego as he trots
	About on his earth with his eyes on his scuffed
	Shoes, frayed cuffs, and such marks
	Of his species--take him,
	And tell him that as he is frail and is dust and not even
	A mote on somebody’s optic, he could please
	Us all most excessively if he’d just
	Quick on his belly for God and the Right
	merely

	Crawl, that’s all--will he do it? Lord, he’ll
	Up on his two hind feet to prance and whinny
	Like Black Beauty. So I ask you,
	Serpents,
	Who are the world’s true Christians?

	Fish,
	As you know he is up there,
	Fishing.
	He lets his lines down with his hooks and sinkers;
	He drags with his nets our provinces;
	And not yet sated he even swims down to us,
	Brandishing
	Sharp things at us as if he were God knows
	What, maybe something Greek? But for all this,

	Fish,
	Think of him not as he would be but as he is,
	Poor forked beast,
	Who envies us vitamins, oxygen, salts and lebensraum,
	And gasping for breath in his thin air watches,
	helpless,
	As our climbing waters stalk him,

	Dogs,
	Are you with me?
	Fight, shall we, fire with fire? Be wise
	In the world’s ways? Listen.
	If you be not for the fashion of these times,
	Feel too deep the species’ difference, penalty of Rover,
	And languish for old custom in your exile,
	Then gather round and I’ll unfold, dear friends,
	For your ears only,
	Shhh . . .
