*** Walt Whitman (1819 - 1892)


1. AMERICA

	Centre of equal daughters, equal sons,
	All, all alike endear’d, grown, ungrown, young or old,
	Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich,
	Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,
	A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,
	Chair’d in the adamant of Time.



2. ARE YOU THE NEW PERSON DRAWN TO ME?

	Are you the new person drawn toward me? 
	To begin with, take warning, I am surely far different from what you suppose; 
	Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal? 
	Do you think it so easy to have me become your lover? 
	Do you think the friendship of me would be unalloy’d satisfaction? 
	Do you think I am trusty and faithful? 
	Do you see no further than this façade, this smooth and tolerant manner of me? 
	Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground toward a real heroic man? 
	Have you no thought, O dreamer, that it may be all maya, illusion? 



3. AS I EBB’D WITH THE OCEAN OF LIFE

	1 
	
	As I ebb’d with the ocean of life, 
	As I wended the shores I know, 
	As I walk’d where the ripples continually wash you Paumanok, 
	Where they rustle up hoarse and sibilant, 
	Where the fierce old mother endlessly cries for her castaways, 
	I musing late in the autumn day, gazing off southward, 
	Held by this electric self out of the pride of which I utter poems, 
	Was seiz’d by the spirit that trails in the lines underfoot, 
	The rim, the sediment that stands for all the water and all the land of the globe. 
	
	Fascinated, my eyes reverting from the south, dropt, to follow those slender windrows, 
	Chaff, straw, splinters of wood, weeds, and the sea-gluten,   
	Scum, scales from shining rocks, leaves of salt-lettuce, left by the tide, 
	Miles walking, the sound of breaking waves the other side of me, 
	Paumanok there and then as I thought the old thought of likenesses, 
	These you presented to me you fish-shaped island, 
	As I wended the shores I know, 
	As I walk’d with that electric self seeking types. 
	
	
	2
	
	As I wend to the shores I know not, 
	As I list to the dirge, the voices of men and women wreck’d, 
	As I inhale the impalpable breezes that set in upon me, 
	As the ocean so mysterious rolls toward me closer and closer, 
	I too but signify at the utmost a little wash’d-up drift, 
	A few sands and dead leaves to gather, 
	Gather, and merge myself as part of the sands and drift. 
	
	O baffled, balk’d, bent to the very earth, 
	Oppress’d with myself that I have dared to open my mouth, 
	Aware now that amid all that blab whose echoes recoil upon me I have not once had the least idea who or what I am, 
	But that before all my arrogant poems the real Me stands yet untouch’d, untold, altogether unreach’d, 
	Withdrawn far, mocking me with mock-congratulatory signs and bows, 
	With peals of distant ironical laughter at every word I have written, 
	Pointing in silence to these songs, and then to the sand beneath. 
	
	I perceive I have not really understood any thing, not a single object, and that no man ever can, 
	Nature here in sight of the sea taking advantage of me to dart upon me and sting me, 
	Because I have dared to open my mouth to sing at all. 
	
	
	3
	
	You oceans both, I close with you, 
	We murmur alike reproachfully rolling sands and drift, knowing not why, 
	These little shreds indeed standing for you and me and all. 
	
	You friable shore with trails of debris, 
	You fish-shaped island, I take what is underfoot, 
	What is yours is mine my father. 
	
	I too Paumanok, 
	I too have bubbled up, floated the measureless float, and been wash’d on your shores, 
	I too am but a trail of drift and debris, 
	I too leave little wrecks upon you, you fish-shaped island. 
	
	I throw myself upon your breast my father, 
	I cling to you so that you cannot unloose me, 
	I hold you so firm till you answer me something. 
	
	Kiss me my father, 
	Touch me with your lips as I touch those I love, 
	Breathe to me while I hold you close the secret of the murmuring I envy. 
	
	
	4
	
	Ebb, ocean of life, (the flow will return,) 
	Cease not your moaning you fierce old mother, 
	Endlessly cry for your castaways, but fear not, deny not me, 
	Rustle not up so hoarse and angry against my feet as I touch you or gather from you. 
	
	I mean tenderly by you and all, 
	I gather for myself and for this phantom looking down where we lead, and following me and mine. 
	
	Me and mine, loose windrows, little corpses, 
	Froth, snowy white, and bubbles, 
	(See, from my dead lips the ooze exuding at last, 
	See, the prismatic colors glistening and rolling,) 
	Tufts of straw, sands, fragments, 
	Buoy’d hither from many moods, one contradicting another, 
	From the storm, the long calm, the darkness, the swell, 
	Musing, pondering, a breath, a briny tear, a dab of liquid or soil, 
	Up just as much out of fathomless workings fermented and thrown, 
	A limp blossom or two, torn, just as much over waves floating, drifted at random, 
	Just as much for us that sobbing dirge of Nature, 
	Just as much whence we come that blare of the cloud-trumpets, 
	We, capricious, brought hither we know not whence, spread out before you, 
	You up there walking or sitting, 
	Whoever you are, we too lie in drifts at your feet.



4. AS I LAY WITH MY HEAD IN YOUR LAP CAMERADO

	As I lay with my head in your lap camerado
	The confession I made I resume what I said to you and the open air
	   I resume
	I know I am restless and make others so
	I know my words are weapons full of danger full of death
	For I confront peace security and all the settled laws to
	   unsettle them
	I am more resolute because all have denied me than I could ever have
	   been had all accepted me
	I heed not and have never heeded either experience cautions
	   majorities nor ridicule
	And the threat of what is call’d hell is little or nothing to me
	And the lure of what is call’d heaven is little or nothing to me;
	Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me and still
	   urge you without the least idea what is our destination
	Or whether we shall be victorious or utterly quell’d and defeated.



5. BEAT! BEAT! DRUMS!

	Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!
	Through the windows--through doors--burst like a ruthless force,
	Into the solemn church, and scatter the congregation,
	Into the school where the scholar is studying,
	Leave not the bridegroom quiet--no happiness must he have now with his bride,
	Nor the peaceful farmer any peace, ploughing his field or gathering his grain,
	So fierce you whirr and pound you drums--so shrill you bugles blow.
	
	Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!
	Over the traffic of cities--over the rumble of wheels in the streets;
	Are beds prepared for sleepers at night in the houses? no sleepers must sleep in those beds,
	No bargainers’ bargains by day--no brokers or speculators--would they continue?
	Would the talkers be talking? would the singer attempt to sing?
	Would the lawyer rise in the court to state his case before the judge?
	Then rattle quicker, heavier drums--you bugles wilder blow.
	
	Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!
	Make no parley--stop for no expostulation,
	Mind not the timid--mind not the weeper or prayer,
	Mind not the old man beseeching the young man,
	Let not the child’s voice be heard, nor the mother’s entreaties,
	Make even the trestles to shake the dead where they lie awaiting the hearses,
	So strong you thump O terrible drums--so loud you bugles blow.



6. COME UP FROM THE FIELDS FATHER

	Come up from the fields father, here’s a letter from our Pete,
	And come to the front door mother, here’s a letter from thy dear son.
	
	Lo, ’tis autumn,
	Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,
	Cool and sweeten Ohio’s villages with leaves fluttering in the moderate wind,
	Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis’d vines,   
	(Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?
	Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)
	
	Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and with wondrous clouds,   
	Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.
	
	Down in the fields all prospers well,
	But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter’s call,
	And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.
	
	Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,
	She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.
	
	Open the envelope quickly,   
	O this is not our son’s writing, yet his name is sign’d,
	O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother’s soul!
	All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main words only,
	Sentences broken, _gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish, taken to hospital,
	At present low, but will soon be better._
	
	Ah now the single figure to me,
	Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,
	Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,
	By the jamb of a door leans.
	
	_Grieve not so, dear mother,_ (the just-grown daughter speaks through her sobs,
	The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay’d,)
	_See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better._
	Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be better, that brave and simple soul,)
	While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,
	The only son is dead.
	
	But the mother needs to be better,
	She with thin form presently drest in black,
	By day her meals untouch’d, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,
	In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,   
	O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,
	To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.



7. CROSSING BROOKLYN FERRY

	1 
	
	Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face! 
	Clouds of the west--sun there half an hour high--I see you also face to face. 
	
	Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious you are to me! 
	On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning home, are more curious to me than you suppose, 
	And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more to me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose. 
	
	
	2
	
	The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day, 
	The simple, compact, well-join’d scheme, myself disintegrated, every one disintegrated yet part of the scheme, 
	The similitudes of the past and those of the future, 
	The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on the walk in the street and the passage over the river, 
	The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away, 
	The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them, 
	The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others. 
	
	Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore, 
	Others will watch the run of the flood-tide, 
	Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the heights of Brooklyn to the south and east, 
	Others will see the islands large and small; 
	Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half an hour high, 
	A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others will see them, 
	Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide. 
	
	
	3 
	
	It avails not, time nor place--distance avails not, 
	I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many generations hence, 
	Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt, 
	Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd, 
	Just as you are refresh’d by the gladness of the river and the bright flow, I was refresh’d, 
	Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift current, I stood yet was hurried, 
	Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the thick-stemm’d pipes of steamboats, I look’d. 
	
	I too many and many a time cross’d the river of old, 
	Watched the Twelfth-month sea-gulls, saw them high in the air floating with motionless wings, oscillating their bodies, 
	Saw how the glistening yellow lit up parts of their bodies and left the rest in strong shadow, 
	Saw the slow-wheeling circles and the gradual edging toward the south, 
	Saw the reflection of the summer sky in the water, 
	Had my eyes dazzled by the shimmering track of beams, 
	Look’d at the fine centrifugal spokes of light round the shape of my head in the sunlit water, 
	Look’d on the haze on the hills southward and south-westward, 
	Look’d on the vapor as it flew in fleeces tinged with violet, 
	Look’d toward the lower bay to notice the vessels arriving, 
	Saw their approach, saw aboard those that were near me, 
	Saw the white sails of schooners and sloops, saw the ships at anchor, 
	The sailors at work in the rigging or out astride the spars, 
	The round masts, the swinging motion of the hulls, the slender serpentine pennants, 
	The large and small steamers in motion, the pilots in their pilot-houses, 
	The white wake left by the passage, the quick tremulous whirl of the wheels, 
	The flags of all nations, the falling of them at sunset, 
	The scallop-edged waves in the twilight, the ladled cups, the frolicsome crests and glistening, 
	The stretch afar growing dimmer and dimmer, the gray walls of the granite storehouses by the docks, 
	On the river the shadowy group, the big steam-tug closely flank’d on each side by the barges, the hay-boat, the belated lighter, 
	On the neighboring shore the fires from the foundry chimneys burning high and glaringly into the night, 
	Casting their flicker of black contrasted with wild red and yellow light over the tops of houses, and down into the clefts of streets. 
	
	
	4 
	
	These and all else were to me the same as they are to you, 
	I loved well those cities, loved well the stately and rapid river, 
	The men and women I saw were all near to me, 
	Others the same--others who look back on me because I look’d forward to them, 
	(The time will come, though I stop here to-day and to-night.) 
	
	
	5 
	
	What is it then between us? 
	What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us? 
	
	Whatever it is, it avails not--distance avails not, and place avails not, 
	I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine, 
	I too walk’d the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the waters around it, 
	I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me, 
	In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me, 
	In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me, 
	I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution, 
	I too had receiv’d identity by my body, 
	That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I should be of my body. 
	
	
	6 
	
	It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall, 
	The dark threw its patches down upon me also, 
	The best I had done seem’d to me blank and suspicious, 
	My great thoughts as I supposed them, were they not in reality meagre? 
	Nor is it you alone who know what it is to be evil, 
	I am he who knew what it was to be evil, 
	I too knitted the old knot of contrariety, 
	Blabb’d, blush’d, resented, lied, stole, grudg’d, 
	Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not speak, 
	Was wayward, vain, greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly, malignant, 
	The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me, 
	The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous wish, not wanting, 
	Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness, none of these wanting, 
	Was one with the rest, the days and haps of the rest, 
	Was call’d by my nighest name by clear loud voices of young men as they saw me approaching or passing, 
	Felt their arms on my neck as I stood, or the negligent leaning of their flesh against me as I sat, 
	Saw many I loved in the street or ferry-boat or public assembly, yet never told them a word, 
	Lived the same life with the rest, the same old laughing, gnawing, sleeping, 
	
	Play’d the part that still looks back on the actor or actress, 
	The same old role, the role that is what we make it, as great as we like, 
	Or as small as we like, or both great and small. 
	
	
	7 
	
	Closer yet I approach you, 
	What thought you have of me now, I had as much of you--I laid in my stores in advance, 
	I consider’d long and seriously of you before you were born. 
	
	Who was to know what should come home to me? 
	Who knows but I am enjoying this? 
	Who knows, for all the distance, but I am as good as looking at you now, for all you cannot see me? 
	
	
	8 
	
	Ah, what can ever be more stately and admirable to me than mast-hemm’d Manhattan? 
	River and sunset and scallop-edg’d waves of flood-tide? 
	The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in the twilight, and the belated lighter? 
	
	What gods can exceed these that clasp me by the hand, and with voices I love call me promptly and loudly by my nighest name as I approach? 
	What is more subtle than this which ties me to the woman or man that looks in my face? 
	Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning into you? 
	
	We understand then do we not? 
	What I promis’d without mentioning it, have you not accepted? 
	What the study could not teach--what the preaching could not accomplish is accomplish’d, is it not? 
	
	
	9 
	
	Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb with the ebb-tide! 
	Frolic on, crested and scallop-edg’d waves! 
	Gorgeous clouds of the sunset! drench with your splendor me, or the men and women generations after me! 
	Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of passengers! 
	Stand up, tall masts of Mannahatta! stand up, beautiful hills of Brooklyn! 
	Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions and answers! 
	Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solution! 
	Gaze, loving and thirsting eyes, in the house or street or public assembly! 
	
	Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically call me by my nighest name! 
	Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the actor or actress! 
	Play the old role, the role that is great or small according as one makes it! 
	Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in unknown ways be looking upon you; 
	Be firm, rail over the river, to support those who lean idly, yet haste with the hasting current; 
	Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in large circles high in the air; 
	Receive the summer sky, you water, and faithfully hold it till all downcast eyes have time to take it from you! 
	Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my head, or any one’s head, in the sunlit water! 
	Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down, white-sail’d schooners, sloops, lighters! 
	Flaunt away, flags of all nations! be duly lower’d at sunset! 
	Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black shadows at nightfall! cast red and yellow light over the tops of the houses! 
	
	Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you are, 
	You necessary film, continue to envelop the soul, 
	About my body for me, and your body for you, be hung out divinest aromas, 
	Thrive, cities--bring your freight, bring your shows, ample and sufficient rivers, 
	Expand, being than which none else is perhaps more spiritual, 
	Keep your places, objects than which none else is more lasting. 
	
	You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beautiful ministers, 
	We receive you with free sense at last, and are insatiate henceforward, 
	Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or withhold yourselves from us, 
	We use you, and do not cast you aside--we plant you permanently within us, 
	We fathom you not--we love you--there is perfection in you also, 
	You furnish your parts toward eternity, 
	Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the soul.



8. FOR YOU O DEMOCRACY

	Come, I will make the continent indissoluble,
	I will make the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon, 
	I will make divine magnetic lands, 
	                   With the love of comrades, 
	                      With the life-long love of comrades. 
	
	I will plant companionship thick as trees along all the rivers of America, and along the shores of the great lakes, and all over the prairies, 
	I will make inseparable cities with their arms about each other’s necks, 
	                   By the love of comrades, 
	                      By the manly love of comrades. 
	
	For you these from me, O Democracy, to serve you ma femme! 
	For you, for you I am trilling these songs.



9. GLIDING O’ER ALL

	Gliding o’er all, through all,
	Through Nature, Time, and Space,
	As a ship on the waters advancing,
	The voyage of the soul--not life alone,
	Death, many deaths I’ll sing.



10. A GLIMPSE

	A glimpse through an interstice caught, 
	Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room around the stove late of a winter night, and I unremark’d seated in a corner, 
	Of a youth who loves me and whom I love, silently approaching and seating himself near, that he may hold me by the hand, 
	A long while amid the noises of coming and going, of drinking and oath and smutty jest, 
	There we two, content, happy in being together, speaking little, perhaps not a word. 



11. I HEAR AMERICA SINGING

	I hear America singing the varied carols I hear
	Those of mechanics each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong
	The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam
	The mason singing his as he makes ready for work or leaves off work
	The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat the deckhand
	   singing on the steamboat deck
	The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench the hatter singing as
	   he stands
	The wood-cutter’s song the ploughboy’s on his way in the morning
	   or at noon intermission or at sundown
	The delicious singing of the mother or of the young wife at work
	   or of the girl sewing or washing
	Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else
	The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young
	   fellows robust friendly
	Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.



12. I SAW IN LOUISIANA A LIVE-OAK GROWING

	I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing, 
	All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches, 
	Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous leaves of dark green, 
	And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself, 
	But I wonder’d how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there without its friend near, for I knew I could not, 
	And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it, and twined around it a little moss, 
	And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room, 
	It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends, 
	(For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,) 
	Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love; 
	For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana solitary in a wide flat space, 
	Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near, 
	I know very well I could not.



13. I SING THE BODY ELECTRIC

	1 
	
	I sing the body electric, 
	The armies of those I love engirth me and I engirth them, 
	They will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them, 
	And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the charge of the soul. 
	
	Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own bodies conceal themselves? 
	And if those who defile the living are as bad as they who defile the dead? 
	And if the body does not do fully as much as the soul? 
	And if the body were not the soul, what is the soul? 
	
	
	2 
	
	The love of the body of man or woman balks account, the body itself balks account, 
	That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is perfect. 
	
	The expression of the face balks account, 
	But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face, 
	It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of his hips and wrists, 
	It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist and knees, dress does not hide him, 
	The strong sweet quality he has strikes through the cotton and broadcloth, 
	To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more, 
	You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side. 
	
	The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and heads of women, the folds of their dress, their style as we pass in the street, the contour of their shape downwards, 
	The swimmer naked in the swimming-bath, seen as he swims through the transparent green-shine, or lies with his face up and rolls silently to and fro in the heave of the water, 
	The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-boats, the horseman in his saddle, 
	Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their performances, 
	The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their open dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting, 
	The female soothing a child, the farmer’s daughter in the garden or cow-yard, 
	The young fellow hoeing corn, the sleigh-driver driving his six horses through the crowd, 
	The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty, good-natured, native-born, out on the vacant lot at sun-down after work, 
	The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love and resistance, 
	The upper-hold and under-hold, the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes; 
	The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play of masculine muscle through clean-setting trowsers and waist-straps, 
	The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell strikes suddenly again, and the listening on the alert, 
	The natural, perfect, varied attitudes, the bent head, the curv’d neck and the counting; 
	Such-like I love--I loosen myself, pass freely, am at the mother’s breast with the little child, 
	Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march in line with the firemen, and pause, listen, count. 
	
	
	3 
	
	I knew a man, a common farmer, the father of five sons, 
	And in them the fathers of sons, and in them the fathers of sons. 
	
	This man was of wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty of person, 
	The shape of his head, the pale yellow and white of his hair and beard, the immeasurable meaning of his black eyes, the richness and breadth of his manners, 
	These I used to go and visit him to see, he was wise also, 
	He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old, his sons were massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced, handsome, 
	They and his daughters loved him, all who saw him loved him, 
	They did not love him by allowance, they loved him with personal love, 
	He drank water only, the blood show’d like scarlet through the clear-brown skin of his face, 
	He was a frequent gunner and fisher, he sail’d his boat himself, he had a fine one presented to him by a ship-joiner, he had fowling-pieces presented to him by men that loved him, 
	When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons to hunt or fish, you would pick him out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang, 
	You would wish long and long to be with him, you would wish to sit by him in the boat that you and he might touch each other. 
	
	
	4 
	
	I have perceiv’d that to be with those I like is enough, 
	To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough, 
	To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough, 
	To pass among them or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly round his or her neck for a moment, what is this then? 
	I do not ask any more delight, I swim in it as in a sea. 
	
	There is something in staying close to men and women and looking on them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well, 
	All things please the soul, but these please the soul well. 
	
	
	5 
	
	This is the female form, 
	A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot, 
	It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction, 
	I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor, all falls aside but myself and it, 
	Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth, and what was expected of heaven or fear’d of hell, are now consumed, 
	Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it, the response likewise ungovernable, 
	Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands all diffused, mine too diffused, 
	Ebb stung by the flow and flow stung by the ebb, love-flesh swelling and deliciously aching, 
	Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous, quivering jelly of love, white-blow and delirious juice, 
	Bridegroom night of love working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn, 
	Undulating into the willing and yielding day, 
	Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh’d day. 
	
	This the nucleus--after the child is born of woman, man is born of woman, 
	This the bath of birth, this the merge of small and large, and the outlet again. 
	
	Be not ashamed women, your privilege encloses the rest, and is the exit of the rest, 
	You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates of the soul. 
	
	The female contains all qualities and tempers them, 
	She is in her place and moves with perfect balance, 
	She is all things duly veil’d, she is both passive and active, 
	She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons as well as daughters. 
	
	As I see my soul reflected in Nature, 
	As I see through a mist, One with inexpressible completeness, sanity, beauty, 
	See the bent head and arms folded over the breast, the Female I see. 
	
	
	6 
	
	The male is not less the soul nor more, he too is in his place, 
	He too is all qualities, he is action and power, 
	The flush of the known universe is in him, 
	Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance become him well, 
	The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sorrow that is utmost become him well, pride is for him, 
	The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul, 
	Knowledge becomes him, he likes it always, he brings every thing to the test of himself, 
	Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail he strikes soundings at last only here, 
	(Where else does he strike soundings except here?) 
	
	The man’s body is sacred and the woman’s body is sacred, 
	No matter who it is, it is sacred--is it the meanest one in the laborers’ gang? 
	Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants just landed on the wharf? 
	Each belongs here or anywhere just as much as the well-off, just as much as you, 
	Each has his or her place in the procession. 
	
	(All is a procession, 
	The universe is a procession with measured and perfect motion.) 
	
	Do you know so much yourself that you call the meanest ignorant? 
	Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and he or she has no right to a sight? 
	Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffuse float, and the soil is on the surface, and water runs and vegetation sprouts, 
	For you only, and not for him and her? 
	
	
	7 
	
	A man’s body at auction, 
	(For before the war I often go to the slave-mart and watch the sale,) 
	I help the auctioneer, the sloven does not half know his business. 
	
	Gentlemen look on this wonder, 
	Whatever the bids of the bidders they cannot be high enough for it, 
	For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years without one animal or plant, 
	For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll’d. 
	
	In this head the all-baffling brain, 
	In it and below it the makings of heroes. 
	
	Examine these limbs, red, black, or white, they are cunning in tendon and nerve, 
	They shall be stript that you may see them. 
	
	Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition, 
	Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant backbone and neck, flesh not flabby, good-sized arms and legs, 
	And wonders within there yet. 
	
	Within there runs blood, 
	The same old blood! the same red-running blood! 
	There swells and jets a heart, there all passions, desires, reachings, aspirations, 
	(Do you think they are not there because they are not express’d in parlors and lecture-rooms?) 
	
	This is not only one man, this the father of those who shall be fathers in their turns, 
	In him the start of populous states and rich republics, 
	Of him countless immortal lives with countless embodiments and enjoyments. 
	
	How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring through the centuries? 
	(Who might you find you have come from yourself, if you could trace back through the centuries?) 
	
	
	8 
	
	A woman’s body at auction, 
	She too is not only herself, she is the teeming mother of mothers, 
	She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers. 
	
	Have you ever loved the body of a woman? 
	Have you ever loved the body of a man? 
	Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all in all nations and times all over the earth? 
	
	If any thing is sacred the human body is sacred, 
	And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of manhood untainted, 
	And in man or woman a clean, strong, firm-fibred body, is more beautiful than the most beautiful face. 
	
	Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool that corrupted her own live body? 
	For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves. 
	
	
	9 
	
	O my body! I dare not desert the likes of you in other men and women, nor the likes of the parts of you, 
	I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of the soul, (and that they are the soul,) 
	I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my poems, and that they are my poems, 
	Man’s, woman’s, child’s, youth’s, wife’s, husband’s, mother’s, father’s, young man’s, young woman’s poems, 
	Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears, 
	Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eyebrows, and the waking or sleeping of the lids, 
	Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws, and the jaw-hinges, 
	Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition, 
	Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the neck, neck-slue, 
	Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoulders, and the ample side-round of the chest, 
	Upper-arm, armpit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-sinews, arm-bones, 
	Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb, forefinger, finger-joints, finger-nails, 
	Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-bone, breast-side, 
	Ribs, belly, backbone, joints of the backbone, 
	Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward round, man-balls, man-root, 
	Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above, 
	Leg fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under-leg, 
	Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel; 
	All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of my or your body or of any one’s body, male or female, 
	The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet and clean, 
	The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame, 
	Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, maternity, 
	Womanhood, and all that is a woman, and the man that comes from woman, 
	The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laughter, weeping, love-looks, love-perturbations and risings, 
	The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shouting aloud, 
	Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking, swimming, 
	Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-curving and tightening, 
	The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and around the eyes, 
	The skin, the sunburnt shade, freckles, hair, 
	The curious sympathy one feels when feeling with the hand the naked meat of the body, 
	The circling rivers the breath, and breathing it in and out, 
	The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and thence downward toward the knees, 
	The thin red jellies within you or within me, the bones and the marrow in the bones, 
	The exquisite realization of health; 
	O I say these are not the parts and poems of the body only, but of the soul, 
	O I say now these are the soul!



14. LONG, TOO LONG AMERICA

	Long, too long America,
	Traveling roads all even and peaceful you learn’d from joys and prosperity only,
	But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish, advancing, grappling with direst fate and recoiling not,
	And now to conceive and show to the world what your children en-masse really are,
	(For who except myself has yet conceiv’d what your children en-masse really are?)



15. A MARCH IN THE RANKS HARD-PREST

	A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,
	A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,
	Our army foil’d with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,
	Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted building,
	We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted building,
	’Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu hospital
	Entering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and poems ever made,
	Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and lamps,
	And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and clouds of smoke,
	By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some in the pews laid down,
	At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of bleeding to death, (he is shot in the abdomen,)
	I stanch the blood temporarily, (the youngster’s face is white as a lily,)
	Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o’er the scene fain to absorb it all,
	Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity, some of them dead,
	Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether, the odor of blood,
	The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also fill’d,
	Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the death-spasm sweating,
	An occasional scream or cry, the doctor’s shouted orders or calls,
	The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of the torches,
	These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odor,
	Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;
	But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives he me,
	Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,
	Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,
	The unknown road still marching.



16. O CAPTAIN! MY CAPTAIN!

	O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,
	The ship has weather’d every rack, the prize we sought is won,
	The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
	While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;
	                        But O heart! heart! heart!
	                           O the bleeding drops of red,
	                              Where on the deck my Captain lies,
	                                 Fallen cold and dead.
	
	O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;
	Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills,
	For you bouquets and ribbon’d wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding,
	For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;
	                        Here Captain! dear father!
	                           This arm beneath your head!
	                              It is some dream that on the deck,
	                                You’ve fallen cold and dead.
	
	My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,
	My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,
	The ship is anchor’d safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,
	From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;
	                        Exult O shores, and ring O bells!
	                           But I with mournful tread,
	                              Walk the deck my Captain lies,
	                                 Fallen cold and dead.



17. OH ME! OH LIFE!

	Oh me! Oh life! of the questions of these recurring,
	Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities fill’d with the foolish,
	Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I, and who more faithless?)
	Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the struggle ever renew’d,
	Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see around me,
	Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,
	The question, O me! so sad, recurring--What good amid these, O me, O life?
	
	                                      Answer.
	That you are here--that life exists and identity,
	That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.



18. OUT OF THE CRADLE ENDLESSLY ROCKING

	Out of the cradle endlessly rocking,
	Out of the mocking-bird’s throat, the musical shuttle,
	Out of the Ninth-month midnight,
	Over the sterile sands and the fields beyond, where the child leaving his bed wander’d alone, bareheaded, barefoot,
	Down from the shower’d halo,
	Up from the mystic play of shadows twining and twisting as if they were alive,
	Out from the patches of briers and blackberries,
	From the memories of the bird that chanted to me,
	From your memories sad brother, from the fitful risings and fallings I heard,
	From under that yellow half-moon late-risen and swollen as if with tears,
	From those beginning notes of yearning and love there in the mist,
	From the thousand responses of my heart never to cease,
	From the myriad thence-arous’d words,
	From the word stronger and more delicious than any,
	From such as now they start the scene revisiting,
	As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,
	Borne hither, ere all eludes me, hurriedly,
	A man, yet by these tears a little boy again,
	Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,
	I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,
	Taking all hints to use them, but swiftly leaping beyond them,
	A reminiscence sing.
	
	Once Paumanok,
	When the lilac-scent was in the air and Fifth-month grass was growing,
	Up this seashore in some briers,
	Two feather’d guests from Alabama, two together,
	And their nest, and four light-green eggs spotted with brown,
	And every day the he-bird to and fro near at hand,
	And every day the she-bird crouch’d on her nest, silent, with bright eyes,
	And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing them,
	Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.
	
	_Shine! shine! shine!
	Pour down your warmth, great sun!
	While we bask, we two together._
	
	_Two together!
	Winds blow south, or winds blow north,
	Day come white, or night come black,
	Home, or rivers and mountains from home,
	Singing all time, minding no time,
	While we two keep together._
	
	Till of a sudden,
	May-be kill’d, unknown to her mate,
	One forenoon the she-bird crouch’d not on the nest,
	Nor return’d that afternoon, nor the next,
	Nor ever appear’d again.
	
	And thenceforward all summer in the sound of the sea,
	And at night under the full of the moon in calmer weather,
	Over the hoarse surging of the sea,
	Or flitting from brier to brier by day,
	I saw, I heard at intervals the remaining one, the he-bird,
	The solitary guest from Alabama.
	
	_Blow! blow! blow!
	Blow up sea-winds along Paumanok’s shore;
	I wait and I wait till you blow my mate to me._
	
	Yes, when the stars glisten’d,
	All night long on the prong of a moss-scallop’d stake,
	Down almost amid the slapping waves,
	Sat the lone singer wonderful causing tears.
	
	He call’d on his mate,
	He pour’d forth the meanings which I of all men know.
	
	Yes my brother I know,
	The rest might not, but I have treasur’d every note,
	For more than once dimly down to the beach gliding,
	Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the shadows,
	Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds and sights after their sorts,
	The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing,
	I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair,
	Listen’d long and long.
	
	Listen’d to keep, to sing, now translating the notes,
	Following you my brother.
	
	_Soothe! soothe! soothe!
	Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,
	And again another behind embracing and lapping, every one close,
	But my love soothes not me, not me._
	
	_Low hangs the moon, it rose late,
	It is lagging--O I think it is heavy with love, with love._
	
	_O madly the sea pushes upon the land,
	With love, with love._
	
	_O night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the breakers?
	What is that little black thing I see there in the white?_
	
	_Loud! loud! loud!
	Loud I call to you, my love!_
	
	_High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves,
	Surely you must know who is here, is here,
	You must know who I am, my love._
	
	_Low-hanging moon!
	What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?
	O it is the shape, the shape of my mate!
	O moon do not keep her from me any longer._
	
	_Land! land! O land!
	Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me my mate back again if you only would,
	For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look._
	
	_O rising stars!
	Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you._
	
	_O throat! O trembling throat!
	Sound clearer through the atmosphere!
	Pierce the woods, the earth,
	Somewhere listening to catch you must be the one I want._
	
	_Shake out carols!
	Solitary here, the night’s carols!
	Carols of lonesome love! death’s carols!
	Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!
	O under that moon where she droops almost down into the sea!
	O reckless despairing carols._
	
	_But soft! sink low!
	Soft! let me just murmur,
	And do you wait a moment you husky-nois’d sea,
	For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,
	So faint, I must be still, be still to listen,
	But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me._
	
	_Hither my love!
	Here I am! here!
	With this just-sustain’d note I announce myself to you,
	This gentle call is for you my love, for you._
	
	_Do not be decoy’d elsewhere,
	That is the whistle of the wind, it is not my voice,
	That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray,
	Those are the shadows of leaves._
	
	_O darkness! O in vain!
	O I am very sick and sorrowful._
	
	_O brown halo in the sky near the moon, drooping upon the sea!
	O troubled reflection in the sea!
	O throat! O throbbing heart!
	And I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night._
	
	_O past! O happy life! O songs of joy!
	In the air, in the woods, over fields,
	Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!
	But my mate no more, no more with me!
	We two together no more._
	
	The aria sinking,
	All else continuing, the stars shining,
	The winds blowing, the notes of the bird continuous echoing,
	With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning,
	On the sands of Paumanok’s shore gray and rustling,
	The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of the sea almost touching,
	The boy ecstatic, with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the atmosphere dallying,
	The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously bursting,
	The aria’s meaning, the ears, the soul, swiftly depositing,
	The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,
	The colloquy there, the trio, each uttering,
	The undertone, the savage old mother incessantly crying,
	To the boy’s soul’s questions sullenly timing, some drown’d secret hissing,
	To the outsetting bard.
	
	Demon or bird! (said the boy’s soul,)
	Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it really to me?
	For I, that was a child, my tongue’s use sleeping, now I have heard you,
	Now in a moment I know what I am for, I awake,
	And already a thousand singers, a thousand songs, clearer, louder and more sorrowful than yours,
	A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, never to die.
	
	O you singer solitary, singing by yourself, projecting me,
	O solitary me listening, never more shall I cease perpetuating you,
	Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations,
	Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me,
	Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what there in the night,
	By the sea under the yellow and sagging moon,
	The messenger there arous’d, the fire, the sweet hell within,
	The unknown want, the destiny of me.
	
	O give me the clew! (it lurks in the night here somewhere,)
	O if I am to have so much, let me have more!
	
	A word then, (for I will conquer it,)
	The word final, superior to all,
	Subtle, sent up--what is it?--I listen;
	Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves?
	Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?
	
	Whereto answering, the sea,
	Delaying not, hurrying not,
	Whisper’d me through the night, and very plainly before day-break,
	
	Lisp’d to me the low and delicious word death,
	And again death, death, death, death,
	Hissing melodious, neither like the bird nor like my arous’d child’s heart,
	But edging near as privately for me rustling at my feet,
	Creeping thence steadily up to my ears and laving me softly all over,
	Death, death, death, death, death.
	
	Which I do not forget,
	But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother,
	That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok’s gray beach,
	With the thousand responsive songs at random,
	My own songs awaked from that hour,
	And with them the key, the word up from the waves,
	The word of the sweetest song and all songs,
	That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet,
	(Or like some old crone rocking the cradle, swathed in sweet garments, bending aside,)
	The sea whisper’d me.



19. OUT OF THE ROLLING OCEAN THE CROWD

	Out of the rolling ocean the crowd came a drop gently to me, 
	Whispering, _I love you, before long I die, 
	I have travell’d a long way merely to look on you to touch you, 
	For I could not die till I once look’d on you, 
	For I fear’d I might afterward lose you._
	
	Now we have met, we have look’d, we are safe, 
	Return in peace to the ocean my love, 
	I too am part of that ocean, my love, we are not so much separated, 
	Behold the great rondure, the cohesion of all, how perfect! 
	But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separate us, 
	As for an hour carrying us diverse, yet cannot carry us diverse forever; 
	Be not impatient--a little space--know you I salute the air, the ocean and the land, 
	Every day at sundown for your dear sake, my love. 



20. A PASSAGE TO INDIA

	Passage O soul to India!
	Eclaircise the myths Asiatic, the primitive fables.
	
	Not you alone, proud truths of the world,            
	Nor you alone, ye facts of modern science,            
	But myths and fables of eld, Asia’s, Africa’s fables,   
	The far-darting beams of the spirit, the unloos’d dreams,            
	The deep diving bibles and legends,         
	The daring plots of the poets, the elder religions;            
	O you temples fairer than lilies, pour’d over by the rising sun!            
	O you fables, spurning the known, eluding the hold of the known, mounting to heaven!            
	You lofty and dazzling towers, pinnacled, red as roses, burnish’d with gold!            
	Towers of fables immortal, fashion’d from mortal dreams!            
	You too I welcome, and fully, the same as the rest!      
	You too with joy I sing.            
	
	Passage to India!
	Lo, soul! seest thou not God’s purpose from the first?            
	The earth to be spann’d, connected by network,                  
	The races, neighbors, to marry and be given in marriage,            
	The oceans to be cross’d, the distant brought near,
	The lands to be welded together.            
	
	A worship new I sing,            
	You captains, voyagers, explorers, yours,            
	You engineers, you architects, machinists, yours,            
	You, not for trade or transportation only,
	But in God’s name, and for thy sake, O soul.     



21. PATROLING BARNEGAT

	Wild, wild the storm, and the sea high running, 
	Steady the roar of the gale, with incessant undertone muttering, 
	Shouts of demoniac laughter fitfully piercing and pealing, 
	Waves, air, midnight, their savagest trinity lashing, 
	Out in the shadows there milk-white combs careering, 
	On beachy slush and sand spirts of snow fierce slanting, 
	Where through the murk the easterly death-wind breasting, 
	Through cutting swirl and spray watchful and firm advancing, 
	(That in the distance! is that a wreck? is the red signal flaring?) 
	
	Slush and sand of the beach tireless till daylight wending, 
	Steadily, slowly, through hoarse roar never remitting, 
	Along the midnight edge by those milk-white combs careering, 
	A group of dim, weird forms, struggling, the night confronting, 
	That savage trinity warily watching.



22. SOMETIMES WITH ONE I LOVE

	Sometimes with one I love I fill myself with rage for fear I effuse unreturn’d love, 
	But now I think there is no unreturn’d love, the pay is certain one way or another 
	(I loved a certain person ardently and my love was not return’d, 
	Yet out of that I have written these songs). 



23. SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

	1 
	
	Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road, 
	Healthy, free, the world before me, 
	The long brown path before me leading wherever I choose. 
	
	Henceforth I ask not good-fortune, I myself am good-fortune, 
	Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing, 
	Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms, 
	Strong and content I travel the open road. 
	
	The earth, that is sufficient, 
	I do not want the constellations any nearer, 
	I know they are very well where they are, 
	I know they suffice for those who belong to them. 
	
	(Still here I carry my old delicious burdens, 
	I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me wherever I go, 
	I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them, 
	I am fill’d with them, and I will fill them in return.) 
	
	
	2 
	
	You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all that is here, 
	I believe that much unseen is also here. 
	
	Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial, 
	The black with his woolly head, the felon, the diseas’d, the illiterate person, are not denied; 
	The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar’s tramp, the drunkard’s stagger, the laughing party of mechanics, 
	The escaped youth, the rich person’s carriage, the fop, the eloping couple, 
	
	The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of furniture into the town, the return back from the town, 
	They pass, I also pass, any thing passes, none can be interdicted, 
	None but are accepted, none but shall be dear to me. 
	
	
	3 
	
	You air that serves me with breath to speak! 
	You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and give them shape! 
	You light that wraps me and all things in delicate equable showers! 
	You paths worn in the irregular hollows by the roadsides! 
	I believe you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me. 
	
	You flagg’d walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges! 
	You ferries! you planks and posts of wharves! you timber-lined sides! you distant ships! 
	
	You rows of houses! you window-pierc’d façades! you roofs! 
	You porches and entrances! you copings and iron guards! 
	You windows whose transparent shells might expose so much! 
	You doors and ascending steps! you arches! 
	You gray stones of interminable pavements! you trodden crossings! 
	From all that has touch’d you I believe you have imparted to yourselves, and now would impart the same secretly to me, 
	From the living and the dead you have peopled your impassive surfaces, and the spirits thereof would be evident and amicable with me. 
	
	
	4 
	
	The earth expanding right hand and left hand, 
	The picture alive, every part in its best light, 
	The music falling in where it is wanted, and stopping where it is not wanted, 
	The cheerful voice of the public road, the gay fresh sentiment of the road. 
	
	O highway I travel, do you say to me Do not leave me? 
	Do you say Venture not--if you leave me you are lost? 
	Do you say I am already prepared, I am well-beaten and undenied, adhere to me? 
	
	O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love you, 
	You express me better than I can express myself, 
	You shall be more to me than my poem. 
	
	I think heroic deeds were all conceiv’d in the open air, and all free poems also, 
	I think I could stop here myself and do miracles, 
	I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like, and whoever beholds me shall like me, 
	I think whoever I see must be happy. 
	
	
	5 
	
	From this hour I ordain myself loos’d of limits and imaginary lines, 
	Going where I list, my own master total and absolute, 
	Listening to others, considering well what they say, 
	Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating, 
	Gently,but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that would hold me. 
	I inhale great draughts of space, 
	The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine. 
	
	I am larger, better than I thought, 
	I did not know I held so much goodness. 
	
	All seems beautiful to me, 
	I can repeat over to men and women You have done such good to me I would do the same to you, 
	I will recruit for myself and you as I go, 
	I will scatter myself among men and women as I go, 
	I will toss a new gladness and roughness among them, 
	Whoever denies me it shall not trouble me, 
	Whoever accepts me he or she shall be blessed and shall bless me. 
	
	
	6 
	
	Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear it would not amaze me, 
	Now if a thousand beautiful forms of women appear’d it would not astonish me. 
	
	Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons, 
	It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth. 
	
	Here a great personal deed has room, 
	(Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men, 
	Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all authority and all argument against it.) 
	
	Here is the test of wisdom, 
	Wisdom is not finally tested in schools, 
	Wisdom cannot be pass’d from one having it to another not having it, 
	Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof, 
	Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content, 
	Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the excellence of things; 
	Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes it out of the soul. 
	
	Now I re-examine philosophies and religions, 
	They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents. 
	
	Here is realization, 
	Here is a man tallied--he realizes here what he has in him, 
	The past, the future, majesty, love--if they are vacant of you, you are vacant of them. 
	
	Only the kernel of every object nourishes; 
	Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me? 
	Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me? 
	
	Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion’d, it is apropos; 
	Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers? 
	Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls? 
	
	
	7 
	
	Here is the efflux of the soul, 
	The efflux of the soul comes from within through embower’d gates, ever provoking questions, 
	These yearnings why are they? these thoughts in the darkness why are they? 
	Why are there men and women that while they are nigh me the sunlight expands my blood? 
	Why when they leave me do my pennants of joy sink flat and lank? 
	Why are there trees I never walk under but large and melodious thoughts descend upon me? 
	(I think they hang there winter and summer on those trees and always drop fruit as I pass;) 
	What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers? 
	What with some driver as I ride on the seat by his side? 
	What with some fisherman drawing his seine by the shore as I walk by and pause? 
	What gives me to be free to a woman’s and man’s good-will? what gives them to be free to mine? 
	
	
	8 
	
	The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness, 
	I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times, 
	Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged. 
	
	Here rises the fluid and attaching character, 
	The fluid and attaching character is the freshness and sweetness of man and woman, 
	(The herbs of the morning sprout no fresher and sweeter every day out of the roots of themselves, than it sprouts fresh and sweet continually out of itself.) 
	
	Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes the sweat of the love of young and old, 
	From it falls distill’d the charm that mocks beauty and attainments, 
	Toward it heaves the shuddering longing ache of contact. 
	
	
	9 
	
	Allons! whoever you are come travel with me! 
	Traveling with me you find what never tires. 
	
	The earth never tires, 
	The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first, Nature is rude and incomprehensible at first, 
	Be not discouraged, keep on, there are divine things well envelop’d, 
	I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful than words can tell. 
	
	Allons! we must not stop here, 
	However sweet these laid-up stores, however convenient this dwelling we cannot remain here, 
	However shelter’d this port and however calm these waters we must not anchor here, 
	However welcome the hospitality that surrounds us we are permitted to receive it but a little while. 
	
	
	10 
	
	Allons! the inducements shall be greater, 
	We will sail pathless and wild seas, 
	We will go where winds blow, waves dash, and the Yankee clipper speeds by under full sail. 
	
	Allons! with power, liberty, the earth, the elements, 
	Health, defiance, gayety, self-esteem, curiosity; 
	Allons! from all formules! 
	From your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic priests. 
	
	The stale cadaver blocks up the passage--the burial waits no longer. 
	
	Allons! yet take warning! 
	He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews, endurance, 
	None may come to the trial till he or she bring courage and health, 
	Come not here if you have already spent the best of yourself, 
	Only those may come who come in sweet and determin’d bodies, 
	No diseas’d person, no rum-drinker or venereal taint is permitted here. 
	
	(I and mine do not convince by arguments, similes, rhymes, 
	We convince by our presence.) 
	
	
	11 
	
	Listen! I will be honest with you, 
	I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough new prizes, 
	These are the days that must happen to you: 
	You shall not heap up what is call’d riches, 
	You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve, 
	You but arrive at the city to which you were destin’d, you hardly settle yourself to satisfaction before you are call’d by an irresistible call to depart, 
	You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those who remain behind you, 
	What beckonings of love you receive you shall only answer with passionate kisses of parting, 
	You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reach’d hands toward you. 
	
	
	12 
	
	Allons! after the great Companions, and to belong to them! 
	They too are on the road--they are the swift and majestic men--they are the greatest women, 
	Enjoyers of calms of seas and storms of seas, 
	Sailors of many a ship, walkers of many a mile of land, 
	Habituès of many distant countries, habituès of far-distant dwellings, 
	Trusters of men and women, observers of cities, solitary toilers, 
	Pausers and contemplators of tufts, blossoms, shells of the shore, 
	Dancers at wedding-dances, kissers of brides, tender helpers of children, bearers of children, 
	Soldiers of revolts, standers by gaping graves, lowerers-down of coffins, 
	Journeyers over consecutive seasons, over the years, the curious years each emerging from that which preceded it, 
	Journeyers as with companions, namely their own diverse phases, 
	Forth-steppers from the latent unrealized baby-days, 
	Journeyers gayly with their own youth, journeyers with their bearded and well-grain’d manhood, 
	Journeyers with their womanhood, ample, unsurpass’d, content, 
	Journeyers with their own sublime old age of manhood or womanhood, 
	Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty breadth of the universe, 
	Old age, flowing free with the delicious near-by freedom of death. 
	
	
	13 
	
	Allons! to that which is endless as it was beginningless, 
	To undergo much, tramps of days, rests of nights, 
	To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days and nights they tend to, 
	Again to merge them in the start of superior journeys, 
	To see nothing anywhere but what you may reach it and pass it, 
	To conceive no time, however distant, but what you may reach it and pass it, 
	To look up or down no road but it stretches and waits for you, however long but it stretches and waits for you, 
	To see no being, not God’s or any, but you also go thither, 
	To see no possession but you may possess it, enjoying all without labor or purchase, abstracting the feast yet not abstracting one particle of it, 
	To take the best of the farmer’s farm and the rich man’s elegant villa, and the chaste blessings of the well-married couple, and the fruits of orchards and flowers of gardens, 
	To take to your use out of the compact cities as you pass through, 
	To carry buildings and streets with you afterward wherever you go, 
	To gather the minds of men out of their brains as you encounter them, to gather the love out of their hearts, 
	To take your lovers on the road with you, for all that you leave them behind you, 
	To know the universe itself as a road, as many roads, as roads for traveling souls. 
	
	All parts away for the progress of souls, 
	All religion, all solid things, arts, governments--all that was or is apparent upon this globe or any globe, falls into niches and corners before the procession of souls along the grand roads of the universe. 
	
	Of the progress of the souls of men and women along the grand roads of the universe, all other progress is the needed emblem and sustenance. 
	
	Forever alive, forever forward, 
	Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled, mad, turbulent, feeble, dissatisfied, 
	Desperate, proud, fond, sick, accepted by men, rejected by men, 
	They go! they go! I know that they go, but I know not where they go, 
	But I know that they go toward the best--toward something great. 
	
	Whoever you are, come forth! or man or woman come forth! 
	You must not stay sleeping and dallying there in the house, though you built it, or though it has been built for you. 
	
	Out of the dark confinement! out from behind the screen! 
	It is useless to protest, I know all and expose it. 
	
	Behold through you as bad as the rest, 
	Through the laughter, dancing, dining, supping, of people, 
	Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside of those wash’d and trimm’d faces, 
	Behold a secret silent loathing and despair. 
	
	No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the confession, 
	Another self, a duplicate of every one, skulking and hiding it goes, 
	Formless and wordless through the streets of the cities, polite and bland in the parlors, 
	In the cars of railroads, in steamboats, in the public assembly, 
	Home to the houses of men and women, at the table, in the bedroom, everywhere, 
	Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright, death under the breast-bones, hell under the skull-bones, 
	Under the broadcloth and gloves, under the ribbons and artificial flowers, 
	Keeping fair with the customs, speaking not a syllable of itself, 
	Speaking of any thing else but never of itself. 
	
	
	14 
	
	Allons! through struggles and wars! 
	The goal that was named cannot be countermanded. 
	
	Have the past struggles succeeded? 
	What has succeeded? yourself? your nation? Nature? 
	Now understand me well--it is provided in the essence of things that from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth something to make a greater struggle necessary. 
	
	My call is the call of battle, I nourish active rebellion, 
	He going with me must go well arm’d, 
	He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty, angry enemies, desertions. 
	
	
	15 
	
	Allons! the road is before us! 
	It is safe--I have tried it--my own feet have tried it well--be not detain’d! 
	
	Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the shelf unopen’d! 
	Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn’d! 
	Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher! 
	Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the court, and the judge expound the law. 
	
	Camerado, I give you my hand! 
	I give you my love more precious than money, 
	I give you myself before preaching or law; 
	Will you give me yourself? will you come travel with me? 
	Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?



24. ON THE BEACH AT NIGHT

	On the beach at night, 
	Stands a child with her father, 
	Watching the east, the autumn sky. 
	
	Up through the darkness, 
	While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses spreading, 
	Lower sullen and fast athwart and down the sky, 
	Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the east, 
	Ascends large and calm the lord-star Jupiter, 
	And nigh at hand, only a very little above, 
	Swim the delicate sisters the Pleiades. 
	
	From the beach the child holding the hand of her father, 
	Those burial-clouds that lower victorious soon to devour all, 
	Watching, silently weeps. 
	
	Weep not, child, 
	Weep not, my darling, 
	With these kisses let me remove your tears, 
	The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious, 
	They shall not long possess the sky, they devour the stars only in apparition, 
	Jupiter shall emerge, be patient, watch again another night, the Pleiades shall emerge, 
	They are immortal, all those stars both silvery and golden shall shine out again, 
	The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again, they endure, 
	The vast immortal suns and the long-enduring pensive moons shall again shine. 
	
	Then dearest child mournest thou only for Jupiter? 
	Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars? 
	
	Something there is, 
	(With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper, 
	I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and indirection,) 
	Something there is more immortal even than the stars, 
	(Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,) 
	Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous Jupiter 
	Longer than sun or any revolving satellite, 
	Or the radiant sisters the Pleiades. 



25. ON THE BEACH AT NIGHT ALONE

	On the beach at night alone,
	As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,
	As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef of the universes and of the future.
	
	A vast similitude interlocks all,
	All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,
	All distances of place however wide,
	All distances of time, all inanimate forms,
	All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in different worlds,
	All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,
	All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,
	All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,
	All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,
	This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann’d,
	And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them.



26. (FROM) THE SLEEPERS

	I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies of the sea, 
	His brown hair lies close and even to his head, he strikes out with courageous arms, he urges himself with his legs, 
	I see his white body, I see his undaunted eyes, 
	I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him head-foremost on the rocks. 
	
	What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves? 
	Will you kill the courageous giant? will you kill him in the prime of his middle-age? 
	
	Steady and long he struggles, 
	He is baffled, bang’d, bruis’d, he holds out while his strength holds out, 
	The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood, they bear him away, they roll him, swing him, turn him, 
	His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is continually bruis’d on rocks, 
	Swiftly and out of sight is borne the brave corpse. 



27. TIME TO COME

	O, Death! a black and pierceless pall
	    Hangs round thee, and the future state;
	No eye may see, no mind may grasp
	    That mystery of fate.
	
	This brain, which now alternate throbs
	    With swelling hope and gloomy fear;
	This heart, with all the changing hues,   
	    That mortal passions bear--
	
	This curious frame of human mould,
	    Where unrequited cravings play,
	This brain, and heart, and wondrous form
	    Must all alike decay.
	
	The leaping blood will stop its flow;
	    The hoarse death-struggle pass; the cheek
	Lay bloomless, and the liquid tongue
	    Will then forget to speak.
	
	The grave will take me; earth will close
	    O’er cold dull limbs and ashy face;
	But where, O, Nature, where shall be
	    The soul’s abiding place?
	
	Will it e’en live? For though its light
	    Must shine till from the body torn;
	Then, when the oil of life is spent,   
	    Still shall the taper burn?
	
	O, powerless is this struggling brain
	    To rend the mighty mystery;
	In dark, uncertain awe it waits
	    The common doom, to die.



28. TO THE STATES

	Why reclining, interrogating? why myself and all drowsing? 
	What deepening twilight--scum floating atop of the waters, 
	Who are they as bats and night-dogs askant in the capitol? 
	What a filthy Presidentiad! (O South, your torrid suns! O North, your arctic freezings!) 
	Are those really Congressmen? are those the great Judges? is that the President? 
	Then I will sleep awhile yet, for I see that these States sleep, for reasons; 
	(With gathering murk, with muttering thunder and lambent shoots we all duly awake, 
	South, North, East, West, inland and seaboard, we will surely awake.)



29. VIGIL STRANGE I KEPT ON THE FIELD ONE NIGHT

	Vigil strange I kept on the field one night; 
	When you my son and my comrade dropt at my side that day, 
	One look I but gave which your dear eyes return’d with a look I shall never forget, 
	One touch of your hand to mine O boy, reach’d up as you lay on the ground, 
	Then onward I sped in the battle, the even-contested battle, 
	Till late in the night reliev’d to the place at last again I made my way, 
	Found you in death so cold dear comrade, found your body son of responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,) 
	Bared your face in the starlight, curious the scene, cool blew the moderate night-wind, 
	Long there and then in vigil I stood, dimly around me the battle-field spreading, 
	Vigil wondrous and vigil sweet there in the fragrant silent night, 
	But not a tear fell, not even a long-drawn sigh, long, long I gazed, 
	Then on the earth partially reclining sat by your side leaning my chin in my hands, 
	Passing sweet hours, immortal and mystic hours with you dearest comrade--not a tear, not a word, 
	Vigil of silence, love and death, vigil for you my son and my soldier, 
	As onward silently stars aloft, eastward new ones upward stole, 
	Vigil final for you brave boy, (I could not save you, swift was your death, 
	I faithfully loved you and cared for you living, I think we shall surely meet again,) 
	Till at latest lingering of the night, indeed just as the dawn appear’d, 
	My comrade I wrapt in his blanket, envelop’d well his form, 
	Folded the blanket well, tucking it carefully over head and carefully under feet, 
	And there and then and bathed by the rising sun, my son in his grave, in his rude-dug grave I deposited, 
	Ending my vigil strange with that, vigil of night and battle-field dim, 
	Vigil for boy of responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,) 
	Vigil for comrade swiftly slain, vigil I never forget, how as day brighten’d, 
	I rose from the chill ground and folded my soldier well in his blanket, 
	And buried him where he fell.



30. WHEN I HEARD THE LEARN’D ASTRONOMER

	When I heard the learn’d astronomer,
	When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,
	When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,
	When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much applause in the lecture-room,
	How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,
	Till rising and gliding out I wander’d off by myself,
	In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
	Look’d up in perfect silence at the stars.



31. WHEN LILACS LAST IN THE DOORYARD BLOOM’D

	1 
	
	When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom’d, 
	And the great star early droop’d in the western sky in the night, 
	I mourn’d, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring. 
	
	Ever-returning spring, trinity sure to me you bring, 
	Lilac blooming perennial and drooping star in the west, 
	And thought of him I love. 
	
	
	2 
	
	O powerful western fallen star! 
	O shades of night--O moody, tearful night! 
	O great star disappear’d--O the black murk that hides the star! 
	O cruel hands that hold me powerless--O helpless soul of me! 
	O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul. 
	
	
	3 
	
	In the dooryard fronting an old farm-house near the white-wash’d palings, 
	Stands the lilac-bush tall-growing with heart-shaped leaves of rich green, 
	With many a pointed blossom rising delicate, with the perfume strong I love, 
	With every leaf a miracle--and from this bush in the dooryard, 
	With delicate-color’d blossoms and heart-shaped leaves of rich green, 
	A sprig with its flower I break. 
	
	
	4 
	
	In the swamp in secluded recesses, 
	A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song. 
	
	Solitary the thrush, 
	The hermit withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements, 
	Sings by himself a song. 
	
	Song of the bleeding throat, 
	Death’s outlet song of life, (for well dear brother I know, 
	If thou wast not granted to sing thou would’st surely die.) 
	
	
	5 
	
	Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities, 
	Amid lanes and through old woods, where lately the violets peep’d from the ground, spotting the gray debris, 
	Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes, passing the endless grass, 
	Passing the yellow-spear’d wheat, every grain from its shroud in the dark-brown fields uprisen, 
	Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards, 
	Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave, 
	Night and day journeys a coffin. 
	
	
	6 
	
	Coffin that passes through lanes and streets, 
	Through day and night with the great cloud darkening the land, 
	With the pomp of the inloop’d flags with the cities draped in black, 
	With the show of the States themselves as of crape-veil’d women standing, 
	With processions long and winding and the flambeaus of the night, 
	With the countless torches lit, with the silent sea of faces and the unbared heads, 
	With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces, 
	With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong and solemn, 
	With all the mournful voices of the dirges pour’d around the coffin, 
	The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs--where amid these you journey, 
	With the tolling tolling bells’ perpetual clang, 
	Here, coffin that slowly passes, 
	I give you my sprig of lilac. 
	
	
	7 
	
	(Nor for you, for one alone, 
	Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring, 
	For fresh as the morning, thus would I chant a song for you O sane and sacred death. 
	
	All over bouquets of roses, 
	O death, I cover you over with roses and early lilies, 
	But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first, 
	Copious I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes, 
	With loaded arms I come, pouring for you, 
	For you and the coffins all of you O death.) 
	
	
	8 
	
	O western orb sailing the heaven, 
	Now I know what you must have meant as a month since I walk’d, 
	As I walk’d in silence the transparent shadowy night, 
	As I saw you had something to tell as you bent to me night after night, 
	As you droop’d from the sky low down as if to my side, (while the other stars all look’d on,) 
	As we wander’d together the solemn night, (for something I know not what kept me from sleep,) 
	As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west how full you were of woe, 
	As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze in the cool transparent night, 
	As I watch’d where you pass’d and was lost in the netherward black of the night, 
	As my soul in its trouble dissatisfied sank, as where you sad orb, 
	Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone. 
	
	
	9 
	
	Sing on there in the swamp, 
	O singer bashful and tender, I hear your notes, I hear your call, 
	I hear, I come presently, I understand you, 
	But a moment I linger, for the lustrous star has detain’d me, 
	The star my departing comrade holds and detains me. 
	
	
	10 
	
	O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved? 
	And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone? 
	And what shall my perfume be for the grave of him I love? 
	
	Sea-winds blown from east and west, 
	Blown from the Eastern sea and blown from the Western sea, till there on the prairies meeting, 
	These and with these and the breath of my chant, 
	I’ll perfume the grave of him I love. 
	
	
	11 
	
	O what shall I hang on the chamber walls? 
	And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls, 
	To adorn the burial-house of him I love? 
	
	Pictures of growing spring and farms and homes, 
	With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright, 
	With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking sun, burning, expanding the air, 
	With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves of the trees prolific, 
	In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a wind-dapple here and there, 
	With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky, and shadows, 
	And the city at hand with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys, 
	And all the scenes of life and the workshops, and the workmen homeward returning. 
	
	
	12 
	
	Lo, body and soul--this land, 
	My own Manhattan with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides, and the ships, 
	The varied and ample land, the South and the North in the light, Ohio’s shores and flashing Missouri, 
	And ever the far-spreading prairies cover’d with grass and corn. 
	
	Lo, the most excellent sun so calm and haughty, 
	The violet and purple morn with just-felt breezes, 
	The gentle soft-born measureless light, 
	The miracle spreading bathing all, the fulfill’d noon, 
	The coming eve delicious, the welcome night and the stars, 
	Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land. 
	
	
	13 
	
	Sing on, sing on you gray-brown bird, 
	Sing from the swamps, the recesses, pour your chant from the bushes, 
	Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines. 
	
	Sing on dearest brother, warble your reedy song, 
	Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe. 
	
	O liquid and free and tender! 
	O wild and loose to my soul--O wondrous singer! 
	You only I hear--yet the star holds me, (but will soon depart,) 
	Yet the lilac with mastering odor holds me. 
	
	
	14 
	
	Now while I sat in the day and look’d forth, 
	In the close of the day with its light and the fields of spring, and the farmers preparing their crops, 
	In the large unconscious scenery of my land with its lakes and forests, 
	In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb’d winds and the storms,) 
	Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the voices of children and women, 
	The many-moving sea-tides, and I saw the ships how they sail’d, 
	And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy with labor, 
	And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with its meals and minutia of daily usages, 
	And the streets how their throbbings throbb’d, and the cities pent--lo, then and there, 
	Falling upon them all and among them all, enveloping me with the rest, 
	Appear’d the cloud, appear’d the long black trail, 
	And I knew death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death. 
	
	Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me, 
	And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me, 
	And I in the middle as with companions, and as holding the hands of companions, 
	I fled forth to the hiding receiving night that talks not, 
	Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness, 
	To the solemn shadowy cedars and ghostly pines so still. 
	
	And the singer so shy to the rest receiv’d me, 
	The gray-brown bird I know receiv’d us comrades three, 
	And he sang the carol of death, and a verse for him I love. 
	
	From deep secluded recesses, 
	From the fragrant cedars and the ghostly pines so still, 
	Came the carol of the bird. 
	
	And the charm of the carol rapt me, 
	As I held as if by their hands my comrades in the night, 
	And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird. 
	
	_Come lovely and soothing death, 
	Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving, 
	In the day, in the night, to all, to each, 
	Sooner or later delicate death._ 
	
	_Prais’d be the fathomless universe, 
	For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious, 
	And for love, sweet love--but praise! praise! praise! 
	For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death._ 
	
	_Dark mother always gliding near with soft feet, 
	Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome? 
	Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all, 
	I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly._ 
	
	_Approach strong deliveress, 
	When it is so, when thou hast taken them I joyously sing the dead, 
	Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee, 
	Laved in the flood of thy bliss O death._ 
	
	_From me to thee glad serenades, 
	Dances for thee I propose saluting thee, adornments and feastings for thee, 
	And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread sky are fitting, 
	And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night._ 
	
	_The night in silence under many a star, 
	The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose voice I know, 
	And the soul turning to thee O vast and well-veil’d death, 
	And the body gratefully nestling close to thee._ 
	
	_Over the tree-tops I float thee a song, 
	Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields and the prairies wide, 
	Over the dense-pack’d cities all and the teeming wharves and ways, 
	I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee O death._ 
	
	
	15 
	
	To the tally of my soul, 
	Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird, 
	With pure deliberate notes spreading filling the night. 
	
	Loud in the pines and cedars dim, 
	Clear in the freshness moist and the swamp-perfume, 
	And I with my comrades there in the night. 
	
	While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed, 
	As to long panoramas of visions. 
	
	And I saw askant the armies, 
	I saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle-flags, 
	Borne through the smoke of the battles and pierc’d with missiles I saw them, 
	And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody, 
	And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs, (and all in silence,) 
	And the staffs all splinter’d and broken. 
	
	I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them, 
	And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them, 
	I saw the debris and debris of all the slain soldiers of the war, 
	But I saw they were not as was thought, 
	They themselves were fully at rest, they suffer’d not, 
	The living remain’d and suffer’d, the mother suffer’d, 
	And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffer’d, 
	And the armies that remain’d suffer’d. 
	
	
	16 
	
	Passing the visions, passing the night, 
	Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades’ hands, 
	Passing the song of the hermit bird and the tallying song of my soul, 
	Victorious song, death’s outlet song, yet varying ever-altering song, 
	As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling, flooding the night, 
	Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again bursting with joy, 
	Covering the earth and filling the spread of the heaven, 
	As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses, 
	Passing, I leave thee lilac with heart-shaped leaves, 
	I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring. 
	
	I cease from my song for thee, 
	From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee, 
	O comrade lustrous with silver face in the night. 
	
	Yet each to keep and all, retrievements out of the night, 
	The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird, 
	And the tallying chant, the echo arous’d in my soul, 
	With the lustrous and drooping star with the countenance full of woe, 
	With the holders holding my hand nearing the call of the bird, 
	Comrades mine and I in the midst, and their memory ever to keep, for the dead I loved so well, 
	For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands--and this for his dear sake, 
	Lilac and star and bird twined with the chant of my soul, 
	There in the fragrant pines and the cedars dusk and dim.



32. WHOEVER YOU ARE HOLDING ME NOW IN HAND

	Whoever you are holding me now in hand,
	Without one thing all will be useless,
	I give you fair warning before you attempt me further,
	I am not what you supposed, but far different.
	
	Who is he that would become my follower?
	Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?
	
	The way is suspicious, the result uncertain, perhaps destructive,
	You would have to give up all else, I alone would expect to be your sole and exclusive standard,
	Your novitiate would even then be long and exhausting,
	The whole past theory of your life and all conformity to the lives around you would have to be abandon’d,
	Therefore release me now before troubling yourself any further, let go your hand from my shoulders,
	Put me down and depart on your way.
	
	Or else by stealth in some wood for trial,
	Or back of a rock in the open air,
	(For in any roof’d room of a house I emerge not, nor in company,
	And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn, or dead,)
	But just possibly with you on a high hill, first watching lest any person for miles around approach unawares,
	Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of the sea or some quiet island,
	Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,
	With the comrade’s long-dwelling kiss or the new husband’s kiss,
	For I am the new husband and I am the comrade.
	
	Or if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,
	Where I may feel the throbs of your heart or rest upon your hip,
	Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;
	For thus merely touching you is enough, is best,
	And thus touching you would I silently sleep and be carried eternally.
	
	But these leaves conning you con at peril,
	For these leaves and me you will not understand,
	They will elude you at first and still more afterward, I will certainly elude you,
	Even while you should think you had unquestionably caught me, behold!
	Already you see I have escaped from you.
	
	For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,
	Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,
	Nor do those know me best who admire me and vauntingly praise me,
	Nor will the candidates for my love (unless at most a very few) prove victorious,
	Nor will my poems do good only, they will do just as much evil, perhaps more,
	For all is useless without that which you may guess at many times and not hit, that which I hinted at;
	Therefore release me and depart on your way.



33. THE WORLD BELOW THE BRINE

	The world below the brine, 
	Forests at the bottom of the sea, the branches and leaves, 
	Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds, the thick tangle, openings, and pink turf, 
	Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white, and gold, the play of light through the water, 
	Dumb swimmers there among the rocks, coral, gluten, grass, rushes, and the aliment of the swimmers, 
	Sluggish existences grazing there suspended, or slowly crawling close to the bottom, 
	The sperm-whale at the surface blowing air and spray, or disporting with his flukes, 
	The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy sea-leopard, and the sting-ray, 
	Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes, sight in those ocean-depths, breathing that thick-breathing air, as so many do, 
	The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle air breathed by beings like us who walk this sphere, 
	The change onward from ours to that of beings who walk other spheres.



34. THE WOUND-DRESSER

	1
	
	An old man bending I come among new faces,
	Years looking backward resuming in answer to children,
	Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens that love me,
	(Arous’d and angry, I’d thought to beat the alarum, and urge relentless war,
	But soon my fingers fail’d me, my face droop’d and I resign’d myself,
	To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead;)
	Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions, these chances,
	Of unsurpass’d heroes, (was one side so brave? the other was equally brave;)
	Now be witness again, paint the mightiest armies of earth,
	Of those armies so rapid so wondrous what saw you to tell us?
	What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,
	Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?
	
	
	2
	
	O maidens and young men I love and that love me,
	What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking recalls,
	Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover’d with sweat and dust,
	In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the rush of successful charge,
	Enter the captur’d works--yet lo, like a swift running river they fade,
	Pass and are gone they fade--I dwell not on soldiers’ perils or soldiers’ joys,
	(Both I remember well--many of the hardships, few the joys, yet I was content.)
	
	But in silence, in dreams’ projections,
	While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,
	So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the sand,
	With hinged knees returning I enter the doors, (while for you up there,
	Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart.)
	
	Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,
	Straight and swift to my wounded I go,
	Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,
	Where their priceless blood reddens the grass, the ground,
	Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof’d hospital,
	To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,
	To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,
	An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,
	Soon to be fill’d with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill’d again.
	
	I onward go, I stop,
	With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,
	I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,
	One turns to me his appealing eyes--poor boy! I never knew you,
	Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that would save you.
	
	
	3
	
	On, on I go, (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)
	The crush’d head I dress, (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away,)
	The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through I examine,
	Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life struggles hard,
	(Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!
	In mercy come quickly.)
	
	From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,
	I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and blood,
	Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv’d neck and side falling head,
	His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the bloody stump,
	And has not yet look’d on it.
	
	I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,
	But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,
	And the yellow-blue countenance see.
	
	I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bullet-wound,
	Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so sickening, so offensive,
	While the attendant stands behind aside me holding the tray and pail.
	 
	I am faithful, I do not give out,
	The fractur’d thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,
	These and more I dress with impassive hand, (yet deep in my breast a fire, a burning flame.)
	
	
	4
	
	Thus in silence in dreams’ projections,
	Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hospitals,
	The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand,
	I sit by the restless all the dark night, some are so young,
	Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,
	(Many a soldier’s loving arms about this neck have cross’d and rested,
	Many a soldier’s kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)
