*** Richard Wilbur (1921 - 2017)


1. ADVICE TO A PROPHET

	When you come, as you soon must, to the streets of our city,   
	Mad-eyed from stating the obvious,
	Not proclaiming our fall but begging us
	In God’s name to have self-pity,
	
	Spare us all word of the weapons, their force and range,   
	The long numbers that rocket the mind;
	Our slow, unreckoning hearts will be left behind,   
	Unable to fear what is too strange.
	
	Nor shall you scare us with talk of the death of the race.   
	How should we dream of this place without us?--
	The sun mere fire, the leaves untroubled about us,   
	A stone look on the stone’s face?
	
	Speak of the world’s own change. Though we cannot conceive   
	Of an undreamt thing, we know to our cost
	How the dreamt cloud crumbles, the vines are blackened by frost,   
	How the view alters. We could believe,
	
	If you told us so, that the white-tailed deer will slip   
	Into perfect shade, grown perfectly shy,
	The lark avoid the reaches of our eye,
	The jack-pine lose its knuckled grip
	
	On the cold ledge, and every torrent burn
	As Xanthus once, its gliding trout
	Stunned in a twinkling. What should we be without   
	The dolphin’s arc, the dove’s return,
	
	These things in which we have seen ourselves and spoken?   
	Ask us, prophet, how we shall call
	Our natures forth when that live tongue is all
	Dispelled, that glass obscured or broken
	
	In which we have said the rose of our love and the clean   
	Horse of our courage, in which beheld
	The singing locust of the soul unshelled,
	And all we mean or wish to mean.
	
	Ask us, ask us whether with the worldless rose   
	Our hearts shall fail us; come demanding   
	Whether there shall be lofty or long standing   
	When the bronze annals of the oak-tree close.



2. AFTER THE LAST BULLETINS

	After the last bulletins the windows darken
	And the whole city founders readily and deep,
	Sliding on all its pillows
	To the thronged Atlantis of personal sleep,
	
	And the wind rises. The wind rises and bowls
	The day’s litter of news in the alleys. Trash
	Tears itself on the railings,
	Soars and falls with a soft crash,
	
	Tumbles and soars again. Unruly flights
	Scamper the park, and taking a statue for dead
	Strike at the positive eyes,
	Batter and flap the stolid head
	
	And scratch the noble name. In empty lots
	Our journals spiral in a fierce noyade
	Of all we thought to think,
	Or caught in corners cramp and wad
	
	And twist our words. And some from gutters flail
	Their tatters at the tired patrolman’s feet,
	Like all that fisted snow
	That cried beside his long retreat
	
	Damn you! damn you! to the emperor’s horse’s heels.
	Oh none too soon through the air white and dry
	Will the clear announcer’s voice
	Beat like a dove, and you and I
	
	From the heart’s anarch and responsible town
	Return by subway-mouth to life again,
	Bearing the morning papers,
	And cross the park where saintlike men,
	
	White and absorbed, with stick and bag remove
	The litter of the night, and footsteps rouse
	With confident morning sound
	The songbirds in the public boughs.



3. A BAROQUE WALL-FOUNTAIN IN THE VILLA SCIARRA

	Under the bronze crown
	Too big for the head of the stone cherub whose feet   
	     A serpent has begun to eat,
	Sweet water brims a cockle and braids down
	
	           Past spattered mosses, breaks
	On the tipped edge of a second shell, and fills   
	     The massive third below. It spills
	In threads then from the scalloped rim, and makes
	
	           A scrim or summery tent
	For a faun-ménage and their familiar goose.   
	     Happy in all that ragged, loose
	Collapse of water, its effortless descent
	
	           And flatteries of spray,
	The stocky god upholds the shell with ease,
	     Watching, about his shaggy knees,
	The goatish innocence of his babes at play;
	
	           His fauness all the while
	Leans forward, slightly, into a clambering mesh   
	     Of water-lights, her sparkling flesh
	In a saecular ecstasy, her blinded smile
	
	           Bent on the sand floor
	Of the trefoil pool, where ripple-shadows come
	     And go in swift reticulum,
	More addling to the eye than wine, and more
	
	           Interminable to thought
	Than pleasure’s calculus. Yet since this all   
	     Is pleasure, flash, and waterfall,   
	Must it not be too simple? Are we not
	
	           More intricately expressed
	In the plain fountains that Maderna set
	     Before St. Peter’s--the main jet   
	Struggling aloft until it seems at rest
	
	           In the act of rising, until   
	The very wish of water is reversed,
	     That heaviness borne up to burst   
	In a clear, high, cavorting head, to fill
	
	           With blaze, and then in gauze   
	Delays, in a gnatlike shimmering, in a fine
	     Illumined version of itself, decline,
	And patter on the stones its own applause?
	
	           If that is what men are
	Or should be, if those water-saints display   
	     The pattern of our areté,
	What of these showered fauns in their bizarre,
	
	           Spangled, and plunging house?
	They are at rest in fulness of desire
	     For what is given, they do not tire
	Of the smart of the sun, the pleasant water-douse
	
	           And riddled pool below,
	Reproving our disgust and our ennui   
	     With humble insatiety.
	Francis, perhaps, who lay in sister snow
	
	           Before the wealthy gate
	Freezing and praising, might have seen in this   
	     No trifle, but a shade of bliss--
	That land of tolerable flowers, that state
	
	           As near and far as grass
	Where eyes become the sunlight, and the hand   
	     Is worthy of water: the dreamt land
	Toward which all hungers leap, all pleasures pass.



4. A BARRED OWL

	The warping night air having brought the boom
	Of an owl’s voice into her darkened room,
	We tell the wakened child that all she heard
	Was an odd question from a forest bird,
	Asking of us, if rightly listened to,
	“Who cooks for you?” and then “Who cooks for you?”
	
	Words, which can make our terrors bravely clear,
	Can also thus domesticate a fear,
	And send a small child back to sleep at night
	Not listening for the sound of stealthy flight
	Or dreaming of some small thing in a claw
	Borne up to some dark branch and eaten raw.



5. THE BEAUTIFUL CHANGES

	One wading a Fall meadow finds on all sides   
	The Queen Anne’s Lace lying like lilies
	On water; it glides
	So from the walker, it turns
	Dry grass to a lake, as the slightest shade of you   
	Valleys my mind in fabulous blue Lucernes.
	
	The beautiful changes as a forest is changed   
	By a chameleon’s tuning his skin to it;   
	As a mantis, arranged
	On a green leaf, grows
	Into it, makes the leaf leafier, and proves   
	Any greenness is deeper than anyone knows.
	
	Your hands hold roses always in a way that says   
	They are not only yours; the beautiful changes   
	In such kind ways,   
	Wishing ever to sunder
	Things and things’ selves for a second finding, to lose   
	For a moment all that it touches back to wonder.



6. CEREMONY

	A striped blouse in a clearing by Bazille   
	Is, you may say, a patroness of boughs   
	Too queenly kind toward nature to be kin.   
	But ceremony never did conceal,
	Save to the silly eye, which all allows,
	How much we are the woods we wander in.
	
	Let her be some Sabrina fresh from stream,
	Lucent as shallows slowed by wading sun,
	Bedded on fern, the flowers’ cynosure:
	Then nymph and wood must nod and strive to dream   
	That she is airy earth, the trees, undone,
	Must ape her languor natural and pure.
	
	Ho-hum. I am for wit and wakefulness,   
	And love this feigning lady by Bazille.   
	What’s lightly hid is deepest understood,   
	And when with social smile and formal dress   
	She teaches leaves to curtsey and quadrille,   
	I think there are most tigers in the wood.



7. A CHRONIC CONDITION

	Berkeley did not foresee such misty weather,
	Nor centuries of light
	Intend so dim a day. Swaddled together
	In separateness, the trees
	Persist or not beyond the gray-white
	Palings of the air. Gone
	Are whatever wings bothered the lighted leaves
	When leaves there were. Are all
	The sparrows fallen? I can hardly hear
	My memory of those bees
	Who only lately mesmerized the lawn.
	Now, something, blaze! A fear
	Swaddles me now that Hylas’ tree will fall
	Where no eye lights and grieves,
	Will fall to nothing and without a sound.
	I sway and lean above the vanished ground.



8. CONJURATION

	Backtrack of sea, the baywater goes; flats
	Bubble in sunlight, running with herringbone streams;
	Sea-lettuce lies in oily mats
	On sand mislaid; stranded
	Are slug, stone and shell, as dreams
	Drain into morning shine, and the cheat is ended.
	
	Oh, it was blue, the too amenable sea.
	We heard of pearls in the dark and wished to dive.
	But here in this snailshell, see, see,
	The crab-legs waggle; where,
	If altered now, and yet alive,
	Did softness get these bitter claws to wear?
	
	As curtains from a fatal window blown,
	The sea’s receding fingers terribly tell
	Of strangest things together grown;
	All join, and in the furl
	Of waters, blind in muck and shell,
	Pursue their slow paludal games. O pearl,
	
	Rise, rise and brighten, wear clear air, and in
	Your natal cloudiness receive the sun;
	Hang among single stars, and twin
	Our double deep; O tides,
	Return a truer blue, make one
	The sky’s blue speech, and what the sea confides.



9. THE DEATH OF A TOAD

	A toad the power mower caught,
	Chewed and clipped of a leg, with a hobbling hop has got
	To the garden verge, and sanctuaried him
	Under the cineraria leaves, in the shade
	Of the ashen heartshaped leaves, in a dim,
	Low, and a final glade.
	
	The rare original heartsblood goes,
	Spends on the earthen hide, in the folds and wizenings, flows
	In the gutters of the banked and staring eyes. He lies
	As still as if he would return to stone,
	And soundlessly attending, dies
	Toward some deep monotone,
	
	Toward misted and ebullient seas
	And cooling shores, toward lost Amphibia’s emperies.
	Day dwindles, drowning, and at length is gone
	In the wide and antique eyes, which still appear
	To watch, across the castrate lawn,
	The haggard daylight steer.



10. EJACULATION, REPLY, AND SONG

	_The Poet_
	
	How oft, retiring from the dusty road
	To rest a moment in the forest’s shade,
	The footsore traveler has set down his load
	And, couched upon some bank of mosses, heard,
	Thrilling the silence of a far, dim glade,
	The music of the ocka-ocka bird!
	
	
	_The Scientist_
	
	How “oft,” you ask, has such a thing occurred?
	The answer to your question, Sir, is _never._
	Art follows nature or it is absurd.
	No reputable ornithologist
	Mentions that name in any text whatever.
	The ocka-ocka bird does not exist!
	
	
	_The Mockingbird_
	
	Chip-chip. Tu-wit-a-wee. Ocka-ocka.



11. FIVE WOMEN BATHING IN MOONLIGHT

	When night believes itself alone
	It is most natural, conceals
	No artifice. The open moon
	With webs in sky and water wields
	
	The slightest wave. This vision yields
	To one sole theme of semblance, land
	Leasing each wave the palest peals
	Of bright apparent notes of sand.
	
	The bathers whitely come and stand.
	Water diffuses them, their hair
	Like seaweed slurs the shoulders, and
	Their voices in the moonstrung air
	
	Go plucked of words. Now wading where
	The moon’s misprisions salve them in.
	To silver, they are unaware
	How lost they are when they begin
	
	To mix with water, making then
	Gestures of blithe obedience,
	As five Danilovas within
	The soft compulsions of their dance.



12. FOR C.

	After the clash of elevator gates
	And the long sinking, she emerges where,
	A slight thing in the morning’s crosstown glare,
	She looks up toward the window where he waits,
	Then in a fleeting taxi joins the rest
	Of the huge traffic bound forever west.
	
	On such grand scale do lovers say good-bye--
	Even this other pair whose high romance
	Had only the duration of a dance,
	And who, now taking leave with stricken eye,
	See each in each a whole new life forgone.
	For them, above the darkling clubhouse lawn,
	
	Bright Perseids flash and crumble; while for these
	Who part now on the dock, weighed down by grief
	And baggage, yet with something like relief,
	It takes three thousand miles of knitting seas
	To cancel out their crossing, and unmake
	The amorous rough and tumble of their wake.
	
	We are denied, my love, their fine tristesse
	And bittersweet regrets, and cannot share
	The frequent vistas of their large despair,
	Where love and all are swept to nothingness;
	Still, there’s a certain scope in that long love
	Which constant spirits are the keepers of,
	
	And which, though taken to be tame and staid,
	Is a wild sostenuto of the heart,
	A passion joined to courtesy and art
	Which has the quality of something made,
	Like a good fiddle, like the rose’s scent,
	Like a rose window or the firmament.



13. JUNK

	_Huru Welandes
	worc ne geswiceσ?
	monna ænigum
	σara σe Mimming can
	heardne gehealdan._
	
	--Waldere
	
	An axe angles
	from my neighbor’s ashcan;
	It is hell’s handiwork,
	the wood not hickory,
	The flow of the grain
	not faithfully followed.
	The shivered shaft
	rises from a shellheap
	Of plastic playthings,
	paper plates,
	And the sheer shards
	of shattered tumblers
	That were not annealed
	for the time needful.
	At the same curbside,
	a cast-off cabinet
	Of wavily warped
	unseasoned wood
	Waits to be trundled
	in the trash-man’s truck.
	Haul them off! Hide them!
	The heart winces
	For junk and gimcrack,
	for jerrybuilt things
	And the men who make them
	for a little money,   
	Bartering pride
	like the bought boxer
	Who pulls his punches,
	or the paid-off jockey   
	Who in the home stretch
	holds in his horse.   
	Yet the things themselves
	in thoughtless honor
	Have kept composure,
	like captives who would not
	Talk under torture.
	Tossed from a tailgate
	Where the dump displays
	its random dolmens,
	Its black barrows
	and blazing valleys,
	They shall waste in the weather
	toward what they were.
	The sun shall glory
	in the glitter of glass-chips,
	Foreseeing the salvage
	of the prisoned sand,   
	And the blistering paint
	peel off in patches,
	That the good grain
	be discovered again.
	Then burnt, bulldozed,
	they shall all be buried   
	To the depth of diamonds,
	in the making dark
	Where halt Hephaestus
	keeps his hammer
	And Wayland’s work
	is worn away.



14. LOOKING INTO HISTORY

	I
	
	Five soldiers fixed by Mathew Brady’s eye   
	Stand in a land subdued beyond belief.   
	Belief might lend them life again. I try
	Like orphaned Hamlet working up his grief
	
	To see my spellbound fathers in these men   
	Who, breathless in their amber atmosphere,   
	Show but the postures men affected then   
	And the hermit faces of a finished year.
	
	The guns and gear and all are strange until   
	Beyond the tents I glimpse a file of trees   
	Verging a road that struggles up a hill.   
	They’re sycamores.
	                           The long-abated breeze
	
	Flares in those boughs I know, and hauls the sound   
	Of guns and a great forest in distress.
	Fathers, I know my cause, and we are bound   
	Beyond that hill to fight at Wilderness.
	
	
	II
	
	But trick your eyes with Birnam Wood, or think   
	How fire-cast shadows of the bankside trees   
	Rode on the back of Simois to sink
	In the wide waters. Reflect how history’s
	
	Changes are like the sea’s, which mauls and mulls   
	Its salvage of the world in shifty waves,
	Shrouding in evergreen the oldest hulls
	And yielding views of its confounded graves
	
	To the new moon, the sun, or any eye   
	That in its shallow shoreward version sees
	The pebbles charging with a deathless cry   
	And carageen memorials of trees.
	
	
	III
	
	Now, old man of the sea,   
	I start to understand:
	The will will find no stillness
	Back in a stilled land.
	
	The dead give no command   
	And shall not find their voice   
	Till they be mustered by   
	Some present fatal choice.
	
	Let me now rejoice
	In all impostures, take
	The shape of lion or leopard,
	Boar, or watery snake,
	
	Or like the comber break,   
	Yet in the end stand fast   
	And by some fervent fraud   
	Father the waiting past,
	
	Resembling at the last
	The self-established tree
	That draws all waters toward   
	Its live formality.



15. LOVE CALLS US TO THE THINGS OF THIS WORLD

	The eyes open to a cry of pulleys,
	And spirited from sleep, the astounded soul   
	Hangs for a moment bodiless and simple   
	As false dawn.
	                    Outside the open window   
	The morning air is all awash with angels.
	
	   Some are in bed-sheets, some are in blouses,   
	Some are in smocks: but truly there they are.   
	Now they are rising together in calm swells   
	Of halcyon feeling, filling whatever they wear   
	With the deep joy of their impersonal breathing;
	
	   Now they are flying in place, conveying
	The terrible speed of their omnipresence, moving   
	And staying like white water; and now of a sudden   
	They swoon down into so rapt a quiet
	That nobody seems to be there.
	                                            The soul shrinks
	
	   From all that it is about to remember,
	From the punctual rape of every blessèd day,
	And cries,
	              “Oh, let there be nothing on earth but laundry,   
	Nothing but rosy hands in the rising steam
	And clear dances done in the sight of heaven.”
	
	   Yet, as the sun acknowledges
	With a warm look the world’s hunks and colors,   
	The soul descends once more in bitter love   
	To accept the waking body, saying now
	In a changed voice as the man yawns and rises,   
	   “Bring them down from their ruddy gallows;
	Let there be clean linen for the backs of thieves;   
	Let lovers go fresh and sweet to be undone,   
	And the heaviest nuns walk in a pure floating   
	Of dark habits,
	                     keeping their difficult balance.”



16. LYING

	To claim, at a dead party, to have spotted a grackle,
	When in fact you haven’t of late, can do no harm.
	Your reputation for saying things of interest
	Will not be marred, if you hasten to other topics,
	Nor will the delicate web of human trust
	Be ruptured by that airy fabrication.
	Later, however, talking with toxic zest
	Of golf, or taxes, or the rest of it
	Where the beaked ladle plies the chuckling ice,
	You may enjoy a chill of severance, hearing
	Above your head the shrug of unreal wings.
	Not that the world is tiresome in itself:
	We know what boredom is: it is a dull
	Impatience or a fierce velleity,
	A champing wish, stalled by our lassitude,
	To make or do. In the strict sense, of course,
	We invent nothing, merely bearing witness
	To what each morning brings again to light:
	Gold crosses, cornices, astonishment
	Of panes, the turbine-vent which natural law
	Spins on the grill-end of the diner’s roof,
	Then grass and grackles or, at the end of town
	In sheen-swept pastureland, the horse’s neck
	Clothed with its usual thunder, and the stones
	Beginning now to tug their shadows in
	And track the air with glitter. All these things
	Are there before us; there before we look
	Or fail to look; there to be seen or not
	By us, as by the bee’s twelve thousand eyes,
	According to our means and purposes.
	So too with strangeness not to be ignored,
	Total eclipse or snow upon the rose,
	And so with that most rare conception, nothing.
	What is it, after all, but something missed?
	It is the water of a dried-up well
	Gone to assail the cliffs of Labrador.
	There is what galled the arch-negator, sprung
	From Hell to probe with intellectual sight
	The cells and heavens of a given world
	Which he could take but as another prison:
	Small wonder that, pretending not to be,
	He drifted through the bar-like boles of Eden
	In a _black mist low creeping_, dragging down
	And darkening with moody self-absorption
	What, when he left it, lifted and, if seen
	From the sun’s vantage, seethed with vaulting hues.
	Closer to making than the deftest fraud
	Is seeing how the catbird’s tail was made
	To counterpoise, on the mock-orange spray,
	Its light, up-tilted spine; or, lighter still,
	How the shucked tunic of an onion, brushed
	To one side on a backlit chopping-board
	And rocked by trifling currents, prints and prints
	Its bright, ribbed shadow like a flapping sail.
	Odd that a thing is most itself when likened:
	The eye mists over, basil hints of clove,
	The river glazes toward the dam and spills
	To the drubbed rocks below its crashing cullet,
	And in the barnyard near the sawdust-pile
	Some great thing is tormented. Either it is
	A tarp torn loose and in the groaning wind
	Now puffed, now flattened, or a hip-shot beast
	Which tries again, and once again, to rise.
	What, though for pain there is no other word,
	Finds pleasure in the cruellest simile?
	It is something in us like the catbird’s song
	From neighbor bushes in the grey of morning
	That, harsh or sweet, and of its own accord,
	Proclaims its many kin. It is a chant
	Of the first springs, and it is tributary
	To the great lies told with the eyes half-shut
	That have the truth in view: the tale of Chiron
	Who, with sage head, wild heart, and planted hoof
	Instructed brute Achilles in the lyre,
	Or of the garden where we first mislaid
	Simplicity of wish and will, forgetting
	Out of what cognate splendor all things came
	To take their scattering names; and nonetheless
	That matter of a baggage-train surprised
	By a few Gascons in the Pyrenees
	Which, having worked three centuries and more
	In the dark caves of France, poured out at last
	The blood of Roland, who to Charles his king
	And to the dove that hatched the dove-tailed world
	Was faithful unto death, and shamed the Devil.



17. MARGINALIA

	Things concentrate at the edges; the pond-surface
	Is bourne to fish and man and it is spread
	In textile scum and damask light, on which
	The lily-pads are set; and there are also
		Inlaid ruddy twigs, becalmed pine-leaves,
		Air-baubles, and the chain mail of froth.
	
	Descending into sleep (as when the night-lift
	Falls past a brilliant floor) we glimpse a sublime
	Décor and hear, perhaps, a complete music,
	But this evades us, as in the night meadows
		The crickets’ million roundsong dies away
		From all advances, rising in every distance.
	
	Our riches are centrifugal; men compose
	Daily, unwittingly, their final dreams,
	And those are our own voices whose remote
	Consummate chorus rides on the whirlpool’s rim,
		Past which we flog our sails, toward which we drift,
		Plying our trades, in hopes of a good drowning.



18. ORCHARD TREES, JANUARY

	It’s not the case, though some might wish it so
	Who from a window watch the blizzard blow
	
	White riot through their branches vague and stark,
	That they keep snug beneath their pelted bark.
	
	They take affliction in until it jells
	To crystal ice between their frozen cells,
	
	And each of them is inwardly a vault
	Of jewels rigorous and free of fault,
	
	Unglimpsed until in May it gently bears
	A sudden crop of green-pronged solitaires.



19. PARABLE

	I read how Quixote in his random ride
	Came to a crossing once, and lest he lose
	The purity of chance, would not decide
	
	Whither to fare, but wished his horse to choose.
	For glory lay wherever turned the fable.
	His head was light with pride, his horse’s shoes
	
	Were heavy, and he headed for the stable.



20. A PLAIN SONG FOR COMADRE

	Though the unseen may vanish, though insight fails
	And doubter and downcast saint
	Join in the same complaint,
	What holy things were ever frightened off
	By a fly’s buzz, or itches, or a cough?
	Harder than nails
	
	They are, more warmly constant than the sun,
	At whose continual sign
	The dimly prompted vine
	Upbraids itself to a green excellence.
	What evening, when the slow and forced expense
	Of sweat is done,
	
	Does not the dark come flooding the straight furrow
	Or filling the well-made bowl?
	What night will not the whole
	Sky with its clear studs and steady spheres
	Turn on a sound chimney? It is seventeen years
	Come tomorrow
	
	That Bruna Sandoval has kept the church
	Of San Ysidro, sweeping
	And scrubbing the aisles, keeping
	The candlesticks and the plaster faces bright,
	And seen no vision but the thing done right
	From the clay porch
	
	To the white altar. For love and in all weathers
	This is what she has done.
	Sometimes the early sun
	Shines as she flings the scrubwater out, with a crash
	Of grimy rainbows, and the stained suds flash
	Like angel-feathers.



21. THE RIDDLE

	Shall I love God for causing me to be?
	I was mere utterance; shall these words love me?
	
	Yet when I caused His work to jar and stammer,
	And one free subject loosened all His grammar,
	
	I love Him that He did not in a rage
	Once and forever rule me off the page,
	
	But, thinking I might come to please Him yet,
	Crossed out ‘delete’ and wrote His patient ‘stet’.



22. SHAME

	It is a cramped little state with no foreign policy,
	Save to be thought inoffensive. The grammar of the language
	Has never been fathomed, owing to the national habit
	Of allowing each sentence to trail off in confusion.
	Those who have visited Scusi, the capital city,
	Report that the railway-route from Schuldig passes
	Through country best described as unrelieved.
	Sheep are the national product. The faint inscription
	Over the city gates may perhaps be rendered,
	“I’m afraid you won’t find much of interest here.”
	Census-reports which give the population
	As zero are, of course, not to be trusted,
	Save as reflecting the natives’ flustered insistence
	That they do not count, as well as their modest horror
	Of letting one’s sex be known in so many words.
	The uniform grey of the nondescript buildings, the absence
	Of churches or comfort-stations, have given observers
	An odd impression of ostentatious meanness,
	And it must be said of the citizens (muttering by
	In their ratty sheepskins, shying at cracks in the sidewalk)
	That they lack the peace of mind of the truly humble.
	The tenor of life is careful, even in the stiff
	Unsmiling carelessness of the border-guards
	And douaniers, who admit, whenever they can,
	Not merely the usual carloads of deodorant
	But gypsies, g-strings, hasheesh, and contraband pigments.
	Their complete negligence is reserved, however,
	For the hoped-for invasion, at which time the happy people
	(Sniggering, ruddily naked, and shamelessly drunk)
	Will stun the foe by their overwhelming submission,
	Corrupt the generals, infiltrate the staff,
	Usurp the throne, proclaim themselves to be sun-gods,
	And bring about the collapse of the whole empire.



23. A SIMILE FOR HER SMILE

	Your smiling, or the hope, the thought of it,
	Makes in my mind such pause and abrupt ease
	As when the highway bridgegates fall,
	Balking the hasty traffic, which must sit
	On each side massed and staring, while
	Deliberately the drawbridge starts to rise:
	
	Then horns are hushed, the oilsmoke rarefies,
	Above the idling motors one can tell
	The packet’s smooth approach, the slip,
	Slip of the silken river past the sides,
	The ringing of clear bells, the dip
	And slow cascading of the paddle wheel.



24. TO AN AMERICAN POET JUST DEAD

	In the _Boston Sunday Herald_ just three lines
	Of no-point type for you who used to sing
	The praises of imaginary wines,
	And died, or so I’m told, of the real thing.
	
	Also gone, but a lot less forgotten
	Are an eminent cut-rate druggist, a lover of Giving,
	A lender, and various brokers: gone from this rotten
	Taxable world to a higher standard of living.
	
	It is out in the comfy suburbs I read you are dead,
	And the soupy summer is settling, full of the yawns
	Of Sunday fathers loitering late in bed,
	And the shhh of sprays on all the little lawns.
	
	Will the sprays weep wide for you their chaplet tears?
	For you will the deep-freeze units melt and mourn?
	For you will Studebakers shred their gears
	And sound from each garage a muted horn?
	
	They won’t. In summer sunk and stupefied
	The suburbs deepen in their sleep of death.
	And though they sleep the sounder since you died
	It’s just as well that now you save your breath.



25. WE

	“We ought to drop the bomb at once before
	Those Russians do. I’m sure you all agree?”
	Of course we do; and hearing of a war
	The Continentals rise in clouds of tea,
	Attired in looks of conscious ancestry,
	Decorous rags, and decorative gore.
	
	“I fear we’re growing soft,” says Mr. Fee,
	A hardened gentleman of several score.
	“Lemon?,” inquires Miss Blood. “It seems to me
	We mustn’t shilly shally any more.”
	The Continentals quick-step out the door
	And pivot off around the shrubbery.
	
	How good to have the Russians to abhor:
	It lets us dance the nation on our knee
	Who haven’t been quite certain since the war
	Precisely what we meant by saying _we_.
	The alien elements have come to be
	Entirely too enormous to ignore.
	
	The servant girl has spoken back to me.
	My dividends are yearly getting lower.
	The nights are full of fires and burglary.
	The Jews have bought my cottage by the shore.
	I feel at times like locking up the door
	And never even going out to tea.



26. WEATHER BIRD

	It’s hard to decide whether the weather-swallow
	Seems on his standard over a tile hill
	To be flying stock-still,
	Or hurdling, rather, a tall composite billow,
	Far too fast for the sea’s
	Slack to be seen, and the vast redundancies.
	
	And it’s hard to say whether the swallow’s standard
	Looks like a leash he ever strains to break,
	Holding him lest he take
	The sky too far; or whether the house, half-foundered,
	Cast him a line, in the hope
	He’d raise it toward horizons with that rope.
	
	Both would be best.
	Contention magnifies,
	And this discarnate swallow is the crown
	Of all that pulls him down,
	Since as a schoolboy’s kite he tries to rise,
	And must be held-to tight
	For fear the house will lose its touch with height.
	
	A house should hug the earth, but turn with it,
	Be buoy to circling storms, and the moon’s manger,
	Aware of the slight danger
	Its halcyon bird may hurl to a helix, set
	The roof toward anywhere,
	And tug the dwellers into empty air.



27. WELLFLEET: THE HOUSE

	Roof overwoven by a soft tussle of leaves,
	The walls awave with sumac shadow, lilac
	Lofts and falls in the yard, and the house believes
	It’s guarded, garlanded in a former while.
	
	Here one cannot intrude, the stillness being
	Lichenlike grown, a coating of quietudes;
	The portraits dream themselves, they are done with seeing;
	Rocker and teacart balance in iron moods.
	
	Yet for the transient here is no offense,
	Because at certain hours a wallowed light
	Floods at the seaside windows, vague, intense,
	And lays on all within a mending blight,
	
	Making the kitchen silver blindly gleam,
	The yellow floorboards swim, the dazzled clock
	Boom with a buoy sound, the chambers seem
	Alluvial as that champed and glittering rock.
	
	The sea strokes up to fashion dune and beach
	In strew by strew, and year by hundred years.
	One is at home here. Nowhere in ocean’s reach
	Can time have any foreignness or fears.



28. WORLDS

	For Alexander there was no Far East,
	Because he thought the Asian continent
	India ended. Free Cathay at least
	Did not contribute to his discontent.
	
	But Newton, who had grasped all space, was more
	Serene. To him it seemed that he’d but played
	With several shells and pebbles on the shore
	Of that profundity he had not made.
	
	Swiss Einstein with his relativity--
	Most secure of all. God does not play dice
	With the cosmos and its activity.
	Religionless equations won’t suffice.



29. YEAR’S END

	Now winter downs the dying of the year,   
	And night is all a settlement of snow;
	From the soft street the rooms of houses show   
	A gathered light, a shapen atmosphere,   
	Like frozen-over lakes whose ice is thin   
	And still allows some stirring down within.
	
	I’ve known the wind by water banks to shake
	The late leaves down, which frozen where they fell   
	And held in ice as dancers in a spell   
	Fluttered all winter long into a lake;   
	Graved on the dark in gestures of descent,   
	They seemed their own most perfect monument.
	
	There was perfection in the death of ferns   
	Which laid their fragile cheeks against the stone   
	A million years. Great mammoths overthrown   
	Composedly have made their long sojourns,   
	Like palaces of patience, in the gray
	And changeless lands of ice. And at Pompeii
	
	The little dog lay curled and did not rise   
	But slept the deeper as the ashes rose
	And found the people incomplete, and froze   
	The random hands, the loose unready eyes   
	Of men expecting yet another sun
	To do the shapely thing they had not done.
	
	These sudden ends of time must give us pause.   
	We fray into the future, rarely wrought
	Save in the tapestries of afterthought.
	More time, more time. Barrages of applause   
	Come muffled from a buried radio.
	The New-year bells are wrangling with the snow.
