*** William Carlos Williams (1883 - 1963)


1. APPROACH OF WINTER

	The half-stripped trees 
	struck by a wind together, 
	bending all, 
	the leaves flutter drily 
	and refuse to let go 
	or driven like hail 
	stream bitterly out to one side 
	and fall 
	where the salvias, hard carmine-- 
	like no leaf that ever was-- 
	edge the bare garden.



2. ARRIVAL

	And yet one arrives somehow, 
	finds himself loosening the hooks of 
	her dress 
	in a strange bedroom-- 
	feels the autumn 
	dropping its silk and linen leaves 
	about her ankles. 
	The tawdry veined body emerges 
	twisted upon itself 
	like a winter wind . . . !



3. A CELEBRATION

	A middle-northern March, now as always-- 
	gusts from the South broken against cold winds-- 
	but from under, as if a slow hand lifted a tide, 
	it moves--not into April--into a second March, 
	
	the old skin of wind-clear scales dropping 
	upon the mold: this is the shadow projects the tree 
	upward causing the sun to shine in his sphere. 
	
	So we will put on our pink felt hat--new last year! 
	--newer this by virtue of brown eyes turning back 
	the seasons--and let us walk to the orchid-house, 
	see the flowers will take the prize tomorrow 
	at the Palace. 
	Stop here, these are our oleanders. 
	When they are in bloom-- 
	You would waste words 
	It is clearer to me than if the pink 
	were on the branch. It would be a searching in 
	a colored cloud to reveal that which now, huskless, 
	shows the very reason for their being. 
	
	And these the orange-trees, in blossom--no need 
	to tell with this weight of perfume in the air. 
	If it were not so dark in this shed one could better 
	see the white. 
	It is that very perfume 
	has drawn the darkness down among the leaves. 
	Do I speak clearly enough? 
	It is this darkness reveals that which darkness alone 
	loosens and sets spinning on waxen wings-- 
	not the touch of a finger-tip, not the motion 
	of a sigh. A too heavy sweetness proves 
	its own caretaker. 
	And here are the orchids! 
	Never having seen 
	such gaiety I will read these flowers for you: 
	This is an odd January, died--in Villon’s time. 
	Snow, this is and this the stain of a violet 
	grew in that place the spring that foresaw its own doom. 
	
	And this, a certain July from Iceland: 
	a young woman of that place 
	breathed it toward the South. It took root there. 
	The color ran true but the plant is small. 
	
	This falling spray of snow-flakes is 
	a handful of dead Februaries 
	prayed into flower by Rafael Arevalo Martinez 
	of Guatemala. 
	Here’s that old friend who 
	went by my side so many years: this full, fragile 
	head of veined lavender. Oh that April 
	that we first went with our stiff lusts 
	leaving the city behind, out to the green hill-- 
	May, they said she was. A hand for all of us: 
	this branch of blue butterflies tied to this stem. 
	
	June is a yellow cup I’ll not name; August 
	the over-heavy one. And here are-- 
	russet and shiny, all but March. And March? 
	Ah, March-- 
	Flowers are a tiresome pastime. 
	One has a wish to shake them from their pots 
	root and stem, for the sun to gnaw. 
	
	Walk out again into the cold and saunter home 
	to the fire. This day has blossomed long enough. 
	I have wiped out the red night and lit a blaze 
	instead which will at least warm our hands 
	and stir up the talk. 
	I think we have kept fair time. 
	Time is a green orchard.
