*** C. K. Williams (1936 - 2015)


1. DROPLETS

	Even when the rain falls relatively hard,
	only one leaf at a time of the little tree
	you planted on the balcony last year,
	then another leaf at its time, and one more,
	is set trembling by the constant droplets,
	
	but the rain, the clouds flocked over the city,
	you at the piano inside, your hesitant music
	mingling with the din of the downpour,
	the gush of rivulets loosed from the eaves,
	the iron railings and flowing gutters,
	
	all of it fuses in me with such intensity
	that I can’t help wondering why my longing
	to live forever has so abated that it hardly
	comes to me anymore, and never as it did,
	as regret for what I might not live to live,
	
	but rather as a layering of instants like this,
	transient as the mist drawn from the rooftops,
	yet emphatic as any note of the nocturne
	you practice, and, the storm faltering, fading
	into its own radiant passing, you practice again.


2. FROM MY WINDOW

	Spring: the first morning when that one true block of sweet, laminar,
	              complex scent arrives
	from somewhere west and I keep coming to lean on the sill, glorying in
	              the end of the wretched winter.
	The scabby-barked sycamores ringing the empty lot across the way are
	              budded--I hadn’t noticed --
	and the thick spikes of the unlikely urban crocuses have already broken
	             the gritty soil.
	Up the street, some surveyors with tripods are waving each other left and
	             right the way they do.
	A girl in a gym suit jogged by a while ago, some kids passed, playing
	             hooky, I imagine,
	and now the paraplegic Vietnam vet who lives in a half-converted ware-
	             house down the block
	and the friend who stays with him and seems to help him out come
	             weaving towards me,
	their battered wheelchair lurching uncertainly from one edge of the
	             sidewalk to the other.
	I know where they’re going--to the “Legion“: once, when I was putting
	             something out, they stopped,
	both drunk that time, too, both reeking--it wasn’t ten o’clock--and we
	             chatted for a bit.
	I don’t know how they stay alive--on benefits most likely. I wonder if
	             they’re lovers?
	They don’t look it. Right now, in fact, they look a wreck, careening hap-
	             hazardly along,
	contriving, as they reach beneath me, to dip a wheel from the curb so
	             that the chair skewers, teeters,
	tips, and they both tumble, the one slowly, almost gracefully sliding in
	             stages from his seat,
	his expression hardly marking it, the other staggering over him, spinning
	             heavily down,
	to lie on the asphalt, his mouth working, his feet shoving weakly and
	             fruitlessly against the curb.
	In the storefront office on the corner, Reed and Son, Real Estate, have
	             come to see the show.
	Gazing through the golden letters of their name, they’re not, at least,
	             thank god, laughing.
	Now the buddy, grabbing at a hydrant, gets himself erect and stands
	             there for a moment, panting.
	Now he has to lift the other, who lies utterly still, a forearm shielding his
	             eyes from the sun.
	He hauls him partly upright, then hefts him almost all the way into the
	             chair, but a dangling foot
	catches a support-plate, jerking everything around so that he has to put
	             him down,
	set the chair to rights, and hoist him again and as he does he jerks the
	             grimy jeans right off him.
	No drawers, shrunken, blotchy thighs: under the thick, white coils of
	             belly blubber,
	the poor, blunt pud, tiny, terrified, retracted, is almost invisible in the
	             sparse genital hair,
	then his friend pulls his pants up, he slumps wholly back as though he
	             were, at last, to be let be,
	and the friend leans against the cyclone fence, suddenly staring up at me
	             as though he’d known,
	all along, that I was watching and I can’t help wondering if he knows that
	             in the winter, too,
	I watched, the night he went out to the lot and walked, paced rather, 
	             almost ran, for how many hours.
	It was snowing, the city in that holy silence, the last we have, when the
	             storm takes hold,
	and he was making patterns that I thought at first were circles, then real-
	             ized made a figure eight,
	what must have been to him a perfect symmetry but which, from where
	             I was, shivered, bent,
	and lay on its side: a warped, unclear infinity, slowly, as the snow came
	             faster, going out.
	Over and over again, his head lowered to the task, he slogged the path
	             he’d blazed,
	but the race was lost, his prints were filling faster than he made them
	             now and I looked away,
	up across the skeletal trees to the tall center city buildings, some, though
	             it was midnight,
	with all their offices still gleaming, their scarlet warning beacons signal-
	             ing erratically
	against the thickening flakes, their smoldering auras softening portions of
	             the dim, milky sky.
	In the morning, nothing: every trace of him effaced, all the field pure
	             white,
	its surface glittering, the dawn, glancing from its glaze, oblique, relent-
	             less, unadorned.


3. THE GAFFE

	1.
	
	If that someone who’s me yet not me yet who judges me is always with me,   
	as he is, shouldn’t he have been there when I said so long ago that thing I said?   
	
	If he who rakes me with such not trivial shame for minor sins now were there then,   
	shouldn’t he have warned me he’d even now devastate me for my unpardonable affront?   
	
	I’m a child then, yet already I’ve composed this conscience-beast, who harries me:   
	is there anything else I can say with certainty about who I was, except that I, that he,   
	
	could already draw from infinitesimal transgressions complex chords of remorse,   
	and orchestrate ever undiminishing retribution from the hapless rest of myself?   
	
	
	2.
	
	The son of some friends of my parents has died, and my parents, paying their call,   
	take me along, and I’m sent out with the dead boy’s brother and some others to play.   
	
	We’re joking around, and some words come to my mind, which to my amazement are said.   
	_How do you know when you can laugh when somebody dies, your brother dies?_
	
	is what’s said, and the others go quiet, the backyard goes quiet, everyone stares,   
	and I want to know now why that someone in me who’s me yet not me let me say it.   
	
	Shouldn’t he have told me the contrition cycle would from then be ever upon me,   
	it didn’t matter that I’d really only wanted to know how grief ends, and when?   
	
	
	3.
	
	I could hear the boy’s mother sobbing inside, then stopping, sobbing then stopping.   
	Was the end of her grief already there? Had her someone in her told her it would end?   
	
	Was her someone in her kinder to her, not tearing at her, as mine did, still does, me,   
	for guessing grief someday ends? Is that why her sobbing stopped sometimes?   
	
	She didn’t laugh, though, or I never heard her. _How do you know when you can laugh?_
	Why couldn’t someone have been there in me not just to accuse me, but to explain?   
	
	The kids were playing again, I was playing, I didn’t hear anything more from inside.   
	The way now sometimes what’s in me is silent, too, and sometimes, though never really, forgets.


4. LIGHT

	Another drought morning after a too brief dawn downpour,
	unaccountable silvery glitterings on the leaves of the withering maples--
	
	I think of a troop of the blissful blessed approaching Dante,
	“a hundred spheres shining,” he rhapsodizes, “the purest pearls . . .”
	
	then of the frightening brilliants myriad gleam in my lamp
	of the eyes of the vast swarm of bats I found once in a cave,
	
	a chamber whose walls seethed with a spaceless carpet of creatures,
	their cacophonous, keen, insistent, incessant squeakings and squealings
	
	churning the warm, rank, cloying air; of how one,
	perfectly still among all the fitfully twitching others,
	
	was looking straight at me, gazing solemnly, thoughtfully up
	from beneath the intricate furl of its leathery wings
	
	as though it couldn’t believe I was there, or were trying to place me,
	to situate me in the gnarl we’d evolved from, and now,
	
	the trees still heartrendingly asparkle, Dante again,
	this time the way he’ll refer to a figure he meets as “the life of . . .”
	
	not the soul, or person, the _life_, and once more the bat, and I,
	our lives in that moment together, our lives, our _lives_,
	
	his with no vision of celestial splendor, no poem,
	mine with no flight, no unblundering dash through the dark,
	
	his without realizing it would, so soon, no longer exist,
	mine having to know for us both that everything ends,
	
	world, after-world, even their memory, steamed away
	like the film of uncertain vapor of the last of the luscious rain.


5. THE NAIL

	Some dictator or other had gone into exile, and now reports were coming about his regime,
	the usual crimes, torture, false imprisonment, cruelty and corruption, but then a detail:
	that the way his henchmen had disposed of enemies was by hammering nails into their skulls.
	Horror, then, what mind does after horror, after that first feeling that you’ll never catch your breath,
	mind imagines--how not be annihilated by it?--the preliminary tap, feels it in the tendons of the hand,
	feels the way you do with _your_ nail when you’re fixing something, making something, shelves, a bed;
	the first light tap to set the slant, and then the slightly harder tap, to em-bed the tip a little more . . .
	
	No, no more: this should be happening in myth, in stone, or paint, not in reality, not here;
	it should be an emblem of itself, not itself, something that would mean, not really have to happen,
	something to go out, expand in implication from that unmoved mass of matter in the breast;
	as in the image of an anguished face, in grief for us, not us as us, us as in a myth, a moral tale,
	a way to tell the truth that grief is limitless, a way to tell us we must always understand
	it’s we who do such things, we who set the slant, embed the tip, lift the sledge and drive the nail,
	drive the nail which is the axis upon which turns the brutal human world upon the world.


6. THE RAMPAGE

	a baby got here once who before
	he was all the way out and could already feel the hindu
	pain inside him and the hebrew and the iliad
	decided he was never going to stop crying no matter what
	until they did something he wasn’t going
	to turn the horror
	off in their fat sentences
	and in the light bulb how much murder to get light
	and in the walls agony agony for the bricks for the glaze
	he was going to keep screaming
	until they made death little like he was
	and loved him too and sent
	him back to undo all this
	and it happened
	he kept screaming he scared them he saw them
	filling with womb-light again like stadiums
	he saw the tears sucked back into the story the smiles
	opening like sandwiches
	so he stopped
	and looked up and said all right
	it’s better now
	I’m hungry now I want just to sleep
	and they let him


7. SHAME

	A girl who, in 1971, when I was living by myself, painfully lonely, bereft, depressed, offhandedly mentioned to me in a conversation with some friends that although at first she’d found me--
	
	I can’t remember the term, some dated colloquialism signifying odd, unacceptable, out-of-things--she’d decided that I was after all all right . . . twelve years later she comes back to me from nowhere and I realize that it wasn’t my then irrepressible, unselective, incessant sexual want she meant, which, when we’d been introduced, I’d naturally aimed at her and which she’d easily deflected, but that she’d thought I really was, in myself, the way I looked and spoke and acted, what she was saying, creepy, weird, whatever, and I am taken with a terrible humiliation.


8. TAR

	The first morning of Three Mile Island: those first disquieting, uncertain, mystifying hours.
	All morning a crew of workmen have been tearing the old decrepit roof off our building,
	and all morning, trying to distract myself, I’ve been wandering out to watch them
	as they hack away the leaden layers of asbestos paper and disassemble the disintegrating drains.
	After half a night of listening to the news, wondering how to know a hundred miles downwind
	if and when to make a run for it and where, then a coming bolt awake at seven
	when the roofers we’ve been waiting for since winter sent their ladders shrieking up our wall,
	we still know less than nothing: the utility company continues making little of the accident,
	the slick federal spokesmen still have their evasions in some semblance of order.
	Surely we suspect now we’re being lied to, but in the meantime, there are the roofers,
	setting winch-frames, sledging rounds of tar apart, and there I am, on the curb across, gawking.
	
	I never realized what brutal work it is, how matter-of-factly and harrowingly dangerous.
	The ladders flex and quiver, things skid from the edge, the materials are bulky and recalcitrant.
	When the rusty, antique nails are levered out, their heads pull off; the underroofing crumbles.
	Even the battered little furnace, roaring along as patient as a donkey, chokes and clogs,
	a dense, malignant smoke shoots up, and someone has to fiddle with a cock, then hammer it,
	before the gush and stench will deintensify, the dark, Dantean broth wearily subside.
	In its crucible, the stuff looks bland, like licorice, spill it, though, on your boots or coveralls,
	it sears, and everything is permeated with it, the furnace gunked with burst and half-burst bubbles,
	the men themselves so completely slashed and mucked they seem almost from another realm, like trolls.
	When they take their break, they leave their brooms standing at attention in the asphalt pails,
	work gloves clinging like Br’er Rabbit to the bitten shafts, and they slouch along the precipitous lip,
	the enormous sky behind them, the heavy noontime air alive with shimmers and mirages.
	
	Sometime in the afternoon I had to go inside: the advent of our vigil was upon us.
	However much we didn’t want to, however little we would do about it, we’d understood:
	we were going to perish of all this, if not now, then soon, if not soon, then someday.
	Someday, some final generation, hysterically aswarm beneath an atmosphere as unrelenting as rock,
	would rue us all, anathematize our earthly comforts, curse our surfeits and submissions.
	I think I know, though I might rather not, why my roofers stay so clear to me and why the rest,
	the terror of that time, the reflexive disbelief and distancing, all we should hold on to, dims so.
	I remember the president in his absurd protective booties, looking absolutely unafraid, the fool.
	I remember a woman on the front page glaring across the misty Susquehanna at those looming stacks.
	But, more vividly, the men, silvered with glitter from the shingles, clinging like starlings beneath the eaves.
	Even the leftover carats of tar in the gutter, so black they seemed to suck the light out of the air.
	By nightfall kids had come across them: every sidewalk on the block was scribbled with obscenities and hearts.