*** Karol Wojtyła (1920 - 2005)


1. JOHN BESEECHES HER

	Don’t lower the wave of my heart, 
	it swells to your eyes, mother;
	don’t alter love, but bring the wave to me
	in your translucent hands.
	He asked for this.
	I am John the fisherman. There isn’t much 
	in me to love.
	I feel I am still on that lake shore,
	gravel crunching under my feet--
	and, suddenly--Him.
	You will embrace his mystery in me no more,
	yet quietly I spread round your thoughts like myrtle.
	And calling you Mother--His wish--
	I beseech you: may this word
	never grow less for you.
	True, it’s not easy to measure the meaning 
	of the words he breathed into us both
	so that all earlier love in those words 
	should be concealed.



2. MATERIAL

	I
	
	Listen: the even knocking of hammers,
	so much their own,
	I project on to the people
	to test the strength of each blow.
	Listen now: electric current
	cuts through a river of rock.
	And a thought grows in me day after day:
	the greatness of work is inside man.
	Hard and cracked 
	his hand is differently charged
	by the hammer
	and thought differently unravels in stone
	as human energy splits from the strength of stone
	cutting the bloodstream, an artery
	in the right place.
	Look, how love feeds 
	on this well-grounded anger
	which flows in to people’s breath
	as a river bent by the wind, 
	and which is never spoken, but just breaks high vocal cords.
	Passers-by scuttle off into doorways, 
	someone whispers: “Yet here is a great force.”
	Fear not. Man’s daily deeds have a wide span,
	a strait riverbed can’t imprison them long.
	Fear not. For centuries they all stand in Him, 
	and you look at Him now
	through the even knocking of hammers.
	
	
	II
	
	Bound are the blocks of stone, the low-voltage wire
	cuts deep in their flesh, an invisible whip--
	stones know this violence.
	When an elusive blast rips their ripe compactness
	and tears them from their eternal simplicity,
	the stones know this violence.
	Yet can the current unbind their full strength?
	It is he who carries that strength in his hands:
	the worker.
	
	
	III
	
	Hands are the heart’s landscape. They split sometimes
	like ravines into which an undefined force rolls.
	The very same hands which man only opens 
	when his palms have had their fill of toil.
	Now he sees: because of him alone others can walk in peace.
	Hands are a landscape. When they split, the pain of their sores
	surges free as a stream. 
	But no thought of pain--
	no grandeur in pain alone.
	For his own grandeur he does not know how to name.
	
	
	IV
	
	No, not just hands drooping with the hammer’s weight, 
	not the taut torso, muscles shaping their own style, 
	but thought informing his work,
	deep, knotted in wrinkles on his brow,
	and over his head, joined in a sharp arc, shoulders and veins vaulted.
	So for a moment he is a Gothic building
	cut by a vertical thought born in the eyes.
	No, not a profile alone, 
	not a mere figure between God and the stone,
	sentenced to grandeur and error.



3. OVER THIS, YOUR WHITE GRAVE

	Over this, your white grave
	the flowers of life in white--
	so many years without you--
	how many have passed out of sight?
	Over this your white grave
	covered for years, there is a stir
	in the air, something uplifting
	and, like death, beyond comprehension.
	Over this your white grave
	oh, mother, can such loving cease?
	for all his filial adoration
	a prayer:
	Give her eternal peace--



4. THE QUARRY

	He wasn’t alone. 
	His muscles grew into the flesh of the crowd, energy their pulse,
	As long as they held a hammer, as long as his feet felt the ground.
	And a stone smashed his temples and cut through his heart’s chamber.
	They took his body and walked in a silent line
	Toil still lingered about him, a sense of wrong.
	They wore gray blouses, boots ankle-deep in mud.
	In this, they showed the end.
	How violently his time halted: 
	the pointers on the low voltage dials jerked, 
	then dropped to zero again.
	White stone now within him, eating into his being, 
	taking over enough of him to turn him into stone.
	Who will lift up that stone, 
	unfurl his thoughts again under the cracked temples?
	So plaster cracks on the wall.
	They laid him down, his back on a sheet of gravel.
	His wife came, worn out with worry; his son returned from school
	Should his anger now flow into the anger of others?
	It was maturing in him through his own truth and love 
	Should he be used by those who came after, 
	deprived of substance, unique and deeply his own?
	The stones on the move again; a wagon bruising the flowers.
	Again the electric current cuts deep into the walls. 
	But the man has taken with him the world’s inner structure, 
	where the greater the anger, the higher the explosion of love.
