*** William Wordsworth (1770 - 1850)


1. CHARACTER OF THE HAPPY WARRIOR

	Who is the happy Warrior? Who is he
	That every man in arms should wish to be?
	--It is the generous Spirit, who, when brought
	Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought
	Upon the plan that pleased his boyish thought:
	Whose high endeavours are an inward light
	That makes the path before him always bright;
	Who, with a natural instinct to discern
	What knowledge can perform, is diligent to learn;
	Abides by this resolve, and stops not there,
	But makes his moral being his prime care;
	Who, doomed to go in company with Pain,
	And Fear, and Bloodshed, miserable train!
	Turns his necessity to glorious gain;
	In face of these doth exercise a power
	Which is our human nature’s highest dower:
	Controls them and subdues, transmutes, bereaves
	Of their bad influence, and their good receives:
	By objects, which might force the soul to abate
	Her feeling, rendered more compassionate;
	Is placable--because occasions rise
	So often that demand such sacrifice;
	More skilful in self-knowledge, even more pure,
	As tempted more; more able to endure,
	As more exposed to suffering and distress;
	Thence, also, more alive to tenderness.
	--’Tis he whose law is reason; who depends
	Upon that law as on the best of friends;
	Whence, in a state where men are tempted still
	To evil for a guard against worse ill,
	And what in quality or act is best
	Doth seldom on a right foundation rest,
	He labours good on good to fix, and owes
	To virtue every triumph that he knows:
	--Who, if he rise to station of command,
	Rises by open means; and there will stand
	On honourable terms, or else retire,
	And in himself possess his own desire;
	Who comprehends his trust, and to the same
	Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim;
	And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait
	For wealth, or honours, or for worldly state;
	Whom they must follow; on whose head must fall,
	Like showers of manna, if they come at all:
	Whose powers shed round him in the common strife,
	Or mild concerns of ordinary life,
	A constant influence, a peculiar grace;
	But who, if he be called upon to face
	Some awful moment to which Heaven has joined
	Great issues, good or bad for human kind,
	Is happy as a Lover; and attired
	With sudden brightness, like a Man inspired;
	And, through the heat of conflict, keeps the law
	In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw;
	Or if an unexpected call succeed,
	Come when it will, is equal to the need:
	--He who, though thus endued as with a sense
	And faculty for storm and turbulence,
	Is yet a Soul whose master-bias leans
	To homefelt pleasures and to gentle scenes;
	Sweet images! which, wheresoe’er he be,
	Are at his heart; and such fidelity
	It is his darling passion to approve;
	More brave for this, that he hath much to love:--
	’Tis, finally, the Man, who, lifted high,
	Conspicuous object in a Nation’s eye,
	Or left unthought-of in obscurity,--
	Who, with a toward or untoward lot,
	Prosperous or adverse, to his wish or not--
	Plays, in the many games of life, that one
	Where what he most doth value must be won:
	Whom neither shape or danger can dismay,
	Nor thought of tender happiness betray;
	Who, not content that former worth stand fast,
	Looks forward, persevering to the last,
	From well to better, daily self-surpast:
	Who, whether praise of him must walk the earth
	For ever, and to noble deeds give birth,
	Or he must fall, to sleep without his fame,
	And leave a dead unprofitable name--
	Finds comfort in himself and in his cause;
	And, while the mortal mist is gathering, draws
	His breath in confidence of Heaven’s applause:
	This is the happy Warrior; this is he
	That every man in arms should wish to be.


2. CHILDHOOD AND SCHOOL-TIME

	--Was it for this
	That one, the fairest of all Rivers, lov’d
	To blend his murmurs with my Nurse’s song,
	And from his alder shades and rocky falls,
	And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice
	That flow’d along my dreams? For this, didst Thou,
	O Derwent! travelling over the green Plains
	Near my ‘sweet Birthplace’, didst thou, beauteous Stream
	Make ceaseless music through the night and day
	Which with its steady cadence, tempering
	Our human waywardness, compos’d my thoughts
	To more than infant softness, giving me,
	Among the fretful dwellings of mankind,
	A knowledge, a dim earnest, of the calm
	That Nature breathes among the hills and groves.
	When, having left his Mountains, to the Towers
	Of Cockermouth that beauteous River came,
	Behind my Father’s House he pass’d, close by,
	Along the margin of our Terrace Walk.
	He was a Playmate whom we dearly lov’d.
	Oh! many a time have I, a five years’ Child,
	A naked Boy, in one delightful Rill,
	A little Mill-race sever’d from his stream,
	Made one long bathing of a summer’s day,
	Bask’d in the sun, and plunged, and bask’d again
	Alternate all a summer’s day, or cours’d
	Over the sandy fields, leaping through groves
	Of yellow grunsel, or when crag and hill,
	The woods, and distant Skiddaw’s lofty height,
	Were bronz’d with a deep radiance, stood alone
	Beneath the sky, as if I had been born
	On Indian Plains, and from my Mother’s hut
	Had run abroad in wantonness, to sport,
	A naked Savage, in the thunder shower.
	
	       Fair seed-time had my soul, and I grew up
	Foster’d alike by beauty and by fear;
	Much favour’d in my birthplace, and no less
	In that beloved Vale to which, erelong,
	I was transplanted. Well I call to mind
	(’Twas at an early age, ere I had seen
	Nine summers) when upon the mountain slope
	The frost and breath of frosty wind had snapp’d
	The last autumnal crocus, ’twas my joy
	To wander half the night among the Cliffs
	And the smooth Hollows, where the woodcocks ran
	Along the open turf. In thought and wish
	That time, my shoulder all with springes hung,
	I was a fell destroyer. On the heights
	Scudding away from snare to snare, I plied
	My anxious visitation, hurrying on,
	Still hurrying, hurrying onward; moon and stars
	Were shining o’er my head; I was alone,
	And seem’d to be a trouble to the peace
	That was among them. Sometimes it befel
	In these night-wanderings, that a strong desire
	O’erpower’d my better reason, and the bird
	Which was the captive of another’s toils
	Became my prey; and, when the deed was done
	I heard among the solitary hills
	Low breathings coming after me, and sounds
	Of undistinguishable motion, steps
	Almost as silent as the turf they trod.
	Nor less in springtime when on southern banks
	The shining sun had from his knot of leaves
	Decoy’d the primrose flower, and when the Vales
	And woods were warm, was I a plunderer then
	In the high places, on the lonesome peaks
	Where’er, among the mountains and the winds,
	The Mother Bird had built her lodge. Though mean
	My object, and inglorious, yet the end
	Was not ignoble. Oh! when I have hung
	Above the raven’s nest, by knots of grass
	And half-inch fissures in the slippery rock
	But ill sustain’d, and almost, as it seem’d,
	Suspended by the blast which blew amain,
	Shouldering the naked crag; Oh! at that time,
	While on the perilous ridge I hung alone,
	With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind
	Blow through my ears! the sky seem’d not a sky
	Of earth, and with what motion mov’d the clouds!
	
	       The mind of Man is fram’d even like the breath
	And harmony of music. There is a dark
	Invisible workmanship that reconciles
	Discordant elements, and makes them move
	In one society. Ah me! that all
	The terrors, all the early miseries
	Regrets, vexations, lassitudes, that all
	The thoughts and feelings which have been infus’d
	Into my mind, should ever have made up
	The calm existence that is mine when I
	Am worthy of myself! Praise to the end!
	Thanks likewise for the means! But I believe
	That Nature, oftentimes, when she would frame
	A favor’d Being, from his earliest dawn
	Of infancy doth open out the clouds,
	As at the touch of lightning, seeking him
	With gentlest visitation; not the less,
	Though haply aiming at the self-same end,
	Does it delight her sometimes to employ
	Severer interventions, ministry
	More palpable, and so she dealt with me.
	
	       One evening (surely I was led by her)
	I went alone into a Shepherd’s Boat,
	A Skiff that to a Willow tree was tied
	Within a rocky Cave, its usual home.
	’Twas by the shores of Patterdale, a Vale
	Wherein I was a Stranger, thither come
	A School-boy Traveller, at the Holidays.
	Forth rambled from the Village Inn alone
	No sooner had I sight of this small Skiff,
	Discover’d thus by unexpected chance,
	Than I unloos’d her tether and embark’d.
	The moon was up, the Lake was shining clear
	Among the hoary mountains; from the Shore
	I push’d, and struck the oars and struck again
	In cadence, and my little Boat mov’d on
	Even like a Man who walks with stately step
	Though bent on speed. It was an act of stealth
	And troubled pleasure; not without the voice
	Of mountain-echoes did my Boat move on,
	Leaving behind her still on either side
	Small circles glittering idly in the moon,
	Until they melted all into one track
	Of sparkling light. A rocky Steep uprose
	Above the Cavern of the Willow tree
	And now, as suited one who proudly row’d
	With his best skill, I fix’d a steady view
	Upon the top of that same craggy ridge,
	The bound of the horizon, for behind
	Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky.
	She was an elfin Pinnace; lustily
	I dipp’d my oars into the silent Lake,
	And, as I rose upon the stroke, my Boat
	Went heaving through the water, like a Swan;
	When from behind that craggy Steep, till then
	The bound of the horizon, a huge Cliff,
	As if with voluntary power instinct,
	Uprear’d its head. I struck, and struck again
	And, growing still in stature, the huge Cliff
	Rose up between me and the stars, and still,
	With measur’d motion, like a living thing,
	Strode after me. With trembling hands I turn’d,
	And through the silent water stole my way
	Back to the Cavern of the Willow tree.
	There, in her mooring-place, I left my Bark,
	And, through the meadows homeward went, with grave
	And serious thoughts; and after I had seen
	That spectacle, for many days, my brain
	Work’d with a dim and undetermin’d sense
	Of unknown modes of being; in my thoughts
	There was a darkness, call it solitude,
	Or blank desertion, no familiar shapes
	Of hourly objects, images of trees,
	Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields;
	But huge and mighty Forms that do not live
	Like living men mov’d slowly through the mind
	By day and were the trouble of my dreams.
	
	       Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!
	Thou Soul that art the eternity of thought!
	That giv’st to forms and images a breath
	And everlasting motion! not in vain,
	By day or star-light thus from my first dawn
	Of Childhood didst Thou intertwine for me
	The passions that build up our human Soul,
	Not with the mean and vulgar works of Man,
	But with high objects, with enduring things,
	With life and nature, purifying thus
	The elements of feeling and of thought,
	And sanctifying, by such discipline,
	Both pain and fear, until we recognize
	A grandeur in the beatings of the heart.
	
	       Nor was this fellowship vouchsaf’d to me
	With stinted kindness. In November days,
	When vapours, rolling down the valleys, made
	A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods
	At noon, and ’mid the calm of summer nights,
	When, by the margin of the trembling Lake,
	Beneath the gloomy hills I homeward went
	In solitude, such intercourse was mine;
	’Twas mine among the fields both day and night,
	And by the waters all the summer long.
	
	       And in the frosty season, when the sun
	Was set, and visible for many a mile
	The cottage windows through the twilight blaz’d,
	I heeded not the summons:--happy time
	It was, indeed, for all of us; to me
	It was a time of rapture: clear and loud
	The village clock toll’d six; I wheel’d about,
	Proud and exulting, like an untired horse,
	That cares not for its home.--All shod with steel,
	We hiss’d along the polish’d ice, in games
	Confederate, imitative of the chace
	And woodland pleasures, the resounding horn,
	The Pack loud bellowing, and the hunted hare.
	So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
	And not a voice was idle; with the din,
	Meanwhile, the precipices rang aloud,
	The leafless trees, and every icy crag
	Tinkled like iron, while the distant hills
	Into the tumult sent an alien sound
	Of melancholy, not unnoticed, while the stars,
	Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west
	The orange sky of evening died away.
	
	       Not seldom from the uproar I retired
	Into a silent bay, or sportively
	Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng,
	To cut across the image of a star
	That gleam’d upon the ice: and oftentimes
	When we had given our bodies to the wind,
	And all the shadowy banks, on either side,
	Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still
	The rapid line of motion; then at once
	Have I, reclining back upon my heels,
	Stopp’d short, yet still the solitary Cliffs
	Wheeled by me, even as if the earth had roll’d
	With visible motion her diurnal round;
	Behind me did they stretch in solemn train
	Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watch’d
	Till all was tranquil as a dreamless sleep.
	
	       Ye Presences of Nature, in the sky
	And on the earth! Ye Visions of the hills!
	And Souls of lonely places! can I think
	A vulgar hope was yours when Ye employ’d
	Such ministry, when Ye through many a year
	Haunting me thus among my boyish sports,
	On caves and trees, upon the woods and hills,
	Impress’d upon all forms the characters
	Of danger or desire, and thus did make
	The surface of the universal earth
	With triumph, and delight, and hope, and fear,
	Work like a sea?
	
	                                          Not uselessly employ’d,
	I might pursue this theme through every change
	Of exercise and play, to which the year
	Did summon us in its delightful round.
	
	       We were a noisy crew, the sun in heaven
	Beheld not vales more beautiful than ours,
	Nor saw a race in happiness and joy
	More worthy of the ground where they were sown.
	I would record with no reluctant voice
	The woods of autumn and their hazel bowers
	With milk-white clusters hung; the rod and line,
	True symbol of the foolishness of hope,
	Which with its strong enchantment led us on
	By rocks and pools, shut out from every star
	All the green summer, to forlorn cascades
	Among the windings of the mountain brooks.
	--Unfading recollections! at this hour
	The heart is almost mine with which I felt
	From some hill-top, on sunny afternoons
	The Kite high up among the fleecy clouds
	Pull at its rein, like an impatient Courser,
	Or, from the meadows sent on gusty days,
	Beheld her breast the wind, then suddenly
	Dash’d headlong; and rejected by the storm.
	
	       Ye lowly Cottages in which we dwelt,
	A ministration of your own was yours,
	A sanctity, a safeguard, and a love!
	Can I forget you, being as ye were
	So beautiful among the pleasant fields
	In which ye stood? Or can I here forget
	The plain and seemly countenance with which
	Ye dealt out your plain comforts? Yet had ye
	Delights and exultations of your own.
	Eager and never weary we pursued
	Our home amusements by the warm peat-fire
	At evening; when with pencil and with slate,
	In square divisions parcell’d out, and all
	With crosses and with cyphers scribbled o’er,
	We schemed and puzzled, head opposed to head
	In strife too humble to be named in Verse.
	Or round the naked table, snow-white deal,
	Cherry or maple, sate in close array,
	And to the combat, Lu or Whist, led on
	thick-ribbed Army; not as in the world
	Neglected and ungratefully thrown by
	Even for the very service they had wrought,
	But husbanded through many a long campaign.
	Uncouth assemblage was it, where no few
	Had changed their functions, some, plebeian cards,
	Which Fate beyond the promise of their birth
	Had glorified, and call’d to represent
	The persons of departed Potentates.
	Oh! with what echoes on the Board they fell!
	Ironic Diamonds, Clubs, Hearts, Diamonds, Spades,
	A congregation piteously akin.
	Cheap matter did they give to boyish wit,
	Those sooty knaves, precipitated down
	With scoffs and taunts, like Vulcan out of Heaven,
	The paramount Ace, a moon in her eclipse,
	Queens, gleaming through their splendour’s last decay,
	And Monarchs, surly at the wrongs sustain’d
	By royal visages. Meanwhile, abroad
	The heavy rain was falling, or the frost
	Raged bitterly, with keen and silent tooth,
	And, interrupting oft the impassion’d game,
	From Esthwaite’s neighbouring Lake the splitting ice,
	While it sank down towards the water, sent,
	Among the meadows and the hills, its long
	And dismal yellings, like the noise of wolves
	When they are howling round the Bothnic Main.
	
	       Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace
	How Nature by extrinsic passion first
	Peopled my mind with beauteous forms or grand,
	And made me love them, may I well forget
	How other pleasures have been mine, and joys
	Of subtler origin; how I have felt,
	Not seldom, even in that tempestuous time,
	Those hallow’d and pure motions of the sense
	Which seem, in their simplicity, to own
	An intellectual charm, that calm delight
	Which, if I err not, surely must belong
	To those first-born affinities that fit
	Our new existence to existing things,
	And, in our dawn of being, constitute
	The bond of union betwixt life and joy.
	
	       Yes, I remember, when the changeful earth,
	And twice five seasons on my mind had stamp’d
	The faces of the moving year, even then,
	A Child, I held unconscious intercourse
	With the eternal Beauty, drinking in
	A pure organic pleasure from the lines
	Of curling mist, or from the level plain
	Of waters colour’d by the steady clouds.
	
	       The Sands of Westmoreland, the Creeks and Bays
	Of Cumbria’s rocky limits, they can tell
	How when the Sea threw off his evening shade
	And to the Shepherd’s huts beneath the crags
	Did send sweet notice of the rising moon,
	How I have stood, to fancies such as these,
	Engrafted in the tenderness of thought,
	A stranger, linking with the spectacle
	No conscious memory of a kindred sight,
	And bringing with me no peculiar sense
	Of quietness or peace, yet I have stood,
	Even while mine eye has mov’d o’er three long leagues
	Of shining water, gathering, as it seem’d,
	Through every hair-breadth of that field of light,
	New pleasure, like a bee among the flowers.
	
	       Thus, often in those fits of vulgar joy
	Which, through all seasons, on a child’s pursuits
	Are prompt attendants, ’mid that giddy bliss
	Which, like a tempest, works along the blood
	And is forgotten; even then I felt
	Gleams like the flashing of a shield; the earth
	And common face of Nature spake to me
	Rememberable things; sometimes, ’tis true,
	By chance collisions and quaint accidents
	Like those ill-sorted unions, work suppos’d
	Of evil-minded fairies, yet not vain
	Nor profitless, if haply they impress’d
	Collateral objects and appearances,
	Albeit lifeless then, and doom’d to sleep
	Until maturer seasons call’d them forth
	To impregnate and to elevate the mind.
	--And if the vulgar joy by its own weight
	Wearied itself out of the memory,
	The scenes which were a witness of that joy
	Remained, in their substantial lineaments
	Depicted on the brain, and to the eye
	Were visible, a daily sight; and thus
	By the impressive discipline of fear,
	By pleasure and repeated happiness,
	So frequently repeated, and by force
	Of obscure feelings representative
	Of joys that were forgotten, these same scenes,
	So beauteous and majestic in themselves,
	Though yet the day was distant, did at length
	Become habitually dear, and all
	Their hues and forms were by invisible links
	Allied to the affections.
	
	                                                       I began
	My story early, feeling as I fear,
	The weakness of a human love, for days
	Disown’d by memory, ere the birth of spring
	Planting my snowdrops among winter snows.
	Nor will it seem to thee, my Friend! so prompt
	In sympathy, that I have lengthen’d out,
	With fond and feeble tongue, a tedious tale.
	Meanwhile, my hope has been that I might fetch
	Invigorating thoughts from former years,
	Might fix the wavering balance of my mind,
	And haply meet reproaches, too, whose power
	May spur me on, in manhood now mature,
	To honorable toil. Yet should these hopes
	Be vain, and thus should neither I be taught
	To understand myself, nor thou to know
	With better knowledge how the heart was fram’d
	Of him thou lovest, need I dread from thee
	Harsh judgments, if I am so loth to quit
	Those recollected hours that have the charm
	Of visionary things, and lovely forms
	And sweet sensations that throw back our life
	And almost make our Infancy itself
	A visible scene, on which the sun is shining?
	
	       One end hereby at least hath been attain’d,
	My mind hath been revived, and if this mood
	Desert me not, I will forthwith bring down,
	Through later years, the story of my life.
	The road lies plain before me; ’tis a theme
	Single and of determined bounds; and hence
	I chuse it rather at this time, than work
	Of ampler or more varied argument.


3. A COMPLAINT

	There is a change--and I am poor;
	Your love hath been, nor long ago,
	A fountain at my fond heart’s door,
	Whose only business was to flow;
	And flow it did; not taking heed
	Of its own bounty, or my need.
	
	What happy moments did I count!
	Blest was I then all bliss above!
	Now, for that consecrated fount
	Of murmuring, sparkling, living love,
	What have I? shall I dare to tell?
	A comfortless and hidden well.
	
	A well of love--it may be deep--
	I trust it is,--and never dry:
	What matter? if the waters sleep
	In silence and obscurity.
	--Such change, and at the very door
	Of my fond heart, hath made me poor.


4. COMPOSED UPON WESTMINSTER BRIDGE

	Earth has not any thing to show more fair:
	Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
	A sight so touching in its majesty:
	This City now doth, like a garment, wear
	The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
	Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
	Open unto the fields, and to the sky;
	All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
	Never did sun more beautifully steep
	In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill;
	Ne’er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
	The river glideth at his own sweet will:
	Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
	And all that mighty heart is lying still!


5. ELEGIAC STANZAS

	_Suggested by a Picture of Peele Castle in a Storm, Painted by Sir George Beaumont_
	
	I was thy neighbour once, thou rugged Pile! 
	Four summer weeks I dwelt in sight of thee: 
	I saw thee every day; and all the while 
	Thy Form was sleeping on a glassy sea. 
	
	So pure the sky, so quiet was the air! 
	So like, so very like, was day to day! 
	Whene’er I looked, thy Image still was there; 
	It trembled, but it never passed away. 
	
	How perfect was the calm! it seemed no sleep; 
	No mood, which season takes away, or brings: 
	I could have fancied that the mighty Deep 
	Was even the gentlest of all gentle things. 
	
	Ah! _then_, if mine had been the Painter’s hand, 
	To express what then I saw; and add the gleam, 
	The light that never was, on sea or land, 
	The consecration, and the Poet’s dream; 
	
	I would have planted thee, thou hoary Pile 
	Amid a world how different from this! 
	Beside a sea that could not cease to smile; 
	On tranquil land, beneath a sky of bliss. 
	
	Thou shouldst have seemed a treasure-house divine 
	Of peaceful years; a chronicle of heaven;--
	Of all the sunbeams that did ever shine 
	The very sweetest had to thee been given. 
	
	A Picture had it been of lasting ease, 
	Elysian quiet, without toil or strife; 
	No motion but the moving tide, a breeze, 
	Or merely silent Nature’s breathing life. 
	
	Such, in the fond illusion of my heart, 
	Such Picture would I at that time have made: 
	And seen the soul of truth in every part, 
	A steadfast peace that might not be betrayed. 
	
	So once it would have been,--’tis so no more; 
	I have submitted to a new control: 
	A power is gone, which nothing can restore; 
	A deep distress hath humanised my Soul. 
	
	Not for a moment could I now behold 
	A smiling sea, and be what I have been: 
	The feeling of my loss will ne’er be old; 
	This, which I know, I speak with mind serene. 
	
	Then, Beaumont, Friend! who would have been the Friend, 
	If he had lived, of Him whom I deplore, 
	This work of thine I blame not, but commend; 
	This sea in anger, and that dismal shore. 
	
	O ’tis a passionate Work!--yet wise and well, 
	Well chosen is the spirit that is here; 
	That Hulk which labours in the deadly swell, 
	This rueful sky, this pageantry of fear! 
	
	And this huge Castle, standing here sublime, 
	I love to see the look with which it braves, 
	Cased in the unfeeling armour of old time, 
	The lightning, the fierce wind, the trampling waves. 
	
	Farewell, farewell the heart that lives alone, 
	Housed in a dream, at distance from the Kind! 
	Such happiness, wherever it be known, 
	Is to be pitied; for ’tis surely blind. 
	
	But welcome fortitude, and patient cheer, 
	And frequent sights of what is to be borne! 
	Such sights, or worse, as are before me here.--
	Not without hope we suffer and we mourn. 


6. EXTEMPORE EFFUSION

	_Upon the death of James Hogg_
	
	When first, descending from the moorlands, 
	I saw the Stream of Yarrow glide 
	Along a bare and open valley, 
	The Ettrick Shepherd was my guide. 
	
	When last along its banks I wandered, 
	Through groves that had begun to shed 
	Their golden leaves upon the pathways, 
	My steps the Border-minstrel led. 
	
	The mighty Minstrel breathes no longer, 
	’Mid mouldering ruins low he lies; 
	And death upon the braes of Yarrow, 
	Has closed the Shepherd-poet’s eyes: 
	
	Nor has the rolling year twice measured, 
	From sign to sign, its stedfast course, 
	Since every mortal power of Coleridge 
	Was frozen at its marvellous source; 
	
	The rapt One, of the godlike forehead, 
	The heaven-eyed creature sleeps in earth: 
	And Lamb, the frolic and the gentle, 
	Has vanished from his lonely hearth. 
	
	Like clouds that rake the mountain-summits, 
	Or waves that own no curbing hand, 
	How fast has brother followed brother, 
	From sunshine to the sunless land! 
	
	Yet I, whose lids from infant slumber 
	Were earlier raised, remain to hear 
	A timid voice, that asks in whispers, 
	“Who next will drop and disappear?” 
	
	Our haughty life is crowned with darkness, 
	Like London with its own black wreath, 
	On which with thee, O Crabbe! forth-looking, 
	I gazed from Hampstead’s breezy heath. 
	
	As if but yesterday departed, 
	Thou too art gone before; but why, 
	O’er ripe fruit, seasonably gathered, 
	Should frail survivors heave a sigh? 
	
	Mourn rather for that holy Spirit, 
	Sweet as the spring, as ocean deep; 
	For Her who, ere her summer faded, 
	Has sunk into a breathless sleep. 
	
	No more of old romantic sorrows, 
	For slaughtered Youth or love-lorn Maid! 
	With sharper grief is Yarrow smitten, 
	And Ettrick mourns with her their Poet dead. 


7. THE GREEN LINNET

	Beneath these fruit-tree boughs that shed 
	Their snow-white blossoms on my head, 
	With brightest sunshine round me spread 
	Of spring’s unclouded weather, 
	In this sequestered nook how sweet 
	To sit upon my orchard-seat! 
	And birds and flowers once more to greet, 
	My last year’s friends together. 
	
	One have I marked, the happiest guest 
	In all this covert of the blest: 
	Hail to Thee, far above the rest 
	In joy of voice and pinion! 
	Thou, Linnet! in thy green array, 
	Presiding Spirit here to-day, 
	Dost lead the revels of the May; 
	And this is thy dominion. 
	
	While birds, and butterflies, and flowers, 
	Make all one band of paramours, 
	Thou, ranging up and down the bowers, 
	Art sole in thy employment: 
	A Life, a Presence like the Air, 
	Scattering thy gladness without care, 
	Too blest with any one to pair; 
	Thyself thy own enjoyment. 
	
	Amid yon tuft of hazel trees, 
	That twinkle to the gusty breeze, 
	Behold him perched in ecstasies, 
	Yet seeming still to hover; 
	There! where the flutter of his wings 
	Upon his back and body flings 
	Shadows and sunny glimmerings, 
	That cover him all over. 
	
	My dazzled sight he oft deceives, 
	A brother of the dancing leaves; 
	Then flits, and from the cottage-eaves 
	Pours forth his song in gushes; 
	As if by that exulting strain 
	He mocked and treated with disdain 
	The voiceless Form he chose to feign, 
	While fluttering in the bushes. 


8. I TRAVELLED AMONG UNKNOWN MEN

	I travelled among unknown men, 
	In lands beyond the sea; 
	Nor, England! did I know till then 
	What love I bore to thee. 
	
	’Tis past, that melancholy dream! 
	Nor will I quit thy shore 
	A second time; for still I seem 
	To love thee more and more. 
	
	Among thy mountains did I feel 
	The joy of my desire; 
	And she I cherished turned her wheel 
	Beside an English fire. 
	
	Thy mornings showed, thy nights concealed, 
	The bowers where Lucy played; 
	And thine too is the last green field 
	That Lucy’s eyes surveyed. 


9. I WANDERED LONELY AS A CLOUD

	I wandered lonely as a cloud
	That floats on high o’er vales and hills,
	When all at once I saw a crowd,
	A host, of golden daffodils;
	Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
	Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.
	
	Continuous as the stars that shine
	And twinkle on the milky way,
	They stretched in never-ending line
	Along the margin of a bay:
	Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
	Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.
	
	The waves beside them danced; but they
	Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:
	A poet could not but be gay,
	In such a jocund company:
	I gazed--and gazed--but little thought
	What wealth the show to me had brought:
	
	For oft, when on my couch I lie
	In vacant or in pensive mood,
	They flash upon that inward eye
	Which is the bliss of solitude;
	And then my heart with pleasure fills,
	And dances with the daffodils.


10. INFLUENCE OF NATURAL OBJECTS

	_In Calling Forth and Strengthening the Imagination in Boyhood and Early Youth_
	
	Wisdom and Spirit of the universe! 
	Thou Soul, that art the Eternity of thought! 
	And giv’st to forms and images a breath 
	And everlasting motion! not in vain, 
	By day or star-light, thus from my first dawn 
	Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me 
	The passions that build up our human soul; 
	Not with the mean and vulgar works of Man; 
	But with high objects, with enduring things, 
	With life and nature; purifying thus 
	The elements of feeling and of thought, 
	And sanctifying by such discipline 
	Both pain and fear,--until we recognise 
	A grandeur in the beatings of the heart. 
	
	Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me 
	With stinted kindness. In November days, 
	When vapours rolling down the valleys made 
	A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods 
	At noon; and ’mid the calm of summer nights, 
	When, by the margin of the trembling lake, 
	Beneath the gloomy hills, homeward I went 
	In solitude, such intercourse was mine: 
	Mine was it in the fields both day and night, 
	And by the waters, all the summer long. 
	And in the frosty season, when the sun 
	Was set, and, visible for many a mile, 
	The cottage-windows through the twilight blazed, 
	I heeded not the summons: happy time 
	It was indeed for all of us; for me 
	It was a time of rapture! Clear and loud 
	The village-clock tolled six--I wheeled about, 
	Proud and exulting like an untired horse 
	That cares not for his home.--All shod with steel 
	We hissed along the polished ice, in games 
	Confederate, imitative of the chase 
	And woodland pleasures,--the resounding horn, 
	The pack loud-chiming, and the hunted hare. 
	So through the darkness and the cold we flew, 
	And not a voice was idle; with the din 
	Smitten, the precipices rang aloud; 
	The leafless trees and every icy crag 
	Tinkled like iron; while far-distant hills 
	Into the tumult sent an alien sound 
	Of melancholy, not unnoticed while the stars, 
	Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west 
	The orange sky of evening died away. 
	
	Not seldom from the uproar I retired 
	Into a silent bay, or sportively 
	Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng, 
	To cut across the reflex of a star; 
	Image, that, flying still before me, gleamed 
	Upon the glassy plain: and oftentimes, 
	When we had given our bodies to the wind, 
	And all the shadowy banks on either side 
	Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still 
	The rapid line of motion, then at once 
	Have I, reclining back upon my heels, 
	Stopped short; yet still the solitary cliffs 
	Wheeled by me--even as if the earth had rolled 
	With visible motion her diurnal round! 
	Behind me did they stretch in solemn train, 
	Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched 
	Till all was tranquil as a summer sea. 


11. INSIDE OF KING’S COLLEGE CHAPEL

	Tax not the royal Saint with vain expense,
	With ill-matched aims the Architect who planned--
	Albeit labouring for a scanty band
	Of white-robed Scholars only--this immense
	And glorious Work of fine intelligence!
	Give all thou canst; high Heaven rejects the lore
	Of nicely-calculated less or more;
	So deemed the man who fashioned for the sense
	These lofty pillars, spread that branching roof
	Self-poised, and scooped into ten thousand cells,
	Where light and shade repose, where music dwells
	Lingering--and wandering on as loth to die;
	Like thoughts whose very sweetness yieldeth proof
	That they were born for immortality.


12. IT IS A BEAUTEOUS EVENING, CALM AND FREE

	It is a beauteous evening, calm and free, 
	The holy time is quiet as a Nun 
	Breathless with adoration; the broad sun 
	Is sinking down in its tranquility; 
	The gentleness of heaven broods o’er the Sea; 
	Listen! the mighty Being is awake, 
	And doth with his eternal motion make 
	A sound like thunder--everlastingly. 
	Dear child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here, 
	If thou appear untouched by solemn thought, 
	Thy nature is not therefore less divine: 
	Thou liest in Abraham’s bosom all the year; 
	And worshipp’st at the Temple’s inner shrine, 
	God being with thee when we know it not. 


13. IT IS NOT TO BE THOUGHT OF

	It is not to be thought of that the Flood
	Of British freedom, which, to the open sea
	Of the world’s praise, from dark antiquity
	Hath flowed, “with pomp of waters, unwithstood,”
	Roused though it be full often to a mood
	Which spurns the check of salutary bands,
	That this most famous Stream in bogs and sands
	Should perish; and to evil and to good
	Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung
	Armoury of the invincible Knights of old:
	We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
	That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold
	Which Milton held.--In every thing we are sprung
	Of Earth’s first blood, have titles manifold.


14. LAODAMIA

	“With sacrifice before the rising morn 
	Vows have I made by fruitless hope inspired; 
	And from the infernal Gods, ’mid shades forlorn 
	Of night, my slaughtered Lord have I required: 
	Celestial pity I again implore;--
	Restore him to my sight--great Jove, restore!” 
	
	So speaking, and by fervent love endowed 
	With faith, the Suppliant heavenward lifts her hands; 
	While, like the sun emerging from a cloud, 
	Her countenance brightens--and her eye expands; 
	Her bosom heaves and spreads, her stature grows; 
	As she expects the issue in repose. 
	
	O terror! what hath she perceived?--O joy! 
	What doth she look on?--whom doth she behold? 
	Her Hero slain upon the beach of Troy? 
	His vital presence? his corporeal mould? 
	It is--if sense deceive her not--’tis He! 
	And a God leads him, wingèd Mercury! 
	
	Mild Hermes spake--and touched her with his wand 
	That calms all fear; “Such grace hath crowned thy prayer, 
	Laodamía! that at Jove’s command 
	Thy husband walks the paths of upper air: 
	He comes to tarry with thee three hours’ space; 
	Accept the gift, behold him face to face!” 
	
	Forth sprang the impassioned Queen her Lord to clasp; 
	Again that consummation she essayed; 
	But unsubstantial Form eludes her grasp 
	As often as that eager grasp was made. 
	The Phantom parts--but parts to re-unite, 
	And re-assume his place before her sight. 
	
	“Protesiláus, lo! thy guide is gone! 
	Confirm, I pray, the vision with thy voice: 
	This is our palace,--yonder is thy throne; 
	Speak, and the floor thou tread’st on will rejoice. 
	Not to appal me have the gods bestowed 
	This precious boon; and blest a sad abode.” 
	
	“Great Jove, Laodamía! doth not leave 
	His gifts imperfect:--Spectre though I be, 
	I am not sent to scare thee or deceive; 
	But in reward of thy fidelity. 
	And something also did my worth obtain; 
	For fearless virtue bringeth boundless gain. 
	
	“Thou knowest, the Delphic oracle foretold 
	That the first Greek who touched the Trojan strand 
	Should die; but me the threat could not withhold: 
	A generous cause a victim did demand; 
	And forth I leapt upon the sandy plain; 
	A self-devoted chief--by Hector slain.” 
	
	“Supreme of Heroes--bravest, noblest, best! 
	Thy matchless courage I bewail no more, 
	Which then, when tens of thousands were deprest 
	By doubt, propelled thee to the fatal shore; 
	Thou found’st--and I forgive thee--here thou art--
	A nobler counsellor than my poor heart. 
	
	“But thou, though capable of sternest deed, 
	Wert kind as resolute, and good as brave; 
	And he, whose power restores thee, hath decreed 
	Thou should’st elude the malice of the grave: 
	Redundant are thy locks, thy lips as fair 
	As when their breath enriched Thessalian air. 
	
	“No spectre greets me,--no vain Shadow this; 
	Come, blooming Hero, place thee by my side! 
	Give, on this well-known couch, one nuptial kiss 
	To me, this day a second time thy bride!” 
	Jove frowned in heaven: the conscious Parcæ threw 
	Upon those roseate lips a Stygian hue. 
	
	“This visage tells thee that my doom is past: 
	Nor should the change be mourned, even if the joys 
	Of sense were able to return as fast 
	And surely as they vanish. Earth destroys 
	Those raptures duly---Erebus disdains: 
	Calm pleasures there abide--majestic pains. 
	
	“Be taught, O faithful Consort, to control 
	Rebellious passion: for the Gods approve 
	The depth, and not the tumult, of the soul; 
	A fervent, not ungovernable love. 
	Thy transports moderate; and meekly mourn 
	When I depart, for brief is my sojourn--” 
	
	“Ah wherefore?--Did not Hercules by force 
	Wrest from the guardian monster of the tomb 
	Alcestis, a reanimated corse, 
	Given back to dwell on earth in vernal bloom? 
	Medea’s spells dispersed the weight of years, 
	And Æson stood a youth ’mid youthful peers. 
	
	“The Gods to us are merciful--and they 
	Yet further may relent: for mightier far 
	Than strength of nerve and sinew, or the sway 
	Of magic potent over sun and star, 
	Is love, though oft to agony distrest, 
	And though his favourite seat be feeble woman’s breast. 
	
	“But if thou goest, I follow--” “Peace!” he said,--
	She looked upon him and was calmed and cheered; 
	The ghastly colour from his lips had fled; 
	In his deportment, shape, and mien, appeared 
	Elysian beauty, melancholy grace, 
	Brought from a pensive though a happy place. 
	
	He spake of love, such love as Spirits feel 
	In worlds whose course is equable and pure; 
	No fears to beat away--no strife to heal--
	The past unsighed for, and the future sure; 
	Spake of heroic arts in graver mood 
	Revived, with finer harmony pursued; 
	
	Of all that is most beauteous--imaged there 
	In happier beauty; more pellucid streams, 
	An ampler ether, a diviner air, 
	And fields invested with purpureal gleams; 
	Climes which the sun, who sheds the brightest day 
	Earth knows, is all unworthy to survey. 
	
	Yet there the Soul shall enter which hath earned 
	That privilege by virtue.--“Ill,” said he, 
	“The end of man’s existence I discerned, 
	Who from ignoble games and revelry 
	Could draw, when we had parted, vain delight, 
	While tears were thy best pastime, day and night; 
	
	“And while my youthful peers before my eyes 
	(Each hero following his peculiar bent) 
	Prepared themselves for glorious enterprise 
	By martial sports,--or, seated in the tent, 
	Chieftains and kings in council were detained; 
	What time the fleet at Aulis lay enchained. 
	
	“The wished-for wind was given:--I then revolved 
	The oracle, upon the silent sea; 
	And, if no worthier led the way, resolved 
	That, of a thousand vessels, mine should be 
	The foremost prow in pressing to the strand,--
	Mine the first blood that tinged the Trojan sand. 
	
	“Yet bitter, oft-times bitter, was the pang 
	When of thy loss I thought, belovèd Wife! 
	On thee too fondly did my memory hang, 
	And on the joys we shared in mortal life,--
	The paths which we had trod--these fountains, flowers: 
	My new-planned cities, and unfinished towers. 
	
	“But should suspense permit the Foe to cry, 
	‘Behold they tremble!--haughty their array, 
	Yet of their numbers no one dares to die?’ 
	In soul I swept the indignity away: 
	Old frailties then recurred:--but lofty thought, 
	In act embodied, my deliverance wrought. 
	
	“And Thou, though strong in love, art all too weak 
	In reason, in self-government too slow; 
	I counsel thee by fortitude to seek 
	Our blest re-union in the shades below. 
	The invisible world with thee hath sympathised; 
	Be thy affections raised and solemnised. 
	
	“Learn, by a mortal yearning, to ascend--
	Seeking a higher object. Love was given, 
	Encouraged, sanctioned, chiefly for that end; 
	For this the passion to excess was driven--
	That self might be annulled: her bondage prove 
	The fetters of a dream opposed to love.--
	
	Aloud she shrieked! for Hermes re-appears! 
	Round the dear Shade she would have clung--’tis vain: 
	The hours are past--too brief had they been years; 
	And him no mortal effort can detain: 
	Swift, toward the realms that know not earthly day, 
	He through the portal takes his silent way, 
	And on the palace-floor a lifeless corse She lay. 
	
	Thus, all in vain exhorted and reproved, 
	She perished; and, as for a wilful crime, 
	By the just Gods whom no weak pity moved, 
	Was doomed to wear out her appointed time, 
	Apart from happy Ghosts, that gather flowers 
	Of blissful quiet ’mid unfading bowers. 
	
	--Yet tears to human suffering are due; 
	And mortal hopes defeated and o’erthrown 
	Are mourned by man, and not by man alone, 
	As fondly he believes.--Upon the side 
	Of Hellespont (such faith was entertained) 
	A knot of spiry trees for ages grew 
	From out the tomb of him for whom she died; 
	And ever, when such stature they had gained 
	That Ilium’s walls were subject to their view, 
	The trees’ tall summits withered at the sight; 
	A constant interchange of growth and blight! 


15. LINES COMPOSED A FEW MILES ABOVE TINTERN ABBEY

	Five years have past; five summers, with the length
	Of five long winters! and again I hear
	These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs
	With a soft inland murmur.--Once again
	Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs,
	That on a wild secluded scene impress
	Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect
	The landscape with the quiet of the sky.
	The day is come when I again repose
	Here, under this dark sycamore, and view
	These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts,
	Which at this season, with their unripe fruits,
	Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves
	’Mid groves and copses. Once again I see
	These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines
	Of sportive wood run wild: these pastoral farms,
	Green to the very door; and wreaths of smoke
	Sent up, in silence, from among the trees!
	With some uncertain notice, as might seem
	Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods,
	Or of some Hermit’s cave, where by his fire
	The Hermit sits alone.
	
	                                              These beauteous forms,
	Through a long absence, have not been to me
	As is a landscape to a blind man’s eye:
	But oft, in lonely rooms, and ’mid the din
	Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,
	In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,
	Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart;
	And passing even into my purer mind
	With tranquil restoration:--feelings too
	Of unremembered pleasure: such, perhaps,
	As have no slight or trivial influence
	On that best portion of a good man’s life,
	His little, nameless, unremembered, acts
	Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust,
	To them I may have owed another gift,
	Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood,
	In which the burthen of the mystery,
	In which the heavy and the weary weight
	Of all this unintelligible world,
	Is lightened:--that serene and blessed mood,
	In which the affections gently lead us on,--
	Until, the breath of this corporeal frame
	And even the motion of our human blood
	Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
	In body, and become a living soul:
	While with an eye made quiet by the power
	Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
	We see into the life of things.
	
	                                                        If this
	Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft--
	In darkness and amid the many shapes
	Of joyless daylight; when the fretful stir
	Unprofitable, and the fever of the world,
	Have hung upon the beatings of my heart--
	How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee,
	O sylvan Wye! thou wanderer thro’ the woods,
	         How often has my spirit turned to thee!
	
	   And now, with gleams of half-extinguished thought,
	With many recognitions dim and faint,
	And somewhat of a sad perplexity,
	The picture of the mind revives again:
	While here I stand, not only with the sense
	Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts
	That in this moment there is life and food
	For future years. And so I dare to hope,
	Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when first
	I came among these hills; when like a roe
	I bounded o’er the mountains, by the sides
	Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,
	Wherever nature led: more like a man
	Flying from something that he dreads, than one
	Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then
	(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days
	And their glad animal movements all gone by)
	To me was all in all.--I cannot paint
	What then I was. The sounding cataract
	Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,
	The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
	Their colours and their forms, were then to me
	An appetite; a feeling and a love,
	That had no need of a remoter charm,
	By thought supplied, nor any interest
	Unborrowed from the eye.--That time is past,
	And all its aching joys are now no more,
	And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this
	Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts
	Have followed; for such loss, I would believe,
	Abundant recompense. For I have learned
	To look on nature, not as in the hour
	Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes
	The still sad music of humanity,
	Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power
	To chasten and subdue.--And I have felt
	A presence that disturbs me with the joy
	Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
	Of something far more deeply interfused,
	Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
	And the round ocean and the living air,
	And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:
	A motion and a spirit, that impels
	All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
	And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
	A lover of the meadows and the woods
	And mountains; and of all that we behold
	From this green earth; of all the mighty world
	Of eye, and ear,--both what they half create,
	And what perceive; well pleased to recognise
	In nature and the language of the sense
	The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
	The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
	Of all my moral being.
	
	                                            Nor perchance,
	If I were not thus taught, should I the more
	Suffer my genial spirits to decay:
	For thou art with me here upon the banks
	Of this fair river; thou my dearest Friend,
	My dear, dear Friend; and in thy voice I catch
	The language of my former heart, and read
	My former pleasures in the shooting lights
	Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while
	May I behold in thee what I was once,
	My dear, dear Sister! and this prayer I make,
	Knowing that Nature never did betray
	The heart that loved her; ’tis her privilege,
	Through all the years of this our life, to lead
	From joy to joy: for she can so inform
	The mind that is within us, so impress
	With quietness and beauty, and so feed
	With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
	Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,
	Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
	The dreary intercourse of daily life,
	Shall e’er prevail against us, or disturb
	Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold
	Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon
	Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;
	And let the misty mountain-winds be free
	To blow against thee: and, in after years,
	When these wild ecstasies shall be matured
	Into a sober pleasure; when thy mind
	Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms,
	Thy memory be as a dwelling-place
	For all sweet sounds and harmonies; oh! then,
	If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief,
	Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts
	Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,
	And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance--
	If I should be where I no more can hear
	Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams
	Of past existence--wilt thou then forget
	That on the banks of this delightful stream
	We stood together; and that I, so long
	A worshipper of Nature, hither came
	Unwearied in that service: rather say
	With warmer love--oh! with far deeper zeal
	Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget,
	That after many wanderings, many years
	Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs,
	And this green pastoral landscape, were to me
	More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake!


16. LINES WRITTEN IN EARLY SPRING

	I heard a thousand blended notes, 
	While in a grove I sate reclined, 
	In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
	Bring sad thoughts to the mind. 
	
	To her fair works did Nature link 
	The human soul that through me ran; 
	And much it grieved my heart to think 
	What man has made of man. 
	
	Through primrose tufts, in that green bower, 
	The periwinkle trailed its wreaths; 
	And ’tis my faith that every flower 
	Enjoys the air it breathes. 
	
	The birds around me hopped and played, 
	Their thoughts I cannot measure:-- 
	But the least motion which they made 
	It seemed a thrill of pleasure. 
	
	The budding twigs spread out their fan, 
	To catch the breezy air; 
	And I must think, do all I can, 
	That there was pleasure there. 
	
	If this belief from heaven be sent, 
	If such be Nature’s holy plan, 
	Have I not reason to lament 
	What man has made of man?


17. LONDON, 1802

	Milton! thou shouldst be living at this hour:
	England hath need of thee: she is a fen
	Of stagnant waters: altar, sword, and pen,
	Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower,
	Have forfeited their ancient English dower
	Of inward happiness. We are selfish men;
	Oh! raise us up, return to us again;
	And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.
	Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart:
	Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea:
	Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,
	So didst thou travel on life’s common way,
	In cheerful godliness; and yet thy heart
	The lowliest duties on herself did lay.


18. MOST SWEET IT IS

	Most sweet it is with unuplifted eyes
	To pace the ground, if path be there or none,
	While a fair region round the traveller lies
	Which he forbears again to look upon;
	Pleased rather with some soft ideal scene,
	The work of Fancy, or some happy tone
	Of meditation, slipping in between
	The beauty coming and the beauty gone.
	If Thought and Love desert us, from that day
	Let us break off all commerce with the Muse:
	With Thought and Love companions of our way,
	Whate’er the senses take or may refuse,
	The Mind’s internal heaven shall shed her dews
	Of inspiration on the humblest lay.


19. MUTABILITY

	From low to high doth dissolution climb, 
	And sink from high to low, along a scale 
	Of awful notes, whose concord shall not fail; 
	A musical but melancholy chime, 
	Which they can hear who meddle not with crime, 
	Nor avarice, nor over-anxious care. 
	Truth fails not; but her outward forms that bear 
	The longest date do melt like frosty rime, 
	That in the morning whitened hill and plain 
	And is no more; drop like the tower sublime 
	Of yesterday, which royally did wear 
	His crown of weeds, but could not even sustain 
	Some casual shout that broke the silent air, 
	Or the unimaginable touch of Time. 


20. NOVEMBER

	Another year!--another deadly blow!
	Another mighty Empire overthrown!
	And We are left, or shall be left, alone;
	The last that dare to struggle with the Foe.
	’Tis well! from this day forward we shall know
	That in ourselves our safety must be sought;
	That by our own right hands it must be wrought;
	That we must stand unpropped, or be laid low.
	O dastard whom such foretaste doth not cheer!
	We shall exult, if they who rule the land
	Be men who hold its many blessings dear,
	Wise, upright, valiant; not a servile band,
	Who are to judge of danger which they fear,
	And honour which they do not understand.


21. NUNS FRET NOT

	Nuns fret not at their convent’s narrow room;
	And hermits are contented with their cells;
	And students with their pensive citadels;
	Maids at the wheel, the weaver at his loom,
	Sit blithe and happy; bees that soar for bloom,
	High as the highest Peak of Furness-fells,
	Will murmur by the hour in foxglove bells:
	In truth the prison, into which we doom
	Ourselves, no prison is: and hence for me,
	In sundry moods, ’twas pastime to be bound
	Within the Sonnet’s scanty plot of ground;
	Pleased if some Souls (for such there needs must be)
	Who have felt the weight of too much liberty,
	Should find brief solace there, as I have found.


22. NUTTING

	--It seems a day
	(I speak of one from many singled out)
	One of those heavenly days that cannot die;
	When, in the eagerness of boyish hope,
	I left our cottage-threshold, sallying forth
	With a huge wallet o’er my shoulders slung,
	A nutting-crook in hand; and turned my steps
	Tow’rd some far-distant wood, a Figure quaint,
	Tricked out in proud disguise of cast-off weeds
	Which for that service had been husbanded,
	By exhortation of my frugal Dame--
	Motley accoutrement, of power to smile
	At thorns, and brakes, and brambles,--and, in truth,
	More ragged than need was! O’er pathless rocks,
	Through beds of matted fern, and tangled thickets,
	Forcing my way, I came to one dear nook
	Unvisited, where not a broken bough
	Drooped with its withered leaves, ungracious sign
	Of devastation; but the hazels rose
	Tall and erect, with tempting clusters hung,
	A virgin scene!--A little while I stood,
	Breathing with such suppression of the heart
	As joy delights in; and, with wise restraint
	Voluptuous, fearless of a rival, eyed
	The banquet;--or beneath the trees I sate
	Among the flowers, and with the flowers I played;
	A temper known to those, who, after long
	And weary expectation, have been blest
	With sudden happiness beyond all hope.
	Perhaps it was a bower beneath whose leaves
	The violets of five seasons re-appear
	And fade, unseen by any human eye;
	Where fairy water-breaks do murmur on
	For ever; and I saw the sparkling foam,
	And--with my cheek on one of those green stones
	That, fleeced with moss, under the shady trees,
	Lay round me, scattered like a flock of sheep--
	I heard the murmur, and the murmuring sound,
	In that sweet mood when pleasure loves to pay
	Tribute to ease; and, of its joy secure,
	The heart luxuriates with indifferent things,
	Wasting its kindliness on stocks and stones,
	And on the vacant air. Then up I rose,
	And dragged to earth both branch and bough, with crash
	And merciless ravage: and the shady nook
	Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower,
	Deformed and sullied, patiently gave up
	Their quiet being: and, unless I now
	Confound my present feelings with the past;
	Ere from the mutilated bower I turned
	Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings,
	I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
	The silent trees, and saw the intruding sky.--
	Then, dearest Maiden, move along these shades
	In gentleness of heart; with gentle hand
	Touch--for there is a spirit in the woods.


23. OCTOBER

	These times strike monied worldlings with dismay:
	Even rich men, brave by nature, taint the air
	With words of apprehension and despair:
	While tens of thousands, thinking on the affray,
	Men unto whom sufficient for the day
	And minds not stinted or untilled are given,
	Sound, healthy, children of the God of heaven,
	Are cheerful as the rising sun in May.
	What do we gather hence but firmer faith
	That every gift of noble origin
	Is breathed upon by Hope’s perpetual breath;
	That virtue and the faculties within
	Are vital,--and that riches are akin
	To fear, to change, to cowardice, and death?


24. ODE

	There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream,
	       The earth, and every common sight,
	                          To me did seem
	                      Apparelled in celestial light,
	            The glory and the freshness of a dream.
	It is not now as it hath been of yore;--
	                      Turn wheresoe’er I may,
	                          By night or day.
	The things which I have seen I now can see no more.
	
	                      The Rainbow comes and goes,
	                      And lovely is the Rose,
	                      The Moon doth with delight
	       Look round her when the heavens are bare,
	                      Waters on a starry night
	                      Are beautiful and fair;
	       The sunshine is a glorious birth;
	       But yet I know, where’er I go,
	That there hath past away a glory from the earth.
	
	Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song,
	       And while the young lambs bound
	                      As to the tabor’s sound,
	To me alone there came a thought of grief:
	A timely utterance gave that thought relief,
	                      And I again am strong:
	The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep;
	No more shall grief of mine the season wrong;
	I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng,
	       The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep,
	                      And all the earth is gay;
	                           Land and sea
	                Give themselves up to jollity,
	                      And with the heart of May
	                 Doth every Beast keep holiday;--
	                      Thou Child of Joy,
	Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy.
	
	Ye blessèd creatures, I have heard the call
	      Ye to each other make; I see
	The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee;
	      My heart is at your festival,
	            My head hath its coronal,
	The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.
	                      Oh evil day! if I were sullen
	                      While Earth herself is adorning,
	                         This sweet May-morning,
	                      And the Children are culling
	                         On every side,
	In a thousand valleys far and wide,
	                      Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,
	And the Babe leaps up on his Mother’s arm:--
	                      I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!
	                      --But there’s a Tree, of many, one,
	A single field which I have looked upon,
	Both of them speak of something that is gone;
	                      The Pansy at my feet
	                      Doth the same tale repeat:
	Whither is fled the visionary gleam?
	Where is it now, the glory and the dream?
	
	Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
	The Soul that rises with us, our life’s Star,
	                      Hath had elsewhere its setting,
	                         And cometh from afar:
	                      Not in entire forgetfulness,
	                      And not in utter nakedness,
	But trailing clouds of glory do we come
	                      From God, who is our home:
	Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
	Shades of the prison-house begin to close
	                      Upon the growing Boy,
	But he beholds the light, and whence it flows,
	                      He sees it in his joy;
	The Youth, who daily farther from the east
	                      Must travel, still is Nature’s Priest,
	                      And by the vision splendid
	                      Is on his way attended;
	At length the Man perceives it die away,
	And fade into the light of common day.
	
	Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own;
	Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind,
	                      And, even with something of a Mother’s mind,
	                      And no unworthy aim,
	The homely Nurse doth all she can
	To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man,
	                      Forget the glories he hath known,
	And that imperial palace whence he came.
	
	Behold the Child among his new-born blisses,
	A six years’ Darling of a pigmy size!
	See, where ’mid work of his own hand he lies,
	Fretted by sallies of his mother’s kisses,
	With light upon him from his father’s eyes!
	See, at his feet, some little plan or chart,
	Some fragment from his dream of human life,
	Shaped by himself with newly-learn{e}d art
	                      A wedding or a festival,
	                      A mourning or a funeral;
	                         And this hath now his heart,
	                      And unto this he frames his song:
	                         Then will he fit his tongue
	To dialogues of business, love, or strife;
	                      But it will not be long
	                      Ere this be thrown aside,
	                      And with new joy and pride
	The little Actor cons another part;
	Filling from time to time his “humorous stage”
	With all the Persons, down to palsied Age,
	That Life brings with her in her equipage;
	                      As if his whole vocation
	                      Were endless imitation.
	
	Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie
	                      Thy Soul’s immensity;
	Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep
	Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind,
	That, deaf and silent, read’st the eternal deep,
	Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--
	                      Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!
	                      On whom those truths do rest,
	Which we are toiling all our lives to find,
	In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave;
	Thou, over whom thy Immortality
	Broods like the Day, a Master o’er a Slave,
	A Presence which is not to be put by;
	Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might
	Of heaven-born freedom on thy being’s height,
	Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke
	The years to bring the inevitable yoke,
	Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?
	Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight,
	And custom lie upon thee with a weight,
	Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!
	
	                      O joy! that in our embers
	                      Is something that doth live,
	                      That Nature yet remembers
	What was so fugitive!
	The thought of our past years in me doth breed
	Perpetual benediction: not indeed
	For that which is most worthy to be blest;
	Delight and liberty, the simple creed
	Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest,
	With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--
	                      Not for these I raise
	                      The song of thanks and praise
	                But for those obstinate questionings
	                Of sense and outward things,
	                Fallings from us, vanishings;
	                Blank misgivings of a Creature
	Moving about in worlds not realised,
	High instincts before which our mortal Nature
	Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised:
	                      But for those first affections,
	                      Those shadowy recollections,
	                Which, be they what they may
	Are yet the fountain-light of all our day,
	Are yet a master-light of all our seeing;
	                Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make
	Our noisy years seem moments in the being
	Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake,
	                To perish never;
	Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour,
	                      Nor Man nor Boy,
	Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
	Can utterly abolish or destroy!
	                Hence in a season of calm weather
	                      Though inland far we be,
	Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea
	                      Which brought us hither,
	                Can in a moment travel thither,
	And see the Children sport upon the shore,
	And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.
	
	Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!
	                      And let the young Lambs bound
	                      As to the tabor’s sound!
	We in thought will join your throng,
	                      Ye that pipe and ye that play,
	                      Ye that through your hearts to-day
	                      Feel the gladness of the May!
	What though the radiance which was once so bright
	Be now for ever taken from my sight,
	                Though nothing can bring back the hour
	Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower;
	                      We will grieve not, rather find
	                      Strength in what remains behind;
	                      In the primal sympathy
	                      Which having been must ever be;
	                      In the soothing thoughts that spring
	                      Out of human suffering;
	                      In the faith that looks through death,
	In years that bring the philosophic mind.
	And O, ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves,
	Forebode not any severing of our loves!
	Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;
	I only have relinquished one delight
	To live beneath your more habitual sway.
	I love the Brooks which down their channels fret,
	Even more than when I tripped lightly as they;
	The innocent brightness of a new-born Day
	                      Is lovely yet;
	The Clouds that gather round the setting sun
	Do take a sober colouring from an eye
	That hath kept watch o’er man’s mortality;
	Another race hath been, and other palms are won.
	Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
	Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears,
	To me the meanest flower that blows can give
	Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.


25. ODE TO DUTY

	_Jam non consilio bonus, sed more eo perductus, ut non tantum recte facere possim, sed nisi recte facere non possim“_
	
	“I am no longer good through deliberate intent, but by long habit have reached a point where I am not only able to do right, but am unable to do anything but what is right.“ 
	--_Seneca, Letters 120.10_
	
	Stern Daughter of the Voice of God! 
	O Duty! if that name thou love 
	Who art a light to guide, a rod 
	To check the erring, and reprove; 
	Thou, who art victory and law 
	When empty terrors overawe; 
	From vain temptations dost set free; 
	And calm’st the weary strife of frail humanity! 
	
	There are who ask not if thine eye 
	Be on them; who, in love and truth, 
	Where no misgiving is, rely 
	Upon the genial sense of youth: 
	Glad Hearts! without reproach or blot; 
	Who do thy work, and know it not: 
	Oh! if through confidence misplaced 
	They fail, thy saving arms, dread Power! around them cast. 
	
	Serene will be our days and bright, 
	And happy will our nature be, 
	When love is an unerring light, 
	And joy its own security. 
	And they a blissful course may hold 
	Even now, who, not unwisely bold, 
	Live in the spirit of this creed; 
	Yet seek thy firm support, according to their need. 
	
	I, loving freedom, and untried; 
	No sport of every random gust, 
	Yet being to myself a guide, 
	Too blindly have reposed my trust: 
	And oft, when in my heart was heard 
	Thy timely mandate, I deferred 
	The task, in smoother walks to stray; 
	But thee I now would serve more strictly, if I may. 
	
	Through no disturbance of my soul, 
	Or strong compunction in me wrought, 
	I supplicate for thy control; 
	But in the quietness of thought: 
	Me this unchartered freedom tires; 
	I feel the weight of chance-desires: 
	My hopes no more must change their name, 
	I long for a repose that ever is the same. 
	
	Stern Lawgiver! yet thou dost wear 
	The Godhead’s most benignant grace; 
	Nor know we anything so fair 
	As is the smile upon thy face: 
	Flowers laugh before thee on their beds 
	And fragrance in thy footing treads; 
	Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong; 
	And the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are fresh and strong. 
	
	To humbler functions, awful Power! 
	I call thee: I myself commend 
	Unto thy guidance from this hour; 
	Oh, let my weakness have an end! 
	Give unto me, made lowly wise, 
	The spirit of self-sacrifice; 
	The confidence of reason give; 
	And in the light of truth thy Bondman let me live!


26. ON THE DEPARTURE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT

	A trouble, not of clouds, or weeping rain,
	Nor of the setting sun’s pathetic light
	Engendered, hangs o’er Eildon’s triple height:
	Spirits of Power, assembled there, complain
	For kindred Power departing from their sight;
	While Tweed, best pleased in chanting a blithe strain,
	Saddens his voice again, and yet again.
	Lift up your hearts, ye Mourners! for the might
	Of the whole world’s good wishes with him goes;
	Blessings and prayers in nobler retinue
	Than sceptred king or laurelled conqueror knows,
	Follow this wondrous Potentate. Be true,
	Ye winds of ocean, and the midland sea,
	Wafting your Charge to soft Parthenope!


27. ON THE EXTINCTION OF THE VENETIAN REPUBLIC

	Once did She hold the gorgeous east in fee;
	And was the safeguard of the west: the worth
	Of Venice did not fall below her birth,
	Venice, the eldest Child of Liberty.
	She was a maiden City, bright and free;
	No guile seduced, no force could violate;
	And, when she took unto herself a Mate,
	She must espouse the everlasting Sea.
	And what if she had seen those glories fade,
	Those titles vanish, and that strength decay;
	Yet shall some tribute of regret be paid
	When her long life hath reached its final day:
	Men are we, and must grieve when even the Shade
	Of that which once was great is passed away.


28. THE POWER OF ARMIES IS A VISIBLE THING

	The power of Armies is a visible thing,
	Formal and circumscribed in time and space;
	But who the limits of that power shall trace
	Which a brave People into light can bring
	Or hide, at will,--for freedom combating
	By just revenge inflamed? No foot may chase,
	No eye can follow, to a fatal place
	That power, that spirit, whether on the wing
	Like the strong wind, or sleeping like the wind
	Within its awful caves.--From year to year
	Springs this indigenous produce far and near;
	No craft this subtle element can bind,
	Rising like water from the soil, to find
	In every nook a lip that it may cheer.


29. RESOLUTION AND INDEPENDENCE

	There was a roaring in the wind all night; 
	The rain came heavily and fell in floods; 
	But now the sun is rising calm and bright; 
	The birds are singing in the distant woods; 
	Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods; 
	The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters; 
	And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters. 
	
	All things that love the sun are out of doors; 
	The sky rejoices in the morning’s birth; 
	The grass is bright with rain-drops;--on the moors 
	The hare is running races in her mirth; 
	And with her feet she from the plashy earth 
	Raises a mist, that, glittering in the sun, 
	Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run. 
	
	I was a Traveller then upon the moor; 
	I saw the hare that raced about with joy; 
	I heard the woods and distant waters roar; 
	Or heard them not, as happy as a boy: 
	The pleasant season did my heart employ: 
	My old remembrances went from me wholly; 
	And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy. 
	
	But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might 
	Of joys in minds that can no further go, 
	As high as we have mounted in delight 
	In our dejection do we sink as low; 
	To me that morning did it happen so; 
	And fears and fancies thick upon me came; 
	Dim sadness--and blind thoughts, I knew not, nor could name. 
	
	I heard the sky-lark warbling in the sky; 
	And I bethought me of the playful hare: 
	Even such a happy Child of earth am I; 
	Even as these blissful creatures do I fare; 
	Far from the world I walk, and from all care; 
	But there may come another day to me-- 
	Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty. 
	
	My whole life I have lived in pleasant thought, 
	As if life’s business were a summer mood; 
	As if all needful things would come unsought 
	To genial faith, still rich in genial good; 
	But how can He expect that others should 
	Build for him, sow for him, and at his call 
	Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all? 
	
	I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy, 
	The sleepless Soul that perished in his pride; 
	Of Him who walked in glory and in joy 
	Following his plough, along the mountain-side: 
	By our own spirits are we deified: 
	We Poets in our youth begin in gladness; 
	But thereof come in the end despondency and madness. 
	
	Now, whether it were by peculiar grace, 
	A leading from above, a something given, 
	Yet it befell that, in this lonely place, 
	When I with these untoward thoughts had striven, 
	Beside a pool bare to the eye of heaven 
	I saw a Man before me unawares: 
	The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs. 
	
	As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie 
	Couched on the bald top of an eminence; 
	Wonder to all who do the same espy, 
	By what means it could thither come, and whence; 
	So that it seems a thing endued with sense: 
	Like a sea-beast crawled forth, that on a shelf 
	Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself; 
	
	Such seemed this Man, not all alive nor dead, 
	Nor all asleep--in his extreme old age: 
	His body was bent double, feet and head 
	Coming together in life’s pilgrimage; 
	As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage 
	Of sickness felt by him in times long past, 
	A more than human weight upon his frame had cast. 
	
	Himself he propped, limbs, body, and pale face, 
	Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood: 
	And, still as I drew near with gentle pace, 
	Upon the margin of that moorish flood 
	Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, 
	That heareth not the loud winds when they call, 
	And moveth all together, if it move at all. 
	
	At length, himself unsettling, he the pond 
	Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look 
	Upon the muddy water, which he conned, 
	As if he had been reading in a book: 
	And now a stranger’s privilege I took; 
	And, drawing to his side, to him did say, 
	“This morning gives us promise of a glorious day.“ 
	
	A gentle answer did the old Man make, 
	In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew: 
	And him with further words I thus bespake, 
	“What occupation do you there pursue? 
	This is a lonesome place for one like you.“ 
	Ere he replied, a flash of mild surprise 
	Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes. 
	
	His words came feebly, from a feeble chest, 
	But each in solemn order followed each, 
	With something of a lofty utterance drest-- 
	Choice word and measured phrase, above the reach 
	Of ordinary men; a stately speech; 
	Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use, 
	Religious men, who give to God and man their dues. 
	
	He told, that to these waters he had come 
	To gather leeches, being old and poor: 
	Employment hazardous and wearisome! 
	And he had many hardships to endure: 
	From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor; 
	Housing, with God’s good help, by choice or chance; 
	And in this way he gained an honest maintenance. 
	
	The old Man still stood talking by my side; 
	But now his voice to me was like a stream 
	Scarce heard; nor word from word could I divide; 
	And the whole body of the Man did seem 
	Like one whom I had met with in a dream; 
	Or like a man from some far region sent, 
	To give me human strength, by apt admonishment. 
	
	My former thoughts returned: the fear that kills; 
	And hope that is unwilling to be fed; 
	Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills; 
	And mighty Poets in their misery dead. 
	--Perplexed, and longing to be comforted, 
	My question eagerly did I renew, 
	“How is it that you live, and what is it you do?“ 
	
	He with a smile did then his words repeat; 
	And said that, gathering leeches, far and wide 
	He travelled; stirring thus about his feet 
	The waters of the pools where they abide. 
	“Once I could meet with them on every side; 
	But they have dwindled long by slow decay; 
	Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may.“ 
	
	While he was talking thus, the lonely place, 
	The old Man’s shape, and speech--all troubled me: 
	In my mind’s eye I seemed to see him pace 
	About the weary moors continually, 
	Wandering about alone and silently. 
	While I these thoughts within myself pursued, 
	He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed. 
	
	And soon with this he other matter blended, 
	Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind, 
	But stately in the main; and, when he ended, 
	I could have laughed myself to scorn to find 
	In that decrepit Man so firm a mind. 
	“God,“ said I, “be my help and stay secure; 
	I’ll think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor!”


30. THE REVERIE OF POOR SUSAN

	At the corner of Wood Street, when daylight appears, 
	Hangs a Thrush that sings loud, it has sung for three years: 
	Poor Susan has passed by the spot, and has heard 
	In the silence of morning the song of the Bird. 
	
	’Tis a note of enchantment; what ails her? She sees 
	A mountain ascending, a vision of trees; 
	Bright volumes of vapour through Lothbury glide, 
	And a river flows on through the vale of Cheapside. 
	
	Green pastures she views in the midst of the dale, 
	Down which she so often has tripped with her pail; 
	And a single small cottage, a nest like a dove’s, 
	The one only dwelling on earth that she loves. 
	
	She looks, and her heart is in heaven: but they fade, 
	The mist and the river, the hill and the shade: 
	The stream will not flow, and the hill will not rise, 
	And the colours have all passed away from her eyes! 


31. SCHOOL-TIME CONTINUED

	Thus far, O Friend! have we, though leaving much 
	Unvisited, endeavour’d to retrace 
	My life through its first years, and measured back 
	The way I travell’d when I first began 
	To love the woods and fields; the passion yet 
	Was in its birth, sustain’d, as might befal, 
	By nourishment that came unsought, for still, 
	From week to week, from month to month, we liv’d 
	A round of tumult: duly were our games 
	Prolong’d in summer till the day-light fail’d; 
	No chair remain’d before the doors, the bench 
	And threshold steps were empty; fast asleep 
	The Labourer, and the old Man who had sate, 
	A later lingerer, yet the revelry 
	Continued, and the loud uproar: at last, 
	When all the ground was dark, and the huge clouds 
	Were edged with twinkling stars, to bed we went, 
	With weary joints, and with a beating mind. 
	Ah! is there one who ever has been young, 
	Nor needs a monitory voice to tame 
	The pride of virtue, and of intellect? 
	And is there one, the wisest and the best 
	Of all mankind, who does not sometimes wish 
	For things which cannot be, who would not give, 
	If so he might, to duty and to truth 
	The eagerness of infantine desire? 
	A tranquillizing spirit presses now 
	On my corporeal frame: so wide appears 
	The vacancy between me and those days, 
	Which yet have such self-presence in my mind 
	That, sometimes, when I think of them, I seem 
	Two consciousnesses, conscious of myself 
	And of some other Being. A grey Stone 
	Of native rock, left midway in the Square 
	Of our small market Village, was the home 
	And centre of these joys, and when, return’d 
	After long absence, thither I repair’d, 
	I found that it was split, and gone to build 
	A smart Assembly-room that perk’d and flar’d 
	With wash and rough-cast elbowing the ground 
	Which had been ours. But let the fiddle scream, 
	And be ye happy! yet, my Friends! I know 
	That more than one of you will think with me 
	Of those soft starry nights, and that old Dame 
	From whom the stone was nam’d who there had sate 
	And watch’d her Table with its huckster’s wares 
	Assiduous, thro’ the length of sixty years. 
	
	We ran a boisterous race; the year span round 
	With giddy motion. But the time approach’d 
	That brought with it a regular desire 
	For calmer pleasures, when the beauteous forms 
	Of Nature were collaterally attach’d 
	To every scheme of holiday delight, 
	And every boyish sport, less grateful else, 
	And languidly pursued. 
	
	When summer came 
	It was the pastime of our afternoons 
	To beat along the plain of Windermere 
	With rival oars, and the selected bourne 
	Was now an Island musical with birds 
	That sang for ever; now a Sister Isle 
	Beneath the oaks’ umbrageous covert, sown 
	With lillies of the valley, like a field; 
	And now a third small Island where remain’d 
	An old stone Table, and a moulder’d Cave, 
	A Hermit’s history. In such a race, 
	So ended, disappointment could be none, 
	Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy: 
	We rested in the shade, all pleas’d alike, 
	Conquer’d and Conqueror. Thus the pride of strength, 
	And the vain-glory of superior skill 
	Were interfus’d with objects which subdu’d 
	And temper’d them, and gradually produc’d 
	A quiet independence of the heart. 
	And to my Friend, who knows me, I may add, 
	Unapprehensive of reproof, that hence 
	Ensu’d a diffidence and modesty, 
	And I was taught to feel, perhaps too much, 
	The self-sufficing power of solitude. 
	
	No delicate viands sapp’d our bodily strength; 
	More than we wish’d we knew the blessing then 
	Of vigorous hunger, for our daily meals 
	Were frugal, Sabine fare! and then, exclude 
	A little weekly stipend, and we lived 
	Through three divisions of the quarter’d year 
	In pennyless poverty. But now, to School 
	Return’d, from the half-yearly holidays, 
	We came with purses more profusely fill’d, 
	Allowance which abundantly suffic’d 
	To gratify the palate with repasts 
	More costly than the Dame of whom I spake, 
	That ancient Woman, and her board supplied. 
	Hence inroads into distant Vales, and long 
	Excursions far away among the hills, 
	Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground, 
	Or in the woods, or near a river side, 
	Or by some shady fountain, while soft airs 
	Among the leaves were stirring, and the sun 
	Unfelt, shone sweetly round us in our joy. 
	
	Nor is my aim neglected, if I tell 
	How twice in the long length of those half-years 
	We from our funds, perhaps, with bolder hand 
	Drew largely, anxious for one day, at least, 
	To feel the motion of the galloping Steed; 
	And with the good old Inn-keeper, in truth, 
	On such occasion sometimes we employ’d 
	Sly subterfuge; for the intended bound 
	Of the day’s journey was too distant far 
	For any cautious man, a Structure famed 
	Beyond its neighbourhood, the antique Walls 
	Of that large Abbey which within the vale 
	Of Nightshade, to St. Mary’s honour built, 
	Stands yet, a mouldering Pile, with fractured Arch, 
	Belfry, and Images, and living Trees, 
	A holy Scene! along the smooth green turf 
	Our Horses grazed: to more than inland peace 
	Left by the sea wind passing overhead 
	(Though wind of roughest temper) trees and towers 
	May in that Valley oftentimes be seen, 
	Both silent and both motionless alike; 
	Such is the shelter that is there, and such 
	The safeguard for repose and quietness. 
	
	Our steeds remounted, and the summons given, 
	With whip and spur we by the Chauntry flew 
	In uncouth race, and left the cross-legg’d Knight, 
	And the stone-Abbot, and that single Wren 
	Which one day sang so sweetly in the Nave 
	Of the old Church, that, though from recent showers 
	The earth was comfortless, and, touch’d by faint 
	Internal breezes, sobbings of the place, 
	And respirations, from the roofless walls 
	The shuddering ivy dripp’d large drops, yet still, 
	So sweetly ’mid the gloom the invisible Bird 
	Sang to itself, that there I could have made 
	My dwelling-place, and liv’d for ever there 
	To hear such music. Through the Walls we flew 
	And down the valley, and a circuit made 
	In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth 
	We scamper’d homeward. Oh! ye Rocks and Streams, 
	And that still Spirit of the evening air! 
	Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt 
	Your presence, when with slacken’d step we breath’d 
	Along the sides of the steep hills, or when, 
	Lighted by gleams of moonlight from the sea, 
	We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand. 
	
	Upon the Eastern Shore of Windermere, 
	Above the crescent of a pleasant Bay, 
	There stood an Inn, no homely-featured Shed, 
	Brother of the surrounding Cottages, 
	But ’twas a splendid place, the door beset 
	With Chaises, Grooms, and Liveries, and within 
	Decanters, Glasses, and the blood-red Wine. 
	In ancient times, or ere the Hall was built 
	On the large Island, had this Dwelling been 
	More worthy of a Poet’s love, a Hut, 
	Proud of its one bright fire, and sycamore shade. 
	But though the rhymes were gone which once inscribed 
	The threshold, and large golden characters 
	On the blue-frosted Signboard had usurp’d 
	The place of the old Lion, in contempt 
	And mockery of the rustic painter’s hand, 
	Yet to this hour the spot to me is dear 
	With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay 
	Upon a slope surmounted by the plain 
	Of a small Bowling-green; beneath us stood 
	A grove; with gleams of water through the trees 
	And over the tree-tops; nor did we want 
	Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream. 
	And there, through half an afternoon, we play’d 
	On the smooth platform, and the shouts we sent 
	Made all the mountains ring. But ere the fall 
	Of night, when in our pinnace we return’d 
	Over the dusky Lake, and to the beach 
	Of some small Island steer’d our course with one, 
	The Minstrel of our troop, and left him there, 
	And row’d off gently, while he blew his flute 
	Alone upon the rock; Oh! then the calm 
	And dead still water lay upon my mind 
	Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky 
	Never before so beautiful, sank down 
	Into my heart, and held me like a dream. 
	
	Thus daily were my sympathies enlarged, 
	And thus the common range of visible things 
	Grew dear to me: already I began 
	To love the sun, a Boy I lov’d the sun, 
	Not as I since have lov’d him, as a pledge 
	And surety of our earthly life, a light 
	Which while we view we feel we are alive; 
	But, for this cause, that I had seen him lay 
	His beauty on the morning hills, had seen 
	The western mountain touch his setting orb, 
	In many a thoughtless hour, when, from excess 
	Of happiness, my blood appear’d to flow 
	With its own pleasure, and I breath’d with joy. 
	And from like feelings, humble though intense, 
	To patriotic and domestic love 
	Analogous, the moon to me was dear; 
	For I would dream away my purposes, 
	Standing to look upon her while she hung 
	Midway between the hills, as if she knew 
	No other region; but belong’d to thee, 
	Yea, appertain’d by a peculiar right 
	To thee and thy grey huts, my darling Vale! 
	
	Those incidental charms which first attach’d 
	My heart to rural objects, day by day 
	Grew weaker, and I hasten on to tell 
	How Nature, intervenient till this time, 
	And secondary, now at length was sought 
	For her own sake. But who shall parcel out 
	His intellect, by geometric rules, 
	Split, like a province, into round and square? 
	Who knows the individual hour in which 
	His habits were first sown, even as a seed, 
	Who that shall point, as with a wand, and say, 
	’This portion of the river of my mind 
	Came from yon fountain?’ Thou, my Friend! art one 
	More deeply read in thy own thoughts; to thee 
	Science appears but, what in truth she is, 
	Not as our glory and our absolute boast, 
	But as a succedaneum, and a prop 
	To our infirmity. Thou art no slave 
	Of that false secondary power, by which, 
	In weakness, we create distinctions, then 
	Deem that our puny boundaries are things 
	Which we perceive, and not which we have made. 
	To thee, unblinded by these outward shows, 
	The unity of all has been reveal’d 
	And thou wilt doubt with me, less aptly skill’d 
	Than many are to class the cabinet 
	Of their sensations, and, in voluble phrase, 
	Run through the history and birth of each, 
	As of a single independent thing. 
	Hard task to analyse a soul, in which, 
	Not only general habits and desires, 
	But each most obvious and particular thought, 
	Not in a mystical and idle sense, 
	But in the words of reason deeply weigh’d, 
	Hath no beginning. 
	
	Bless’d the infant Babe, 
	(For with my best conjectures I would trace 
	The progress of our Being) blest the Babe, 
	Nurs’d in his Mother’s arms, the Babe who sleeps 
	Upon his Mother’s breast, who, when his soul 
	Claims manifest kindred with an earthly soul, 
	Doth gather passion from his Mother’s eye! 
	Such feelings pass into his torpid life 
	Like an awakening breeze, and hence his mind 
	Even [in the first trial of its powers] 
	Is prompt and watchful, eager to combine 
	In one appearance, all the elements 
	And parts of the same object, else detach’d 
	And loth to coalesce. Thus, day by day, 
	Subjected to the discipline of love, 
	His organs and recipient faculties 
	Are quicken’d, are more vigorous, his mind spreads, 
	Tenacious of the forms which it receives. 
	In one beloved presence, nay and more, 
	In that most apprehensive habitude 
	And those sensations which have been deriv’d 
	From this beloved Presence, there exists 
	A virtue which irradiates and exalts 
	All objects through all intercourse of sense. 
	No outcast he, bewilder’d and depress’d; 
	Along his infant veins are interfus’d 
	The gravitation and the filial bond 
	Of nature, that connect him with the world. 
	Emphatically such a Being lives, 
	An inmate of this active universe; 
	From nature largely he receives; nor so 
	Is satisfied, but largely gives again, 
	For feeling has to him imparted strength, 
	And powerful in all sentiments of grief, 
	Of exultation, fear, and joy, his mind, 
	Even as an agent of the one great mind, 
	Creates, creator and receiver both, 
	Working but in alliance with the works 
	Which it beholds.--Such, verily, is the first 
	Poetic spirit of our human life; 
	By uniform control of after years 
	In most abated or suppress’d, in some, 
	Through every change of growth or of decay, 
	Pre-eminent till death. 
	
	From early days, 
	Beginning not long after that first time 
	In which, a Babe, by intercourse of touch, 
	I held mute dialogues with my Mother’s heart 
	I have endeavour’d to display the means 
	Whereby this infant sensibility, 
	Great birthright of our Being, was in me 
	Augmented and sustain’d. Yet is a path 
	More difficult before me, and I fear 
	That in its broken windings we shall need 
	The chamois’ sinews, and the eagle’s wing: 
	For now a trouble came into my mind 
	From unknown causes. I was left alone, 
	Seeking the visible world, nor knowing why. 
	The props of my affections were remov’d, 
	And yet the building stood, as if sustain’d 
	By its own spirit! All that I beheld 
	Was dear to me, and from this cause it came, 
	That now to Nature’s finer influxes 
	My mind lay open, to that more exact 
	And intimate communion which our hearts 
	Maintain with the minuter properties 
	Of objects which already are belov’d, 
	And of those only. Many are the joys 
	Of youth; but oh! what happiness to live 
	When every hour brings palpable access 
	Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight, 
	And sorrow is not there. The seasons came, 
	And every season to my notice brought 
	A store of transitory qualities 
	Which, but for this most watchful power of love 
	Had been neglected, left a register 
	Of permanent relations, else unknown, 
	Hence life, and change, and beauty, solitude 
	More active, even, than ’best society’, 
	Society made sweet as solitude 
	By silent inobtrusive sympathies, 
	And gentle agitations of the mind 
	From manifold distinctions, difference 
	Perceived in things, where to the common eye, 
	No difference is; and hence, from the same source 
	Sublimer joy; for I would walk alone, 
	In storm and tempest, or in starlight nights 
	Beneath the quiet Heavens; and, at that time, 
	Have felt whate’er there is of power in sound 
	To breathe an elevated mood, by form 
	Or image unprofaned; and I would stand, 
	Beneath some rock, listening to sounds that are 
	The ghostly language of the ancient earth, 
	Or make their dim abode in distant winds. 
	Thence did I drink the visionary power. 
	I deem not profitless those fleeting moods 
	Of shadowy exultation: not for this, 
	That they are kindred to our purer mind 
	And intellectual life; but that the soul, 
	Remembering how she felt, but what she felt 
	Remembering not, retains an obscure sense 
	Of possible sublimity, to which, 
	With growing faculties she doth aspire, 
	With faculties still growing, feeling still 
	That whatsoever point they gain, they still 
	Have something to pursue. 
	
	And not alone, 
	In grandeur and in tumult, but no less 
	In tranquil scenes, that universal power 
	And fitness in the latent qualities 
	And essences of things, by which the mind 
	Is mov’d by feelings of delight, to me 
	Came strengthen’d with a superadded soul, 
	A virtue not its own. My morning walks 
	Were early; oft, before the hours of School 
	I travell’d round our little Lake, five miles 
	Of pleasant wandering, happy time! more dear 
	For this, that one was by my side, a Friend 
	Then passionately lov’d; with heart how full 
	Will he peruse these lines, this page, perhaps 
	A blank to other men! for many years 
	Have since flow’d in between us; and our minds, 
	Both silent to each other, at this time 
	We live as if those hours had never been. 
	Nor seldom did I lift our cottage latch 
	Far earlier, and before the vernal thrush 
	Was audible, among the hills I sate 
	Alone, upon some jutting eminence 
	At the first hour of morning, when the Vale 
	Lay quiet in an utter solitude. 
	How shall I trace the history, where seek 
	The origin of what I then have felt? 
	Oft in these moments such a holy calm 
	Did overspread my soul, that I forgot 
	That I had bodily eyes, and what I saw 
	Appear’d like something in myself, a dream, 
	A prospect in my mind. 
	
	’Twere long to tell 
	What spring and autumn, what the winter snows, 
	And what the summer shade, what day and night, 
	The evening and the morning, what my dreams 
	And what my waking thoughts supplied, to nurse 
	That spirit of religious love in which 
	I walked with Nature. But let this, at least 
	Be not forgotten, that I still retain’d 
	My first creative sensibility, 
	That by the regular action of the world 
	My soul was unsubdu’d. A plastic power 
	Abode with me, a forming hand, at times 
	Rebellious, acting in a devious mood, 
	A local spirit of its own, at war 
	With general tendency, but for the most 
	Subservient strictly to the external things 
	With which it commun’d. An auxiliar light 
	Came from my mind which on the setting sun 
	Bestow’d new splendor, the melodious birds, 
	The gentle breezes, fountains that ran on, 
	Murmuring so sweetly in themselves, obey’d 
	A like dominion; and the midnight storm 
	Grew darker in the presence of my eye. 
	Hence by obeisance, my devotion hence, 
	And hence my transport. 
	
	Nor should this, perchance, 
	Pass unrecorded, that I still have lov’d 
	The exercise and produce of a toil 
	Than analytic industry to me 
	More pleasing, and whose character I deem 
	Is more poetic as resembling more 
	Creative agency. I mean to speak 
	Of that interminable building rear’d 
	By observation of affinities 
	In objects where no brotherhood exists 
	To common minds. My seventeenth year was come 
	And, whether from this habit, rooted now 
	So deeply in my mind, or from excess 
	Of the great social principle of life, 
	Coercing all things into sympathy, 
	To unorganic natures I transferr’d 
	My own enjoyments, or, the power of truth 
	Coming in revelation, I convers’d 
	With things that really are, I, at this time 
	Saw blessings spread around me like a sea. 
	Thus did my days pass on, and now at length 
	From Nature and her overflowing soul 
	I had receiv’d so much that all my thoughts 
	Were steep’d in feeling; I was only then 
	Contented when with bliss ineffable 
	I felt the sentiment of Being spread 
	O’er all that moves, and all that seemeth still, 
	O’er all, that, lost beyond the reach of thought 
	And human knowledge, to the human eye 
	Invisible, yet liveth to the heart, 
	O’er all that leaps, and runs, and shouts, and sings, 
	Or beats the gladsome air, o’er all that glides 
	Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself 
	And mighty depth of waters. Wonder not 
	If such my transports were; for in all things 
	I saw one life, and felt that it was joy. 
	One song they sang, and it was audible, 
	Most audible then when the fleshly ear, 
	O’ercome by grosser prelude of that strain, 
	Forgot its functions, and slept undisturb’d. 
	
	If this be error, and another faith 
	Find easier access to the pious mind, 
	Yet were I grossly destitute of all 
	Those human sentiments which make this earth 
	So dear, if I should fail, with grateful voice 
	To speak of you, Ye Mountains and Ye Lakes, 
	And sounding Cataracts! Ye Mists and Winds 
	That dwell among the hills where I was born. 
	If, in my youth, I have been pure in heart, 
	If, mingling with the world, I am content 
	With my own modest pleasures, and have liv’d, 
	With God and Nature communing, remov’d 
	From little enmities and low desires, 
	The gift is yours; if in these times of fear, 
	This melancholy waste of hopes o’erthrown, 
	If, ’mid indifference and apathy 
	And wicked exultation, when good men, 
	On every side fall off we know not how, 
	To selfishness, disguis’d in gentle names 
	Of peace, and quiet, and domestic love, 
	Yet mingled, not unwillingly, with sneers 
	On visionary minds; if in this time 
	Of dereliction and dismay, I yet 
	Despair not of our nature; but retain 
	A more than Roman confidence, a faith 
	That fails not, in all sorrow my support, 
	The blessing of my life, the gift is yours, 
	Ye mountains! thine, O Nature! Thou hast fed 
	My lofty speculations; and in thee, 
	For this uneasy heart of ours I find 
	A never-failing principle of joy, 
	And purest passion. 
	
	Thou, my Friend! wert rear’d 
	In the great City, ’mid far other scenes; 
	But we, by different roads at length have gain’d 
	The self-same bourne. And for this cause to Thee 
	I speak, unapprehensive of contempt, 
	The insinuated scoff of coward tongues, 
	And all that silent language which so oft 
	In conversation betwixt man and man 
	Blots from the human countenance all trace 
	Of beauty and of love. For Thou hast sought 
	The truth in solitude, and Thou art one, 
	The most intense of Nature’s worshippers 
	In many things my Brother, chiefly here 
	In this my deep devotion. 
	
	Fare Thee well! 
	Health, and the quiet of a healthful mind 
	Attend thee! seeking oft the haunts of men, 
	And yet more often living with Thyself, 
	And for Thyself, so haply shall thy days 
	Be many, and a blessing to mankind. 


32. SEPTEMBER

	Departing summer hath assumed 
	An aspect tenderly illumed, 
	The gentlest look of spring; 
	That calls from yonder leafy shade 
	Unfaded, yet prepared to fade, 
	A timely carolling. 
	
	No faint and hesitating trill, 
	Such tribute as to winter chill 
	The lonely redbreast pays! 
	Clear, loud, and lively is the din, 
	From social warblers gathering in 
	Their harvest of sweet lays. 
	
	Nor doth the example fail to cheer 
	Me, conscious that my leaf is sere, 
	And yellow on the bough:-- 
	Fall, rosy garlands, from my head! 
	Ye myrtle wreaths, your fragrance shed 
	Around a younger brow! 
	
	Yet will I temperately rejoice; 
	Wide is the range, and free the choice 
	Of undiscordant themes; 
	Which, haply, kindred souls may prize 
	Not less than vernal ecstasies, 
	And passion’s feverish dreams. 
	
	For deathless powers to verse belong, 
	And they like Demi-gods are strong 
	On whom the Muses smile; 
	But some their function have disclaimed, 
	Best pleased with what is aptliest framed 
	To enervate and defile. 
	
	Not such the initiatory strains 
	Committed to the silent plains 
	In Britain’s earliest dawn: 
	Trembled the groves, the stars grew pale, 
	While all-too-daringly the veil 
	Of nature was withdrawn! 
	
	Nor such the spirit-stirring note 
	When the live chords Alcæus smote, 
	Inflamed by sense of wrong; 
	Woe! woe to Tyrants! from the lyre 
	Broke threateningly, in sparkles dire 
	Of fierce vindictive song. 
	
	And not unhallowed was the page 
	By wingèd Love inscribed, to assuage 
	The pangs of vain pursuit; 
	Love listening while the Lesbian Maid 
	With finest touch of passion swayed 
	Her own Æolian lute. 
	
	O ye, who patiently explore 
	The wreck of Herculanean lore, 
	What rapture! could ye seize 
	Some Theban fragment, or unroll 
	One precious, tender-hearted scroll 
	Of pure Simonides. 
	
	That were, indeed, a genuine birth 
	Of poesy; a bursting forth 
	Of genius from the dust: 
	What Horace gloried to behold, 
	What Maro loved, shall we enfold? 
	Can haughty Time be just! 


33. SHE DWELT AMONG THE UNTRODDEN WAYS

	She dwelt among the untrodden ways 
	Beside the springs of Dove, 
	A Maid whom there were none to praise 
	And very few to love: 
	
	A violet by a mossy stone 
	Half hidden from the eye! 
	--Fair as a star, when only one 
	Is shining in the sky. 
	
	She lived unknown, and few could know 
	When Lucy ceased to be; 
	But she is in her grave, and, oh, 
	The difference to me! 


34. SHE WAS A PHANTOM OF DELIGHT

	She was a Phantom of delight 
	When first she gleamed upon my sight; 
	A lovely Apparition, sent 
	To be a moment’s ornament; 
	Her eyes as stars of Twilight fair; 
	Like Twilight’s, too, her dusky hair; 
	But all things else about her drawn 
	From May-time and the cheerful Dawn; 
	A dancing Shape, an Image gay, 
	To haunt, to startle, and way-lay. 
	I saw her upon nearer view, 
	A Spirit, yet a Woman too! 
	Her household motions light and free, 
	And steps of virgin-liberty; 
	A countenance in which did meet 
	Sweet records, promises as sweet; 
	A Creature not too bright or good 
	For human nature’s daily food; 
	For transient sorrows, simple wiles, 
	Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles. 
	And now I see with eye serene 
	The very pulse of the machine; 
	A Being breathing thoughtful breath, 
	A Traveller between life and death; 
	The reason firm, the temperate will, 
	Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill; 
	A perfect Woman, nobly planned, 
	To warn, to comfort, and command; 
	And yet a Spirit still, and bright 
	With something of angelic light.


35. SIMON LEE: THE OLD HUNTSMAN

	In the sweet shire of Cardigan, 
	Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall, 
	An old Man dwells, a little man,--
	’Tis said he once was tall. 
	For five-and-thirty years he lived 
	A running huntsman merry; 
	And still the centre of his cheek 
	Is red as a ripe cherry. 
	
	No man like him the horn could sound, 
	And hill and valley rang with glee 
	When Echo bandied, round and round 
	The halloo of Simon Lee. 
	In those proud days, he little cared 
	For husbandry or tillage; 
	To blither tasks did Simon rouse 
	The sleepers of the village. 
	
	He all the country could outrun, 
	Could leave both man and horse behind; 
	And often, ere the chase was done, 
	He reeled, and was stone-blind. 
	And still there’s something in the world 
	At which his heart rejoices; 
	For when the chiming hounds are out, 
	He dearly loves their voices! 
	
	But, oh the heavy change!--bereft 
	Of health, strength, friends, and kindred, see! 
	Old Simon to the world is left 
	In liveried poverty. 
	His Master’s dead--and no one now 
	Dwells in the Hall of Ivor; 
	Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead; 
	He is the sole survivor. 
	
	And he is lean and he is sick; 
	His body, dwindled and awry, 
	Rests upon ankles swoln and thick; 
	His legs are thin and dry. 
	One prop he has, and only one, 
	His wife, an aged woman, 
	Lives with him, near the waterfall, 
	Upon the village Common. 
	
	Beside their moss-grown hut of clay, 
	Not twenty paces from the door, 
	A scrap of land they have, but they 
	Are poorest of the poor. 
	This scrap of land he from the heath 
	Enclosed when he was stronger; 
	But what to them avails the land 
	Which he can till no longer? 
	
	Oft, working by her Husband’s side, 
	Ruth does what Simon cannot do; 
	For she, with scanty cause for pride, 
	Is stouter of the two. 
	And, though you with your utmost skill 
	From labour could not wean them, 
	’Tis little, very little--all 
	That they can do between them. 
	
	Few months of life has he in store 
	As he to you will tell, 
	For still, the more he works, the more 
	Do his weak ankles swell. 
	My gentle Reader, I perceive, 
	How patiently you’ve waited, 
	And now I fear that you expect 
	Some tale will be related. 
	
	O Reader! had you in your mind 
	Such stores as silent thought can bring, 
	O gentle Reader! you would find 
	A tale in every thing. 
	What more I have to say is short, 
	And you must kindly take it: 
	It is no tale; but, should you think, 
	Perhaps a tale you’ll make it. 
	
	One summer-day I chanced to see 
	This old Man doing all he could 
	To unearth the root of an old tree, 
	A stump of rotten wood. 
	The mattock tottered in his hand; 
	So vain was his endeavour, 
	That at the root of the old tree 
	He might have worked for ever. 
	
	“You’re overtasked, good Simon Lee, 
	Give me your tool,” to him I said; 
	And at the word right gladly he 
	Received my proffered aid. 
	I struck, and with a single blow 
	The tangled root I severed, 
	At which the poor old Man so long 
	And vainly had endeavoured. 
	
	The tears into his eyes were brought, 
	And thanks and praises seemed to run 
	So fast out of his heart, I thought 
	They never would have done. 
	--I’ve heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds 
	With coldness still returning; 
	Alas! the gratitude of men 
	Hath oftener left me mourning. 


36. THE SIMPLON PASS

	                  --Brook and road
	Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass,
	And with them did we journey several hours
	At a slow step. The immeasurable height
	Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,
	The stationary blasts of waterfalls,
	And in the narrow rent, at every turn,
	Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn,
	The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,
	The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,
	Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside
	As if a voice were in them, the sick sight
	And giddy prospect of the raving stream,
	The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens,
	Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light--
	Were all like workings of one mind, the features
	Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree,
	Characters of the great Apocalypse,
	The types and symbols of Eternity,
	Of first and last, and midst, and without end.


37. A SLUMBER DID MY SPIRIT SEAL

	A slumber did my spirit seal; 
	I had no human fears: 
	She seemed a thing that could not feel 
	The touch of earthly years. 
	
	No motion has she now, no force; 
	She neither hears nor sees; 
	Rolled round in earth’s diurnal course, 
	With rocks, and stones, and trees. 


38. THE SOLITARY REAPER

	Behold her, single in the field, 
	Yon solitary Highland Lass! 
	Reaping and singing by herself; 
	Stop here, or gently pass! 
	Alone she cuts and binds the grain, 
	And sings a melancholy strain; 
	O listen! for the Vale profound 
	Is overflowing with the sound. 
	
	No Nightingale did ever chaunt 
	More welcome notes to weary bands 
	Of travellers in some shady haunt, 
	Among Arabian sands: 
	A voice so thrilling ne’er was heard 
	In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird, 
	Breaking the silence of the seas 
	Among the farthest Hebrides. 
	
	Will no one tell me what she sings?--
	Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow 
	For old, unhappy, far-off things, 
	And battles long ago: 
	Or is it some more humble lay, 
	Familiar matter of to-day? 
	Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain, 
	That has been, and may be again? 
	
	Whate’er the theme, the Maiden sang 
	As if her song could have no ending; 
	I saw her singing at her work, 
	And o’er the sickle bending;--
	I listened, motionless and still; 
	And, as I mounted up the hill, 
	The music in my heart I bore, 
	Long after it was heard no more. 


39. SONG OF THE FEAST OF BROUGHAM CASTLE

	High in the breathless Hall the Minstrel sate, 
	And Emont’s murmur mingled with the Song.--
	The words of ancient time I thus translate, 
	A festal strain that hath been silent long:--
	
	“From town to town, from tower to tower, 
	The red rose is a gladsome flower. 
	Her thirty years of winter past, 
	The red rose is revived at last; 
	She lifts her head for endless spring, 
	For everlasting blossoming: 
	Both roses flourish, red and white: 
	In love and sisterly delight 
	The two that were at strife are blended, 
	And all old troubles now are ended.--
	Joy! joy to both! but most to her 
	Who is the flower of Lancaster! 
	Behold her how She smiles to-day 
	On this great throng, this bright array! 
	Fair greeting doth she send to all 
	From every corner of the hall; 
	But chiefly from above the board 
	Where sits in state our rightful Lord, 
	A Clifford to his own restored! 
	
	“They came with banner, spear, and shield; 
	And it was proved in Bosworth-field. 
	Not long the Avenger was withstood--
	Earth helped him with the cry of blood: 
	St. George was for us, and the might 
	Of blessed Angels crowned the right. 
	Loud voice the Land has uttered forth, 
	We loudest in the faithful north: 
	Our fields rejoice, our mountains ring, 
	Our streams proclaim a welcoming; 
	Our strong-abodes and castles see 
	The glory of their loyalty. 
	
	“How glad is Skipton at this hour--
	Though lonely, a deserted Tower; 
	Knight, squire, and yeoman, page and groom, 
	We have them at the feast of Brough’m. 
	How glad Pendragon--though the sleep 
	Of years be on her!--She shall reap 
	A taste of this great pleasure, viewing 
	As in a dream her own renewing. 
	Rejoiced is Brough, right glad, I deem, 
	Beside her little humble stream; 
	And she that keepeth watch and ward 
	Her statelier Eden’s course to guard; 
	They both are happy at this hour, 
	Though each is but a lonely Tower:--
	But here is perfect joy and pride 
	For one fair House by Emont’s side, 
	This day, distinguished without peer, 
	To see her Master and to cheer--
	Him, and his Lady-mother dear! 
	
	“Oh! it was a time forlorn 
	When the fatherless was born--
	Give her wings that she may fly, 
	Or she sees her infant die! 
	Swords that are with slaughter wild 
	Hunt the Mother and the Child. 
	Who will take them from the light? 
	--Yonder is a man in sight--
	Yonder is a house--but where? 
	No, they must not enter there. 
	To the caves, and to the brooks, 
	To the clouds of heaven she looks; 
	She is speechless, but her eyes 
	Pray in ghostly agonies. 
	Blissful Mary, Mother mild, 
	Maid and Mother undefiled, 
	Save a Mother and her Child! 
	
	“Now who is he that bounds with joy 
	On Carrock’s side, a Shepherd-boy? 
	No thoughts hath he but thoughts that pass 
	Light as the wind along the grass. 
	Can this be He who hither came 
	In secret, like a smothered flame? 
	O’er whom such thankful tears were shed 
	For shelter, and a poor man’s bread! 
	God loves the Child; and God hath willed 
	That those dear words should be fulfilled, 
	The Lady’s words, when forced away 
	The last she to her Babe did say: 
	“My own, my own, thy fellow-guest 
	I may not be; but rest thee, rest, 
	For lowly shepherd’s life is best!” 
	
	“Alas! when evil men are strong 
	No life is good, no pleasure long. 
	The Boy must part from Mosedale’s groves, 
	And leave Blencathara’s rugged coves, 
	And quit the flowers that summer brings 
	To Glenderamakin’s lofty springs; 
	Must vanish, and his careless cheer 
	Be turned to heaviness and fear. 
	--Give Sir Lancelot Threlkeld praise! 
	Hear it, good man, old in days! 
	Thou tree of covert and of rest 
	For this young Bird that is distrest; 
	Among thy branches safe he lay, 
	And he was free to sport and play, 
	When falcons were abroad for prey. 
	
	“A recreant harp, that sings of fear 
	And heaviness in Clifford’s ear! 
	I said, when evil men are strong, 
	No life is good, no pleasure long, 
	A weak and cowardly untruth! 
	Our Clifford was a happy Youth, 
	And thankful through a weary time, 
	That brought him up to manhood’s prime. 
	--Again he wanders forth at will, 
	And tends a flock from hill to hill: 
	His garb is humble; ne’er was seen 
	Such garb with such a noble mien; 
	Among the shepherd-grooms no mate 
	Hath he, a Child of strength and state! 
	Yet lacks not friends for simple glee, 
	Nor yet for higher sympathy. 
	
	To his side the fallow-deer 
	Came and rested without fear; 
	The eagle, lord of land and sea, 
	Stooped down to pay him fealty; 
	And both the undying fish that swim 
	Through Bowscale-tarn did wait on him; 
	The pair were servants of his eye 
	In their immortality; 
	And glancing, gleaming, dark or bright, 
	Moved to and fro, for his delight. 
	He knew the rocks which Angels haunt 
	Upon the mountains visitant; 
	He hath kenned them taking wing: 
	And into caves where Faeries sing 
	He hath entered; and been told 
	By Voices how men lived of old. 
	Among the heavens his eye can see 
	The face of thing that is to be; 
	And, if that men report him right, 
	His tongue could whisper words of might. 
	--Now another day is come, 
	Fitter hope, and nobler doom; 
	He hath thrown aside his crook, 
	And hath buried deep his book; 
	Armour rusting in his halls 
	On the blood of Clifford calls,--
	’Quell the Scot,’ exclaims the Lance--
	Bear me to the heart of France, 
	Is the longing of the Shield--
	Tell thy name, thou trembling field; 
	Field of death, where’er thou be, 
	Groan thou with our victory! 
	Happy day, and mighty hour, 
	When our Shepherd, in his power, 
	Mailed and horsed, with lance and sword, 
	To his ancestors restored 
	Like a re-appearing Star, 
	Like a glory from afar 
	First shall head the flock of war!” 
	
	Alas! the impassioned minstrel did not know 
	How, by Heaven’s grace, this Clifford’s heart was framed: 
	How he, long forced in humble walks to go, 
	Was softened into feeling, soothed, and tamed. 
	
	Love had he found in huts where poor men lie; 
	His daily teachers had been woods and rills, 
	The silence that is in the starry sky, 
	The sleep that is among the lonely hills. 
	
	In him the savage virtue of the Race, 
	Revenge and all ferocious thoughts were dead: 
	Nor did he change; but kept in lofty place 
	The wisdom which adversity had bred. 
	
	Glad were the vales, and every cottage-hearth; 
	The Shepherd-lord was honoured more and more; 
	And, ages after he was laid in earth, 
	“The good Lord Clifford” was the name he bore. 


40. SONNET FROM THE RIVER DUDDON

	I thought of Thee, my partner and my guide,
	As being past away.--Vain sympathies!
	For, backward, Duddon! as I cast my eyes,
	I see what was, and is, and will abide;
	Still glides the Stream, and shall for ever glide;
	The Form remains, the Function never dies;
	While we, the brave, the mighty, and the wise,
	We Men, who in our morn of youth defied
	The elements, must vanish;--be it so!
	Enough, if something from our hands have power
	To live, and act, and serve the future hour;
	And if, as toward the silent tomb we go,
	Through love, through hope, and faith’s transcendent dower,
	We feel that we are greater than we know.


41. SURPRISED BY JOY

	Surprised by joy--impatient as the Wind 
	I turned to share the transport--Oh! with whom 
	But Thee, long buried in the silent Tomb, 
	That spot which no vicissitude can find? 
	Love, faithful love, recalled thee to my mind--
	But how could I forget thee?--Through what power, 
	Even for the least division of an hour, 
	Have I been so beguiled as to be blind 
	To my most grievous loss!--That thought’s return 
	Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore, 
	Save one, one only, when I stood forlorn, 
	Knowing my heart’s best treasure was no more; 
	That neither present time, nor years unborn 
	Could to my sight that heavenly face restore. 


42. THE TABLES TURNED

	Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books; 
	Or surely you’ll grow double: 
	Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks; 
	Why all this toil and trouble? 
	
	The sun above the mountain’s head, 
	A freshening lustre mellow 
	Through all the long green fields has spread, 
	His first sweet evening yellow. 
	
	Books! ‘tis a dull and endless strife: 
	Come, hear the woodland linnet, 
	How sweet his music! on my life, 
	There’s more of wisdom in it. 
	
	And hark! how blithe the throstle sings! 
	He, too, is no mean preacher: 
	Come forth into the light of things, 
	Let Nature be your teacher. 
	
	She has a world of ready wealth, 
	Our minds and hearts to bless-- 
	Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health, 
	Truth breathed by cheerfulness. 
	
	One impulse from a vernal wood 
	May teach you more of man, 
	Of moral evil and of good, 
	Than all the sages can. 
	
	Sweet is the lore which Nature brings; 
	Our meddling intellect 
	Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things:-- 
	We murder to dissect. 
	
	Enough of Science and of Art; 
	Close up those barren leaves; 
	Come forth, and bring with you a heart 
	That watches and receives. 


43. THERE WAS A BOY

	There was a Boy; ye knew him well, ye cliffs 
	And islands of Winander! many a time, 
	At evening, when the earliest stars began 
	To move along the edges of the hills, 
	Rising or setting, would he stand alone, 
	Beneath the trees, or by the glimmering lake; 
	And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands 
	Pressed closely palm to palm and to his mouth 
	Uplifted, he, as through an instrument, 
	Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls 
	That they might answer him.--And they would shout 
	Across the watery vale, and shout again, 
	Responsive to his call,--with quivering peals, 
	And long halloos, and screams, and echoes loud 
	Redoubled and redoubled; concourse wild 
	Of jocund din! And, when there came a pause 
	Of silence such as baffled his best skill: 
	Then, sometimes, in that silence, while he hung 
	Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise 
	Has carried far into his heart the voice 
	Of mountain-torrents; or the visible scene 
	Would enter unawares into his mind 
	With all its solemn imagery, its rocks, 
	Its woods, and that uncertain heaven received 
	Into the bosom of the steady lake. 
	
	This boy was taken from his mates, and died 
	In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old. 
	Pre-eminent in beauty is the vale 
	Where he was born and bred: the churchyard hangs 
	Upon a slope above the village-school; 
	And through that churchyard when my way has led 
	On summer-evenings, I believe that there 
	A long half-hour together I have stood 
	Mute--looking at the grave in which he lies! 


44. THE THORN

	I
	
	“There is a Thorn--it looks so old,
	In truth, you’d find it hard to say
	How it could ever have been young,
	It looks so old and grey.
	Not higher than a two years’ child
	It stands erect, this aged Thorn;
	No leaves it has, no prickly points;
	It is a mass of knotted joints,
	A wretched thing forlorn.
	It stands erect, and like a stone
	With lichens is it overgrown.
	
	
	II
	
	“Like rock or stone, it is o’ergrown,
	With lichens to the very top,
	And hung with heavy tufts of moss,
	A melancholy crop:
	Up from the earth these mosses creep,
	And this poor Thorn they clasp it round
	So close, you’d say that they are bent
	With plain and manifest intent
	To drag it to the ground;
	And all have joined in one endeavour
	To bury this poor Thorn for ever.
	
	
	III
	
	“High on a mountain’s highest ridge,
	Where oft the stormy winter gale
	Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds
	It sweeps from vale to vale;
	Not five yards from the mountain path,
	This Thorn you on your left espy;
	And to the left, three yards beyond,
	You see a little muddy pond
	Of water--never dry,
	Though but of compass small, and bare
	To thirsty suns and parching air.
	
	
	IV
	
	“And, close beside this aged Thorn,
	There is a fresh and lovely sight,
	A beauteous heap, a hill of moss,
	Just half a foot in height.
	All lovely colours there you see,
	All colours that were ever seen;
	And mossy network too is there,
	As if by hand of lady fair
	The work had woven been;
	And cups, the darlings of the eye,
	So deep is their vermilion dye.
	
	
	V
	
	“Ah me! what lovely tints are there
	Of olive green and scarlet bright,
	In spikes, in branches, and in stars,
	Green, red, and pearly white!
	This heap of earth o’ergrown with moss,
	Which close beside the Thorn you see,
	So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,
	Is like an infant’s grave in size,
	As like as like can be:
	But never, never any where,
	An infant’s grave was half so fair.
	
	
	VI
	
	“Now would you see this aged Thorn,
	This pond, and beauteous hill of moss,
	You must take care and choose your time
	The mountain when to cross.
	For oft there sits between the heap,
	So like an infant’s grave in size,
	And that same pond of which I spoke,
	A Woman in a scarlet cloak,
	And to herself she cries,
	‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!
	Oh woe is me! oh misery!’﻿
	
	
	VII
	
	“At all times of the day and night
	This wretched Woman thither goes;
	And she is known to every star,
	And every wind that blows;
	And there, beside the Thorn, she sits
	When the blue daylight’s in the skies,
	And when the whirlwind’s on the hill,
	Or frosty air is keen and still,
	And to herself she cries,
	‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!
	Oh woe is me! oh misery!’ ”
	
	
	VIII
	
	“Now wherefore, thus, by day and night,
	In rain, in tempest, and in snow,
	Thus to the dreary mountain-top
	Does this poor Woman go?
	And why sits she beside the Thorn
	When the blue daylight’s in the sky
	Or when the whirlwind’s on the hill,
	Or frosty air is keen and still,
	And wherefore does she cry?--
	O wherefore? wherefore? tell me why
	Does she repeat that doleful cry?”
	
	
	IX
	
	“I cannot tell; I wish I could;
	For the true reason no one knows:
	But would you gladly view the spot,
	The spot to which she goes;
	The hillock like an infant’s grave,
	The pond--and Thorn, so old and grey;
	Pass by her door--’tis seldom shut--
	And if you see her in her hut--
	Then to the spot away!
	I never heard of such as dare
	Approach the spot when she is there.”
	
	
	X
	
	“But wherefore to the mountain-top
	Can this unhappy Woman go,
	Whatever star is in the skies,
	Whatever wind may blow?”
	“Full twenty years are past and gone
	Since she (her name is Martha Ray)
	Gave with a maiden’s true good-will
	Her company to Stephen Hill;
	And she was blithe and gay,
	While friends and kindred all approved
	Of him whom tenderly she loved.
	
	
	XI
	
	“And they had fixed the wedding day,
	The morning that must wed them both;
	But Stephen to another Maid
	Had sworn another oath;
	And, with this other Maid, to church
	Unthinking Stephen went--
	Poor Martha! on that woeful day
	A pang of pitiless dismay
	Into her soul was sent;
	A fire was kindled in her breast,
	Which might not burn itself to rest.
	
	
	XII
	
	“They say, full six months after this,
	While yet the summer leaves were green,
	She to the mountain-top would go,
	And there was often seen.
	What could she seek?--or wish to hide?
	Her state to any eye was plain;
	She was with child, and she was mad;
	Yet often was she sober sad
	From her exceeding pain.
	O guilty Father--would that death
	Had saved him from that breach of faith!
	
	XIII
	
	“Sad case for such a brain to hold
	Communion with a stirring child!
	Sad case, as you may think, for one
	Who had a brain so wild!
	Last Christmas-eve we talked of this,
	And grey-haired Wilfred of the glen
	Held that the unborn infant wrought
	About its mother’s heart, and brought
	Her senses back again:
	And, when at last her time drew near,
	Her looks were calm, her senses clear.
	
	
	XIV
	
	“More know I not, I wish I did,
	And it should all be told to you;
	For what became of this poor child
	No mortal ever knew;
	Nay--if a child to her was born
	No earthly tongue could ever tell;
	And if ’twas born alive or dead,
	Far less could this with proof be said;
	But some remember well,
	That Martha Ray about this time
	Would up the mountain often climb.
	
	
	XV
	
	“And all that winter, when at night
	The wind blew from the mountain-peak,
	’Twas worth your while, though in the dark,
	The churchyard path to seek:
	For many a time and oft were heard
	Cries coming from the mountain head:
	Some plainly living voices were;
	And others, I’ve heard many swear,
	Were voices of the dead:
	I cannot think, whate’er they say,
	They had to do with Martha Ray.
	
	
	XVI
	
	“But that she goes to this old Thorn,
	The Thorn which I described to you,
	And there sits in a scarlet cloak,
	I will be sworn is true.
	For one day with my telescope,
	To view the ocean wide and bright,
	When to this country first I came,
	Ere I had heard of Martha’s name,
	I climbed the mountain’s height:--
	A storm came on, and I could see
	No object higher than my knee.
	
	
	XVII
	
	“ ’Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain:
	No screen, no fence could I discover;
	And then the wind! in sooth, it was
	A wind full ten times over.
	I looked around, I thought I saw
	A jutting crag,--and off I ran,
	Head-foremost, through the driving rain,
	The shelter of the crag to gain;
	And, as I am a man,
	Instead of jutting crag, I found
	A Woman seated on the ground.
	
	
	XVIII
	
	“I did not speak--I saw her face;
	Her face!--it was enough for me;
	I turned about and heard her cry,
	‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!’﻿
	And there she sits, until the moon
	Through half the clear blue sky will go;
	And when the little breezes make
	The waters of the pond to shake,
	As all the country know,
	She shudders, and you hear her cry,
	‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!’ ”
	
	
	XIX
	
	“But what’s the Thorn? and what the pond?
	And what the hill of moss to her?
	And what the creeping breeze that comes
	The little pond to stir?”
	“I cannot tell; but some will say
	She hanged her baby on the tree;
	Some say she drowned it in the pond,
	Which is a little step beyond:
	But all and each agree,
	The little Babe was buried there,
	Beneath that hill of moss so fair.
	
	
	XX
	
	“I’ve heard, the moss is spotted red
	With drops of that poor infant’s blood;
	But kill a new-born infant thus,
	I do not think she could!
	Some say, if to the pond you go,
	And fix on it a steady view,
	The shadow of a babe you trace,
	A baby and a baby’s face,
	And that it looks at you;
	Whene’er you look on it, ’tis plain
	The baby looks at you again.
	
	
	XXI
	
	“And some had sworn an oath that she
	Should be to public justice brought;
	And for the little infant’s bones
	With spades they would have sought.
	But instantly the hill of moss
	Before their eyes began to stir!
	And, for full fifty yards around,
	The grass--it shook upon the ground!
	Yet all do still aver
	The little Babe lies buried there,
	Beneath that hill of moss so fair.
	
	
	XXII
	
	“I cannot tell how this may be,
	But plain it is the Thorn is bound
	With heavy tufts of moss that strive
	To drag it to the ground;
	And this I know, full many a time,
	When she was on the mountain high,
	By day, and in the silent night,
	When all the stars shone clear and bright,
	That I have heard her cry,
	‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!
	Oh woe is me! oh misery!’ ”


45. THREE YEARS SHE GREW

	Three years she grew in sun and shower, 
	Then Nature said, “A lovelier flower 
	On earth was never sown; 
	This Child I to myself will take; 
	She shall be mine, and I will make 
	A Lady of my own. 
	
	“Myself will to my darling be 
	Both law and impulse: and with me 
	The Girl, in rock and plain, 
	In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, 
	Shall feel an overseeing power 
	To kindle or restrain. 
	
	“She shall be sportive as the fawn 
	That wild with glee across the lawn 
	Or up the mountain springs; 
	And hers shall be the breathing balm, 
	And hers the silence and the calm 
	Of mute insensate things. 
	
	“The floating clouds their state shall lend 
	To her; for her the willow bend; 
	Nor shall she fail to see 
	Even in the motions of the Storm 
	Grace that shall mould the Maiden’s form 
	By silent sympathy. 
	
	“The stars of midnight shall be dear 
	To her; and she shall lean her ear 
	In many a secret place 
	Where rivulets dance their wayward round, 
	And beauty born of murmuring sound 
	Shall pass into her face. 
	
	“And vital feelings of delight 
	Shall rear her form to stately height, 
	Her virgin bosom swell; 
	Such thoughts to Lucy I will give 
	While she and I together live 
	Here in this happy dell.” 
	
	Thus Nature spake--The work was done--
	How soon my Lucy’s race was run! 
	She died, and left to me 
	This heath, this calm and quiet scene; 
	The memory of what has been, 
	And never more will be. 


46. TO A HIGHLAND GIRL

	Sweet Highland Girl, a very shower 
	Of beauty is thy earthly dower! 
	Twice seven consenting years have shed 
	Their utmost bounty on thy head: 
	And these grey rocks; that household lawn; 
	Those trees, a veil just half withdrawn; 
	This fall of water that doth make 
	A murmur near the silent lake; 
	This little bay; a quiet road 
	That holds in shelter thy Abode--
	In truth together do ye seem 
	Like something fashioned in a dream; 
	Such Forms as from their covert peep 
	When earthly cares are laid asleep! 
	But, O fair Creature! in the light 
	Of common day, so heavenly bright, 
	I bless Thee, Vision as thou art, 
	I bless thee with a human heart; 
	God shield thee to thy latest years! 
	Thee, neither know I, nor thy peers; 
	And yet my eyes are filled with tears. 
	
	With earnest feeling I shall pray 
	For thee when I am far away: 
	For never saw I mien, or face, 
	In which more plainly I could trace 
	Benignity and home-bred sense 
	Ripening in perfect innocence. 
	Here scattered, like a random seed, 
	Remote from men, Thou dost not need 
	The embarrassed look of shy distress, 
	And maidenly shamefacedness: 
	Thou wear’st upon thy forehead clear 
	The freedom of a Mountaineer: 
	A face with gladness overspread! 
	Soft smiles, by human kindness bred! 
	And seemliness complete, that sways 
	Thy courtesies, about thee plays; 
	With no restraint, but such as springs 
	From quick and eager visitings 
	Of thoughts that lie beyond the reach 
	Of thy few words of English speech: 
	A bondage sweetly brooked, a strife 
	That gives thy gestures grace and life! 
	So have I, not unmoved in mind, 
	Seen birds of tempest-loving kind--
	Thus beating up against the wind. 
	
	What hand but would a garland cull 
	For thee who art so beautiful? 
	O happy pleasure! here to dwell 
	Beside thee in some heathy dell; 
	Adopt your homely ways, and dress, 
	A Shepherd, thou a Shepherdess! 
	But I could frame a wish for thee 
	More like a grave reality: 
	Thou art to me but as a wave 
	Of the wild sea; and I would have 
	Some claim upon thee, if I could, 
	Though but of common neighbourhood. 
	What joy to hear thee, and to see! 
	Thy elder Brother I would be, 
	Thy Father--anything to thee! 
	
	Now thanks to Heaven! that of its grace 
	Hath led me to this lonely place. 
	Joy have I had; and going hence 
	I bear away my recompense. 
	In spots like these it is we prize 
	Our Memory, feel that she hath eyes: 
	Then, why should I be loth to stir? 
	I feel this place was made for her; 
	To give new pleasure like the past, 
	Continued long as life shall last. 
	Nor am I loth, though pleased at heart, 
	Sweet Highland Girl! from thee to part; 
	For I, methinks, till I grow old, 
	As fair before me shall behold, 
	As I do now, the cabin small, 
	The lake, the bay, the waterfall; 
	And thee, the spirit of them all! 


47. TO THE CUCKOO

	O blithe New-comer! I have heard, 
	I hear thee and rejoice. 
	O Cuckoo! shall I call thee Bird, 
	Or but a wandering Voice? 
	
	While I am lying on the grass 
	Thy twofold shout I hear; 
	From hill to hill it seems to pass, 
	At once far off, and near. 
	
	Though babbling only to the Vale 
	Of sunshine and of flowers, 
	Thou bringest unto me a tale 
	Of visionary hours. 
	
	Thrice welcome, darling of the Spring! 
	Even yet thou art to me 
	No bird, but an invisible thing, 
	A voice, a mystery; 
	
	The same whom in my school-boy days 
	I listened to; that Cry 
	Which made me look a thousand ways 
	In bush, and tree, and sky. 
	
	To seek thee did I often rove 
	Through woods and on the green; 
	And thou wert still a hope, a love; 
	Still longed for, never seen. 
	
	And I can listen to thee yet; 
	Can lie upon the plain 
	And listen, till I do beget 
	That golden time again. 
	
	O blessèd Bird! the earth we pace 
	Again appears to be 
	An unsubstantial, faery place; 
	That is fit home for Thee! 


48. TO THE SKYLARK

	Ethereal minstrel! pilgrim of the sky!
	Dost thou despise the earth where cares abound?
	Or, while the wings aspire, are heart and eye
	Both with thy nest upon the dewy ground?
	Thy nest which thou canst drop into at will,
	Those quivering wings composed, that music still!
	
	Leave to the nightingale her shady wood;
	A privacy of glorious light is thine;
	Whence thou dost pour upon the world a flood
	Of harmony, with instinct more divine;
	Type of the wise who soar, but never roam;
	True to the kindred points of Heaven and Home!


49. THE VIRGIN

	Mother! whose virgin bosom was uncrost
	With the least shade of thought to sin allied.
	Woman! above all women glorified,
	Our tainted nature’s solitary boast;
	Purer than foam on central ocean tost;
	Brighter than eastern skies at daybreak strewn
	With fancied roses, than the unblemished moon
	Before her wane begins on heaven’s blue coast;
	Thy image falls to earth. Yet some, I ween,
	Not unforgiven the suppliant knee might bend,
	As to a visible Power, in which did blend
	All that was mixed and reconciled in thee
	Of mother’s love with maiden purity,
	Of high with low, celestial with terrene!


50. WE ARE SEVEN

	------A simple Child, 
	That lightly draws its breath, 
	And feels its life in every limb, 
	What should it know of death? 
	
	I met a little cottage Girl: 
	She was eight years old, she said; 
	Her hair was thick with many a curl 
	That clustered round her head. 
	
	She had a rustic, woodland air, 
	And she was wildly clad: 
	Her eyes were fair, and very fair; 
	--Her beauty made me glad. 
	
	“Sisters and brothers, little Maid, 
	How many may you be?” 
	“How many? Seven in all,” she said, 
	And wondering looked at me. 
	
	“And where are they? I pray you tell.” 
	She answered, “Seven are we; 
	And two of us at Conway dwell, 
	And two are gone to sea. 
	
	“Two of us in the church-yard lie, 
	My sister and my brother; 
	And, in the church-yard cottage, I 
	Dwell near them with my mother.” 
	
	“You say that two at Conway dwell, 
	And two are gone to sea, 
	Yet ye are seven! I pray you tell, 
	Sweet Maid, how this may be.” 
	
	Then did the little Maid reply, 
	“Seven boys and girls are we; 
	Two of us in the church-yard lie, 
	Beneath the church-yard tree.” 
	
	“You run about, my little Maid, 
	Your limbs they are alive; 
	If two are in the church-yard laid, 
	Then ye are only five.” 
	
	“Their graves are green, they may be seen,” 
	The little Maid replied, 
	“Twelve steps or more from my mother’s door, 
	And they are side by side. 
	
	“My stockings there I often knit, 
	My kerchief there I hem; 
	And there upon the ground I sit, 
	And sing a song to them. 
	
	“And often after sun-set, Sir, 
	When it is light and fair, 
	I take my little porringer, 
	And eat my supper there. 
	
	“The first that died was sister Jane; 
	In bed she moaning lay, 
	Till God released her of her pain; 
	And then she went away. 
	
	“So in the church-yard she was laid; 
	And, when the grass was dry, 
	Together round her grave we played, 
	My brother John and I. 
	
	“And when the ground was white with snow, 
	And I could run and slide, 
	My brother John was forced to go, 
	And he lies by her side.” 
	
	“How many are you, then,” said I, 
	“If they two are in heaven?” 
	Quick was the little Maid’s reply, 
	“O Master! we are seven.” 
	
	“But they are dead; those two are dead! 
	Their spirits are in heaven!” 
	’Twas throwing words away; for still 
	The little Maid would have her will, 
	And said, “Nay, we are seven!”


51. WHY ARE THOU SILENT

	Why art thou silent! Is thy love a plant 
	Of such weak fibre that the treacherous air 
	Of absence withers what was once so fair? 
	Is there no debt to pay, no boon to grant? 
	Yet have my thoughts for thee been vigilant--
	Bound to thy service with unceasing care, 
	The mind’s least generous wish a mendicant 
	For nought but what thy happiness could spare. 
	Speak--though this soft warm heart, once free to hold 
	A thousand tender pleasures, thine and mine, 
	Be left more desolate, more dreary cold 
	Than a forsaken bird’s-nest filled with snow 
	‘Mid its own bush of leafless eglantine--
	Speak, that my torturing doubts their end may know. 


52. THE WORLD IS TOO MUCH WITH US

	The world is too much with us; late and soon,
	Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;--
	Little we see in Nature that is ours;
	We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!
	This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;
	The winds that will be howling at all hours,
	And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers;
	For this, for everything, we are out of tune;
	It moves us not. Great God! I’d rather be
	A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
	So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
	Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
	Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
	Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.


53. WRITTEN IN LONDON

	O Friend! I know not which way I must look
	For comfort, being, as I am, opprest,
	To think that now our life is only drest
	For show; mean handy-work of craftsman, cook,
	Or groom!--We must run glittering like a brook
	In the open sunshine, or we are unblest:
	The wealthiest man among us is the best:
	No grandeur now in nature or in book
	Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expense,
	This is idolatry; and these we adore:
	Plain living and high thinking are no more:
	The homely beauty of the good old cause
	Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence,
	And pure religion breathing household laws.


54. YARROW REVISITED

	The gallant Youth, who may have gained, 
	Or seeks, a “winsome Marrow,” 
	Was but an Infant in the lap 
	When first I looked on Yarrow; 
	Once more, by Newark’s Castle-gate 
	Long left without a warder, 
	I stood, looked, listened, and with Thee, 
	Great Minstrel of the Border! 
	
	Grave thoughts ruled wide on that sweet day, 
	Their dignity installing 
	In gentle bosoms, while sere leaves 
	Were on the bough, or falling; 
	But breezes played, and sunshine gleamed- 
	The forest to embolden; 
	Reddened the fiery hues, and shot 
	Transparence through the golden. 
	
	For busy thoughts the Stream flowed on 
	In foamy agitation; 
	And slept in many a crystal pool 
	For quiet contemplation: 
	No public and no private care 
	The freeborn mind enthralling, 
	We made a day of happy hours, 
	Our happy days recalling. 
	
	Brisk Youth appeared, the Morn of youth, 
	With freaks of graceful folly,- 
	Life’s temperate Noon, her sober Eve, 
	Her Night not melancholy; 
	Past, present, future, all appeared 
	In harmony united, 
	Like guests that meet, and some from far, 
	By cordial love invited. 
	
	And if, as Yarrow, through the woods 
	And down the meadow ranging, 
	Did meet us with unaltered face, 
	Though we were changed and changing; 
	If, then, some natural shadows spread 
	Our inward prospect over, 
	The soul’s deep valley was not slow 
	Its brightness to recover. 
	
	Eternal blessings on the Muse, 
	And her divine employment! 
	The blameless Muse, who trains her Sons 
	For hope and calm enjoyment; 
	Albeit sickness, lingering yet, 
	Has o’er their pillow brooded; 
	And Care waylays their steps-a Sprite 
	Not easily eluded. 
	
	For thee, O Scott! compelled to change 
	Green Eildon-hill and Cheviot 
	For warm Vesuvio’s vine-clad slopes; 
	And leave thy Tweed and Tiviot 
	For mild Sorrento’s breezy waves; 
	May classic Fancy, linking 
	With native Fancy her fresh aid, 
	Preserve thy heart from sinking! 
	
	Oh! while they minister to thee, 
	Each vying with the other, 
	May Health return to mellow Age 
	With Strength, her venturous brother; 
	And Tiber, and each brook and rill 
	Renowned in song and story, 
	With unimagined beauty shine, 
	Nor lose one ray of glory! 
	
	For Thou, upon a hundred streams, 
	By tales of love and sorrow, 
	Of faithful love, undaunted truth 
	Hast shed the power of Yarrow; 
	And streams unknown, hills yet unseen, 
	Wherever they invite Thee, 
	At parent Nature’s grateful call, 
	With gladness must requite Thee. 
	
	A gracious welcome shall be thine, 
	Such looks of love and honour 
	As thy own Yarrow gave to me 
	When first I gazed upon her; 
	Beheld what I had feared to see, 
	Unwilling to surrender 
	Dreams treasured up from early days, 
	The holy and the tender. 
	
	And what, for this frail world, were all 
	That mortals do or suffer, 
	Did no responsive harp, no pen, 
	Memorial tribute offer? 
	Yea, what were mighty Nature’s self? 
	Her features, could they win us, 
	Unhelped by the poetic voice 
	That hourly speaks within us? 
	
	Nor deem that localized Romance 
	Plays false with our affections; 
	Unsanctifies our tears-made sport 
	For fanciful dejections: 
	Ah, no! the visions of the past 
	Sustain the heart in feeling 
	Life as she is-our changeful Life, 
	With friends and kindred dealing. 
	
	Bear witness, Ye, whose thoughts that day 
	In Yarrow’s groves were centred; 
	Who through the silent portal arch 
	Of mouldering Newark entered; 
	And clomb the winding stair that once 
	Too timidly was mounted 
	By the “last Minstrel,”(not the last!) 
	Ere he his Tale recounted. 
	
	Flow on for ever, Yarrow Stream! 
	Fulfil thy pensive duty, 
	Well pleased that future Bards should chant 
	For simple hearts thy beauty; 
	To dream-light dear while yet unseen, 
	Dear to the common sunshine, 
	And dearer still, as now I feel, 
	To memory’s shadowy moonshine! 


55. YARROW UNVISITED

	From Stirling castle we had seen
	The mazy Forth unravelled;
	Had trod the banks of Clyde, and Tay,
	And with the Tweed had travelled;
	And when we came to Clovenford,
	Then said my “_winsome Marrow_,”
	“Whate’er betide, we’ll turn aside,
	And see the Braes of Yarrow.”
	
	“Let Yarrow folk, _frae_ Selkirk town,
	Who have been buying, selling,
	Go back to Yarrow, ’tis their own;
	Each maiden to her dwelling!
	On Yarrow’s banks let her herons feed,
	Hares couch, and rabbits burrow!
	But we will downward with the Tweed
	Nor turn aside to Yarrow.
	
	“There’s Galla Water, Leader Haughs,
	Both lying right before us;
	And Dryborough, where with chiming Tweed
	The lintwhites sing in chorus;
	There’s pleasant Tiviot-dale, a land
	Made blithe with plough and harrow:
	Why throw away a needful day
	To go in search of Yarrow?
	
	“What’s Yarrow but a river bare,
	That glides the dark hills under?
	There are a thousand such elsewhere
	As worthy of your wonder.”
	--Strange words they seemed of slight and scorn;
	My True-love sighed for sorrow;
	And looked me in the face, to think
	I thus could speak of Yarrow!
	
	“Oh! green,” said I, “are Yarrow’s holms,
	And sweet is Yarrow flowing!
	Fair hangs the apple frae the rock,
	But we will leave it growing.
	O’er hilly path, and open Strath,
	We’ll wander Scotland thorough;
	But, though so near, we will not turn
	Into the dale of Yarrow.
	
	“Let beeves and home-bred kine partake
	The sweets of Burn-mill meadow,
	The swan on still St. Mary’s Lake
	Float double, swan and shadow!
	We will not see them; will not go,
	To-day, nor yet to-morrow;
	Enough if in our hearts we know
	There’s such a place as Yarrow.
	
	“Be Yarrow stream unseen, unknown!
	It must, or we shall rue it:
	We have a vision of our own;
	Ah! why should we undo it?
	The treasured dreams of times long past,
	We’ll keep them, winsome Marrow!
	For when we’er there, although ’tis fair,
	’Twill be another Yarrow!
	
	“If Care with freezing years should come,
	And wandering seem but folly,--
	Should we be loth to stir from home,
	And yet be melancholy;
	Should life be dull, and spirits low,
	’Twill soothe us in our sorrow,
	That earth has something yet to show,
	The bonny holms of Yarrow!”


56. YARROW VISITED

	And is this--Yarrow?--This the stream
	Of which my fancy cherished,
	So faithfully, a waking dream?
	An image that hath perished!
	O that some Minstrel’s harp were near,
	To utter notes of gladness,
	And chase this silence from the air,
	That fills my heart with sadness!
	
	Yet why?--a silvery current flows
	With uncontrolled meanderings;
	Nor have these eyes by greener hills
	Been soothed, in all my wanderings.
	And, through her depths, Saint Mary’s Lake
	Is visibly delighted;
	For not a feature of those hills
	Is in the mirror slighted.
	
	A blue sky bends o’er Yarrow vale,
	Save where that pearly whiteness
	Is round the rising sun diffused,
	A tender hazy brightness;
	Mild dawn of promise! that excludes
	All profitless dejection;
	Though not unwilling here to admit
	A pensive recollection.
	
	Where was it that the famous Flower
	Of Yarrow Vale lay bleeding?
	His bed perchance was yon smooth mound
	On which the herd is feeding:
	And haply from this crystal pool,
	Now peaceful as the morning,
	The Water-wraith ascended thrice--
	And gave his doleful warning.
	
	Delicious is the Lay that sings
	The haunts of happy Lovers,
	The path that leads them to the grove,
	The leafy grove that covers:
	And Pity sanctifies the Verse
	That paints, by strength of sorrow,
	The unconquerable strength of love;
	Bear witness, rueful Yarrow!
	
	But thou, that didst appear so fair
	To fond imagination,
	Dost rival in the light of day
	Her delicate creation:
	Meek loveliness is round thee spread,
	A softness still and holy;
	The grace of forest charms decayed,
	And pastoral melancholy.
	
	That region left, the vale unfolds
	Rich groves of lofty stature,
	With Yarrow winding through the pomp
	Of cultivated nature;
	And, rising from those lofty groves,
	Behold a Ruin hoary!
	The shattered front of Newark’s Towers,
	Renowned in Border story.
	
	Fair scenes for childhood’s opening bloom,
	For sportive youth to stray in;
	For manhood to enjoy his strength;
	And age to wear away in!
	Yon cottage seems a bower of bliss,
	A covert for protection
	Of tender thoughts, that nestle there--
	The brood of chaste affection.
	
	How sweet, on this autumnal day,
	The wild-wood fruits to gather,
	And on my True-love’s forehead plant
	A crest of blooming heather!
	And what if I enwreathed my own!
	’Twere no offence to reason;
	The sober Hills thus deck their brows
	To meet the wintry season.
	
	I see--but not by sight alone,
	Loved Yarrow, have I won thee;
	A ray of fancy still survives--
	Her sunshine plays upon thee!
	Thy ever-youthful waters keep
	A course of lively pleasure;
	And gladsome notes my lips can breathe,
	Accordant to the measure.
	
	The vapours linger round the Heights,
	They melt, and soon must vanish;
	One hour is theirs, nor more is mine--
	Sad thought, which I would banish,
	But that I know, where’er I go,
	Thy genuine image, Yarrow!
	Will dwell with me--to heighten joy,
	And cheer my mind in sorrow.

