*** Charles Wright (1935 - )


1. THE APPALACHIAN BOOK OF THE DEAD

	Sunday, September Sunday . . . Outdoors,
	Like an early page from The Appalachian Book of the Dead,
	Sunlight lavishes brilliance on every surface,
	Doves settle, surreptitious angels, on tree limb and box branch,
	A crow calls, deep in its own darkness,
	Something like water ticks on
	Just there, beyond the horizon, just there, steady clock . . .

	Go in fear of abstractions . . .
	Well, possibly. Meanwhile,
	They are the strata our bodies rise through, the sere veins
	Our skins rub off on.
	For instance, whatever enlightenment there might be
	Housels compassion and affection, those two tributaries
	That river above our lives,
	Whose waters we sense the sense of late at night, and later still.

	Uneasy, suburbanized,
	I drift from the lawn chair to the back porch to the dwarf orchard
	Testing the grass and border garden.
	A stillness, as in the passageways of Paradise,
	Bell jars the afternoon.
	Leaves, like ex votos, hang hard and shine
	Under the endlessness of heaven.
	Such skeletal altars, such vacant sanctuary.

	It always amazes me
	How landscape recalibrates the stations of the dead,
	How what we see jacks up
	the odd quotient of what we don’t see,
	How God’s breath reconstitutes our walking up and walking down.
	First glimpse of autumn, stretched tight and snicked, a bad face lift,
	Flicks in and flicks out, a virtual reality.
	Time to begin the long division.



2. BEDTIME STORY

	The generator hums like a distant _ding an sich_.
	It's early evening, and time, like the dog it is,
	is hungry for food,
	And will be fed, don't doubt it, will be fed, my small one.
	The forest begins to gather its silences in.
	The meadow regroups and hunkers down
	for its cleft feet.

	Something is wringing the rag of sunlight
	inexorably out and hanging.
	Something is making the reeds bend and cover their heads.
	Something is licking the shadows up,
	And stringing the blank spaces along, filling them in.
	Something is inching its way into our hearts,
	scratching its blue nails against the wall there.

	Should we let it in?
	Should we greet it as it deserves,
	Hands on our ears, mouths open?
	Or should we bring it a chair to sit on, and offer it meat?
	Should we turn on the radio,
	should we clap our hands and dance
	The Something Dance, the welcoming Something Dance?
	I think we should, love, I think we should.



3. BLACK ZODIAC

	Darkened by time, the masters, like our memories, mix
	And mismatch,
	and settle about our lawn furniture, like air
	Without a meaning, like air in its clear nothingness.
	What can we say to either of them?
	How can they be so dark and so clear at the same time?
	They ruffle our hair,
	they ruffle the leaves of the August trees.
	Then stop, abruptly as wind.
	The flies come back, and the heat--
	what can we say to them?
	Nothing is endless but the sky.
	The flies come back, and the afternoon
	Teeters a bit on its green edges,
	then settles like dead weight
	Next to our memories, and the pale hems of the masters’ gowns.

	Those who look for the Lord will cry out in praise of him.
	Perhaps. And perhaps not--
	dust and ashes though we are,
	Some will go wordlessly, some
	Will listen their way in with their mouths
	Where pain puts them, an inch-and-a-half above the floor.
	And some will revile him out of love
	and deep disdain.
	The gates of mercy, like an eclipse, darken our undersides.
	Rows of gravestones stay our steps,
	August humidity
	Bright as auras around our bodies.
	And some will utter the words,
	speaking in fear and tongues,
	Hating their garments splotched by the flesh.
	These are the lucky ones, the shelved ones, the twice-erased.

	Dante and John Chrysostom
	Might find this afternoon a sidereal roadmap,
	A pilgrim’s way . . .
	You might too
	Under the prejaundiced outline of the quarter moon,
	Clouds sculling downsky like a narrative for whatever comes,
	What hasn’t happened to happen yet
	Still lurking behind the stars,
	31 August 1995 . . .
	The afterlife of insects, space graffiti, white holes
	In the landscape,
	such things, such avenues, lead to dust
	And handle our hurt with ease.
	Sky blue, blue of infinity, blue
	waters above the earth:
	Why do the great stories always exist in the past?

	The unexamined life’s no different from
	the examined life--
	Unanswerable questions, small talk,
	Unprovable theorems, long-abandoned arguments--
	You’ve got to write it all down.
	Landscape or waterscape, light-length on evergreen, dark sidebar
	Of evening,
	you’ve got to write it down.
	Memory’s handkerchief, death’s dream and automobile,
	God’s sleep,
	you’ve still got to write it down,
	Moon half-empty, moon half-full,
	Night starless and egoless, night blood-black and prayer-black,
	Spider at work between the hedges,
	Last bird call,
	toad in a damp place, tree frog in a dry . . .

	We go to our graves with secondary affections,
	Second-hand satisfaction, half-souled,
	star charts demagnetized.
	We go in our best suits. The birds are flying. Clouds pass.
	Sure we’re cold and untouchable,
	but we harbor no ill will.
	No tooth tuned to resentment’s fork,
	we’re out of here, and sweet meat.
	Calligraphers of the disembodied, God’s word-wards,
	What letters will we illuminate?
	Above us, the atmosphere,
	The nothing that’s nowhere, signs on, and waits for our beck and call.
	Above us, the great constellations sidle and wince,
	The letters undarken and come forth,
	Your X and my X.
	The letters undarken and they come forth.

	Eluders of memory, nocturnal sleep of the greenhouse,
	Spirit of slides and silences,
	Invisible Hand,
	Witness and walk on.
	Lords of the discontinuous, lords of the little gestures,
	Succor my shift and save me . . .
	All afternoon the rain has rained down in the mind,
	And in the gardens and dwarf orchard.
	All afternoon
	The lexicon of late summer has turned its pages
	Under the rain,
	abstracting the necessary word.
	Autumn’s upon us.
	The rain fills our narrow beds.
	Description’s an element, like air or water.
	That’s the word.



4. BLACKWATER MOUNTAIN

	That time of evening, weightless and disparate,
	When the loon cries, when the small bass
	Tostle the lake's reflections, when
	The green of the oak begins
	To open its robes to the dark, the green
	Of water to offer itself to the flames,
	When lily and lily pad
	Husband the last light
	Which flares like a white disease, then disappears:
	This is what I remember. And this:

	The slap of the jacklight on the cove;
	The freeze-frame of ducks
	Below us; your shots; the wounded flop
	And skid of one bird to the thick brush;
	The moon of your face in the fire's glow;
	The cold; the darkness. Young,
	Wanting approval, what else could I do?
	And did, for two hours, waist-deep in the lake,
	The thicket as black as death,
	Without success or reprieve, try.

	The stars over Blackwater Mountain
	Still dangle and flash like hooks, and ducks
	Coast on the evening water;
	The foliage is like applause.
	I stand where we stood before and aim
	My flashlight down to the lake. A black duck
	Explodes to my right, hangs, and is gone.
	He shows me the way to you;
	He shows me the way to a different fire
	Where you, black moon, warm your hands.



5. CHICKAMAUGA

	Dove-twirl in the tall grass.
	End-of-summer glaze next door
	On the gloves and split ends of the conked magnolia tree.
	Work sounds: truck back-up beep, wood tin-hammer, cicada, fire horn.

	History handles our past like spoiled fruit.
	Mid-morning, late-century light
	calicoed under the peach trees.
	Fingers us here. Fingers us here and here.

	The poem is a code with no message:
	The point of the mask is not the mask but the face underneath,
	Absolute, incommunicado,
	unhoused and peregrine.

	The gill net of history will pluck us soon enough
	From the cold waters of self-contentment we drift in
	One by one
	into its suffocating light and air.

	Structure becomes an element of belief, syntax
	And grammar a catechist,
	Their words what the beads say,
	words thumbed to our discontent.



6. CLEAR NIGHT

	Clear night, thumb-top of a moon, a back-lit sky.
	Moon-fingers lay down their same routine
	On the side deck and the threshold, the white keys and the black keys.
	Bird hush and bird song. A cassia flower falls.

	I want to be bruised by God.
	I want to be strung up in a strong light and singled out.
	I want to be stretched, like music wrung from a dropped seed.
	I want to be entered and picked clean.

	And the wind says “What?” to me.
	And the castor beans, with their little earrings of death, say “What?” to me.
	And the stars start out on their cold slide through the dark.
	And the gears notch and the engines wheel.



7. DIO ED IO

	There is a heaviness between us,
	Nameless, raised from the void, that counts out the sprung hours.
	What ash has it come to purify?
	What disappearance, like water, does it lift up to the clouds?

	God of my fathers, but not of mine,
	You are a part, it is said, an afterthought, a scattered one.
	There is a disappearance between us as heavy as dirt.
	What figure of earth and clay would it have me become?

	Sunday again, January thaw back big time.
	The knock-kneed, overweight boys and girls
	Sit on the sun-warmed concrete sidewalk outside the pharmacy
	Smoking their dun-filtered cigarettes.

	Nothing is bothering them—and their nicotine dreams—
	This afternoon. Everything's weightless,
	As insubstantial as smoke.
	Nothing is disappearing in their world. Arrival is all.

	There is a picture of Yves Klein leaping out of a window
	Above a cobblestone Paris street.
	A man on a bicycle peddles away toward the distance.
	One of them's you, the other is me.

	Cut out of the doctored photograph, however, the mesh net
	Right under the swan-diving body.
	Cut out of another print, the black-capped, ever-distancing cyclist, as well as the mesh net.
	Hmm . . . And there you have it, two-fingered sleight-of-hand man.

	One loses one's center in the air, trying to stay afloat,
	Doesn't one? Snowfalling metaphors.
	Unbidden tears, the off-size of small apples. Unshed.
	And unshedable.

	Such heaviness. The world has come and lies between us.
	Such distance. Ungraspable.
	Ash and its disappearance—
	Unbearable absence of being,
	Tonto, then taken back.



8. ENTRIES

	--The seepage from what you have killed in one part of your life will rise, eventually,
	  through your rooms no matter what doors you might try to close.

	--Always it is the same dark you touch, wherever you touch, its odors, its watery flesh closing
	  about you, spreading across your hands like new skin.

	--What does one say to the mad? They hang from their trees like swollen fruit, unwilling
	  to fall, untouched by the weather. What meetings can hold them there? What candor?

	--The shed skin, the broken rind, your life but a catch now in your own throat . . .

	--So one has to dive, sinking more rapidly than what sinks in advance of you: once down, once
	  under it all, the quieter it becomes, the less fearful it becomes, the quieter it becomes.



9. FUTURE TENSE

	All things in the end are bittersweet--
	An empty gaze, a little way-station just beyond silence.

	If you can’t delight in the everyday,
	you have no future here.

	And if you can, no future either.

	And time, black dog, will sniff you out,
	and lick your lean cheeks,
	And lie down beside you--warm, real close--and will not move.



10. THE GRAVE OF THE RIGHT HAND

	It lies in the American West
	All but forgotten. No stone
	Commemorates the spot,
	Nor is one necessary. What hopes there
	Have calcified, what expectations,
	The traveller would not recognize;
	Or--recognizing--care.

	Such landmarks as showed the way
	(The curious rocks, the morning clouds
	Which were skulls) are scattered now,
	Or have eroded. And paths

	Which suffered our crossing, the roads which once
	Existed, it seemed, merely
	To take us there, have faded and overgrown.
	Nothing is easily found . . .

	Should you persist, however, and should
	You approach, tonight, that broken landscape you
	Would find, at land's end, these words

	‘This is the grave of the right hand:
	The threshold, the woebegone.’



11. IN THE VALLEY OF THE MAGRA

	In June, above Pontrèmoli, high in the Lunigiana,
	The pollen-colored chestnut blooms sweep like a long cloth
	Snapped open over the bunched tree tops
	And up the mountain as far as the almost-alpine meadows.
	At dusk, in the half-light, they appear
	Like stars come through the roots of the great trees from another sky.
	Or tears, with my glasses off.
	Sometimes they seem like that
	Just as the light fades and the darkness darkens for good.

	Or that's the way I remember it when the afternoon thunderstorms
	Tumble out of the Blue Ridge,
	And distant bombardments muscle in across the line

	Like God's solitude or God's shadow,
	The loose consistency of mortar and river stone
	Under my fingers where I leaned out
	Over it all, isolate farm lights
	Starting to take the color on, the way I remember it . . .



12. NIGHT PIECE

	After the cormorant, after the rain, after the long snow in the shark's belly, after the grass,
	  after the last chord in the frog's throat, the dark moon will enter behind the eyelids;
	  when the blood takes it in, billowing into light--another fire that will not heal, another
	  tinsel, black rose, old petal-face, for you.



13. NORTHHANGER RIDGE

	Half-bridge over nothingness,
	White sky of the palette knife; blot orange,
	Vertical blacks; blue, bird-like,
	Drifting up from the next life,
	The heat-waves, like consolation, wince-
	One cloud, like a trunk, stays shut
	Above the horizon; off to the left, dream-wires,
	Hill-snout like a crocodile's.

	Or so I remember it,
	Their clenched teeth in their clenched mouths,
	Their voices like shards of light,
	Brittle, unnecessary.
	Ruined shoes, roots, the cabinet of lost things:
	This is the same story,
	Its lips in flame, its throat a dark water,
	The page stripped of its meaning.

	Sunday, and Father Dog is turned loose:
	Up the long road the children's feet
	Snick in the dust like raindrops; the wind
	Excuses itself and backs off; inside, heat
	Lies like a hand on each head;
	Slither and cough. Now Father Dog
	Addles our misconceptions, points, preens,
	His finger a white flag, run up, run down.

	Bow-wow and arf, the Great Light;
	O, and the Great Yes, and the Great No;
	Redemption, the cold kiss of release,
	Etc.; sentences, sentences.
	(Meanwhile, docile as shadows, they stare
	From their four corners, looks set:
	No glitter escapes
	This evangelical masonry.)

	Candleflame; vigil and waterflow:
	Like dust in the night the prayers rise:
	From 6 to 6, under the sick Christ,
	The children talk to the nothingness,
	Crossrack and wound; the dark room
	Burns like a coal, goes
	Ash to the touch, ash to the tongue's tip;
	Blood turns in the wheel:

	Something drops from the leaves; the drugged moon
	Twists and turns in its sheets; sweet breath
	In a dry corner, the black widow reknits her dream:
	Salvation again declines,
	And sleeps like a skull in the hard ground,
	Nothing for ears, nothing for eyes;
	It sleeps as its always slept, without
	Shadow, waiting for nothing.



14. PECCATOLOGY

	As Kafka has told us, sin always comes openly:
	It walks on its roots and doesn't have to be torn out.

	How easily it absolves itself in the senses,
	However, in Indian Summer, the hedge ivy's star-feet
	Treading the dead spruce and hemlock spurs,
	The last leaves like live coals banked in the far corners of the yard,
	The locust pods in Arabic letters, right to left.

	How small a thing it becomes, nerve-sprung
	And half-electric, deracinated, full of joy.



15. ROAD WARRIORS

	My traveling clothes light up the noon.
	I’ve been on my way for a long time
	back to the past,
	That irreconcilable city.
	Everyone wants to join me, it seems, and I let them.
	Roadside flowers drive me to distraction,
	dragonflies
	Hover like lapus lazuli, there, just out of reach.

	Narrow road, wide road, all of us on it, unhappy,
	Unsettled, seven yards short of immortality
	And a yard short of not long to live.
	Better to sit down in the tall grass
	and watch the clouds,
	To lift our faces up to the sky,
	Considering--for most of us--our lives have been a constant mistake.



16. SALT

	Skeptical, often deserving; a purgative; a seasoner; gives liveliness, pungency; a preservative;
	  creates a false impression; is stored away . . . O, definitions, holding--for nothing--our
	  black hands . . . tassels, tassels . . . the words come, and the words come, trailing like dew upon
	  the world's wet wounds, O salt!



17. SITTING OUTSIDE AT THE END OF AUTUMN

	Three years ago, in the afternoons,
	I used to sit back here and try
	To answer the simple arithmetic of my life,
	But never could figure it--
	This object and that object
	Never contained the landscape
	nor all of its implications,
	This tree and that shrub
	Never completely satisfied the sum or quotient
	I took from or carried to,
	nor do they do so now,
	Though I'm back here again, looking to calculate,
	Looking to see what adds up.

	Everything comes from something,
	only something comes from nothing,
	Lao Tzu says, more or less.
	Eminently sensible, I say,
	Rubbing this tiny snail shell between my thumb and two fingers.
	Delicate as an earring, it carries its emptiness like a child
	It would be rid of.
	I rub it clockwise and counterclockwise, hoping for anything
	Resplendent in its vocabulary or disguise--
	But one and one make nothing, he adds,
	endless and everywhere,
	The shadow that everything casts.



18. STONE CANYON NOCTURNE

	Ancient of Days, old friend, no one believes you’ll come back.
	No one believes in his own life anymore.

	The moon, like a dead heart, cold and unstartable, hangs by a thread
	At the earth’s edge,
	Unfaithful at last, splotching the ferns and the pink shrubs.

	In the other world, children undo the knots in their tally strings.
	They sing songs, and their fingers blear.

	And here, where the swan hums in his socket, where bloodroot
	And belladonna insist on our comforting,
	Where the fox in the canyon wall empties our hands, ecstatic for more,

	Like a bead of clear oil the Healer revolves through the night wind,
	Part eye, part tear, unwilling to recognize us.
